Research article
Barriers and opportunities in communicating about the intersection of
health, climate change and equity
Nick Seavera,*, Sean Drydenb, Jennie Day-Burgetc
a Burness, 7910 Woodmont Avenue, Suite 650, Bethesda, MD 20814, United States
b PerryUndem Research and Communication, Washington, DC, United States
c Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, 50 College Road East, Princeton, NJ 08540-6614, United States
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 25 July 2022
Accepted 24 October 2022
Available online 28 October 2022
A B S T R A C T
The toll of climate change continues to increase with each passing month and the evidence showing climate
change harms our health grows. The evidence is clear that while many are at greater risk (e.g., due to age,
health status, the types of jobs they work, etc.), people of color, those with low incomes, and those living in
rural areas—or some combination of these three factors—are often at the most risk of climate change’s
harms. The research described in this commentary was designed to better understand how the public under-
stands health inequities that are caused or magniﬁed by climate change, learn about barriers to recognition
of this reality, and identify strategies to help people accept and incorporate this evidence.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Health equity
Communication research
Message research
Health
Racial equity
The toll of climate change continues to increase with each passing
month, and the evidence showing climate change harms our health
grows. A June 2022 poll released by the Robert Wood Johnson Founda-
tion (RWJF), the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health and National
Public Radio (NPR) bears this out1. Nearly 8 in 10 adults (78%) said that
they’d been personally impacted by an extreme weather event (e.g., wild-
ﬁres, drought, extreme heat, hurricanes and tropical storms) and 1 in 4 of
those impacted said these events had caused a serious health problem.
Climate change is reshaping our communities, making life less
predictable, and disrupting infrastructure and our opportunities to
lead our healthiest lives. Additionally, the evidence is clear that while
many are at greater risk (e.g., due to age, health status, the types of
jobs they work, etc.), people of color, those with low incomes, and
those living in rural areas—or some combination of these three fac-
tors—are often at the most risk of climate change’s harms.
The June 2022 poll conﬁrmed that while 24% of all households
that experienced an extreme weather event reported serious health
problems, Native Americans, Latino, Asian and Black adults were far
more likely than White respondents to report that extreme weather
events harmed their health. In fact, more than half (51%) of Native
Americans, and about 1 in 3 Latino, Asian and Black adults reported
health harms, compared to 18% of White adults.
We must build the critical mass to act. And, to get started, we
must understand the best ways to talk to voters, advocates and others
in ways they will consider and understand.
With health equity as the North Star for RWJF, together with our
team of research and polling experts at PerryUndem and communica-
tions strategists and practitioners at Burness, we set out to ﬁnd out
how the public understands health inequities that are caused or mag-
niﬁed by climate change and to identify strategies to help people
accept and incorporate this reality.
In November 2020 our team conducted four focus groups to learn
more about baseline understanding of climate change, health and
equity, with the following characteristics: one with Black registered
voters in the South, one with Latino registered voters in the West, one
with White registered voters in the Midwest, and one with “opinion
leaders/activists” from across the country. Each group included 6 to 8
participants. In January-February 2021 we repeated these focus
groups to explore messages about these issues. For all groups, we
screened for respondents who were open to conversations about cli-
mate change. Our last research tool was a nationally representative
survey of 1,322 registered voters, oversampling for Latino, Black and
Asian American and Paciﬁc Islander (AAPI) respondents.
Three barriers in communicating about health, climate change
and equity
Our ﬁrst insight came quickly; for many we spoke with in focus
groups, the idea that health, climate change and inequities are
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nseaver@burness.com (N. Seaver).
1 Poll available at https://www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2022/06/the-impact-of-
extreme-weather-on-views-about-climate-policy-in-the-united-states.html
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100185
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100185
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
connected was a new idea. Communication about the relationship
between these issues presented a steep learning curve for many par-
ticipants, and this is undoubtedly ampliﬁed by the fact that the three
issues are complicated and often fraught on their own (i.e., health
raising deeply rooted beliefs about personal responsibility, climate
being perceived by many as a partisan issue, and racial equity raising
both aforementioned issues). In general, participants were quick to
accept the connections between climate change and health when
presented with simple statements that explicitly mention the con-
nections.
However, when we turned to communicating about the health
inequities created by or deepened by climate change, we ran into our
second larger barrier. For some people, the idea that climate change
is a planetary phenomenon and threat felt at odds with the idea that
climate change is a greater threat for some people than others. It was
a barrier in communicating about health, climate change and equity
that is important to anticipate, and one we gained the most traction
overcoming with examples that highlighted factors like income or
geography as the cause of inequities.
While health inequities caused or ampliﬁed by climate change are
obvious to those working in this space, assuming that all people will
quickly accept this connection runs the risk that audiences will hear
these statements and reﬂexively dismiss the message—and poten-
tially the messenger.
Finally, we ran into a third barrier when we turned from inequi-
ties broadly (gender, income, age, etc.) to racial inequity, speciﬁcally.
We quickly heard from many an automatic-appearing reaction and
resistance to the mention of racial inequities. This manifests in a few
ways, including variations of the sentiment, “Why does this have to
be about race?” While we can’t extrapolate from just eight focus
groups, this pushback was seen most in the focus groups of White,
conservative-leaning audiences—though it surfaced at points with
each audience. When we provided speciﬁc examples of these inequi-
ties, we saw quicker recognition of this reality among participants in
the Black group—many of whom shared their own lived experiences
—and to a lesser extent in the groups that comprised Latino and
White respondents.
It’s not hard to envision how we run the risk of losing many in our
audiences if we don’t help them navigate past each hurdle as we
unpack this complex intersection.
What further complicates the barriers described above is that
while we saw the need for a slow, intentional introduction of each
element in the focus groups with Black, Latino and White partici-
pants, we heard markedly different reactions in two focus groups
with “opinion leaders” (i.e., people who reported deeper than aver-
age civic engagement and inclination to activism). Participants in
these groups wanted racial inequities and their roots to be named
quickly and strongly, in ways that we saw shut down the other par-
ticipants who were new to these issues.
Four promising themes for engaging audiences
We saw four key patterns emerge in the focus groups and survey
work that are important for communicators working at this intersec-
tion. While climate change is perceived differently to different people
in different communities and regions, a common sentiment we heard
in all groups was that weather is less predictable and, more generally,
that “things are different than they used to be.” Speaking to this
shared reﬂection on climate change and its impacts appears to be a
broad but resonant way to start this conversation. If we open with
this shared perspective, we can then quickly move to do the neces-
sary work to personalize and localize the issue to build a sense of
urgency. Climate change is felt locally in different ways (e.g., wild-
ﬁres, hurricanes, etc.), and people need help connecting these back to
a shared global issue.
Second, people readily accept the climate and health connection
when it’s stated simply and explicitly. We saw focus group partici-
pants accept this connection (e.g., worsening heart and lung disease
on hot or poor air quality days, more serious allergies) and, in many
cases, quickly recognize and name these connections in their own
lives or the lives of their family and friends.
Third, respondents want solutions on a large scale, and they want
to understand how they are part of it. People are looking for collec-
tive action to tackle these issues that include government, commu-
nity
organizations
and
businesses
aligned
on
climate
change
solutions. These solutions need to feel effective and meaningful, and
need to place individuals within and as a part of this collective action.
Finally, in our survey we found it was effective to talk about equity
by framing the issue as requiring equitable solutions that bring
everyone to the metaphorical table. Focusing on who is shaping solu-
tions appears to serve as an effective entry point that allows for an
exploration of why inequities exist and how to avoid making the
same mistakes again.
Insights to shape the path forward
As part of this survey and focus groups, we developed a narrative
that followed the following basic sequence:
1. State a shared aspiration for healthy lives and safe, stable commu-
nities;
2. Connect with the feeling that things are changing and threatening
that stability;
3. Raise speciﬁc and direct ways that health is threatened by climate
change and delineate the connection;
4. Name that while climate change impacts everyone, inequities
mean some people feel it worse and sooner—naming a few of the
myriad drivers of inequities and including race;
5. Provide optimism that solutions are being enacted at all levels
(providing speciﬁc examples) and emphasize the role that indi-
viduals can play to advance climate change solutions.
This narrative saw strong support and appeared to open the door
to further conversations about the inequities caused or deepened by
climate change.
This approach isn’t a simple soundbite, nor do we argue it’s the
only or best approach. Most importantly, none of this is to shy away
from a conversation about racial inequities, but rather it is to put
such inequities in context for audiences for whom this is a new issue.
In testing how people reacted to different language about inequities,
we saw a majority of respondents feel positively toward key mes-
sages about racial equity, which gave us hope that many carefully
crafted approaches can work. However, we did see this support wane
(though still with support from a majority of respondents) when we
skipped broader equity messaging before naming racial inequities,
which points to the need to start broad and then narrow the equity
focus with some audiences.
Finally, while identifying and knowing your speciﬁc audience is a
foundational principle in effective communications, it emerges as a
pivotal driver of how we shape climate, health and equity communi-
cations. While certain insights cut across audiences such as the feel-
ing that “things are different than they used to be," geography,
personal experience, race, ideology, and familiarity with all three
issues—let alone their intersections—all play critical roles in shaping
how experts start communicating on these issues. More tailored
approaches to more clearly deﬁned audiences are bound to be more
effective.
This became more apparent when the research team put the sur-
vey data through cluster analysis to group people by views. Survey
responders were broken into ﬁve clusters that aligned with their
views of climate, health and equity. About 22% of respondents
N. Seaver, S. Dryden and J. Day-Burget
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100185
2
supported action on climate change and health that centers on
equity, while another 16% supported climate action, but had some
hesitance about doing so through an equity lens. Twenty percent
were reasonably supportive of climate action generally (and likely
not as a health or equity issue), but don’t see it as a high priority. The
remaining cohorts were ambivalent (14%) or opposed to action on
these issues (27%).
Conclusion
This research makes clear that we have more work to do to under-
stand how to effectively engage audiences in health equity—and spe-
ciﬁcally
racial
equity—issues
that
emerge
as
climate
change
continues to impact our communities, country and world. And this
requires listening. Rather than being tempted to shy away from this
challenge, we see promising signs that we can accomplish these goals
with intentional strategies to bring audiences along a communication
and learning journey rather than expecting people to take everything
in at once. There is much more research to be done on effectively
communicating about these issues and in ways that don’t just inform,
but engage and spark optimism and action.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
Support for this research was provided by the Robert Wood John-
son Foundation. The views expressed here do not necessarily reﬂect
the views of the Foundation. In addition to the listed authors, Mike
Perry, Naomi Mulligan Kolb and Adriana Bustillo at PerryUndem, and
Anna Chen and Sarah Pytalski at Burness contributed to this research.
N. Seaver, S. Dryden and J. Day-Burget
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100185
3
