Research article
Developing a guide to climate & health justice education: Process and
content
Mita Huqa,*, Sonora Englisha, Heizal Patricia Naggindab, Jon Bonifacioc,
Thilagawathi Abi Deivanayagama,d, Rita Issaa, Sorcha Ni Chobhthaigha,
Priscila de Morais Satoe, Hans Mulindwab, Delan Devakumara
a Institute for Global Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK
b Climate Operation Ltd, Kisaasi-Kyanja Road, P.O Box 37705, Kampala, Uganda
c Youth Advocates for Climate Action Philippines, College of Science Library, P. Velasquez Street, UP Campus, Diliman, Quezon City, Philippines
d Lancaster Medical School, Faculty of Health and Medicine, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YG, UK
e School of Public Health, University of S~ao Paulo, Avenida Doutor Arnaldo, 715, S~ao Paulo, Brazil
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 30 July 2022
Accepted 14 November 2022
Available online 21 November 2022
A B S T R A C T
Climate justice and health education can address the disproportionate health impacts of climate change on
minoritized communities by providing frameworks to build awareness and instigate action on climate-
related health inequities. The Envisioning Environmental Equity Educator’s Guide to Climate and Health Justice
provides a framework for educators, activists and health professionals to lead lessons on health and climate
justice that center the experiences of those Most Affected People and Areas (MAPA) by climate change. Col-
laborators in Brazil, the Philippines, and Uganda engaged in stakeholder meetings to assess priorities and
needs about climate and health with policymakers, doctors, activists, and students. These meetings informed
the product: An educator’s guide to climate and health justice that explores their dynamics from an anti-rac-
ist, anti-colonial approach. The guide serves as a recommended lesson framework ﬁt with concepts, exam-
ples, and activities for educators teaching in primary and secondary learning settings. It is an innovative
climate and health justice educational resource that draws on principles of anti-colonialism, critical thinking
and consciousness, and engaged pedagogy. It offers a strategy for climate justice communication that targets
diverse audiences across climate, health and social contexts by promoting educational approaches that cen-
ter MAPA experiences, ﬁt for diverse audiences.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate justice
Health justice
Climate education
Anti-colonialism
Educational resources
Environmental equity
Lesson design
Curriculum development
1. Introduction
Climate justice and health education can address the dispropor-
tionate health impacts of climate change on minoritized communities
by providing frameworks to build awareness and instigate action on
climate-related health inequities [1−3]. Such educational initiatives
are essential as the impacts of climate change materialize along
racial, ethnic, and identity lines [4,5]. These inequities are founded by
colonial habits [6], making equity central to sustainable climate
action decision-making [7]. Nevertheless, this lens appears to be
missing in educational spaces that tackle the intersection between
climate change and health [8].
While educational materials exist for climate and health, and cli-
mate justice modules are abundant, there is a gap in educational
resources that convenes health and climate through the lens of anti-
coloniality, social justice, and MAPA(most affected peoples and areas)
perspectives while taking a more explicit social justice approach [9].
In January 2022, a scoping exercise conducted by the authors found
no pre-university educational resources that comprehensively dis-
cussed the intersection of climate change, health, and the origins
of related injustices in colonialism and oppression. As such, we
designed a resource for educators that structures lessons on climate
and health justice for late-primary through secondary school settings.
This resource distills complex concepts, contextualizes the crisis
within colonial and oppressive systems of power, and provides tools
and examples that center the perspectives of MAPA, and takes peda-
gogical approaches relevant to discussing justice and power in
diverse learning settings.
2. Developing the Guide
The Envisioning Environmental Equity (EEE) Educator’s Guide to Cli-
mate and Health Justice is a structured collection of concepts,
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: mita.huq.19@ucl.ac.uk (M. Huq).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100188
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100188
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
examples, and activities for educators, activists and health professio-
nals to use when designing lessons on climate and health justice. It
equips educators to teach on this nexus while centering MAPA com-
munities using MAPA-relevant and diverse examples, and encourag-
ing reﬂective, dialogic discussions about the social justice dimension
of climate change.
This process was a collective effort by the EEE initiative, a research
and public engagement project delivered by University of S~ao Paulo
in Brazil (USP), Youth Advocates for Climate Action Philippines
(YACAP), Climate Operation (CO) Uganda, and Race & Health, UK. In
late 2021, project partners convened under the EEE initiative to
secure a funding opportunity to platform MAPA narratives in climate
and health justice movements, of which fuels the guide’s creation.
2.1. Foundational theories & pedagogical approaches
The guide aims to inform climate education with anti-colonial,
socially-oriented, justice driven approaches to climate and health
education [1]. It draws from pedagogical approaches derived from
Paulo Freire [6] and bell hooks [10] to reﬁne content delivery using
practices relevant to social justice-oriented learning contexts. To do
so, we ﬁrst developed a humanities-focused climate and health les-
sons related to injustice, colonialism, and roots of inequality. We
then supplemented these lessons with narrative-driven case studies,
examples, and activities that interrogate climate-related health
inequities in MAPA communities and minoritised communities in
global North countries.
We provide pedagogical recommendations for educators using
teaching notes provided throughout the guide on how to foster com-
munity in the classroom, facilitate dialogic learning environments,
and conduct critical reﬂective activities. These recommendations are
informed by Freire’s Pedagogy of the Oppressed, which emphasizes
praxis and dialogue to promote student-led knowledge building that
confronts systems of oppression [11]. Concurrently, we draw from
bell hooks’ engaged pedagogy that emphasizes the role of community
in learning and the teacher’s role in establishing learning communi-
ties [12]. From this lens, student contributions to the course material,
including reactions, connections, and critiques are invaluable. In the
context of anti-racism and anti-coloniality, creating a learning expe-
rience that is not only critical and creative, but is also generative and
empowering was a key principle to the guide’s design [13].
2.2. Priority setting and content creation
This guide targets educators, activists, and other community edu-
cators from Brazil, the Philippines, and Uganda of all ages. Users
and educators would have experience leading lessons in institutions
and/or with non-governmental (NGO)-led community education set-
tings with learners in late-primary through secondary educational
settings.
This target population is diverse in geography, language, educa-
tional experience, culture, and institution, meaning their needs will
vary across socio- and geopolitical contexts. To identify priority
health issues, educational access, relevant content/examples, and
perception of climate and health justice, we engaged policymakers,
health professionals, activists, and students to discuss their needs,
priorities, and perceived gaps in awareness about climate change. Pri-
orities and strategies were further informed by collaborators with
prior experience in climate education with communities in their
respective countries. These collaborators include climate and health
community-based educators, researchers, and health professionals
with experience educating and working with local MAPA communi-
ties. Subsequent content development priorities can be categorized
into three themes: relatability, delivery, and adaptability.
2.2.1. Relatability
Relatability is essential to effective climate change education [14].
Based on input from the stakeholder meetings, and from the teams’
prior experiences, mainstream representations of climate change
derive from global North countries and are less relatable to MAPA
communities as they lack MAPA-relevant perspectives [15].
To address this, we conceptualized injustice by framing climate
change and its related health impacts within colonialism, justice, and
its relationship with hierarchical social categorisations (e.g., race,
caste, ethnicity) [16]. We also provided instructions, examples, and
case studies that encouraged educators to identify locally relevant
and relatable examples of discrimination, history, and politics that
shaped local climate-related health outcomes. This consideration
yielded tangible tools and examples that explore the root causes of
climate and health inequities while encouraging each classroom to
incorporate local experiences and ideas in the teaching process.
2.2.2. Delivery
Informational gaps exist amongst educators themselves who,
though keen to discuss climate justice and health, need more resour-
ces about climate and health justice to feel prepared to teach on the
subject 17]. Given the target audience diversity, content needed to be
tailored to varied levels of education, and easily incorporated into
diverse educational cultures.
To address informational gaps, the guide details important con-
cepts relevant to climate and health justice while providing examples
from around the world for educators to use and/or adapt to their
learners. The format follows a question-and-answer format to inform
a logical progression from one concept to the next, and prompts edu-
cators to explore discussion questions with students pervasively
throughout each section. Educators are encouraged to make use of
these questions (or adaptations thereof) to open classroom dialogue
per Freire’s pedagogical approaches [11] to create space for educators
and their students to engage key concepts and invite additional dia-
logue [18,19].
The guide is a free, printer-friendly resource that will be hosted
across collaborator websites. All activities in the guide do not rely on
writing materials, presentations, or the internet. The intended mode
of delivery thus accounts for varied access to and reliability of inter-
net connection, especially in remote and rural areas most impacted
by climate change.
2.2.3. Adaptability
To ensure the guide’s usability across diverse contexts, content
must be easily translatable and adaptable by educators across diverse
learning settings, and include content relevant to key stakeholders.
To promote the contents’ transferability across learning contexts, we
provided guidance on developing contextually relevant case studies
while providing a wide breadth of examples across varied MAPA
communities to select from. The guide’s adaptability is intended to
ensure it can be transferred across contexts while equipping educa-
tors with a resource that they can use and reshape according to their
needs.
The initial version of the guide is in English as it is the shared lan-
guage of the collaborators. It was developed to be inclusive of diverse
English reading and writing levels, and for ease of translation. How-
ever, the guide will be translated into Portuguese, Tagalog, and
Luganda for community and institutional education settings in Brazil,
the Philippines, and Uganda.
2.3. Evaluation and piloting process
Using a semi-structured qualitative survey that explored prede-
termined themes around content, accuracy, relatability, and anti-col-
oniality, the guide was reviewed by an international panel of
community educators, institutional educators, climate and health
M. Huq, S. English, H.P. Nagginda et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100188
2
experts, and activists across project sites. Feedback praised the guide
for its focus on MAPA perspectives of climate change, and the suc-
cinct focus on colonial roots of the crisis. Suggested improvements
highlighted a need for further instructions for end-chapter activities,
increasing the ratio of examples compared to concepts, and including
supporting visuals for educators to use when exploring key concepts.
The guide will be piloted at schools in the Philippines and Uganda
through existing community relationships afﬁliated with the respec-
tive organization to assess its usability and accessibility (see Fig. 1).
Lessons learned from piloting will be integrated into the guide before
the ﬁrst version’s publication, with iterations of feedback/adaptations
to come.
3. Resulting Guide Format
This guide is a detailed course outline that can take between 1
−4 months to deliver depending on the educator’s expertise and the
educational setting (e.g., activist vs. institutional). Its chapters are
designed to be presented in succession, however chapters can be
extracted and delivered between 2−4 weeks. Each chapter (see
Table 1) starts with a content summary and practical recommenda-
tions informed by the selected pedagogical approaches. Lesson aims
and objectives are presented before the main content presentation,
which is delivered in a Q&A format, supplemented with periodic criti-
cal thinking questions and summary boxes for reinforcement. Each
lesson concludes with an extended case study and proposed discus-
sion activities.
4. Discussion and conclusion
Reviewers expressed that the EEE Educator’s Guide to Climate and
Health Justice will be an innovative climate and health justice educa-
tional resource that draws on well-established theoretical and meth-
odological approaches. It synthesizes and builds upon existing
climate education practices from MAPA settings, sharing the best
approaches that have been tried and tested in countries facing some
of the worst manifestations of the climate crisis. It also offers a strat-
egy for climate justice communication that targets diverse audiences
across climate, health and social contexts by prioritizing modes of
delivery, adaptability and relatability.
The guide faces limitations: It lacks audio-visual that would sup-
port virtual learning strategies. These were not included in the inter-
est of linguistic diversity due to barriers associated with translating
external resources such as videos and podcasts. Coupled with the
burden these resources have on areas with limited internet accessi-
bility, such as rural areas heavily impacted by climate change, access
and adaptability were prioritized.
Further, the guide attempts to capture a wide target audience.
While our iterative feedback process attempts to accommodate this
audience, we will also incorporate long-term feedback infrastructure
to iteratively collate feedback. Iterations of the guide will be released
as feedback is received. Although the original iteration is in English, it
will be translated as needed and translations will be made publicly
available. This includes an online learning community designed to
promote international sharing of translations, examples, methods,
Table 1
Guide overview.
Introduction to the EEE Guide
Introductory remarks to users
Who it is for
How to use it
Chapter 1 - Introduction to climate change, global warming, and humans
Brief introduction to climate science
The relationship between climate change and the humanities
Chapter 2 - Climate Change and Human Health
The relationship between climate and health
Health inequities across minoritized communities
Chapter 3 - Climate Change and (In)justice
Power, oppression, and colonialism in climate-related health injustice
Justice principles and their relationship to climate-related health inequity
Colonialism as a key contributor to climate change and imbalanced climate decision-making
Chapter 4 - Moving Towards Justice
Importance of systems-level changes
How to enact system-level changes
Critical assessment of proposed climate action for structural change
Participating in structural change
Fig. 1. Guide development timeline.
M. Huq, S. English, H.P. Nagginda et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100188
3
and feedback about experiences with both the guide and teaching on
climate, health, and justice. This will be hosted on a free project-
delivery app and supported by the EEE team.
Our approach tackles both climate and health injustice and the
epistemic injustice pervasive in climate communication resources. It
encourages educators to create communities in their classrooms that
think critically about climate and health injustice and the power
structures that fuel them, raising critical consciousness and engage-
ment with rapid and equitable climate action.
Educators can access the guide on the EEE collaborator websites:
Climate Operation: https://climate-operation.webﬂow.io/
Race & Health:www.raceandhealth.org
YACAP: https://yacap.org/
Funding
This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust. Grant number:
224687/Z/21/Z. The Wellcome Trust had no inﬂuence over the meth-
ods followed in this piece, nor the guide.
Acknowledgment
To the local communities, activists, and educators who have facili-
tated the very necessary, empowering, and difﬁcult work that is cli-
mate justice education: thank you for convening on this initiative
and contributing your expertise, passions, and stories to this guide.
References
[1] Mcgregor C, Scandrett E, Christie E, Crowther J. Climate justice education: from
social movement learning to schooling. Routledge Handbook of Climate Justice.
Routledge; 2018.
[2] McLaren P, Houston D. Revolutionary ecologies: Ecosocialism and critical peda-
gogy. A Journal of the American Educational Studies Association 2004;36(1)
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1207/s15326993es3601_4.
[3] Olsson D. Empowering political engagement with unsustainable actions: the pos-
sibilities and limitations of teaching guides for climate change education. Envi-
ronmental Education Research 2022;28(8):1–17.
[4] Abimbola O, Kwesi J, Aikins T, Makhesi-Wilkinson T, Roberts EL. Racism and
Climate (in)justice: How Racism and Colonialism Shape the Climate Crisis and Cli-
mate Action, 38. Washington, DC: Heinrich B€oll Stiftung; 2021.
[5] Hickel J, Slamersak A. Existing climate mitigation scenarios perpetuate colonial
inequalities. The Lancet Planetary Health 2022;6(7):e628–31.
[6] da Costa BM. Moving towards Climate Justice with Pedagogy of the Oppressed, 62.
The Forum; 2020. p. 189–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.15730/forum.2020.62.2.189.
[7] IPCC. Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Work-
ing Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University
Press; 2022. doi: 10.1017/9781009157926.
[8] Limaye VS, Grabow ML, Stull VJ, Patz JA. Developing a deﬁnition of climate and
health literacy. Health Aff (Millwood) 2020;39(12):2182–8.
[9] Rousell D, Cutter-Mackenzie-Knowles A. A systematic review of climate change
education: giving children and young people a “voice” and a “hand” in redressing
climate change. Children’s Geographies 2020;18(2).
[10] Sultana F. Decolonizing development education and the pursuit of social justice.
Human Geography 2019;12(3):31–46. doi: 10.1177/194277861901200305.
[11] Shih YH. Rethinking Paulo Freire’s dialogic pedagogy and its implications for
teachers’ teaching. Journal of Education and Learning 2018;7(4):230.
[12] hooks b. Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom. 1st ed
Routledge; 1994. p. 224.
[13] Diemer MA, Rapa LJ, Voight AM, McWhirter EH. Critical consciousness: a develop-
mental approach to addressing marginalization and oppression. Child Dev Per-
spect 2016;10(4):216–21.
[14] Monroe MC, Plate RR, Oxarart A, Bowers A, Chaves WA. Identifying effective cli-
mate change education strategies: a systematic review of the research. Environ
Educ Res 2019;25(6):791–812.
[15] Asaduzzaman M, Ara R, Afrin S, Meiring JE, Saif-Ur-Rahman KM. Planetary health
education and capacity building for healthcare professionals in a global context:
current opportunities, gaps and future directions. Int J Environmental Research
and Public Health 2022;19(18):11786.
[16] Selvarajah S, Deivanayagam TA, Lasco G, Scafe S, White A, Zembe-Mkabile W,
et al. Categorisation and Minoritisation. BMJ Glob Health 2020;5(12) [Internet].
Available from. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2020-004508.
[17] Apollo A, Mbah MF. Challenges and Opportunities for Climate Change Education
(CCE) in East Africa: A Critical Review. Climate 2021;9(6):93.
[18] Egan-Simon D. Active agents of change: a conceptual framework for social
justice-orientated citizenship education. Equity in Education & Society 2022;1(2):
275264612210893.
[19] Yang H. A research on the effective questioning strategies in class. Science Journal
of Education 2017;5(4):158.
M. Huq, S. English, H.P. Nagginda et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100188
4
