The withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement and its impact on
global climate change governance
ZHANG Yong-Xianga, CHAO Qing-Chena,*, ZHENG Qiu-Hongb, HUANG Leia
a National Climate Center, China Meteorological Administration, Beijing 100081, China
b China Meteorological Administration Training Center, Beijing 100081, China
Received 4 July 2017; accepted 9 August 2017
Available online 31 August 2017
Abstract
The global community has prepared for the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement since Donald Trump was elected as the president
of the U.S. However, Trump's formal declaration of withdrawal still caused worldwide reaction. Trump will use the withdrawal to build his
political reputation and to renegotiate the Paris Agreement despite its negative effects on the political credibility, international relationships, and
potential long-term economic growth of the U.S. In general, the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement will not change the development
of low-carbon technologies and the transformation trend of the global climate governance regime. However, the long-term goals and international
cooperation on climate change will be affected by budget cuts in American climate change research and the cancelation of donations from the
multilateral environmental fund of the U.S. If the Paris Agreement is renegotiated, the common but differentiated principle of responsibility of the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change will be challenged again. Nevertheless, climate change governance remains a main
theme of future sustainable development. Instead of national governments, local governments and non-governmental organizations will develop
strategies for technical innovation and emphasize pragmatic cooperation, thus expanding their roles in climate change governance. The capacity
building on climate change research and public awareness should be enhanced as a long-term objective of global climate change governance.
Keywords: U.S. withdraw Paris Agreement; Global climate change governance; Impact
1. Introduction
Parties of the United Nation Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCCC) passed the Paris Agreement in its
COP21 in December, 2015. As one of the most important
outcomes of international multilateral progress, the Paris
Agreement showed the willingness of member countries to
cooperate and clearly signaled the need for the low-carbon
transformation of the international society. Global coopera-
tion on the response to climate change thus entered a new era
(Zheng et al., 2016; UNEP and Bloomberg, 2017). Driven by
the strong political support, the Paris Agreement came into
force shortly within a year in November, 2016. Negotiations
under the framework of UNFCCC focused on the details of the
Paris Agreement. However, the results of the U.S. presidential
election presented potential threats to the implementation of
the Paris Agreement. The new U.S. President, Donald Trump,
claimed that global warming is a hoax concocted by China to
weaken the competitive industrial power of the U.S. He then
announced on June 1, 2017 that he had decided to pull the U.S.
out of the non-binding Paris Agreement. Claiming that the
Paris Agreement restricts the U.S. while empowering other
countries, Trump said the U.S. would begin negotiations to re-
enter the agreement and make it “fair” to the U.S.
Thewithdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement aroused
great response both in and outside the country. Former U.S.
President Obama pointed out that Trump's decision has made the
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: chaoqc@cma.gov.cn (CHAO Q.-C.).
Peer review under responsibility of National Climate Center (China
Meteorological Administration).
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/accr/
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.accre.2017.08.005
1674-9278/Copyright © 2017, National Climate Center (China Meteorological Administration). Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
U.S. join the minor group of countries that have rejected the
future. In the U.S., dozens of states joined a newly established
American Climate Alliance. More than 200 city mayors
committed to adopt, respect, and obey the goals of the Paris
Agreement. Numerous U.S. companies claimed to support these
decisions. Nevertheless, several Republican politicians sup-
ported the decision for withdrawal. Outside of the U.S., the
SecretaryGeneraloftheUnitedNationsandseveralinternational
organizations showed great disappointment in the withdrawal of
the U.S. from the Paris Agreement. Meanwhile, the presidents
and head ofﬁcials of the governments of China, Germany,
France, and Italy claimed that they will continue to fulﬁll their
obligations in the implementation of Paris Agreement.
2. Background on the withdrawal of the U.S. from the
Paris Agreement
The withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement was
expected. During the early stages of the U.S. election, Trump
had claimed several times that climate change is a hoax. As a
publicity stunt, he promised to withdraw the U.S. from the
Paris Agreement. Once he took the ofﬁce of the president,
Trump proposed the America First Energy Plan, in which he
intends to re-stimulate the U.S. fossil energy industry.
Furthermore, he completely dismantled the climate policies
made by former U.S. President Obama. Trump canceled the
Clean Power Plan and issued the Executive Order on Pro-
moting Energy Independence and Economic Growth. He
drastically cut the federal budget on climate change policies
and researches. He also appointed anti-climate ofﬁcials to
highly
important
positions.
Collectively,
these
activities
signaled the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement.
Trump and his team seemed to have deliberated on this de-
cision. In his intervention, Trump did not deny the truth of
climate change but instead provided three points to support his
decision. First, he believed that Paris Agreement is harmful to
the U.S. and could damage the domestic economy, thus
causing job losses. Second, he thought that the goals of the
Paris Agreement would negligibly mitigate climate change.
Even under the full implementation of National Determined
Contribution, the global temperature increase will merely
decrease by 0.2 C. Third, he claimed that large developing
countries, like China and India, made an unfair agreement
against the U.S. He claimed that he would renegotiate the
terms of the Paris Agreement to be fairer to the U.S.
Three points must be considered in the in-depth analysis of
Trump's motivation to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris
Agreement. First is Trump's Republican background. Re-
publicans are conservative in terms of social issues and are
close to libertarians in terms of economic issues (Rubenzer,
2017). Republicans support the development of fossil fuel
energy above all other aspects of energy policy. In the new
government, the Senate, the House, the Department of Com-
merce, and the Department of Energy are dominated by con-
servative Republicans.
Moreover, these
Republicans
are
Trump supporters and are mostly from traditional energy
sectors. The cabinet of the Trump administration includes
members who are formerly afﬁliated with energy companies.
Trump has to consider their requirements. Second is Trump's
need to fulﬁll his election promises. Trump has to enhance the
public awareness of his policies and prepare for the next term
of his administration. Trump presents himself as a busi-
nessman and as an anti-politician. He emphasizes on America
First and tries to create easy environment for states that
heavily rely on traditional energy as an industry. These moves
strengthen the conﬁdence of his supporters and attract poten-
tial voters, thus adding to his political image. In addition, the
two-party politics in the U.S. allows the succeeding govern-
ment to destroy and remove the inﬂuence of the previous
government. Third, the Trump administration made an overall
assessment of the withdrawal and left enough space for them
to renegotiate. 1) Trump is not the ﬁrst U.S. President to
withdraw from a legally binding international climate agree-
ment. Early in 2001, President Bush claimed that climate
mitigation is not in the best interest of the U.S. and refused to
sign the Kyoto Protocol. His decision led to Canada, Russia,
and Japan to opt out of the second commitment period of the
Kyoto Protocol. 2) According to Article 28 of the Paris
Agreement, parties cannot apply for withdrawal for ﬁrst three
years. And, another year is required for actual withdrawal once
the UN has formally received the withdrawal application.
Therefore, Trump can only start the process for withdrawal by
November 2019, and withdrawal will be accomplished no
earlier than the end of the ﬁrst term of the Trump adminis-
tration. Hence, Trump has considerable grounds for renegoti-
ation and for ﬂexibility for his next term in ofﬁce. The U.S.
still could participate and inﬂuence the negotiation of the Paris
Agreement. 3) Even if the U.S. does not participate or
participate less in negotiation, countries allied with the U.S.
could intercede on behalf of the U.S.
3. Future trends of the global responses to climate change
The most important characteristic of Paris Agreement is that
it conﬁrms the direction of international cooperation in
responding to climate change and the consensus on promoting
green and low-carbon development. In the context of global
climate governance, the Paris Agreement conﬁrms the concept
of “doing everyone's best and achieve a winewin scenario”
(Chao et al., 2016). The withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris
Agreement will likely shock international governance and
cooperation systems for climate change. The long-term and
general developing trends indicate that green, low-carbon, and
sustainable development continues to advance on a global level.
However, the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement
could be seen as a ﬂuctuation in this constant upward trend.
3.1. Non-reversal of the general structure of global
climate governance
3.1.1. Progress in combating climate change will not
drastically change
The withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement
received criticism from countries, international organizations,
214
ZHANG Y.-X. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
city mayors, and industry leaders. Almost all the countries that
issued a statement on the withdrawal resolved to continue the
implementation of Paris Agreement. This reaction reﬂects a
high degree of the awareness of climate science ﬁndings. The
international resolution to actively respond to climate change
is not going to change.
Trump emphasized that the U.S. might rejoin the Paris
Agreement if is “fair” to the US. Climate justice, however, is
the foundation of the international climate regime (Chen,
2014). Everyone is inviolable on the basis of this justice
(Rawls, 1988). Climate justice provides equal rights and op-
portunities to every individual to seek a high quality of life
under the impacts of global climate change. Climate justice
also provides countries with equal rights and opportunities to
seek sustainable development. Reviewing the progress of in-
ternational negotiations and climate science research reveals
key elements for the evaluation of the degree of climate jus-
tice, including historical responsibility, developmental stage,
capacity, and national circumstance. Trump simply does not
see climate justice on a global scale.
In a global context, the two main political groups of South
and North, and the three poles of powers in the climate regime
(EU, the Umbrella Group and G77 þ China) will not change
although the economy, trade, and emissions of developing
countries, especially the emerging economies, have grown
rapidly. However, many aspects of global climate governance
lack consensus. These aspects include the differentiation be-
tween developing countries and developed countries; the
contribution of each country to meet the targeted 2 C through
global stocktaking and transparency mechanism; the support
from developed countries on the ﬁnance, technology, and ca-
pacity building to developing countries; and the balance be-
tween existing and new emergent gaps and needs among
mitigation, adaptation, ﬁnance, technology, and capacity
building. Nevertheless, the obligations of developed and
developing countries under international climate cooperation
will not change. Developed countries still need to response for
a large proportion of historical emissions and per capita
emissions. And they are also leading the global economy,
technology, and setting standards for discourses. Developing
countries will continue to prioritize poverty reduction and
social development.
3.1.2. New model of global climate response will be
enforced
The efﬁciency of the global climate regime could be
evaluated from the aspects of environmental performance,
economic performance, distribution impacts, and institutional
capability (Nordhaus, 2007). Institutional development is
multilateral, complex, and inﬂuential in the context of the
UNFCCC. In the Paris Agreement, the top-down structure is
broken down. National Determined Contributions (NDC)
effectively motivates the capability of parties. Although
climate governance among country governments remains the
core of global governance, the participation of sub-national
entities, including cities, NGOs, enterprises, and local gov-
ernments in climate governance has become more intensive.
Multiple stakeholders bloom the elements of equity and ra-
tionality into global climate governance. Several articles in the
Paris Agreement also encourage various stakeholders to join in
the climate regime. Part V of the decision of the COP21
emphasized that non-party stakeholders are welcome to
participate the international climate actions. Global climate
governance broadly includes participants by using public
power to leverage private resources and taking advantage of
existing market mechanisms instead of top-down policies.
Therefore, national entities and their positions will likely be
weakened. The withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agree-
ment will facilitate this trend.
3.2. Fluctuating impacts
3.2.1. Impact on the efﬁciency of the multilateral climate
change response mechanism
The U.S. is the second-highest amount of GHG emitter.
U.S. climate policy heavily inﬂuences global climate gover-
nance. There is a view (Kemp, 2017) that the withdrawal of
the U.S. from the Paris Agreement will trigger new global
leadership and will remove obstacles set by the U.S. to the
implementation of Paris Agreement. However, in reality, U.S.
withdrawal will impact the ﬂourishing international climate
regime as never before.
First, the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement
indicates that the U.S. is becoming a consumer rather than a
support supplier of responses to global climate change
governance. The transition of the U.S. from consumer to
supplier will greatly weaken the supply of global public goods
and affect the willingness of other suppliers (Bloomberg,
2016), thus negatively affecting the efﬁcacy of the imple-
mentation Paris Agreement. In the global context, the with-
drawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement is not merely a
climate issue but an issue linked with geological political re-
lationships among main economies. Therefore, it has crucial
implications in international political economics and will
greatly inﬂuence the environmental political balance between
China and the U.S., the U.S. and the EU, and China and the
EU.
Second, the large sum cut from the ﬁnancial support to the
Multiple Environmental Fund will curb the progress in
meeting the targets of the Paris Agreement. According to the
Financial Budget of the U.S. in its 2018 Fiscal Year, the
budgets for international climate activities by the Department
of State and USAID have been cut by US$ 10.9 billion or by
28.7% together. The ﬁnancial support to Global Climate
Change Initiatives has been canceled. The Global Climate
Change Initiatives support all climate-related bilateral actions
that track and reduce emissions and enhance the capacity of
developing countries to develop renewable energy, as well as
provide ﬁnancial support to the UNFCCC and IPCC. In
addition, the contribution of the U.S. to the Green Climate
Fund has been canceled. The Obama administration previously
committed US$ 3 billion to help developing countries mitigate
climate impacts. The Obama administration has paid US$ 1
billion. The remaining funds have been canceled.
215
ZHANG Y.-X. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
Third, although the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris
Agreement impacts the extensiveness and effectiveness of
global climate governance, it is not enough to change the
global emission structure. However, if the U.S. refuses to
fulﬁll the commitments in its NDC, it will be a bad example
for other countries. Other countries might reverse their posi-
tions in international climate change or take no actions, thus
harming the cooperation established among countries and
shocking the global cooperation mechanism. Analysis has
shown that India and China have provided great contributions
to reduce GHG emissions in light of their active mitigation
policies. In 2030, global carbon emissions will be reduced by
2e3 billion tCO2. This ﬁgure is considerably higher than the
400 million tCO2 claimed by Trump (H€ohne et al., 2017). If
Trump's climate policy is fully implemented, U.S. emissions
will remain constant instead of decreasing.
3.2.2. Impact on the political reputation and international
cooperation of the U.S.
The withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris Agreement op-
poses sustainable development and climate justice. Denying
the climate policy of the former president will harm the in-
ternational image of the U.S. as a responsible country. This
move will further break up the conﬁdence of the alliance be-
tween the U.S. and the EU. In fact, the Prime Minister of
Germany, Merkel, has already claimed the time has ended
when the U.S. and the EU could completely believe each
other. She also called for EU citizens to hold their fates in their
own hands. Therefore, the U.S. will lose its leadership in
climate issues because of its withdrawal from the Paris
Agreement.
3.2.3. Impact on the long-term economic development of
the U.S.
The withdrawal from the Paris Agreement will improve the
U.S. economy for the short- but not the long-term. The support
on domestic traditional fossil fuel sector could lead to the
short-lived prosperity of the sector. However, the coal industry
of the U.S. is overloaded. Renewable power is as cheap as or
cheaper than coal power. Environmental issues could also
cause the coal industry to lose its competitiveness. To rebuild
the coal industry is likely unsustainable. The global energy
market has greatly changed in the past 10 years. Wind and
solar energy have become cheaper. In many countries,
renewable energy is as cost effective as fossil energy. Since
2015, most newly installed power plants have provided
renewable energy. Though the overall investment value has
decreased by 1/4, investment in renewable energy has
increased by 9% in 2016 compared with that in 2015 (IEA,
2016). State governments and the market mechanism in the
U.S. have strong inﬂuence on the development of renewable
energy. Despite the lack of support from the federal govern-
ment, the renewable energy sector still has support from
almost 30 states, including the states of New York and Cali-
fornia. In addition, Apple, Amazon, and Microsoft also sup-
port climate change actions. Therefore, what Trump called
America First is probably only an election slogan.
3.3. Impact on the climate change response of
developing countries
One of Trump's reasons for withdrawing the U.S. from the
Paris Agreement is that large developing countries lack miti-
gation effort. As a re-bargaining condition for the U.S. to back
the Agreement, he may probably place more pressure on large
developing countries by denying the CBDR principle and
requiring that large developing counties raising their mitiga-
tion goals will be and further asking large developing coun-
tries
to
provide
more
ﬁnancial
support
and
improve
technology transfer. In addition, he can still link environmental
and trade issues to make developing countries take on envi-
ronmental responsibilities and obey environmental standards
similar to that of developed countries. He can use environ-
mental articles in trading agreements to impose green barriers
to developing countries. Hence, the space and equity for
development in developing countries will be narrowed down
and crowded out. On the other hand, without the U.S.'s
commitment, to fully implement the targets of the Paris
Agreement large developing countries will be forced to take
on more burden. From a third aspect, the U.S. has cut off or
decreased ﬁnancial support to international cooperation and
organizations on climate change, such as UNFCCC and IPCC.
Large developing countries will have to provide more ﬁnancial
support. Fourth, from the strategic aspect, climate cooperation
between the U.S. and China, as a highlight of overall
ChinaeU.S. relations, will be weakened. To some extent, it
will also negatively affect science and technology cooperation
between China and the U.S. Finally, some developing coun-
tries might be expected to do more. For example, the world has
a great expectation for China to take the leadership in global
climate governance. However, the capability of China to take
on such a responsibility, even it is the biggest developing
country, should ﬁrst be evaluated.
4. Impact on future climate science and technology
4.1. Cutting public budget on climate change and
strengthening the roles of the local government and
private sectors
In early 2017, the executive ofﬁce of the U.S. President
released the Budget Outline of the 2018 Fiscal Year “America
First, a Budget Blueprint to Make America Great Again”.1 The
budget of federal research institutions have been drastically
cut down. The roles of local actions and private companies are
encouraged. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is
facing the largest budget cut in history: US$ 2.6 billion, or
31.4% of the whole budget. The budget cut 1) stops ﬁnancial
support to the Clean Power Plan, International Climate
Change Program, and Cooperation on Climate Change
Research; 2) cancels support to speciﬁc local actions and
1 Ofﬁce of Management and Budget (OMB). America First: A Budget
Blueprint to Make American Great Again.
216
ZHANG Y.-X. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
returns the duties for environmental protection activities and
plans to state and local governments; and 3) cancels more than
50 EPA programs. The budget for the Department of Energy
has been reduced by US$ 1.7 billion or by 5.6% of the total
budget. Advanced energy research and development could be
better supported by private sectors, which can commercialize
innovation. Hence, the Budget canceled ARPA-E, seventeen
credit insurance plans for innovative technology, and one
production plan for cars with advanced technology. The
budget demand for NASA was lower by 0.8% than the 2017
implementation level. NASA was the ﬁrst organization to alert
the global community to the impacts of carbon emissions and
their greenhouse effects. The Trump administration has made
NASA refocus on space investigation and advanced aircraft.
The 2017 budget also ended four earth science task forces and
reduced funding to the Earth Science Research Fund.
4.2. Impact on international scientiﬁc research
The U.S. is always and absolutely the most prominent
power in global climate research. As shown in the SCI-E
database of the Web of Science of the U.S. Science Infor-
mation Research Institution, the quality and quantity of
climate literature in 2010e2016 are dominated by studies
from the U.S. A total of 113,918 papers on climate change
were published. Among these papers, 39,929 were submitted
from the U.S. and accounted for 35.1% of all climate change
publications, ranking ﬁrst worldwide. The U.S. production of
literature is far more than the second country, the UK. The
UK contributed 14,207 papers, or 12.5% of the total number
of papers. China contributed the third highest number of pa-
pers, 11,491 or 10.1%. Meantime, 4089 papers with a climate
change theme have been published in seven top journals2; the
U.S. contributed 2247 or 55.0% of these papers. The U.S.
researchers contributed 74 of the top 100 most frequently
cited papers. The number of climate change papers increases
on a yearly basis. The U.S. is the number one contributor to
world literature production, and more than 35% of published
papers are from the U.S. In some years, this proportion also
exceeds 40%. As shown in Fig. 1, experts from the U.S. have
provided prominent supporting efforts to global climate
change research. In addition to universities, the top 10 orga-
nizations that contribute the most to the literature on climate
change are the U.S. Ministry of Agriculture, U.S. Geological
Investigation Agency, U.S. National Ocean Atmosphere
Management Agency, U.S. Ministry of Energy, U.S. Forestry
Agency, NASA, and some federal agencies. The budgets for
all these agencies have been slashed by the Trump adminis-
tration. Speciﬁc areas that will face ﬁnancial cuts include
ocean and space monitoring and climate change research.
Therefore, scientiﬁc research on climate change will be
greatly affected.
4.3. Impact on future climate technology
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
released an International Patent Classiﬁcation (IPC) green
inventory on the September 16, 2010. This inventory provides
information on the environmentally sound technology patents
listed by the UNFCCC Secretariat. It includes seven technol-
ogy classes, such as renewable production, transportation,
energy saving,
waste
management,
agriculture,
forestry,
institutional legislation and planning, and nuclear power.3 To
ﬁnd evidence for the position of the U.S. in the global context
of low-carbon technology development, we used the DII
database on Web of Science to check nine areas of patents,
including wind power, solar power, ocean power, electricity
cars, nuclear power, LED, biomass and waste as fuels power,
reuse of the waste heat, and joint circulate power plant.
The results show that 1) the Copenhagen Climate Confer-
ence greatly promoted the development of low-carbon tech-
nology in 2009. Beyond nuclear power, the number of patents
in the remaining areas has boomed since 2009 and continues
to increase. This triggered the growth of geothermal power,
waste heat utilization, and joint circulate power plants, among
other areas. 2) The numbers of patents from China, the U.S.,
and the world are unbalanced in the above nine areas. This is
consistent with the results of Chen (2011). Solar power and
electric car patents are the highest. The number of patents on
biomass and waste fuel power, waste heat utilization, and joint
circulate power plant is relatively low. 3) Before 2009, the
U.S. had more patents in the majority of low-carbon areas.
After 2009, however, the number of Chinese patents for low-
carbon technology rapidly grew. China is surpassing the U.S.
and contributed the highest proportion of patents in low-
carbon areas, as shown in Fig. 2.
Compared with the advantages of the U.S. in scientiﬁc
research on climate change, that of the U.S. on low-carbon
technology is not that competitive. Even during the Obama
presidency, low-carbon technology in the U.S. did not exhibit
robust growth. By contrast, low-carbon technology rapidly
developed in China. This could be attributed to the resolution
and strength that Chinese government has taken in responding
0
6000
12000
18000
2000
2005
2010
2015
Literatures 
Year 
Global
U.S.
China
Fig. 1. Annual number of climate-change-related literatures from the globe,
the U.S., and China during 2000e2015.
2 PNAS, Nature, Science, Nature Climate Change, Natural Hazards, Nature
Geoscience, Nature Communications.
3 WIPO: http://www.wipo.int/classiﬁcations/ipc/en/est/.
217
ZHANG Y.-X. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
to climate change. Under Trump's anti-climate policies, people
have a reason to worry about the future of low-carbon tech-
nology development in the U.S. On one hand, now and in the
future of global low-carbon technology development, the
Trump administration will reduce the competitive power of the
U.S. with their climate policies. On the other hand, according
to the search results, innovative technology is contributed by
GE, Ford, IBM, Westinghouse Electronic, GNF-A, SEAR-
ETE, and other large companies. Therefore, changes in the
U.S. government will not greatly inﬂuence private innovation.
5. Conclusions and discussion
5.1. Global response to climate change is in the right
direction and remains the main theme of international
cooperation
The international climate regime is dealing on public goods
and requires scarce strategic resources allocation. It inﬂuences
international politics and economic structure. The evolution of
the climate regime combines efforts from scientiﬁc studies,
international political and economic development, stake-
holders, and other aspects (Richard, 2017). The Paris Agree-
ment has proposed a long-term goal to ﬁght for. It also
encourages all possible entities to join and protects the rights
and obligations of parties. Its mechanism of implementation
and compliance emphasize transparency, non-confrontation,
and non-punishment. It shows that the art of negotiation re-
quires compromise and practice. Thus, it allows the NDC to be
implemented without the inﬂuence of any other countries. The
importance of the U.S. is decreasing as its total contribution to
total global emission is decreasing. From a global view,
although the effectiveness of the Paris Agreement is not as
high as before because of the withdrawal of the U.S., other
parties will still make active efforts to implement its policies
and fulﬁll their commitments.
5.2. Climate governance has entered an era in which
non-parties start count
IPCC AR5 has summarized the structure of the Paris
Agreement and mechanism on global climate change and
proposed that the UNFCCC acts as the axis, whereas non-
UNFCCC institutions
act as
the
spikes
(IPCC, 2014).
Climate negotiation is entering a new era. Although conﬂicts
remain, the essence of negotiation is the effort of taking re-
sponsibility for important global affairs. The objectives of
climate negotiation are to set up proper global climate
governance (Du, 2014; Zou et al., 2015). The substance of
responding to climate change is to lead the global society to a
complete transformation to a low-carbon and green society.
Hence, achieving sustainable development will beneﬁt all
human beings. Climate negotiation should make various
parties come to a consensus in building a global climate
Fig. 2. Patents for low-carbon technologies from the world, the U.S., and China at different periods.
218
ZHANG Y.-X. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
regime. Despite some present difﬁculties, global climate
governance
is
in
the
right
direction
of
seeking
on-
confrontational
and
winewin
cooperation.
Governments,
companies, and civil societies are gathering together and
sharing the beneﬁts of green transformation.
Putting aside the withdrawal of the U.S. from the Paris
Agreement and the ﬂuctuation in climate negotiation, global
climate governance is stepping into a new era. It is different
from that in 1992, when the UNFCCC was ﬁrst started and
lead by the U.S. and EU. There was a big gap then between the
North and the South. It is also different from what it was in
2001, when the U.S. refused to sign the Kyoto Protocol and
the EU hesitated to take the lead. It is still different from what
it was in 2009, when EU could not balance all powers and
negotiation broke. The single and double polarizations of the
global climate governance have lost their positions. Multiple
countries and country groups are taking the ﬂoor together.
Despite country parties, sub-national entities are also making
their efforts e.g. local governments, cities, companies, NGOs,
individuals, and other non-parties. The participants are diver-
siﬁed in global climate governance.
5.3. Strengthening technological innovation becomes
more realistic
The core issue in the framework of the sustainable response
to climate change is not to exert negative impacts on economy
and society. Through technological and institutional innova-
tion, people could reduce GHGs to achieve low-carbon or non-
carbon development (Thomlinson et al., 2008). A low-carbon
technology system is being formulated and is a crucial signal
for
promoting
national
competitive
power.
Therefore,
strengthening cooperation among companies, cities, univer-
sities, and academics is the right direction for international
climate governance to take. Although the U.S. government has
stepped back on climate policies, climate technology and
research in the U.S. remain strong. Local governments and
civil communities substantially cooperate on pilot projects and
technology research and development. The carbon-driven
standard system should be established. Policies should be
used to stimulate investment in low-carbon technology.
Different policy tools and ﬁnancing models should be used
given that technologies in different countries are in different
stages and types. International cooperation on climate tech-
nologies should be promoted.
5.4. Enforcing the capacity building of climate scientiﬁc
research and public awareness
Climate change deniers will always exist and are one of the
obstacles to the mitigation of climate change. The main tasks
for improving the international response to climate change
include the enforcement of the study on basic climate science;
the enhancement of the awareness of climate change; and the
reduction of the uncertainties on climate change forecasts,
attributions, and risk assessment. In addition, the potential
economic beneﬁts of green and low-carbon technologies are
another important aspect for policy making. The economic
analysis on green and low-carbon technologies and energy
transformation will support decision making and actions.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the 9th program of the
Emergency Projects of Ministry of Science and Technology
(2016), major project of the Ministry of Education (15JZD035),
China CDM project supporting research on IPCC AR5 Working
Group I and Working Group II Reports, Synthesis Report, and
Inventory Working Group Report (2013024), and Special
Program on Climate Change (CCSF201731).
References
Bloomberg, 2016. New Energy Outlook 2016: Powering a Changing World.
Chao, Q.-C., Zhang, Y.-X., Gao, X., et al., 2016. Paris Agreement: a new start
for global climate governance. Clim. Change Res. 12 (1), 61e67 (in
Chinese).
Chen, K., 2011. Global trend for low carbon technology patents. Sci. Focus 6
(3), 44e50 (in Chinese).
Chen, Y., 2014. Implications on sustainable development and equity issues in
IPCC AR5. Progress. Inquisitiones Mutat. Clim. 10 (5), 348e354 (in
Chinese).
Du, X.-W., 2014. Essence and resolution of international climate negotiation.
Adv. Clim. Change Res. 5 (3), 149e152.
H€ohne, N., Luna, L., Fekete, H., et al., 2017. Action by China and India Slows
Emissions Growth, President Trump's Policies Likely to Cause US Emis-
sions
to
Flatten.
http://climateactiontracker.org/assets/publications/
brieﬁng_papers/CAT_2017-05-15_Brieﬁng_India-China-USA.pdf.
IEA, 2016. Renewable Energy. Medium-term Market Report 2016. http://
www.iea.org/Textbase/npsum/MTrenew2016sum.pdf.
IPCC, 2014. Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contri-
bution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge and New York.
Kemp, L., 2017. Better out than in. Nat. Clim. Change. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1038/nclimate3309.
Nordhaus, W., 2007. Critical assumptions in the stern review on climate
change. Science 317 (5845), 1682e1682.
Rawls, J., 1988. A Theory of Justice (H.-H. He, S.-B. Liao, Trans.). China
Social Sciences Press, Beijing (in Chinese).
Richard, S.J., 2017. The structure of the climate debate. Energy Policy 104,
431e438.
Rubenzer,
T.,
2017.
Today's
Foreign
Policy
Issues:
Democrats
and
Republicans.
Thomlinson, S., Zorlu, P., Langley, C., 2008. Innovation and Technology
Transfer: Framework for a Global Climate Deal. E3G and Chatham House.
UNEP, Bloomberg, 2017. Global Trends in Renewable Energy Investment
2017.
Zheng, G.-G., Chao, Q.-C., Zhang, Y.-X., 2016. Paris Climate Change Con-
ference: a fresh start of international climate governance in the new era.
Chin. J. Urban Environ. Stud. 4 (1), 1e9.
Zou, J., Fu, S., Chen, J., et al., 2015. Global Climate Governance: Structuring
an Innovative Pathway of International Mechanisms for Human Beings.
China Planning Press, Beijing (in Chinese).
219
ZHANG Y.-X. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 8 (2017) 213e219
