Research article
Pathways to Climate Health: Active learning and effective communication
to optimize climate change action an evaluation of the climate change
and renal health awareness and education toolkit for healthcare
providers: Reducing climate-health risks in primary care
Christie Torresa,*, Jane Dixonb
a Central Texas VA Health Care System, 1901 S. Veteran Drive, Temple, TX 76504, United States
b Yale School of Nursing, United States
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 21 July 2022
Accepted 15 December 2022
Available online 17 December 2022
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: Globally, the combined effects of extreme heat due to climate change, dehydration, and socio-
economic disparities have been linked to preventable kidney disease. Health care professionals (HCPs) must
elevate mitigation of climate change impacts on health by integrating climate-aware health strategies into
routine practice, but there is little guidance on speciﬁcally how to do this.
Methods: This quality improvement report describes the development of a climate change and renal health
toolkit for HCPs, and its implementation in two primary care clinics in a Central Texas Veterans Administra-
tion medical center (United States). The toolkit was accessed by HCPs who completed pre (n=43) and post
(n=33) assessments to measure their attitudes and self-efﬁcacy in facilitating a climate-health discussion
with patients on the impacts of climate change on kidney health; knowledge of climate change and kidney
disease also was assessed.
Results: We found signiﬁcant increases in HCPs’ attitudes and self-efﬁcacy for facilitating discussion
with patients on impacts of climate change on kidney health and related responsibilities in primary
care, with 90% reporting improved conﬁdence for discussing climate change and health with
patients. We also found signiﬁcant improvement in HCPs’ knowledge about climate change and kid-
ney disease.
Discussion: Findings indicate that a self-led and easily accessible toolkit is feasible to implement, is well-
received by HCPs, and achieves the established educational goals.
Conclusion: This approach provides an evidence-based model for continued efforts to inform health practice
for integration of climate change into clinical practice.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change action
Communication for sustainable healthcare
Educational intervention
Primary care
Introduction
Climate change is one of the top public health threats worldwide,
as it has been associated with poor air quality, wildﬁres, extreme
weather events producing social disruption, vector-borne illnesses
and death [1,2]. Further, climate change poses a growing threat to
nutritional and housing insecurity, greater exposure to environ-
mental toxins, and stresses to both mental health and physical
well-being [3]. Evidence also shows that the social inequalities in
both the resources and the opportunities required for optimal
health places people at high risk of climate-related injuries [4].
Taken together, the impacts of climate change increase numerous
risk factors for injury and disease, signiﬁcantly inﬂuencing human
health.
Kidney disease is of particular interest in this context because the
kidney has a unique role in providing protection from heat and dehy-
dration and is an important site of heat stress-related illness. Extreme
heat when combined with dehydration has been linked to adverse
Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CKDu, chronic
kidney disease of unknown origin; DM, diabetes; HCPs, health care professionals; HTN,
hypertension; IMEH, integrative model for environmental health; KTA, knowledge to
action framework; QI, quality improvement; SDOH, social determinants of health;
SDGs, sustainable development goals; VA, veterans administration
Toolkit: To access the toolkit, The Climate Change and Renal Health Awareness and
Education Toolkit for Healthcare Providers, use this link: https://nursing.yale.edu/sites/
default/ﬁles/ﬁles/Climate-Change-and-Renal-Health-Toolkit_FINAL.pdf
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: christie.torres@yale.edu (C. Torres).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100198
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
kidney health outcomes—directly causing or aggravating pre-exist-
ing kidney disease and increasing exposure to risk factors for kidney
disease, particularly acute kidney injury (AKI), chronic kidney disease
(CKD), and kidney stones [5−8].
Kidney disease is a worldwide health crisis, which affects over
850 million people throughout the world [9,10]. The burden of kid-
ney disease is increasing, and experts estimate that by 2040, it will
jump in ranking to be the ﬁfth leading cause of death worldwide [9].
The projected rise in kidney disease incidence and prevalence is
alarming and of concern, especially when viewed in the context of its
disease burden and its underrecognized and underreported statistics.
The number of individuals with kidney disease continues to escalate
yet many remain unaware they are at risk. This is because, at ﬁrst,
kidney disease is silent with no overt signs or symptoms until it is in
its advanced stage [10,11].
Further increasing its share of disease burden is the lack of
awareness on the part of HCPs of all the types of kidney disease
and its multiple risk factors, when compared with their awareness
of diabetes (DM) and hypertension (HTN) [12]. Although often con-
sidered a consequence of other chronic conditions such as DM or
HTN, the roles of socio-economic inequalities in the kidney disease
epidemic are becoming steadily of more concern [13]. These non-
traditional risk factors for kidney disease include socioeconomic
disparities such as poverty, unsheltered homelessness, food and
water insecurity, and a lack of primary health care or essential
medications, as well as environmental factors such as poor hydra-
tion in people who perform activities in hot environments for pro-
longed periods of time [14−16].
Heat-related kidney disease is preventable [14]. Primary care
HCPs play a key role in providing support to patients with climate-
health risks, as they are often the ﬁrst point of contact for patients
and see patients on a regular basis [17,18]. Primary care visits offer
opportunities to facilitate climate change and health counseling
and deliver information about the serious health effects of climate
change. Primary care HCPs with climate-health training are more
likely to identify and closely monitor susceptible patients, to
advise on risk-reducing strategies shortly prior to, during, and fol-
lowing heatwaves. For example, for at risk patients, HCPs can
counsel on how to recognize early symptoms of heat injuries and
take appropriate actions such as proper hydration and relocation
to cooler environments during heat waves [19]. Overall, helping
patients to recognize risk factors is the quickest way to reduce pre-
ventable kidney disease and the immense cost of its treatment
[11,19].
To help primary care HCPs perform effective climate-health
counseling, training is necessary to equip HCPs with the knowl-
edge and skills to be able to communicate the health impacts of cli-
mate change and to understand the connections between climate
change, kidney disease and the social determinants of health
(SDOH) in their community, as are evidence-based climate-health
materials that can be easily accessed. The objective of this quality
improvement (QI) project was to develop an evidence-based tool-
kit, The Climate Change and Renal Health Awareness and Education
Toolkit for Healthcare Providers. The toolkit was designed to bring
climate-health evidence to the front lines of primary care. We
implemented the toolkit into routine clinical practice in two Cen-
tral Texas Veterans Administration (United States) primary care
clinics and evaluated its effectiveness as a knowledge translation
strategy intended to encourage the adoption of climate-health
counseling as part of routine practice.
Methods
The QI project is unique in that it took a creative co-design
approach in developing an educational toolkit that would be useful
and practical and one that acts on the inequalities of the SDOH in the
context of climate change and kidney disease. We developed and
evaluated the project through an eight-step process based on the
Knowledge to Action (KTA) Framework [20], along with integration of
the Integrative Model for Environmental Health (IMEH) [21]. As shown
in Table 1, we used an iterative approach in designing and imple-
menting the project, in which early phases informed later results,
and repeated the phases until desired results were achieved.
Knowledge-To-Action framework
The KTA framework is a guiding framework to move clinical evi-
dence into utilization. As a process model, it outlines a series of steps
that can be taken in variable order for the creation and application of
knowledge [20]. The framework’s 8-step approach is as follows: (i)
Identify the problem; assess barriers to knowledge use, (ii) knowl-
edge creation, (iii) identify, review, select knowledge, (iv) tailor inter-
vention, (v) assess barriers and facilitators to knowledge use; adapt
to local context, (vi) develop intervention and implementation strat-
egy, (vii) implement intervention; monitor knowledge use; and (viii)
sustain knowledge use [20].
Integrative Model for Environmental Health
The IMEH is a guiding conceptual framework comprising four
domains: Physiological, Vulnerability, Epistemological, and Health
Protection [21]. Each domain is interrelated and when collectively
applied to intervention design the framework allows health inequal-
ities to be fully considered.
Toolkit development
Step 1: Identify the problem & assess barriers to knowledge use
Guided by the KTA framework, we evaluated recommendations
made by health and public health organizations and the Executive
Order 14008, Tackling the Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad to iden-
tify a need for a climate-ready health care workforce [22,23]. After
review, we developed a survey and administered to all HCPs in the
participating clinics to formally assess perceptions about climate
change as a health issue in clinical practice prior to implementing the
toolkit. As shown in Table 2, three questions were created using a 5-
point Likert Scale response to determine how well the staff under-
stood the connections between climate change and kidney health.
Step 2: Knowledge creation
We then used the IMEH to structure our literature review to
develop an approach to informing the toolkit’s design. We found that
ﬁndings from our literature review were grouped easily into the
IMEH’s domains and further categorized by the Working List of Ques-
tions for Analyzing an Environmental Problem found in the model.
The questions that we found most useful were the following: What is
the problem? Who is affected? How does everyone know about this?
And what do people do about it? This was an optimal approach in
analyzing and communicating climate change inﬂuences on kidney
health and its inter-linkages among the SDOH with equal consider-
ation on climate-health policy.
Steps 3 and 4: Identify, review, select knowledge & Tailor intervention
Next, a panel of experts judged the content validity of the toolkit’s
education components, using quantitative methods. The committee
was comprised of two physicians specializing in nephrology and
chronic kidney disease of unknown origin (CKDu) research, and a
nurse leader from the Yale School of Nursing with an extensive cli-
mate-health research background. Items of content that met the vali-
dation criteria were included in the ﬁnal toolkit.
C. Torres and J. Dixon
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
2
Step 5: Assess barriers and facilitators to knowledge use & adapt to local
context
The toolkit was integrated into the local context and evidence-
based design elements were used to enhance the delivery of the tool-
kit to decrease barriers for its clinical adoption. For example, in the
assessment of common barriers to care in the primary care settings,
our ﬁndings from other research highlighted competing patient
health needs, time constraints, a lack of shared knowledge and avail-
able training, perceived political nature of this issue, and no clear
guidelines to guide care as potential hindrances [24]. Therefore, to
minimize barriers and facilitate the toolkit’s perceived ease of use,
we designed the project goals to support the goals of the organiza-
tion. Key stakeholders, including the leaders and all HCPs in the pri-
mary care setting were engaged and actively involved in all phases of
the project. We then designed the toolkit to be a digital resource that
could provide users with easy to read and quick credible facts, with
hyperlinks to facilitate free, rapid access to research evidence-based
medical information. Lastly, visual content was designed to be
interactive and engaging for its users and was developed in collabo-
ration with a professional graphic designer team (Fig. 1).
Step 6: Develop intervention and implementation strategy
The intervention, The Climate Change and Renal Health Awareness
and Education Toolkit for Healthcare Providers, had a focus on
extreme heat and kidney disease and was developed based on the
most current climate-health research. Its educational content
included foundational knowledge of kidney disease, and the impact
of extreme heat/high temperatures on kidney health. Additionally,
interactive resources to help HCPs effectively communicate about
climate change and health also were included, such as a heat stress
and kidney disease illustration, tips for conducting climate change
and health counseling in the clinic setting, climate-health pocket
reminders cards, and commitment strategies to support sustainable
climate-smart health care practices. We expected that the increase
of knowledge of the toolkit, the effects of communication and ease
Table 1.
Implementation plan and results with activities of “The climate change and renal health awareness and education toolkit for healthcare providers” based on the KTA
action cycle and IMEH
KTA Phase
Methods for Each Phase
Results
Identify the problem; assess barriers to knowledge
use
1. Developed questionnaire to assess knowledge and
attitudes related to climate-health
1. Assessment of practice gap: Active Executive
Order 14008 [23], but climate-health is not part of
mainstay practice in the two primary care clinics
2. HCPs do not consistently counsel their patients on
climate-health and are unsure of their role in
addressing climate change with their patients
Knowledge creation
1. Review of current evidence for climate change
and kidney disease in vulnerable population
groups
Recommendations for:
1. Use of climate-health materials in clinical practice
to support patients with climate-health risks
2. Prevalence of CKD in the Veteran population is
estimated to be 34% higher than in the general
population [25]
3. Approximately 11% (960,000) of the VA patients
meet the established criteria for kidney disease,
while only 5% (324,000) of Veterans have a diag-
nosis of kidney disease, supporting the need for
improved CKD prevention efforts [26]
Identify, review, select knowledge
1. Literature review guided and categorized accord-
ing to the four domains of the IMEH
1. Selected knowledge (i.e. climate change and kid-
ney disease and health equity)
2. Evidence easily grouped into the four domains
Tailor intervention
1. Organized 3-member expert panel: their special-
ized input and recommendations were gathered
and reﬂected upon
2. Adaptation of the evidence to ﬁt into the local
context, primary care and HCP; recommendations
for public health interventions developed by HCPs
for clinical practice
1. Expert input was instrumental in reﬁning the
toolkit and its education content
2. Primary care health care professional: a. Any
member of the health care team who advocates
for climate-smart practices and increases climate
health awareness to patients
Assess barriers and facilitators to knowledge use;
adapt knowledge to local context
1. Assessment of common barriers in the primary care
setting was reviewed in our review of the literature
1. Barriers included competing patient health needs,
time constraints, a lack of shared knowledge, per-
ceived political nature of this issue, and shortages
of primary care providers
Develop intervention and implementation strategy
1. Toolkit education content guided by the Working
List of Questions for Analyzing an Environmental
Program in the IMEH
2. The toolkit was developed with HCPs in mind
1. Education content included foundational knowl-
edge of kidney disease, the impact of heat
extreme temperatures on kidney health, health
equity, and ways to raise climate-health aware-
ness at all systems level
2. The climate change and renal health toolkit was
designed to be an interactive, creative, and a
dynamic stand-alone resource to improve HCPs
access to climate change and health information
Implement intervention and monitor knowledge use
1. Utilized pre-posttest surveys to measure HCPs’
knowledge, attitude, and self-efﬁcacy and to
assess any change because of the toolkit
1. Survey results demonstrated statistically signiﬁ-
cant improvement in HCP’s knowledge, attitude
and self-efﬁcacy related to climate health
Sustain knowledge use
1. Toolkit was hosted on a VA Intranet SharePoint
site accessible to all staff; it was made freely avail-
able at www.nursing.yale.edu; and launched
using a dissemination plan that targeted climate
change and health professional networks and
National Associations
1. Broadscale dissemination
C. Torres and J. Dixon
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
3
of accessing its resources should increase clinical adoption for sus-
tainment.
Step 7: Implement intervention & monitor knowledge use
A pretest-posttest process was utilized to measure HCPs’ knowl-
edge, attitude, and self-efﬁcacy and to assess any change associated
with the toolkit. An online 6-item pretest and identical posttest with
a 5-point Likert Scale response and one multiple choice response
were created using Survey Monkey. HCPs providing care in the pri-
mary care setting were eligible to participate. Professional clinic lead-
ers responsible for advancing evidence-based practice also were
invited to participate. We recruited from two primary care clinics
within Central Texas Veterans Administration with a combined total
of 268 HCPs to understand the toolkit’s effectiveness as a knowledge
translation strategy for facilitating a practice change among HCPs. To
evaluate the nature of the toolkit’s usability for learning and clinical
practice, we also developed a 4-item questionnaire to determine user
experience. The project was evaluated as a minimal risk by Yale Insti-
tutional Review Board and received exempt status.
Toolkit evaluation
In September 2021, each primary care clinic received an email
containing the toolkit, with an explanation of the project and a link
to the surveys. Participants were asked to complete the anonymous
survey before and after using the toolkit over a 2-week time-period.
Descriptive statistics were used for initial analysis of all HCP
responses. Between-subjects analysis was used because participants
were not given a unique numerical identiﬁcation number that could
track participants across time and match pre-and post-observations,
such as in within-subjects designs. The statistical assumption of nor-
mality was checked for using skewness and kurtosis statistics. Lev-
ene’s Test was then used to check for the assumption of homogeneity
variance. When both assumptions were met, independent samples t-
tests were used to compare the pre-group observations against the
post-group observations of each individual question. Means and stan-
dard deviations were calculated to give context to the t-test ﬁndings.
When a binary, categorical outcome was used, then non-parametric
Chi-square analysis was utilized to compare the independent groups.
All analyses were performed using SPSS Version 26 (Armonk, NY:
IBM Corp.) and statistical signiﬁcance was assumed at a p-value of
0.05.
Table 2
The survey questions developed to assess HCP’s knowledge and attitudes regard-
ing climate change and health before the educational intervention, with the
results as noted.
Question
Level
Frequency (%)
How informed do you feel about
topics of climate change and
health?
Not informed
7 (26.9%)
Slightly informed
7 (26.9%)
Neither
2 (15.4%)
Informed
4 (15.4%)
Very informed
4 (15.4%)
Providers should have an active
role in addressing climate
change with their patients.
Strongly disagree
3 (11.5%)
Disagree
4 (15.4%)
Neither
9 (34.6%)
Agree
5 (19.2%)
Strongly agree
3 (22.5%)
How comfortable are you in
counseling your patients about
climate change and renal
health?
Extremely uncomfortable
7 (26.9%)
Uncomfortable
8 (30.8%)
Neither
9 (34.6%)
Comfortable
1 (3.8%)
Extremely comfortable
1 (3.8%)
Fig. 1. This is one example of a creative and vivid image used in the toolkit to capture users’ attention and inspire them to think about the connections between climate change and
kidney disease. The image illustrates the four domains of the IMEH in action to help communicate the connections between climate change and kidney disease in a dynamic way.
C. Torres and J. Dixon
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
4
Results
Pre-implementation survey
In total, 26 HCPs completed the pre-implementation survey. Con-
sistent with previous research, our survey identiﬁed that HCPs felt
they should actively address climate-health with their patients but
did not feel comfortable counseling patients on this issue in the clini-
cal setting. This gap suggested a vital opportunity to increase climate
change and health awareness and knowledge.
Toolkit implementation results
A total of 43 HCPs completed pre-test surveys (a 16% participation
rate) and 33 HCPs completed post-test surveys (a 12% response rate).
The assumptions of normality and homogeneity of variance were
met for each analysis. Post-test participants had signiﬁcantly higher
scores than pre-test participants on the following measures: knowl-
edge on the impacts of climate change on renal health, t(74) = 4.80, p
< 0.001; comfort facilitating a climate change −kidney health discus-
sion, t(74) = 4.78, p < 0.001; and being responsible for counseling
patients on the emerging issue of climate change and health, t
(74) = 2.32, p = 0.023. There were no signiﬁcant differences between
the pre and post participants on the following measures: screening
individuals for housing insecurity and access to air conditioning and
shade during a clinical encounter, t(74) = 0.99, p = 0.33; and stating
that climate-smart health care has the potential to save lives, t
(74) = 0.91, p = 0.36. The means and standard deviations for the t-test
analyses can be found in Table 3. Also, a signiﬁcantly higher propor-
tion of post-test participants (25 of 33) than pre-test participants (15
of 43) correctly answered the question about risk factors for kidney
disease, X2(1) = 12.51, p < 0.001. The frequencies and percentages for
these ﬁndings are presented in Tables 3 and 4. Toolkit usability: A
large majority of respondents found the toolkit to be useful and
usable: 89% agreed that it increased their knowledge of climate
change and health; 90% said it improved their conﬁdence in discus-
sing climate change and health with their patients; and 80% said they
were likely to use this resource in their clinical practice. The results
of the survey instrument are presented in Table 5.
Discussion
This project utilized a creative co-design approach using the KTA
framework and the IMEH to develop an educational toolkit. We
examined the knowledge and practices of two Central Texas VA pri-
mary care clinics and sought to raise awareness about climate change
and renal health being part of clinical practice. A lack of knowledge
regarding climate-health interactions was identiﬁed among HCPs in
the initial survey. The HCPs self-identiﬁed that further climate-health
training was needed to increase conﬁdence in discussing this issue
with their patients. Therefore, the toolkit focused on raising HCP
awareness of kidney disease education to include the effects of cli-
mate change on health, building their skills and knowledge for effec-
tive climate change engagement and communication in the practice
setting. As anticipated, the results of the project provided some evi-
dence linking the toolkit intervention with HCPs’ improved climate-
health knowledge and self-efﬁcacy that was observed in the main
project analysis.
Additionally, the project contributes novel insight on how the KTA
framework and the IMEH model can be used together to guide health
interventions and evaluate their impact to promote recommenda-
tions in climate-health best practices. We feel that the IMEH is appro-
priate for our toolkit design because it has a greater focus on SDOH,
allowing us to communicate and create the linkages between what
we know about climate change and kidney disease, the health effects,
and social justice. This also supports the current efforts towards the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that
place a priority on improving the general health and well-being of
individuals, communities, and the environment. Overall, this project
supports the toolkit as an effective strategy in raising awareness
about climate change and health in the primary care setting and pro-
vides a model for promoting best practices for climate health.
The project had some limitations. First, the usability and impact of
the toolkit were difﬁcult to assess due to unclear evaluation methods.
Thus, so far, no clinical impact of any practice change from the toolkit
has been demonstrated. Another limitation was that each participant
viewed the toolkit on his or her own time and leisure, making it chal-
lenging to control for variables, as well as whether the toolkit or
some other factors was the catalyst for change. Perhaps because of
this, 23% of the participants did not complete the posttest surveys.
Table 3
Descriptive and frequency statistics for t-test comparisons.
Question
Pre-Group (n = 43)
Post-Group (n = 33)
t-value
df
p-value
Knowledge of impacts of climate change on renal health
2.47 (1.32)
3.94 (1.34)
4.80
74
< 0.001*
Comfort with facilitating a climate change-renal health discussion
2.14 (1.06)
3.27 (0.98)
4.78
74
< 0.001*
Responsibility to counsel patients on the issues of climate change and health
3.67 (0.99)
4.18 (0.88)
2.32
74
0.023*
Screening individuals for housing insecurity and their access to air conditioning and shade
4.30 (0.56)
4.42 (0.50)
0.99
74
0.33
Climate-smart health care has the potential to save lives
4.19 (0.66)
4.33 (0.74)
0.91
74
0.36
Risk factors for kidney disease (correct)**
15 (34.9%)
25 (75.8%)
12.51
1
< 0.001*
Likert items range from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly Agree)
Note:
* Statistically signiﬁcant, p < 0.05,
** Values are frequency (percentage), all other values are mean (standard deviation)
Table 4
Chi-Square tests.
Value
df
Asymptotic Signiﬁcance (2-sided)
Exact Sig. (2-sided)
Exact Sig. (1-sided)
Pearson Chi-Square
12.512a
1
.000
Continuity Correctionb
10.926
1
.001
Likelihood Ratio
12.975
1
.000
Fisher’s Exact Test
.001
.000
Linear-by-Linear Association
12.347
1
.000
N of Valid Cases
76
a 0 cells (0.0%) have expected count less than 5. The minimum expected count is 15.63.
b Computed only for a 2 £ 2 table
5
C. Torres and J. Dixon
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
Next, given that our surveys could not be tracked over time there was
no way to link participants across measurements, therefore, reducing
the validity of our ﬁndings. A within subject analysis would have
been a stronger design. Additionally, had we used a stricter approach
to analysis using Bonferroni correction, the item about counseling
patients on the issues of climate change and health would not have
been deemed statistically signiﬁcant. However, it is noted that the
pre-test value of 3.67 is already high, leaving less room for improve-
ment. Finally, our project was limited by being a single-center project
and had a small and less diverse sample size of participants and lim-
ited response rate; therefore, the generalizability of the ﬁndings to
other settings and regions are unknown. Nevertheless, although the
limits of our non-experimental evaluation design do not allow us to
reach conclusions about the effectiveness of the toolkit in increasing
climate change and health knowledge, the data collected demon-
strate that the toolkit was deemed useful and usable by the large
majority of post-test participants. Based on the positive ﬁndings from
this project, subsequent research and piloting of this toolkit are
needed to evaluate the toolkit in a larger and more diverse sample
size of participants and settings, as well as using a stronger evalua-
tion method for improved data collection and analysis.
Conclusion
This project was an exploratory step in an initiative to expand
prevention efforts through the lens of climate change. As far as we
are aware, our QI toolkit is one of the ﬁrst resources of its kind. A
major strength of the toolkit is that it follows two well-known frame-
works and includes outside expert review and feedback. Thus, appli-
cation of the processes used for project development can be useful
for collecting information from which to draw lessons as part of
expanding the toolkit to include other types of climate-health related
conditions for daily clinical practice use.
Additionally, climate health education is now being incorporated
into curricula in some existing university programs to address the
interconnection of climate change and health. This study may help
raise awareness of the toolkit’s existence and provide one example of
an innovative approach and a model on which to build larger curricu-
lum efforts to inform health practice.
Clearly, we, as HCPs, are embarking on an exciting but challenging
journey as we improve our understanding of the impacts of climate
change on health and explore innovative ways to integrate climate-
health into clinical practice. Globally, temperatures are not getting
any cooler and kidney disease numbers are not getting smaller. If we
are to imagine a more equitable and sustainable health care system,
it is vital to increase awareness on climate-health preventive meas-
ures through education efforts so opportunities are not missed to
improve health and well-being.
Funding
This QI project did not receive any grants or support by funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-project sectors.
Access to the toolkit
https://nursing.yale.edu/sites/default/ﬁles/ﬁles/Climate%20Chan
ge%20and%20Renal%20Health%20Toolkit_FINAL.pdf
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge collaborators whose work either inﬂu-
enced or was explicitly incorporated into this article. Special thanks
are due to Dr. Ann Kurth, Dr. Fredric Finkelstein, and Dr. Ricardo Cor-
rea-Rotter for their time and commitment in serving as expert panel
members. Their extensive knowledge and expertise in climate-health
were invaluable to the project. We would also like to thank Prof. Joan
Kearney for insightful comments that greatly improved an earlier
version of the manuscript and Prof. MaryAnn Camilleri and Yale
School of Nursing in helping to disseminate the project to a wider
audience to advance climate-health awareness. We also thank all
Central Texas HCPs who took the time to participate in all phases of
the project.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found
in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100198.
Table 5
Participant toolkit feedback survey responses
Participants provided feedback on
whether the Toolkit (A) was needed as an educational resource in the primary care
setting, (B) increased their knowledge, (C) was organized in an appropriate manner
for learning, (D) increased their conﬁdence in discussing climate change and health
with patients, and (E) if they are likely to use the resource in the clinic (n=29 survey
respondents).
Question
Level
Frequency (%)
The toolkit is needed.
Strongly disagree
0 (0%)
Disagree
0 (0%)
Neither
3 (10.3%)
Agree
13 (44.8%)
Strongly agree
13 (44.8%)
I learned new knowledge from this
learning activity.
Strongly disagree
0 (0%)
Disagree
0 (0%)
Neither
3 (10.3%)
Agree
10 (34.5%)
Strongly agree
16 (55.2%)
The degree of the toolkit was organized
in an appropriate manner for the
subject.
Strongly disagree
0 (0%)
Disagree
1 (3.4%)
Neither
2 (6.9%)
Agree
11 (37.9%)
Strongly agree
15 (51.7%)
I will be able to apply the knowledge and
skills learned to improve my job
performance.
Strongly disagree
0 (0%)
Disagree
0 (0%)
Neither
3 (10.3%)
Agree
11 (37.9%)
Strongly agree
15 (51.7%)
The toolkit’s material will be useful for
my clinical practice needs.
Strongly disagree
0 (0%)
Disagree
0 (0%)
Neither
6 (20.6%)
Agree
9 (31.0%)
Strongly agree
14 (48.2%)
The toolkit is a sustainable education
resource to be used by health care
professionals.
Strongly disagree
0 (0%)
Disagree
0 (0%)
Neither
5 (17.2%)
Agree
9 (31.0%)
Strongly agree
15 (51.7%)
6
C. Torres and J. Dixon
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
References
[1] World Health Organization. (2022). Climate change. Retrieved from https://www.
who.int/health-topics/climate-change#tab=tab_1
[2] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2022). Climate effects on health.
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/default.htm
[3] Hayes K, Blashki G, Wiseman J, Burke S, Reifels L. Climate change and mental
health: risks, impacts and priority action. Int J Ment Health Syst 2021;12:1–12.
doi: 10.1186/s13033-018-0210-6.
[4] Ebi KL, Hess JJ. Health risks due to climate change: Inequity in causes and conse-
quences. Environ Health 2020;39:2056–62. doi: 10.1377/htthaff.2020.01125.
[5] Barraclough KA, Blashki GA, Holt SG, Agar JW. Climate change and kidney disease
-
threats
and
opportunities.
Kidney
Int
2017;92:526–30.
doi:
10.1016/j.
kint.2017.03.047.
[6] Borg M, Nitschke M, Williams S, McDonald S, Nairn J, Peng B. Using the excess
heat factor to indicate heatwave-related urinary disease: a case study in Adelaide,
South Australia. Int J Biometeorol 2019;63:435–47 Retrieved from https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/s00484-019-01674-5.
[7] Conti MS, Meli M, Minelli G, Palummeri E, Soli R, Toccaceli V, Vichi M. General and
speciﬁc mortality among the elderly during the heat wave in Genova. Environ Res
2003;103:267–74. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2006.06.003.
[8] Hansen AL, Bi P, Ryan P, Nitschke M, Pisaniello D, Tucker G. The effect of heat
waves on hospital admissions for renal disease in a temperate city of Australia.
Int J Epidemiol 2008;37:1359–65. doi: 10.1093/ijcdyn.165.
[9] Jager KJ, Kovesdy C, Langham R, Rosenberg M, Jha V, Vivehanand J, Zoccali C. A
single number for advocacy and communication: Worldwide more than 850 mil-
lion individuals have kidney diseases. Kidney Int 2019;96:1048–50. doi: 10.1016/
j.kint.2019.07.012.
[10] World Health Organization. (2017). The global burden of kidney disease and the
sustainable development goals. Retrieved from https://www.who.int/bulletin/
volumes/96/6/17206441/en/
[11] Li PK, Garcia-Garcia G, Lui SF, Andreoli S, Fung WW, Hradsky A, et al. Kidney
health for everyone everywhere - from prevention to detection and equitable
access to care. Kidney Int 2020;97:226–32. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2019.12.002.
[12] Fox CH, Vest BM, Kahn LS, Dickinson M, Fang H, Pace W, et al. Improving evi-
dence-based primary care for chronic kidney disease: study protocol for a cluster
randomized control trial for translating evidence into practice (TRANSLATE CKD).
Implement Sci 2013;8(1):8 Retrieved from https://www.aafp.org/dam/AAFP/
documents/patient_care/nrn/Fox_CKD%20ImprovingEvidenedBasedCare_2013.
pdf.
[13] National Kidney Foundation. (2022). Social determinants of kidney disease.
Retrieved
on October
4, 2022,
from
https://www.kidney.org/atoz/content/
kidneydiscauses
[14] Nerbass FB, Pecoits-Filho R, Clark WF, Sontrop JM, McIntyre CW, Moist L. Occupa-
tional heat stress and kidney health: From farms to factories. Kidney Int Rep
2017;2(6):998–1008. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2017.08.012.
[15] Sorensen C, Garcia-Trabanino R. A new era of climate medicine −addressing
heat-triggered renal disease. N Engl J Med 2019;381:693–6. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMp1907859.
[16] Wen B, Xu R, Wu Y, Coelho M, Saldiva PHN, Guo Y, et al. Association between
ambient temperature and hospitalization for renal diseases in Brazil during 2000
−2015:
a
nationwide
case-crossover
study.
Lancet
Regional
Health
2021;6:100101. doi: 10.1016/j.lana.2021.100101.
[17] Boland TM, Temte JL. Family medicine patient and physicians’ attitude toward cli-
mate change and health. Wilderness Environ Med 2019;30:386–93. doi: 10.1016/
j.wem.2019.08.005.
[18] Capelli O, Quattrini B, Abate F, Casalgradi B, Cacciapuoti I. Integrated care for
chronic diseases-State of the Art. Primary Care Pract 2016 doi: 10.577/63362.
[19] Parker CL, Wellbery CE, Mueller M. The changing climate: managing health
impacts. Am Fam Phys 2019;100:618–26 Retrieved from https://www.aafp.org/
afp/2019/1115/p618.html#afp20191115p618-sort1.
[20] Graham ID, Logan J, Harrison MB, Straus SE, Tetroe J, Caswell W, Robinson N. Lost
in knowledge translation: Time for a map? J Contin Educ Health Prof
2006;26:13–24. doi: 10.1002/chp.47.
[21] Dixon JK, Dixon JP. An integrative model for environmental health research. Adv
Nurs Sci 2002;24:43–57. doi: 10.1097/00012272-200203000-00006.
[22] American Public Health Association. (2021). U.S. Call to action on climate, health,
and equity: A policy action agenda. Retrieved from https://climatehealthaction.
org/cta/climatehealth-equity-policy/
[23] U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs: Clim Action Plan, August 2021. Retrieved
from https://www.energy.va.gov/docs/va-climate-action-plan.pdf
[24] Mallen E, Joseph HA, McLaughlin M, English DQ, Olmedo C, Roach M, Tirdea C,
Vargo J, Wolff M, York E. Overcoming barriers to successful climate and health
adaptation practice: notes from the ﬁeld. Int J Environ Res Public Health
2022;19:7169. doi: 10.3390/ijerph19127169.
[25] National Institute of Health (2020). Veterans Affairs (VA) Activities. Retrieved
from
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/about-niddk/advisory-coordinating-commit-
tees/kuh-icc/kicc/federalckd-matrix/veterans-affairs-va-activities
[26] Department of Veterans Affairs. (2020, March 17). VHA Directive 1053. Chronic
kidney disease prevention, early recognition, and management. Retrieved from
https://www.va.gov/vhapublications/ViewPublication.asp?pub_ID=8737
Christie Torres, DNP, APRN, FNP-BC, is a nurse practitioner in primary care at the Olin E.
Teague Veterans’ Medical Center, and a graduate of the Yale Healthcare Leadership,
Systems, and Policy Doctor of Nursing Practice program.
Jane Dixon, PhD, is a professor emerita of nursing at the Yale School of Nursing.
7
C. Torres and J. Dixon
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100198
