Research article
Parents’ perspectives about discussing climate change during
well-child visits
Maya I. Ragavana,*, Lucy E. Marcilb, Rebecca Philipsbornc, Arvin Gargb,#
a University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States
b Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States
c Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, United States
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 10 August 2021
Accepted 31 August 2021
Available online 3 September 2021
A B S T R A C T
Objectives: The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends discussing climate change with parents, partic-
ularly at well-child visits; however, parental opinions about receiving climate change information at their
child’s checkup are largely unknown. This exploratory study examines: (1) parents’ perspectives on fre-
quency of climate change discussions during well-child visits and if climate change should be incorporated
into well-child visits; and (2) associations between parents’ perspectives about climate change and if climate
change should be incorporated into well-child visits.
Methods: We conducted cross-sectional surveys with parents of children 0−17; parents were recruited from
the waiting rooms of two clinics and an online recruitment repository. The survey included investigator-
developed questions about guidance around climate change during well-child visits and questions from the
Climate Change in the American Mind survey. Descriptive statistics were used to examine frequencies,
means, and standard deviations. Logistic regression was used to examine associations between perspectives
about climate change and how climate change should be incorporated into well-child visits.
Results: A total of 371 parents (71% of those approached) completed the survey. Four percent of parents
reported that global warming was discussed during their child’s well visits over the past year. Eighty percent
strongly agreed or agreed that the impact of global warming on their child’s health should be discussed dur-
ing their well visits. Fewer thought preparing for global warming (57%), reducing global warming (55%), or
talking to decision makers about global warming (38%) should be covered. There were signiﬁcant positive
associations between parents’ perceptions about global warming and their agreement that global warming
should be incorporated into well-child visits.
Conclusion: Results of this exploratory study suggest parental interest in incorporating climate change into
well-child visits. Further research should be conducted with a larger, more diverse population, consider per-
spectives of providers and children, and develop best practices for inclusion of climate change into the pedi-
atric medical home.
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Pediatrics
Well-child visits
Child health
Social determinants of health
Survey research
Parents’ perspectives
Climate change (also called global warming) is a public health cri-
sis with detrimental effects on children’s health including worsening
allergies and asthma, heat-related illnesses, vector-borne infectious
diseases, and physical and emotional trauma [1-3]. Climate change
also disproportionately affects marginalized and minoritized commu-
nities; addressing it is critical to promoting health equity and social
justice [4,5].
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) encourages pediatric
healthcare providers to engage on climate change. The AAP’s climate
change policy statement encourages the use of “existing anticipatory
guidance as a framework for discussing climate change with families
[1].” Several barriers to physicians adopting this guidance exist
including: (1) limited time; (2) pediatric providers’ lack of knowledge
about climate change; and (3) concern about parents’ perceptions of
a politicized topic. Including parents in the development of anticipa-
tory guidance and health education initiatives within the pediatric
primary care space is a tenet of family-centered care [6,7]. However,
little is known about parents’ perspectives regarding the importance
of climate change as a topic for well-child visits. Elucidating parents’
perspectives is an important step toward incorporating climate
change into routine pediatric practice.
* Correspondence author at: Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital of Pitts-
burgh of UPMC, 3420 Fifth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213.
E-mail address: ragavanm@chp.edu (M.I. Ragavan).
# Dr. Garg is now afﬁliated with the University of Massachusetts Medical School in
Worcester, MA.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100048
2667-2782/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100048
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
The goals of this study include examining: (1) parents’ perspec-
tives on the frequency of climate change discussions during well-
child visits and if climate change should be incorporated into well-
child visits; and (2) associations between parents’ perspectives about
climate change and if climate change should be incorporated into
well-child visits.
Methods
Study design and setting
We utilized a cross-sectional, convenience sampling study design.
Participants were intentionally recruited from three sites in the Pitts-
burgh, PA area: 1) an urban academic clinic; 2) a suburban practice;
and 3) Pitt + Me, an online recruitment repository of 240,000 individ-
uals interested in participating in research. The University of Pitts-
burgh Institutional Review Board deemed this study exempt.
Measures
Questions regarding climate change beliefs were taken from the
Climate Change in the American Mind survey developed by the Yale
Program on Climate Change Communication [8]. The survey included
four domains. Importantly, although the Yale Program on Climate
Change Communication uses the term “climate change” broadly on
their website, their survey questions use the term “global warming
[8].” Therefore, we also used the term “global warming” throughout
the survey.
Parents’ overall perceptions about climate change: We queried
parents’ overall perceptions about climate change, taken from the Cli-
mate Change in the American Mind survey, which included three
items: (1) whether global warming is happening (yes, no, never
heard of global warming, not sure); (2) why it is happening (human
activities, natural, not happening, not sure); (3) and how worried a
participant is that it will impact their child’s health (4-point Likert
scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree).
Participant
sociodemographics.
Participant
sociodemographics
included parent age, parent’s race (white, Black, or Other), parent’s
education (graduated high school, some college, graduated college,
masters or doctorate degree), and child’s age for all children ages 0 to
17. For child’s age, we asked parents with one child to report the age
of their child in years. For parents with more than one child, we asked
them to report the age of their eldest and youngest child only (age 0
to 17). We also asked parents if they have a child old enough to
understand the meaning of global warming; for those who selected
yes, we asked them to check the ages of their child(ren) who under-
stand global warming.
Parents perceptions about climate change during well child visits.
We asked if global warming was discussed during well-child visits in
the past 12 months (yes/no). Next, we asked a question about
whether parents though their child’s doctor would know the answers
to their questions on global warming (4-point Likert scale, strongly
agree to strongly disagree). Finally, we queried if ﬁve speciﬁc climate
change related topics should be discussed during well-child visits:
(1) how global warming affects child health; (2) how families should
prepare for global warming; (3) how to reduce global warming; (4)
how to talk with decision makers about global warming; and (5) how
to address child stress around global warming (4-point Likert scale
strongly agree to strongly disagree). We only presented the last ques-
tion to parents who ﬁrst reported that they have a child old enough
to understand the meaning of climate change. All questions about cli-
mate change and well-child visits were developed by investigators.
Prior to data collection, we pilot tested the questions with six
parents (ages 30−50; 4 women, 2 men), reviewed the survey with
them in detail, and revised the questions based on their feedback. All
questions were framed within the context of a well-child visit.
Participants and data collection
Eligible parents: 1) were ≥age 18; 2) had a child age 0−17; and 3)
were comfortable taking the survey in English. Recruitment occurred
from December 2019 to April 2020. For the two clinical sites, a
research assistant recruited participants from the waiting room.
Information about the study was posted on the Pitt + Me website;
interested participants contacted the research team. Participants
completed the 15-minute survey on the REDCap software program.
Data analysis
Surveys with more than 50% missing data were removed (n = 11);
missing data were otherwise retained in the analysis. One parent was
also removed as the ages of their children were not below 18.
Another 8 participants reported that their eldest child was older than
18; however, because their younger child was less than 18 these par-
ticipants met inclusion criteria and their data was retained. Descrip-
tive statistics were used to examine frequencies, means, and
standard deviations.
We built adjusted logistic regression models to test associations
between parents’ perspectives about whether global warming is hap-
pening and all 5 measures on if global warming should be incorpo-
rated into well-child visits. For these models, we created binary
variables; for the question about whether global warming is happen-
ing, we grouped parents who said that is it happening as “yes” and
those who either did not know or said it wasn’t happening as “no.”
For all outcomes on incorporating global warming into well-child vis-
its, we grouped strongly agree and agree as “agree” and strongly dis-
agree and disagree as “disagree.” We built similar multivariable
models to examine associations between how worried parents are
that global warming will affect their child’s health and the 5 meas-
ures on incorporating global warming into well-child visits. We cre-
ated a binary variable for how worried parents are about global
warming affecting children’s health: very worried or worried was
labelled as “worried” and not very worried or not at all worried was
labelled as “not worried.” All models were adjusted for parents’ race,
age, gender, and education.
Results
A total of 524 parents were approached in the waiting room or
reached out on Pitt + Me to express their interest in the study. Of
these, 371 participated (71%). The majority (204: 55%) were recruited
from Pitt + Me; 122 (33%) were recruited from the suburban practice;
and 45 (12%) from the urban academic practice. Most identiﬁed as
female (305; 82%), were ages 35−44 (155; 42%), non-Hispanic white
(303; 82%), and college graduates (236; 63%). Three hundred and
thirteen parents (84%) believed global warming is happening; 251
(68%) reported it is caused by human activities; and 263 (71%) wor-
ried about the impact of global warming on their children’s health. A
total of 158 parents (43%) thought their child (or children) was old
enough to understand the meaning of global warming; the majority
of these children were age 8 or older (Table 1). Only 14 parents (4%)
reported that their pediatric provider had discussed global warming
during their child’s well-child visit in the past year (Table 2).
In terms of parents’ perspectives about including global warming
during well-child visits, 295 (80%) strongly agreed or agreed that
pediatric providers should discuss how global warming affects child-
ren’s health. For parents who felt they have children old enough to
understand the meaning of global warming, 133 (84%) wanted pedi-
atric providers to talk about what to do if a child is feeling stressed
about global warming. Two hundred and thirteen parents (57%)
thought pediatric providers should discuss how to prepare for global
warming and 201 (55%) strongly agreed or agreed with discussions
about how families can help reduce global warming. Fewer (139;
M.I. Ragavan, L.E. Marcil, R. Philipsborn et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100048
2
38%) reported pediatric providers should review how to talk to deci-
sion makers about global warming. Two hundred and thirty-four par-
ticipants (63%) strongly agreed or agreed that pediatric providers
would know the answer to their questions about how global warm-
ing affects children’s health (Table 2).
Adjusted logistic regressions showed that parents who believed
global warming is happening and were strongly worried or worried
that their children’s health could be impacted by global warming had
signiﬁcantly higher odds of strongly agreeing or agreeing that climate
change should be incorporated into well-child visits for all ﬁve meas-
ures (Table 3).
Table 2
Perspectives about climate change discussions during well-child visitsa.
In the past 12 months, has your child’s doctor talked with you
about global warmingb during a well-child visit?
Yes
14 (4%)
No
356 (96%)
Missing
1 (0.3%)
If I had a question about how global warming affects my child’s
health, my child’s doctor would know the answer.
Strongly agree
62 (17%)
Agree
172 (46%)
Disagree
104 (28%)
Strongly disagree
31 (8%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how global warming
could affect my child’s health.
Strongly agree
107 (29%)
Agree
188 (51%)
Disagree
53 (14%)
Strongly disagree
21 (6%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how my family
should prepare for global warming.
Strongly agree
45 (12%)
Agree
168 (45%)
Disagree
113 (30%)
Strongly disagree
43 (12%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how I can help
reduce global warming.
Strongly agree
58 (16%)
Agree
143 (39%)
Disagree
123 (33%)
Strongly disagree
45 (12%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how I can talk to
decision makers (politicians, school principals, community
leaders) about reducing global warming.
Strongly agree
36 (10%)
Agree
103 (28%)
Disagree
172 (46%)
Strongly disagree
58 (16%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
My child’s doctor should talk with me about what to do if my child
is feeling stressed about global warming.c
Strongly agree
49 (31%)
Agree
84 (53%)
Disagree
13 (8%)
Strongly disagree
9 (6%)
Missing
3 (2%)
a : Well-child visits were deﬁned for participants in the following way: When you
are answering these questions, please think about your child's well-child visits (also
called a physical exam or routine visit).
b : Global warming was deﬁned for parents in the following way, adapted from
the “Climate Changed in the American Mind” survey through the Yale Program in on
Climate Change Communication: Global warming refers to the idea that the world's
average temperature has been increasing over the past 150 years, may be increasing
more in the future, and that the world's climate may change as a result.
c : Total n = 158, because only parents who stated they had a child old enough to
understand the meaning of global warming were asked this question.
Table 1
Participant sociodemographic characteristics and attitudes about climate change.
Sociodemographic characteristic
N (%)
Parent Age
18−24
16 (4%)
25−34
121 (33%)
35−44
155 (42%)
45 or older
79 (21%)
Gender
Male
65 (17%)
Female
305 (82%)
Non-binary
1 (0.3%)
Education
High school degree or less
53 (14%)
Some college
80 (22%)
Graduated college
105 (28%)
Masters level or higher
131 (35%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
Ages of children (0−17) in years
Only child (for parents with 1 child)
6.7 (sd:6, range 0−17)
Eldest child (for parents with more than 1 child)
9.5 (sd: 5, range 1−24)a
Youngest child (for parents with more than 1 child)
4.8 (sd: 4; range 0−17)
Race and ethnicity
Black or African American
40 (11%)
White
303 (82%)
Otherb
28 (8%)
Has a child ages 0−17 who the parent believes under-
stands the concept of climate change
Yes
158 (43%)
No
212 (57%)
Missing
1 (0.3%)
Age of child(ren) who the parent believes under-
stands the concept of climate changec
Less than 1
3 (2%)
1−3 years old
5 (3%)
4−7 years old
30 (19%)
8−11 years old
63 (40%)
12−14 years old
51 (32%)
15 to 17 years old
63 (40%)
Attitudes about climate change
N (%)
Is global warmingd happening
Yes
313 (84%)
No
18 (5%)
Haven’t heard
0 (0%)
I am not sure
38 (10%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
What is causing global warming?
Mostly human activities
251 (68%)
Mostly natural changes
60 (16%)
None, because global warming isn’t happening
10 (3%)
I am not sure
50 (13%)
How worried are you that global warming will impact
your children’s health?
Very worried
104 (28%)
Somewhat worried
159 (43%)
Not very worried
81 (22%)
Not at all worried
25 (7%)
Missing
2 (0.5%)
a : The maximum age for “eldest child” is 24 as 8 individuals wrote the age of their
eldest child who was older than 17. As their youngest child was 17 or younger, these
participants were included in the data analysis.
b : “Other” for participants’ racial and ethnic identiﬁcation includes American
Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Hispanic/Latino, Native Hawaiian or Paciﬁc Islander,
or Multiracial.
c : Total number is 215 as some participants selected having more than one child
who they believed was old enough to understand what global warming means. The
percentages here are calculated with a denominator of 158 as only parents who said
they have a child old enough to understand what global warming means were asked
this question.
d : Global warming was deﬁned for parents in the following way, adapted from
the “Climate Changed in the American Mind” survey through the Yale Program in on
Climate Change Communication: Global warming refers to the idea that the world's
average temperature has been increasing over the past 150 years, may be increasing
more in the future, and that the world's climate may change as a result.
M.I. Ragavan, L.E. Marcil, R. Philipsborn et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100048
3
Discussion
This study is the ﬁrst to our knowledge to examine parents’ per-
spectives about discussing climate change during well-child visits.
While most parents believed pediatric providers should discuss the
impact of climate change on children’s health, only 4% reported
receiving this type of guidance during well-child visits. This gap sug-
gests a discrepancy between climate change related anticipatory
guidance delivered by pediatric providers with what is desired by
parents. Such a mismatch is similar to results from a study on adult
patients, which showed that patients have high trust in their health-
care providers’ knowledge about global warming; however, few
reported speaking about climate change during medical visits [9].
Our ﬁndings suggest that parent buy-in to discussing climate change
during pediatric visits—in alignment with AAP recommendations
−may already exist.
Parents were most interested in discussing the implications of cli-
mate change on child health and well-being, with fewer agreeing on
discussing carbon mitigation or talking with decision makers. This
could be because climate change is heavily politicized [8], and
parents may not feel comfortable discussing climate change advocacy
during visits. Connecting the health implications of climate change
back to an individual child’s health could enable focused conversa-
tions around climate change during well-child visits and engage
parents in the connection between climate change advocacy and
their family’s well-being.
The majority of parents wanted information from pediatric pro-
viders about supporting children feeling stressed by the climate cri-
sis. Eco-anxiety, deﬁned as anxiety related to the global climate
crisis, disproportionately affects young people and can cause a range
of mental health symptoms [10,11]. Results from our study suggest
that pediatric providers have a responsibility to support parents in
discussing climate change with their children, especially in the con-
text of children experiencing eco-anxiety.
We found that parents who believe that climate change exists or
were worried it could impact their children’s health were signiﬁ-
cantly more likely to want climate change discussions incorporated
into well-child visits. While not surprising, it does suggest that differ-
ent strategies may be needed for parents depending on their opinions
about climate change. One potential solution is to integrate discus-
sion on the health implications of climate change within routine
health promotion and screening topics (e.g., mental health, healthy
diets, heat and sun protection, disaster preparedness) and within rel-
evant disease management topics (e.g., asthma and allergic diseases,
climate-sensitive infectious illnesses, etc.; [12])
We recognize limitations to this study. We used the term “global
warming” in the survey to remain in alignment with the Climate
Change in the American Mind survey, while much of the academic lit-
erature (including the AAP Policy Statement) uses the term “climate
change.” We recognize that participants may interpret the terms
“global warming” and “climate change” differently. The results may
lack generalizability, since surveys were conducted in one region in
the US with limited racial and ethnic diversity (although consistent
with the overall sociodemographics of Allegheny County [13]). The
predominance of parents identifying as female and non-Hispanic
white is important as opinions about climate change vary across
demographic groups. For example, according to the Yale Climate
Change Communication Program [8], women are slightly more likely
than men and non-Hispanic white individuals slightly less likely than
minoritized individuals to believe climate change is happening. This
study used a convenience sampling approach; thus, those who partic-
ipated may be more likely to be interested in this topic. Further, we
recognize there may be differences in opinions between participants
recruited from the two clinics versus the online recruitment reposi-
tory although this exploratory study was underpowered to examine
these differences.
Limitations notwithstanding, results from this exploratory study
set the stage for future studies in multiple US regions with diverse
groups of parents to elucidate the climate and child health topics
most likely to resonate with parents experiencing different climate-
driven health threats. More in-depth studies examining the perspec-
tives of parents who do not believe in climate change is critical to
determine what strategies may work for them. Studies are also
needed to explore pediatric providers’ perceptions about if and how
they are addressing climate change now and recommendations for
incorporating climate change during well-child visits. Studies may
consider asking about other opportunities in the pediatric medical
home to incorporate climate change (e.g., asthma follow up visits,
sports physicals, mental and behavioral health care), as we recognize
well-child visits already are full of many demands. Future research
should build upon parent perspectives by examining the opinions of
children and adolescents, as children may inspire their parents’ cli-
mate change advocacy [14].
These results also suggest the need for innovations within the
pediatric medical home to include climate change. Future efforts to
enhance pediatricians’ skills and behaviors include incorporating the
topic of climate change in Bright Futures guidelines, developing
patient-centered education and resources sheets, and creating EMR
templates for conversations about climate change during well-child
visits.
Climate
change
is
increasingly
understood
as
a
social
Table 3
Adjusted odds ratios of parents’ perspectives about incorporating climate change into well-child visits based on whether they believe climate change is happening and if they are
worried about how climate change will impact their child’s healtha.
Global warmingb is
happening
Am worried about how global warming
will impact my child’s health
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how global warming could affect my child’s health.
5.9 (3.1, 11)***
13.6 (7.3, 25.2)***
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how my family should prepare for global warming.
2.6 (1.4, 4.7)**
5.5 (3.3, 9.2)***
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how I can help reduce global warming.
3.2 (1.7, 6.2)***
6.2 (3.6, 10.7)***
My child’s doctor should talk with me about how I can talk to decision makers (politicians, school prin-
cipals, community leaders) about reducing global warming.
2.1 (1.1, 4.2)*
5.6 (3.0, 10.4)***
My child’s doctor should talk with me about what to do if my child is feeling stressed about global
warming.c
7.1 (2.2, 23.4)**
7.6 (2.6, 22.2)***
* P < 0.05.
** P < 0.01.
*** P < 0.001.
a : Adjusted for parent’s race, gender, age, and education.
b : Global warming was deﬁned for parents in the following way, adapted from the “Climate Changed in the American Mind” survey through the Yale Program in on Climate
Change Communication: Global warming refers to the idea that the world's average temperature has been increasing over the past 150 years, may be increasing more in the future, and
that the world's climate may change as a result.
c : Only parents who stated they have a child old enough to understand the meaning of global warming (n = 158) were asked this question.
M.I. Ragavan, L.E. Marcil, R. Philipsborn et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100048
4
determinant of health [15] that leads to both worsening child health
inequities and increased healthcare costs. This broader context may
serve to further build consensus around and justify inclusion of cli-
mate change in routine pediatric practice. Climate change content
should also be incorporated into medical education and evaluated in
standardized exams, including the American Board of Pediatric
exams.
Conclusion
Climate change is one of the greatest health threats of our time,
posing disproportionate harm to children. Our exploratory study sug-
gests parental interest in learning about climate change during well-
child visits, particularly how the changing climate impacts child
health. Results set the stage for developing best practices to inten-
tionally incorporate climate change into the pediatric medical home.
Funding/support
Dr Ragavan is supported by the National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences (NCATS) of the National Institutes of Health
under award KL2TR001856.
Role of the funder
NCATS had no role in design and conduct of the study
Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Shuchi Talati, PhD for her review of this
manuscript
References
[1] American Academy of Pediatrics Council on Environmental Health. Global climate
change and children’s health. Pediatrics 2015;136(5):992–7.
[2] Watts N, Amann M, Arnell N, et al. The 2019 report of The Lancet on health and
climate change: ensuring that the health of a child born today is not deﬁned by a
changing climate. Lancet 2019;16(394):1836–78.
[3] Philipsborn RP, Shefﬁeld P, White A, Osta A, Anderson M, Berstein AL. Climate
change and the practice of medicine: essentials for resident education. . Acad Med
2021 In-press.
[4] Levy BS, Patz JA. Climate change, human rights, and social justice. Ann Glob
Health 2015;81(3):310–22.
[5] Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Climate change resilience: an oppor-
tunity for reducing inequalities. New York, NY: United Nations; 2016.
[6] Coker TR, Chung PJ, Cowgill BO, Chen L, Rodriguez MA. Low-income parents’
views on the redesign of well-child care. Pediatrics 2009;124(1):194–204.
[7] Radecki L, Olson LM, Frintner MP, Tanner JL, Stein MT. What do families want
from well-child care? Including parents in the rethinking discussion. Pediatrics
2009;124(3):858–65.
[8] Yale Program on Climate Communication. Climate change in the American mind
survey question wording. Updated 9/2/2020; Accessed 3/1/2020. Retrieved from:
https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/visualizations-data/ycom-us/
[9] Boland TM, Temte JL. Family medicine patient and physician attitudes toward climate
change and health in Wisconsin. Wilderness Environ Med 2019;30(4):386–93.
[10] Wu J, Snell G, Samji H. Climate anxiety in young people: a call to action. Lancet
2020;20(30223):S2542–5196.
[11] Clayton S, Manning CM, Krygsman K, Speiser M. Mental health and our changing
climate: impacts, implications, and guidance. Washington, D.C.: American Psy-
chological Association, and ecoAmerica; 2017.
[12] Philipsborn RP, Cowenhoven J, Bole A, Balk SJ, Bernstein A. A pediatrician's guide
to climate change-informed primary care. Curr Probl Pediatr Adolesc Health Care
2021;51(6):101027. doi: 10.1016/j.cppeds.2021.101027.
[13] Census quick facts: allegheny county. July 2019. Retrieved from: https://www.
census.gov/quickfacts/alleghenycountypennsylvania
[14] Lawson DF, Stevenson KT, Peterson MN, Carrier SJ, Strnad R, Seekamp E. Intergen-
erational learning: are children key in spurring climate action. Global Environ-
mental Change 2018;53:204–8.
[15] Ragavan MI, Marcil LM, Garg A. Climate change as a social determinant of health.
Pediatrics 2020;145(5):e20193169.
M.I. Ragavan, L.E. Marcil, R. Philipsborn et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100048
5
