Short communication
Climate, health care, and the race to zero: An urgent call to action
Amy Collinsa,b,*, Shanda Demoresta,c,d, Jonathan E. Slutzmane,f
a Health Care Without Harm, 12110 Sunset Hills Road, Suite 600, Reston, VA 20190, United States
b MetroWest Medical Center, Department of Emergency Medicine, 115 Lincoln Street, Framingham, MA 01702, United States
c Practice Greenhealth, 12110 Sunset Hills Road, Suite 600, Reston, VA 20190, United States
d University of Minnesota School of Nursing, 5-140 Weaver-Densford Hall, 308 Harvard Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, United States
e Center for the Environment and Health, Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Zero Emerson Place Suite 3B, Boston, MA 02114, United States
f Department of Emergency Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, Zero Emerson Place Suite 3B, Boston, MA
02114, United States
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 13 August 2021
Accepted 4 September 2021
Available online 16 September 2021
Keywords:
Climate-smart health care
Health care climate footprint
Sustainable health care
Clinical sustainability
Health care sustainability
A warming planet poses grave threats to public health world-
wide. Recent events such as heat waves and wildﬁres in the
western United States, Canada, and Greece, along with calamitous
ﬂoods in Germany and China, have made clear the devastating
reality of living on a planet warmed almost 1.1°C since pre-indus-
trial times [1]. The Sixth Assessment Report from the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change is a “code red for humanity,”
warning that we are dangerously close to exceeding the critical
increase of 1.5°C in the next two decades, in the absence of rapid
mitigation [1]. To prevent the most catastrophic health effects of
climate change, urgent reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emis-
sions are needed from all sectors to meet the goals of the Paris
Agreement, along with those of the Race to Zero: to halve emis-
sions by 2030 and achieve net zero emissions by 2050 [2]. The
health care sector is not exempt from this charge.
With so many challenges facing the health care sector, why
climate? Why now?
Health care is on the front line of the climate crisis. Our patients
experience the adverse health effects of a changing climate along
with injuries, sickness, and mental health impacts related to extreme
weather events, which can also disrupt health care access and deliv-
ery. Ironically, the health care sector contributes signiﬁcantly to the
climate crisis and the associated health impacts, antithetical to the
sector’s healing mission and the oath to “ﬁrst, do no harm.”
While there are currently a number of public health challenges
requiring health professional leadership and advocacy, no challenge
is more ﬁercely urgent or critical than the climate crisis. The world is
literally on ﬁre, and health care is supplying some of the fuel. As doc-
tors, nurses, and other health professionals, we must acknowledge
that health care operations contribute to this crisis, and the condi-
tions we treat. We have a historic opportunity and an ethical impera-
tive to leverage our trust and inﬂuence to advance climate solutions
not only outside, but inside the hospital.
The COVID-19 crisis demonstrated how swiftly and effectively the
health care sector can respond to a crisis with the rapid implementa-
tion of protocols to keep patients and providers safe, PPE conserva-
tion strategies, and telehealth. We must call on our health care
leadership to demonstrate the same boldness now by committing to
the transition to resilient, climate-smart, and ultimately net zero,
health care to protect human health now and in the future.
Declaration of interests Amy Collins, M.D. is an independent contractor for Health
Care Without Harm. Shanda Demorest, DNP, PHN is employed by Practice Greenhealth
and Health Care Without Harm and this work was supported by her general employ-
ment. Jonathan E. Slutzman, M.D. has no known competing ﬁnancial interests or per-
sonal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this
paper
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: acollins@hcwh.org (A. Collins), sdemorest@practicegreenhealth.
org (S. Demorest), jslutzman@mgh.harvard.edu (J.E. Slutzman).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100050
2667-2782/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100050
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
The health care sector directly bears the impact of a changing
climate
Extreme weather events, including severe storms, ﬂoods, and
wildﬁres, are increasing in severity and frequency. In 2020, the
United States experienced a record-breaking 22 billion-dollar
weather disasters, causing deaths, injuries, and human suffering
[3]. 2021 is on course to be another year of unprecedented cli-
mate disasters resulting in harms to human health and stress on
our health care systems already overburdened by the COVID-19
crisis.
Health care is at the forefront of these weather disasters,
which can impact health care infrastructure and access leading to
hospital evacuations and closures, delays in surgeries and treat-
ment, and signiﬁcant ﬁnancial losses [4]. Such evacuations and
health care disruptions are becoming the new reality. As Dr. Ste-
phen Parodi, who leads emergency management for 21 hospitals
in Northern California wrote, “I must have missed the wildﬁre
evacuation course in medical school. Learning how to move criti-
cally ill patients while ﬂames lick the ground just feet away
wasn’t part of my residency training. Most physicians never antic-
ipate having to empty their hospitals while smoke ﬁlls the halls
and the sky glows red. This is becoming our everyday reality in
Northern California” [5].
Health professionals far away from weather events can feel their
aftermath. Puerto Rico is home to major pharmaceutical, medical
device, and supply manufacturing plants. After Hurricane Maria dev-
astated the island in 2017, hospitals faced critical shortages of normal
saline IV bags, pharmaceuticals, medical products, and surgical devi-
ces due to damage to the plants [6].
Recognizing the myriad ways that extreme weather can impact
health care and patients, along with the strong business case for cli-
mate resilience, hospitals and health systems are preparing for
extreme weather by creating climate-ready facilities that can remain
open, operational, and able to serve their communities during
weather catastrophes [4].
Ironically, health care contributes to the climate crisis and public
health harm
The health care sector has a signiﬁcant climate impact, respon-
sible for 4.4% of global GHG emissions. If the global health care
sector were a country, it would be the ﬁfth largest GHG emitter
in the world. U.S. health care has a large climate impact; it is
responsible for 27% of the global health care carbon footprint [7]
and 8.5% of U.S. emissions [8], with the indirect public health
harms on the same order of magnitude as medical errors [9]. Just
as health care facilities and regulators urgently responded to the
harm caused by medical errors [10], the sector has an imperative
to respond to the health and environmental harms caused by its
operations.
Given the immensity and complexity of health care, it should
come as no surprise that the sector has a signiﬁcant impact. Hos-
pitals
are
energy-intensive
buildings
that
generate
massive
amounts of waste and are large employers with a signiﬁcant
transportation footprint and enormous supply chain. In fact, 62-
82% of health care emissions are from the supply chain, including
food, pharmaceuticals, supplies, and devices, and their up- and
downstream activities, such as manufacturing, transport, and dis-
posal [8, 11]. Operating rooms make an outsized contribution to a
hospital’s environmental impact, with surgery being particularly
energy-, resource-, and waste-intensive [12]. In addition, volatile
anesthetic gases, particularly desﬂurane and nitrous oxide, are
potent GHGs that inﬂate an OR’s impact [13].
Clinical care is part of the problem
Clinical care is the primary driver of health care GHG emissions
and pollution. In the process of providing care, clinicians order tests
and treatments, prescribe pharmaceuticals, screen for medical condi-
tions, use supplies and devices (often single-use disposables), and
perform surgeries and procedures. Such interventions are often nec-
essary to provide quality care, but do not always add value and can
contribute to both wasteful health care spending and pollution [8]. It
is through this process of providing care within a resource-intensive
and waste-productive system that clinicians can inadvertently do
harm. Clinicians, with engineers, are leading health care emissions
research, including life cycle assessments, which provide data to
allow health professionals to make evidence-based clinical and
device use decisions to improve the environmental performance of
health care services.
Now is the time for bold health professional leadership
Recognizing the opportunity to mitigate the climate impact of
health care delivery, along with the solid business case for environ-
mental sustainability in health care [14], many hospitals and health
systems are taking action to promote climate-smart health care.
Clinicians can and should lead the transition to a climate-smart,
environmentally-responsible health care sector.
A ﬁrst step in advancing climate-smart health care as a clinician is
to acknowledge that clinical care is part of the problem, and that we
have a unique opportunity to promote clinically sustainable health
care as a key strategy in reducing health care emissions. Our collec-
tive choices and practices −from prescribing to device use to selec-
tion of an anesthetic agent to surgical approach to waste disposal −
along with minimizing low-value surgeries, tests and interventions,
can help reduce health care’s impact.
Recognizing the value of clinician leadership and the impact of
clinical care, health systems are appointing physicians and nurses as
clinical directors of sustainability to lead and coordinate efforts to
reduce the impact of clinical services.
Increasingly, medical and nursing societies are issuing position
papers and policy statements calling on physicians and other health
professionals to not only advocate for policies that reduce GHG emis-
sions, but also to lead action to reduce health care’s environmental
impact and prepare facilities for the health effects of climate change
[15].
Under a business-as-usual scenario, health care emissions are
expected to more than triple by 2050 [16]. Wolff and Schenk, in this
special issue, describe a number of actions health systems have taken
and can continue to take to address the climate crisis, including
engaging with Health Care Without Harm and Practice Greenhealth,
along with the seven key actions recommended to decarbonize
health care by 2050 [17]. Charting a global health care course to net-
zero emissions will require bold leadership, action, and cooperation
from health professionals around the world - from the kitchen to the
operating room to the board room (see Table 1 for suggestions).
Physicians, nurses, and other health professionals are perfectly suited
to communicate the imperative to transition to resilient, climate-
smart operations to health care leaders using a powerful health
framework. As trusted and respected health professionals, we can
help steer the health care sector back toward its mission to ﬁrst, do
no harm.
A. Collins, S. Demorest and J.E. Slutzman
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100050
2
References
[1] Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pirani A, Connors SL, Pean C, Berger S, et al. The cli-
mate change 2021: physical science basis. Contribution of working group I to the
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Eds.. Cambridge University Press;
2021
Aug.
Available
from
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/
report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_Full_Report.pdf.
[2] United Nations. Join the race: Campaign overview, https://racetozero.unfccc.int/
join-the-race/ [accessed 2021 Aug 10 ].
[3] National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Record number of bil-
lion-dollar disasters struck U.S. in 2020, https://www.noaa.gov/stories/
record-number-of-billion-dollar-disasters-struck-us-in-2020
[accessed
2021 Aug 9 ].
[4] Health Care Without Harm [HCWH]. Safe haven in the storm: protecting lives at
the margins with climate-smart health care. Reston (VA): Health Care Without
Harm; 2018 Jan. Available from https://noharm-uscanada.org/sites/default/ﬁles/
documents-ﬁles/5146/Safe%20Haven.pdf.
[5] Parodi S. When ‘Do no harm’ means evacuating hospitals in California. NY Times;
2019 Nov 1. Sect. Opinion https://www.nytimes.com/2019/11/01/opinion/califor-
nia-kincade-hospital-wildﬁre.html [accessed 2021 Aug 9].
[6] Sacks CA, Kesselheim AS, Fralick M. The shortage of normal saline in the wake of
Hurricane
Maria.
JAMA
2018
Jul
1;178(7):885–6.
doi:
10.1001/jamai-
nternmed.2018.1936.
[7] Karliner J, Slotterback S, Boyd R, Ashby B, Steele K. Health care’s climate footprint.
Reston (VA): Health Care Without Harm; 2019 Sept. Green Paper Report No.: 1.
Available
from
https://noharm-global.org/sites/default/ﬁles/documents-ﬁles/
5961/HealthCaresClimateFootprint_092319.pdf.
[8] Eckelman MJ, Huang K, Lagasse R, Senay E, Dubrow R, Sherman J. Health care pol-
lution and the public health damage in the United States: an update. Health
Affairs 2020 Dec;39(12). doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01247.
[9] Eckelman MJ, Sherman J. Environmental impacts of the U.S. health care system
and effects on public health. PLoS One 2016 Jun;11(6):e0157014. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pone.0157014.
[10] Leape L, Berwick D. Five years after To Err Is Human: What have we learned?
JAMA 2005 May;293(19):2384–90. doi: 10.1001/jama.293.19.2384.
[11] Tennison I, Roschnik S, Ashby B, Boyd R, Hamilton I, Oreszczyn T, Eckelman MJ.
Health care’s response to climate change: a carbon footprint assessment of the
NHS in England. Lancet Planet Health 2021 Feb;5(2) e84-e92. doi: 10.1016/
S2542-5196(20)30271-0.
[12] Rizan C, Steinbach I, Nicholson R, Lillywhite R, Reed M, Bhutta MF. The carbon
footprint overview of surgical operations: a systematic review. Ann Surg Dec
2020;272(6):986–95. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0000000000003951.
[13] MacNeill AJ, Lillywhite R, Brown CJ. The impact of surgery on global climate: a
carbon footprinting study of operating theaters in three health systems. Lancet
Planet Health 2017 Dec;1(9) e381-e388. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30162-6.
[14] Chen A, Murthy V. How health systems are meeting the challenge of climate
change. Harvard Business Review 2019 Sept [Internet]Sect. Sustainability [cited
2021 Aug 9]. Available from https://hbr.org/2019/09/how-health-systems-are-
meeting-the-challenge-of-climate-change.
[15] The Medical Society Consortium on Climate & Health, Medical society policy
statements,
https://medsocietiesforclimatehealth.org/category/medical-society-
policy-statements/ [accessed 2021 Aug 9 ].
[16] Health Care Without Harm. Global roadmap for health care decarbonization,
https://healthcareclimateaction.org/roadmap [accessed 2021 Aug 9 ].
[17] Wolff J, Schenk E. Climate-smart and climate-ready health systems - the time is
now. J Clim Chang Health 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100046.
Table 1
Actions for health professionals to take in moving health care facilities toward greater environmental sustainability. GHG = greenhouse gas.
Actions and opportunities
Resources and examples
Join a group that supports clinicians interested in reducing the
environmental impact of health care
Health Care Without Harm Physician Network
Doctors for Greener Healthcare
Doctors for the Environment Australia
American Society of Anesthesiologists Environmental Task Force
Nurses Climate Challenge
Get educated about the climate footprint of health care and
opportunities to create resilient, climate-smart health care
Health Care Without Harm
My Green Doctor
Centre for Sustainable Healthcare
Greener NHS
Health Care Climate Resilience Toolkit
Support your facility in taking climate action
Ask your facility to join an organization that helps facilities implement sustainability solutions such as
Practice Greenhealth, Global Green and Healthy Hospitals, Nordic Center for Sustainable Healthcare or
the Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care.
Ask your health facility to do a full GHG emissions inventory, set a net-zero goal, and join the global
Health Care Climate Challenge.
Inspire your food services director to serve climate-friendly, healthy food, sign onto the Cool Food
Pledge or follow The Planetary Health Diet.
Call on your health system to invest in clean technologies and divest or freeze fossil fuel holdings using
guidance from The BMJ’s divestment campaign.
Encourage your supply chain leaders to develop a sustainable purchasing strategy and explore opportu-
nities to replace single-use disposable supplies with reusables.
Evaluate your clinical practice at the bedside
Reassess your pharmaceutical prescribing practices. Consider deprescribing, limit reﬁlls and quantities,
and recommend non-pharmaceutical interventions when appropriate.
Reformulate OR kits.
Eliminate use of desﬂurane and nitrous oxide.
Educate others
Give grand rounds, write an opinion piece, or submit a conference proposal about the intersection
between climate, health and health care.
Engage your professional society
Draft a climate-health policy statement including content about health care’s impact and ask your soci-
ety to engage and educate members about climate-smart health care.
Meet with legislators
Educate your policymakers about the importance of providing funding, tax incentives, and ﬁnancing
mechanisms that health care facilities - with a focus on nonproﬁt, safety-net, and rural hospitals - can
use to reduce their GHG emissions and invest in clean energy and resilience.
A. Collins, S. Demorest and J.E. Slutzman
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 4 (2021) 100050
3
