Research article
Organizing to advance equitable climate and health solutions: The
medical society consortium on climate and health
Mona Sarfatya,*, Nicole Duritza, Rob Gouldb, Mark Mitchella, Lisa Patelc, Jerome Paulsond,
Linda Rudolphe, Colin Nackermanf, Beverly Harpa, Edward W. Maibacha
a George Mason University, 400 University Drive, 6A8, Fairfax, VA, USA
b One Degree Strategies, Rockville, MD, USA
c Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA
d George Washington University Emeritus, USA
e Public Health Institute, Oakland, CA, USA
f George Mason University, Encinitas, CA, USA
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 29 June 2022
Accepted 9 September 2022
Available online 13 September 2022
A B S T R A C T
In 2016, concern among physicians about the health harms of climate change led to the founding of the Med-
ical Society Consortium on Climate and Health, a coalition of medical societies and ultimately other health
organizations, to publicly sound the alarm and address profound and growing health and equity consequen-
ces of climate change. Building on strong public trust in medical and other health professionals, in partner-
ship with other health organizations, in 2019 the Consortium declared climate change a health emergency
and now pursues a policy agenda of equitable climate solutions that protect and promote health. The health
case for climate action is compelling because while solutions provide climate beneﬁts in the future, many solu-
tions provide powerful health beneﬁts in the present, and primarily in communities taking such actions. The
economic case is also compelling, with the cost of electricity from clean renewable sources now lower than
fossil fuels, and the cost of inaction continuing to grow: Recent estimates of the health cost of climate change
show it surpassing $800 billion per year. The Consortium supports decarbonizing the U.S. health sector and
international efforts to convince the world’s leaders to limit global warming to no more than 1.5C, which is
the upper limit of the safe zone.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Medical society
Climate policy
Climate advocacy
Health emergency
Physician advocacy
Decarbonization
Climate change is adversely affecting the health of Americans and
people worldwide in in increasingly serious ways [1,2]. These health
harms include illness from heat exposure, bodily harm from danger-
ous storms, breathing difﬁculties from wildﬁre smoke and smog, dis-
eases carried by insects, and longer and more intense allergy
symptoms. Mental health impacts are increasingly taking a toll, espe-
cially on young people [3].
Founding of the consortium
In 2016, concern among physicians about these health harms led
to founding of a coalition of medical societies, and ultimately other
health organizations, to publicly sound the alarm and address the
profound and growing health consequences of our climate crisis. This
new group, the Medical Society Consortium on Climate and Health
(Consortium), launched itself by issuing a “Medical Alert” about
climate and health, a pre-tested, plain language summary of the
health impacts of climate change in the United States based on the
ﬁndings of the 2014 National Climate Assessment [4−6]. The results
of surveys conducted in 2014 and 2015 with members of three US
medical societies provided the backdrop for the formation of the Con-
sortium. These surveys found that large majorities of physicians
were: Concerned about the health harms of climate change; witness-
ing health impacts of climate change among members of their own
patient populations (e.g., increasing rates of heat illnesses, allergy
symptoms, breathing problems related to longer and larger wildﬁres,
insect-borne infections occurring outside the usual months, and
mental impacts from forced and prolonged evacuations related to cli-
mate disasters); and supportive of their medical societies engaging in
public education and policy advocacy to address the problem [7−9].
The initial aim of the Consortium was to educate policymakers
and the public about the human health relevance of climate change
and climate solutions. However, in 2017, given the lack of receptive-
ness of the Trump administration and many in Congress—and the
need for both state and federal actions—policy advocacy quickly
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: msarfaty@gmu.edu (M. Sarfaty).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100174
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100174
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
became an additional aim. The causes of climate change and its
health harms—especially fossil fuel use and unsustainable land use
practices—are rooted in government and institutional policies that
fail to recognize and protect the health needs of the population.
While these policy failures are harmful to all, they also greatly exac-
erbate long-standing population health inequities rooted in a history
of racist and classist policies, and they especially burden young peo-
ple and future generations creating a profound intergenerational
injustice. Therefore, the mission of the Consortium was eventually
refocused “to mobilize and amplify the voices of U.S. doctors, in part-
nership with public health experts and fellow health professionals, to
successfully advocate for equitable climate solutions that protect and
promote the health of all people.”
Formal membership in the Consortium was initially (but is no lon-
ger) limited to science-based national medical societies. Currently 38
national societies representing 70% of the nation’s physicians, plus 5
state-based medical societies, are members of the Consortium. Each
member society appoints a representative to the Consortium’s Steer-
ing Committee, which serves as the organizational governing body.
From the beginning, other health organizations joined as partners,
including the American Lung Association, Health Care Without Harm,
Alliance of Nurses for Healthy Environments, Physicians for Social
Responsibility, American Psychological Association, National Envi-
ronmental Health Association, American Heart Association, and the
National Association of Social Workers.
Strategic directions
In 2017, the Consortium helped a group of health professionals in
Virginia form a state-focused afﬁliate organization, Virginia Clinicians
for Climate Action (VCCA), to advocate for state-level climate and
health policies. VCCA rapidly demonstrated efﬁcacy at engaging with
state policymakers [10], which led to inquiries from health professio-
nals in other states about how they too could establish a state-
focused climate and health group. The Consortium has now helped
incubate additional state groups and helped bring these together into
a growing Climate and Health State Network comprised of 20 state-
based health groups.
In 2019, in partnership with other health organizations, the Con-
sortium declared climate change to be a health emergency and issued
a 10-point climate, health and equity policy action agenda which
remains the basis for Consortium’s policy work [11]. In 2020, follow-
ing the murder of George Floyd, the Consortium created the Climate
and Health Equity Fellowship (CHEF) program for physicians from
under-represented communities. The ﬁrst cohort of fellows—six
Black physicians from southeastern states—participated in and com-
pleted their fellowships in 2021; a more diverse group of 15 fellows
from across the country is currently participating in the second
cohort.
The Consortium’s core operational strategies include
 Organizing the health community to support equitable climate
and health policies.
 Empowering the health community with webinars, resources, and
training.
 Amplifying the trusted voices in the health community through
outreach to news organizations, social media, and assistance with
op-ed writing.
 Mobilizing the health community to participate in advocacy.
Policy advocacy
In 2021, and continuing into 2022, with the Biden Administration
and Congress showing openness to policy reforms in defense of
climate change and health equity, the Consortium and its partners
issued a series of open letters and calls with policy recommenda-
tions to the President of the United States (2021) [12−15], to Con-
gress [16], and to the Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) [17].
The Consortium is hosted by and is a program of the George
Mason University Center for Climate Change Communication (Mason
4C). The Consortium has harnessed communication research by
developing evidenced-based messaging [5,18−20], and by tracking
public understanding of the health implications of climate change—
which has risen sharply since the launch of the Consortium [21,22].
This research has yielded important communication insights, espe-
cially that when people learn about the human health relevance of
climate change, it increases their perceived personal relevance of the
problem, and increases their support for climate solutions—espe-
cially among Americans in the middle of the political continuum,
including moderate Republicans [5,18,19].
Health voices—those of individual health professionals and their
organizations—are perhaps uniquely well positioned to help build
the public and political will necessary to enact policies that will effec-
tively address climate change and protect human health in equitable
ways [10,23]. Health professionals are members of one of the few
professions that remain trusted by a strong majority of the American
public. This high level of trust affords them opportunities to reframe
climate change and climate solutions away from political gridlock
and toward shared values of health, safety, and prosperity.
Health beneﬁts and costs
The health case for climate action is particularly compelling
because while climate solutions provide climate beneﬁts in the
future, many solutions provide powerful health beneﬁts in the pres-
ent, and primarily in the communities that take the actions [24].
Clean renewable energy as a source of electricity protects the
health of everyone, especially people at the “fence line” where
extraction, processing, storage, transportation, and combustion takes
place. Similarly, electric vehicles, active transportation, and mass
transportation lead to cleaner air and better health—especially in
heavily populated cities. These health beneﬁts accrue across the life
cycle, from before birth (e.g., pregnant women who are less exposed
to air pollution are more likely to deliver a full-term and fully grown
baby) to the ﬁnal stages of life (e.g. elders who are less exposed to air
pollution are less likely to suffer from dementia and premature
death). Greening communities reduces urban heat islands, which
protects people from heat illness in their own neighborhoods,
reduces air conditioning costs, creates more pleasant surroundings
that promote active lifestyles and community-building, and helps to
control ﬂooding—a vexing problem in some, especially low-income
neighborhoods. Climate smart food systems based on regenerative
agriculture augment carbon sinks for sequestration and reduce fertil-
izer induced dead zones in rivers and bays.
The economic case for action is compelling as well. The healthcare
costs of inaction are substantial and growing; researchers with the
Consortium and NRDC determined that costs exceed $800 billion per
year in the US alone [25]. Another study on air pollution found that
decarbonizing electricity generation, transportation, and the building
and industrial sectors could save $600 billion annually in health costs
in the U.S [26]. Additional costs attributable to climate disasters—i.e.,
excluding health costs—have also risen dramatically, $300 billion in
2021 alone [27].
In addition, the cost of decarbonization is rapidly decreasing, and
renewable energy costs are less than conventional energy sources in
many areas [28]. While behavioral economic research has consis-
tently shown that people—including and perhaps especially policy-
makers—are reluctant to incur short-term costs for the promise of
beneﬁts that accrue primarily in the future, causing a conundrum for
M. Sarfaty, N. Duritz, R. Gould et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100174
2
advocates of climate policy, the reversal of the relative price ratios is
creating a new backdrop that is more favorable to change.
Politics vs policy
The politics however remain fraught. Over the past quarter century,
the issue of climate change has become a politically polarized issue as
the result of a sustained misinformation and political inﬂuence cam-
paign waged by the fossil fuel industry and think tanks they support.
The international crises of the Covid-19 pandemic with accompanying
economic blows and now Russia’s war on Ukraine are massive distrac-
tions from the shared common threat of climate change. Despite this,
the public will for climate action has grown sharply in recent years. As
of yet, this has not created adequate political will at the federal level to
overcome partisan opposition. More progress has been made in some
(mostly blue) states and cities/counties.
The Consortium is now focused on advancing both federal and
state policies, and on equitable implementation of existing and new
policies for climate and health.
The accomplishments of the Consortium to date reside in dramati-
cally expanding a health movement of doctors and health professio-
nals who are committed to addressing climate change and advancing
climate solutions. The policy agenda released in 2019 by the Consor-
tium and partners has garnered nearly 200 endorsements by organi-
zations and schools of medicine, nursing, and public health and one
council that represents 500 hospitals [11]. A large and rapidly grow-
ing network of health professionals are engaging in the issue through
learning, teaching, and advocating for solutions.
Many challenges lie ahead. Health professionals, the public, busi-
nesses, and governments are struggling to address many real and
pressing problems, while the climate misinformation and delay
industry is working diligently to distract us from the urgent need to
respond to the climate crisis. Moreover, while most physicians recog-
nize the importance of addressing the climate crisis, relatively few
are personally engaging in the effort to educate the public and policy-
makers, and to advocate for policies that will protect people’s health
and our climate in equitable ways. While the public is increasingly
concerned about climate change, it is not yet a top-tier voting issue.
Not deterred by these challenges, the Consortium will continue
efforts to educate the public and policy makers and bring together its
advocates to push for equitable climate and health policies at the fed-
eral, state and local levels. The Consortium is also supporting growing
efforts to decarbonize the health sector—led by the National Acad-
emy of Medicine and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Serv-
ices. Through its participation in the Global Climate and Health
Alliance, the Consortium is also supporting efforts by health organi-
zations worldwide to advocate with world leaders for more rapid
decarbonization and enhanced climate/health resilience.
In conclusion, there is broad and deep potential for the medical
community to engage in education and advocacy to promote policies
that will advance equitable health and climate goals through changes
in public policy. More work is needed to fully express this potential
and convert it to inﬂuence.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mona Sarfaty: Writing −original draft, Writing −review & edit-
ing. Nicole Duritz: Writing −original draft, Writing −review & edit-
ing.
Rob
Gould:
Conceptualization.
Mark
Mitchell:
Funding
acquisition. Lisa Patel: Writing −review & editing, Writing −original
draft. Jerome Paulson: Project administration. Linda Rudolph: Soft-
ware. Colin Nackerman: Supervision. Beverly Harp: Conceptualiza-
tion. Edward W. Maibach: Writing −review & editing, Writing −
original draft.
Acknowledgments
Funding for this work has been provided by George Mason Uni-
versity, Kresge Foundation, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Energy
Foundation, Hightide Foundation, Northlight Foundation, Johnson &
Johnson, and the Sean N. Parker Center for Asthma & Allergy Research
at Stanford University.
References
[1] Ebi K.L., Balbus J.M., Luber G., Bole A., Crimmins A., Glass G., Saha A., Shimamoto
M.M., Trtanj J., White-Newsome J.L. (2018). Human health. In impacts, risks, and
adaptation in the United States: fourth national climate assessment, Volume II [
D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. May-
cock, and B.C. Stewart (eds.) ]. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington,
DC, USA, pp. 539−571. doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH14.
[2] IPCC, P€ortner HO, Roberts DC, Tignor M, Poloczanska ES, Mintenbeck K, Alegría A,
Craig M, Langsdorf S, L€oschke S, M€oller V, Okem A, Rama B. Climate Change 2022:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press; 2022 In Press.
[3] Vergunst F, Berry HL. Climate change and children’s mental health: a develop-
mental perspective. Clin Psychol Sci 2022:767–78.
[4] Sarfaty M, Gould R, Maibach E. Medical alert! climate change is harming. our
health 2017;28 https://medsocietiesforclimatehealth.org/reports/medical-alert/.
[5] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Hassol S, Montoro M. How Americans respond to informa-
tion about global warming’s health impacts: evidence from a national survey
experiment. GeoHealth 2018. doi: 10.1029/2018GH000154.
[6] Terese (T.C.) Richmond Luber G, Knowlton K, Balbus J, Frumkin H, Hayden M, Hess
J, McGeehin M, Sheats N, Backer L, Beard CB, Ebi KL, Maibach E, Ostfeld RS, Wie-
dinmyer C, Zielinski-Gutierrez E, Ziska L, Melillo JM, Yohe GW. Ch. 9: Human
Health. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: the Third National Climate
Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program; 2014. p. 220–56 Terese (T.C.)
Richmond. doi: 10.7930/J0PN93H5.
[7] Sarfaty M, Mitchell M, Bloodhart B, Maibach E. A survey of African-American
physicians on the health effects of climate change. Int J Environ Res Public Health
2014;11:12473–85.
[8] Sarfaty M, Bloodhart B, Ewart G, Thurstson G, Balmes J, Guidotti T, Maibach E.
American thoracic society member survey on climate change and health. Ann Am
Thorac Soc 2015;12:274–8.
[9] Sarfaty M, Kreslake J, Casale T, Maibach E. Views of AAAAI members on climate
change
and
health.
J
Allergy
Clin
Immunol
Pract
2016.
doi:
10.1016/j.
jaip.2015.09.018.
[10] Maibach E, Frumkin H, Ahdoot S. Health professionals and the climate crisis: Trusted
voices, essential roles. World Med Health Policy 2021. doi: 10.1002/whm3.421.
[11] Medical Groups Announce Policy Agenda and Call to Action on the Climate Health
Emergency. (2019). The Medical Society Consortium on Climate and Health
(MSCCH). https://medsocietiesforclimatehealth.org.
[12] https://climatehealthaction.org/media/uploads/2021/01/18/climateemergencys-
tatementjan2021.pdf.
[13] https://climatehealthaction.org/media/uploads/2021/05/06/ndc_letter_to_presi-
dent_biden_apr2021e.pdf.
[14] https://climatehealthaction.org/media/uploads/2021/10/21/health-organiza-
tions-letter-on-cepp.pdf.
[15] https://climatehealthaction.org/media/uploads/2022/04/22/americashealthpro-
fessionalscallonbidentolimitfossilfuelexpansion_april222022_8JOQgjK.pdf.
[16] https://climatehealthaction.org/media/uploads/2021/09/20/americashealthpro-
fessionalscalloncongresstoinvestinhealth-signed-sept2021d.pdf.
[17] Climate, Health, and Equity: Recommendations for the Department of Health and
Human Services. (2021). https://climatehealthaction.org/media/uploads/2021/
04/29/hhs-climate-change-recommendations-28apr2021.pdf.
[18] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Choi W. Fossil fuels are harming our brains: identifying key
messages about the health effects of air pollution from fossil fuels. BMC Pubic
Health 2019;19:1079.
[19] Kotcher J, Feldman L, Luong K, Wyatt J, Maibach E. Advocacy messages about cli-
mate and health are more effective when they include information about risks,
solutions and a normative appeal: Evidence from a conjoint experiment. J Clim
Change Health 2021. doi: 10.1016/j/joclim.2021.100030.
[20] Lee H, Pagano I, Kotcher J, Campbell E, Borth A, Hubbert B, Maibach E. Health pro-
fessional’s willingness to advocate for strengthening global commitments to the
Paris climate agreement: ﬁndings from a multi-nation survey. J Clim Change
Health 2021. doi: 10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100016.
[21] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Rosenthal S, Gustafson A, Leiserowitz A. Americans increas-
ingly understand that climate change harms human health. https://www.climate-
changecommunication.org/all/americans-increasingly-understand-that-climate-
change-harms-human-health/.
M. Sarfaty, N. Duritz, R. Gould et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100174
3
[22] Roser-Renouf C, Maibach E, Leiserowitz A, Rosenthal S, Kotcher J. Understanding
the health harms of climate change: a six Americans analysis. https://www.cli-
matechangecommunication.org/all/understanding-the-health-harms-of-climate-
change-a-six-americas-analysis/.
[23] Maibach E, Sarfaty M, Mitchell M, Gould R. Limiting global warming to 1.5 to 2.0
degrees C—A unique and necessary role for health professionals. PLOS Med 2019.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1002804.
[24] Gould R, Sarfaty M, Maibach E. The Health Promise of Climate Solutions. epub-
lished March. Medical Society Consortium on Climate and Health; 2022 https://
medsocietiesforclimatehealth.org/reports/health-promise-climate-solutions/.
[25] Limaye V, DeAlwys A. The health costs of inaction on climate change. Medical Society
Consortium on Climate and Health. Natural Resources Defense Council, University of
Wisconsin; 2020 https://medsocietiesforclimatehealth.org/reports/costs-inaction-eco-
nomic-burden-fossil-fuels-climate-change-health-united-states/.
[26] Mailloux N, Abel D, Holloway T, Patz J. Nationwide and regional PM2.5-related air
quality health beneﬁts from the removal of energy-related emissions in the
United States. GeoHealth 2022. doi: 10.1029/2022GH000603.
[27] NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI) U.S. Billion-Dollar
Weather and Climate Disasters (2022). https://www.ncei.noaa.gov/access/bil-
lions/, doi: 10.25921/stkw-7w73.
[28] Chrobak U . (2021). Solar power got cheap. So why aren’t we using it more: It
turns out there’s a lot of inertia built into the energy system. Oct 8, 2021. Popular
Science.
https://www.popsci.com/story/environment/cheap-renewable-energy-
vs-fossil-fuels/
M. Sarfaty, N. Duritz, R. Gould et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100174
4
