Glacier geoengineering to address sea-level rise: A geotechnical approach
Andrew LOCKLEYa, Michael WOLOVICKb, Bowie KEEFERc, Rupert GLADSTONEd,
Li-Yun ZHAOb,e, John C. MOOREb,d,*
a University College London (Bartlett School), London, WC1H 0QB, UK
b College of Global Change and Earth System Science, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, PR China
c 120 Manastee Road, Galiano Island, British Columbia, BC V0N 1P0, Canada
d Arctic Centre, University of Lapland, Rovaniemi, 96101, Finland
e Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory, Zhuhai, 519082, China
Received 15 January 2020; revised 3 August 2020; accepted 27 November 2020
Available online 5 December 2020
Abstract
It is remarkable that the high-end sea level rise threat over the next few hundred years comes almost entirely from only a handful of ice
streams and large glaciers. These occupy a few percent of ice sheets’ coastline. Accordingly, spatially limited interventions at source may
provide globally-equitable mitigation from rising seas. Ice streams control draining of ice sheets; glacier retreat or acceleration serves to greatly
increase potential sea level rise. While various climatic geoengineering approaches have been considered, serious consideration of geotechnical
approaches has been limited e particularly regarding glaciers. This study summarises novel and extant geotechnical techniques for glacier
restraint, identifying candidates for further research. These include draining or freezing the bed; altering surface albedo; creating obstacles:
retaining snow; stiffening shear margins with ice; blocking warm sea water entry; thickening ice shelves (increasing buttressing, and
strengthening fractured shelves against disintegration); as well as using regional climate engineering or local cloud seeding to cool the glacier or
add snow. Not all of these ideas are judged reasonable or feasible, and even fewer are likely to be found to be advisable after further
consideration. By describing and evaluating the potential and risks of a large menu of responses e even apparently hopeless ones e we can
increase the chances of ﬁnding one that works in times of need.
Keywords: Climate intervention; Targeted geoengineering; Antarctica; Greenland; Glaciers; Sea level rise
1. Introduction
Glaciers are slow moving, river-like bodies of ice. The
continental ice sheets of Greenland and Antarctica are drained
through huge, relatively fast-ﬂowing glaciers or ice streams
(Rignot et al., 2011; Joughin et al., 2010), ﬂowing at rates of
1e5 km per year; while the majority of the ice sheets move
around 10 m per year. Just ﬁve dynamically thinning glaciers
in Greenland, < 1% by area, contributed >12% of recent net
ice loss (McMillan et al., 2016).
The ﬂow of ice streams is largely through sliding over the
bed, and their rate of slip is determined by basal drag which is
often locally concentrated in ‘sticky spots’ (Alley, 1993),
related to bed roughness and geometry e either directly as a
bedrock bump, or by affecting subglacial water and till. Ice
streams may change dramatically: for example, Kamb ice
stream on Antarctica's Siple coast became stagnant during the
last few centuries (Retzlaff and Bentley, 1993). The driving
mechanism is bed water supply, varying because of water
piracy between adjacent ice streams or basal freeze-on
* Corresponding author. College of Global Change and Earth System Sci-
ence, Beijing Normal University, Beijing, 100875, PR China.
E-mail address: john.moore.bnu@gmail.com (MOORE J.C.).
Peer review under responsibility of National Climate Center (China
Meteorological Administration).
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/accr/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accre.2020.11.008
1674-9278/Copyright © 2020, National Climate Center (China Meteorological Administration). Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
(Tulaczyk
et
al.,
2000;
Anandakrishnan
et
al.,
1997;
Bougamont et al., 2011).
Climate change affects ice sheets: warmer air can hold
more water, increasing snowfall. Warmer ice is softer, and
would accelerate e although warming the ice at depth
would take millennia. More importantly, warming oceans
melt ice rapidly where it starts to ﬂoat. Where bedrock
deepens away from the coast, acceleration because of
warming will be dramatic, as warm seawater advances under
the ice e ice ﬂow increases due to a deepening grounding
line (Alley et al., 2015; Joughin et al., 2012; Turner et al.,
2017). Of global sea level rise, 3.4 m is held in unstable
marine basins in West Antarctica, 19 m is in basins in East
Antarctica that are potentially unstable (Fretwell et al.,
2013), and only 60 cm is outside the Greenland and Ant-
arctic ice sheets, in ~200,000 mountain glaciers and ice caps
(Grinsted, 2013). Ice stream acceleration and ice sheet
collapse poses a major risk to coastal cities (Jevrejeva et al.,
2016; Hinkel et al., 2014).
Geoengineering, the deliberate modiﬁcation of the climate
system, has been proposed to address anthropogenic global
warming (AGW), possibly complementing a full range of
strategies to keep temperatures below thresholds, e.g. 1.5 C
above pre-industrial (Jones et al., 2018). Commonly discussed
forms of geoengineering are climatic; seeking to address im-
pacts (like sea-level rise) by controlling global average surface
temperature (MacMartin and Kravitz, 2019). These ap-
proaches are controversial (Sugiyama et al., 2020), partly due
to concerns that changes will be contested (Buck, 2018),
causing political strife. Even if carbon emissions fall (per the
Paris Agreement e Kitous and Keramidas, 2015), approaching
zero sometime after 2050, the oceans will likely continue
rising anyway, and the risk remains of dramatic centennial sea
level rise (Jevrejeva et al., 2016).
Consequently, this study considers potential geotechnical
geoengineering solutions. These do not act on climate;
instead aiming to reduce glacier ﬂow rates, restrain the ice
sheets which they drain, and/or reduce ablation. The limited
literature on ice sheet conservation focuses on blocking
warm ocean waters accessing ice shelf cavities (Moore et al.,
2018; Wolovick and Moore 2018; Hunt and Byers, 2019)
and increasing snow fall (Frieler et al., 2016; Feldmann
et al., 2019). Here, we expand the options available to
address sea level rise, outlining new potential interventions.
We are not endorsing or recommending any of these tech-
niques; the best of them come with serious unresolved sci-
entiﬁc and engineering challenges, while the worst of them
may have fatal ﬂaws which preclude further development.
We are merely expanding the overall menu of societal op-
tions and brieﬂy outlining the major issues involved with
each one.
We provide a background to ice sheets and sea level rise,
with a focus on ice/ocean interactions. For an overview on
solar radiation management geoengineering's effect on ice
sheets, see analyses of Greenland (Moore et al., 2019), and
Antarctica (McCusker et al., 2015), though see caveats in
Irvine et al. (2018). Subsequently, we consider intervention
possibilities, difﬁculties and potential. Finally, we discuss risk
and precaution in real-world applications.
2. An elementary primer on ice sheets and sea level
Glaciers have an accumulation zone at high altitude, and (in
warmer climes) an ablation zone at low altitude. Glaciers are
characterised by termination (calving or melting) and base
condition (warm e i.e. wet; or cold e i.e. dry). Calving ter-
minations are hard to deal with numerically (Moore et al.,
2013; Åstr€om et al., 2014). A bed lubricated with water may
be due to frictional melting of the glacier moving on the bed,
geothermal heat, or surface inﬁltration. Dry-based glaciers
ﬂow slowly, through internal deformation of the ice only
(Moore et al., 2013). Dry glaciers react very slowly to
changing climate conditions e on timescales, of millennia
(Cuffey and Paterson, 2010). Glaciers terminating on land are
relatively slow-responding e because the heat capacity of air
is relatively low; melt rates are typically ~1 m per year. Gla-
ciers terminating in water can have basal melt rates of order
100 m per year as the ocean transfers heat more efﬁciently
(Turner et al., 2017). Fast-ﬂow is controlled by sliding across
their beds and is governed by the availability, pressure, and
distribution of subglacial water.
Subglacial water systems can be classiﬁed as either efﬁ-
cient or inefﬁcient. Efﬁcient systems move large volumes of
water through conduits governed by equilibrium between
outward melting and inward creep closure (Rothlisberger,
1972; Weertman, 1972; Nye, 1976; Rothlisberger and Lang,
1987; Hewitt, 2013). Efﬁcient systems cover a small fraction
of the basal area, running at lower pressure than the ice
overburden, increasing basal drag and decreasing ice sliding.
Efﬁcient systems dominate where surface melt is high e
summer, Greenland ablation zone & downstream Antarctica
(Schroeder et al., 2013).
Inefﬁcient
hydrology
systems
involve
either
poorly-
connected subglacial water pockets, or water in saturated
subglacial sediments (Blankenship et al., 1986; Walder, 1986;
Kamb, 1987; Tulaczyk et al., 2000a, 2000b; Hewitt, 2013). In
these systems water covers a large fraction of the basal area
and is close to the ice pressure e reducing drag and promoting
rapid sliding. In both efﬁcient and inefﬁcient systems, water
exits at the ice margin or grounding line.
Runoff from the surface and basal melt emerges at the
grounding line as cold and fresh subglacial discharge, which is
buoyant. This rises along the ice face as a buoyant plume
(Jenkins, 1991, 2011). Turbulent mixing entrains warm salty
ocean water. This reduces plume buoyancy but increases heat
content, which controls the melt rate. Increased subglacial
discharge and ocean heat content increase melting at the
iceeocean interface, while also pushing calved tabular ice-
bergs away from fragmenting ice shelf ocean margins.
Marine terminating glaciers are held by buttressing.
Bedrock high-points contact the ﬂoating ice base, acting as
pinning points. Greenland fjords walls provide buttressing
without pinning beneath. Sea ice and icebergs forming a
melange reduce calving rates (Amundson et al., 2010; Robel
402
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
2017), but do not substantially restrain ice ﬂux except in
narrow fjords (Guo et al., 2019; Pollard et al., 2018).
Glaciers terminating in the ocean and resting on bedrock
that deepens inland are subject to Marine Ice Sheet Insta-
bility (MISI), a positive feedback between ice ﬂux and
grounding line depth (Hughes, 1973; Weertman, 1974;
Thomas and Bentley, 1978; Schoof, 2007). As the grounding
line retreats into a deepening basin, ice ﬂux across the
grounding line increases, thus increasing the rate of dynamic
thinning and accelerating retreat. The MISI is mechanical,
driven by bedrock geometry; but ocean coupling will
accelerate instability. The retreating grounding line and
thinning shelf will increase sub-shelf cavity volume, allow-
ing more vigorous circulation and increased basal melt
(Jacobs et al., 2011).
Greenland surface melting leads to about 1/2 present mass
loss, the rest being by calving (van den Broeke et al., 2009).
Water runs through the ice mass in a sub-glacial drainage
system that is well-organised, channelized and efﬁciently
drains to the ocean. Efﬁcient drainage means surface melt
increases do not accelerate ice ﬂow. Nevertheless, meltwater
induces further melting, via albedo. In Antarctica, essentially
no surface melt is supplied to the bed, which is lubricated by
water formed in situ and well-dispersed across the ice stream.
Reducing production of water at the bed will have the effect of
reducing lubrication and slowing the ice stream.
Modifying
either
ice
streams’
basal
conditions,
or
increasing buttressing will tend to restrain ﬂow. Increasing
snowfall on ice sheets, or otherwise adjusting surface mass
balance will accumulate ice, but will thicken and steepen the
ice, leading to increasing ﬂow within a few centuries, thus
acting against accumulation (Winkelmann et al., 2012).
The most important factor controlling sea level rise un-
certainty (Jevrejeva et al., 2016) are glaciers and ice streams
susceptible to MISI. MISI may already be underway on Pine
Island Glacier, Thwaites Glacier, and their smaller neighbors
(Joughin et al., 2014; Favier et al., 2014; Rignot et al., 2014).
Others might become important in the multi-centennial time-
scale, but only a handful are of immediate concern (DeConto
and Pollard, 2016); these are located in the Amundsen Sea
sector of Antarctica. There is also much to be gained by
observing and understanding relatively smaller systems, e.g. in
Greenland (Fig. 1).
3. Interventions
3.1. Albedo management
Attempts have already been made to preserve glaciers and
sea ice by using insulating or reﬂecting materials (Field et al.,
2018; Messenger, 2010). These may be useful on glaciers
draining ice sheets. Where warm air contacts the glacier sur-
face in the ablation zone these may prevent surface darkening,
from dust or melt ponds.
In the Greenland ablation zone, drainage (via surface
drainage channels and then moulins) causes surface accumu-
lation of dark material (dust and black carbon). Ice covered by
thick debris (mountain glaciers), is insulated from solar heat-
ing and warmed air, and melt rates may be very low. Polar
debris cover is much thinner and tends to accelerate melting,
by lowering albedo.
Surface melt ponds are darker than surrounding ice and
snow, absorbing much more energy from the sun. Draining
ponds into moulins would negate this. Lake drainage would
need to be gradual, as sudden lake drainage overwhelms the
basal hydrology system and causes a surge in ice ﬂow (Das
et al., 2008). Regulating drainage rates at many separate
lakes and monitoring basal hydrologic response would present
major difﬁculties in implementing this intervention.
Alternatively, pond water may be used for snow making,
when air temperature is low enough. Unlike earlier ideas that
intended snow making to add bulk mass to the ice sheet
(Feldmann et al., 2019), our goal is to adjust albedo. Only thin
layers need be applied; water and energy requirements are far
lower than when adding mass to compensate for sea level rise.
These machines are efﬁcient in air temperatures < ~5 C.
Albedo modiﬁcation has been investigated for Arctic sea
ice. The ‘Ice 911’ proposal considers addition of reﬂective,
sand-like material (Field et al., 2018). This may be beneﬁcial,
outperforming artiﬁcial snow in warmer conditions. Achieving
the desired mono-layer is challenging even for ﬂat sea ice,
where icebreaker ships may be positioned rather arbitrarily.
Glaciers are difﬁcult and dangerous environments for ma-
chinery or pedestrians, due to crevasses, severe weather con-
ditions, difﬁculties of search & rescue, and remoteness.
Aircraft spreading has some similarities with crop-spraying
where economic coverage is the primary concern, but is
likely to be prohibitively costly when extended over vast areas
of Greenland.
Instead of covering dark material, a conceivable alternative
is removal. Polluted snow is darker; this is ampliﬁed during
the melt season, as dark particles concentrate on the surface.
Specialist machines (perhaps based on ploughs, bulldozers or
dragline excavators) might be developed to scrape the dirty
surface layer of relatively stable glaciers into piled windrows,
powered by smokeless fuel such as hydrogen to avoid black
carbon emissions exacerbating the problem. This could use-
fully create packed snow berms as windbreaks.
Where a mountain glacier is thinly covered in rubble, al-
bedo may dominate thermal insulation. Removing rubble may
be a locally-effective intervention e but such alpine glaciers
contribute little to sea level rise. Nevertheless, this may pro-
vide a local ecosystem service.
The dark region of Greenland is extensive. There is no
leverage from working only the fast outlet glaciers, because
surface melt does not affect their ﬂow. Any surface albedo
modiﬁcations would be extensive, and costly. Dark material is
conﬁned to the surface decimetres, but this is rough, with
surface crevassing, sastrugi (wind-formed features), and melt
ponds making complex topography. Removal of the dirty top
layer would expose the next layer to summer melting and
renewed surface concentration of dark contaminants in that
layer. Continued deposition of airborne black carbon aerosols
from industrial pollution and potentially-increasing boreal
403
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
forest wildﬁres will continue the accumulation of dark
contaminants.
In summary, such albedo modiﬁcation techniques do not
appear practical at the largest scale. Deployment would be
required over a large fraction of the ablation zone, in order to
have a meaningful inﬂuence on sea level rise. Operations on
smaller, rubble-covered mountain glaciers may help local
preservation, but the energy and cost requirements of dealing
with the entire ablation zone are prohibitive. Albedo modiﬁ-
cation techniques may ﬁnd a niche in areas around the equi-
librium line where snow loss and albedo reduction were just
beginning, but these techniques do not seem to be feasible at
large scales.
3.2. Anchoring techniques
The gravitational driving forces in large glaciers and ice
streams are much too large for ice sheet movement to be more
than inﬁnitesimally slowed by mechanical anchoring or stiff-
ening with steel cables or chains, by bedrock blasting to
roughen the glacier bed, or by somehow installing artiﬁcial
protrusions, such as stub piles embedded in subglacial till or
drilled into bedrock.
Some degree of ice shelf stabilization might be possible,
with the objectives of maintaining buttressing of inland gla-
ciers, preventing marine ice-cliff instability (DeConto and
Pollard, 2016), and reducing the draft of released icebergs
that could endanger any artiﬁcial subsea barriers installed to
block deep warm seawater intrusion. The horizontal resistive
stress due to buoyancy of a free-ﬂoating ice shelf 500 m thick
is about 250 kPa, much too large for any reasonable tensile
reinforcement of the shelf surface to exert more than minor
inhibition of crevasse fracturing and rift propagation. How-
ever, tensile reinforcement by anchored steel cables or buried
chains could delay ﬁnal rupture of tabular iceberg rifts by
mooring emergent icebergs in place. Large drifting icebergs
cannot plausibly be restrained, but it could be possible to
prevent them from initial drifting until much later in the
process of ice shelf thinning and decay.
Iceberg drift away from a shelf margin is driven by wind
and ocean currents. These include outward-ﬂowing buoyant
plumes of subglacial meltwater: these are often also associated
with polynyas, which form as surface water and ﬂoating ice is
pushed away from the shelf margin. These forces might be
restrained by cable networks with self-embedding plough
devices for load transfer to the ice, and post-tensioning by ice
shelf spreading and weighted cable hanging over the active
shelf edge. With icebergs moored to the parent shelf, rifts will
tend to heal by winter freezing. This has taken place naturally
in the case of the Brunt ice shelf, in which a ﬂotilla of
mutually jammed icebergs has been frozen together in a
reconstituted ice shelf. In suitable weather conditions, pump-
ing water onto the surface may speed this fusion.
Deployment of tensioning cables across rough and treach-
erous ice shelf surfaces would be difﬁcult. Cables hanging
over the shelf edge will eventually drop to the seabed, from
which they might later be salvaged for recycling or reuse.
Investigation of stresses, fracture modes and stability man-
agement of the new calving front would require much further
research. Any such intervention would certainly be extremely
Fig. 1. The Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets showing their surface ice velocities, and an enlargement of the Amundsen Sea embayment with the Pine Island
Thwaites glaciers, that are rapidly losing mass to the ocean. Particular outlet glaciers are marked that might present opportunities for engineering, for local
community beneﬁts, engineering testing, or large sea level rise commitments.
404
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
expensive in terms of material, installation and continuing
operational costs.
Splitting of ﬂoating shelves into icebergs is not fully un-
derstood. Fatigue by ﬂexing from tides and waves (Pritchard
and Vaughan 2007), and damage from pre-existing fractures
contributes to rapid shelf disintegration (Liu et al., 2015),
especially when thinned by melting from below. It is aided by
freeze-thaw hydrofracturing by surface meltwater (Scambos
et al., 2003), the draining of which could be a useful inter-
vention e again, depending on weather conditions.
Tensile reinforcements to suppress the breakup (e.g. as
described above), would ideally have a designed preload to
create compression across the potential split, while with-
standing loads from wind and ocean currents, as well as
ﬂexing from tides and low frequency ocean swell. It is chal-
lenging to locate future fractures, and to put sufﬁcient re-
inforcements in place.
Ice streams are often ﬂanked by narrow and highly frac-
tured shear margins, across which velocities increase from
near-zero to full speed. As ice streams accelerate, shear mar-
gins become more chaotic, damaged, and provides less but-
tressing (Alley et al., 2019; Guo et al., 2019).
Strengthening shear margins might add buttressing. Forces
on grounded ice ﬂows are much too large to control with steel
e but, particularly where streams ﬂoat (forming ice shelves), it
might be feasible to stiffen shear margins with ice. Stream
margins are strengthened naturally in cases where they merge
into shelves and conditions allow accumulation of basal
‘marine ice’ underneath them (Holland et al., 2009). Marine
ice inﬁlls basal crevasses with saline ice which is more ductile
than freshwater ice, and strengthens suture zones between
streams (Kulessa et al., 2014). Inﬁlling ﬂoating shear margins
might work, naturally penetrating the crevassed zone and
freezing rapidly in cold ice. This speed may be attractive,
although slower freezing and fresher marine ice accumulation
might be important for mechanical strengthening, since the
brine trapped affects its rheology (Khazendar et al., 2009;
Moore et al., 1994).
3.3. Bed drying
Warm-based glaciers tend to ﬂow fast because they have
liquid water lubricating their beds. That bed may be hard rock,
but more likely is soft sedimentary material.
The Kamb ice stream in Antarctica switched off (Retzlaff
and Bentley, 1993) when its water supply was lost e either
to the adjacent ice stream or to freezing (Alley et al., 1994;
Tulaczyk
et
al.,
2000;
Anandakrishnan
et
al.,
1997;
Bougamont et al., 2011). Hence natural basal drying is known
to slow ice streams.
Bed water may be organized in various ways: from
dispersed pockets, to dendritic channels. The more connected
the drainage system, the less the water introduced affects
sliding; a concentrated, efﬁcient drainage system occupies a
small area and has lower pressure than the ice overburden
(Rothlisberger, 1972; Nye, 1976; Rothlisberger and Lang,
1987; Hewitt, 2013). Rapid pulses of water into an efﬁcient
system (days or less) can overwhelm its capacity, causing
pressure
to
increase
and
water
spreading,
temporarily
increasing sliding (Das et al., 2008; Schoof, 2010).
In Greenland, basal water volume is large, due to surface
melt; this promotes efﬁcient drainage. In Antarctica, water
comes from basal melt via plastic deformation, compression
melt, geothermal ﬂux, and bed friction (friction is dominant in
faster ﬂows). In the upper reaches of Antarctica's fast outlets
(e.g. Pine Island and Thwaites, Fig. 2), drainage is inefﬁcient
and water dispersed. As ice streams approach the coast, and
larger volumes of melt are available, drainage systems become
more organized. Radar shows Thwaites Glacier's drainage
becomes channelized <50 km from the grounding line
(Schroeder et al., 2013). To slow glaciers subject to rapid
MISI, reducing water in the bed at elevations above the
threshold for channelized ﬂow is likely to be desirable.
However, modelling downstream impacts is critical, to ensure
that this intervention does not impede channel formation
downstream. Once water is channelized there is little impact
on glacier speed. The objective would be to either drain
distributed systems (i.e. drain subglacial sediment); or convert
distributed drainage to channelized, which does not seem
possible.
Removing basal water requires challenging engineering.
The oil industry offers relevant techniques. Simple drilling
(rotary bits, hot water drilling) allows creation of routes from
bed to surface, from which water can be extracted. Directional
drilling is possible, enabling a branched network of boreholes
from a single surface well.
Such extraction may not be simple; the base will typically
be close to freezing point, while higher layers are colder. The
water temperature must be raised to prevent freezing and
borehole blockage. Electrical heat tracing along borehole
casings is needed, with enough heating power to compensate
unavoidable conductive heat ﬂow into surrounding ice. Heat
loss into the surrounding ice will be greatest during initial
operation of a drainage well. Filament-wound ﬁberglass pipe
can be used as well casings, with advantages of lower thermal
conductivity and much lower weight than steel. A braided
insulation sleeve of robust thermoplastic material could
somewhat reduce heat tracing power consumption, and could
help manage stresses in the casing from deformation of the
glacier.
The sediment bed is a sensitive system. Porosity and
permeability depend on pore water pressure. When pressur-
ised, porosity and permeability are high, as sediment grains
are water-separated. Reduction in pressure collapses water
pockets, severely reducing bed permeability (Tulaczyk et al.,
2000) especially in tills with high clay content. Further
reduction in suction pressure to drive adequate water ﬂux will
greatly
increase
pumping
power
requirements,
while
increasing the risk of blockage by ice formation. Removing
water from a wide area will be more difﬁcult than pumping it
from one hole, unless careful adjustment of pressures and
water ﬂow are achieved. It may be impracticable to extract
water over ~30 m basal distances in a distributed drainage
system. A network of boreholes is probably needed e unless
405
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
good surveys of basal water pockets can be made (e.g. with
ice-penetrating radar, seismic surveys, or down-hole cameras).
Optimal borehole locations could be determined by ice dy-
namics simulations.
Reservoir engineering expertise from the petroleum in-
dustry may be helpfully applied to subglacial drainage chal-
lenges. Enhanced oil recovery (EOR) techniques based on
nitrogen or CO2 injection into failing wells would be affected
by the energy cost of compressing air or nitrogen, or capturing
and liquefying atmospheric CO2. This would greatly exceed
the pumping power for lifting the water displaced by that ﬂuid
injection. However, such approaches may be required to dry
porous beds, where pressures are limited by the packing of
loose bed material. Were such techniques used, a delicate
balance would need to be maintained: over-pressurization
would result in local jacking of the glacier, removing fric-
tion; while under-pressurization would cause a drop in
porosity, blocking ﬂow towards the borehole.
Water extraction would not need to remove all bed water.
Pine Island Glacier produces about 50 m3 s1 of melt over its
whole area, or around 10 mm per year (Joughin et al., 2009);
disposal would be difﬁcult. Stress transfer means that
increasing basal friction in a small area would slow the glacier.
This is especially true in areas with both low driving stress and
drag; the addition of localized sticky spots could substantially
increase
integrated
drag.
Conservatively
assuming
that
0.1 m3 s1 represents a quantity of water that could reasonably
be disposed of at the surface, and taking 10 mm per year as an
average basal melt rate, that suggests capacity to create
roughly 300 km2 of sticky spots. Freezing this much water at
the surface would release 33 MW of latent heat; if we
conservatively assume that 1 W m2 represents a reasonable
area-averaged heat ﬂow that could be dispersed at the surface,
then this would correspond to spreading the water over an area
of 33 km2, or a square just under 6 km on a side. A vastly
reduced surface area would be required in the polar night,
where temperatures are often tens of Celsius below zero. It is
impossible to know how much water could actually be
removed without far more detailed design and engineering
analysis, but changing the amount of water that could be
removed would change the amount of sticky area that could be
created (proportionally, under the simplistic assumptions that
melt rate is spatially constant, and complete and even drying
can be achieved). Coupled ice dynamic and basal hydrology
modelling would be required to optimise the distribution of
sticky spots across the ice stream. The resulting water could be
Fig. 2. Schematic representation of glacier intervention engineering schemes. Note that in this cartoon the ice area relative to the interventions is about 1 million
times smaller than in reality, and it would be unlikely to utilize more than one method on any particular glacier. Albedo: reﬂective materials, draining melt ponds,
snow making machines; cloud seeding. Bed drying & binding:melt removal; thermosyphon base freezing; enhanced Oil Recovery analogues; CO2 hydrate for-
mation; CO2 fracking-chilling. Ice shelf buttressing: enhancing pinning points; thickening/strengthening ice with pumps, snow making machines, thermosyphons
and wind breaks; draining shelf melt; tensile reinforcement. Environmental modiﬁcation: cloud brightening, underwater berms/sheets, manipulating ocean/air
currents, regional solar radiation management.
406
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
frozen easily in winter near drilling sites. Spraying water
would aid cooling, and it may also need to be settled/ﬁltered,
removing dark till that would exacerbate summer melting.
Removing water ﬂowing along the bed could have advan-
tages beyond the bed. Meltwater discharge at the grounding
line is many hundred meters below the surface, generating a
buoyantly-rising plume, which turbulently entrains warmer
seawater to wash against the ice front e causing rapid melting
(Jenkins, 1991, 2011). Subsea ablation from mixed meltwater/
seawater weakens the glacier from below, encouraging calving
fragmentation. If the buoyant plume rises to the surface, it
pushes ﬂoating ice fragments out to sea, removing any but-
tressing, which would otherwise prop the glacier before sub-
sequent calving. A large fraction of total meltwater would
require removal to achieve this additional beneﬁt.
An organized drainage network is the least effective way
for water to affect ice speeds. Only a tiny fraction of the
glacier is then in contact with the water (rather than most of
the glacier, in a distributed system), and water pressures are
lower. There is nothing to be gained by disrupting or draining
channelized networks; it is the drainage type that draining the
bed (Moore et al., 2018) is seeking to mimic.
While subglacial water drainage could greatly reduce bed
lubrication, total energy costs will be very high for drilling
wells, heat tracing wells through cold ice, pumping the water
to the surface, and excess pressurization for water disposal by
winter freezing or snow-making. A dense ﬁeld of wells over a
substantial area would probably be required for stable for-
mation of an ice stream ‘sticky spot’. Designing and oper-
ating
the
well
ﬁeld
will
be
challenging,
considering
hydrologically active terrain on a moving glacier and a dy-
namic sedimentary bed.
3.4. Basal freezing
Bed freezing equates to drying (Moore et al., 2018).
Conceivably, coolant could be circulated through boreholes
with winter cooling at the surface, or between the bed and cold
layers at intermediate depth. This would create frozen plugs
around active ends of cooling wells. There are great technical
challenges. Firstly, holes need accurate drilling (near or within
basal melt), including installation of impermeable sleeves.
Secondly, bottom heat transfer, to take up the latent heat of
freezing, is restricted by ice's low thermal conductivity. The
heat transfer limitation also applies to dissipation into cold
intermediate ice layers, as opposed to air cooling. Thirdly, heat
transport by sensible heat coolants is impaired by thermal
equalization between counter-current coolant supply and re-
turn ﬂows e potentially necessitating separate wells. Fourth,
numerous parallel boreholes would be needed to cool any
substantial basal area, with costs compounded by limited life
of boreholes in moving glaciers.
Heat transport by latent heat of vaporization is more
effective than by sensible heat of a liquid coolant. For sub-
glacial freezing, liquid air, liquid nitrogen or liquid CO2 might
be technically feasible direct contact refrigerants. The exces-
sively high energy cost of air or nitrogen liquefaction would
limit pragmatically possible application of those cryogens to
small scale ﬂash freezing applications. CO2 captured from the
atmosphere might conceivably be a more viable direct contact
refrigerant because of the further incentive for carbon
sequestration, if applied to inland glacier regions sufﬁciently
far from unstable margins.
The low temperature and low humidity of polar air reduces
the theoretical energy consumption of capturing CO2 from
ambient air. Atmospheric CO2 capture is now being performed
at pilot scale in temperate climates by adsorption on special
solid adsorbents with high afﬁnity for CO2, followed by
thermal swing regeneration of the adsorbent (Wurzbacher
et al., 2012). Low temperatures over polar ice sheets would
facilitate use of zeolite or activated carbon adsorbents to
concentrate CO2, followed by cryogenic liquefaction. The CO2
will be gravitationally pressurized in delivery down the ﬁrst
compartment of a dual compartment well with annular casings
as shown in Fig. 3. The ﬁrst compartment between outer and
inner casings would be pressurized above basal pressure, while
the second compartment inside the inner casing would contain
low pressure CO2 being returned to the surface. A remotely
actuated closed-centre switching valve at the base of the
casing could sequentially open each compartment to the basal
formation while closing the other compartment. This switch-
ing valve would in a ﬁrst position deliver a pulse of cold liquid
CO2 at well above the lithostatic pressure into the porous
subglacial till formation to act as fracking ﬂuid, and in a
second position vent ﬂash vaporizing CO2 back from the
formation into the second compartment for mechanical
recompression at the surface. The vapour pressure should be
less than 2 MPa at the base of the second compartment in
order to avoid CO2 condensation in the inner casing of the
vertical pipe. A refrigeration cycle would thus be provided
between basal heat uptake from CO2 vaporization in the basal
area surrounding the borehole, and heat release from relique-
faction at the surface.
The switching valve sequentially opens the liquid and
vapour compartments to the subglacial till, while never con-
necting the liquid and vapour compartments together. The
switching valve might be a rotary valve whose actuator would
be energized by the pressure difference between ﬁrst and
second compartments, and controlled by a solenoid pilot valve
responding to basal pressure transducers. The injection/release
cycle period would likely be hours or possibly days. Designing
this cycle would be a very challenging exercise for collabo-
ration with petroleum reservoir engineers, and requiring
experimental work on fracturing frozen ice/till composites. A
critical issue will be satisfactory release and return of CO2
vapour, as a majority fraction of CO2 liquid injected.
Following typical petroleum industry fracking practices, par-
ticulate proppants may be injected with the liquid CO2 to keep
ﬂow passages sufﬁciently open during the low-pressure vapour
release step.
A portion of the liquid CO2 injected into the subglacial till
formation would remain there and gradually bind with basal
water to form clathrate hydrates. CO2 hydrates have a higher
melting temperature at subglacial pressures than ice, and in
407
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
massive forms have superior mechanical properties. Methane
hydrates may have contributed to ‘sticky spots’ in palae-
oglacial
ice
streams
under
the
present
Barents
Sea
(Winsborrow et al., 2016). Bed drying by hydrate formation
sequesters CO2 from the atmosphere, however exothermicity
of hydrate formation would require supplemental basal
refrigeration to avoid melting adjacent ice. One mole of
liquid CO2 binding with about 6.5 mol of water ice to form
hydrate at the basal freezing temperature would release
12.8 kJ mol1(CO2), enough heat to melt another 2.1 mol of
ice (Anderson, 2003). As the latent heat of CO2 vaporization
at the freezing point of water is 10.3 kJ mol1, the majority
of the descending liquid CO2 must be returned to the surface
as vapour in order for any net basal refrigeration to be ach-
ieved after any remaining CO2 has converted to hydrate. The
fraction of the injected CO2 remaining in the till formation
must be small to avoid compromising the basal refrigeration
purpose by exothermic hydrate formation. Nevertheless, the
ﬁgures above still show a net increase in solid material in the
wet system, even without heat removal.
This direct contact CO2 cyclical injection/release refriger-
ation concept should have a very high coefﬁcient of perfor-
mance in winter conditions, before allowing for the energy
cost of the CO2 fraction permanently deposited under the ice.
The cost of CO2 capture from the atmosphere may be sup-
ported by carbon sequestration credits, but would not apply to
locations in fast-moving ice anywhere near ice sheet margins.
The above speculative concept is fraught with many chal-
lenges and uncertainties, but could provide a worthwhile
multidisciplinary research topic. Difﬁculties include reduction
of glacier bed permeability by high effective pressure when
CO2 vapour is being released to the surface, and the risk of ice
plugging the well if liquid water breaks through the deeply
frozen area being formed around the well. Complexity, un-
certainty and costs of this approach may well be excessive.
The above direct contact CO2 refrigeration concept is
closely related to closed thermosyphons that are widely used
for passive winter cooling of foundations in permafrost zones
(Wagner, 2014). Thermosyphons are essentially vertically
oriented heat pipes lifting heat from working ﬂuid evaporation
at their warmer bottom end and rejecting heat from conden-
sation at their colder top end. CO2 and anhydrous ammonia are
typical working ﬂuids for thermosyphons. While the direct
contact
CO2 refrigeration
approach requires mechanical
compression and pumping energy consumption to maintain the
necessary pressure differences between injection and release
steps during coolant escape, the “closed thermosyphon” using
either CO2 or NH3 working ﬂuid is entirely passive without
any need for external power.
Thermosyphons are a device for moving latent heat, so heat
exchange across the walls needs to be balanced for process
stability with condensation at the colder top end and evapo-
ration at the warmer bottom end. With condensation at lower
temperature and evaporation at higher temperature, these de-
vices are actually low grade geothermal heat engines, sup-
porting their internal ﬂuid circulation against frictional
pressure drops.
Specialized thermosyphons might possibly be adapted for
cooling glacier beds. Glaciers approaching their terminus
typically have a very cold layer near their base, as a result of
advection from the frigid high elevation interior. The tem-
perature gradient is quite steep in the ﬁrst 100 m above the
base, while greatly ﬂattening toward the surface. There is thus
a choice between rejecting heat into the cold ice about 100 m
Fig. 3. Direct contact basal refrigeration by cyclic liquid CO2 injection and vapour release.
408
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
above the base (as suggested in Fig. 4), or into the atmosphere
at the surface (perhaps 1000 m above the base). While heat
exchange into ice is conductivity-limited, the ice 100e200 m
above the base may be colder than the summer surface tem-
perature. Suitable thermosyphons contain an initially pres-
surized charge of working ﬂuid in a hermetically sealed pipe
enclosure installed in a vertical borehole. The nominal internal
vapour working pressure in glacier applications must be in-
termediate between the vapour pressure of the working ﬂuid
evaporating at the freezing temperature of subglacial water,
and the vapour pressure of the working ﬂuid condensing at a
practicable average heat rejection temperature about 20 C
colder. Higher pressure would prevent condensation in the heat
exchanger. This nominal internal vapour working pressure
would be about 2.5e3 MPa in CO2 thermosyphons, and an
order of magnitude smaller in NH3 thermosyphons. Ammonia
would be a suitable working ﬂuid because of its much lower
molecular weight and vapour pressure at temperatures near the
freezing point of water, avoiding the steeper gravitational
pressure gradient of compressed CO2 vapour in a long vertical
pipe. Nevertheless, ammonia releases would not be as envi-
ronmentally benign as CO2.
Conventional thermosyphons are typically no more than
about 10 m tall, while glacier applications require taller de-
vices by one or two orders of magnitude. The density of
saturated liquid CO2 at 273 K is 927 kg m3, intermediate
between the densities of water and ice. Density of saturated
liquid NH3 at 273 K is 638 kg m3. The vertical gradient of
boiling point elevation resulting from hydrostatic pressure will
be about 0.1 K m1 for CO2 and about 0.27 K m1 for NH3.
Because of the high thermal resistances faced at both ends by a
thermosyphon embedded in ice, such small temperature gra-
dients across the evaporation section may critically affect
operating performance, in the direction of shutting down with
excessively deep ﬂooding. The suggestion of a ﬂoat valve
controlled liquid level may thus be helpful for extremely tall
thermosyphons.
Further
study
should
engage
qualiﬁed
specialist expertise and perform detailed thermal and hydro-
dynamic modeling to assess feasibility of thermosyphons
(with or without liquid reservoirs and ﬂoat valves) as a
completely passive approach to subglacial
refrigeration.
Careful attention should be devoted to two-phase ﬂow con-
ditions, internal pressure distribution and operational stability
of thermosyphons at least an order of magnitude taller than
any used in present applications. To avoid destructive bending
and crushing, thermosyphons should not be installed in active
basal fault zones. For extremely tall thermosyphons as here
contemplated, liquid draining downward from the top end
condensation section may be collected in a reservoir (Fig. 4)
provided by a vertically elongated compartment extending
between the upper condensation and lower evaporation sec-
tions of the thermosyphon, with a ﬂoat actuated valve in the
evaporator controlling depressurization and admission of the
working ﬂuid liquid to the evaporation section where exces-
sive ﬂooding or drying must be avoided. Failure of ﬂuid
control will result in instability of partial/complete failure of
the device.
The low thermal conductivity of ice will greatly impair the
basal cooling effectiveness of thermosyphons, though they
may have elongated near-horizontal extensions of their evap-
oration section into the ice for greater contact area. Dense
ﬁelds of thermosyphons and corresponding large numbers of
boreholes are may well be prohibitively expensive.
3.5. Ice shelf buttressing
Floating ice shelves provide buttressing, resisting ice ﬂux
and mitigating MISI (Gudmundsson, 2013). This force is
derived from points which contact the Earth, either at its un-
derside where it grounds (forming rises/rumples); or at lateral
margins, contacting an embayment or fjord. Even small nat-
ural pinning points have wide-ranging impact (Fu¨rst et al.,
2015).
There are two ways to increase buttressing provided by
ﬂoating ice shelves. Firstly, building artiﬁcial pinning points
(Wolovick and Moore, 2018). Secondly, increase thickness or
structural strength of the ice shelf, so it contacts more natural
points, or transmits more force from existing pinning points.
Fig. 4. Closed thermosyphon for basal refrigeration.
409
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
These techniques mostly require work on the ice shelf.
Fringing shelves, ubiquitous around Antarctica, vary in size
and accessibility. Floating glacier tongues and shelves of the
Amundsen Sea are small and chaotically crevassed, because of
rapid sub shelf melting driven by the warm ocean currents
contacting grounding lines. Some crevasse-free regions may
be available, providing a base for work.
Artiﬁcially-raised pinning points might be constructed on
bedrock reefs in open water just outside present ice shelf
margins, to enable glacier regrounding after ice margin
advance has been stimulated by other methods such as subsea
barriers (discussed in the next section) to block deep warm
water ablation. Such pinning points should be strongly arm-
oured, and might be formed as interlocking arrays of ﬂoated-in
reinforced concrete caissons anchored by drilled piles. The
caissons may be built by slip forming in the same way as
offshore petroleum platforms, and designed to accept some
crushing iceberg impact damage without loss of overall
cohesive integrity. Structural durability of such artiﬁcial
pinning points would need to be evaluated by future feasibility
studies. Deep ice sheets would apply very high forces to such
caissons, which would be subject to a variety of failure modes:
being torn off moorings; snapping under bending/shear loads;
surface abrasion from till; shearing of square corners; salt-
water corrosion of rebar; freeze-thaw fracking of concrete;
denting or crushing of hollow members; etc.
Ice shelf thickening may be applied evenly across the ice
shelf, or it may be possible to organize thickening into useful
shapes, such as a compressive arch (Kulessa et al., 2014) or on
the shear margins. Pumping water through ice shelves via
boreholes onto the surface could thicken ice in cold seasons
(perhaps integrating brine rejection). A similar concept has
been suggested to manage Arctic sea ice (Desch et al., 2017).
Winter cooling may be applied to the ice shelf base, using
thermosyphons. The limited cooling area available (small heat
exchangers, as compared to the top surface of the ice) limits
use to well-chosen locations e likely with mechanical strength
importance, as opposed to being a way of simply increasing
ice volume. The syphon base will quickly become encased in
ice, limiting heat transfer. Further investigation of such ther-
mosyphons may explore possibilities for shedding at least
some encasing ice, through use of ice-phobic coatings and
perhaps cyclic mechanical impulses or water-hammer de-
ﬂections generated by abrupt releases of gravitationally pres-
surized liquid working ﬂuid from an internal reservoir into the
evaporation section e akin to a ﬂushing toilet. The combina-
tion of small surface area and modest heat ﬂux (once encased)
will mandate a forest of devices, probably excessively
increasing costs.
About 3.1 Gt per year of snow is blown to the sea around
Antarctica (Palm et al., 2019). Coastal Antarctica is subject to
katabatic winds; gravity ﬂows of cold air from the interior.
These dominate stable weather patterns, except during sum-
mers. Wide ﬂat plains ensure that much wind-blown snow
ends up in the sea. Windbreaks may retain some of this snow
and may fashion functional structures, e.g. arches. Windbreaks
can be created by erecting fencing, or bulldozing snow.
Similar techniques prevent desertiﬁcation, dune movement
and wind erosion in loose soils1. In Antarctica, structures
quickly become buried e creating aerodynamically smooth
features. These stop accumulating snow; windbreaks need
constant maintenance.
Similarly, given the right suitable weather conditions,
pumping water on top of the glacier to form an ice layer will
serve to bind any snow which is there. While ice has a lower
albedo than does snow, any fresh falls onto the ice surface will
tend to brighten it. Ensuring that ice is laid down only in
winter will minimise heating from albedo effects.
Snow control techniques could also be used on the upper
reaches of glaciers, and would be more energy efﬁcient that
either pumping seawater to refreeze, or generating artiﬁcial
snow.
In summary, increasing ice shelf thickness and strength are
keys to stabilizing against MISI. Both reducing melting from
warmer oceans and increasing stability by surface accumula-
tion of snow might be worthwhile. Addition of water onto ice
shelves however carries risks from hydrofracturing, but there
is plentiful windblown snow that could usefully be restrained
and sculpted.
3.6. Environmental modiﬁcations
Glaciers and ice sheets exist within a wider environment,
bordered by air, rock and ocean. All can be modiﬁed, to
transfer less heat into the ice, or more heat out.
Thermosyphons could passively cool basal ice or sur-
rounding rock, though severely constrained by low thermal
conductivity of that ice. Operational challenges of installation
are not trivial e especially if cooling at depth. Valuable de-
vices may be damaged or destroyed after emplacement too
deeply in basal shear zones. Intervention at scale would be
costly. Carefully targeted interventions may be justiﬁed.
There are already techniques which could be used to cool
water contacting ice. Marine cloud brightening (MCB) pos-
tulates ships spraying ﬁne seawater mist (Latham et al., 2012),
making clouds whiter to reﬂect sunlight to space (Stjern et al.,
2018). Similarly, marine micro bubbles brighten the ocean
(Gabriel et al., 2017). Local MCB has been proposed to pro-
tect the Great Barrier Reef from warming (McDonald et al.,
2019).
Various authors have suggested erection of underwater
berms or suspended sheets of metal to prevent warm water
reaching beneath ice sheets; modelling suggests that this is
likely effective, although with challenging civil engineering
(Moore et al., 2018; Wolovick and Moore, 2018; Hunt and
Byers, 2018; Gurses et al., 2019). Current ongoing in-
vestigations
are
considering
alternative
approaches
for
installing such barriers in ice-infested waters, with suitably
resilient conﬁgurations of reinforced tensile fabric. The
‘seabed anchored curtains’ would rise from the ocean ﬂoor to
1 Scottish Natural Heritage, 2020. Dune fencing. https://www.coastal
management.eu/dune-fencing.
410
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
intercept the thermocline a few hundred meters below the
surface, while allowing free passage of cooler water and
ﬂoating ice above the thermocline. Further work is needed to
determine cost-effectiveness of technically viable designs,
though this approach seems quite promising.
Changing mesoscale marine currents was suggested (Hunt
et al., 2019) with a focus on the Arctic. Such techniques
would not necessarily be helpful in preserving local ice sheets,
except possibly in special locations such as the Amundsen
embayment, where the Antarctic Circumpolar Current loops
around the Ross Gyre and impinges on the Amundsen Sea
shelf with deep warm water entering the troughs along the
continental shelf edge. Very careful simulation would be
necessary, before any practical attempts.
Changing heat transfer from the atmosphere is difﬁcult.
The atmosphere absorbs ~20%e25% of solar radiation
(Trenberth et al., 2009). Heat transfer from air could be locally
controlled. Windbreaks and insulating sheeting are already in
commercial use to preserve ski resort snow pack over the
summer period. Changes to air circulation can cause local
cooling but may not scale. Nevertheless, this may have some
limited use in particular topographies, where crucial elements
were desirable to preserve.
Falling snow matches air temperature and is difﬁcult to
change. Manipulating snow might be beneﬁcial for other
reasons. Fresh-fallen snow has a higher albedo. Cloud seeding
may be beneﬁcial, but would rely on appropriate temperatures
and humidity levels; much of Antarctica has extremely low
humidity. Coastal regions are the exception and cloud seeding
may conceivably strengthen ice shelves, giving extra leverage
to sea level mitigation.
Modifying the global radiation budget would certainly help.
Boreal forest wildﬁres darken Greenland ice (Thomas et al.,
2017). There is presently inadequate effort to control wild-
ﬁres, except where settlements are endangered. Remedial
silvicultural can protect boreal forest carbon stocks, while
simultaneously reducing darkening of Greenland ice by black
carbon fallout. Encouragement can be given to signiﬁcant
polluters (Russia, China) to accelerate their move away from
coal.
Alternatively, using general solar radiation management
may be a more achievable and realizable option than many of
those presented here. While broad intervention over both
polar regions would be essentially part of a globalised
climate intervention (Moore et al., 2019), localised in-
terventions could also be envisaged. These may include
tropospheric aerosols, especially during heat waves. Contin-
uous distribution would be costly, as persistence is limited.
Acting only during heat waves may prove effective in
Greenland, or to prevent accumulation of meltwater on ice
shelves slowing hydrofracture.
In summary, modifying the non-ice environment is prob-
ably more complex in terms of side-effects than conﬁning
action to the glaciers. There are possible high-leverage loca-
tions where localized ocean currents can feasibly be diverted
from MISI-sensitive glaciers. Large-scale solar radiation
management is also expected to conserve ice sheets, due to
general cooling; this continues to be actively researched across
the world.
4. Precautionary principles
An obvious guiding principle for choosing climate in-
terventions is no net harm. Thus, we should look critically at
installing equipment needing later removal. Removal or
weakening ice during construction, particularly of buttressing,
should be viewed suspiciously. Temporarily removing ice,
particularly ﬂoating ice, implies potential containment failure
e more so than proposals that increase buttressing or thicken
ice. Risky interventions include: removing ice shelves to build
buttresses on the seabed; fracturing sea ice to promote
increased heat exchange or precipitation.
A distinction can be drawn between destructive versus
constructive approaches: ‘destructive’ being any intervention
which deliberately damages a part of the ice sheet system that
adds stability, such as destroying a portion of an ice shelf to
build an artiﬁcial pinning point or warm-water barrier under-
neath it. A constructive (or preservative) version would be
building the same structure with submersibles underneath the
ﬂoating shelf.
Destructive interventions should not be summarily dis-
missed; though it seems unlikely that such approaches would
be recommended after careful analysis. Because nonlinear
feedbacks exist (and are uncertain), any intervention disturb-
ing a stabilizing part of the system must be subjected to
increased and extremely cautious scrutiny. Destroying shelves
could trigger runaway marine ice-cliff failure (DeConto and
Pollard, 2016). When in doubt, we should fear nonlinearities
in the system. Implementing the destructive version thus re-
quires more conﬁdence in predicting ice fracture than imple-
menting the constructive version.
In contrast, distributed hydrology systems are destabilizing.
So subglacial drying would not be “destructive”, because it is
not deliberately damaging a stabilizing element.
The timescale of harms and beneﬁts must also be consid-
ered. Thickening glaciers by increasing snowfall or slowing
advance will build gravitational driving stresses. Eventually,
this will overcome basal friction, potentially leading to rapid
acceleration and ice release if glacier retreat has been reversed
to the point of substantial sea level drawdown. What timescale
would such a release require? Observed behaviour of ice
streams switching on centennial to millennial periods (Joughin
et al., 2002; Tulaczyk et al., 2000) implies this would be far
into the future; human-kind may be better able to cope than in
the 21st century. Glacial geoengineering techniques should be
designed with full controllability, so that interventions can
readily be moderated or ended as required for overall stability.
What happens to the energy used to melt ice if it is diver-
ted? Gurses et al. (2019) used an ocean model to explore
blocking warm water entering the Amundsen and Belling-
shausen Seas in West Antarctica e that is larger than in-
terventions
simulated
by
Wolovick
and
Moore
(2018),
conserving Thwaites glacier. They found diverted warm water
would intensify melting of neighbouring ice shelves, but these
411
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
ice shelves were not involved in critical buttressing on un-
stable glaciers (MISI). The area simulated to melt faster is the
most stable parts of West Antarctica. Hence, it could be
considered a success that warm water is directed to less
damaging places.
5. Conclusions
This study lists techniques, some more realistic than others,
to conserve ice sheets against collapse e and resulting sea
level rise. These techniques all require: geo-technical analysis,
ensuring efﬁcacy; projecting engineering scrutiny, ensuring
deliverability and cost-effectiveness e particularly considering
the harsh, inaccessible, pristine environments involved.
There will be visual impacts and ecosystem changes, during
and often after construction. The techniques listed have no
guarantee of efﬁcacy; they are not a ‘get out of jail free card’
for sea level rise.
Methods discussed include:
increasing albedo of glaciers by removing or burying dust,
or by adding artiﬁcial or induced snow;
drying the glacier bed by draining sediments or freezing in
situ e using closed-loop thermosyphons, open-loop CO2
injection, or bedrock fracking;
thickening and thus strengthening ice shelves e by adding
water in winter, anchoring emerging tabular icebergs,
raising pinning points, adding artiﬁcial or induced snow, or
by using windbreaks to retain natural snow;
jamming glacier ﬂow e using cold shear margin water
injection, ice shelf thickening & buttressing, and by
creating marine pinning points;
altering glaciers' wider environment, using climate engi-
neering technologies.
Inclusion on this list does not constitute recommendation,
save for further analysis. Indeed, all approaches considered are
somewhat problematic, and it is difﬁcult to see how some
could be made to work technically or economically.
Probably more important than technical feasibility is soci-
etal acceptance (Buck, 2018; Moore et al., 2020). Working in
Greenland requires agreement by the Greenland home rule
and, in Antarctica, from Antarctic Treaty voting members.
The interventions we outline require polar activities far
more costly and invasive than those in recent years on the
polar ice sheets. However, during the Cold War era of the
1960s, large numbers of men and associated equipment were
stationed in Greenland, including substantial infrastructure on
the ice sheet. The investment and commitment of the 1960s is
alien to present ice sheet professionals, and most of the
indigenous population. If ice sheets once again became stra-
tegic e as we suggest they must, because of the potential for
catastrophic sea level rise e such infrastructure would be
reinstated.
Conserving ice sheets tackles sea level rise at source, rather
than mandating local adaptations. It beneﬁts rich and poor
equally, and may save small island states and coastal or low-
lying areas from disappearance. Accordingly, future research
is promising.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported by National Basic Research
Program of China (2016YFA0602701), National Natural
Science Foundation of China (41941006, 41530748), and
National
Key
Research
and
Development
Program
of
China (2018YFC1406104).
References
Alley, K.E., Scambos, T.A., Alley, R.B., et al., 2019. Troughs developed in ice-
stream shear margins precondition ice shelves for ocean-driven breakup.
Sci. Adv. 5, eaax2215.
Alley, R.B., 1993. In search of ice-stream sticky spots. J. Glaciol. 39 (133),
447e454.
Alley, R.B., Anandakrishnan, S., Bentley, C.R., et al., 1994. A water-piracy
hypothesis for the stagnation of ice stream C, Antarctica. Ann. Glaciol.
20 (1), 187e194.
Alley, R.B., Anandakrishnan, S., Christianson, K., et al., 2015. Oceanic
forcing of ice-sheet retreat: west Antarctica and more. Annu. Rev. Earth
Planet
Sci.
43
(1),
207e231.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-
060614-105344.
Amundson, J.M., Fahnestock, M., Truffer, M., et al., 2010. Ice melange dy-
namics and implications for terminus stability, Jakobshavn Isbræ,
Greenland. J. Geophys. Res.-Earth 115 (F1). https://doi.org/10.1029/
2009JF001405.
Anandakrishnan, S., Alley, R.B., 1997. Stagnation of ice stream C, West
Antarctica by water piracy. Geophys. Res. Lett. 24, 265e268.
Anderson, G.K., 2003. Enthalpy of dissociation and hydration number of
carbon dioxide hydrate from the clapeyron equation. J. Chem. Thermodyn.
35, 1171e1183.
Åstr€om, J.A., Vallot, D., Sch€afer, M., et al., 2014. Termini of calving glaciers
as self-organized critical systems. Nat. Geosci. 7 (12), 874e878. https://
doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2290.
Blankenship, D.D., Bentley, C.R., Rooney, S.T., et al., 1986. Seismic mea-
surements reveal a saturated porous layer beneath an active Antarctic ice
stream. Nature 322 (6074), 54e57. https://doi.org/10.1038/322054a0.
Bougamont, M., Price, S., Christoffersen, P., et al., 2011. Dynamic patterns of
ice stream ﬂow in a 3-D higher-order ice sheet model with plastic bed and
simpliﬁed hydrology. J. Geophys. Res. 116, F04018. https://doi.org/
10.1029/2011JF002025.
Buck, H.J., 2018. Perspectives on solar geoengineering from Finnish Lapland:
local insights on the global imaginary of Arctic geoengineering. Geoforum
91, 78e86.
Cuffey, K.M., Paterson, W.S.B., 2010. The Physics of Glaciers, fourth ed.
Butterworth-Heineman/Elsevier, Burlington.
Das, S.B., Joughin, I., Behn, M.D., et al., 2008. Fracture Propagation to the
Base of the Greenland ice sheet during supraglacial lake drainage. Science
320 (5877), 778e781. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1153360.
DeConto, R.M., Pollard, D., 2016. Contribution of Antarctica to past and
future sea-level rise. Nature 531 (7596), 591e597. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature17145.
Desch, S.J., Smith, N., Groppi, C., et al., 2017. Arctic ice management. Earth’s
Future 5 (1), 107e127. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016ef000410.
Favier, L., Durand, G., Cornford, S.L., et al., 2014. Retreat of Pine Island
Glacier controlled by marine ice-sheet instability. Nat. Clim. Change 4,
117e121. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2094.
Feldmann, J., Levermann, A., Mengel, M., 2019. Stabilizing the West Ant-
arctic ice sheet by surface mass deposition. Science Advances 5 (7).
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaw4132 eaaw4132.
412
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
Field, L., Ivanova, D., Bhattacharyya, S., et al., 2018. Increasing Arctic sea ice
albedo using localized reversible geoengineering. Earth's Future 6,
882e901. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018 EF000820.
Fretwell, P., Pritchard, H.D., Vaughan, D.G., et al., 2013. Bedmap2: improved
ice bed, surface and thickness datasets for Antarctica. Cryosphere 7 (1),
375e393. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-375-2013.
Frieler, K., Mengel, M., Levermann, A., 2016. Delaying future sea-level rise
by storing water in Antarctica. Earth System Dynamics 7, 203e210.
https://doi.org/10.5194/esd-7-203-2016.
Fu¨rst, J.J., Durand, G., Gillet-Chaulet, F., et al., 2015. Assimilation of Ant-
arctic velocity observations provides evidence for uncharted pinning
points. Cryosphere 9, 1427e1443. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-9-1427-2015.
Gabriel, C.J., Robock, A., Xia, L., et al., 2017. The G4Foam experiment:
global climate impacts of regional ocean albedo modiﬁcation. Atmos.
Chem. Phys. 17 (1), 595e613. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-17-595-2017.
Grinsted, A., 2013. An estimate of global glacier volume. Cryosphere 7,
141e151. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-141-2013.
Gudmundsson, G.H., 2013. Ice-shelf buttressing and the stability of marine ice
sheets. Cryosphere 7, 647e655. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-647-2013.
Guo, X., Zhao, L., Gladstone, R., et al., 2019. Simulated retreat of jakobshavn
isbræ during the 21st century. Cryosphere 13, 3139e3153. https://doi.org/
10.5194/tc-13-3139-2019.
Gurses, O., Kolatschek, V., Wang, Q., et al., 2019. Brief communication: a
submarine wall protecting the Amundsen Sea intensiﬁes melting of
neighboring ice shelves. Cryosphere 13 (9), 2317e2324. https://doi.org/
10.5194/tc-13-2317-2019.
Hewitt, I.J., 2013. Seasonal changes in ice sheet motion due to melt water
lubrication. Earth Planet Sci. Lett. 371e372, 16e25. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.epsl.2013.04.022.
Hinkel, J., Lincke, D., Vafeidis, A.T., et al., 2014. Coastal ﬂood damage and
adaptation costs under 21st century sea-level rise. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
111, 3292e3297. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1222469111.
Holland, P.R., Corr, H.F., Vaughan, D.G., et al., 2009. Marine ice in Larsen ice
shelf. Geophys. Res. Lett. 36 (11), L11604.
Hughes, T., 1973. Is the West Antarctic ice sheet disintegrating? J. Geophys.
Res. 78 (33), 7884e7910. https://doi.org/10.1029/JC078i033p07884.
Hunt, J.D., Byers, E., 2018. Reducing sea level rise with submerged barriers
and dams in Greenland. Mitig. Adapt. Strategies Glob. Change 24, 779.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-018-9831-y.
Hunt, J.D., Nascimento, A., Diuana, F.A., et al., 2020. Cooling down the world
oceans and the earth by enhancing the North Atlantic Ocean current. SN
Appl. Sci. 2, 15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s42452-019-1755-y.
Irvine, P.J., Keith, D.W., Moore, J.C., 2018. Brief communication: under-
standing solar geoengineering's potential to limit sea level rise requires
attention from cryosphere experts. Cryosphere 12, 2501e2513.
Jacobs, S.S., Jenkins, A., Giulivi, C.F., et al., 2011. Stronger ocean circulation
and increased melting under Pine Island Glacier ice shelf. Nat. Geosci. 4
(8), 519e523. https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo1188.
Jenkins, A., 1991. A one-dimensional model of ice shelf-ocean interaction. J.
Geophys. Res. 96 (C11), 20671e20677.
Jenkins, A., 2011. Convection-driven melting near the grounding lines of ice
shelves and tidewater glaciers. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 41 (12), 2279e2294.
https://doi.org/10.1175/JPO-D-11-03.1.
Jevrejeva, S., Jackson, L.P., Riva, R.E.M., et al., 2016. Coastal sea level rise
with warming above 2
C. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 113 (47),
13342e13347. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1605312113.
Jones, A.C., Hawcroft, M.K., Haywood, J.M., et al., 2018. Regional climate
impacts of stabilizing global warming at 1.5 K using solar geoengineering.
Earth’s Future 6 (2), 230e251. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017EF000720.
Joughin, I., Alley, R.B., Holland, D.M., 2012. Ice-sheet response to oceanic
forcing. Science 338 (6111), 1172. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
1226481.
Joughin, I., Smith, B.E., Medley, B., 2014. Marine ice sheet collapse poten-
tially underway for the Thwaites Glacier Basin, West Antarctica. Science
344 (6185), 735e738. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1249055.
Joughin, I., Tulaczyk, S., Bindschadler, R., et al., 2002. Changes in West
Antarctic ice stream velocities: observation and analysis. J. Geophys. Res.
107 (B11), 2289. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001JB001029.
Joughin, I., Tulaczyk, S., Bamber, J.L., et al., 2009. Basal conditions for Pine
Island and Thwaites glaciers, West Antarctica, determined using satellite
and airborne data. J. Glaciol. 55, 245e257.
Joughin, I., Smith, B.E., Howat, I.M., et al., 2010. Greenland ﬂow variability
from ice-sheet-wide velocity mapping. J. Glaciol. 56 (197), 415e430.
https://doi.org/10.3189/002214310792447734.
Kamb, B., 1987. Glacier surge mechanism based on linked cavity conﬁgura-
tion of the basal water conduit system. J. Geophys. Res. 92 (B9),
9083e9100. https://doi.org/10.1029/JB092iB09p09083.
Khazendar, A., Rignot, E., Larour, E., 2009. Roles of marine ice, rheology, and
fracture in the ﬂow and stability of the Brunt/Stancomb-Wills Ice Shelf. J.
Geophys. Res. 114 (F4), F04007.
Kitous, A., Keramidas, K., 2015. Analysis of Scenarios Integrating the INDCs.
European Commission.
Kulessa, B., Jansen, D., Luckman, A.J., et al., 2014. Marine ice regulates the
future stability of a large Antarctic ice shelf. Nat. Commun. 5 (1), 3707.
https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms4707.
Latham, J., Bower, K., Choularton, T., et al., 2012. Marine cloud brightening.
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. A 370, 4217e4262. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2012.0086.
Liu, Y., Moore, J.C., Cheng, X., et al., 2015. Ocean-driven thinning enhances
iceberg calving and retreat of Antarctic ice shelves. P. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 112 (11), 3263e3268. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1415137112.
MacMartin, D.G., Kravitz, B., 2019. Mission-driven research for stratospheric
aerosol geoengineering. P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 1089e1094.
McCusker, K.E., Battisti, D.S., Bitz, C.M., 2015. Inability of strato-
spheric sulfate aerosol injections to preserve the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet. Geophys. Res. Lett. 42 (12), 4989e4997. https://doi.org/10.
1002/2015GL064314.
McDonald, J., McGee, J., Brent, K., et al., 2019. Governing geoengineering
research for the great barrier reef. Clim. Pol. 19 (7), 801e811. https://
doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2019.1592742.
McMillan, M., Leeson, A.A., Shepherd, A., et al., 2016. A high resolution
record of Greenland mass imbalance. Geophys. Res. Lett. 43, 7002e7010.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL069666.
Messenger, S., 2010. Melting glacier in Italy gets a giant thermal blanket.
Treehugger.
https://www.treehugger.com/clean-technology/melting-
glacier-in-italy-gets-a-giant-thermal-blanket.html/.
(Accessed
10
January 2020).
Moore, J.C., Reid, A.P., Kipfstuhl, J., 1994. Microstructure and electrical
properties of marine ice and its relationship to meteoric and sea ice. J.
Geophys. Res. 99, 5171e5180.
Moore, J.C., Grinsted, A., Zwinger, T., et al., 2013. Semi-empirical and
process-based global sea level projections. Rev. Geophys. 51 (3),
484e522. https://doi.org/10.1002/rog.20015.
Moore, J.C., Gladstone, R., Zwinger, T., et al., 2018. Geoengineer polar gla-
ciers to slow sea level rise. Nature 555, 303e305.
Moore, J.C., Yue, C., Zhao, L., et al., 2019. Greenland ice sheet response to
stratospheric aerosol injection geoengineering. Earth's Future 7. https://
doi.org/10.1029/2019EF001393.
Moore, J.C., Metti€ainen, I., Wolovick, M., et al., 2020. Targeted geo-
engineering: local interventions with global implications. Global Policy.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.12867.
Nye, J.F., 1976. Water ﬂow in glaciers: jokulhlaups, tunnels, and veins. J.
Glaciol. 17 (76), 181e207.
Palm, S., Yang, Y., Kayetha, V., 2019. New perspectives on blowing snow in
Antarctica and implications for ice sheet mass balance. In: Kanao, M.
(Ed.), Antarctica, A Key to Global Change. IntechOpen. https://doi.org/
10.5772/intechopen.81319.
Pollard, D., DeConto, R.M., Alley, R.B., 2018. A continuum model (PSU-
MEL1) of ice melange and its role during retreat of the Antarctic Ice Sheet.
Geosci. Model Dev. (GMD) 11, 5149e5172. https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-
11-5149-2018.
Pritchard, H.D., Vaughan, D.G., 2007. Widespread acceleration of tidewater
glaciers on the Antarctic Peninsula. J. Geophys. Res. 112 (F3), F03S29.
Retzlaff, R., Bentley, C.R., 1993. Timing of stagnation of Ice Stream C, West
Antarctica, from short-pulse radar studies of buried surface crevasses. J.
Glaciol. 39, 553e561.
413
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
Rignot, E., Mouginot, J., Scheuchl, B., 2011. Ice ﬂow of the antarctic ice sheet.
Science 333 (6048), 1427e1430. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1208336.
Rignot, E., Mouginot, J., Morlighem, M., et al., 2014. Widespread, rapid
grounding line retreat of pine island, Thwaites, smith and kohler glaciers,
west Antarctica from 1992 to 2011. Geophys. Res. Lett. 41, 3502e3509.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL060140.
Robel, A.A., 2017. Thinning sea ice weakens buttressing force of iceberg
melange and promotes calving. Nat. Commun. 8, 14596. https://doi.org/
10.1038/ncomms14596.
Rothlisberger, H., 1972. Water pressure in intra- and subglacial channels. J.
Glaciol. 11 (62), 177e203.
Rothlisberger, H., Lang, H., 1987. Glacial hydrology. in: Gurnell, A.M.,
Clark, M.J. (Eds.), Glacio-ﬂuvial Sediment Transfer: an Alpine Perspec-
tive. John Wiley and Sons, New York, pp. 207e284.
Scambos, T.A., Hulbe, C.L., Fahnestock, M.A., 2003. Climate-induced ice
shelf disintegration in the Antarctic Peninsula. Antarct. Res. 79, 79e92.
https://doi.org/10.1029/AR079p0079.
Schoof, C., 2007. Ice sheet grounding line dynamics: steady states, stability,
and hysteresis. J. Geophys. Res. Earth 112 (F3), F03S28. https://doi.org/
10.1029/2006JF000664.
Schoof, C., 2010. Ice-sheet acceleration driven by melt supply variability.
Nature 468 (7325), 803e806. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09618.
Schroeder, D.M., Blankenship, D.D., Young, D.A., 2013. Evidence for a
water system transition beneath Thwaites glacier, west Antarctica. P.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 110 (30), 12225e12228. https://doi.org/10.
1073/pnas.1302828110.
Stjern, C.W., Muri, H., Ahlm, L., et al., 2018. Response to marine cloud
brightening in a multi-model ensemble. Atmos. Chem. Phys. 18, 621e634.
https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-18-621-2018.
Sugiyama, M., Asayama, S., Kosugi, T., 2020. The NortheSouth Divide on
public perceptions of stratospheric aerosol geoengineering? A survey in six
Asia-Paciﬁc
countries.
Environmental
Communication
1752e4040.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17524032.2019.1699137.
Thomas, R.H., Bentley, C.R., 1978. A model for holocene retreat of the West
Antarctic ice sheet. Quat. Res. 10 (2), 150e170.
Thomas, J.L., Polashenski, C., Soja, A.J., et al., 2017. Quantifying black
carbon deposition over the Greenland ice sheet from forest ﬁres in
Canada.
Geophys.
Res.
Lett.
44,
7965e7974.
https://doi.org/10.
1002/2017GL073701.
Trenberth, K., Fasullo, J., Kiehl, J., 2009. Earth's global energy budget. BAMS
311e323. https://doi.org/10.1175/2008BAMS2634.1.
Tulaczyk, S., Kamb, W.B., Engelhardt, H.F., 2000a. Basal mechanics of ice
stream B, west Antarctica: I. Till mechanics. J. Geophys. Res.-Sol. Ea. 105
(B1), 463e481. https://doi.org/10.1029/1999JB900329.
Tulaczyk, S.M., Kamb, B., Engelhardt, H.F., 2000b. Basal mechanics of ice
stream B, west Antarctica. II. Plastic-bed model. J. Geophys. Res. 105
(B1), 483e494.
Turner, J., Orr, A., Gudmundsson, G.H., et al., 2017. Atmosphere-ocean-ice
interactions in the Amundsen Sea embayment, west Antarctica. Rev.
Geophys. 55 (1), 235e276. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016RG000532.
van den Broeke, M., van den Broeke, M., Bamber, J.L., et al., 2009. Parti-
tioning recent Greenland mass loss. Science 326, 984e986.
Wagner, A.M., 2014. Review of thermosyphon applications, report ERDC/
CRREL TR-14-1. Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory,
Engineer Research and Development Center.
Walder, J., 1986. Hydraulics of subglacial cavities. J. Glaciol. 32, 439e445.
Weertman, J., 1972. General theory of water ﬂow at the base of a glacier or ice
sheet. Rev. Geophys. Space Phys. 10, 287e333.
Weertman, J., 1974. Stability of the junction of an ice sheet and an ice shelf. J.
Glaciol. 13 (67), 3e11.
Winkelmann, R., Levermann, A., Martin, M.A., et al., 2012. Increased future
ice discharge from Antarctica owing to higher snowfall. Nature 492
(7428), 239e242. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11616.
Winsborrow, M., Andreassen, K., Hubbard, A., et al., 2016. Regulation of ice
stream ﬂow through subglacial formation of gas hydrates. Nat. Geosci. 9
https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2696.
Wolovick, M., Moore, J.C., 2018. Stopping the ﬂood: could we use targeted
geoengineering to mitigate sea level Rise. Cryosphere 12, 2955e2967.
https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-12-2955-2018.
Wurzbacher, J.A., Gebald, C., Piatkowski, N., et al., 2012. Concurrent
separation of CO2 and H2O from air by a temperature-vacuum
swing adsorption/desorption cycle. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46 (16),
9191e9198.
414
LOCKLEY A. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 11 (2020) 401e414
