Research article
Participatory modeling for local and regional collaboration on climate
change adaptation and health
Sarah Harrisona, Alexandra Macmillana,*, Sophie Bondb, Janet Stephensonc
a Department of Preventive and Social Medicine, Otago Medical School, University of Otago, PO Box 56 Dunedin 9054, New Zealand
b School of Geography, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand
c Centre for Sustainability, University of Otago, PO Box 56, Dunedin 9054, New Zealand
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 31 October 2022
Accepted 22 March 2023
Available online 29 March 2023
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: Climate change-related ﬂooding and sea-level rise have important direct and indirect health
effects. In order to support health and equity, adaptation responses require collaborative, transdisciplinary
learning and consensus-building, across a wide range of local-level stakeholders. We aimed to co-develop a
shared understanding of the complex interplay between health, health determinants, ﬂooding, and sea-level
rise in a low-income urban area of Aotearoa New Zealand, to inform action.
Methods: We used qualitative participatory system dynamics modeling, involving interviews and group
workshops with transdisciplinary stakeholders. We developed a shared set of wellbeing outcomes and trian-
gulated participants’ knowledge with published evidence to develop a set of causal loop diagrams (CLDs).
These capture the system feedback behavior between ﬂooding and sea-level rise, and local health and
wellbeing.
Results: Thirty-three participants were involved across the project, identifying 22 wellbeing outcomes. The
CLDs covered six intersecting themes: community-led development and participation in decision-making;
quality of housing; the housing market; the insurance market; economic effects of ﬂooding and sea-level
rise; and access issues arising from ﬂooding. Intervention points were identiﬁed, with the potential to inform
health equity-focused adaptation policy. The process supported shifts in participants’ mental models towards
consensus and effective intervention points, and transdisciplinary relationship-building.
Conclusion: Participatory systems modeling approaches may support cross-sector collaborative learning
about the complex, dynamic inﬂuences on health and wellbeing in the context of local climate change adap-
tation. These shared, holistic understandings are essential to inform decision-making that promotes positive
health and social equity outcomes.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Adaptation
Health
Wellbeing
System dynamics
Participatory modeling
1. Introduction
Climate change is a major threat to public health, with rising
global temperatures leading to sea-level rise, changes in the spread
and risk of diseases, water and food insecurity, and increased fre-
quency and severity of extreme weather events [1−3]. Those already
experiencing inequitable health outcomes will be disproportionally
affected, including those with existing health conditions, the elderly,
children, low-income households, and Indigenous Peoples [1,2,4,5].
It is imperative to adapt to the unavoidable effects of climate change
in ways that maximize positive health and equity outcomes. Flooding
and sea-level rise are major interrelated climate change health
threats, with direct health effects (e.g. drowning and injuries [6],
mental trauma [7]), and effects on the building blocks of health (e.g.
critical infrastructure [8], housing [9], income and wealth [10]). Adap-
tation responses also have the potential to be health-promoting, for
instance, by multi-solving existing public health problems [11], or
they can exacerbate existing health inequities and introduce new
harms [12].
The complex, highly uncertain nature of climate change interac-
tions with society and environment means holistic, systems thinking
approaches are needed to design health-promoting adaptation
responses [13]. There is a need for transdisciplinary processes that
cross disciplines, sectors, and the divide between academia and
affected communities in order to engender positive societal change
[14]. This includes approaches that draw on science-based evidence
and the local expertise of community stakeholders, while bringing
policymakers into the process. The meaningful participation of struc-
turally oppressed communities is particularly important as a form of
Abbreviations: CLD, Causal Loop Diagram; pSD, Participatory system dynamics; SD,
System dynamics
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: alex.macmillan@otago.ac.nz (A. Macmillan).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100235
2667-2782/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
procedural justice for those typically excluded from decision-making
processes [5,15]. Such participation includes active involvement and
leadership in the co-production of knowledge, social learning, capac-
ity-building, and eventual implementation of adaptation polices
[16,17]. This paper provides an overview of a qualitative participatory
system dynamics modeling process we used to support transdisci-
plinary collaboration and learning in the context of local ﬂooding and
sea-level rise.
Prior to undertaking the research described in this paper, we con-
ducted a systematic review of existing research that has used
participatory approaches to inform health and wellbeing-focused
adaptation planning and decision-making [18]. The review found 11
articles, which highlighted the beneﬁts for effective adaptation of
participatory approaches in which stakeholders share their knowl-
edge with each other and triangulate it with existing evidence. The
review also demonstrated the value of participatory processes for
relationship-building that supports collaboration, in particular sys-
tems thinking approaches [19]. A major gap in the literature was the
overall lack of focus on the unanticipated health and wellbeing
impacts of adaptation actions themselves. This research addresses
this and other gaps identiﬁed in the review by undertaking a partici-
patory process to understand the complex interplay between health,
ﬂooding, and sea-level rise in South Dunedin, an urban area within
the city of Otepoti Dunedin, Aotearoa New Zealand (Fig. 1).1
Built on what was coastal wetland of importance to local mana
whenua (Indigenous Maori with ancestral relationships and responsi-
bilities in the area), South Dunedin is home to over 10,000 people
[21], and is one of the largest single communities at risk of national
sea-level rise [22]. Climate change is also causing heavy rainfall
events to become more frequent and severe in Otepoti [23], a risk
exempliﬁed by a major pluvial ﬂooding event in 2015 that caused
widespread damage in South Dunedin [24]. The area has high levels
of socioeconomic deprivation [24−26], as well as a higher proportion
of other groups who may be at greater risk of harm due to structural
inequities, including the elderly and renters [27−29]. Many disabled
people and those with mobility issues also choose to live in South
Dunedin because of its ﬂat topography [30,31].
The purpose of this research was to support wellbeing-focused
adaptation that accounts for the diversity of needs amongst those liv-
ing in South Dunedin. We aimed to facilitate a shared understanding
of the local health and wellbeing impacts of ﬂooding and sea-level
rise, their complex drivers, and implications for considering possible
adaptation decisions.
2. Methods
We adopted a qualitative approach which recognises the socially
constructed nature of knowledge, and the signiﬁcant contribution
that people’s lived experience makes to understanding the issues
that affect them within their local context [32,33]. The emphasis was
on capturing different knowledges, meanings, and worldviews to
inform decision-making, rather than quantiﬁcation [32]. Recognizing
these principles, we used qualitative participatory system dynamics
(pSD) modeling to facilitate knowledge-sharing and consensus-build-
ing amongst stakeholders, with the aim of developing a shared men-
tal model of the complex interplay between health, ﬂooding, and
sea-level rise [34−36]. System dynamics (SD) models are used to
understand how the causal relationships between different variables
drive system behavior over time, often in non-linear and unexpected
ways [34,35,37]. These causal relationships are circular, creating
feedback loops that are either reinforcing or balancing, leading to sys-
tem patterns such as exponential growth or decay, trends towards
equilibrium, and oscillation [34,38].
In pSD, stakeholder learning occurs through model simulation and
group discussions, in which different policies or interventions to
manage dynamic problems are explored and policy trade-offs are
identiﬁed [35,39]. Emphasis is placed on transdisciplinary learning
and understanding the underlying dynamic behavior of a system,
Fig. 1. Map showing the location of the city of Otepoti within Aotearoa and the Otago region, as well as the greater South Dunedin area within the metropolitan area. Adapted from
Bond and Barth [20].
1 Otepoti is the Maori name for the city of Dunedin, and Aotearoa the contemporary
Maori name for New Zealand; Maori are the Indigenous Peoples of Aotearoa New Zea-
land. Throughout the remainder of the article, we will use the Maori names.
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
2
rather than the model’s accuracy in predicting system outcomes
[35,37]. The collaborative nature of group modeling can foster trust
and relationship-building between a diverse range of stakeholders,
supporting future engagement in decision-making processes [36,40],
and effective implementation of research ﬁndings and policies
[17,41,42].
We adapted Videira et al.’s generic SD modeling framework,
undertaking a qualitative version of the process (Fig. 2) [35]. For stage
one, preparation, we used an a priori sampling framework (Table 1)
and snowball sampling technique [37] to identify mana whenua rep-
resentatives and a range of community stakeholders, local govern-
ment staff, and scientiﬁc experts familiar with the South Dunedin
context [18,43]. Relationship-building and identifying participants
took over a year. Although few mana whenua are residents of the
area, at inception we started by engaging with mana whenua and
then building on existing researcher relationships with South Dune-
din community leaders. Ongoing engagement with mana whenua
was undertaken, including with the local Runaka (tribal council,
board) and two local Maori health providers. Potential participants
were approached in person, by email, and/or by phone call. We pri-
oritised representatives of those communities who are more likely to
experience health and social inequities, and those in positions where
they might be able to incorporate the research ﬁndings into adapta-
tion decision-making, to increase the likelihood of equitable real-
world change [44]. The latter included relevant senior-level local gov-
ernment staff.
Individual participant interviews involved a mix of semi-struc-
tured
questions
and
cognitive
mapping
[45],
a
diagramming
approach we used to elicit interviewee cause and effect understand-
ings about local health and wellbeing impacts of ﬂooding and sea-
level rise. Each cognitive map was broadly organized around a central
variable or idea, and included underlying assumptions about its
causes and resulting outputs.
We undertook a thematic analysis of the interview data to
develop a list of health and wellbeing outcomes participants consid-
ered important, as well as a draft set of qualitative causal loop dia-
grams (CLDs) that aggregated participants’ cognitive maps. We
followed Braun and Clarke’s [46] process of thematic analysis: famil-
iarizing ourselves with the data, coding the data, searching for
themes, reﬁning and naming the themes, performing analysis and
reporting back. Our analysis was primarily inductive, with themes
developed based on the data rather than a priori themes.
We developed a set of variables based on these themes and then
looked for cause and effect relationships between them, building a
set of preliminary CLDs using Vensim PLE software.2 We triangu-
lated this with research knowledge gained from a scoping review of
the literature on the health and wellbeing effects of ﬂooding and sea-
level rise, particularly as they relate to urban communities in high-
income countries (Supplementary material). Where there was dis-
agreement between participants’ theories of cause and effect rela-
tionships that could not be clariﬁed by the existing literature, we left
both options in the CLDs to allow participants to discuss them in the
group workshops. The variables that comprise the CLDs are con-
nected by arrows which demonstrate possible causal relationships,
forming feedback loops that are reinforcing or balancing in nature
[35,47,48]. Reinforcing loops (‘R’) amplify system behavior [34], lead-
ing to exponential growth or decline in a variable. Balancing loops
(‘B’) reverse and limit change, often resulting in oscillating over- and
under-corrective behavior [34].
Stage two of the research process involved two group workshops
in which participants were introduced to the basics of pSD modeling
and reviewed and amended the CLDs together in small groups. This
was done using a World Cafe-style approach with research team
members rotating between each group’s table, at which members
presented the group with a preliminary CLD and garnered feedback
about the relationships and feedback loop structures.
We reﬁned the CLDs between workshops based on participants’
feedback, again triangulating their expert local knowledge with fur-
ther literature scans relating to proposed causal relationships.
In the second workshop, participants also undertook a policy
thought
experiment
using
a
subset
of
feedback
loops
which
highlighted potentially important tensions between several building
blocks of wellbeing: the vibrancy and appeal of the area to live in,
housing affordability, the availability of green space, and ﬂood miti-
gation efforts (Supplementary material). Participants were asked to
Fig. 2. Generic qualitative SD modeling process. Adapted from Videira et al. [35].
2 Academic version 8.0.9 Copyright 1988-2019 Ventana Systems, Inc.
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
3
think about how a policy intervention previously identiﬁed in the
interviews, ‘investment in the community’, might inﬂuence vibrancy
in the area and, in turn, the other variables in the CLD. The activity
aimed to increase participant understandings about how policy inter-
ventions may create trade-offs or tensions between desired out-
comes, and how the CLD could help identify these and potentially
avoid them, or at least make them explicit.
The ﬁnal stage of the research process involved an anonymous
self-report questionnaire to evaluate the research process and indi-
vidual learning, completed by workshop participants (Supplementary
material). Learning was also measured by asking participants at the
beginning and conclusion of each interview, and at the end of each
workshop, about actions they believed should be taken to address
local ﬂooding and sea-level rise, and noting any changes over time
(“What are the top three actions you believe should be taken in order
to address ﬂooding and/or sea-level rise in South Dunedin?”).
Further details of the methods used in this research are available
elsewhere [18,43].
3. Results
In this section we describe both the direct outcomes of the inter-
views and workshops, and the results of the collaborative learning
process itself.
3.1. Participants
Thirty-two participants took part in an interview. They covered a
broad range of the groups from our a priori framework, including
community groups, health and social services, local government staff,
and scientists (Table 1). Thirteen participants took part in the ﬁrst
group modeling workshop, and fourteen in the second. Notably, no
mana whenua representatives were able to take part because of their
lead health role in the local COVID-19 response, their priority focus
on freshwater issues, and the recent loss of their only climate change
staff member. Climate change work was necessarily prioritised to the
geographical areas of most importance to the Runaka. Nonetheless,
they indicated an interest in the ﬁndings of the research and we have
kept the Runaka informed of the outcomes.
3.2. Health, wellbeing, ﬂooding, and sea-level rise
Participants discussed the direct health and wellbeing effects of
ﬂooding and sea-level rise extensively in the interviews, including
aspects of mental, physical, and spiritual wellbeing. Mental wellbeing
was the most discussed aspect, with all thirty-two participants
reﬂecting on how ﬂooding and sea-level rise can lead to anxiety,
stress, fear, anger, and depression. Over half of all participants
acknowledged that those already experiencing inequities would be
disproportionally affected. Participants also discussed how ﬂooding
and sea-level rise affect broader determinants of health such as hous-
ing and ﬁnancial security, reﬂecting their holistic understandings of
wellbeing. From this, we developed a list of health and wellbeing out-
comes participants considered important in the context of climate
change and adaptation (Table 2). Participants reviewed these out-
comes in the ﬁrst workshop, adding some of their own.
3.3. Summary of the causal loop diagrams (CLDs)
Drawing on existing evidence and the themes identiﬁed in our
thematic analysis of the interviews, we developed four qualitative
draft CLDs. These were presented to participants at the ﬁrst group
workshop for revision and reﬁnement. Following this, an additional
two CLDs were developed. The ﬁnal six CLDs were:
 Community-led
development
and
participation
in
decision-
making
 Quality of housing
 The housing market
 The insurance market
 The economic effects of ﬂooding and sea-level rise for wellbeing
 Access issues arising from ﬂooding
Together, the CLDs form a qualitative model capturing the com-
plex, highly interconnected relationships between health, wellbeing,
ﬂooding, and sea-level rise in South Dunedin. Fig. 3 demonstrates the
connections between the CLDs.
The housing market CLD is presented as an example in Fig. 4. All
the CLDs can be found in the supplementary material.
The effects of ﬂooding and sea-level rise on the housing market
were a major theme, generating substantial discussion amongst
workshop participants. In particular, the inﬂuence of increasing sea-
level rise and ﬂood risk on the appeal of the area to live in was con-
sidered an important driver of the housing market’s behavior over
time. Declining appeal and housing values due to increasing risk
were linked to negative mental wellbeing. Conversely, adaptation
measures that reduce risk and increase the area’s appeal raised ten-
sions with housing affordability and the availability of local natural
spaces.
Loops B1 (house prices and demand) and B2 (housing demand and
supply) capture the complex relationships between the appeal of the
area, house prices, affordability, and the number of people living
Table 1
List of participants by group or organization type, in accordance with our a priori sampling framework. Actual number of partici-
pants who took part are indicated in brackets. Some participants are represented in more than one group or organization type.
Mana whenua (n = 0)
Community (n = 15)
Business (1)
Churches, Faith-based communities (2)
Disability advocacy (2)
Education (1)
Migrant/Refugee (0)
Pasiﬁka3 (3)
South Dunedin-focused special interest groups (4)
Youth organizations (2)
Government (n = 7)
Local city government staff (2)
Mayor of Otepoti (1)
National government representatives (0)
Regional government staff (4)
Health and social services (n = 9)
Emergency preparedness services (1)
Public health services (2)
Social services (including disability, housing,
and age-related support services) (6)
Science (n = 3)
Geological and natural hazards experts (3)
3 Paciﬁc peoples living in Aotearoa.
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
4
there. Loops R1-R3 outline how, in the context of changing climate
risk, the appeal and affordability of the area can create demographic
“monocultures” of residents by socioeconomic status. High demand
can make the area ‘exclusive’ and expensive, pricing out and displac-
ing lower-income residents. Declining appeal and increasing afford-
ability may lead to a higher proportion of low-income households
and rentals, which participants believed could reduce attractiveness
for those who can afford to live elsewhere.
The development of new, high-quality, high-density housing was
considered an important inﬂuence on the appeal of the area to live in
(R4). Some participants believed that high-quality developments
would increase prices in the area, given that the existing housing
stock is of such poor quality (B3, effect of new, high-quality housing on
value and demand). However, these price increases may be counter-
acted if unaffordability reduces demand over time.
The CLD also explores tensions between land use for housing and
for natural spaces to reduce the area’s ﬂood risk. Increasing built land
surface cover reduces permeability, making ﬂooding more likely (B4,
green, blue space and ﬂood risk) [50]. It also undermines opportunities
to convert sections of land to blue-green spaces, such as wetlands, to
mitigate existing ﬂood risk (B5, green, blue space and ﬂood mitigation).
Most participants considered that creating more natural spaces
would support wellbeing and increase the area’s appeal to live in (B6,
green, blue space and appeal of the area).
Increasing ﬂood risk may require the red-zoning of parts of the
area, in which the land is deemed unusable for habitation, with the
potential for signiﬁcant upheaval and emotional trauma (B7, retreat,
green/blue space, and ﬂood mitigation). Unoccupied red-zone land
could be converted to blue-green space to reduce ﬂood risk, though
future demand for land may make the area attractive for housing
development once more.
The area’s appeal was also linked to experiences of ﬂooding (B8,
ﬂood risk and appeal of the area; B9, housing density and experience of
ﬂooding) [50], which could result in a mass exodus (R5) of people leav-
ing the area. Those unable to leave could be left in an increasingly
underinvested and run-down area that some participants described
as a "ghetto", negatively affecting their mental and social wellbeing.
Most participants did not think a mass exodus was likely unless
imposed by government, as residents would consider other aspects
of the area to be more important, including personal ties, housing
affordability, and its ﬂat topography.
3.4. Collaborative learning
Participants demonstrated evidence that their thinking had
changed as a result of being involved in the research. About three-
quarters of participants changed their priority actions in a way that
reﬂected the themes they had discussed during the interview
Table 2
Health and wellbeing outcomes identiﬁed as important in the context of ﬂooding, sea-level rise, and adaptation. An asterisk ‘*’ indicates the outcome was
added by participants during workshop one.
Core wellbeings
 Spiritual wellbeing
 Social wellbeing
 Mental wellbeing
 Physical wellbeing
 Reducing inequities
Economic wellbeing
 Financial wellbeing
 Poverty alleviation
Access
 Access for all to goods, services, people, places
 Access for all to nature (including more natural spaces in the area)
Community agency
 Community-led development
 Community resilience*
Engagement processes that support agency
 Comprehensive, ongoing engagement with policymakers
 Trust between community and policymakers
 Committing to, and maintaining, action on climate change as a priority*
 As much ‘certainty’ about the future as possible*
Vibrancy and appeal of the area
 South Dunedin as a vibrant, appealing place to be
 Investment in the community
 Availability of affordable, quality housing
 A sense of future, hope for the area
 Community pride
 Everyone feels safe and welcome*
 Trust within the community*
Fig. 3. Overview of the causal loop diagrams. Dotted lines indicate indirect causal relationships.
5
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
cognitive mapping exercise or workshops. For example, several par-
ticipants shifted their priorities towards improving the quality and
climate resilience of housing, and supporting community engage-
ment in decision-making. The research team also observed how the
CLDs enabled participants to discuss feedback behavior with increas-
ing conﬁdence, and identify policy trade-offs that arise between com-
peting health and adaptation priorities.
Feedback from the workshop evaluation questionnaire indicated
that participants felt they had gained useful insights from the
research. For example, one participant noted the CLDs were useful
for “illustrating complexities of individual issues and overall interde-
pendencies, and [the] challenges this creates [in] developing solu-
tions”. Many said they valued collaborating with others during the
workshops, and that hearing a diverse range of views deepened their
understanding of the complex relationships between health, ﬂood-
ing, and sea-level rise. New relationships were built for further col-
laboration on adaptation planning.
4. Discussion
We used participatory system dynamics modeling as a collabora-
tive learning tool, enabling stakeholders to develop a shared under-
standing of how ﬂooding and sea-level rise affect health and
wellbeing in the South Dunedin area. The group modeling process
successfully supported social learning across a range of stakeholders.
In particular, the workshops challenged participants to think in depth
about system complexity and to synthesize their knowledge with
that of others. The research ﬁndings include a list of important health
and wellbeing outcomes, six CLDs that constitute a qualitative model
of the issues, and some early policy insights. These remain open to
revision and can be used in future engagement processes to prompt
discussion about what matters to the community in developing adap-
tation responses. The CLDs can also be used to conduct qualitative
policy thought experiments testing potential policy interventions.
Participants, including local government staff, are already using the
results to inform adaptation policies and support further community
discussions, indicating the utility of the process.
4.1. Implications for policy
The results of this research indicate that the greatest risks that
ﬂooding and sea-level rise pose to urban areas like South Dunedin
will be mental and physical stresses relating to changes in the follow-
ing: the quality of housing; the housing market; the availability of
insurance cover; the health of the local economy; and access to goods
and services necessary for wellbeing.
Participants saw opportunities to address poor housing quality
and affordability through the development of quality, climate-
Fig. 4. The ‘housing market’ CLD. An ‘S’ notation on an arrow means that a change in the ﬁrst variable will cause the variable at the end of the arrow to change in the same direction
[49]. An ‘O’ indicates the variables will change in opposite directions. Two parallel lines intersecting an arrow indicate a signiﬁcant time delay between cause and effect. Important
health and wellbeing outcomes are presented in a box. Important exogenous variables, which sit outside the system, are presented in gray.
6
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
resilient housing. However, government provision of social housing
and other market interventions such as rent controls may be needed
to avoid gentriﬁcation and the worsening of inequities in access to
housing. Broader government investment is also necessary to support
a positive sense of future about the area, but must consider how
increasing the area’s appeal also increases residual risk by exposing
more people to ﬂooding and insurance retreat over time. Further,
tools that enable local government to manage land use are needed to
ensure housing improvements do not undermine ﬂood risk mitiga-
tion. Finally, participants considered community-led development
and adaptation decision-making to be essential for supporting com-
munity agency and avoiding negative health and equity outcomes.
For example, participants recognized that while targeted retreat from
high-risk areas may become necessary, it requires extensive and
ongoing consultation with the community to best support their well-
being aspirations.
The concerns identiﬁed in this research are likely to be relevant in
similar urban communities at risk of ﬂooding and sea-level rise.
Many of the issues require high-level, societal transformation to
address, the planning of which occurs amongst a global context of
uncertainty about climate trajectories. Long-term structural planning
that accounts for system complexity is required, and can be sup-
ported by adopting systems thinking approaches.
More broadly, this research has underscored the beneﬁts of cross-
sector processes for facilitating collaboration and knowledge-sharing
on issues marked by trade-offs and conﬂicting priorities. Participa-
tory systems modeling can support a degree of shared knowledge
and agreement from which policy or interventions can be developed.
4.2. Limitations
COVID-related lockdowns and commitments of many of our
stakeholders disrupted the participatory workshop process and con-
strained the ability of some stakeholders (especially from health serv-
ices) to participate. Rather than merely a limitation, we see this as
salutary. As climate change progresses, we are more likely to be try-
ing to make decisions in the context of multiple unfolding emergen-
cies, making urgent mitigation efforts and early adaptation critical.
South Dunedin remains signiﬁcant to mana whenua who hold
ancestral connections with, and responsibilities for the area. Their
representation in adaptation decision-making is critical, not only for
offering valuable scientiﬁc knowledge for adaptation, but also to
ensure adaptation policies include restorative justice and address the
ongoing effects of colonization and structural racism. This makes the
absence of mana whenua representatives in this part of the wider
decision-making process a major limitation, although there is a
higher level involvement in Dunedin City Council’s climate change
adaptation work, including for South Dunedin, and their previous
input informed the CLD. For the purposes of this research, we also
drew on existing insights from Maori researchers in the ﬁeld to
inform our thinking [51−53]. Ensuring meaningful partnership in
adaptation decision-making will require substantially increasing
resourcing to further their capacity to engage in decision-making
about the area. There remain substantial systemic barriers to
responding to the call for climate change tipping points and relational
tipping points resulting from colonization to be addressed together
[54], especially where skills are scarce. In this case, while South Dun-
edin was not seen as a high priority for mana whenua involvement,
they recognized the importance of urgent adaptation action for resi-
dents and supported the research continuing without their involve-
ment.
Further diversity of participants in the workshops would have
contributed other important insights. For example, the perspectives
of youth and migrant communities will also be required in future
engagement efforts.
While participants were generally comfortable understanding the
CLDs, more time with the models would have given them greater
conﬁdence to take them back to their respective communities or
organizations. Additional workshops would beneﬁt future projects.
However, participants who found the CLDs hard to understand still
beneﬁted from the group learning environment, with their fellow
participants helping them to understand the models.
The recruitment strategy used for this project meant the CLDs suc-
cessfully captured feedback behavior that drives health and social
inequities; however, the variables tended to conﬂate diverse impacts
for different groups. For example, the ﬁnal CLDs did not sufﬁciently
capture the inﬂuence of racism on Pasiﬁka wellbeing, something
likely to affect other demographic groups as well. The issues identi-
ﬁed here support existing calls for further work to effectively express
equity in CLD design [55].
Future use of systems thinking approaches in other settings would
provide insights into the generalizability of the themes and feedback
processes identiﬁed here. Further conﬁrmation of the causal links
identiﬁed in this research would be valuable as some were based on
a brief scan of the literature rather than systematic reviews, meaning
they may not have adequately incorporated dissenting evidence. A
quantitative simulation model that incorporates routinely collected
data would enable causal hypotheses and policy scenarios to be
tested further.
5. Conclusions
Drawing on the expert knowledge of local stakeholders and the
existing literature, the results of this research have identiﬁed how cli-
mate change-related ﬂooding and sea-level rise can negatively affect
health and wellbeing within a diverse coastal urban area. In particu-
lar, risks to wellbeing may arise from the exacerbation of existing
challenges relating to poor-quality housing, poverty, and underin-
vestment in community development. Policy tensions arise between
the need to address these existing challenges and the need to adapt
while considering issues such as insurance retreat and gentriﬁcation.
This research has demonstrated the value of participatory system
dynamics modeling for drawing various stakeholders together in a
structured transdisciplinary process for organizing knowledge and
social learning around adaptation planning and decision-making. It
also demonstrates the value of holistic, systems thinking approaches
which allow stakeholders to identify the complex system behavior
that produces unintended health and equity outcomes. These shared
understandings are essential to ensure adaptation that supports com-
munity ﬂourishing in the midst of a changing climate.
Funding
SH received a University of Otago Doctoral scholarship to conduct
this research.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100235.
References
[1] Costello A, Abbas M, Allen A, Ball S, Bell S, Bellamy R, et al. Managing the health
effects of climate change: lancet and University College London Institute for
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
7
Global Health Commission. Lancet North Am Ed 2009;373(9676):1693–733 Avail-
able
from:.
doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60935-1https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0140673609609351.
[2] Watts N, Amann M, Arnell N, Ayeb-Karlsson S, Beagley J, Belesova K, et al. The
2020 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: responding
to converging crises. Lancet North Am Ed 2021;397(10269):129–70. Available
from:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014067362032290X.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32290-X.
[3] Allen MR, Dube OP, Solecki W, Aragon-Durand F, Cramer W, Humphreys S, et al.
Framing and context. In: global warming of 15°C an IPCC special report on the
impacts of global warming of 15°C above pre-industrial levels and related global
greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2018. [49-91]. Avail-
able
from:
https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/chapter-1/.
doi:
10.1017/
9781009157940.003.
[4] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change 2022: impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Summary for Policymakers 2022 [cited 2022 May
3] Available from: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPC-
C_AR6_WGII_SummaryForPolicymakers.pdf.
[5] Adger WN, Paavola J, Huq S. Toward justice in adaptation to climate change W. N.
Adger, J. Paavola, S. Huq, Mace MJ, editors. Fairness in adaptation to climate
change. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT press; 2006. p. 1–20.
[6] Ahern M, Kovats RS, Wilkinson P, Few R, Matthies F. Global health impacts of
ﬂoods: epidemiologic evidence. Epidemiol Rev 2005;27(1):36–46. doi: 10.1093/
epirev/mxi004.
[7] Fernandez A, Black J, Jones M, Wilson L, Salvador-Carulla L, Astell-Burt T, et al.
Flooding and mental health: a systematic mapping review. PLoS One 2015;10(4)
e0119929-. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119929.
[8] Berariu R, Fikar C, Gronalt M, Hirsch P. Understanding the impact of cascade
effects of natural disasters on disaster relief operations. Int J Disaster Risk Reduct
2015;12:350–6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdrr.2015.03.005.
[9] Hernandez D, Chang D, Hutchinson C, Hill E, Almonte A, Burns R, et al. Public
housing on the periphery: vulnerable residents and depleted resilience reserves
post-hurricane sandy. J Urban Health 2018;95(5):703–15. doi: 10.1007/s11524-
018-0280-4.
[10] Hudson P, Botzen WJW, Poussin J, Aerts JCJH. Impacts of ﬂooding and ﬂood pre-
paredness on subjective well-being: a monetisation of the tangible and intangible
impacts. J Happiness Stud 2019;20(2):665–82. doi: 10.1007/s10902-017-9916-4.
[11] World Health Organization. Climate change and health: vulnerability and adapta-
tion assessment 2021. Available from: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/
9789240036383.
[12] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change 2014: synthesis
report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the ﬁfth assessment report
of the intergovernmental panel on climate change; 2014. Available from: https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/.
[13] Noble IR, Huq S, Anokhin YA, Carmin J, Goudou D, Lansigan FP, et al. Adaptation
Needs and Options C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastran-
drea, T.E. Bilir, et al., editors. Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vul-
nerability part A: global and sectoral aspects contribution of working group II to
the ﬁfth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change.
Cambridge University Press; 2014. p. 833–68.
[14] Hadorn GH, Biber-Klemm S, Grossenbacher-Mansuy W, Hoffmann-Riem H, Joye
D, Pohl C, et al. The emergence of transdisciplinarity as a form of research. Hand-
book of transdisciplinary research. Dordrecht: Springer; 2008 [19-39]. doi:
10.1007/978-1-4020-6699-3_2.
[15] George AS, Mehra V, Scott K, Sriram V. Community participation in health sys-
tems research: a systematic review assessing the state of research, the nature of
interventions involved and the features of engagement with communities. PLoS
One
2015;10(10).
Available
from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
26496124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141091.
[16] Cornwall A, Jewkes R. What is participatory research? Soc Sci Med 1995;41
(12):1667–76 Available from:. doi: 10.1016/0277-9536(95)00127-Shttps://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/027795369500127S.
[17] Blackstock KL, Kelly GJ, Horsey BL. Developing and applying a framework
to evaluate participatory research for sustainability. Ecol Econ 2007;60(4):726–
42.
Available
from:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S0921800906002898. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2006.05.014.
[18] Harrison S. Climate change adaptation for health and wellbeing: a participatory
modelling approach [dissertation on the internet]. Dunedin: University of Otago;
2022. Available from: http://hdl.handle.net/10523/13589.
[19] L Schmitt Olabisi, Blythe S, Levine R, Cameron L, Beaulac M. Participatory, dynam-
ics models: a tool for dialogue A. S. Parris, G. M. Garﬁn, K. Dow, R. Meyer, Close SL,
editors. Climate in context: science and society partnering for adaptation. John
Wiley & Sons; 2010. p. 99–116.
[20] Bond S, Barth J. Care-full and just: making a difference through climate change
adaptation. Cities 2020;102:102734. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S0264275119307838. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2020.102734.
[21] Dunedin City Council. About South Dunedin. 2022; cited 2022 Jul 10]. Available
at:
https://www.dunedin.govt.nz/council/council-projects/south-dunedin-
future/history
[22] Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment. Preparing new zealand for
rising seas: certainty and uncertainty. Wellington: Parliamentary Commis-
sioner for the Environment; 2015. [cited 2019 May 16] Available from:
https://pce.parliament.nz/media/fgwje5fb/preparing-nz-for-rising-seas-web-
small.pdf.
[23] Ministry for the Environment, Statistics New Zealand. Our atmosphere and cli-
mate 2020. 2020. [cited 2020 Oct 30] Available from: https://environment.govt.
nz/publications/our-atmosphere-and-climate-2020/
[24] Otago Regional Council. Coastal Otago ﬂood event 3 June 2015. 2015. [cited 2019
May 20] Available from: https://www.orc.govt.nz/media/1662/coastal-otago-
ﬂood-event-3-june-2015.pdf
[25] EHINZ. Socioeconomic deprivation proﬁle - NZDep for 2018. 2019. Available at:
https://ehinz.ac.nz/indicators/population-vulnerability/socioeconomic-depriva-
tion-proﬁle/
[26] University of Otago Wellington. Socioeconomic deprivation indexes: NZDep and NZi-
Dep. Department of Public Health; 2019. Available at: https://www.otago.ac.nz/wel-
lington/departments/publichealth/research/hirp/otago020194.html#2018.
[27] id community. Dunedin City Deprivation Index. 2018. Available at: https://proﬁle.
idnz.co.nz/dunedin/deprivation-index?WebID=650
[28] Statistics New Zealand. 2018 Census place summaries. 2018. Available at: https://
www.stats.govt.nz/tools/2018-census-place-summaries
[29] idcommunity. Dunedin City. 2020. Available at: https://proﬁle.idnz.co.nz/dune-
din?WebID=650
[30] Statistics New Zealand. Disability estimates for small areas tool −2013. 2013.
Available at: https://www.stats.govt.nz/topics/disability
[31] Barth J., South Dunedin Community Network Ropu. Greater South Dunedin com-
munity network Hui: the visions and values of the Greater South Dunedin Com-
munities. 2019.
[32] Braun V, Clarke V. Successful qualitative research: a practical guide for beginners.
SAGE; 2013.
[33] Guba EG, Lincoln YS. Competing paradigms in qualitative research editors. In:
Denzin NK, Lincoln YS, editors. Handbook of qualitative research. SAGE; 1994. p.
105–77.
[34] Sterman JD. Business system dynamics: systems thinking and modeling for a
complex world. Boston: Irwin/McGraw-Hill; 2000.
[35] Videira N, Antunes P, Santos R. Engaging stakeholders in environmental and sus-
tainability decisions with participatory system dynamics modeling. Environmen-
tal modeling with stakeholders: theory, methods, and applications. Springer
International Publishing; 2017 [241-65]. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-25053-3_12.
[36] Stave K. Participatory system dynamics modeling for sustainable environmental
management: observations from four cases. Sustainability 2010;2(9):2762–84.
doi: 10.3390/su2092762.
[37] van den Belt M. Mediated modeling: a system dynamics approach to environ-
mental consensus building. Island Press; 2004.
[38] Beall AM, Ford A. Reports from the ﬁeld: assessing the art and science of participa-
tory environmental modeling Wang J, editor. Societal impacts on information sys-
tems development and applications. Hershey, PA: IGI Global; 2012. p. 195–213.
[39] Forrester JW. Industrial dynamics. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press; 1961.
[40] Atkinson JA, Wells R, Page A, Dominello A, Haines M, Wilson A. Applications of
system dynamics modelling to support health policy. Public Health Research &
Practice 2015;25(3). doi: 10.17061/phrp2531531.
[41] Cvitanovic C, Howden M, Colvin RM, Norstr€om A, Meadow AM, Addison PFE.
Maximising the beneﬁts of participatory climate adaptation research by under-
standing and managing the associated challenges and risks. Environ Sci Policy
2019;94:20–31 Available from:. doi: 10.1016/j.envsci.2018.12.028https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1462901118311018.
[42] Gupta J. Climate change governance: history, future, and triple-loop learning?
WIREs Climate Change 2016;7(2):192–210. doi: 10.1002/wcc.388.
[43] Harrison S, Macmillan A, Bond S, Stephenson J. Climate change adaptation deci-
sion-making for health and wellbeing in south Dunedin: report on the use of
causal mapping for stakeholders. University of Otago; 2022 http://hdl.handle.net/
10523/13621.
[44] Vennix JAM. Group model building: facilitating team learning using system
dynamics. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons; 1996.
[45] Eden C, Ackermann F. Making strategy: the journey of strategic management.
London: SAGE; 1998.
[46] Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006;3
(2):77–101.
[47] Bryson JM, Ackermann F, Eden C, Finn CB. Visible thinking: unlocking causal map-
ping for practical business results. Chichester, West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons
Inc.; 2004.
[48] Meadows D. Thinking in systems: a primer. White River Junction, Vermont: Chel-
sea Green Publishing; 2008.
[49] Schaffernicht M. Causal loop diagrams between structure and behaviour: a critical
analysis of the relationship between polarity, behaviour and events. Syst Res
Behav Sci 2010;27(6):653–66. doi: 10.1002/sres.1018.
[50] Macmillan A., Davies M., Yekatherina B. Integrated decision-making about hous-
ing, energy and wellbeing (HEW): report on the mapping work for stakeholders.
2014. [cited 2019 Jul 22] Available from: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/environ-
mental-design/sites/bartlett_environmental_design/ﬁles/ﬁnal-mapping-report-
for-stakeholders.pdf
[51] Awatere S., King D., Reid J., Williams L., Masters-Awatere B., Harris P., et al. He
Huringa Ahuarangi, He Huringa Ao: a changing climate, a changing world. 2021.
Report
No.:
LC3948.
https://www.landcareresearch.co.nz/uploads/public/
researchpubs/He-huringa-ahuarangi-he-huringa-ao-a-changing-climate-a-
changing-world.pdf
[52] Jones R, Bennett H, Keating G, Blaiklock A. Climate change and the right to health
for Maori in Aotearoa/New Zealand climate justice and the right to health: a spe-
cial issue. Health Human Rights J 2014;16(1):54–68. Available from: https://
www.hhrjournal.org/2014/07/climate-change-and-the-right-to-health-for-
maori-in-aotearoanew-zealand/.
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
8
[53] Whyte K. Too late for indigenous climate justice: ecological and relational tipping
points. WIREs Climate Change. 2020; 11(1). doi:10.1002/wcc.603
[54] Jones R, Reid P, Macmillan A. Navigating fundamental tensions towards a decolo-
nial relational vision of planetary health. Lancet Planetary Health 2022;6(10):
E834–41. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(22)00197-8.
[55] Deutsch AR, Lustﬁeld R, Jalali MS. Community-based system dynamics modelling
of stigmatized public health issues: increasing diverse representation of individu-
als with personal experiences. Systems Res Behav Sci 2021:1–16. doi: 10.1002/
sres.2807.
S. Harrison, A. Macmillan, S. Bond et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 12 (2023) 100235
9
