Research article
Virtual interviews: Less carbon, less bias?
Rajajee Selvama, Husein Molooa,b, Helen MacRaec, Fahad Alamd, Isabelle Raichea,*
a Department of Surgery, The Ottawa Hospital - Civic Campus, 305-737 Parkdale Avenue, K1Y 1J8, Ottawa, Ontario K1J 4E9, Canada
b The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
c Department of Surgery, Sinai Health System and University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
d Department of Anesthesia, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, The Wilson Centre for Research in Medical Education, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 21 January 2022
Accepted 20 August 2022
Available online 27 August 2022
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: While moving to a virtual fellowship selection process was mandated by the coronavirus pan-
demic, hesitancy remains when it comes to a complete transition away from in-person interviews. To help
programs with their decision making, this project aimed to document the experience of program directors
and applicants undergoing a virtual selection process as we enter a post-pandemic era.
Materials and Methods: Applicants and program directors involved in the 2020 Canadian Colorectal Fellow-
ship Match were recruited to participate in this qualitative study via email. All programs carried out their
selection process as per their protocol. Structured phone interviews were completed. The perspectives of
applicants and program directors were extracted using directed content analysis.
Results: All 6 program directors and 5 of 10 applicants participated. Main goals of the interview for both
applicants and program directors were to share/gather information about the program and assess the ﬁt
between applicants and programs. Beneﬁts of virtual interviews included reduction in the ﬁnancial, opportu-
nity, and environmental costs. However, it was noted that assessment of ﬁt and interpretation of body lan-
guage was more challenging.
Conclusion: Virtual interviewing is a feasible alternative to face-to-face interviews for Canadian Colorectal
Fellowship programs, with clear beneﬁts from an environmental impact perspective. Further research on
how to assess ﬁt fairly through a virtual platform may be useful in developing a selection process that is just,
while appreciating our role as healthcare leaders in the climate crisis.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Virtual interviewing
Personnel selection
Climate change
Introduction
The selection of medical and surgical trainees has traditionally
included in-person interviews. However, in the midst of the pan-
demic, medical educators were forced to adapt quickly as trainee
selection moved to a virtual approach. Following this rapid and
unexpected change, survey studies have reported beneﬁts of virtual
interviews such as reduced ﬁnancial costs and less time taken away
from clinic activities [1−8]. Furthermore, the backdrop of the cli-
mate crisis has revealed the unacceptably high carbon footprint of
in-person interviews of approximately 1.82 tonnes per applicant
[9]. In-person interviews become difﬁcult to justify ethically based
on the fact, for example, that the average person in India contrib-
uted to 1.7 tonnes in CO2 emissions in 2020 [10]. Additionally, there
are ﬁnancial and opportunistic disparities that are associated with
mandating applicants to travel across the nations for interviews
[11]. Despite this, there continues to be a preference for face-to-
face interviews for reasons that are unclear from the current studies
[1−8].
As we consider the new normal post-pandemic, educators and
societies will decide whether to return to in-person interviews, or
continue virtually. In addition to considerations of the feasibility and
utility of virtual interviews when it comes to trainee selection, the
carbon footprint should be a part of our decision making. Further-
more, this transition to virtual interviews also provides an opportu-
nity to evaluate ways in which our existing selection processes may
be affected by discrimination and bias [12,13].
Collins et al. have highlighted the value of clinician leadership in
implementing environmentally conscious policies [14]. To facilitate
reﬂection and decision making on how future selection processes
can be optimized in the context of the climate crisis, we conducted
a series of interviews with stakeholders to better describe their
experience with virtual interviews. Our goal is to encourage the
advent of a selection process that is fair, effective and environmen-
tally responsible.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: iraiche@toh.ca (I. Raiche).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100167
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 8 (2022) 100167
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
Material and methods
Study design
A pragmatic naturalistic approach was taken to guide this study
[15]. This manuscript was created using the Standards for Reporting
Qualitative Research [16].
Study participants
All program directors (n = 6) of the accredited Canadian Colorectal
Fellowship programs were invited to participate via email. Programs
conducted applicant selection as per their own protocol, without any
inﬂuence from study participation.
Applicants to the Canadian Colorectal Fellowship programs were
also invited to participate in this study via email. Participants were
informed that participation, or the lack thereof, would have no inﬂu-
ence on the selection process.
Semi-structured interviews
Applicants and program directors participated in structured tele-
phone interviews to elicit their perceptions of the beneﬁts, limita-
tions, and suggestions for improvement for virtual interviews. The
protocol for these structured interviews was developed by the
research team based on existing literature [17−23].
Program directors were interviewed at two time points: prior to
the Colorectal Fellowship interviews, and a week after the interviews.
Applicants were interviewed only after the completion of the Colo-
rectal Fellowship interviews and match for feasibility reasons and to
minimize the perception of coercion.
The interview scripts that guided our structured interviews can be
found in the supplemental content. Interviews were conducted by a
single interviewer (RS) and lasted 15−20 min. The interview scripts
were piloted before study initiation. The interviewer received train-
ing on the conduct of qualitative interviews. All participants were
informed that the interview would be audio recorded.
Analysis
The interviews were transcribed and de-identiﬁed by a third party
prior to completing directed content analysis [15]. NVivo (QSR Inter-
national Pty Ltd., 2020) was used for data analysis [24]. The tran-
scripts were reviewed by two authors independently (IR and RS). A
list of codes based on existing literature was used to code the tran-
scripts, and material not coded with the initial codes were then
assigned different codes [17−23]. Each reviewer then independently
grouped statements made during the structured interviews using the
initial coding categories, but adding or revising categories as needed
by the data. The reviewers met periodically to revise the selected cat-
egories by combining similar, overlapping categories and separating
broader themes into their own entity.
The ﬁnal list of categories was reviewed by a third analyst (FA) −a
clinician with a Master of Education and experience in qualitative
analysis without a surgical background, working in a different institu-
tion −to ensure that the ﬁnal coding tree was describing a rich set of
categories. The transcripts were entirely coded using the ﬁnal coding
tree. Finally, the coders reviewed their coding together, discussed
discrepancies in their coding and resolved any disagreements by con-
sensus.
Trustworthiness
Steps were taken to ensure trustworthiness of the ﬁndings
[25,26]. The interview protocol was created based on current litera-
ture and piloted multiple times. It was amended to ensure the data
would be pertinent to our research question. We used researcher tri-
angulation by having the data analyzed by a practicing surgeon, a
junior resident, and an anesthesiologist [27]. These different perspec-
tives ensure a more comprehensive analysis. The surgeons and the
resident analyzed the data independently initially using the coding
grid but also creating new categories. This approach ensured that the
perspective of the resident was reﬂected and without interference
due to hierarchy.
We discussed our ﬁndings at divisional research meetings and
with two interview participants as a member check [27]. They con-
ﬁrmed that our ﬁndings reﬂected their perception. Finally, by gather-
ing the perspective of both the applicants and program directors, we
were able to compare their viewpoints. Given our access to a limited
number of participants and use of a directed analysis framework, we
did not assess for saturation.
Ethics
Institutional approval was received from the Ottawa Hospital
Research Institute (OHRI) Research Ethics Board (20,200,188−01H).
As the authors were also members of the fellowship interview team,
participants were informed that participation, or the decision not to
participate, would have no bearing on the selection process. All inter-
views were conducted by a single interviewer who was not part of
the selection process. Our interviews with the applicants were only
conducted after the fellowship interviews and applicant ranking
were completed to minimize the effect of participation bias.
Results
Study participants
The 6 program directors of the Canadian Colorectal Fellowship
programs and 10 applicants were contacted for study participation.
All 10 applicants who were contacted for study participation were
Canadian trained residents who had done medical school in Canada.
All 6(100%) of the program directors agreed to participate along with
5(50%) of the applicants. Telephone interviews prior to the applica-
tion process were completed with all 6(100%) of the program direc-
tors. Telephone interviews after the application process were
conducted with 5 of the 6 program directors (83%). All 5 applicants
who agreed to participate completed their telephone interviews after
the application process was completed. All 5 applicants were female,
with an average age of 31. Among program directors, there were 5
males and 1 female, with an average number of 16 years of practice.
The main results regarding the role of the interview, its weight in
the ranking process and the differences that were noted between the
virtual and in-person interview are presented below, along with a
summary of major themes presented in Table 1.
Role of the interview
Applicants
Applicants use the interview for a few different purposes. They are
trying to decide how supportive a program would be to help them
achieve their goals and to assess how it would be to work with the
people interviewing them.
APP1 “I’m also interviewing them in a lot of ways, and I want to be
able to assess whether I think that it’s going to be a supportive envi-
ronment or not supportive environment if I was to work with that
group of people”
They are also concerned with how well they would ﬁt in the pro-
gram. The interview is another piece of information to help them
R. Selvam, H. Moloo, H. MacRae et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 8 (2022) 100167
2
select the program; they combine this with their interaction with
previous fellows, and their own experience if an elective was done.
APP2 “Gain any sort of extra insight into the program that I may have
missed when I was talking to fellows or talking to the staff while I
was there”
Program directors
The program directors all agree that they are looking for appli-
cants they would enjoy working with and applicants that would ﬁt
well in the program.
PD3.1 “We’re trying to get a sense of whether or not we would enjoy
working with that person for two years. . .because although CVs are
really important, and obviously academic accomplishments are very
important. . .what really matters to me is, you know, will I enjoy
working with that person for a few years? Will I be proud of that
individual when they’re ﬁnished. . .do I have an afﬁnity for their
character?”
They are interested in clarifying the goals of the applicants to see
if it aligns with what the program can offer. For applicants who have
done electives, program directors mention that the interview day
acts as a refresher and as an opportunity for people to compare appli-
cants with one another.
PD1.1 “And then I think the interview is. . .helpful in just trying to get
them and sort of seeing them all together, you know, in short order-
. . .because a lot of them also, sometimes they haven’t been with us,
sometimes, for a year.”
Weight of the interview in the ranking process
Applicants
Applicants discussed a variety of factors involved in their rank list.
In general, if they had a chance to do an elective, their elective experi-
ence was seen as the most important piece of information.
APP1 “the biggest determinant of my rank list would be my elec-
tive experience. But that being said, the portion of the experience
that matters the most for me is whether I’m going to be working with
a group of supportive surgeons. Like I want to go somewhere where
there is, where the group of people that I’m working with are sup-
portive and welcoming and committed to education and they have
good interpersonal relationships with each other. “
The conversation they had during the interview was another
occasion to assess how well they would ﬁt in the program and gain
some information about the program that could change their rank
list.
APP3 “it was big to like go back and talk. And even if something, if a pro-
gram wasn’t necessarily my top program to go talk to people and −
and you remember things and they tell you more about it and it
affects how you think about them “
Program directors
Program directors in general discussed that the weight of the
interview would vary depending if the applicants had done an elec-
tive with the program or not. If they had not done an elective, the
interview was the only interaction they had with an applicant and
their only occasion to assess ‘ﬁt’ and that was seen as very important.
PD1.2 “if they came and did an elective with us then obviously we
had more insight than a 30-minute video chat. . .the main point is
that you don’t really know them beyond just a 30-minute interview.
And with the videos you do lose that perspective from the other resi-
dents and trainees.”
On the other hand, for known applicants, the weight of the inter-
view was much less, with program directors having made up their
minds regarding their rank list beforehand in many cases.
PD2.1 “I’ve already made up my mind who I want in terms of the
ranking or where they’re going to rank. . .because they have already
done an elective rotation with us here. . . it would be anything nega-
tive would move them downwards rather than moving upwards. . .
There’s not much changing in my mind because I’ve seen their CVs
and have already interacted with them”
Difference between virtual and in-person
Applicants
Applicants felt that multiple costs associated with the interview
process were minimized with the transition to a virtual platform.
This included the ﬁnancial costs associated with travel and accommo-
dations, the amount of time required to be taken away from clinical
activity, as well as the environmental costs associated with ﬂying to
each city.
APP2 “it’s like a lot of money and it’s a lot of ﬂights and it’s terrible for
the environment”
Virtual interviews provided them with enough information to
answer most of the questions they were trying to answer with the
interview.
APP3 “For fellowship interviews again, I would do a virtual interview
again because I think that I was able to achieve the goals that I
wanted
to
achieve. . .the
schools
that
interviewed
made
it
comfortable”
Table 1
Summary of results.
Applicants
Program directors
Goals of the interview
 Get information about the program
 Assess ﬁt
 Get information about the applicants’ goals
 Assess ﬁt
Beneﬁts of virtual interview
 Fewer ﬁnancial costs
 Better for the environment
 Less time taken away from clinical activity
 Fewer ﬁnancial costs for program
 Better for the environment
 More structure to the interview
 Less time taken away from clinical activity
Challenges with virtual interview
 Difﬁculty in reading body language
 Difﬁculty in having informal conversations with current fel-
lows/staff
 Difﬁculty in assessing ﬁt
 Difﬁculty in reading body language
 Difﬁculty in promoting their program, particularly for newer
programs
 Difﬁculty in assessing ﬁt
Plans for the future
 Would do virtual interviews again for fellowship in the future
 Worried that virtual interview would be seen as a sign that an
applicant is less interested
 Would continue with virtual interviews for environmental ben-
eﬁt, but also to keep up with culture change across programs
R. Selvam, H. Moloo, H. MacRae et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 8 (2022) 100167
3
When it came to assess how well they ﬁt with a program, which
was mentioned as an important goal of the interview, applicants
found the interpretation of body language challenging and thought it
was harder to assess how people reacted to their answer.
APP4 “So I found it much more difﬁcult to read people’s body lan-
guage and to work within a group of people to generate a conversa-
tion or get a feel for what people’s moods were.”
Finally, applicants mentioned that in the future, if applicants were
offered the option of virtual and in-person interview by programs,
they
would
potentially
choose
in-person
to
demonstrate
commitment.
APP3 “You’re kind of left in this position where you don’t know what
the more favourable. . . I don’t want somebody to think I don’t care
because I choose a video-based interview.”
Program directors
Program directors found that virtual interviews were more eco-
nomically sound for both applicants and the programs themselves.
Program directors also highlighted the environmental beneﬁts of mini-
mizing the need for applicants to take ﬂights to each interview site.
PD2.2 “The primary motivator was really carbon footprint. . .even if
there is a slight beneﬁt to in-person. . .it is at the expense of the harm
we are inﬂicting on the planet”
When program directors compared virtual and in-person inter-
views, they noticed that the difference was more important for peo-
ple they had never met before, explaining that for people who had
come on elective, coming for an in-person interview was probably
not necessary.
PD3.2 “if they have done a rotation, elective rotation here, then they
would have. . .experience in the hospital to know how it works, the
people, they would interact with, like the nursing and other medical
staff. . .So in that situation, in fact, we would consider the video inter-
view and not ask necessarily that they come back in person”
Program directors also felt that virtual interviews made it more
challenging to assess body language, which made it harder to assess
how applicants handled stress. They also explained that not being
able to pick up on body language resulted in a more scripted
interview.
PD5.2 “You can pick on more from their body language. . .the ques-
tions didn’t have to necessarily be as per a setup format. . .you can go
off the script a little bit.”
They also worried that they could not share as much information
about their program through a virtual platform.
PD3.1 “we have a group of colorectal surgeons that we work with-
. . .But not all of them are going to be on the interview panel. So
they’re not all of them going to be on the video chat, and you know, a
half-hour video chat is different than a half a day spent getting a tour
and meeting the previous fellow. . .with seeing where the ofﬁces are
and how things are structured.”
Discussion
This study presents the perspectives of fellowship applicants and
program directors regarding the potential role of virtual interview in
the selection process. The participants in this study agreed with the
literature and conﬁrmed that the goal of the interview, regardless of
whether it is in-person or virtual, is to 1) share information about
programs, which participants are used to doing effectively virtually
at this point, and 2) to assess the ﬁt between applicants and programs
[12]. Furthermore, many participants mentioned that the carbon
footprint of the selection process should be taken into consideration
when deciding how to plan future selection processes.
Applicants and program directors mentioned ﬁt assessment as a
key role of the interview on multiple occasions. Interestingly there is
little evidence in the surgical education literature to support the role
of ﬁt as a key feature of successful trainees. While the concept of ﬁt
has previously been explored within selection processes in medicine,
authors have cautioned against the use of a term with such ambigu-
ous and varying subjective interpretations [13]. Without speciﬁc deﬁ-
nitions or tools to measure ﬁt, colloquial deﬁnitions of ﬁt may serve
to propagate implicit bias into the selection process, and ultimately
threaten diversity.
In this study, participants mentioned the role of body language as
an assessment of ﬁt −relying on informal interactions and body lan-
guage to assess the degree to which there is a good ﬁt between appli-
cants and programs. It was one of their major concerns with virtual
interviews raised by participants in our study, with certain program
directors saying that it was the main advantage of in-person inter-
views and possibly justifying their increased carbon footprint. During
virtual interviews, there is less informal interaction, and body lan-
guage is more challenging to assess. This difﬁculty in reading body
language might be an unexpected beneﬁt of virtual interviewing as
body language can be manipulated, is hard to interpret and has been
shown to be a reﬂection of social skills more than motivation [28]. It
has also been shown that body language predicts interview rating
more accurately than job performance [29].
We would like to argue that ﬁt assessment and body language
assessment should not be used to justify the carbon footprint of in-
person selection processes. At this point, there is no evidence that in-
person interviews are superior to virtual interviews in terms of
selecting better candidates or creating better programs. In fact, two
studies report that program directors are as satisﬁed with their train-
ees selected through a virtual process [30,31]. However, only 55% of
the program directors surveyed planned on keeping their selection
virtual in the years to come [31]. Their response was based on the
impression that their colleagues were more comfortable with getting
a “feel” for the candidates with in-person interviews. Overall, putting
value on body language and ﬁt during the selection process can lead
to a more discriminatory process and preclude strong candidates
from being selected based on their lack of impression management
skills [32]. By reducing programs’ reliance on intrinsic bias to make
their selection decisions, virtual interviews have the potential to help
with the fairness of the process while making the selection process
more ecofriendly.
Similar to other planetary health concerns that have been linked
to social justice issues, decisions about virtual versus in-person inter-
views also highlight interactions between planetary health and
equity [33]. Applicants highlighted that virtual interviews allowed
for decreased ﬁnancial costs as well as less time taken away from
clinical activity. While it may not necessarily apply to the Colorectal
Surgery Fellowship Match given the relatively smaller number of pro-
grams, applicants at other stages of training may ﬁnd that virtual
interviewing negates ﬁnancial barriers that would otherwise need to
be factored in within the era of in-person interviews. On a larger
scale, virtual interviews make the application process more accessi-
ble to applicants which has the potential to help with the fairness of
the process while concurrently making the selection process more
ecofriendly.
Finally, a common concern raised by participants when it came to
the weight of the interview in the selection process as a whole was
that the interview itself was less important for applicants who had
R. Selvam, H. Moloo, H. MacRae et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 8 (2022) 100167
4
completed an elective rotation. For applicants who had done an elec-
tive, the interview served to answer any additional questions, but the
biggest contributor to the rank list was their elective experience. Sim-
ilarly, program directors described already having a rank list deter-
mined prior to interviews for applicants who had performed an
elective, highlighting that their elective provided more insight than
an interview. This ﬁnding, combined with the environmental impact
of in-person interviews, suggest that programs should reconsider the
role of the interview itself in the selection process. While we encour-
age ongoing research to optimize the virtual interview process, halt-
ing in-person interviews to minimize our carbon footprint −
particularly for applicants who have done an on-site elective −
should happen now. This is in line with the precautionary approach
outlined in the Rio Declaration that explains that when there are seri-
ous threats that can be mitigated, the lack of scientiﬁc certainty
should not be used as a reason to delay measures that would prevent
environmental harm [34].
This study has some limitations. While we were able to capture
the perceptions of Colorectal Fellowship program directors across
Canada, the response rate from applicants was 50% despite reaching
out three times. As we only explored perceptions of participants in
the Colorectal Fellowship Match, our ﬁndings may not be generaliz-
able to other stages of training or at other institutions where there
may be more applicants or applicants may not complete one month
electives. On the other hand, few studies have focused on fellowship
selection process and we think that documenting the perception of
more senior trainees adds value to this body of literature. In addition,
our applicants were all female. While 8 of the 10 applicants who
were contacted for study participation were female, our sample of
participants may not capture the full range of viewpoints on virtual
interviewing. Applicant participation and responses in our study are
susceptible to bias as members of the research team were also
involved in the Colorectal Fellowship interview process. We took
steps to decrease the risk of bias by having our ﬁndings assessed by
an external analyst. The nature of the structured interviews pre-
vented us from exploring issues in more depths with our participants.
This study was set up as an initial assessment of stakeholders’ per-
spective with the plan to use these ﬁndings to focus further research.
Conclusions
The coronavirus pandemic has forced us to revisit our traditional
practices to adopt virtual alternatives, allowing for the opportunity
to scrutinize the way things have been done. As programs consider
the future of the selection process, environmental concerns should
be part of their reﬂection. We hope that our qualitative study on the
use of virtual interviewing in the 2020 Canadian Colorectal fellow-
ship match generates reﬂection amongst healthcare leaders involved
in the trainee selection process. Two important tenets of trainee
selection that have been highlighted are the concepts of ﬁt and the
role of body language in assessing it. They have been mentioned by
our participants as possible limitations of the virtual selection process
and as potential justiﬁcation for the higher carbon footprint of an in-
person interview. We argue that by limiting our ability to rely on
informal interactions and body language, virtual interviews may help
control some of the bias in the selection process. A selection process
where we focus on a more structured approach to look for common
core values while being open to differences has the potential to bene-
ﬁt residency and fellowship programs and the profession as a whole.
Ottawa, March 2022
Conﬂicts of interest and source of funding
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Rajajee Selvam: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data curation,
Writing −original draft, Writing −review & editing. Husein Moloo:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing −original draft, Writing −
review & editing. Helen MacRae: Methodology, Conceptualization,
Writing −review & editing. Fahad Alam: Methodology, Formal anal-
ysis, Writing −review & editing. Isabelle Raiche: Conceptualization,
Methodology, Data curation, Writing −original draft, Writing −
review & editing, Supervision.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100167.
References
[1] Day RW, Taylor BM, Bednarski BK, Tzeng C-WD, Gershenwald JE, Lee JE, Grubbs
EG. Virtual interviews for surgical training program applicants during COVID-19:
lessons learned and recommendations. Ann Surg 2020;272(2):e144–7. doi:
10.1097/sla.0000000000004064.
[2] Vining CC, Eng OS, Hogg ME, Schuitevoerder D, Silverman RS, Yao KA, Winchester
DJ, Roggin KK, Talamonti MS, Posner MC, Turaga KK, Tseng J. Virtual surgical fel-
lowship recruitment during COVID-19 and its implications for resident/fellow
recruitment in the future. Ann Surg Oncol 2020;27(S3):911–5. doi: 10.1245/
s10434-020-08623-2.
[3] Molina G, Mehtsun WT, Qadan M, Hause KC, Raut CP, Fairweather M. Virtual
interviews for the complex general surgical oncology fellowship: the dana-
Farber/partners experience. Ann Surg Oncol 2020;27(9):3103–6. doi: 10.1245/
s10434-020-08778-y.
[4] Chesney TR, Bogach J, Devaud N, Govindarajan A, Wright FC. How we did it: creat-
ing virtual interviews for postgraduate medical trainee recruitment and keeping
it
personal.
Ann
Surg
2020
Advance
online
publication.
doi:
10.1097/
SLA.0000000000004183.
[5] McKinley SK, Fong ZV, Udelsman B, Rickert CG. Successful virtual interviews: per-
spectives from recent surgical fellowship applicants and advice for both appli-
cants and programs. Ann Surg 2020 Advance online publication. doi: 10.1097/
SLA.0000000000004172.
[6] Jones RE, Abdelfattah KR. Virtual interviews in the era of COVID-19: a primer for
applicants. J Surg Educ 2020;77(4):733–4. doi: 10.1016/j.jsurg.2020.03.020.
[7] Wolff M, Burrows H. Planning for virtual interviews: residency recruitment dur-
ing a pandemic. Acad Pediatr 2021;21(1):24–31. doi: 10.1016/j.acap.2020.10.006.
[8] Asmar S, Kulvatunyou N, Davis K, Joseph B. Virtual interviews for surgical critical
care fellowships and acute care fellowships amid the COVID-19 pandemic. J
Trauma
Acute
Care
Surg
Publish
Ahead
Print
2020:92–4.
doi:
10.1097/
ta.0000000000002831.
[9] Fung B, Raiche I, Lamb T, Gawad N, MacNeill A, Moloo H. A chance for reform: the
environmental impact of travel for general surgery residency interviews. Can
Med Educ J 2021. doi: 10.36834/cmej.71022.
[10] Ritchie, H., & Roser, M. (2020) CO₂ and greenhouse gas emissions. Published online
at OurWorldInData.org. Retrieved from: ’ https://ourworldindata.org/co2-and-
other-greenhouse-gas-emissions ’.
[11] Susarla SM, Swanson EW, Slezak S, Lifchez SD, Redett RJ. The perception and costs
of the interview process for plastic surgery residency programs: can the process
be streamlined? Plast Reconstr Surg 2017;139(1) 302e−9e. doi: 10.1097/
PRS.0000000000002912.
[12] & Douglas 2nd A, Hendrix J. Black medical student considerations in the era of vir-
tual interviews. Ann Surg 2021;274:232–3.
[13] Shappell E, Schnapp B. The F word: how “ﬁt” threatens the validity of resident
recruitment. J Grad Med Educ 2019;11(6):635–6. doi: 10.4300/JGME-D-19-
00400.1.
[14] Collins A, Demorest S, Slutzman JE. Climate, health care, and the race to zero: an
urgent call to action. J Clim Change Health 2021;4:100050. doi: 10.1016/j.joc-
lim.2021.100050.
[15] Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual
Health Res 2005;15(9):1277–88. doi: 10.1177/1049732305276687.
[16] O’Brien BC, Harris IB, Beckman TJ, Reed DA, Cook DA. Standards for reporting
qualitative
research.
Acad
Med
2014;89(9):1245–51.
doi:
10.1097/
acm.0000000000000388.
[17] Edje L, Miller C, Kiefer J, Oram D. Using skype as an alternative for residency selec-
tion interviews. J Grad Med Educ 2013;5(3):503–5. doi: 10.4300/jgme-D-12-
00152.1.
5
R. Selvam, H. Moloo, H. MacRae et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 8 (2022) 100167
[18] Daram SR, Wu R, Tang S. Interview from anywhere: feasibility and utility of web-
based videoconference interviews in the gastroenterology fellowship selection
process. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109(2):155–9. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2013.278.
[19] Shah SK, Arora S, Skipper B, Kalishman S, Timm TC, Smith AY. Randomized evalu-
ation of a web based interview process for urology resident selection. J Urol
2012;187(4):1380–4. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2011.11.108.
[20] Tiller D, O’Mara D, Rothnie I, Dunn S, Lee L, Roberts C. Internet-based multiple
mini-interviews for candidate selection for graduate entry programmes. Med
Educ 2013;47(8):801–10. doi: 10.1111/medu.12224.
[21] Vadi MG, Malkin MR, Lenart J, Stier GR, Gatling JW, Applegate II RL. Comparison of
web-based and face-to-face interviews for application to an anesthesiology train-
ing program: a pilot study. Int J Med Educ 2016;7:102–8. doi: 10.5116/
ijme.56e5.491a.
[22] Okike K, Me U, Aa W. Topics in Training. J Bone Jt Surg 2013;107(1):1–10. doi:
10.2106/JBJS.F.01083.
[23] Pourmand A, Lee H, Fair M, Maloney K, Caggiula A. Feasibility and Usability of
Tele-interview for medical residency interview. West J Emerg Mede 2018:80–6.
doi: 10.5811/westjem.2017.11.35167.
[24] QSR International Pty Ltd. (2020) NVivo (released in March 2020), https://www.
qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software/home
[25] Lincoln Y, Guba E. Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills: Sage; 1985.
[26] Shenton A. Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research proj-
ects. Educ Inform 2004;22:63–75.
[27] Kitto SC, Chesters J, Grbich C. Quality in qualitative research criteria for authors
and assessors in the submission and assessment of qualitative research articles
for the Medical Journal of Australia. MJA 2008;188:243–6.
[28] Gifford R, Ng FC, Wilkinson M. Nonverbal cues in the employment interview:
links between applicant qualities and interviewer judgments. J Appl Psychol
1985;70:729–36.
[29] Barrick MR, Shaffer JA, Degrassi SW. What you see may not be what you get: rela-
tionships among self-presentation tactics and ratings of interview and job perfor-
mance. J Appl Psychol 2009;94:1394–411.
[30] Simmons RP, Ortiz J, Kisielewski M, Zaas A, Finn KM. Virtual recruitment:
experiences and perspectives of internal medicine program directors. Am J
Med 2022;135:258–63.e1.
[31] D’angelo JD, D’angelo AD, Mathis KL, Dozois EJ, Kelley SR. Program director opin-
ions of virtual interviews: whatever makes my partners happy. J Surg Educ
2021;78:e12–8.
[32] Maxﬁeld CM, Thorpe MP, Desser TS, Heitkamp DE, Hull NC, Johnson KS, Koontz
NA, Mlady GW, Welch TJ, Grimm LJ. Bias in radiology resident selection: do we
discriminate against the obese and unattractive? Acad Med 2019;94:1774–80.
[33] Levy BS, Patz JA. Climate change, human rights, and social justice. Ann Glob
Health 2015;81:310–22.
[34] United Nations Conference On Environment And Development: Rio Declaration
On Environment And Development. Int Legal Mater 1992;31(4):874–80 http://
www.jstor.org/stable/20693717.
6
R. Selvam, H. Moloo, H. MacRae et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 8 (2022) 100167
