International carbon markets under the Paris Agreement: Basic form and
development prospects
GAO Shuaia, LI Meng-Yub, DUAN Mao-Shengb, WANG Cana,*
a State Key Joint Laboratory of Environment Simulation and Pollution Control (SKLESPC), and School of Environment, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084,
China
b Institute of Energy, Environment and Economy, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
Received 24 January 2019; revised 12 March 2019; accepted 19 March 2019
Available online 23 March 2019
Abstract
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement introduces two international carbon markets that receive extensive attention and are expected to play an
important role in the post-2020 climate regime. Three key elements of the two international carbon markets, including the scope, the types of
tradable units and the governance, are identiﬁed, as the basis to clarify their basic forms. Based on the key issues and their different designs
identiﬁed in negotiations, this study analyzes the contributions and challenges for China to participate in international carbon markets.
Considering the inherent needs of climate change mitigation, climate ﬁnance, the development of a green “Belt and Road” and the China
SoutheSouth cooperation in climate change, along with the existing domestic capacities on market mechanisms, this study puts forward the
short-, medium- and long-term development prospects of the two international carbon markets.
Keywords: Paris Agreement; International carbon markets; Cooperative approaches; Sustainable development mechanism; Climate change
1. Introduction
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement established two interna-
tional carbon markets through the cooperative approaches
(CAs) under Articles 6.2e6.3 and the sustainable development
mechanism (SDM) under Articles 6.4e6.7 (UNFCCC, 2015).
These could be used by Parties to achieve their nationally
determined contributions (NDCs) and increase the ambition of
the mitigation targets in the future. On the one hand, roughly
half of the Parties intend to use the international carbon market
in post-2020 (Chen et al., 2018). On the other hand, the Car-
bon Offset and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation
aims to provide a large amount of demand for the international
carbon market units (Cames et al., 2016). Therefore, the
international carbon market is expected to play a crucial role
in post-2020 climate regime (Koakutsu et al., 2016).
Currently, the Subsidiary Body for Scientiﬁc and Techno-
logical Advice (SBSTA) summarizes the views submitted by
Parties in order to support the development of the guidance for
CAs and the rules, modalities and procedures for the SDM
(UNFCCC, 2018a, 2018b). Therefore, it is important for China
to accurately grasp the development of international carbon
markets by identifying the key issues in negotiations and their
basic forms. Moreover, analyzing the contributions and chal-
lenges for China to participate in the international carbon
markets and their development prospects can help maximize
their roles in China. Therefore, in this work, we identify the
key elements of the international carbon markets to clarify
their basic forms based on the literature review. The key issues
in negotiations and their design options are identiﬁed through
informal documents of the SBSTA meetings. On this basis, we
analyze the contributions and challenges for China to take part
in the international carbon markets. This study puts forward
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: canwang@tsinghua.edu.cn (WANG C.).
Peer review under responsibility of National Climate Center (China
Meteorological Administration).
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
ScienceDirect
Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/accr/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accre.2019.03.001
1674-9278/Copyright © 2019, National Climate Center (China Meteorological Administration). Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
the development prospects of the two international carbon
markets in accordance with the inherent needs of climate
change mitigation, climate ﬁnance, the development of a green
“Belt and Road” and the SoutheSouth cooperation on climate
change, along with the existing domestic capacities on the
market mechanisms.
2. International carbon markets under the Paris
Agreement
Discussions related to the international carbon markets
under the Paris Agreement could be traced back to the 16th
Conference of the Parties (COP16) to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in
Cancun in 2010, which decided to consider the establishment
of one or more market mechanisms to enhance the cost-
effectiveness of mitigation actions and elaborated the princi-
ples of market mechanisms as shown in Table 1. The COP17
in Durban formally established two international carbon
markets, namely, the framework of various approaches and the
new market mechanism. Since Durban, there has been hardly
any progress on these two market mechanisms. However, the
COP21 in Paris reintegrated international carbon markets into
the agreement, removed the framework of various approaches
and the new market mechanism and replaced them with the
CAs and the SDM. As shown in Table 1, the two international
carbon markets under the COP21 looks quite similar to those
under the COP17. It seems that the CAs and the SDM inherit
the key components of the framework of various approaches
and the new market mechanism. Therefore, the discussions on
the basic forms of CAs and the SDM could be built on the
previous discussions under the COP17 in Durban (Koakutsu
et al., 2016).
In spite of the slow progress of the framework of various
approaches and the new market mechanism in the negotia-
tions, the discussions on these issues have continued within the
academic circles (Baron et al., 2009; Schneider and Cames,
2009; Sterk et al., 2015). Moreover, some countries have
started pilot programs to facilitate their development (WB,
2015; Kfw, 2013). Therefore, based on the previous research
(Gao et al., 2016), we identify the key elements of the inter-
national carbon markets as the bases by which to clarify their
basic forms (Fig. 1).
2.1. Cooperative approaches
Cooperative approaches enable Parties to use ITMOs to-
ward their NDCs, increase the ambition of mitigation actions,
promote sustainable development, and ensure environmental
integrity. The Parties are requested to apply robust accounting
to avoid double accounting under CAs. In this sense, CAs
could be regarded as a framework that develops guidance for
robust accounting to govern the transfer of ITMOs from
various types of market-based activities (ADB, 2018).
(1) The scope of CAs refers to the types of mitigation ac-
tivities that are governed by the guidance for robust
accounting developed under CAs. Article 6 does not
seem to place a limit on the scope of CAs, in that,
technically speaking, any mitigation activity could
generate ITMOs. Currently, CAs commonly involve the
linking of the emission trading systems (ETS) of
different
Parties,
direct
government-to-government
transfers and the use of international crediting mecha-
nisms that might include bilateral crediting mechanisms
governed by Parties (e.g., Joint crediting mechanism)
and the SDM proposed under Article 6.4 (Schneider
et al., 2017; Rocamora et al., 2017; Cames et al.,
2016). However, due to the different types of gover-
nance between CAs and the SDM, whether the tradable
units generated by the SDM could be regarded as
ITMOs remains a controversial issue in the negotiations.
(2) The speciﬁc type of ITMOs under CAs depends on
which type of mitigation activities generates them. If an
ITMO comes from the linking of different ETS, it could
be the tradable unit from a national carbon market, such
as European Emission Allowance from EU-ETS. If it
comes from direct government-to-government transfers,
it could be similar to the type of the NDC, such as the
renewable energy certiﬁcate from India. An ITMO could
also be the emission reduction credit if it is generated by
the bilateral or multilateral crediting mechanism, such as
the JCM credits from Japan.
(3) Article 6 does not specify the governance of CAs. Most
Parties consider CAs as a decentralized mechanism
because CAs could be regarded as the successor of the
framework of various approaches. However, contro-
versies remain when it comes to negotiations on the
Table 1
UNFCCC discussions related to the international carbon markets under the
Paris Agreement.
Climate Change
Conference
UNFCCC discussions related to international carbon
markets
COP16 in
Cancun (2010)
Principles of carbon markets: voluntary
participation, broad segments of the economy,
environmental integrity, net decrease, and meeting
part of the mitigation targets
COP17 in
Durban (2011)
The framework of various approaches: a framework
to govern internationally traded units from different
mechanisms designed by all Parties (Koakutsu and
Usui, 2014); standards that deliver real, permanent,
additional and veriﬁed mitigation outcomes; avoid
double counting; and achieve net decrease
New market mechanism: scale up mitigation
activities to broad segments of the economy and
achieve net decrease
COP21 in
Paris (2015)
CAs: a framework to govern various types of
market-based activities (Rocamora et al., 2017),
allow Parties to use internationally transferred
mitigation outcomes (ITMOs) to achieve NDCs,
ensure environmental integrity, and promote
sustainable development
SDM: a new market mechanism to promote
mitigation, support sustainable development, and
deliver an overall mitigation in global emissions
22
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
issues related to the extent of decentralized governance
and the role of the Conference of Parties serving as the
meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA).
2.2. Sustainable development mechanism
The sustainable development mechanism, which is estab-
lished under the authority and guidance of the CMA, allows
Parties to use emission reduction outcomes generated by this
mechanism as a host country or a buyer country to achieve
their NDCs. It aims to promote mitigation and foster sus-
tainable development while ensuring overall mitigation in
global emissions (Healy, 2017).
(1) The SDM could be regarded as the successor of the
clean development mechanism (CDM) in post-2020 to
some extent. Although the CDM involves the program of
mitigation activities, it remains a project-based market
mechanism with limited emission reductions. Most
Parties believe that the SDM would cover mitigation
activities at the sectoral, sub-sectoral or cross-sectoral
levels (Cames et al., 2016). Furthermore, there is a
wealth of experience and expertise with the project-
based mechanisms, and discussions on the transition of
the CDM to the SDM are also under way (Marcu, 2014).
Therefore, both the project- and sectoral-level mitigation
activities would be incorporated in the SDM.
(2) Although Article 6 does not mention the mechanism
type of the SDM, the additionality presented in Article
6.4 implies that it would be a crediting mechanism
(Marcu, 2016; Zeng and Dang, 2017). Therefore, the
type of tradable unit under the SDM is the certiﬁcated
emission reduction credit.
(3) The SDM will be a centralized mechanism which is
supervised by the CMA. However, considering the
bottom-up architecture of the PA, the host country
government would be more involved compared with the
CDM (Marcu, 2017b).
3. Key issues on international carbon markets in
negotiations
3.1. Key issues on CAs
3.1.1. Scope of the guidance and governance
As shown in Fig. 2, the scope of the guidance for CAs is
closely related to its governance. Two views can be identiﬁed
in relation to the scope of such guidance (ADB, 2018), the
guidance only covers accounting rules, and therefore, can
only ensure that the transfer of ITMOs is represented in an
accurate way to avoid double accounting; and, the guidance
needs to ensure environmental integrity and promote sus-
tainable development, which means it covers how you
transfer an ITMO, as well as what you transfer. In this view,
an ITMO should meet certain environmental characteristics.
When the scope of the guidance only covers accounting
rules, Parties will make their own criteria for ensuring
environmental integrity of an ITMO, which will be trans-
parent to other Parties based on the transparency provisions
under Article 13, and the bilateral and multilateral aspect of
CAs will ensure a check for environmental integrity. This
option is a completely decentralized and unbinding climate
change regime. When the scope of the guidance extends to
ensuring environmental integrity and promoting sustainable
development, there are two kinds of governance available: (i)
a decentralized governance, and (ii) a centralized gover-
nance. In a decentralized governance, the CMA only sets
general principles or guidelines for environmental integrity
and sustainable development, whereby Parties develop the
speciﬁc standards. This option will contain additional
disclosure provisions under Article 13 on how the ITMOs
meet the standards, and require a technical peer review
process. Therefore, this option is a decentralized climate
change regime but has a certain binding force. Meanwhile
under a centralized governance, the CMA sets out the spe-
ciﬁc standards, provides the review process, and supervises
the approval, issuance and transfer of ITMOs. This option is
similar to the CDM and has strong binding force.
Governance
Types of 
tradable 
unis
Scope
Types of 
mitigation 
activities that 
produce ITMOs
The scope of 
SDM
Emission 
reduction credits
Internationally 
transferred 
mitigation 
outcomes
(ITMOs)
Centralized under 
the COP
Decentralized
bilateral & 
multilateral
SDM
CAs
Fig. 1. Key elements of the international carbon markets.
23
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
3.1.2. Limitations on ITMOs
There are four limitations on ITMOs (Marcu, 2017c), and
the ﬁrst one has to do with the scope of ITMOs, speciﬁcally,
whether a mitigation outcome originating from mitigation
activities outside the scope of a Party's NDC could be regarded
as an ITMO. Some Parties have expressed the importance of
fostering ambition by allowing a mitigation outcome outside
the NDC to be transferred under CAs. Other Parties, however,
argue that this could result in double accounting, and would
bring controversy in developing accounting rules. The second
limitation is on the type of ITMOs. The ﬁrst view claims that
ITMOs can be any type of units that ﬁt with the NDC of the
Parties involved in the transfer in order to encourage Parties to
participate in CAs actively. The second view holds that only
an ITMO denominated in tCO2 can be transferred under CAs
so as to ensure compatibility and make accounting signiﬁ-
cantly easier. The third limitation has something to do with the
shelf life, which refers to whether an ITMO could be banked,
and if allowed, whether it needs to restrict the shelf life. The
last one is about quantity, which means that Parties can only
use an explicit percentage of ITMOs toward their NDCs.
3.1.3. Accounting rules
Accounting rules include the application of the corre-
sponding adjustments if ITMOs are actually transferred be-
tween two Parties. Therefore, four issues need to be settled
(Mizuno, 2017). The ﬁrst issue is about what exactly should be
adjusted. Basically, there are two options: (i) emission budget-
based adjustments, namely, the application of corresponding
adjustments to an emissions budget that corresponds to the
NDC target of the country; and (ii) inventory-based adjust-
ments, namely, the application of corresponding adjustments
to the total net emissions level, as reported by the country
through
its
emission
inventory.
The
timing
of
the
corresponding adjustments is the second issue. Option one is
to make the adjustments when using ITMOs to achieve the
NDC. Another option is to make the adjustments at the time of
transfer regardless of whether or not the buyer has used
ITMOs. Moreover, most of the NDCs are determined for a
single year target, which presents a challenge when trans-
ferring ITMOs. One view is that only ITMOs generated by the
seller in the same year as the buyer's target year can be used.
Another view holds that the mitigation outcomes generated
during the NDC period could be averaged and the average
number would be used toward the NDC. The third view is to
accumulate the mitigation outcomes during the NDC period.
Finally, there remains a controversy on whether corresponding
adjustments should still be made if mitigation actions take
place outside the NDC. Proponents view that doing so can
avoid double counting, but opponents claim that this can
actually discourage the mitigation activities outside the scope
of the NDC.
3.2. Key issues on the SDM
3.2.1. Overall mitigation
Many Parties deﬁne overall mitigation as having a use of
mitigation outcomes toward NDCs that is less than the actual
abatement in order to achieve net decrease. Three issues on
overall mitigation must be addressed (WI, 2017; Marcu,
2017a). The ﬁrst issue is on the necessity of delivering over-
all mitigation, and the second issue regards how overall
mitigation can be delivered. One approach is to subjectively
deﬁne conservative baselines. A second option is to set an
objective percentage. If the second option is preferred, it will
have to be decided when to deliver overall mitigation. This
could be done at the time of issuance, transfer, or usage toward
NDCs.
Accounting rules, 
environmental integrity and 
sustainable development
˄generation and transfer of 
ITMOs˅
Accounting rules
˄transfer of ITMOs˅
Completely decentralized 
governance
Parties themselves set the 
standards for environmental 
integrity and sustainable 
development
Decentralized governance
The CMA only sets general 
principles for environmental 
integrity and sustainable 
development,whereby Parties 
develop the specific standards
Centralized governance
The CMA sets the specific 
standards, provides the review 
process and supervises the 
approval, issuance and transfer 
of ITMOs
Non-binding
Bilateral or  multilateral check
Binding to a certain extent
Technical peer review
Strong binding force
Reviewed by the CMA
Scope of the 
guidance
Governance
Binding or non-
binding
Fig. 2. The scope of the guidance and the governance of CAs.
24
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
3.2.2. Relationship between the SDM and CAs
Article 6 does not explicitly state the relationship between
these two international carbon markets. The issue hinges on
the fungibility of credits from the SDM and ITMOs (ADB,
2018). One option is that there is no fungibility and that
SDM credits are never ITMOs because of the uncertainties in
the environmental integrity of ITMOs. This implies the crea-
tion of a parallel transfer rules for SDM credits. Another op-
tion is that SDM credits would become ITMOs once they are
transferred. Therefore, the transfer of SDM credits would be
done under the same accounting rules with CAs. The third
option is to consider SDM credits as ITMOs at some point.
This implies that the SDM credit is not an ITMO under the
ﬁrst transfer, but it will become an ITMO under the second
transfer.
3.2.3. CDM transition to the SDM
The transition of the CDM to the SDM is an important issue
as it signals the credibility of investment in the carbon market
created under the UNFCCC. The transition refers to different
aspects, including CDM activities, CDM credits, and CDM
rules and institutions, among which the transition of CDM
activities receives great differences (CF, 2017). Some Parties
are in favor of migrating all registered CDM activities directly
into the SDM. However, most Parties hold that the migration
of CDM activities should depend on whether or not the SDM
requirements are met. Furthermore, there are different views
on which CDM activities should be allowed to migrate. One
view is to allow all CDM activities to migrate but with ad-
justments that limit how many credits can be issued. Another
view is to set restrictions to choose the speciﬁc types of
mitigation activities, such as allowing only migrating activities
in speciﬁc regions, with speciﬁc technology types or vintages.
4. International carbon markets in China
4.1. Contributions of the international carbon markets in
China
4.1.1. An effective tool for climate ﬁnance
In order to achieve the peak emission target in 2030, the
climate ﬁnancing demand of China must reach CN¥2.52 tril-
lion. However, at present, the annual supply of climate funds is
only CN¥525.6 billion, and the gap can still exceed CN¥2
trillion per year (Amin et al., 2014; Li et al., 2017). To ﬁll this
huge gap, public funds must be increased and private in-
vestments should be fully leveraged, and the latter can be
attained through the international carbon market. The inter-
national carbon market should provide investors with a stable
and clear carbon price signal so as to well function in climate
ﬁnance. Therefore, the supply and demand of the post-2020
carbon market must be clariﬁed in order to avoid the disin-
vestments due to the low price. The demand of the interna-
tional carbon market should mainly come from three sources.
First, Parties will need the international carbon market units
toward their NDCs, but this part of demand is likely to be
small. Although nearly half of the countries intend to use the
international carbon markets, 68% of these are developing
countries that are more likely to be the sellers than the buyers
(Cames et al., 2016). Second, the International Civil Aviation
Organization established a global market-based measure,
which requires that all emissions of international aviation
above the emission level of 2020 should be offset to achieve
carbon neutral growth. Currently, there are more than 70
countries involved and the demand for offsets may amount to
2.64e2.81 Gt (Cames et al., 2016; CME, 2018). Third, the
demand could come from the result-based ﬁnance. Given that
SDM can be used for the disbursement tool of the result-based
ﬁnance, which can provide predictable payments due to its
relation to the Green Climate Fund (UNFCCC, 2013). On the
one hand, the host country government can obtain revenues
similar to those under the CDM through the international
carbon market, which can increase the public funds in climate
change. On the other hand, the investors can receive predict-
able payments through a forward contract under the bilateral
crediting mechanism. Furthermore, they can also apply the
result-based project through the SDM and obtain ﬁnancial
support, such as through loans or guarantees, in order to
alleviate the burden related to the lack of upfront investment
funds.
4.1.2. Provide further emission reductions
The international carbon market can help China deepen and
broaden mitigation actions in three aspects. First, it can pro-
vide more carbon price incentives for non-ETS sectors. Ac-
cording to estimates, by 2050, the emission reduction potential
of the building and transportation sectors would reach 2.88
GtCO2 and 2.04 GtCO2, which are about 1.5 and 1.02 times
that of the industrial sector, respectively (Dai et al., 2013). For
the afforestation and forest management sector, by 2030, the
emission reduction potential would be about 492e811 MtCO2,
roughly the same with the industry sector. However, none of
the three sectors are involved in the national carbon market.
Although the non-ETS sectors can gain carbon price in-
centives by applying for the voluntary emission reduction
projects, the number of projects applied in these three sectors
is less than 8% (Zhang et al., 2018). In addition to the
complexity of methodologies in these three sectors, the other
two main reasons are the low demand resulting from re-
strictions on voluntary emission reduction projects in the
carbon market pilots and the high transaction costs embedded
in the projects (Zhou and Duan, 2014). In comparison, there
are less restrictions on the emission reduction projects under
the international carbon markets, thus providing investors with
more options for carbon price incentives. Moreover, the sec-
toral approach under the SDM would lower overall transaction
costs, as the analysis of additionality would be done once at
the sector level (Chan et al., 2016). Second, the international
carbon market can broaden mitigation actions to non-CO2
greenhouse gases (GHG). In China, the non-CO2 GHG are
paid less attention and are excluded from the voluntary ETS
and the national carbon market. However, the emission
reduction potential of non-CO2 GHG must reach 800 MtCO2
each year, among which 600 MtCO2 must be achieved by the
25
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
ﬁscal subsidies or carbon price incentives (Yao et al., 2016).
Therefore, the international carbon market can be used to offer
economic incentives to promote the non-CO2 emission
reduction. Finally, the international carbon market could
enhance the emission reduction by overcoming non-prices
barriers. There is a large amount of ﬁnancially viable miti-
gation potential, which has not been fully developed in China,
implying that some non-price barriers or hidden costs exist.
For example, the emission reduction potential in the nonfer-
rous metal industry with negative costs is 18.48 Mt CO2 by
2020, accounting for 95% of the total emission reduction
potential of this industry. In the iron and steel industry, the
production of cost-effective electric arc furnace technology
only accounts for 10% (much less than that in most developed
countries) (Li and Zhu, 2014). In order to address these bar-
riers, the government must implement dedicated policy mea-
sures (Sterk et al., 2015). Therefore, the climate funds from
the international carbon market could offer the ﬁnancial sup-
port for developing such policies.
4.1.3. Promote Belt and Road initiatives and the China
SoutheSouth cooperation in climate change
The government has made clear its intention to incorporate
green strategies into the Belt and Road initiatives (BRI).
However, the actual investments so far have not shown a
strong alignment with this ideal. From 2014 to 2017, six
Chinese banks participated in syndicated loans worth US$143
billion in 32 BRI countries, but 72% of the total syndicated
loans went to the oil, gas, and petrochemical sector (Zhou
et al., 2018). About 54% of the syndicated loans were used
to ﬁnance fossil-fuel power plants within the electric power
generation and transmission sector (Zhou et al., 2018).
Therefore, redirecting China's overseas investments to low
carbon areas is the key to promoting the green BRI and
eliminating the negative impact of “exporting excess capacity
and pollution.” The international carbon market can make a
two-fold contribution in this area. On the one hand, companies
and ﬁnancial institutions could be directed to make low-carbon
investments in the BRI countries through bilateral or multi-
lateral crediting mechanisms under CAs and the SDM. The
return on investment includes not only the proﬁts of the project
itself, but also the emission reductions that can be used to
achieve the companies' emission reduction targets or be sold in
carbon markets. On the other hand, the investments of state-
owned companies strongly focus on the large fossil-fuel
power generation projects, but rarely involve the relatively
small renewable energy power generation projects. One reason
might be that the larger projects can cover the high transaction
of state-owned companies (Zhou et al., 2018). International
carbon markets allow the development of the emission
reduction projects at the sectoral level, and also allow the
decentralized small-scale projects to be integrated in order to
achieve scale advantages which, in turn, can lead to the low-
carbon investments of state-owned companies to a certain
extent. Moreover, as the price-based instrument, the interna-
tional carbon market can contribute to the upgrading of the
China SoutheSouth cooperation model in climate change. The
cooperation model can then be transformed from government-
to-government material donations to the advanced technology
transfer and industry export led by the companies through the
international carbon market. Governments of BRI countries
would be well promoted to update their NDCs with sufﬁcient
granularity and quantitative information and to identify their
low carbon priorities through the international carbon market.
Doing so can help provide clear signals for investors and
attract more investments.
4.2. Challenges faced by international carbon markets
in China
4.2.1. Impacts on registered CDM projects in China
As mentioned above, the transition of the CDM is a key
issue in negotiations. Some restrictions would be set to screen
speciﬁc types of CDM activities, thus implying that only ac-
tivities in certain regions, with speciﬁc technology types or
vintages, might be allowed to undergo migration. Currently,
China owns the largest CDM market in the world, with
registered CDM projects accounting for 40% of the global
CDM projects. The types of registered CDM projects focus on
the renewable energy and industrial gas recycling. If only
activities in certain regions (e.g., Africa, the least developed
countries, and small island developing states) or activities of
speciﬁc types could be migrated, it would have a negative
effect on the conﬁdence of Chinese investors in the stability of
the carbon pricing and result in a waste of related capacity
building. Therefore, in relation to a large number of registered
CDM projects, China can make suggestions in conjunction
with other countries (e.g., Brazil and India) that the rules of
the SDM should take these countries into account, encour-
aging them to choose the type of CDM to be migrated. At the
same time, given that the sale of emission reduction outcomes
under the SDM will have an effect on the achievement of
NDCs through the adjustment of NDCs, the host country
government must consider the appropriate types of the CDM
to be migrated and the system to be used for regulating the sale
of emission reduction outcomes.
4.2.2. Policy interaction with existing climate policies
Currently, many climate policies are implemented in China,
including the command and control regulations, such as the
detailed emission reduction targets at the national and provin-
cial level, the speciﬁc requirements on local governments and
companies, and the market-based instruments, such as the
voluntary ETS and the national ETS. Furthermore, there is a
wide range of sectoral measures on low carbon technology and
energy efﬁciency. All these policies would interact with the
international carbon market, heightening the difﬁculties of
measurement and projection of emissions and doubling the
amount of accounting tasks involved (Munnings et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2013). In addition, these climate policies are
developed by different ministries and agencies, leading to
overlap, confusion, and inconsistency (Zhang et al., 2014). The
policy interaction will become more complex under the SDM
as the additionality must be assessed. If the emission reduction
26
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
projects take place outside the NDC, the policy interaction will
have less effect on the additionality. If the emission reduction
projects are developed inside the NDC, the domestic climate
policies can have a direct effect on the assessment of the
additionality and, in turn, affect the emission reduction revenue.
Therefore, the government needs to address the compatibility of
the international carbon market with other policies.
4.2.3. Impacts on the mitigation activities outside the NDC
Parties have argued on the scope of the ITMOs in negoti-
ations. Some Parties believe that the ITMOs should originate
from the inside of the NDC to ensure environmental integrity.
This implies that China will lose the opportunity to use the
international
carbon
market
to
encourage
the
emission
reduction of non-CO2 GHG. Moreover, if ITMOs are allowed
to be generated outside the NDC, some parties claim that
corresponding adjustments of the NDC should be made when
transferring an ITMO. On the one hand, the transfer of ITMOs
will affect the achievement of the NDC. On the other hand,
this would discourage the investments in the mitigation ac-
tivities of non-CO2 GHG. Some mitigation technologies on
non-CO2 GHG cannot be implemented without the carbon
price incentives. In addition, the main reason why some sec-
tors or GHG are not included in an NDC is usually the lack of
quality data (WI, 2017). The majority of climate policies and
targets only focus on CO2 in China, resulting in limited
awareness on non-CO2 GHG (Yao et al., 2016). If emission
reduction projects on non-CO2 GHG are suppressed under the
international carbon market, this would have a negative effect
on data availability and thereby discourage the government to
integrate the non-CO2 GHG in future NDCs. Therefore, China
could recommend allowing ITMOs to be generated from the
outside the NDC, eliminating the need to adjust the host
country's NDC when transferring such ITMOs.
5. Development prospects of the international carbon
markets in China
5.1. Development prospects of CAs in China
China must consider the implementation of international
carbon markets at different stages of development. The bilat-
eral crediting mechanism under CAs might be developed in
the short term based on three reasons. First, there is a need to
develop green BRI and upgrade the SoutheSouth cooperation
model of climate change in China, which can be achieved
through the bilateral crediting mechanism. Second, the gov-
ernment and companies have accumulated rich experience in
voluntary emission reduction projects and CDM projects, thus
promoting a quick start for the bilateral crediting mechanism.
Third, there are many successful cases available for reference
as Japan has initiated the bilateral crediting mechanism since
2010. As for the capacity building, China must identify pri-
ority cooperation countries in BRI regions, engage in feasi-
bility studies to ﬁnd potential emission reduction projects, and
develop standards and methods for the measurement, report-
ing, and veriﬁcation (MRV) activities (Le and Delbosc, 2012).
Meanwhile, consultations with local government ofﬁcials and
companies are required to develop capacity to implement the
bilateral crediting mechanism by organizing technical semi-
nars and workshops.
ETS linkage is not just the development direction of the
international carbon market, it is also the main way for China
to explore international cooperation in the carbon markets
(Pang et al., 2014). In addition, the government has encour-
aged the exploration of the feasibility of ETS linkage (NDRC,
2014; Ewing, 2016). Given that the full harmonization of ETS
at the national level has many challenges, it is possible for
China to explore the ETS linkage at the regional level in the
short and medium term, which would establish the basis for
the linkage at the national level. The incremental linkage that
focuses on “linking by degrees” is a good starting point, which
allows for the tentative alignment of key design elements prior
to the formal linkage (Ewing, 2016). The government is thus
required to establish an information platform to enhance the
transparency around MRV rules and practices that must be
partially harmonized. The design of the national ETS must
avoid incompatibility with other carbon markets to pursue the
linkage-readiness designs, which can provide ﬂexibility in
linking with other ETS in the long term.
5.2. Development prospects of the SDM in China
Three factors should be considered when exploring the
development prospects of the SDM in China: (i) development
of the emission reduction projects at the project level or at the
sectoral level, (ii) whether or not the installation level database
has been established, and (iii) the relationship between the
SDM and national ETS.
Developing the SDM at the project level is a good starting
point as there is rich experience and expertise with project-
based mechanisms in China. This approach could provide
more carbon price incentives for companies and promote a
quick start for the SDM. However, the emission reduction
actions must be deepened and broadened in order to achieve
the NDC that cannot be attained through the SDM at the
project level. Therefore, the scope of the SDM must be
broadened to the sectoral level in the medium term. On the one
hand, the quality and quantity of emission data tend to be poor
in China (Munnings et al., 2016); on the other hand, some
climate policies already exist and have been proven to be
effective. Therefore, strengthening these policies could be a
good start for the SDM at the sectoral level. For example, the
implementation of 50% reduction in design heating energy for
buildings without proper insulation has already saved 31.5
MtCO2 in 2010. If all the new buildings aim for a standard of
65% reduction, an additional reduction of 63 MtCO2 would be
realized by 2030 (Xiao et al., 2014). The government has
required the key companies to report their annual GHG
emissions since 2014 and issued accounting methods and
reporting guidelines for 24 industries. Therefore, the installa-
tion level data will be available in the long term, making it
possible to develop the SDM by setting an emission reduction
target for an entire sector. Further, this target could be
27
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
decomposed into emission target for individual installation in
order to provide clearer and more reliable price signal.
When it comes to the relationship between the SDM and
the national ETS, there remains a need to consider the
speciﬁc sector in which the SDM will be developed. If the
SDM is implemented in the non-ETS sectors, there are two
options: (i) the SDM in the non-ETS sectors could be used
to create readiness in these sectors in order to help such
sectors gradually transition to the national ETS, and (ii) the
SDM in non-ETS sectors could be considered as an inde-
pendent and complementary emission reduction tool for the
national ETS. If the SDM is implemented in the ETS sec-
tors, then the government can refer to the experience from
the EU-ETS to introduce the SDM at the sectoral level into
the national ETS, thus ensuring high dynamic and static
economic efﬁciency.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express our appreciation to the
National Social Science Foundation of China (17ZDA077) and
the
Ministry
of
Science
and
Technology
of
China
(2017YFA0605304).
References
ADB (Asian Development Bank), 2018. Decoding Article 6 of the Paris
Agreement.
https://www.adb.org/sites/default/ﬁles/publication/418831/
article6-paris-agreement.pdf.
Amin, A.L., Ng, S.W., Holmes, I., 2014. The Road of Low Carbon Finance in
China. https://www.e3g.org/docs/Chinese_Report_WEB.pdf (in Chinese).
Baron, R., Buchner, B., Ellis, J., 2009. Sectoral Approaches and the Carbon
Market. OECD/IEA. https://www.oecd.org/env/cc/42875080.pdf.
Cames, M., Healy, S., T€anzler, D., et al., 2016. International Market Mecha-
nisms after Paris. DEHSt (German Emissions Trading Authority). https://
www.adelphi.de/en/system/ﬁles/mediathek/bilder/International_market_
mech_after_Paris_discussion_paper.pdf.
Chan, G., Bloomquist, H., Denk, B., et al., 2016. Guidelines for a Sectoral
Sustainable Development Mechanism in the Post-2020 Climate Regime.
Retrieved from the University of Minnesota Digital Conservancy. http://
hdl.handle.net/11299/190929.
Chen, Y.D., Cai, W.J., Wang, C., 2018. The characteristics of intended na-
tionally determined contributions. Clim. Change Res. 14 (3), 79e86 (in
Chinese).
CF (Climate Focus), 2017. What Is the Future of the CDM? Questions and
Answers.
https://climatefocus.com/sites/default/ﬁles/Post-2020%20CDM
%20QA%20Brieﬁng%20Note.pdf.
CME (Carbon Market Express), 2018. Carbon Offsetting and Reduction
Scheme for International Aviation. https://www.carbon-markets.go.jp/eng/
mkt-mech/climate/icao.html.
Dai, Y.D., Hu, X.L., et al., 2013. Potential and Cost Study on China's Carbon
Mitigation Technologies. China Environmental Science Press, Beijing (in
Chinese).
Ewing, J., 2016. Roadmap to a Northeast Asian Carbon Market. Asia Society
Policy Institute. https://asiasociety.org/ﬁles/RoadmapNortheastern-ﬁnal-
online%2B.pdf.
Gao, S., Smits, M., Mol, A.P.J., et al., 2016. New market mechanism and its
implication for carbon reduction in China. Energy Policy 98, 221e231.
Healy, S., 2017. Quick Facts on Article 6: Market Mechanisms. DEHSt
(German
Emissions
Trading
Authority).
https://www.adelphi.de/en/
publication/quick-facts-article-6-market-mechanisms.
Kfw, 2013. Project Outline: Facility for Carbon-Linked Incentive Scheme in
Indonesia.
https://www.kfw-entwicklungsbank.de/migration/
Entwicklungsbank-Startseite/Entwicklungsﬁnanzierung/Umwelt-und-
Klima/Klimaschutzfonds/PDF-Dokumente-Klimaschutzfonds/
Projektsteckbrief-CLS-Indonesien-2013-05-15.pdf.
Koakutsu, K., Usui, K., 2014. New Market Mechanisms in Charts. IGES.
http://pub.iges.or.jp/modules/envirolib/upload/3352/attach/new_mech_
charts.pdf.
Koakutsu, K., Amellina, A., Rocamora, A.R., et al., 2016. Operationalizing the
Paris Agreement Article 6 through the Joint Crediting Mechanism (JCM).
IGES.
https://pub.iges.or.jp/pub/operationalizing-paris-agreement-article-
6.
Le, H., Delbosc, A., 2012. Japan's bilateral offset crediting mechanism: a
bilateral solution to a global issue. Clim. Brief 11. http://www.cdcclimat.
com/IMG/pdf/12-01_climate_brief_11_-_japan_s_bilateral_offset_
crediting_mechanism.pdf.
Li, B.H., Chen, B., Huang, B.J., Yin, Y., 2017. Climate ﬁnancing demand
analysis in China based on CFDAM model. J. Fudan Univ. (Nat. Sci.) (5),
39e45 (in Chinese).
Li, Y., Zhu, L., 2014. Cost of energy saving and CO2, emissions reduction in
China's iron and steel sector. Appl. Energy 130 (C), 603e616.
Marcu, A., 2014. The Framework for Various Approaches and the New Market
Mechanism. CEPS. https://www.ceps.eu/system/ﬁles/No%2090%20CMF
%20on%20FVA%20and%20NMM.pdf.
Marcu, A., 2016. Carbon Market Provisions in the Paris Agreement (Article
6). CEPS. https://www.ceps.eu/system/ﬁles/SR%20No%20128%20ACM
%20Post%20COP21%20Analysis%20of%20Article%206.pdf.
Marcu, A., 2017a. Article 6 of the Paris Agreement: Reﬂections on Party
Submissions
before
Marrakech.
ICTSD.
https://www.ictsd.org/sites/
default/ﬁles/research/article_6_of_the_paris_agreement_ii_ﬁnal_0.pdf.
Marcu, A., 2017b. Governance of Article 6 of the Paris Agreement and Lessons
Learned From the Kyoto Protocol. Centre for International Governance
Innovation (CIGI). https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/
Fixing%20Climate%20Governance%20Paper%20no.4%20WEB.pdf.
Marcu, A., 2017c. Issues and Options: Elements for Text under Article 6.
ICTSD.
https://www.ictsd.org/sites/default/ﬁles/research/20171020_
andrei_marcu_-_issues_and_option_in_article_6_pa_0.pdf.
Mizuno, Y., 2017. Proposal for Guidance on Robust Accounting under Article
6
of
the
Paris
Agreement.
IGES.
https://www.ieta.org/resources/
International_WG/Article6/Portal/Guidance%20on%20robust%
20accounting%20under%20Art%206%20ver3.pdf.
Munnings, C., Morgenstern, R.D., Wang, Z., et al., 2016. Assessing the design
of three carbon trading pilot programs in China. Energy Policy 96,
688e699.
NDRC (National Development and Reform Commission, China), 2014.
China's National Plan on Climate Change (2014e2020). http://www.sdpc.
gov.cn/gzdt/201411/W020141104591413713551.pdf (in Chinese).
Pang, T., Zhou, L., Duan, M.S., 2014. Study on the linking of China's emis-
sions trading pilot schemes. China Popul. Res. Environ. 24 (9), 6e12 (in
Chinese).
Rocamora, A.R., Amellina, A., Umemiya, C., 2017. New market mechanisms
in
charts.
IGES.
https://pub.iges.or.jp/pub_ﬁle/newmechchartspdf/
download.
Schneider, L., Cames, M., 2009. A Framework for a Sectoral Crediting
Mechanism in a Post-2012 Climate Regime. Report for the Global Wind
Energy Council. €Oko Instiitue. https://www.oeko.de/oekodoc/904/2009-
022-en.pdf.
Schneider, L., Fu¨ssler, J., Kohli, A., et al., 2017. Robust Accounting of In-
ternational Transfers under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Discussion
Paper. German Emissions Trading Authority (DEHSt). https://www.dehst.
de/SharedDocs/downloads/EN/project-mechanisms/Robust_accounting_
2016.pdf?__blob¼publicationFile&v¼4.
Sterk, W., Bolscher, H., Laan, J.V.D., et al., 2015. Developing a sectoral new
market mechanism: insights from theoretical analysis and country show-
cases. Clim. Policy 15 (4), 417e437.
28
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
UNFCCC, 2013. Report of the Conference of the Parties on its Nineteenth
Session, Held in Warsaw from 11 to 23 November 2013. http://unfccc.int/
resource/docs/2013/cop19/eng/10a01.pdf.
UNFCCC,
2015.
Paris
Agreement.
https://unfccc.int/sites/default/ﬁles/
english_paris_agreement.pdf.
UNFCCC, 2018a. Informal Document Containing the Draft Elements of
Guidance on Cooperative Approaches Referred to in Article 6, Paragraph
2, of the Paris Agreement. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/ﬁles/resource/
docs/2018/sbsta/eng/sbsta48.informal.2.pdf.
UNFCCC, 2018b. Informal Document Containing the Draft Elements of the
Rules, Modalities and Procedures for the Mechanism Established by
Article 6, Paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement. https://unfccc.int/sites/
default/ﬁles/resource/docs/2018/sbsta/eng/sbsta48.informal.3.pdf.
WB (World Bank), 2015. Crediting-related Activities under the PMR: Status
and Support for Implementation. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/22348.
WI (Wuppertal Institute), 2017. Shaping the Paris Mechanisms Part III an
Update on Submissions on Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. https://epub.
wupperinst.org/ﬁles/6987/6987_Paris_Mechanisms.pdf.
Xiao, H., Wei, Q., Wang, H., 2014. Marginal abatement cost and carbon
reduction potential outlook of key energy efﬁciency technologies in
China's building sector to 2030. Energy Policy 69, 92e105.
Yao, B., Ross, K., Zhu, J.J., et al., 2016. Opportunities to Enhance Non-carbon
Dioxide Greenhouse Gas Mitigation in China. WRI. http://www.wri.org/
sites/default/ﬁles/Opportunities_to_enhance_non-CO2_GHG_mitigation_
in_China.pdf.
Zeng, W.G., Dang, S.F., 2017. Analysis on new market mechanism under
intended nationally determined contributions of Paris Agreement. China
Popul. Res. Environ. 27 (9), 112e119 (in Chinese).
Zhang, B., Zhang, H., Liu, B., et al., 2013. Policy interactions and under-
performing emission trading markets in China. Environ. Sci. Technol. 47,
7077e7084.
Zhang, D., Karplus, V.J., Cassisa, C., et al., 2014. Emissions trading in China:
progress and prospects. Energy Policy 75 (4), 9e16.
Zhang, X., Ma, A.M., Zhang, M.S., et al., 2018. Construction of Chinese
Greenhouse Gas Voluntary Emission Trading System. http://www.cssn.cn/
jjx/xk/jjx_yyjjx/csqyhjjjx/201802/t20180206_3842575.shtml (in Chinese).
Zhou, L.H., Gilbert, S., Wang, Y., et al., 2018. Moving the Green Belt and
Road Initiative: from Words to Actions. WRI. https://www.bu.edu/gdp/
ﬁles/2018/11/GDP-and-WRI-BRI-MovingtheGreenbelt.pdf.
Zhou, S., Duan, M.S., 2014. Prospect of the Building Sector in the Offset
Mechanism of Carbon Market in China. GIZ. http://ets-china.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/04/offsetting_building_ZH.pdf (in Chinese).
29
GAO S. et al. / Advances in Climate Change Research 10 (2019) 21e29
