Perspective
Rematriation and climate justice: Intersections of indigenous health and
place
Kyle X. Hilla,*, Lyla June Johnstonb, Misty R. Bluec,1, Jaidyn Probstd, Madison Staeckere,
Lydia L. Jenningsf,g
a Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa (Anishinaabe), Sisseton-Wahpeton Oyate (Dakota), Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe (Lakota), Division of Environmental Health
Sciences, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
b Dine (Navajo), Tsets^ehest^ahese (Cheyenne)
c White Earth Nation (Anishinaabe), Grassroots Solutions, Minneapolis, MN, USA
d Bdewakantunwan Dakota, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
e School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA
f Pascua Yaqui Tribe (Yoeme), Huichol (Wixarika), Presidential Postdoctoral Fellow, Arizona State University, School of Sustainability (Lands of the Akimel O’odham
and Pee Posh Peoples), Tempe, AZ, USA
g Duke University, Nicholas School of the Environment (Lands of the Tutelo, Haliwa-Saponi, Sappony and Occaneechi Peoples), Durham, NC, USA
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 28 February 2024
Accepted 30 March 2024
Available online 3 April 2024
A B S T R A C T
Indigenous peoples shoulder a disproportionate burden of risk posed by climate change and associated envi-
ronmental shifts. Simultaneously, Indigenous communities are recognized as arbiters of planetary health and
climate resilience due to their interdependence with local ecosystems, traditional lifeways and Indigenous
Traditional Ecological Knowledge(s) (ITEKs) that inform adaptation and mitigation programming. Accord-
ingly, Indigenous Peoples protect and steward 80% of the global biodiversity, while only inhabiting 22% of
the earth’s surface, and comprising only 5% of the earth’s global population [1]. Yet, climate resilience often
disregards opportunities for Indigenous communities to explore reparative frameworks that seek to heal the
social and ecological determinants responsible for climate-related vulnerabilities associated with histories of
colonial subjugation. This manuscript offers critical insights and Indigenous perspectives on climate justice,
while redressing the intersection of place-based determinants of Indigenous health, sovereignty and self-
determination, with ancestral land-based practices of birthing justice and rematriation of Indigenous territo-
ries. As Indigenous communities grapple with land dispossession and conﬁnement - rematriation, ancestral
remembrance and reciprocity offer novel insights on the critical relationship to territorial homelands and the
sanctity of place to Indigenous health. In closing, the authors explore opportunities for decolonizing relation-
ships to place from climate justice perspectives, while discussing a case of rematriation and healing at Bdote,
the place of genesis for Dakota Peoples, also known as Minneapolis and Saint Paul, MN.
© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Indigenous health
Ecological determinants of health
Kinship
Indigenous epistemologies
Planetary health
Rights of nature
Landback
Rematriation
Health equity
Settler-colonialism
Introduction
While climate change has been described as the most pressing
global public health crisis of our time, the impacts and burdens of
these crises are borne disproportionately between racial and ethnic
groups. Indigenous Peoples are considered amongst the most vulner-
able to climatic changes due to their interdependence with their local
ecosystems, as well as increased morbidity from the enduring
impacts of health inequities [1,2]. In addition, while climate change
and associated environmental shifts are intensifying, climate impacts
intersect with the compounded and enduring impacts of land dispos-
session, displacement and forced acculturation vis-a-vis Settler-colo-
nialism [1]. Unfortunately, this era of the Anthropocene (human-
induced cause of climate change), has done little to redress centuries
of colonial subjugation, forced acculturation, and genocide of Indige-
nous communities, despite recognition that the roots of the Anthro-
pocene are planted within the architecture of Settler-colonialism.
Thus, the climate crisis as we know it is not only an existential threat
to Indigenous Peoples, but also represents one of many crises caused
by Settler-colonialism, and a further proliferation of this form of
hegemony that threatens Indigenous conceptualization of kinship,
reciprocity, and relationality [3]. To understand the scale of land dis-
possession, Farrell and colleagues (2021) found that American Indian
* Corresponding author at: Division of Environmental Health Sciences, School of
Public Health, University of Minnesota.
E-mail address: kxhill@umn.edu (K.X. Hill).
1 Tribal Afﬁliation: White Earth Nation.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2024.100314
2667-2782/© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 18 (2024) 100314
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
communities experienced a 98.9% cumulative reduction in coexten-
sive lands, with 42.1% of tribes from historical periods that have an
absence of any recognized present-day land base. Furthermore, the
average size of any Tribe’s present-day land is only 2.6% of historically
recognized territory. Finally, the average forced migration that many
Tribes were forced to undertake was 239 km, with a maximum forced
migration distance of 2774 km [4]. Despite the historical imposition
of Settler-colonialism to cultural, spiritual, and traditional kinship
practices to territorial homelands and lifeways, Indigenous commu-
nities continue to resist acculturation by actively asserting sovereign
stewardship of cultural and traditional lifeways, languages, kinship
practices, and land-based pedagogies.
Indigenous land tenure as climate mitigation
As Indigenous scholars, climate and environmental activists, eld-
ers and grassroots organizers move to recognize the inherent
strengths of Indigenous communities, particularly in areas of biodi-
versity protection, ecosystem stewardship, and resilience in the face
of genocide, we must reconcile with an oft-cited truth - Indigenous
Peoples steward 80% of the global biodiversity, while only inhabiting
22% of the earth’s surface, and comprising only 5% of the earth’s
global population [1,37]. The broad implications of these ﬁndings call
to question a history of colonial subjugation, and the disruptive
impacts to both Indigenous Peoples’ kinship and reciprocal relation-
ship to land and place, as well as the capacity of the planet to sustain
life. Today, we grapple with evidence that has suggested that con-
serving, reforesting, and regenerating the biological and carbon
sequestration capabilities of just 30% of the Earth’s degraded lands
and oceans has the potential to stabilize not only climate change, but
a whole constellation of related existential crises including biodiver-
sity loss, food/water security, deforestation and desertiﬁcation [5,6].
Such indicators are powerful testimony that recognize the conse-
quences of land and living systems’ degradation due to anthropo-
genic climatic changes and the challenges facing climate science and
climate risk assessment, which have historically been shaped primar-
ily by Western/Northern hemisphere reductionist scientiﬁc para-
digms.
More recently, several scientiﬁc bodies have elevated the critical
importance of Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK)
traditions that recognize the intersections between ecological sys-
tems and environmental and climatic conditions as central to an
interdisciplinary approach to climate adaptation. In many cases, con-
siderable restoration projects and opportunities have, indeed, been
informed by ITEK(s) and practices, with growing capabilities to moni-
tor and coordinate action at bioregional scales—through an inte-
grated,
locally-based
implementation
framework.
Many
such
projects have supported ecosystems in re-establishing stability and
homeostasis amid the intersecting crises—biodiversity loss, pollu-
tion, food/water insecurity, forced migration, among others. Histori-
cally, Indigenous communities of Turtle Island (North America) have
long demonstrated their ability to sustain millennial scale ecosystems
through innovative land management techniques [7]. From 3000 year
old American chestnut groves, to 3500 year old human assisted clam
gardens in the Paciﬁc Northwest, to the systematic ﬁre management
of buffalo habitat and grasslands from Canada to Louisiana, to the
curation of 8000 year old regional soil management of the Amazon
River Basin, to the creation of landscape scale ﬂoodplain aquaculture
in Bolivia, Indigenous Peoples have shown that through reciprocity,
reverence, and humility, humanity can sustain abundant food and
land management systems with longstanding success [8−12].
If nature-based solutions are indeed the most holistic and power-
ful instruments of climate stabilization—and if Indigenous Peoples
have proven to be the world’s leading guardians of ecosystem health
[1]—it would follow that returning Indigenous lands to Indigenous
hands should be a key policy priority in the quest for climate rehabili-
tation.
Because Indigenous communities (generally speaking) are matri-
lineal, matrifocal, and/or matriarchal, it would also stand to reason
that returning lands to traditional stewardship is returning to
women-led land tenure. Indeed, the reverence and appreciation of
women within most Indigenous societies is interconnected with our
reverence and appreciation of the earth, who is often likened to a
woman −our ﬁrst mother. It is through this ethic of reciprocity,
respect, Indigenous feminism, and relationality that Indigenous land
management systems are born and implemented. To return lands to
Native peoples is to return lands to women’s leadership. Through
these sustainable and time-tested practices, we can cultivate a pow-
erful, nature-based solution to climate change, while also healing a
long history of dispossession and relocation.
Climate change impacts and indigenous health
The global health impacts of climate change are comprehensive in
scale and indisputably disruptive at local, state and national levels.
Yet, the health impacts of climate change are not distributed equita-
bly. In fact, climate change is known to exacerbate vulnerabilities
associated with existing health inequities [1,2]. Such is the case
within Indigenous communities, particularly American Indian and
Alaska Native communities in the U.S. where direct and indirect cli-
mate impacts further burden communities experiencing food and
water insecurity [1]. In many cases, health inequities within AI/AN
communities are etiologically related to social and ecological deter-
minants, a residue of Settler-colonialism in the U.S., and North Amer-
ica more generally. Furthermore, data indicate that present day AI/
AN territories are exposed to greater durations of extreme heat than
historical land bases, as well as receiving decreased mean precipita-
tion [4], which implicates federal policies associated with Settler-
colonialism as the driver of environmental shifts vis-a-vis land dis-
possession and forced relocation. In many instances, these correlates
are recognized as etiologically related to many known health dispar-
ities within American Indian and Alaska Native communities,
whether that be the nutrition transition and the relative contribution
to obesity, diabetes and cardiovascular risk; or historical and inter-
generational trauma and its links to depression, suicide and sub-
stance use [13−15].
Additionally, in the context of climate change, mortality and mor-
bidity associated with contemporary health inequities within Indige-
nous communities are compounded by the burden onto systems and
infrastructures that are already under considerable duress to support
community health and wellness. Such circumstances become dire
when we as a global community bear witness to the devastation of
extreme drought, further exacerbating water and food insecurity in
many communities, with Indigenous communities being among the
most vulnerable [1,16]. Additionally, pollution and green-house gas
emissions pose a unique global public health challenge in industrial-
ized nations, invoking questions of equitable exposure to vulnerable
communities, particularly when we consider a fair share approach. In
many cases, countries with large Indigenous communities suffer dis-
proportionately, relative to their contributions to global emissions
[17]. Similarly, extreme heat reduces opportunities for physical activ-
ity, while challenging critical public health infrastructure in urban
and rural communities, which, in the case of the Indian Health Ser-
vice, is critically underfunded to support such vulnerabilities [18].
Furthermore, we understand that increases in air temperature and
extreme heat are risk factors for wildﬁres, while also creating favor-
able conditions for food, water and vector-borne illnesses [16]. Again,
such climatic changes pose challenges to already vulnerable health-
care, food and water systems within Indigenous communities. Many
of such systems not only lack the technological advancements
K.X. Hill, L.J. Johnston, M.R. Blue et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 18 (2024) 100314
2
needed for adaptation, but also highlight the ongoing structural rac-
ism and disenfranchisement they continue to face.
In the case of mental health, we are only beginning to understand
the challenges faced in the context of climate change. In regard to the
integrity of Indigenous epistemologies and ontologies, the kinship to
land and interdependence becomes central to questions of health
and welfare in the Anthropocene. The intersections of Indigenous
ways of knowing, epistemologies, and climate change paint an
important picture for the ﬁeld of climate change and health, particu-
larly how we reconcile our relationship to place. Recently, Cunsolo
and Ellis (2018) described the experience of altered or severed con-
nection to place and the emotional experiences that surface as eco-
logical grief [19]. For Indigenous communities, the subacute and
chronic climatic shifts (e.g. drought, sea/lake ice duration and extent,
snow cover duration, altered seasons, etc.) are both dynamic and
cumulative, when we consider the added stressors and impacts from
historical loss and trauma, as well as legacy of colonial subjugation
[16]. Such experiences undermine the ancestral connection with land
and place, grounded in ITEKs and Indigenous ontologies, which are
organized according to cultural and traditional practices often in har-
mony with seasonal changes and ancestrally recognized calendars.
Disruptions to this harmony, in the case of anthropogenic causes of
environmental/climatic shifts, have proven deleterious for cultural
identity, sense of place, and manifest in community dis-ease (i.e.,
general distress, substance use, suicidal ideation, depression, feelings
of disconnectedness, etc.). Quite understandably, climate-induced
migration or mobility is associated with severe distress in cases
where the lived-environment is no longer able to support Indigenous
cultures and lifestyles [4,19,20].
Climate justice as a reparative approach
Climate justice is a paradigm shift that recognizes the dispropor-
tionate climate impacts to communities recognized as at-risk or vul-
nerable,
the
historical
harms
that
these
communities
have
experienced along the arc of Settler-colonialism, as well as ongoing
structural discrimination and oppression. Most notably, climate jus-
tice redresses a history of forced acculturation, land dispossession
and displacement of Indigenous Peoples by engaging principles of
distributive justice, which advocates for equitable allocation of bur-
dens and beneﬁts of climate change; procedural justice, which seeks
to engage equitable decision-making and litigation of the Anthropo-
cene; and, recognition, which advances considerations of fairness,
respect, and equity [2]. Though, from an Indigenous perspective, cli-
mate justice is grounded within three interrelated tenets or postu-
lates. Firstly, we recognize that the Anthropocene is a residue and
artifact of Settler-colonialism, with devastating implications on Indig-
enous land-tenure and Indigenous rights [21]. Such that the architec-
ture of Settler-colonialism, namely the dispossession and genocide of
Indigenous peoples of North America as well as the collective impacts
of capitalism, extractive economies, industrial revolution, and urbani-
zation, are well-recognized “human-induced” correlates of the cli-
mate crises. Similarly, Hernandez (2022) asserts that Ecocolonialism
represents the rapid environmental alterations that result from
urbanization and Settler-colonialism that, in combination with cli-
mate change, has displaced or disrupted Indigenous peoples’ sense of
place and lifeways [22]. Secondly, we assert that ITEKs are a conduit
and arbiter of our interdependence and sovereign relationship with
local ecosystems and traditional territories. In many ways, the privi-
leged and intentional engagement of ITEK(s) (i.e. active use of Indige-
nous languages, traditional, cultural and spiritual activities) offer a
decolonizing approach for climate adaptation and mitigation pro-
grams, as well as Indigenous health. Lastly, Indigenous reparative
frameworks that not only encourage the principles, but redress the
disruption and epistemic, cultural, and ontological discontinuity
imposed by Settler-colonialism are critical in this regard. Social and
climate justice movements of front-line communities represent
grassroots efforts that reconcile these principles into social and cli-
mate justice movements, such as the Landback movement. Landback
represents a key movement in elevating Indigenous communities in
the struggle for liberation, which is rooted in climate justice [23].
In the context of climate justice, liberation for Indigenous commu-
nities as articulated by the United Nations Declaration for the Rights
of Indigenous Peoples offers pointed and thorough recognition of the
human rights critical to Indigenous communities. In particular, article
25 offers important insights and considerations for the climate justice
movement. Article 25 states, “Indigenous Peoples have the right to
maintain and strengthen their distinctive spiritual relationship with
their traditionally owned or otherwise occupied and used lands, territo-
ries, waters and coastal seas and other resources and to uphold their
responsibilities to future generations in this regard” [24].
Rematriation as an ethos of climate adaptation and sovereignty
for indigenous communities
Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge(s) reﬂect the plural-
ity and heterogeneity of ecosystem and place-based knowledges
that, as a collective, have supported Indigenous Peoples in tracking
environmental shifts and climatic changes, while inventorying
changes in species composition and ecosystems across generations
[25]. Indigenous Peoples have long pressed for recognition and
respect of their knowledge systems as part of their struggles for self-
determination. Researchers and international environmental organi-
zations are increasingly engaging with Indigenous Knowledges in
relation to adapting to climate change, often in extractive research
practices that use Indigenous knowledge systems with minimal par-
ticipation or decision making from the communities who hold that
expertise [26].
In this article, we discuss critical reﬂections on how we recognize
rematriation as a component of both the ﬁeld of climate and environ-
mental justice, as well as decolonizing and dismantling movement
imperatives, such as the Landback movement. In addition, we also
ground our understanding of rematriation in Indigenous principles
that govern Indigenous science. Speciﬁcally, we call on spirituality,
ethical relationship, mutualism, reciprocity, respect, restraint, har-
mony and interdependence of People and Place [27]. For Indigenous
peoples, the land is an ancestor who carries our memories, our sto-
ries, and our traumas. Healing the land is inextricably linked with
healing our people [22].
A case of rematriation and ancestral memory in Mni Sota Maḳoce
and Bdote
This manuscript was borne from an invitation for a keynote
speaking engagement at the Climate Health 2023 meeting in Long
Island, New York. At this talk, key considerations for climate justice
within Indigenous communities were discussed, with a case of birth-
ing justice and rematriation centered. In particular, the discussion
revolved around the active rematriation of Indigenous territories,
reclamation of relationship to place and a spiritual practice of reci-
procity. In this case, the ﬁrst author (KH), Dakota, Lakota and Anishi-
naabeg, highlighted the embattled experience as a parent to
newborn a Dakota daughter and a hope to renew kinship to place, in
this case, Bdote, or “conﬂuence of two rivers/bodies of water” in
Dakota language. Of note, Bdote is a term for conﬂuence, however,
the Bdote that sits at the conﬂuence of the Minnesota and Mississippi
Rivers in Mni Sota Maḳoce (Minnesota) is understood to be the gene-
sis of Dakota Peoples, who were exiled from their traditional home-
lands as part of the U.S. vs. Dakota war of 1862, commonly referred
to as the “Sioux Uprising”. Though interrogating the entirety of this
period is beyond the scope of this manuscript, we want to elevate the
K.X. Hill, L.J. Johnston, M.R. Blue et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 18 (2024) 100314
3
practices of birthing justice, midwifery, and land-based healing as a
covenant of climate justice and decolonizing praxis.
In this case example, we reﬂect on the journey and act of return-
ing to Bdote for a placenta burial ceremony for Dakota families as an
active practice of rematriation of kinship to place. Such acts are natu-
ral observations of natural law, a return of the sacred connection,
spirit-world, and natural world, back to her life-giving source. In
many respects, these practices are an embodiment of kincentric ecol-
ogy, reciprocity, and engagement of Indigenous epistemologies and
ontologies [22]. Altogether, reclamation of ancestral Indigenous land-
based practices, particularly those that are stewarded by matriarchal/
matrilineal communities, and lead by Indigenous matriarchs and
Indigenous women is a process of rematriation, a core principle of cli-
mate justice and determinant of planetary health. Along the trajec-
tory of healing, restoration or adaptation where lands hold memory,
conscientious and intentional reclamation of ancestral traditional
and spiritual practices that honor our relationship to land and place,
are inextricably linked to Indigenous conceptualizations of wellness -
The land is healthy, when the people are healthy.
Rematriation reﬂects the conscious and intentional movement of
the Indigenous feminine to reclaim sovereign relationship to sacred
lands, waters, and territories of Indigenous Peoples [28,29]. Taken
further, any opportunity to organize Indigenous stewardship over
territorial homelands, be it ceremonial, cultural, or restoration (i.e.
mitigation), is a vital endeavor that exercises sovereignty of matriar-
chal and matrilineal societies, of which the many Indigenous commu-
nities represent. After all, water is our ﬁrst medicine, and Indigenous
women are recognized as water keepers, and many ceremonies
invoke the process of maternity and birthing. Indigenous men and
two-spirit relatives are also considered as carrying femininity, spiri-
tually. Herein, we explore the process of birthing justice as rematria-
tion, and rematriation and climate justice. “The act of returning the
sacred to the mother” [28(p26)].
Mni Sota Maḳoce is the land where clear waters reﬂect blue skies,
which is representative of ecocentric nature of Indigenous languages,
Dakotiapi (the Dakota language) being amongst them. Long before
the “Land of 10,000 Lakes”, Dakota oral narratives have afﬁrmed their
connection to this place, its land and its water, as homelands. Within
these lands, there is no more sacred a place than that of Bdote, which
is the place of ﬁrst creation, a place of genesis that rests at the conﬂu-
ence of Mnísota Wakpa (Minnesota River) and Wakpa ThaEka (Mis-
sissippi River), and it is where the ﬁrst Dakota man and ﬁrst Dakota
woman emerged. It was here that Dakota people prospered from.
Over time, each of the four groups, or four ﬁres, of the Dakota
developed a relationship and responsibility of care to the land and
their relatives based on where they were situated. “The Bdewakaƞ-
tuƞwaƞ were the spiritual people who lived by the water, as did the
Sisituƞwaƞ who were medicine people. The Waḣ pekute were war-
riors who protected the medicine people. Waḣ petuƞwaƞ people
were dwellers in the forest. . .” [30(p19)]. These relationships only
strengthened with time through care and proximity, where the goal
was to honor and nourish biodiversity to ultimately serve the collec-
tive goal of balance. This model of care proliferated and was
employed through the many other village locations and sacred places
within the region, such as HemníchaE (Barn Bluff), WakhaE Thípi
(Spirit Cave), Oheyawahe (Pilot Knob), and Wíta ThaEka (Pike Island).
All of these places continue to be highly revered within the Twin Cit-
ies landscape, a relationship that has withstood colonialism, land dis-
possession and ethnocide. Though, it is at Bdote that the creation
story of Dakota Peoples, the intersection of our world and the spirit
world, where medicines and plants used for Dakota women to give
birth, live. This, by all accounts, is a life-giving place [31].
Justice is reclaiming our humanity by reclaiming our sacred earth -
that earth is our homeland.
Gabrielle Tateyuskanskan [32(p119)].
Through the process of rematriation, guided by Indigenous rela-
tional worldviews and the reconciliation of historical and contempo-
rary land and water injustices, the Waterback and Landback
movements emerge as powerful forces shaping the future of climate
justice. Rematriation, then, becomes a transformative path, allowing
humanity to be rematriated into the care of Mother Earth and her
life-giving waters [29]. Furthermore, the Rights of Nature movement
recognizes the fundamental and inherent rights of natural or envi-
ronmental bodies that correspond with Indigenous epistemologies
and ontologies [33]. Of note, in the case of sacred and spiritual places
for Indigenous communities like the Dakota Oyate, are critical ecosys-
tems for millions of people, i.e., the Minnesota and Mississippi rivers.
Climate change in Indigenous communities is through the ‘dual nar-
ratives of marginalization and resilience’ [27]. Indigenous peoples are
subjected to extraordinary burdens from the impacts of climate
change on water and land security, and from the secondary impacts
on beings that depend on water and land for maintaining life, cul-
tural, and ceremonial practices [29].
Conclusion
“. . .everything starts and ends with the water and the land. . .every-
thing is tied into it. Whether you look at our complex social hierar-
chies we’ve had prior to colonization, to our stories, our creation
stories for placing geographical areas . . .that’s what it means to be
place-based peoples.” (Saul Brown, Reconciliation Negotiator, Heilt-
suk Nation) [34(p33)].
In efforts to address climate change, we must ﬁrst redress the
injustice to Indigenous peoples, whom we as a scientiﬁc community
recognize as both being the most vulnerable to the direct and indirect
impacts of climate change and as having the unique potential to miti-
gate and adapt to climate change. In this pursuit we must confront
the injustice of Settler-colonial histories and allocate the resources
necessary to support Indigenous communities in reclaiming tradi-
tional lifeways, kinship, culture, language and spiritualities. It is nec-
essary to heal wounds rooted in the stolen lands where ancestral
knowledge still belongs and to develop reparative frameworks that
intercede on behalf of climate justice on all fronts, especially in the
Fig. 1. The Indigenous Holistic Worldview Illustration [36].
K.X. Hill, L.J. Johnston, M.R. Blue et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 18 (2024) 100314
4
face of environmental or structural racism. Such a journey calls for
recognition of the determinants of planetary health, as we seek to
decolonize lifeways that support climate adaptation and mitigation
programs and adhere to natural law that inspires us to recognize pla-
ces like Bdote as kin, and the medicines that call this place home as
worthy of being protected [1,3] (See Fig. 1 The Indigenous Holistic
Worldview). Indigenous Peoples are healthy when the land is healthy;
Indigenous Peoples ARE the land. Consider the implications of these
governing principles. Returning a placenta to the place of genesis,
recognizing the cyclical nature of life and life-givers, rematriation of
territorial homelands and signiﬁcance of place is an act of interde-
pendence and kinship to land. However, as an exiled Dakota commu-
nity, where do we begin to understand the importance of our original
instructions, or ancestral lifeways, along a trajectory of climate
change? How do we look to these ancestral practices to guide efforts
to know our lands, and adapt to a changing climate? As we consider
opportunities, we look to other Indigenous communities to help us
nurture our path back to our territorial homelands, especially those
that have undergone urbanization. Indigenous climate adaptation
strategies conveyed from four First Nations communities include:
(1) strengthening Indigenous governance and sovereignty, self-deter-
mination, (2) promoting knowledge sharing for adaptation practices
within and among communities (kinship and communal practices),
(3) promoting adaptive co-management among governance scales,
and (4) developing learning platforms for climate impacts and adap-
tive strategies [34].
Finally, as we recognize how the climate justice movement inter-
sects with the nascent Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), both
aspire to support global efforts across key sectors of climate justice.
Indigenous communities, not dissimilar to Low- and Middle-Income
Countries, experience disproportionate burdens associated with the
17 SDGs. As we move to organize around policy and grassroots efforts
that protect critical ecosystems, we are guided by the determinants of
planetary health, particularly the Mother Earth level determinants -
1. Respect of the feminine, and 2. ancestral legal personhood designa-
tion - steadfast in our commitment to advocacy for ancestral claims
to place be recognized as sovereign, in their own right, invoking the
Rights of Nature as a substantive principle of Natural Law [1,35].
Sacred places, places of worship, places of genesis - places like Bdote
are host to vibrant and critical ecosystems home to rich biodiversity,
with ancestral memory. We are the land; the land is us.
Authorship agreement
All authors agree to peer-review publication process and report
no conﬂicts of interest. Please direct any questions or concerns to the
corresponding author, Dr. Kyle X. Hill.
Acknowledgements
Thank you to the Wellcome Trust for funding the travel of the
author to present this paper at Climate Health 2023.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kyle X. Hill: Writing −review & editing, Writing −original draft,
Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, Resources, Project
administration, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data
curation, Conceptualization. Lyla June Johnston: Writing −original
draft,
Visualization.
Misty
R.
Blue:
Writing
−
original
draft,
Visualization, Resources, Methodology. Jaidyn Probst: Writing −
review & editing, Visualization, Project administration, Data curation.
Madison Staecker: Writing −review & editing, Project administra-
tion, Data curation. Lydia L. Jennings: Writing −review & editing,
Writing −original draft, Methodology.
References
[1] Redvers N, Aubrey P, Celidwen Y, Hill K. Indigenous Peoples: traditional knowl-
edges, climate change, and health. Pai M, editor. PLOS Glob Public Health 2023;3
(10):e0002474.
[2] IPCC. Summary for Policymakers [H.-O. P€ortner, D.C. Roberts, E.S. Poloczanska, K.
Mintenbeck, M. Tignor,A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. L€oschke, V. M€oller, A.
Okem
(eds.)].
In:
P€ortner
H-O,
Roberts
DC,
Tignor
M,
Poloczanska
ES,
Mintenbeck K, Alegría A, Craig M, Langsdorf S, L€oschke S, M€oller V, Okem A,
Rama B, editors. Climate change 2022: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. con-
tribution of working group II to the sixth assessment report of the intergovern-
mental panel on climate change. Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA:
Cambridge University Press; 2022. p. 3–33. doi: 10.1017/9781009325844.001.
[3] Redvers N, Celidwen Y, Schultz C, et al. The determinants of planetary health: an
Indigenous consensus perspective. Lancet Planet Health 2022;6(2):e156–63. doi:
10.1016/S2542-5196(21)00354-5.
[4] Farrell J, Burow PB, McConnell K, Bayham J, Whyte K, Koss G. Effects of land dis-
possession and forced migration on Indigenous peoples in North America. Science
2021;374(6567):eabe4943.
[5] United Nations Environment Programme. Nature-based solutions: opportunities
and challenges for scaling up. [quote: 2024, February] Available from: https://
wedocs.unep.org/20.500.11822/40783.
[6] Land management practices for carbon dioxide removal and reliable sequestra-
tion. In: Proceedings of a Workshop in Brief [Internet]. National Academies Press,
Washington, D.C.; 2018. Available from: https://www.nap.edu/catalog/25037.
[7] Abrams MD, Nowacki GJ. Native Americans as active and passive promoters of
mast and fruit trees in the eastern USA. Holocene 2008;18(7):1123–37.
[8] Delcourt PA, Delcourt HR, Ison CR, Sharp WE, Gremillion KJ. Prehistoric human
use of ﬁre, the eastern agricultural complex, and Appalachian oak-chestnut for-
ests: paleoecology of Cliff Palace pond, Kentucky. Am Antiq 1998;63(2):263–78.
[9] Lepofsky D, Toniello G, Earnshaw J, Roberts C, Wilson L, Rowell K, et al. Ancient
anthropogenic clam gardens of the northwest coast expand clam habitat. Ecosys-
tems 2021;24:248–60.
[10] Stewart OC. Forgotten ﬁres: native americans and the transient wilderness. Uni-
versity of Oklahoma Press; 2002.
[11] Hecht SB. Indigenous soil management and the creation of Amazonian dark
earths: implications of Kayapo practices. Amazonian dark earths: origin, proper-
ties, management; 2003355–71.
[12] Erickson CL. An artiﬁcial landscape-scale ﬁshery in the Bolivian Amazon. Nature
2000;408(6809):190–3.
[13] Warne D, Wescott S. Social determinants of American Indian nutritional health.
Curr Dev Nutri 2019;3:3014003.
[14] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Indian Health Service. Trends in
Indian health: 2014 edition. 2014.
[15] NCAI Policy Research Center. Diabetes and behavioral health comorbidities:
advancing the tribal behavioral health agenda. Washington, DC: National Con-
gress of American Indians; 2018.
[16] Romanello M, McGushin A, di Napoli C, Drummond P, Hughes N, Jamart L, et al.
The 2021 report of the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: code
red for a healthy future. Lancet. 2021;398(10311):1619–62 PMID: 34687662. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01787-6.
[17] Deivanayagam TA, English S, Hickel J, et al. Envisioning environmental equity: cli-
mate change, health, and racial justice. Lancet 2023;402(10395):64–78. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(23)00919-4.
[18] Warne D, Frizzell LB. American Indian health policy: historical trends and con-
temporary issues. Am J Public Health 2014;104(Suppl 3(Suppl 3)):S263–7 Epub
2014
Apr
22.
PMID:
24754649;
PMCID:
PMC4035886.
doi:
10.2105/
AJPH.2013.301682.
[19] Cunsolo A, Ellis NR. Ecological grief as a mental health response to climate
change-related loss. Nat Clim Chang 2018;8(4):275–81.
[20] Middleton J, Cunsolo A, Jones-Bitton A, Wright CJ, Harper SL. Indigenous mental
health in a changing climate: a systematic scoping review of the global literature.
Environ Res Lett 2020;15(5).
[21] Whyte Kyle. Indigenous climate change studies: indigenizing futures, decoloniz-
ing the anthropocene. Engl Lang Notes 2017;55(1):153–62 Project MUSE muse.
jhu.edu/article/711473.
[22] Hernandez J. Fresh banana leaves: healing indigenous landscapes through indige-
nous science. North Atlantic Books; 2022.
[23] Pieratos NA, Manning SS, Tilsen N. Land back: a meta narrative to help indigenous
people show up as movement leaders. Leadership 2021;17(1):47–61.
[24] UN General Assembly. United Nations declaration on the rights of indigenous
peoples: resolution /adopted by the General Assembly. A/RES/61/295.
[25] Jessen TD, Ban NC, Claxton NX, Darimont CT. Contributions of indigenous knowl-
edge to ecological and evolutionary understanding. Front Ecol Environ 2022;20
(2):93–101.
[26] David-Chavez DM, Gavin MC. A global assessment of Indigenous community
engagement in climate research. Environ Res Lett 2018;13(12):123005.
K.X. Hill, L.J. Johnston, M.R. Blue et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 18 (2024) 100314
5
[27] Cajete GA. Indigenous science, climate change, and Indigenous community build-
ing: a framework for foundational perspectives for Indigenous community resil-
ience and revitalization. Sustainability 2020;12(22):9569.
[28] Nielsen MO, Jarratt-Snider K, editors. Indigenous justice and gender. University of
Arizona Press; 2023.
[29] Leonard K, David-Chavez D, Smiles D, Jennings L, ʻAnolani Alegado R, Tsinnajinnie
L, et al. Water Back: a review centering rematriation and indigenous water
research sovereignty. Water Altern 2023;16(2):374–428.
[30] Westerman G, White BM. Mni Sota Makoce: the land of the Dakota. Minnesota
Historical Society; 2012.
[31] The Truth Project. Towards recognition and university-tribal healing Oshkigin
Noojimo’iwe, Na_gi Waƞ P̣etu Uƞ Ihduwaṡ’ake He Oyate Kiƞ Zaniwic̣aye Kte:
renewing systems landscapes through traditional indigenous management prac-
tices. 2023.
[32] Waziyatawin. What does justice look like?: The struggle for liberation in Dakota
homeland. St. Paul, Minn: Living Justice Press; 2008.
[33] Gilbert J. Creating synergies between international law and rights of nature.
Transnatl Environ Law 2023;12(3):671–92.
[34] Whitney CK, Frid A, Edgar BK, Walkus J, Siwallace P, Siwallace IL, et al. "Like the
plains people losing the buffalo": perceptions of climate change impacts, ﬁsheries
management, and adaptation actions by Indigenous peoples in coastal British
Columbia, Canada. Ecol Soc 2020;25(4).
[35] Gilbert J, Soliev I, Robertson A, Vermeylen S, Williams NW, Grabowski RC. Under-
standing the rights of nature: working together across and beyond disciplines.
Hum Ecol 2023;51:363–77. doi: 10.1007/s10745-023-00420-1.
[36] Status of Tribes and Climate Change Working Group (STACCWG). In: Marks-
Marino D, editor. Status of tribes and climate change report. Flagstaff, AZ: Insti-
tute for Tribal Environmental Professionals, Northern Arizona University; 2021
http://nau.edu/stacc2021.
[37] The World Bank. The role of indigenous peoples in biodiversity conservation: the natu-
ral but often forgotten partners. 2008 https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/
995271468177530126/pdf/443000WP0BOX321onservation01PUBLIC1.pdf.
K.X. Hill, L.J. Johnston, M.R. Blue et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 18 (2024) 100314
6
