Research article
Perceptions of climate change and climate action among climate-engaged
health professionals in Northern Ontario: A qualitative study
Robert Sanderson*,
Lindsay P. Galway, Associate Professor and Canada Research Chair in Social-Ecological Health*
Department of Health Sciences, Lakehead University, 955 Oliver Rd, Thunder Bay, Canada
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 19 April 2021
Accepted 14 June 2021
Available online 25 June 2021
A B S T R A C T
Health professionals are being called upon to embrace a stronger role in addressing climate change, yet
understanding how health professionals perceive climate change and climate action has garnered minimal
attention in academic literature. Through semi-structured interviews with climate-engaged health professio-
nals (n = 19), this exploratory paper describes trends and key issues with respect to health professionals’ per-
ceptions of climate change and climate mitigation within the rural and remote context of Northern Ontario.
Participating health professionals viewed climate change as a profound health problem in Northern Ontario,
with impacts extending beyond physical health, impacting mental health and psychosocial wellbeing, in
addition to driving further health inequities based on social determinants of health. Participants felt engage-
ment with climate change within their role could be furthered to protect health. However, the current
expectations of the health professionals’ role, the politicization of climate change as a topic, and the fear of
damaging the trusted relationship between clients, community and the health professional were all identi-
ﬁed as challenges. Participants voiced the need to better contextualize approaches to addressing climate
change, calling for collaborative, localized action and enhanced education. This insight of health professio-
nals’ perceptions offers a contextualized understanding for future climate action engagement.
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
1. Introduction
The climate crisis creates far-reaching, interconnected, and cumu-
lative impacts on human health that are amplifying existing health
inequities, while threatening to reverse signiﬁcant health achieve-
ments made in the last century [1-3]. Despite increased evidence
documenting impacts on health, within Canada signiﬁcant climate
inaction exists, further compounding climate change impacts to
health [4].
Health professionals, as recognized community leaders and health
advocates, are well-positioned to understand and communicate the
implications of climate change and the necessity of taking timely,
bold action to protect health [3,5,6]. Moreover, research suggests that
framing climate change as a health issue may aid in how a message is
received and utilized, furthering the potential role that health profes-
sionals can play by leveraging their knowledge and experience in the
health ﬁeld [7]. These factors highlight the potential that health pro-
fessionals hold for raising awareness about the impacts of climate
change on health and inspiring and advocating for individual,
institutional, and collective climate action. However, key knowledge
gaps exist regarding how health professionals perceive climate
change and their role in climate action, particularly in rural and
remote settings [8]. Research has shown that context plays a crucial
role in shaping perceptions and understanding of climate change and
climate action, and while there have been previous studies gathering
health professional perceptions from national, predominantly urban
settings, there are gaps in our understanding of perceptions in rural,
remote, and resource-dependent contexts [8-10].
At the time of this research, limited scholarly literature existed
which examined health professionals’ understanding of the health
impacts of climate change, and none that focused on rural and
remote contexts [11]. Aiming to address the gap in contextualized
health professional perspective, this study speciﬁcally examined
trends and key issues with respect to health professionals’ percep-
tions of climate change and climate mitigation in Northern Ontario,
Canada. Drawing on key-informant interviews with health professio-
nals working in communities across Northern Ontario, this study
expands understanding of health professionals’ knowledge, percep-
tions, and concerns in relation to climate change in rural, remote, and
resource-dependent settings while highlighting opportunities for
 lgalway@lakeheadu.ca
E-mail addresses: rfsander@lakeheadu.ca (R. Sanderson), lgalway@lakeheadu.ca
(L.P. Galway).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100025
2667-2782/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
strengthening the role of health professionals in addressing the
climate crisis.
2. Material and methods
2.1. Research setting
This study was conducted in Northern Ontario, Canada (Fig. 1), a
vast area of approximately 806,000 km2, with a dispersed population
of over 780,000 and population density of 0.9/km2 [12]. The recent
settler history and economy of Northern Ontario have been driven by
the primary sector, predominantly mining and forestry, which con-
tinues to shape the changing landscape of Northern Ontario. Over
half (55.9%) of Northern Ontarians reside in medium-sized popula-
tion centres that serve as health service hubs for the surrounding and
remote communities [12]. The remaining 44.1% of the population
reside in small population centres and rural areas, which include 106
First Nations [12]. Stark health disparities persist throughout the
region with signiﬁcant challenges comprising elevated rates of
chronic illness and food insecurity, premature mortality, and suicide
often far above provincial averages and experienced predominantly
among Indigenous populations [13]. Indigenous peoples across
Northern Ontario (First Nations, Metis, and Inuit) “have faced various
discriminatory policies . . . that created inequities that continue to
affect the health of populations, including forced relocations, residen-
tial schools and forced sterilizations” [14].
Communities across Northern Ontario are geographically isolated
and marginalized. Many depend on the land for their livelihood and
cultural practices, and many face economic and political challenges
that lead to increased vulnerability to climate change impacts
alongside challenges to implementing climate action [15,16]. How-
ever, strengths and assets that support resilience in the face of cli-
mate change coexist with challenges [17]. A strong sense of
community, traditional knowledge, close ties with the land, and base-
line understandings and concerns about climate change are examples
of these strengths [18].
2.2. Data collection
Participants were recruited using purposive and snowball sam-
pling to achieve a diversity of occupations, experiences, and opinions
among health professionals working across the study setting [19,20].
Using previously established connections, as well as the examination
of recent publications, presentations, and reports, health professio-
nals who are engaged with climate change were identiﬁed as poten-
tial participants. In addition, snowball sampling was utilized to
recruit potential participants based on recommendations given by
participants at the conclusion of the interview. To allow for a diver-
sity of experiences and perspectives between health professionals, a
participant recruitment framework guided participant selection,
which aimed to reach individuals who worked in a wide variety of
health occupations from emergency care providers to public health
professionals and a range of allied health professionals. Participants
within the same occupational classiﬁcation worked in different geo-
graphic locations and held different positions to allow for a variety of
experiences that provided a more representative sample and helped
to reduce answer bias.
Participants met two inclusion criteria. First, they had experience
working in Northern Ontario as a health professional and second,
they self-identiﬁed as a ‘climate change leader’. The classiﬁcation of
Fig 1. Participant distribution and classiﬁcation across Northern Ontario.
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
2
‘health professional’ followed the World Health Organization deﬁni-
tion, encompassing a range of health professionals who study, treat
and prevent illness, as well as those practicing traditional medicine
[21]. Participants were further classiﬁed based on their occupation,
allowing for analysis between those working in public health and
those working in regulated or allied health professional roles [22,23].
In this study, we deﬁned ‘climate change leader’ as an individual who
is engaged and committed to advancing climate change solutions to
protect health, following the deﬁnition from Climate for Health, a net-
work promoting cross-sector collaboration to protect health and the
environment [24]. This study aimed to recruit and interview a total of
20 participants, however the study concluded with a total of 19 par-
ticipants as the authors felt that data saturation had been achieved.
Data were collected through the use of key informant interviews
which followed a semi-structured design, allowing for the interview
guide to direct conversation while also permitting for ﬂexibility to
explore topics brought up by the participants that had not been pre-
viously considered. The interview guide was developed collabora-
tively by the authors, and contained prompts for each question to, if
required, help stimulate a more elaborate response from the partici-
pant, or to re-focus their response towards the central research ques-
tion. To maintain consistency and enhance rigor, the lead author
conducted each interview. To gain a deeper understanding of partici-
pants’ experiences, interviews were scheduled to take place in-person
(n = 11) at a location convenient to the interviewee. When unable to
arrange an in-person meeting, interviews were conducted over the
telephone (n = 8). Auditory and, when in-person, observational notes
were recorded, contextualizing the participants’ expressiveness and
body language; this, in addition to subsequent reﬂective notes made
after each interview, aided in informing initial data analysis.
2.3. Data analysis
Clarke and Braun’s [25] 6-step framework guided the thematic
analysis, utilizing an inductive approach that identiﬁed, examined
and reported themes within the data. This iterative analysis process
allowed for a deeper insight into participant perspectives while pro-
viding a deliberately structured and rigorous guide to ensure that the
emergent themes were grounded in the data. The ﬁrst three steps in
the analytical process were completed soley by the primary author,
while the ﬁnal three steps were completed collaboratively involving
all authors. The primary author was responsible for ﬁnal decisions
during the analytical process. Table 1 provides a descriptive overview
of each step.
3. Results
This paper explores knowledge, perceptions, and concerns among
health professionals with respect to climate change and climate miti-
gation in Northern Ontario. Participant characteristics are summa-
rized in Table 2. Through thematic analysis, four main themes
emerged surrounding health professionals’ understanding of (1) cli-
mate change as an emerging and profound health challenge, (2) the
interconnectedness of climate-related health concerns impacting the
North, (3) feelings of uncertainty around engaging in climate action,
and (4) adopting mitigation in the North.
3.1. Climate change: An emerging and profound health challenge in the
North
I view it [climate change] as the most profound health problem
we will face, we are facing, it is the health problem. (emphasis
added from auditory notes)
When asked if they viewed climate change as a health problem, par-
ticipants unanimously agreed that climate change poses a severe
Table 1
Description of analytical steps.
Analytical steps suggested
by Clarke and Braun [25]
Analytical steps taken within this study
Familiarizing yourself with
the data
Interviews were transcribed and subsequently
reviewed in conjunction with listening to the
audio recording to ensure accuracy of tran-
scription. Observational and auditory notes
were re-examined to recall and further contex-
tualize the data.
Generating initial codes
Initial codes were constructed utilizing an induc-
tive approach, wherein interesting and mean-
ingful features of the data were identiﬁed.
Generation of the initial codes followed a sys-
tematic approach, thoroughly examining the
entire data set to identify all elements of inter-
est and potential relevance, with a narrowed
focus on explicit data content.
Searching for themes
All initial codes were iteratively categorized and
collated into larger sub-themes, which were
further conceptualized into overarching
themes until thematic saturation was achieved.
Examination of the linkages between initial
codes and larger themes provided an opportu-
nity to critically explore the relationship
between, and signiﬁcance of, each theme.
Reviewing themes
Themes were critically examined and reﬁned,
while reﬂecting on the study’s objectives to
ensure relevance and support of the larger goal
of the study. Distinction between themes was
improved, while also ensuring data comprised
within each theme cohered.
Deﬁning and naming themes
The themes were subsequently deﬁned, focusing
on understanding and extracting the essence
and relationship amongst themes to create a
deeper interpretation in connection to the
research objectives.
Reporting and synthesizing
Co-authors engaged in a review and discussion of
the theme classiﬁcation and integration within
the article.
Table 2
Demographic data for study participants.
Total n (%)
Age
25−39
6 (32)
40−64
12 (63)
65 years and over
1 (5)
Gender
Male
7 (37)
Female
12 (63)
Other
0 (0)
Region
Northwestern Ont.
9 (47)
Northeastern Ont.
10 (53)
Occupation
Regulated and Allied Health Professional*
9 (47)
Physician
7 (37)
Registered nurse
1 (5)
Radiation therapist
1 (5)
Public Health Professional**
10 (53)
Medical ofﬁcer of health
3 (16)
Program planner, health promoter and evaluator
4 (21)
Environmental health practitioner
2 (10)
Researcher
1 (5)
* Deﬁned within this study as health professionals distinct from
public health, who work to diagnose and treat human illness and
injury, providing an acute, immediate focus.
** Deﬁned within this study as professionals working in the ﬁeld of
public health who work to study, identify, evaluate and prevent
disease.
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
3
threat to human health, with complex health impacts at the individ-
ual and population level, emerging across multiple scales. All partici-
pants had a good understanding of climate change beyond basic
comprehension of the causes and impacts and discussed the inter-
connectedness and complexity of impact pathways.
It’s really hard to trace the causality in a very clear-cut way. . .
health impacts from climate change they’re not often direct. . .
you’re usually talking about indirect impacts, cumulative impacts.
Although all participants described climate change as an impor-
tant health issue in the context of Northern Ontario, they varied in
describing the severity and immediacy of its impacts on their com-
munities. The majority of participants touched on the urgency of the
issue, highlighting the need for immediate action to minimize the
severity of future impacts. However, many of the same participants
saw climate change as an emerging and developing issue that
requires further exploration to fully understand the health impacts
and necessary action.
I think it [climate change] is absolutely a great challenge to popu-
lation health both at the local and global scale and we’re only
really beginning to understand what some of those health impacts
look like in concrete terms.
Conversely, a small proportion of participants viewed climate
change as one of many threats to human health, emphasizing the
need to consider threats perceived to be more immediate such as opi-
oid addiction or obesity, in addition to climate change.
“. . . if you asked me about ‘what are the major health problems
right now?’ I would think of opioids, cardiovascular disease, that
sort of stuff. However, there are things like poverty and climate
change that are really bigger social determinants of health, health
problems.
3.2. The interconnectedness of climate ampliﬁed health concerns
impacting the North
When asked what climate change impacts are most concerning as a
health professional working in Northern Ontario, participants described an
array of impacts with varying degrees of concern and conﬁdence in causal
pathways. The most frequently discussed health impacts of concern were
increased vector-borne disease, food insecurity, and extreme weather
events. Almost all participants demonstrated a diverse knowledge of the
health impacts of climate change, describing multiple impacts and impact
pathways, often expanded upon through accompanying stories of shared
experience between the health professional and the clients or popula-
tions they serve (Table 3). Participants’ tone generally indicated a strong
level of concern, regardless of whether they were discussing an impact to
which they had a personal connection or experience, or if they were spec-
ulating on a known potential impact to health. There were, however, var-
iations in participants’ apparent conﬁdence when describing the current
or potential health impacts of climate change. Unanimously, participants
appeared more conﬁdent discussing health impacts that they had a per-
sonal experience or connection with (e.g., having a client experience anxi-
ety due to the loss of a home from a forest ﬁre or extreme heat events),
compared to discussions of the speculative impacts.
Many participants took a holistic approach when discussing the
impacts of climate change on health, speaking to the interconnected-
ness and complexity of impacts with a ﬂuidity that wove together
the concept of direct3 and indirect4 impacts. For the purpose of
Table 3
Climate change impacts of concern organized by impact pathway.
Impact Pathway
Impacts of concern
Quote
Direct
Air Quality
“I ﬁnd that [air quality] is one of the things that is hard. It might seem like less of a priority because it’s less visible,
but [last year was] one of the ﬁrst times that the health unit put out an air quality warning.”
Extreme Weather
Events
Forest Fires
“I think the ﬁre issue is a big one and we’re seeing it now. A) The displacement of people from those zones, B) the
impact of the smoke and that on asthma rates and in health in general. And again, we’re hearing, Indigenous peo-
ple saying their landscapes are changing. So those are some big ones.”
Floods
“Warming temperatures and very intense precipitation events that again ampliﬁes the effects [of water contamina-
tion] and the possibility, or potentiality for people to come in contact with those pathogens.”
Storms
“So, we were looking at, extreme storms as well from an extreme precipitation and potential for ﬂood risk, and also
included tornadoes because we are sort of in tornado alley for Ontario within our region, so potential for that will
also be increased”
Temperature Extremes
“The impacts from heat I think are going to be quite large moving forward. . .. Our climate is shifting dramatically, so
when we looked at the actual projections, we saw an increase by 2080 of over ﬁve degree centigrade of an annual
temperature increase. So that when you put that into perspective of what our communities will look like from a
climate perspective, that is similar to Mississippi from in the 1990s. So that's a major shift in the way our climate
is going to react.”
Indirect
Food Security and
Nutrition
“The impacts on traditional food systems is huge for people, because it’s affecting their health in so many different
ways and it also connects to of course the increase in non-communicable diseases like type-2 diabetes, other met-
abolic health conditions, or diseases like obesity, but it also connects with the impacts of climate change on road
stability, or land stability. . . it is impacting people’s access to safe and nutritious foods and then that affects your
mental wellness in different ways, not only your nutritional health.”
Mental Health
So, I recognize in myself, that sense of ecological grief, which is not a mental illness the way that we think of mental
illness, but it is a burden of grief that I think I’ve found a language for it, but I’m not sure that my patients have,
and I wonder sometimes the extent to which they present. . . a free ﬂowing anxiety, or an anxiety that they can’t
describe.
Socio-Economic
“My immediate reaction would be that the socioeconomic determinants of health are far more relevant and how cli-
mate change affects the socioeconomic aspects is probably more relevant than the more visible, high proﬁle
events related to climate change.”
Vector-Borne Disease
“[What] I’ve always said is, if you want an indication of climate change locally, then look to the occurrence and dis-
tribution of ticks and especially the vector-borne diseases that ticks can carry. . . the distribution of the vectors is
going to increase, the distribution of the insect pests and agriculture is going to increase as well.”
3 Direct impacts refer primarily to changes in the frequency and intensity of extreme
weather. Instances of ﬂooding, forest ﬁres, heat waves, and other extreme weather
events due to climate change have a direct impact on the health of the populations
who experience them through increased morbidity and mortality [26].
4 Indirect impacts refer to changes mediated through natural and human systems.
This includes effects mediated through the environment such as vector-borne disease
or air pollution, and effects mediated through human systems such as occupational
health impacts, under nutrition and psychosocial impacts [26].
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
4
clarity, and in alignment with commonly used frameworks outlining
the health impacts of climate change, the ﬁndings are presented here
dichotomously. Direct impacts were most frequently discussed, with
the majority of participants providing examples of seeing and
experiencing the impacts of climate change with respect to their
health and the health of their clients. Among the direct impacts,
extreme weather events, particularly forest ﬁres, were of primary
concern. The negative implications for individuals with pre-existing
respiratory conditions such as asthma were frequently recognized, in
addition to the indirect impacts of being displaced from one’s home,
a loss of access to essential social and health services, and the associ-
ated mental health impacts from experiencing and dealing with the
consequences of such a traumatic event.
Indirect health impacts of climate change were discussed less fre-
quently and often following prompting. Only three participants explic-
itly
identiﬁed
the
broader
theme
of
climate
change
impacting
conditions that make up the social determinants of health without
prompting. However, when prompted, several participants provided
examples of indirect impacts of climate change seen in their work,
such as food insecurity, water quality, and mental health. Many partici-
pants spoke to the dependency which Northern Indigenous communi-
ties have on transportation for food access and the precarity a warming
climate poses to ice road stability and the decreased availability of safe
and nutritious foods. Additionally, impacts of a changing landscape on
subsistence hunting, ﬁshing, and foraging were discussed as these prac-
tices provide signiﬁcant nutritional health and cultural value to the
community members, and will be challenged with climate change. A
few participants elaborated on the challenge of accessing safe and cul-
turally appropriate foods, highlighting the connection to an increase in
non-communicable diseases such as type 2 diabetes, nutrient deﬁ-
ciency, obesity and other metabolic health conditions, but also impact-
ing mental wellness. Furthermore, these participants discussed impacts
on growing food, with many highlighting the unsuitability and the
accompanying challenges of growing food in the northern context.
The last of the notable impacts discussed by participants were the
impacts on mental and psychosocial health. Interestingly, several
participants recounted personal and observational experiences of cli-
ents and colleagues experiencing mental health impacts of climate
change. Participants recognized symptoms in their clients and com-
munities that they felt were akin to a diagnosis of anxiety or depres-
sion, that related in some way to climate change but did not feel
conﬁdent in diagnosing causation between mental health and climate
change. Participants described seeing cases of Indigenous clients
beginning to struggle with their identity, with the loss of the land
negatively impacting their clients’ connection to the environment, an
integral component of Indigenous culture.
I think about ‘wow the temperature’s warming’ and the impact of
that on the people who do subsistence hunting, and what’s the
impact for those people who just feel that it’s an important part
of the reason why they’re [existing]. What does that do to their
mental health as those things disappear.
Though participants are working to engage with the issue of cli-
mate change in their work as health professionals, feelings of hope-
lessness and loss of meaning emerged as participants described the
impacts climate change is still having, speciﬁcally describing con-
cerns that climate change will undo previous health advancements.
I mean [climate change] is really challenging for me in ways,
because sometimes it makes the work that I do in the ofﬁce day to
day feel like rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic.
The complexity and interplay between different social systems
was a recurring theme in the data, which was commonly exempliﬁed
through tacitly linking climate change impacts to social determinants
of health and vulnerable populations in Northern Ontario.
I think in the Northern rural and remote communities, both Indige-
nous and non-Indigenous, are at highest risk in terms of access to
food, ﬂooding, evacuation, range of forest ﬁres, electrical grid,
basically everything, access to healthcare.
Most commonly in reference to remote First Nations communi-
ties, many participants emphasized the changes and challenges peo-
ple living in rural, remote areas would face, as access to food, health
and social services will be more precarious with a changing climate.
Participants also acknowledged, both explicitly and implicitly, that
the increased vulnerability of populations in Northern Ontario, in
particular rural, remote, and Indigenous communities, is part of a sys-
tem of injustices experienced due, in large part, to circumstances of
their social determinants of health that have resulted from coloniza-
tion and settler colonialism.
3.3. Feeling uncertain about engaging in climate action: Whose role is it
anyway?
All participants believed that health professionals have a role to
play in climate action but felt that there were certain professionals
whose role was better suited than others to do so in their work. Regu-
lated and allied health professionals within this study, predominantly
represented by acute care physicians and nurses, viewed climate
change action as peripheral to their role, and felt that public health
professionals were better situated to integrate climate change into
their work, engage in climate action and advocate for climate action.
Public health professionals shared this perspective, as their governing
bodies currently mandate their work addressing climate change, but
felt that the health professions, as a collective group, can best address
climate
change
action
together.
However,
two
participants
highlighted the challenge in viewing health professionals as a collec-
tive group, when they are “very heterogenous”. Many participants
were surprised by the lack of a collective voice coming from health
professionals and spoke to the importance of a united message advo-
cating for greater action on climate change, that encompassed all
health professions.
‘Where is our voice?’ I feel always quite surprised that there isn’t a
stronger public health-physician voice as a whole.
Many participants did commend recent position statements from
governing bodies such as the Canadian Medical Association and
Canadian Public Health Association as positive steps towards promot-
ing the role of health professionals in climate action, yet also ques-
tioned how much of an impact these documents would have in the
absence of support from hospital administration and governing
bodies.
I was overwhelmed by the idea that the Canadian Medical Associ-
ation [CMA], at least the president elect of the CMA, has endorsed
carbon pricing. Does that mean that doctors as a whole endorse it,
I really don’t know.
When participants were asked speciﬁcally about what role they felt
health professionals should and can play when it comes to climate
change, the majority discussed increasing individual and collective
education among health professionals to improve understanding of
the impacts on health. Opportunities such as professional develop-
ment and curriculum modiﬁcation were highlighted as an important
means to increase health professional understanding and conﬁdence
in linking climate change to human health and provide practical tools
to engage in climate communication and advocacy. Participants dis-
cussed the importance of taking small-scale, individual action in their
homes and workplaces and thereby acting as role models and leaders,
with the common reiteration of “one person can still make a
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
5
difference”. Many participants also highlighted the necessity of par-
taking in larger-scale advocacy, calling on communities and govern-
ments to take action to protect health in a changing climate and the
importance of using one's vote to effect changes.
We have to educate the entire healthcare team, both in public
health and basically in acute healthcare or primary healthcare, we
need to have more educational campaigns, education of the pub-
lic, we need to have more mitigation programs in place for the
community, and that we really need to go out and vote in ways
that would support the people in policy making who are more
key on making the changes that we want.
The majority of participants acknowledged the implicit responsi-
bility they felt as trusted leaders in communities to accurately and
meaningfully communicate the health risks of climate change. A few
viewed advocating for climate action as a moral obligation, as the
nature of their occupation is to protect and preserve health. Many
participants highlighted that their profession is among the most
trusted and that their voice needs to be utilized to communicate the
message to educate the public and call for action. One participant in
particular, with a comprehensive background in climate change com-
munication, emphasized the importance of collaboratively communi-
cating consistent messaging, on multiple levels, to educate the public
and key stakeholders and decision-makers.
I think what’s important is for health professionals to communicate
and work collaboratively. I think so many people get their informa-
tion from so many different means that we need to make sure that
we’re all speaking the same language. So, if our municipalities are
saying one thing, we’re also saying that one thing, because I think
the more the message is out there and is similar and is saying the
same words, then people will believe it more. And if it’s being
implied or communicated from multiple avenues, the likelihood of
the message getting out there is so much stronger.
Over half of the participants brought up the politicization of climate
change as a barrier to engaging in climate change action as a part of
their professional role. These participants understood their role as hav-
ing an expectation of being unbiased and shared that the political
nature of climate change could be viewed as “pushing an agenda”.
If I’m there pushing my agenda on whatever it is, and it’s my
personal views, I'm not sure in my position that I should be
skewing things too much left or right. The same as if I was a cli-
mate denier and then got on my soap box every single time a
patient came in, or if I had political views and shared them with
them, I’m not sure that’s totally appropriate. So even though I’m
convinced this is the right thing, how do I use that power and
inﬂuence is a little bit controversial in my mind, because I
wouldn’t be too happy if someone was pushing an agenda that I
don’t agree with completely.
3.4. Adopting climate mitigation in the North
Participants were provided with a basic deﬁnition of health co-
beneﬁts5 when asked how they understand climate change mitigation
and the possible health co-beneﬁts associated with mitigation activities.
All participants did acknowledge the need for mitigation in response
to climate change as well as the potential for health co-beneﬁts of cli-
mate action. However, all participants also emphasized challenges of
climate mitigation speciﬁcally in the context of Northern Ontario.
Participants unanimously agreed that Northern Ontario is not geo-
graphically favourable or currently structured in a way that empow-
ers individuals or organizations to engage in mitigative activities that
offer health co-beneﬁts. For example:
I see it as valuable that any sort of mitigation strategy has health
beneﬁts, but I think any of those types of changes I feel like are
going to impact cities more, like bigger centers, more than rural
areas.
Active transportation, primarily cycling, was most commonly
identiﬁed as an example of climate mitigation offering co-beneﬁts for
physical and mental health. For example:
Active transportation is a particular interest of mine and there are
certainly health co-beneﬁts, with respect to physical activity, and
perhaps even beyond physical wellbeing, mental health and well-
being, when it comes to increasing physical activity.
However, many of these same participants also emphasized the
challenges of active transportation in Northern Ontario communities
due to the expansive geography of the North, weather, limited infra-
structure to support active transportation, and a dominant ‘car cul-
ture’ shaping major infrastructure and community design decisions.
Also, extreme cold and heavy snow limited the ability to produce and
utilize green energy year-round.
I think there are a couple of particular challenges for our rural
communities. One is community design; they haven’t been
designed to be green communities, and our community is fortu-
nate, it has sidewalks; some communities in Northern Ontario
don’t and they’ve been laid out in a way that has accepted the fact
that land is available, so it can be a little bit more spread out than
might have otherwise been the case if people were designing a
very walkable community, so I think that’s a challenge.
One participant held the perspective that mitigation action, using
the example of removing jobs in communities that are dependent on
resource extraction or heavy CO2 producing industries, could also
negatively impact a populations’ social determinants of health. They
explained that, from their perspective, people who lose their jobs
were likely to then engage in poor, unhealthy lifestyles, leading to
greater dependence and strain on health resources.
3.5. Limitations
Although we succeeded in recruiting a diverse sample in terms of
age, gender, and occupation, none of the participants self-identiﬁed
as Indigenous to Northern Ontario. It is also important to recognize
that participants held a privileged position, both through the power
inherent in their occupations, as well as their social locations, and did
not feel comfortable speaking for Indigenous populations but rather
spoke to witnessing the vulnerability of the Indigenous populations
they work with and the vulnerability that is socially and geographi-
cally constructed. Another notable limitation is that all participants
practiced from a Western model such that perspectives on traditional
Indigenous medicine are lacking. Future research should strive to
incorporate the missing perspectives of healthcare providers who
self-identify as Indigenous and/or who practice traditional medicine
using decolonizing methodologies to help deepen the understanding
of the experience of the impacts of climate change on health in
Northern Ontario. Additionally, the majority of participants worked
in small and medium-sized population centers across Northern
Ontario. None of the participants lived and worked in remote First
Nation communities in the far north of the province. While the
majority of study participants had some experience working with
5 Health co-beneﬁts are often deﬁned as additional beneﬁts to health when engag-
ing in climate mitigation action [27]. As an example, engaging in active transportation
as a way to lower personal emissions and reliance on fossil fuels, will improve air qual-
ity, cardiovascular health and lower the long-term risk of developing chronic disease
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
6
Indigenous populations and remote communities in the far north,
they practiced predominantly in regional centres (i.e., Thunder Bay,
Sudbury, Sault Ste Marie, Kenora, and Parry Sound). Although this
reﬂects the nature of health service delivery in the province gener-
ally, there may be implications for the ﬁndings reported herein. How-
ever, a full understanding that would be achieved by having the
perspectives of health professionals working predominantly in the
most remote, most vulnerable communities is still lacking. This con-
sideration may help guide related future studies. Finally, we cannot
exclude the possibility of response bias. Participants may have
responded to interview questions to agree with what they thought
was a ‘correct’ or expected answers rather than sharing their actual
experiences or views.
4. Discussion
This study explored trends and key issues with respect to health
professionals’ perceptions of climate change and climate action in
Northern Ontario. It is important to note that, although all partici-
pants recognize climate change as a threat to human health, most
feel somewhat uncomfortable and uncertain about engaging in cli-
mate action within their role as a health professional in Northern
Ontario and therefore are engaging with the issue of climate change
outside of their professional capacity. This section explores this dis-
comfort and uncertainty to discuss the value health professionals
place on climate change, their understanding of the complex nexus
of climate and health, and the perception of climate action as a health
professional working in Northern Ontario. These three constructs −
complexity, value, and action −provide a framework for this discus-
sion and help elucidate opportunities for strengthening the role of
health professionals in addressing the climate crisis.
4.1. Inherently complex and challenging to engage with
Within the existing climate change and health literature, health
impacts are commonly discussed and described in disconnected
ways [2,27]. This differs from the more holistic descriptions shared
by the health professionals within this study. While participants
acknowledged that impacts on health are complex, they showed a
strong understanding of the ways in which climate-sensitive health
effects are highly interconnected, and shaped by local and regional
vulnerabilities and capacities.
Although often overlooked in the existing literature, participants
also identiﬁed that climate change is impacting the mental health
and psychosocial wellbeing of their clients and populations served,
particularly those in rural and remote communities. Allied and regu-
lated providers and public health professionals alike shared speciﬁc
examples of grief, trauma, and overwhelming sadness that they
believed were connected to climate change. Examples were provided
in relation to patients and populations served, colleagues, and them-
selves. One participant, in particular, noted that they were beginning
to see their clients struggling with their identity, as their connection
to the land was being negatively impacted by climate change. For
many Northern populations, culture and identity are intimately tied
to the land [28]. Our study is consistent with the emerging literature
highlighting that the mental and psychosocial health implications of
climate change are growing areas of concern that are not yet ade-
quately understood nor addressed [29−31]. Our ﬁndings also empha-
size that, as we move forward in the ﬁeld of climate change health
and continue our collective efforts to address the interconnected
health risks of a changing climate, it is important to acknowledge
that additional socio-cultural, economic and geographic factors are
impacting the mental health of populations in rural, remote, and
resource-dependent communities [17].
The health impacts of climate change become more complex
when we acknowledge that not every individual or population
experiences them to the same degree. Socially and structurally main-
tained vulnerabilities exist, particularly in rural, remote, and Indige-
nous communities of Northern Ontario [15,32]. Populations within
Northern Ontario, and rural, remote and resource-dependent com-
munities broadly, are disproportionately and unjustly disadvantaged
by systematically constructed social determinants of health, leading
to heightened vulnerability [33]. These vulnerabilities create and
maintain unique lived experiences for those in the community, and
climate action aimed at protecting health in rural, remote and
resource-dependent communities must recognize and reﬂect place-
based vulnerabilities, realities, and strengths.
Engaging in climate action as a health professional is also inher-
ently complex. In an attempt to address this complexity, participants
expressed a need for additional education and knowledge, to become
more conﬁdent in naming climate change as a health issue, commu-
nicating about climate impacts and solutions, engaging in action, and
advocating for action. This aligns with previous literature, which has
identiﬁed steps that could be taken to improve health professionals’
conﬁdence and skills, both in academic settings, through news and
media outreach, as well as greater public engagement and knowledge
of the health impacts and health co-beneﬁts of climate action
[5,7,34]. Health professionals across a range of settings are advocat-
ing for increased emphasis on climate and health education and
training through various forms of continuing education and curricu-
lar modiﬁcation [3,8,35,36]. Recent research has illustrated that
health professionals demonstrate a desire to learn and manage the
associated health risks of climate change to provide appropriate care
and effective public health responses [5,8]. Our ﬁndings further
emphasize the need for place-based climate and health education
and training so that health professionals can protect the health of the
people and populations that they serve. Participants in this study
who sought out further education around climate change and its
impacts on health appeared to be more conﬁdent in speaking about
climate change as a health problem and engaging in action and advo-
cacy. Through increased knowledge, understanding, and education,
participants may also further their motivation to engage with climate
communication, advocacy, and action.
There was, among participants, a differing sense of urgency in
addressing the health impacts related to climate change, which may
be indicative of individual value [37]. Literature shows that value is a
key motivator to behaviour change, in that we are more likely to
make a behaviour change if it aligns with our values [9,38]. If health
professionals increase their personal and professional value of
addressing climate change and its health impacts, they may be more
likely to communicate the necessary action to address this crisis in
their everyday practice.
4.2. Potential for action within the health professional role
While all participants agreed that climate action is needed to
address climate change and protect health, and that health professio-
nals have an important role to play in terms of engaging in, advocat-
ing for, promoting, and supporting action, there was hesitancy and
uncertainty concerning the kinds of climate action to support and
engage in and which health professionals should do this work. This
hesitancy and uncertainty likely has many sources and may be justi-
ﬁed. We are asking individuals in a profession whose workload is
already overburdened to take on the unprecedented and uniquely
challenging tasks, with minimal training and support to do so. Never-
theless, this work is necessary and urgent; we must identify opportu-
nities for strengthening the role of health professionals in addressing
the climate crisis. Importantly, those in power and with authority
within governing bodies to mandate climate action within the roles
of health professionals should do so. But, does this align with the
objectives of those in power? The public health system is also over-
burdened, working to address an expansive list of current threats to
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
7
human health, and those in positions of power within these systems
must make choices on where resources are directed and focused. We
know that those in power are not those who are experiencing the
health impacts of climate change to a greater extent, and therefore
may be less personally invested in mandating climate action within
the role of health professionals.
Climate change was also described as a politicized issue by the
health professionals that participated in our study. One partici-
pant speciﬁcally explained that because the issue is politicalized,
particularly in contexts where economies and livelihoods are
tightly coupled with resource extractive activities, engaging in
and advocating for climate action can be perceived as pushing a
speciﬁc political agenda or even alienate clients. The view of cli-
mate change as a politicized issue is supported in previous litera-
ture,
which
cites
political
leaders,
in
addition
to
health
professionals, as those who are best suited to address the issue of
climate change due to their perceived expertise in addressing and
working with polarizing issues [9,10,39]. This raises the question
of whether or not it is realistic to ever view climate change and
climate action as apolitical. Perhaps instead, to support our col-
lective efforts towards addressing the climate action deﬁcit, we
must recognize the political nature of climate change and develop
education and training resources to help health professionals
effectively engage in climate communication and advocacy while
shifting the narrative towards a focus on climate action as an
opportunity that offers co-beneﬁts to individual and population
health.
5. Conclusion
Understanding the key trends and issues among health professio-
nals with respect to their perceptions and concerns in relation to cli-
mate change and climate action highlighted participants’ collective
view of climate change as a threat to health with many current and
projected implications. However, further research beyond under-
standing perspectives is needed to catalyze engagement and support
action that will protect the health of individuals and populations. If
health professionals working within the context of Northern Ontario
are to develop and strengthen their role as climate-health leaders,
we recommend a renewed focus to enhanced cross-sector collabora-
tion among all health professionals along with enhanced training
and education in relation to climate science, communication, and
advocacy.
Within this broad recommendation, engaging in climate change
action should become an explicit part of every health professional
role to eliminate feelings of uncertainty surrounding appropriateness
of climate engagement, while mandating designated time to allocate
and help balance demanding workloads. Further collaboration among
health professionals, climate scientists, and local experts will prevent
knowledge and engagement silos, while reducing perceptions of iso-
lation through establishing a network of engaged health professio-
nals across Northern Ontario. Enhanced collaboration will help to
increase and diversify education around climate science and engage-
ment among health professionals, so they themselves can under-
stand and integrate new information to create deliverables for their
clients.
Declaration of interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] Watts N, et al. The Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: from
25 years of inaction to a global transformation for public health. The Lancet Feb.
2018;391(10120):581–630. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32464-9.
[2] Watts N, et al. The 2019 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate
change: ensuring that the health of a child born today is not deﬁned by a chang-
ing climate. The Lancet Nov. 2019;394(10211) Art. no. 10211. doi: 10.1016/
S0140-6736(19)32596-6.
[3] Watts N, et al. The 2020 report of The Lancet Countdown on health and climate
change: responding to converging crises. The Lancet, Dec. 2020;397(10269):129–
70. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32290-X.
[4] Masuda J, Lewis D, Poland B, Sanchez-Pimienta CE. Stop ringing the alarm; it is
time to get out of the building!. Can. J. Public Health. Dec. 2020;111(6):831–5.
doi: 10.17269/s41997-020-00437-9.
[5] Kreslake JM, Sarfaty M, Roser-Renouf C, Leiserowitz AA, Maibach EW. The Critical
Roles of Health Professionals in Climate Change Prevention and Preparedness.
Am
J
Public
Health
Apr.
2018;108(Suppl
2):S68–9.
doi:
10.2105/
AJPH.2017.304044.
[6] Martin W, Vold L. Climate Change and Health: it’s Time for Nurses to Act. Can. Fed.
Nurses Unions 2019:52.
[7] Adlong W, Dietsch E. Environmental education and the health professions: fram-
ing climate change as a health issue. Environ Educ Res Jul. 2015;21(5):687–709.
doi: 10.1080/13504622.2014.930727.
[8] Hathaway J, Maibach EW. Health implications of climate change: a review of the
literature about the perception of the public and health professionals. Curr Envi-
ron Health Rep 2018;5(1):197–204. doi: 10.1007/s40572-018-0190-3.
[9] Moser SC. Reﬂections on climate change communication research and practice in
the second decade of the 21st century: what more is there to say?: climate
change communication research and practice. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Clim Change
May 2016;7(3):345–69. doi: 10.1002/wcc.403.
[10] Richards GW, Carruthers Den Hoed R. Seven strategies of climate change science
communication for policy change: combining academic theory with practical evi-
dence from science−policy partnerships in Canada. In: Leal Filho W, Manolas E,
Azul AM, Azeiteiro UM, McGhie H, editors. Handbook of climate change commu-
nication: vol. 2. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2018. p. 147–60 Eds..
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-70066-3_11.
[11] Sarfaty M, Kreslake JM, Casale TB, Maibach EW. Views of AAAAI members on cli-
mate change and health. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract Mar. 2016;4(2):333–5 e26.
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2015.09.018.
[12] Canadian 2016 census data proﬁle,. Statistics Canada; 2017.
[13] Health Quality Ontario. Health in the North: a report on geography and the health
of people in Ontario’s two northern regions. Toronto: Queen’s Printer for Ontario.
2017. Available: https://healthinthenorth.hqontario.ca/
[14] Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Honouring the truth, reconciling
for the future: Summary of the ﬁnal report of the Truth and Reconciliation Com-
mission of Canada. Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada 2015 http://
www.trc.ca/assets/pdf/Executive_Summary_English_Web.pdf.
[15] Ford JD, Berrang-Ford L, King M, Furgal C. Vulnerability of Aboriginal health sys-
tems in Canada to climate change. Glob Environ Change Oct. 2010;20(4):668–80.
doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.05.003.
[16] Harper SL, Edge VL, Ford J, Cunsolo Willox A, Wood M, McEwen SA. Climate-sensi-
tive health priorities in Nunatsiavut, Canada. BMC Public Health Jul. 2015;15:605.
doi: 10.1186/s12889-015-1874-3.
[17] Kipp A, Cunsolo A, Vodden K, King N, Manners S, Harper SL. At-a-glance Climate
change impacts on health and wellbeing in rural and remote regions across Can-
ada: a synthesis of the literature. Health Promot Chronic Dis Prev Can Res Policy
Pract. Apr. 2019;39(4):122–6.
[18] Gislason MK, Galway L, Buse C, Parkes M, Rees E. Place-based climate change
communication and engagement in Canada’s Provincial North: lessons learned
from climate champions. Environ Commun Jan. 2021;0(0):1–16. doi: 10.1080/
17524032.2020.1869576.
[19] Kirchherr J, Charles K. Enhancing the sample diversity of snowball samples: rec-
ommendations from a research project on anti-dam movements in Southeast
Asia. PLoS ONE Aug. 2018;13(8):e0201710. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0201710.
[20] Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, Wisdom JP, Duan N, Hoagwood K. Purposeful
sampling for qualitative data collection and analysis in mixed method implemen-
tation research. Adm Policy Ment Health Sep. 2015;42(5):533–44. doi: 10.1007/
s10488-013-0528-y.
[21] Transforming and scaling up health professionals’ education and training: world
health organization guidelines 2013. World Health Organization; 2013. Accessed:
Aug.
18,
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK298950/.
[22] Health Force Ontario. Ontario regulated health professionals | home. 2020 http://
www.healthforceontario.ca/en/Home/Health_Providers.
[23] MOHLTC. Health workforce planning branch - Health Care professionals -
MOHLTC.
http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/hhrsd/ (accessed Apr.
13, 2020).
[24] Climate Change Leaders For Health. Climate for health; https://climateforhealth.
org/who-is-leading/ (accessed Jan. 12, 2020).
[25] V. Clarke and V. Braun, “Successful qualitative research: a practical guide for
beginners,” Mar. 2013, Accessed: Feb. 08, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://uwe-
repository.worktribe.com/output/934201
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
8
[26] IPCC. Climate change 2014: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. part A: global
and sectoral aspects. contribution of working group II to the ﬁfth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel on climate change. Cambridge, UK and
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2014.
[27] Smith KR, Woodward A. Human health: impacts, adaptation, and co-Beneﬁts.
Hum. Health 2014;46.
[28] Tobias JK, Richmond CAM. ‘That land means everything to us as Anishinaabe. . ..’:
environmental dispossession and resilience on the North Shore of Lake Superior.
Health Place Sep. 2014;29:26–33. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2014.05.008.
[29] Hayes K, Berry P, Ebi KL. Factors inﬂuencing the mental health consequences of
climate change in Canada. Int J Environ Res Public Health May 2019;16(9). doi:
10.3390/ijerph16091583.
[30] Ingle HE, Mikulewicz M. Mental health and climate change: tackling invisible
injustice. Lancet Planet. Health Apr. 2020;4(4):e128–30. doi: 10.1016/S2542-
5196(20)30081-4.
[31] Palinkas LA, Wong M. Global climate change and mental health. Curr Opin Psy-
chol Apr. 2020;32:12–6. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2019.06.023.
[32] Furgal C, Seguin J. Climate change, health, and vulnerability in Canadian
northern Aboriginal communities. Environ Health Perspect Dec. 2006;114
(12):1964–70.
[33] Ford JD, et al. Preparing for the health impacts of climate change in Indigenous
communities: the role of community-based adaptation. Glob Environ Change
Mar. 2018;49:129–39. doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.02.006.
[34] Weathers MR, Maibach EW, Nisbet M. Communicating the public health risks of
climate change. Oxf Res Encycl Clim Sci Sep. 2017. doi: 10.1093/acrefore/
9780190228620.013.428.
[35] Castleden H, Lin J, Darrach M. The public health emergency of climate change:
how/are Canadian post-secondary public health sciences programs responding?
Can. J. Public Health. Dec. 2020;111(6):836–44. doi: 10.17269/s41997-020-
00386-3.
[36] Hackett F, Got T, Kitching GT, MacQueen K, Cohen A. Training Canadian doctors
for the health challenges of climate change. Lancet Planet. Health Jan. 2020;4(1):
e2–3. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(19)30242-6.
[37] Corner A, Markowitz E, Pidgeon N. Public engagement with climate change: the
role of human values. WIREs Clim. Change 2014;5(3):411–22. doi: 10.1002/
wcc.269.
[38] O’Brien KL, Wolf J. A values-based approach to vulnerability and adaptation to cli-
mate change. WIREs Clim. Change 2010;1(2):232–42. doi: 10.1002/wcc.30.
[39] Mirsaeidi M, Javadzadeh A, Campos M. A risky political game with climate change.
Eur Respir J Oct. 2017;50(4):1701145. doi: 10.1183/13993003.01145-2017.
R. Sanderson and L.P. Galway
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100025
9
