Review
Climate Change and Emerging Food Safety Issues: A Review
RAMONA A. DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND HUDAA NEETOO
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5513-8539*
Faculty of Agriculture, University of Mauritius, Réduit, Mauritius
MS 21-141: Received 31 March 2021/Accepted 23 June 2021/Published Online 29 June 2021
ABSTRACT
Throughout the past decades, climate change has been one of the most complex global issues. Characterized by worldwide
alterations in weather patterns, along with a concomitant increase in the temperature of the Earth, climate change will
undoubtedly have signiﬁcant effects on food security and food safety. Climate change engenders climate variability: signiﬁcant
variations in weather variables and their frequency. Both climate variability and climate change are thought to threaten the safety
of the food supply chain through different pathways. One such pathway is the ability to exacerbate foodborne diseases by
inﬂuencing the occurrence, persistence, virulence and, in some cases, toxicity of certain groups of disease-causing
microorganisms. Food safety can also be compromised by various chemical hazards, such as pesticides, mycotoxins, and heavy
metals. With changes in weather patterns, such as lower rainfall, higher air temperature, and higher frequency of extreme
weather events among others, this translates to emerging food safety concerns. These include the shortage of safe water for
irrigation of agricultural produce, greater use of pesticides due to pest resistance, increased difﬁculty in achieving a well-
controlled cold chain resulting in temperature abuse, or the occurrence of ﬂash ﬂoods, which cause runoff of chemical
contaminants in natural water courses. Together, these can result in foodborne infection, intoxication, antimicrobial resistance,
and long-term bioaccumulation of chemicals and heavy metals in the human body. Furthermore, severe climate variability can
result in extreme weather events and natural calamities, which directly or indirectly impair food safety. This review discusses the
causes and impacts of climate change and variability on existing and emerging food safety risks and also considers mitigation
and adaptation strategies to address the global warming and climate change problem.
HIGHLIGHTS
 Climate change may heighten the occurrence and virulence of foodborne pathogens.
 Risk of contamination of food by chemical hazards will also likely increase.
 Climate change may likely result in a rise in foodborne infection and intoxication.
 Frequent extreme weather events brought by climate change also affect food safety.
 Ensuring food safety under a changing climate requires key adaptation strategies.
Key words: Adaptation; Climate; Food hazards; Food safety; Mitigation
Climate change has literally become a hot topic and an
alarming issue worldwide. From literature, climate change
is deﬁned as a long-term change in statistical properties of
the climate system and is demonstrated by an unusual
distribution around the recorded mean over an average
period of 30 years (20, 86). Climate change encompasses
variations in atmospheric carbon dioxide, changes in
worldwide temperatures and precipitation, which all, in
turn, inﬂuence sea levels and salinity, crop yields, soil
quality, nitrogen deposition, plant diversity, and crop
diseases (20). The principal cause of climate change is
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission, and the climatic factors
inﬂuenced are temperature, relative humidity, precipitation,
and UV, thus resulting in climate variability (33, 48, 86).
According to the International Panel on Climate Changes
and several authors, global climate models have projected a
mean global warming ranging from 1.5 to 5.88C and a rise
in the mean global precipitation of 5 to 15% by the end of
the century (71, 79, 86). A signiﬁcant shift in the variables
can induce meteorological hazards, such as extreme weather
events, with weather variables and frequency below or
above the ﬁxed mean threshold (18), as well as natural
calamities, which are sudden localized extreme hydrolog-
ical, geophysical, meteorological, or climatological events
(60) (Fig. 1). Extreme weather events, which usually have a
frequency of less than 5% will become more recurrent due
to the impact of climate change (86). Many extreme weather
disasters, such as ﬂoods, heat waves, and winter storms
have been recorded in Europe over the last two decades.
Several ﬂoods have struck northern Italy, France, and
Switzerland in 2000, the United Kingdom in 2007, as well
as Germany and France in 2016 (43). Severe heat waves
occurred in the summers of 2003, 2010, and 2018 (43).
* Author for correspondence. Tel: 230-403-7885; Fax: 230-465-5743;
E-mail: s.neetoo@uom.ac.mu.
1884
Journal of Food Protection, Vol. 84, No. 11, 2021, Pages 1884–1897
https://doi.org/10.4315/JFP-21-141
Copyright , International Association for Food Protection
Furthermore, winter storms were recorded in 2007 and 2010
(43). Other examples include extreme snowpack in the
northern Alps in 2006 and 2019, wildﬁres in southern and
eastern Europe in 2007, 2010, and 2017, and hailstorms in
Germany in 1984 and 2013 (43). As for natural calamities,
namely, tropical cyclones, tsunamis, and monsoons, these
may be accompanied by intense rainfall, severe ﬂooding,
and high winds (79). It is now acknowledged that with the
progress of climate change, extreme weather events and
natural calamities will become more frequent and more
extreme (43). However, before delving into the inﬂuence of
climate change and food safety hazards, we need to ﬁrst
understand the physical causes and broad impacts of this
phenomenon.
CLIMATE CHANGE: ITS PHYSICAL CAUSES
Because the Earth’s atmosphere is made mostly of
nitrogen and oxygen, the Earth’s climate is inﬂuenced by
the water cycle and carbon cycle. Carbon dioxide (CO2),
together with methane (CH4), nitrous oxides (NO and N2O),
and ozone (O3), make up the GHGs that trap heat in the
Earth’s atmosphere. Although individually present as small
amounts, they have the biggest role in changes in climate, as
the level of GHGs is directly related to atmospheric
temperature. For instance, an increase in GHG level in
one region in the world can alter the climate of the whole
planet due to its release in the atmosphere. Eventually, an
excessive rise in GHGs creates the greenhouse effect, thus
giving rise to climate change (32). GHGs are naturally
present in the Earth’s atmosphere, to maintain a proper
environment for life, but their levels can change due to
natural processes, as well as human activities. CO2 is the
most abundant of the GHGs with a much greater impact on
temperature worldwide (32). Because CO2 and temperature
are closely correlated, an increase in CO2 implies increased
warming of the Earth. Hence, the excessive release of CO2
in the atmosphere is the root cause of global warming and,
consequently, of climate change (32). Because 80% of
GHGs are associated with human activities, the phenome-
non has been more appropriately termed as “anthropogenic
climate change” (32). Human activities include the altered
use of land from forests to farmland or industrialization, as
well as the use of manmade GHGs, such as chloroﬂuoro-
carbons and air pollution. GHGs, some of which have been
trapped for millenniums in fossil fuels and biomass, are also
being added to the atmosphere by humans (32). Altogether,
human activities greatly alter the composition of the Earth’s
atmosphere and bring about consequent changes in climate.
However, climate models trying to replicate the current
conditions of climate change have not worked by solely
considering the human dimension because the underlying
natural causes also have a role to play (32). Having said
that, human activities, especially since the Industrial
Revolution, have been the main contributor in advancing
the release of CO2 in the atmosphere (32).
BROAD IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE
The main result of the increased release of CO2 in the
Earth’s atmosphere is global warming, thus contributing
greatly to climate change. This rise in temperature has had
an impact on the different components of the Earth, be it the
atmosphere, the hydrosphere, the cryosphere, the geosphere,
or the biosphere (21, 32). Some of the main environmental
impacts of climate change include warmer temperatures,
alteration in the water cycle, and more severe and more
frequent extreme weather events, which include heat waves,
droughts, and ﬂoods (32). Melting of ice caps, ocean
warming and acidiﬁcation, rise in sea level, increased
erosion, and changes in deep ocean circulation are
additional effects of warming (32). Altogether, these will
have a direct impact on the ecosystem food security and
indirectly on food safety and human health.
Arctic, oceans, and agricultural land. Temperature
patterns show that the Northern Hemisphere will undergo
warming to a greater extent than the Southern Hemisphere,
as it is mostly land (32). Polar regions will also warm up
more than the rest of the planet due to the transition of ice to
liquid water (32). With the continuous melting of the Arctic,
animals such as polar bears and seals, may become extinct
and lead to an imbalance in the food chain, as well as a
threat to food security in the Arctic region. Between 2030
and 2050, it has been predicted that Australia’s Great
Barrier Reef will undergo annual bleaching due to
increasing temperatures, ocean acidity, and higher sea level
(32). In fact, almost all coral reefs in tropical areas are
expected to disappear by 2050 (66). Eventually, the loss of
coral reefs will affect not only the ecosystem but also food
sources, including commercial ﬁsheries. The impact of
climate change on the ocean has already affected the
volume and distribution of ﬁsheries and marine organisms
(66). Several cold-water species are being reduced, and
some tropical species are being redistributed (66). Ocean
warming and acidiﬁcation can further affect the reproduc-
tion processes of some marine species, such as shellﬁsh,
which are sensitive to acidiﬁcation (66). Also, microorgan-
isms, such as bacteria and phytoplankton, which are key to
the marine food web will also be impacted (66). Overall, the
combined aquatic stress may disrupt the food chain in the
marine ecosystem, leading to a reduced stock of commercial
marine species in some parts of the world. Impacts of
increased temperature and tropical cyclonic activity will
FIGURE 1. Relationship among climate variability, the effects of
climate change, and other related phenomena.
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1885
also likely affect the capture, production, and marketing
costs of marine ﬁsh (68). It has been predicted that tropical
areas, especially small islands that depend on ﬁsheries for
the economy and for human consumption, will suffer from
poverty and ensuing health and hygiene problems (66). As
for agricultural food production, in mid to high latitudes that
had typically cooler climates, warming in these regions is
expected to cause an increase in yields of food crops.
However, higher latitudes will suffer from hotter and drier
conditions, with a reduced agricultural productivity, less
access to clean water for irrigation, and increased plant
diseases and pests (32). Models have predicted that CO2
doubling will result in losses of 10 to 50% of agricultural
croplands and a decrease in the global yield of key food
crops between 10 and 70% (32). Furthermore, with reduced
arable land and with projected increased human migration
associated with climate, there are more challenges and risks
associated with the successful cultivation of crops and
rearing of domestic animals. As a result, food security is
threatened, famine may become more common in areas,
such as sub-Saharan Africa and many other regions, and
food safety can be greatly impaired, putting human health at
stake (32).
Water cycle. The water cycle is also affected by
climate change, with decreasing rain in drier areas, such as
midcontinental regions, and increased rain in wetter areas,
such as monsoon and tropical regions, thus greatly affecting
the agricultural sector. About 1.7 billion people are already
living in countries that are water stressed, and by 2025, the
number will likely rise to 5 billion (32). The most water-
stressed countries are located in the Middle East and North
Africa region, with Qatar, Israel, and Lebanon ﬁguring
among the most water-stressed countries (81). Droughts will
become longer and ﬁercer, and many marginal regions will
become almost impossible to inhabit (32). Coupled with
heat waves, drought will contribute to losses in agricultural
productivity along with shortness of a clean water supply
(32). With expanding water insecurity issues, there may be
the increased use of contaminated irrigation water for
cultivation with ensuing foodborne and waterborne disease
risks. In addition, the emergence of new waterborne
pathogens and parasites may perpetuate a vicious cycle of
food and waterborne diseases, again threatening food
security and safety. Also, diseases common to tropical
regions will likely spread to temperate zones, affecting
developed, as well as developing nations (32). Some of the
infectious diseases expected to increase are malaria,
encephalitis, yellow fever, cholera, and dengue fever (32).
Human migration and settlements. With climate
change, more frequent extreme climatic events, such as
windstorms, heat waves, heavy rainfall, droughts, and
ﬂoods are predicted (34). This is likely to cause resettling
of people to other regions that are less prone to these risks.
Moreover, over time and with changes in agricultural and
industrial land use in some areas of the world, massive
migrations and redistributions of people could occur (32).
This shift in human settlement patterns may cause
overpopulation in some parts of the world (32). Also, as
people migrate from low-lying coastal areas to interior areas
or from drought-affected farms to cities, this gives rise to
more urbanization (32). As the “climate-change immi-
grants” move to new lands, there can be an overpopulation
that, in turn, brings about socioeconomic disruptions,
compromised food security and safety, and negative health
impacts (32). This is expected to exacerbate the problem of
deforestation, as there is a quest for more land and
infrastructure, thus leading to further release of CO2 in
the Earth’s atmosphere.
RELATIONSHIP AMONG FOOD SAFETY AND
CLIMATE CHANGE, CLIMATE VARIABILITY, AND
CLIMATIC FACTORS
It has been documented that climate change is an
important driver of emerging risks, threatening food and
feed safety, plant and animal health, and nutritional quality,
as shown in Table 1 (48). However, with the number of
hazards and factors involved, there are large uncertainties in
the relationship between climate change and food safety.
Climate change is thought to have an adverse impact on
humans, plants, animals, and environmental systems with
the potential to exacerbate the frequency and severity of
certain foodborne diseases (78). According to the Fourth
Report by the United Nations International Panel on
Climate Change, increased temperatures, elevated CO2
levels, changes in rainfall pattern, and extreme weathers
will likely compromise food safety (80). The climate
change and emerging risks for food safety project, a
multidisciplinary network consisting of international and
intergovernmental experts involved in climate change, aims
to identify emerging risks linked to climate change in
relation to food safety. It came to the conclusion that climate
change impacts on the occurrence, persistence, dominance
(78, 79), and toxicity of marine and freshwater algal
blooms, bacteria, fungi, viruses, parasites (40, 86), as well
as vectors pathogenic to plants and animals (48). As a
result, changes in climatic factors will likely inﬂuence the
(i) sources and modes of transmission, (ii) growth and
survival, and (iii) ecology of pathogens in food (78, 86). For
instance, temperature changes may affect the reproduction
period of pathogens, thereby altering distribution and
growth, and in some areas, lead to the emergence of new
pathogens for a speciﬁc host (86). Major outcomes of
climate change are the emergence of new hazards or an
increased host susceptibility to existing and known hazards
(48).
MICROBIOLOGICAL HAZARDS AND
CLIMATE CHANGE
There can be a range of hazards that can compromise
the safety of food at various points along the production
chain. For example, because microorganisms are ubiquitous
in nature, pathogenic microorganisms coupled with climate
change, can contaminate food at any stage, from farm to
fork (54), as illustrated in Figure 2. Foodborne pathogens
are mainly hazardous bacteria, viruses, or parasites that are
present in food, leading to food poisoning or foodborne
1886
DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND NEETOO
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
diseases (72). According to the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, foodborne hazards are classiﬁed by food
hazard pairs, that is, food frequently associated with the
hazard of interest (72). Some examples of common food
hazard pairs are histamine and ﬁsh, Salmonella and poultry,
Campylobacter spp. and dairy products, Vibrio spp. and
mollusks, and noroviruses and leafy green vegetables or
shellﬁsh (72, 78). Contamination of food by infectious,
toxicoinfectious, or toxigenic organisms can occur in
various food sectors, including crop, livestock, and seafood
production, and these are highly inﬂuenced by environ-
mental determinants (73). For example, heavy rainfall can
cause runoffs of human sewerage in fresh watercourses,
thereby contaminating water used for irrigation of crops.
Weather and climate factors, in turn, affect these environ-
mental determinants, potentially enhancing the viability,
stability, reproduction, and even the transport rates of the
pathogens (73), and altering the exposure pathways of
foodborne diseases. Two highly inﬂuential climatic vari-
ables that affect the occurrence of foodborne diseases are
temperature and precipitation (73, 49). With the predicted
rise in world temperature, this will likely increase the heat
load on all systems of the cold chain (36). Moreover, a 2 to
38C rise in the temperature will likely reduce the chilled
storage life by half and lead to increased food spoilage and
poisoning, unless the cold chain is extended and improved
(36).
Foodborne diseases associated with plant-based
commodities. In recent decades, foodborne disease out-
breaks have been increasingly associated with the con-
sumption of fresh produce, often as raw vegetables in salads
(2, 29, 47). Findings have shown that the risk of foodborne
diseases is directly related to the prevalence of bacteria on
leafy green vegetables. Moreover, the phenomenon of
internalization of enteric pathogens, such as Salmonella
spp. and Escherichia coli O157:H7, has been reported in
various vegetables, including alfalfa sprouts, lettuces,
tomatoes, broccoli, celery, squash, and green onion (2, 30,
47). The risk of contamination of fresh produce by
pathogens can be exacerbated by the consequences of
climate change, such as frequent and more intense rainfall
(15), recurring ﬂood and drought (14), and temperature
increase (29, 30). Following heavy precipitation, levels of
bacteria in the air can increase by 25- to 30-fold in
agricultural ﬁelds, and splash dispersal can lead to bacterial
contamination of fresh produce (15). Moreover, ﬂooding
has been linked with an overﬂow of untreated human
sewage, resulting in an increased probability of contamina-
tion of fresh produce by enteric viruses and bacteria (78).
Similarly, protozoan parasites, usually associated with
waterborne diseases, are mostly affected by changes in
precipitation pattern. Intense rainfall and ﬂooding may also
lead to increased waterborne diseases, as well as contam-
ination of raw vegetables by protozoan parasites (78). As a
result, frequent ﬂooding of cropland can facilitate the entry
of human pathogens in the food chain upon consumption of
contaminated raw produce (78). In 2017, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration had eventually issued a warning
concerning the consumption of fresh produce that had been
in contact with ﬂood water (45). Drought also poses a threat
to agriculture, albeit indirectly, because it leads to scarcity
of clean irrigation water. In a study carried out by Ganeshan
and Neetoo (26), tomato and bell pepper fruits were directly
TABLE 1. Summary of major effects of climate-dependent environmental factors on the behavior of foodborne pathogens and impact on
food safetya
Effect of climate on environmental factors involved in the growth,
survival, and pathogenicity of foodborne pathogens
Temperature
Increase
Increased occurrence of parasites in freshwater fish and plants (33)
Detection of new mycotoxin-producing fungal species in maize in Europe (56)
Increase in mastitis incidence in cows (44)
Increase in Salmonella in poultry (33)
Increased number of Vibrio cells in seafood (50)
Decrease
Increased contamination of berries by norovirus and hepatitis A (11, 23)
Precipitation and humidity
Increase in precipitation
Internalization of pathogenic E. coli and Salmonella in leafy green vegetables (29, 47)
Increased contamination of seafood by fecal indicator organisms due to water runoffs (50)
Increased risk of splash dispersal and aerosolized Salmonella infecting tomatoes due to increased
frequency of short period of heavy rainfall (15)
Decrease in precipitation
and humidity
Increased mycotoxin contamination by xerophilic fungi in maize at preharvest stage (56)
pH and salinity
Decrease in pH
Ocean acidification leads to increased HABs (50)
Decrease in salinity
Increases in bioaccumulation of toxic metals in molluscs (86)
Light
Increase
Favors the growth of HABs (50)
a Adapted from Duchenne et al. (22).
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1887
sprayed with either E. coli O157:H7 or Listeria monocy-
togenes. Viable bacterial cells could be recovered from the
edible portion of the fruits up to 48 h postinoculation. This
suggests that vegetables irrigated with contaminated water
are likely to harbor human pathogens, and the latter may
eventually proliferate under rising temperatures (26). As
such, the use of irrigation water of a poor sanitary quality
may lead to the contamination of fresh produce, as
exempliﬁed by the U.S. 2008 Salmonella serotype Saintpaul
outbreak linked to irrigated produce (45). Furthermore, with
increases in temperature, the transmission cycle and
geographical distribution of foodborne trematodes, which
are transmitted via raw or undercooked crops, are also
inﬂuenced (78). According to Tirado et al. (78), an increase
in temperature may also result in accelerated disease
transmission, as well as the occurrence of outbreaks in
new locations. Climate change has also been found to
increase the biotic stress of plants, thus making it more
conducive for plant diseases (47). As a result, diseased or
susceptible food crops are weakened and become more
prone to contamination by human pathogens, which in turn
compromise food safety (28, 78). Indeed, previous research
has suggested that bacterial plant pathogens can enhance
inﬁltration or internalization of human pathogens in the
roots, leaves, and fruits of food crops (19).
Zoonotic foodborne diseases. Climate change can also
increase the risk of zoonotic foodborne diseases both
directly or indirectly. As climate change affects the living
conditions of livestock animals, this makes them more
susceptible to microbial diseases, thus acting as major
reservoirs of diseases. Moreover, an increased population of
animal pests act as vectors for these zoonoses. As far as
seafood safety is concerned, changes in air and sea
temperature, precipitation patterns, ocean acidity, and
salinity can also have an effect on the viability and
disease-causing potential of human pathogens present in
seawater and seafood. All these different food contamina-
tion pathways are inﬂuenced by climate change, thus posing
a threat to the safety of different food commodities.
Foodborne diseases associated with poultry. A
highly persistent zoonotic pathogen in poultry is Salmonella
and is the leading cause of acute gastroenteritis worldwide
(38). According to Herrera et al. (33), past research has
documented that Salmonella infections are directly propor-
FIGURE 2. Impact of climatic factors on
the safety of food at the production chain:
(a) the growth and survival of micro-
organims are inﬂuenced by climatic factors
and the ability of the microorganisms to
cause an infection or produce a toxin is
dependent on the climatic factors; (b)
mycotoxigenic fungi infect and colonize
crops used in the feed production for
animals; (c) mycotoxins produced by the
mycotoxigenic fungi or dioxins present in
the feed are passed to the animals via
contaminated feed ingredients; (d) in the
farm, animal pathogens and zoonotic
agents infect the animal; (e) antibiotics
are administered to the animals to treat
bacterial infections; and (f) mycotoxins,
dioxins, superbugs, antibiotic residues, and
zoonotic agents are transferred from the
animal to the food if not properly pasteur-
ized or monitored and can also be present
in processed foods (22).
1888
DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND NEETOO
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
tional to temperature. In several European countries,
salmonellosis has been found to increase by 5 to 10% for
each 18C increase in weekly temperature, for temperatures
above 58C. (78, 86). Climate change–related warming is
projected to favor the colonization and growth of Salmo-
nella in broiler ﬂocks (38). Without proper surveillance,
monitoring, and disinfection, long periods of high temper-
ature can cause an increase in the number of Salmonella
cells in the broiler ﬂock. Consequently, the bacterium can be
passed on in the food chain. Moreover, Campylobacter, also
a pathogenic bacterium in poultry, is inﬂuenced by
temperature. From 1999 to 2010 in Israel, an increase of
18C above the threshold temperature of 278C resulted in an
increase of 16.1% of Campylobacter jejuni infections and
18.8% of Campylobacter coli in all age groups (24). The
density of common houseﬂies (Musca domestica), which
may act as a vector of Campylobacter, is highest at mean
temperatures of 20 to 258C, and the ﬂies are most active at
low humidity (84). In broiler ﬂocks, these ﬂies feed on litter
and lay eggs, which in turn hatch within a few hours to
again produce more ﬂies (84). Milder winters will increase
the survivability of a range of Campylobacter vectors,
including ﬂies, resulting in a projected increase in
campylobacteriosis (24). With climate change and climatic
variability, a 3% increase in the incidence of campylobac-
teriosis, including vectorborne campylobacteriosis, has been
predicted for the coming decades (78).
Foodborne diseases associated with seafood. Ap-
proximately 8% of the world’s population rely on seafood as
a source of food and income (12, 41, 50). Bacteria,
particularly Vibrio spp., are the main pathogenic organisms
associated with seafood, and the occurrence, frequency, and
severity are greatly affected by rises in temperature (50).
The main effects of climatic changes associated with
seafood contamination are temperature increase in the
upper ocean, an accelerated water cycle, ocean acidiﬁcation,
increased stratiﬁcation, and changes in the degree of
weather disturbances and rainfall patterns (41, 50). In
Mauritius, a tropical island, two studies investigated the
effect of climate on the prevalence of Vibrio species in
ﬁnﬁsh and oyster respectively. Pohoroo and Ranghoo-
Sanmukhiya (64) demonstrated a statistically higher
prevalence of Vibrio spp., namely, Vibrio alginolyticus,
Vibrio cholerae, and Vibrio parahaemolyticus, in ﬁnﬁsh in
summer compared with winter seasons. Reega et al. (69)
demonstrated a higher Vibrio density in oysters in summer
compared with winter. Other emerging factors that impact
Vibrio-associated infections include drought conditions,
dust emissions, and wind direction (24). Aeroplanktonic
adult ﬂies (chironomids) are known to be airborne vectors
of V. cholerae, and with wind, the bacterial disease is
disseminated through the spread of the vector. Three cholera
outbreaks were recorded in Africa and on the Indian
subcontinent due to the spread of V. cholerae via
aeroplanktonic adult ﬂies (24). In Alaska, warmer water
increased the number of V. parahaemolyticus and resulted in
outbreaks with more than 400 conﬁrmed cases in summer
2004 (24, 50). Soft turtles and marine ﬁshes are colonized
by V. cholerae, and climate change not only impacts the
population density of the bacterium but also bring shifts in
the habitats and distribution of those marine organisms, thus
leading to more outbreaks in several countries, especially in
those where such food is consumed raw or half cooked (24).
CHEMICAL HAZARDS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
Mycotoxigenic fungi and mycotoxins. Mycotoxins
are secondary metabolites produced by ﬁlamentous fungi
belonging mainly to the genera Aspergillus, Fusarium,
Penicillium, and Alternaria (7, 59). The most toxic
mycotoxins are aﬂatoxins, zearalenone, trichothecenes,
fumonisins, and ochratoxins, as they have carcinogenic
and immunosuppressive properties, affecting both humans
and animals (1, 59). Mycotoxigenic fungi can infect various
staple crops (62), such as corn, rice, maize, as well as nuts,
coffee, grains, dried fruits, spices, feed crops, fruits, and
vegetables (1, 4, 7), and these can, in turn, produce
mycotoxins that affect safety. For instance, there is
increased concern about fungal diseases caused by Fusar-
ium and Aspergillus spp. in staple crops, as they not only
cause yield loss, but they are also mycotoxin producers that
enter the food chain (6). Mycotoxin contamination of food
is thought to be exacerbated by the effects of climate change
(54, 63). The main climatic factors involved in the
occurrence and prevalence of mycotoxigenic fungi are
temperature, humidity, and precipitation (62). Moreover, a
slightly elevated CO2 level has been found to have an
impact, as well when interacting with temperature and water
availability (62). Some secondary factors affecting myco-
toxin contamination of crops include the displacement of
existing fungal species by virulent fungi, pest attacks, the
effectiveness of fungicides and pesticides, and shift in the
geographical distribution of insects (62).
Cereals. Cereals (such as wheat, rice, and maize)
constitute approximately 56 and 44% of global human and
animal consumption, respectively (6), and are the most
severely affected by pathogenic and mycotoxigenic fungi
(51, 58). According to the European Food Safety Author-
ity’s Emerging Risks Unit, mycotoxin contamination in
maize due to climate change is a potential emerging hazard,
with a risk of aﬂatoxin contamination expected to increase
(79). Typically, mycotoxin increases with relative humidity
above 75% and when there is a decline in temperature in the
range below 128C or above 328C (62). However, some more
virulent mycotoxigenic fungi are able to thrive in adverse
conditions. The main aﬂatoxin producers, Aspergillus ﬂavus
and Aspergillus parasiticus, are xerophilic in nature,
enabling them to thrive under higher temperatures and
lower rainfall. This has been exempliﬁed by the case in
northern Italy in 2003, whereby under hot and dry spells, A.
ﬂavus was actively able to colonize maize by outcompeting
the formerly predominant Fusarium spp. (62). A study was
carried out by Battilani et al. (8) on the possible emergence
of aﬂatoxin B1 in cereals in Europe due to climate change. It
has been projected that there will be an increased risk of
aﬂatoxin contamination in the four main maize-producing
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1889
countries, namely France, Hungary, Romania, and northeast
Italy due to an increased temperature (8, 58). A number of
Penicillium species are also xerotolerant or xerophilic, that
is, they are able to colonize food products with a reduced
water activity, which usually is an environmental stress for
other microorganisms. As for Fusarium spp., they are not
xerophiles but usually colonize crops at the preharvest stage
and induce mycotoxin production at the postharvest stage
under temperature (10 to 158C and .308C) and water (0.90
to 0.93 water activity) stress (52). This property enables
them to colonize and infect many staple crops, such as
cereals, nuts, fruits, and vegetables and hence produce
mycotoxin in the edible parts of the crops. Fumonisin, a
mycotoxin produced by certain Fusarium species, occurs
under drought stress, and its presence was evident in maize
during the dry season in southern and eastern Africa (62).
Under high temperatures, the growth of the fumonisin
producer Fusarium verticillioides is favored, thus causing it
to dominate other maize-borne Fusarium species. The most
common fungal species associated with Fusarium head
blight in cereals was F. culmorum until the dawning of
2000, when Fusarium graminearum turned out to be more
abundant on wheat (58). It has been predicted that by 2050,
the north European climate will become more humid, thus
forecasting a shift in the Fusarium ﬂora in cereal grains
with F. graminearum becoming the dominant one (58).
Nuts. The three fungal genera of importance involved
in food spoilage and production of mycotoxins in nuts are
Aspergillus, Fusarium, and Penicillium (77). Several nuts,
such as peanuts (76), tree, and Brazil nuts, are often
susceptible to contamination by mycotoxins produced by
toxigenic Aspergillus (Table 2). Drought is favorable for
infection of the plant, mainly by A. ﬂavus, A. parasiticus,
and Aspergillus nomius, and facilitates production of
aﬂatoxin at the preharvest stage (77). At the postharvest
stage, nuts can be contaminated by ochratoxin A produced
by the toxigenic fungi Aspergillus ochraceus, Aspergillus
carbonarius, and Aspergillus niger (77). Regarding peanuts,
they are mainly affected by A. ﬂavus and A. parasiticus,
resulting in aﬂatoxin contamination (77). The level of
aﬂatoxin produced in peanuts at the preharvest stage is
greatly affected by spells of droughts. On the other hand,
tree nuts, such as almonds, pistachios, walnuts, and Brazil
nuts, are more susceptible to A. ﬂavus at the postharvest
stage and become contaminated with aﬂatoxins (77). Brazil
nuts, harvested on the ground, are also more prone to
infection with A. ﬂavus, producer of aﬂatoxin, when
exposed to humid conditions (77).
HAB and phycotoxins. Harmful algal bloom (HAB) is
the rapid spread of naturally occurring microalgal cells or
macroalgae to a bulk number that harms the environment. A
number of marine microalgae that are responsible for HABs
are known to elaborate natural toxins, known as phycotox-
ins (65). Prokaryotic microalgae, such as cyanobacteria
produce cyanotoxins, while dinoﬂagellates and diatoms,
which are eukaryotic, produce marine biotoxins, also known
as marine algal toxins. Several phycotoxins are neurotoxic
and threaten human health and food safety (65). For
instance, cyanotoxins can contaminate freshwater reservoirs
and drinking water, thus posing a direct threat to human
health (17). A study carried out by Ballah et al. (5) at an
impounding reservoir of Mauritius noted the presence of
cyanotoxin-producing microalga Oscillatoria and further
observed that its population density increased during the
“winter-to-summer” transition month of October. As for
marine biotoxins, they bioaccumulate in various tissues of
aquatic organisms, such as bivalve molluscs and ﬁsh, and
enter the food chain upon consumption (65). For example,
eating seafood contaminated by saxitoxins produced by the
algae Alexandrium can cause paralytic shellﬁsh poisoning
(25). Climate change pressures are believed to have an
impact on marine planktonic systems globally, and it is
projected that the frequency and severity of HABs may
increase (82). Speciﬁc climatic factors involved in HAB
occurrence and prevalence are temperature, stratiﬁcation,
light, ocean acidiﬁcation, precipitation, and wind (82). It is,
thus, projected that under a changing climatic scenario,
those factors will affect the current spatial and temporal
distribution of HAB species. Spatially, the geographic
domains of HAB species may expand, contract, or shift
latitudinally (82). Temporally, there may be a shift in
seasons due to an increase in atmospheric and water
temperature that will likely prolong summertime conditions,
causing growth to contract or expand (82). Temperature
plays a major role in the physiological processes of
phytoplankton at different growth stages and bloom
development and is expected to change with climate
TABLE 2. Toxigenic Aspergillus species that affect the different
types of nutsa
Nuts
Mycotoxigenic
Aspergillus species
Reference(s)
Peanuts
A. flavus
A. parasiticus
A. niger
A. nomius
A. pseudotamarii
A. bombycis
A. minisclerotigenes
A. arachidicola
76, 77
Tree nuts (almonds,
pistachios, walnuts,
hazelnuts)
A. flavus
A. carbonarius
A. niger
A. ochraceus
A. nidulans
A. tamarii
A. fumigatus
A. melleus
10, 77
Brazil nuts
A. flavus
A. parasiticus
A. nomius
A. arachidicola
A. bombysis
A. pseudonomius
A. pseudotamarii
53, 77
a Adapted from Taniwaki et al. (77).
1890
DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND NEETOO
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
change. However, depending on a range of factors, some
coastal regions may be more affected by global warming
than others. In subtropical or tropical waters, the growth of
HABs may increase if temperature exceeds the optimum
growth temperature (82). The relationship between climate
change and outbreaks of marine HABs is exempliﬁed by the
case of ciguatera ﬁsh poisoning in the tropical Paciﬁc that
was observed to increase during the El Niño period (50).
Consumption of seafood caught from waters where there is
the occurrence of HAB thus creates a pathway for these
toxins to enter the food chain.
Antimicrobials and antimicrobial resistance. Anti-
microbial resistance is another emerging issue of global
concern. The overuse of antibiotics in terrestrial livestock
production, aquaculture, and crop production has led to an
increase in pathogens that are resistant to certain antimi-
crobials. Approximately 73% of antimicrobial use is
intended for meat production, thus giving rise to antimi-
crobial-resistant pathogenic microorganisms in food-pro-
ducing animals (24). In 2010, the global consumption of
antimicrobials in livestock was 63,151 t, and this amount is
projected to increase by 67% by 2030 (24). Major
foodborne and waterborne pathogens, namely, V. cholerae,
Campylobacter spp., L. monocytogenes, Salmonella spp., E.
coli, and Arcobacter spp., are increasingly showing
resistance to clinically important antibiotics (24). In
addition to bacteria exhibiting resistance to antibiotics,
there is increasing evidence of fungi acquiring resistance to
antifungal drugs. With warmer temperatures brought by
climate change, this will likely result in a rise in the
prevalence of microbial infections, thereby increasing
resistance globally. The Food and Agriculture Organization,
in fact, reported that some countries have experienced a rise
in the prevalence of antimicrobial resistance with an
increase of average ambient temperature (24). Moreover,
the pathogenic fungus Candida auris adapted to climate
change–induced warmer temperatures and replicated at
378C (13). It has been posited that warmer temperatures
may facilitate horizontal transfer of resistance genes. This
has been conﬁrmed by Johnsen and Kroer (39) who
previously reported an increase in plasmid-mediated
transfer of genes between E. coli and Pseudomonas putida
in response to a rise in temperature.
Use of antibiotics for food crop production. Changes
in temperature and other environmental factors bring along
changes and increase in geographic ranges of pests and
pathogens (78). This naturally implies an increase in disease
burden, as well as use of antimicrobials, thus exacerbating
the problem related to antimicrobial resistance. In Florida in
the United States, citrus fruits suffer from a bacterial
infection named “citrus greening disease” transmitted by the
Asian citrus psyllid (Diaphorina citri) that originated from
China (24). To control the disease, the antibiotics
streptomycin and oxytetracycline, usually used to treat
human diseases, are being used in agriculture, and this use
is expected to rise. Hence, this will likely result in higher
amount of drug residues in plant-based commodities
entering the food chain. Another example is the use of
contaminated water in plant irrigation. Fresh vegetables and
crops sprayed with contaminated water containing antibiot-
ic-resistant bacteria not only act as vehicles for foodborne
pathogens but also as carriers of antimicrobial residues (78).
Nonpathogenic foodborne microorganisms, such as Entero-
bacter cloacae, can also transfer mobile genetic elements
that contain antibiotic resistance genes (31). During ﬂoods,
fresh produce can get contaminated with Enterobacter
cloacae originating from untreated human sewage or during
splash dispersal. Consumption of such contaminated
produce can lead to foodborne illnesses, with ensuing risks
of ingestion of antibiotic-resistant bacteria (24). For
instance, Ghaly et al. (31) reported that Enterobacter
cloacae found on baby spinach leaves has the potential to
transfer resistance genes to the microbiome of the human
digestive tract upon ingestion (31).
Use of antibiotics in livestock production. Mastitis is
a common disease in dairy cattle, and it affects the
mammary tissue. Mastitis caused by methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus can lead to the transfer of antibiotic-
resistant pathogen into milk, and thereafter to humans upon
consumption, if not properly pasteurized (44). Moreover,
cows treated with antibiotics can transfer antibiotic residues
into the milk, and traces of which may favor the
development of “superbugs” and increase the incidence of
antibiotic resistance in humans (44). With the effects of
global warming, dairy cattle may become more susceptible
to infection by Streptococcus agalactiae and Streptococcus
dysgalactiae and to increased thermal stress, affecting the
milk quality and quantity, respectively (80).
Fungicides and pesticides. An estimated 20 to 40% of
global crop production is lost to pests, and according to the
Food and Agriculture Organization Corporate Statistical
Database, approximately 4.2 million t of pesticide active
ingredients were used in the world’s croplands in 2017 (24).
Over the decades, the overuse and misuse of pesticides,
especially the slowly degrading ones, have had a serious
impact on the environment and on water quality with toxic
effects on human and animal health (20, 24). Pesticides are
in the human diet in the form of residues on crops that have
been treated or through livestock, ﬁsh that have bioaccu-
mulated the chemicals from their feed or water bodies, or
through contaminated drinking water. Because climate
change is expected to change the geographical distribution,
life cycle, and population of agricultural pests and
pathogens, it is predicted that there will be an increase in
pesticide and fungicide use, doses, and frequency of
application (20). Higher temperatures favor a rapid
population increase of plant pests, insects, and pathogens.
For instance, in viticulture, warmer temperatures and
humidity encourage fungal growth and infections, such as
downy mildew (Plasmopara viticola) and powdery mildew
(Eysiphe necatrix) on grapes (16). As a result, there has
been more aggressive pesticide use in areas with warmer
temperatures. Lehmann et al. (46) reviewed the effects of
global warming on 31 economically important phytopha-
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1891
gous insect pests on the basis of four response categories,
namely, range expansion, life story, population dynamics,
and trophic interactions. Results demonstrated that 41% of
the insect species are expected to increase pest damage, 4%
will have a reduced effect, and 55% had mixed responses
(46). This suggests that although insect, pest, and pathogen
populations may increase, the severity of a given insect pest
may either increase or decrease with temperature increase.
When combined with rising CO2 levels and direct sunlight
exposure, elevated temperatures can cause dilution and
increased volatilization of pesticides and fungicides in
plants, lowering the concentration, and thereby reducing
their efﬁciency against pest and pathogens (20). To keep
insect damage and fungal infection in storage areas at a
minimum under rising temperature and humidity, this likely
calls for an increased use of pesticides and fungicides. In
scenarios of intense rainfall, herbicides may not only leach
into groundwater or runoff and be in water bodies, they may
also become too diluted to exert any effects (61). With
changing patterns in precipitation and humidity, there will
be increased use of fungicides and pesticides to compensate
for loss through leaching (20). Moreover, with global
warming, crop pests and pathogens have been moving
toward the pole at a rate of 2.7 (60.8) km per year since
1960 (24). With such a dramatic change in geographical
distribution, it is very likely that agricultural land will
experience an intensiﬁcation in pesticide use, compounding
the food safety risks.
Heavy metals. Heavy metals are metallic elements
with a density much higher than that of water and metal
pollution is known to have negative effects on the marine
ecosystem and human health (37). The heavy metals that are
major toxicants even at low levels of exposure are lead (Pb),
cadmium (Cd), chromium (Cr), mercury (Hg), and arsenic
(As). Heavy metals bioconcentrate at each trophic level of
the seafood chain. In a study by Bawuro et al. (9), zinc (Zn),
Pb, Cd, and copper (Cu) were detected at a relatively low
level in the ﬂesh of ﬁsh; Zn, Cu, and Pb were accumulated
in the liver, while Cd was highest in the gills. During regular
consumption of ﬁshes and seafood, heavy metals enter the
human body and may accumulate in speciﬁc organs such as
the kidney and liver (37, 57). Factors of climate change that
affect the fate of heavy metals are alterations in precipita-
tion and temperature. More intense and more frequent
rainfall patterns are predicted to enhance the runoff of heavy
metals from soil and increase their leaching into water
systems (83). Another issue is the absorption of heavy
metals by crops, which upon consumption eventually enter
the food chain. Zhang et al. (87) reported a high
contamination of heavy metals in 10.2% of arable land in
China, and this affected nearly 14% of its grain production.
Rice is a major crop that takes up and bioaccumulates the
heavy metal As from soil (24). As not only accumulates in
the rice plant but in the grain consumed as well. Because it
is a crop consumed in several developing countries,
bioaccumulation of As in rice poses a threat to the health
of millions of people. Also, a study in Bangladesh showed
that the uptake of As by plants is favored under elevated soil
temperatures (58). This shows that the level of As in rice
may double with the projected increase in soil temperatures.
Elevated temperature also favors permafrost thawing, which
in turn may release trapped heavy metals in water bodies,
such as the ocean (24). In addition, intense rainfall can also
cause the wash off of heavy metals into water bodies, and
the risk of subsequent absorption by marine species should
not be ignored (24).
EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS
Extreme weather events are unusual extreme meteoro-
logical conditions, with the climatic factor having a
maximum and minimum value above and below the ﬁxed
mean thresholds and with frequencies above or below
speciﬁed percentile levels (18). Extreme weather events are
related to human-induced climate change and is the result of
increased frequency and intensity of daily temperature
extremes and ﬂuctuations of daily precipitation extremes
(35, 75). Climate change will likely result in shifts in the
frequency and severity of extreme weather events (34).
These include ﬂoods, droughts, and heat waves, and all of
them are characterized by an intensity above the frequency
threshold or are simply out of the range of usual recorded
mean values for the weather variables. It has been projected
that by 2080, two to seven million people per year will face
the effects of coastal ﬂooding (80) and that crop and
livestock production will be negatively affected.
Floods. Floods account for 40% of all extreme weather
events that occurred worldwide 20 years ago (14), and
climate change has a great bearing on the frequency,
intensity, and duration of excessive rainfall and ﬂooding.
Flooding particularly affects agricultural lands and livestock
farms (74) and increases the likelihood of microbial and
chemical contamination of food and water (78). In 1993, a
ﬂood in the United States led to an increase in waterborne
diseases and runoff of agrochemicals into the Mississippi
River and the Gulf of Mexico (71), with a concomitant
increase in gastrointestinal illness cases (71). Foodborne
disease outbreaks of salmonellosis and cholera have also
been recorded following ﬂooding and spells of elevated
prevailing air temperature (84). Orozco et al. (67) detected
the presence of E. coli and Salmonella Newport in tomatoes
during and after ﬂooding. Hence, fresh produce grown in
ﬂooded contaminated lands act as potential vehicles for the
transmission of pathogenic microorganism. Castro-Ibáñez et
al. (14) evaluated the effects of ﬂood events on microbial
contamination of leafy greens grown in ﬂoodplains. Soil
and lettuce samples were found to have levels of coliforms
and E. coli higher than 5 and 3 log CFU/g, respectively,
when sampled 1 week after ﬂooding. Salmonella was also
detected in irrigation water and soil after ﬂooding events.
Because there is a signiﬁcant correlation between the
presence of pathogens and E. coli counts (14), the high
levels of E. coli were indicative of pathogen presence. The
study thus reinforces the hypothesis that ﬂooding represents
a main risk factor for the microbial contamination of leafy
greens. In other cases, contamination can occur via injured
crops. The accumulated water in ﬂooded soils can favor the
1892
DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND NEETOO
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
aggregation of minerals around the root, thus injuring the
plant and making it more vulnerable to bacterial and fungal
contamination (29, 47, 71). Shiraz et al. (74) evaluated the
effect of ﬂooding on the microbial safety of strawberries in
Louisiana. Three strains of E. coli were spiked in ﬂoodwater
and used to ﬂood strawberry plants for 4 h. E. coli was
detected only in soil within 96 h of ﬂooding, and 1.0 to 2.8
log CFU/g coliforms was detected in both the harvested
mature strawberries and soil at 0, 48, 96, and 144 h in all
treatments. In addition to fresh produce, farmed molluscan
shellﬁsh are also susceptible to contamination by enteric
bacteria and viruses during ﬂooding due to accumulation
and diffuse discharges of human sewage (33).
Drought. Drought is a phase with declining soil
moisture and can affect both rain-fed and irrigated
agriculture (55). Drought conditions induce stress on plants,
thereby reducing their vigour and making them more
vulnerable to pathogenic and mycotoxigenic fungi (24). In
2012, about 70% of maize was contaminated with aﬂatoxin
as a result of extreme drought in Serbia (42). In 2003, in six
northern regions of Italy, drought coupled with unusual
higher temperature caused a shift from fumonisin contam-
ination of maize, caused by F. verticillioides, to aﬂatoxin
contamination caused by Aspergillus spp. (24). Another
example is the higher incidence of A. ﬂavus in the southern
United States in 1977 and 1983 (71). Water deﬁcits not only
raise the concentration of mycotoxins in food and feed (71)
but also that of leached herbicides, fungicides, and
pesticides, as water levels drop in water bodies. In addition
to mycotoxins, heavy metals also pose a great threat to food
and water safety. Azevedo et al. (3) evaluated the effect of
drought on the level of accumulation of methylmercury
(MeHg), a neurotoxicant, in different ﬁsh species in
southeastern Brazil and noted a 20% increase in MeHg
concentration in muscle tissues of ﬁsh under drought
conditions, compared with the previous year when drought
was not experienced.
NATURAL CALAMITIES
Natural calamities are sudden extreme hydrological,
geophysical, meteorological, or climatological events,
usually occurring for a short period of time and impacting
a relatively small area at once (60). Natural calamities
encompass such events as tropical cyclones or hurricanes,
monsoons, tsunamis, tornadoes, and wildﬁres (27), and their
occurrence, intensity, and frequency are greatly inﬂuenced
by climate variability (71, 85). Since 1880, 2010 was the
second year with the largest recorded number of natural
disasters (34). That year was marked by a deadly Russian
heat wave, the warmest year for Canada, southwest
Australia’s driest year, Pakistan’s biggest ﬂood, the
second-hottest summer in the United States, devastating
drought and wildﬁres in the states of Texas, New Mexico,
and Arizona, and historic ﬂooding in the state of North
Dakota (34). Events, such as tropical cyclones, tsunamis,
and monsoon seasons, are often accompanied by increased
precipitation and severe ﬂooding. Altogether, they pose a
threat to food safety. As recorded in 1999, ﬂooding caused
by Hurricane Floyd in the coastal regions of North Carolina
and New Jersey, engendered increased fungal infections,
affecting both agriculture and human health (71). Following
Hurricane Katrina in the United States, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention reported an outbreak of
gastroenteritis, among which two cases were caused by
toxigenic V. cholerae O1 (35). In 2004 in Bangladesh, two
monsoon-related ﬂoods led to large outbreaks of diarrheal
disease, with cholera being the most common disease
outbreak, followed by infection by enterotoxigenic E. coli
(35). In cases of hurricanes and storms, where severe winds
are involved, the air currents are thought to help in the long-
range transportation of causative agents, such as fungal
spores of toxigenic fungi (35). Natural calamities do not
always have a direct impact on food safety and can
indirectly affect the safety of crops and commodities
following ﬂooding, droughts, or ﬁres. For instance, wet
paper labels on canned foods (35) may harbor dangerous
bacteria and molds, resulting in foodborne disease out-
breaks. Moreover, a power cut can lead to the disruption of
chilling, freezing, and cooking systems, eventually encour-
aging the proliferation of pathogenic and spoilage micro-
organisms, and leading to foodborne illness (35). Heat
dissipated from wildﬁres and volcanic eruptions can
activate food spoilage bacteria, and the toxic fumes may
contaminate food causing food intoxication (35). Corona-
virus disease 2019 is a pandemic that has been attributed to
zoonotic transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2, potentially from a bat to humans (70). It can,
thus, be hypothesised that natural disasters, such as
wildﬁres, can force feral animals and exotic mammals that
are vectors or carriers of pathogens to escape their natural
habitat. As a result, new strains of well-known pathogens or
emerging pathogens may eventually enter the human food
chain.
APPROACHING THE CLIMATE CHANGE
PROBLEM: MITIGATION AND ADAPTATION
According to many scientists, the CO2 emission level
should be halved over the next 50 years to be able to
monitor greenhouse global warming (21). Hence, immedi-
ate response is key to prevent the worst scenarios. There are
two ways to deal with the threat of climate change: (i)
mitigation, which is taking actions to reduce GHG
emissions and (ii) adaptation, which is altering human
behaviors to adjust to the inevitable climatic changes (21).
Some major actions for climate mitigation include increased
energy efﬁciency, the expanded use of renewable energy,
and slower deforestation (21, 32), while adaptation includes
actions, such as the building of rainwater storage systems
and the reinforcement of protective levees at coastal areas,
among others.
Improved energy efﬁciency. Improving energy efﬁ-
ciency is the easiest and quickest approach for the reduction
of GHG emissions (21). In the best interest of everyone,
countries and political leaders should cooperate in reducing
CO2 emission. Unfortunately, not all countries have the
political will to participate (21). Because money is often an
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1893
effective motivator, a carbon tax can be put in place for
energy sources that release more CO2 in the atmosphere
(21). As such, the more the energy consumed, the greater
the tax to be paid, thus providing an incentive to individuals
to be more energy efﬁcient. The government can also
encourage individuals to reduce their energy consumption
by providing monetary incentives for energy conservation
(21). Of course, this will encourage companies to bring
forward more energy-efﬁcient vehicles and appliances.
Sweden, Finland, Norway, and The Netherlands have
already adopted the idea of a carbon tax (21). However,
in some countries such as the United States, the taxes may
represent a larger percentage of the income of poor people
(21). Transportation is one of the largest users of energy in
the world. Hence, there is a need to tackle fuel efﬁciency
and to encourage people to go for smaller and lighter cars.
For example, hybrid cars are a modern approach, where the
energy lost during braking is then stored and used during
acceleration (21). Moreover, in 1970s, when fuel was
restricted from the Middle East, automakers had to nearly
double the average efﬁciency of automobiles, and this
resulted in a CO2 fall from 4% to between 1 and 2% yearly
(21). In agriculture, good agricultural practices should be
inculcated. For example, techniques can be developed to
capture CH4 from landﬁlls or animal wastes for electricity
(21, 32).
Transformation of energy. To substantially reduce
GHG emissions, drastic changes need to be made. One
major approach is the shift from the carbon economy to a
sustainable energy economy (21, 32). Alternative energy
sources are solar energy, which can be used in photovoltaic
cells, hydropower to produce hydroelectricity, wind energy
harnessed by wind turbines and wind farms, and geothermal
energy from rocks for the production of electricity, biofuels,
and nuclear power (21, 32). For instance, hydropower
produces about 24% of the world’s electricity, and wind
could supply 40 times the current demand for electricity and
about 5 times the global consumption of power (21).
However, they also have certain drawbacks. For example,
wind farms are expensive, while nuclear power can have
compromised safety aspects. Nevertheless, those need to be
tackled with less expensive or fail-safe designs to reduce the
possibility of catastrophic accidents and for safe disposal of
radioactive wastes. Other approaches are carbon sequestra-
tion in natural systems, such as the soil, through large-scale
reforestation, the increase of organic matter in the soil, and
farming techniques, such as no-till farming and crop
rotation and research (21, 32).
Adaptation. Alongside mitigation, adaptation should
also be considered, despite reductions in GHG emissions,
temperatures will keep rising due to the already present
GHGs (21). Thus, nations should prepare for the changes.
Adaptation can be a costly process, but as it is said,
prevention is better than cure, and planning ahead will spare
more deaths and destruction (21). Some examples of
adaptation are building of rainwater storage systems to
alleviate damage caused by ﬂoods, with the water being
reused during drier periods, reinforcement of protective
levees on coastal areas, the development of crop strains that
require less water and soil moisture, planting of crops
earlier, and moving farms to more climatically hospitable
areas (21, 32). This will be best achieved though
cooperation among individuals and countries to tackle this
climate agenda.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
It is anticipated that climate change and related
phenomena will increasingly threaten the safety of the food
supply and bring about a steady rise in the incidence of
foodborne infection and intoxication in the coming years.
This urgently calls for more interdisciplinary research and
concerted efforts among food scientists, public health
ofﬁcers, epidemiologists, veterinarians, meteorologists,
and statisticians to better understand and address the
challenges of climate change and food safety.
Thanks to global foodborne disease surveillance
programs, it is now possible to get real-time updates on
the occurrence of any foodborne disease outbreaks in most
parts of the world. However, it is additionally important that
longitudinal studies are carried out in most developing and
developed nations to gather large epidemiological data sets
to ascertain relationships between foodborne outbreaks and
climate phenomena. Country leaders should provide support
to government-owned public health laboratories to focus on
active surveillance systems and early detection methods.
Automated and high-throughput methods of detection of
pathogens, toxins, and chemical residues in food are needed
for enhanced monitoring of contamination. Genotype-based
approaches to surveillance of food pathogens, such as use of
real-time PCR and whole genome sequencing, also need to
be widely implemented to enhance tracing and tracking of
foodborne illnesses. As such, any emerging foodborne
disease trends or otherwise unnoticed outbreaks may be
detected in almost real time. Moreover, data sharing among
different sectors or ministries and timely translation of
research outputs are essential.
Empowerment of the different actors in the food chain
to implement food safety management programs in the
production systems is also key. In addition to law
enforcement, a critical review of existing food laws and
standards is also needed in order to adapt to emerging risks
and threats. Hence, developing food safety preparedness
plans in the event of natural disasters should also be a
national priority for every country. Finally, education and
awareness campaigns on food safety and health promotion
targeting the general population should not be overlooked.
Universities, as think tanks, should wield a greater role in
education, training, and outreach on the food safety risks
linked to climatic factors and climate change, while at the
same time building capacity in risk assessment and
management. The coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic is a
concrete example of a food contamination issue that had
resulted in an unprecedented epidemic of a global
proportion. Indeed, risk analysis constitutes the sine qua
non for science-based decision making by stakeholders in
1894
DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND NEETOO
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
the different agrifood sectors, all with the view to devising
approaches for “climate prooﬁng” our food systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the Higher Education Commission of Mauritius
(REF HEC 11/4/13/10) for support.
REFERENCES
1.
Agriopoulou, S., E. Stamatelopoulou, and T. Varzakas. 2020.
Advances in occurrence, importance, and mycotoxin control
strategies: prevention and detoxiﬁcation in foods. Foods 9:137.
2.
Ávila-Quezada, G., E. Sánchez, A. A. Gardea-Béjar, and E. Acedo-
Félix. 2010. Salmonella spp. and Escherichia coli: survival and
growth in plant tissue. N. Z. J. Crop Hortic. Sci. 38:47–55.
3.
Azevedo, L. S., I. A. Pestana, A. R. M. Rocha, A. C. Meneguelli-
Souza, C. A. I. Lima, M. G. Almeida, W. R. Bastos, and C. M. M.
Souza. 2018. Drought promotes increases in total mercury and
methylmercury concentrations in ﬁsh from the lower Paraíba do Sul
river, southeastern Brazil. Chemosphere 202:483–490.
4.
Balendres, M. A. O., P. Karlovsky, and C. J. R. Cumagun. 2019.
Mycotoxigenic fungi and mycotoxins in agricultural crop commod-
ities in the Philippines: review. Foods 8:249.
5.
Ballah, M., V. Bhoyroo, and H. Neetoo. 2019. Assessment of the
physico-chemical quality and extent of algal proliferation in water
from an impounding reservoir prone to eutrophication. J. Ecol.
Environ. 43:5. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41610-018-0094-z
6.
Barea, J.-M. 2015. Interactions among plants, arbuscular mycorrhizal
and mycotoxigenic fungi related to food crop health in a scenario of
climate change, p. 53–64. In L. M. Botana and M. J. Sainz (ed.),
Climate change and mycotoxins. Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin.
7.
Barkai-Golan, R., and N. Paster. 2008. Mouldy fruits and vegetables
as a source of mycotoxins: part 1. World Mycotoxin J. 1:147–159.
8.
Battilani, P., P. Toscano, H. J. Van der Fels-Klerx, A. Moretti, M. C.
Leggieri, C. Brera, A. Rortais, T. Goumperis, and T. Robinson. 2016.
Aﬂatoxin B1 contamination in maize in Europe increases due to
climate change. Sci. Rep. 6:24328.
9.
Bawuro, A. A., R. B. Voegborlo, and A. A. Adimado. 2018.
Bioaccumulation of heavy metals in some tissues of ﬁsh in Lake
Geriyo, Adamawa State, Nigeria. J. Environ. Public Health
2018:1854892.
10.
Bayman, P., J. L. Baker, and N. E. Mahoney. 2002. Aspergillus on
tree nuts: incidence and associations. Mycopathologia 155:161–169.
11.
Calder, L., G. Simmons, C. Thornley, P. Taylor, K. Pritchard, G.
Greening, and J. Bishop. 2003. An outbreak of hepatitis A associated
with consumption of raw blueberries. Epidemiol. Infect. 131:745–
751.
12.
Campos, C. J. A., S. R. Kershaw, and R. J. Lee. 2013. Environmental
inﬂuences on faecal indicator organisms in coastal waters and their
accumulation in bivalve shellﬁsh. Estuar. Coast. 36:834–853.
13.
Casadevall, A., D. P. Kontoyiannis, and V. Robert. 2019. On the
emergence of Candida auris: climate change, azoles, swamps, and
birds. mBio 10:e01397-19. https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.01397-19
14.
Castro-Ibáñez, I., M. I. Gil, J. A. Tudela, and A. Allende. 2015.
Microbial safety considerations of ﬂooding in primary production of
leafy greens: a case study. Food Res. Int. 68:62–69.
15.
Cevallos-Cevallos, J. M., G. Gu, M. D. Danyluk, N. S. Dufault, and
A. H. C. Van Bruggen. 2012. Salmonella can reach tomato fruits on
plants exposed to aerosols formed by rain. Int. J. Food Microbiol.
158:140–146.
16.
Chakraborty, S., A. V. Tiedemann, and P. S. Teng. 2000. Climate
change: potential impact on plant diseases. Environ. Pollut. 108:317–
326.
17.
Cheung, M. Y., S. Liang, and J. Lee. 2013. Toxin-producing
cyanobacteria in freshwater: a review of the problems, impact on
drinking water safety, and efforts for protecting public health. J.
Microbiol. 51:1–10.
18.
Collins, D. A., P. M. Della-Marta, N. Plummer, and B. C. Trewin.
2000. Trends in annual frequencies of extreme temperature events in
Australia. Aust. Meteorol. Mag. 49:277–292.
19.
Critzer, F., and M. Doyle. 2010. Microbial ecology of foodborne
pathogens associated with produce. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 21:125–
130.
20.
Delcour, I., P. Spanoghe, and M. Uyttendaele. 2015. Literature
review: impact of climate change on pesticide use. Food Res. Int.
68:7–15.
21.
Desonie, D. 2008. Climate: causes and effects of climate change.
Chelsea House Publishers, New York.
22.
Duchenne, R., V. M. Ranghoo-Sanmukhiya, and H. Neetoo. 2021.
Impact of climate change and climate variability on food safety and
occurrence of foodborne diseases, chap 25. In O. O. Babalola (ed.),
Food security and safety: African perspectives. Springer Nature,
Cham, Switzerland.
23.
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) Panel on Biological
Hazards. 2014. Scientiﬁc Opinion on the risk posed by pathogens
in food of non-animal origin. Part 2 (Salmonella and Norovirus in
berries). EFSA J. 12:95.
24.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. (FAO).
2020. Climate change: unpacking the burden on food safety. FAO,
Rome. Available at: https://doi.org/10.4060/ca8185en. Accessed 16
November 2020.
25.
Fox, J. W. 2012. Venoms and poisons from marine organisms, p.
697–700. In L. Goldman and A. I. Schafer (ed.), Goldman’s Cecil
medicine, 24th ed. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia.
26.
Ganeshan, S., and H. Neetoo. 2015. Pre-harvest microbial contam-
ination of tomato and pepper plants: understanding the pre-harvest
contamination pathways of mature tomato and bell pepper plants
using bacterial pathogen surrogates. Adv. Crop Sci. Technol. 4:204.
27.
Garcia, S. N., B. I. Osburn, and M. T. Jay-Russell. 2020. One health
for food safety, food security, and sustainable food production. Front.
Sustain. Food Syst. 4:1. https://doi.org/10.3389/fsufs.2020.00001
28.
Garrett, K. A., M. Nita, E. D. De Wolf, P. D. Esker, L. Gomez-
Montano, and A. H. Sparks. 2016. Plant pathogens as indicators of
climate change, 425–437. In T. M. Letcher (ed.), Climate change:
observed impacts on planet Earth. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
29.
Ge, C., C. Lee, and J. Lee. 2012. The impact of extreme weather
events on Salmonella internalization in lettuce and green onion. Food
Res. Int. 45:1118–1122.
30.
Ge, C., C. Lee, E. Nangle, J. Li, D. Gardner, M. Kleinhenz, and J.
Lee. 2014. Impact of phytopathogen infection and extreme weather
stress on internalization of Salmonella Typhimurium in lettuce. Int. J.
Food Microbiol. 168–169:24–31.
31.
Ghaly, T. M., L. Chow, A. J. Asher, L. S. Waldron, and M. R.
Gillings. 2017. Evolution of class 1 integrons: mobilization and
dispersal via food-borne bacteria. PLoS One 12:e0179169. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179169
32.
Hardy, J. T. 2003. Climate change: causes, effects, and solutions.
John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
33.
Herrera, M., R. Anadón, S. Z. Iqbal, J. D. Bailly, and A. Ariño. 2016.
Climate change and food safety, p. 113–123. In J. Selamat and S. Z.
Iqbal (ed.), Food safety—basic concepts, recent issues, and future
challenges. Springer, Cham, Switzerland.
34.
Huber, D. G., and J. Gulledge. 2011. Extreme weather and climate
change: understanding the link, managing the risk. Available at:
https://www.c2es.org/document/extreme-weather-and-climate-
change-understanding-the-link-and-managing-the-risk/. Accessed 10
December 2020.
35.
Ivers, L. C., and E. T. Ryan. 2006. Infectious diseases of severe
weather-related and ﬂood-related natural disasters. Curr. Opin. Infect.
Dis. 19:408–414.
36.
James, S. J., and C. James. 2010. The food cold-chain and climate
change. Food Res. Int. 43:1944–1956.
37.
Javed, M., and N. Usmani. 2011. Accumulation of heavy metals in
ﬁshes: a human health concern. Int. J. Environ. Sci. 2:659.
38.
Jiang, C., K. Shaw, C. R. Upperman, D. Blythe, C. Mitchell, R.
Murtugudde, A. R. Sapkota, and A. Sapkota. 2015. Climate change,
extreme events and increased risk of salmonellosis in Maryland,
USA: evidence for coastal vulnerability. Environ. Int. 83:58–62.
39.
Johnsen, A. R., and N. Kroer. 2007. Effects of stress and other
environmental factors on horizontal plasmid transfer assessed by
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1895
direct quantiﬁcation of discrete transfer events. FEMS Microbiol.
Ecol. 59:718–728.
40.
Jones, R. A. C. 2016. Future scenarios for plant virus pathogens as
climate change progresses. Adv. Virus Res. 87–147.
41.
Kniel, K. E., and P. Spanninger. 2017. Preharvest food safety under
the inﬂuence of a changing climate. Microbiol. Spectr. 5(2). https://
doi.org/10.1128/microbiolspec.PFS-0015-2016
42.
Kos, J., E. Janić Hajnal, B. Šarić, P. Jovanov, A. Mandić, O. Đuragić,
and B. Kokić. 2018. Aﬂatoxins in maize harvested in the Republic of
Serbia over the period 2012–2016. Food Addit. Contam. Part B
Surveill. 11:246–255. https://doi.org/10.1080/19393210.2018.
1499675
43.
Kron, W., P. Löw, and Z. W. Kundzewicz. 2019. Changes in risk of
extreme weather events in Europe. Environ. Sci. Policy 10:74–83.
44.
Lacetera, N. 2019. Impact of climate change on animal health and
welfare. Anim. Front. 9:26–31.
45.
Lake, I. R., and G. C. Barker. 2018. Climate change, foodborne
pathogens and illness in higher-income countries. Curr. Environ.
Health Rep. 5:187–196.
46.
Lehmann, P., T. Ammunét, M. Barton, A. Battisti, S. D. Eigenbrode,
J. U. Jepsen, G. Kalinkat, S. Neuvonen, P. Niemelä, J. S. Terblanche,
B. Okland, and C. Björkman. 2020. Complex responses of global
insect pests to climate warming. Front. Ecol. Environ. 18:141–150.
https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.2160
47.
Liu, C., N. Hofstra, and E. Franz. 2013. Impacts of climate change on
the microbial safety of pre-harvest leafy green vegetables as
indicated by Escherichia coli O157 and Salmonella spp. Int. J. Food
Microbiol. 163:119–128.
48.
Maggiore, A., A. Afonso, F. Barrucci, and G. De Sanctis. 2020.
Climate change as a driver of emerging risks for food and feed safety,
plant, animal health and nutritional quality. Publication 2020:EN-
1881. European Food Safety Authority, Parma, Italy.
49.
Mandaviya, T. K. 2020. Review on impact of climate change on plant
diseases. Agriallis 2:AL202107. Available at: https://agriallis.com/
wp-content/uploads/2020/10/REVIEW-ON-IMPACT-OF-
CLIMATE-CHANGE-ON-PLANT-DISEASES.pdf. Accessed 7 De-
cember 2020.
50.
Marques, A., M. L. Nunes, S. K. Moore, and M. S Strom. 2010.
Climate change and seafood safety: human health implications. Food
Res. Int. 43:1766–1779.
51.
Medina, A., A. Akbar, A. Baazeem, A. Rodriguez, and N. Magan.
2017. Climate change, food security and mycotoxins: do we know
enough? Fungal Biol. Rev. 31:143–154.
52.
Medina, A., A. Rodríguez, and N. Magan. 2015. Changes in
environmental factors driven by climate change: effects on the
ecophysiology of mycotoxigenic fungi, p. 71–85. In L. M. Botana
and M. J. Sainz (ed.), Climate change and mycotoxins. Walter de
Gruyter GmbH, Berlin.
53.
Midorikawa, G. E., M. de L. M. de Sousa, O. Silva, J. do S. A. Dias,
L. I. Kanzaki, R. E. Hanada, R. M. L. C. Mesquita, R. C. Gonçalves,
V. S Alvares, D. M. C. Bittencourt, and R. N. G. Miller. 2014.
Characterization of Aspergillus species on Brazil nut from the
Brazilian Amazonian region and development of a PCR assay for
identiﬁcation at the genus level. BMC Microbiol. 14:138.
54.
Milićević, D., R. Petronijevic, Z. Petrovic, J. Djinovic Stojanovic, J.
Jovanovic, T. Baltić, and S. Jankovic. 2019. Impact of climate
change on aﬂatoxin M1 contamination of raw milk with a special
focus on climate conditions in Serbia. J. Sci. Food Agric. 99:5202–
5210. https://doi.org/10.1002/jsfa.9768
55.
Mishra, A., E. Bruno, and D. Zilberman. 2021. Compound natural
and human disasters: managing drought and COVID-19 to sustain
global agriculture and food sectors. Sci. Total Environ. 754:142210.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.142210
56.
Moretti, A., M. Pascale, and A. F. Logrieco. 2018. Mycotoxin risks
under a climate change scenario in Europe. Trends Food Sci. Technol.
84:38–40.
57.
Naveedullah, M. Z. Hashmi, C. Yu, H. Shen, D. Duan, C. Shen, L.
Lou, and Y. Chen. 2013. Risk assessment of heavy metals pollution
in agricultural soils of siling reservoir watershed in Zhejiang
Province, China. Biomed Res. Int. 2013:590306. https://doi.org//10.
1155/2013/590306
58.
Neumann, R. B., A. L. Seyfferth, J. Teshera-Levye, and J. Ellingson.
2017. Soil warming increases arsenic availability in the rice
rhizosphere. Agric. Environ. Lett. 2:170006.
59.
Nleya, N., M. Adetunji, and M. Mwanza. 2018. Current status of
mycotoxin contamination of food commodities in Zimbabwe. Toxins
10:89.
60.
Onyango, M. A., and M. Uwase. 2017. Humanitarian response to
complex emergencies and natural disasters, p. 106–116. In S. R.
Quah (ed.), International encyclopedia of public health, 2nd ed.
Academic Press, Boston.
61.
Otieno, P. O., P. O. Owuor, J. O. Lalah, G. Pﬁster, and K-W.
Schramm. 2012. Impacts of climate-induced changes on the
distribution of pesticides residues in water and sediment of Lake
Naivasha, Kenya. Environ. Monit. Assess. 185:2723–2733.
62.
Paris, M. P. K., Y.-J. Liu, K. Nahrer, and E. M. Binder. 2015. Climate
change impacts on mycotoxin production, p. 133–149. In L. M.
Botana and M. J. Sainz (ed.), Climate change and mycotoxins. Walter
de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin.
63.
Paterson, R. R. M., and N. Lima. 2010. How will climate change
affect mycotoxins in food? Food Res. Int. 43:1902–1914. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2009.07.010
64.
Pohoroo, A., and V. M. Ranghoo-Sanmukhiya. 2017. Food-borne
bacterial load in fresh and frozen ﬁsh sold in Mauritius. Int. Food
Res. J. 24:2193–2200.
65.
Pulido, O. M. 2016. Phycotoxins by harmful algal blooms (HABS)
and human poisoning: an overview. Int. Clin. Pathol. J. 2:145–152.
66.
Ocean and Climate. 2015. Scientiﬁc notes. Available at: www.ocean-
climate.org. Accessed 29 May 2021.
67.
Orozco, R. L., M. H. Iturriaga, M. L. Tamplin, P. M. Fratamico, J. E.
Call, J. B. Luchansky, and E. F. Escartin. 2008. Animal and
environmental impact on the presence and distribution of Salmonella
and Escherichia coli in hydroponic tomato greenhouses. J. Food
Prot. 71:676–683.
68.
Rao, G. G. S. N., A. V. M. S. Rao, and V. U. M. Rao. 2011. Climate
change—impacts and mitigation strategies, p. 1–14. In G. S. L. H. V.
P. Rao (ed.), Climate change adaptation strategies in agriculture and
allied sectors, 1st ed. Scientiﬁc Publishers, Jodhpur, India.
69.
Reega, K., H. Neetoo, V. Bhoyroo, N. Nazurally, Y. Jaufeerally-
Fakim, M. Hosenally, and C. Liu. 2019. Effect of climate change and
climate variability on the prevalence and distribution of Vibrio in
seawater around Mauritius. Available at: https://symposium.wiomsa.
org/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/46NEET1.pdf. Accessed 11 De-
cember 2020.
70.
Rizou, M., I. M. Galanakis, T. M. S. Aldawoud, and C. M. Galanakis.
2020. Safety of foods, food supply chain and environment within the
COVID-19 pandemic. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 102:293–299.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tifs.2020.06.008
71.
Rosenzweig, C., A. Iglesias, X. B. Yang, P. R. Epstein, and E.
Chivian. 2001. Climate change and extreme weather events—
implications for food production, plant diseases, and pests. Glob.
Chang Hum. Health 2:90–104. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:10150868
31467
72.
Safavieh, M., S. Nahar, M. Zourob, and M. U. Ahmed. 2014.
Microﬂuidic biosensors for high throughput screening of pathogens
in food, p. 327–357. In A. K. Bhunia, M. S. Kim, and C. R. Taitt
(ed.), High throughput screening for food safety assessment, 1st ed.
Woodhead Publishing, Cambridge.
73.
Semenza, J. C., S. Herbst, A. Rechenburg, J. E. Suk, C. Höser, C.
Schreiber, and T. Kistemann. 2012. Climate change impact
assessment of food- and waterborne diseases. Crit. Rev. Environ.
Sci. Technol. 42:857–890.
74.
Shiraz, S., D. Djebbi-Simmons, M. Alhejaili, K. Danos, M. Janes, K.
Fontenot, and W. Xu. 2020. Evaluation of the microbial safety and
quality of Louisiana strawberries after ﬂooding. Food Control
110:106970. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2019.106970
75.
Stott, P. 2016. How climate change affects extreme weather events.
Science 352:1517–1518.
1896
DUCHENNE-MOUTIEN AND NEETOO
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
76.
Sultan, Y., and N. Magan. 2010. Mycotoxigenic fungi in peanuts
from different geographic regions of Egypt. Mycotoxin Res. 26:133–
140.
77.
Taniwaki, M. H., J. I. Pitt, and N. Magan. 2018. Aspergillus species
and mycotoxins: occurrence and importance in major food
commodities. Curr. Opin. Food Sci. 23:38–43.
78.
Tirado, M. C., R. Clarke, L. A. Jaykus, A. McQuatters-Gollop, and J.
M. Frank. 2010. Climate change and food safety: a review. Food Res.
Int. 43:1745–1765.
79.
Uyttendaele, M., C. Liu, and N. Hofstra. 2015. Special issue on the
impacts of climate change on food safety. Food Res. Int. 68:1–6.
80.
Van der Spiegel, M., H. J. Van der Fels-Klerx, and H. J. P. Marvin.
2012. Effects of climate change on food safety hazards in the dairy
production chain. Food Res. Int. 46:201–208.
81.
Water Source. 2019. New data maps world’s most water-stressed
regions. Available at: https://watersource.awa.asn.au/environment/
natural-environment/new-data-maps-worlds-most-water-stressed-
regions/. Accessed 7 June 2021.
82.
Wells, M. L., V. L. Trainer, T. J. Smayda, B. S. O. Karlson, C. G.
Trick, R. M. Kudela, A. Ishikawa, S. Bernard, A. Wulfﬁ, D. M.
Anderson, and W. P. Cochlan. 2015. Harmful algal blooms and
climate change: learning from the past and present to forecast the
future. Harmful Algae 49:68–93.
83.
Wijngaard, R. R., M. van der Perk, B. van der Grift, T. C. M. de Nijs,
and M. F. P. Bierkens. 2017. The impact of climate change on metal
transport in a lowland catchment. Water Air Soil Pollut. 228:107.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-017-3261-4
84.
World Health Organisation (WHO). 2003. Houseﬂies. Available at:
https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/resources/vector302
to323.pdf. Accessed 9 January 2021.
85.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2005. Ensuring food safety in
the aftermath of natural disasters. Technical Report 2005(a). WHO,
Geneva.
86.
Wu, X., Y. Lu, S. Zhou, L. Chen, and B. Xu. 2016. Impact of climate
change on human infectious diseases: empirical evidence and human
adaptation. Environ. Int. 86:14–23.
87.
Zhang, X., T. Zhong, L. Liu, and X. Ouyang. 2015. Impact of soil
heavy metal pollution on food safety in China. PLoS One
10:e0135182. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135182
J. Food Prot., Vol. 84, No. 11
CLIMATE CHANGE AND FOOD SAFETY
1897
