Research article
Advocacy messages about climate and health are more effective when
they include information about risks, solutions, and a normative appeal:
Evidence from a conjoint experiment
John Kotchera,*, Lauren Feldmanb, Kate T. Luonga, James Wyattc, Edward Maibacha
a George Mason University, 4400 University Drive, MS 6A8, Fairfax, VA, 22030, USA
b Rutgers University, 4 Huntington Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA
c Climate Nexus, 1140 Connecticut Ave, Suite 609, Washington, DC 20036 USA
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 9 June 2021
Accepted 18 July 2021
Available online 21 July 2021
A B S T R A C T
Previous research has shown that providing information about the health consequences of climate change
can increase climate change issue engagement and support for mitigation policies. Here, we extend that
research by testing the motivational value of three categories of climate information (termed information
categories): health consequences of climate change; health beneﬁts of climate solutions; and calls-to-action
intended to motivate people to engage in political advocacy for climate solutions. The use of choice-based
conjoint analysis enabled us to determine the effectiveness of each information category, as well the effec-
tiveness of speciﬁc types of information within each category. Research participants were adults quota-sam-
pled to represent the U.S. population (n=7,596). We found that each of these categories−consequences,
solutions, and a call-to-action−enhanced the overall motivational value of the message, with solution infor-
mation being the most inﬂuential. Of the 360 message combinations tested, the most compelling ﬁrst
described the negative impacts of climate change on air quality, then explained how transitioning to clean
energy will beneﬁt people’s health, and ended by explaining that most Americans support this solution, and
many are taking action to advocate for it. These ﬁndings are consistent with a large body of risk communica-
tion theory, and provide practical insights to health professionals and others seeking to build public and
political will for actions that reduce the health threats posed by climate change.
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Climate advocacy
Risk communication
Health communication
Conjoint analysis
1. Introduction
Climate change impacts on human health have been well-docu-
mented over the past two decades and are projected to drastically
increase if mitigation responses remain inadequate [1,2]. Rising
global temperatures directly heighten the frequency and intensity of
extreme weather events, including heat waves, hurricanes, wildﬁres,
ﬂoods, and droughts, directly damaging public health across broad
geographical locations [2,3]. Furthermore, shifting climate patterns
lead to an increase in the prevalence of vector-borne diseases, a
reduction in crop yields and nutritional values, contamination of food
and water, and rising socio-political conﬂicts [3,4].
Research on the nexus of climate change and health has corre-
spondingly grown [5]. Extant public health recommendations stress
the urgent importance of implementing policies to mitigate and
adapt to climate change—including integrating these plans into
health policies—if we are to protect the public’s health and our health
systems [6,7]. Yet, when it comes to understanding climate change
impacts on health, there is still a persistent disconnect between
experts, such as researchers and health professionals, and non-
experts, such as policy makers and the lay public, especially in the
United States.
In general, climate change as an issue is considered psychologi-
cally distant and not personally relevant for many Americans. Most
people perceive themselves, their families, and people in their com-
munity to be at less risk from climate change than people who are
spatially (e.g., in developing countries) or temporally distant (e.g.,
future generations) [8]. In April 2020, fewer than half of American
adults felt that people in the United States are being harmed by cli-
mate change right now, although this number did increase 13 per-
centage points between 2015 and 2020 [8]. A similar pattern follows
for climate change impacts on health. In a 2014 survey, 61% of
respondents reported having given little thought to this topic, and
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jkotcher@gmu.edu (J. Kotcher), lauren.feldman@rutgers.edu
(L. Feldman), tluong8@gmu.edu (K.T. Luong), jwyatt@climatenexus.org (J. Wyatt),
emaibach@gmu.edu (E. Maibach).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100030
2667-2782/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
most respondents could not name speciﬁc affected health conditions
[9]. Few people indicated that their own health (17%) or the health of
Americans (31%) are currently being impacted by climate change,
although greater proportions (27% and 39% respectively) expected
such impacts in the future [9]. Similar to overall climate change risk
perceptions, these numbers have grown recently. Between 2014 and
2020, signiﬁcantly more people came to understand that climate
change will cause a range of speciﬁc health conditions to become
more common in their community over the next ten years. Depend-
ing on the health condition, this growth in awareness ranged from 13
percentage points (from 38% to 51% for pollen-related allergies) to 28
percentage points (from 26% to 54% for bodily harm from wildﬁres)
[10].
In short, despite present, serious and growing impacts of climate
change on health, most Americans do not accurately assess these
risks, especially for themselves, their families, and people in their
community. Although risk perceptions are increasing, more efforts
are needed to bridge the gap between experts’ risk assessments and
the lay public’s understanding. Promoting public understanding of
the health risks of climate change is important because it can help
people and families make better risk management decisions, and
because prior research has shown it to be an effective way to increase
support for climate change policies and actions that can reduce those
risks and improve public health. Presenting information about the
health implications of climate change and air pollution from fossil
fuels has been shown to be novel, engaging, and personally relevant
to people across the spectrum of views about climate change [11].
This approach promotes risk perceptions and policy support [12],
affective assessment and assessment certainty [13], and hopeful
emotions [14]. Focusing on the health impacts of climate change also
has the potential to reduce political polarization around the issue, as
people across the political spectrum, especially moderates and mod-
erate conservatives, respond well to this information [12,13], making
it a promising way to communicate information about this hyper-
politicized topic.
A guiding principle offered by Fischhoff [15] and Maibach [16] for
improving public understanding of climate change involves creating
and testing simple, clear, accurate, relevant messages that, if shown
to be helpful, can be delivered by a variety of trusted sources. In this
study we developed brief messages—based on ﬁndings from peer-
reviewed research on climate and health—and tested them to iden-
tify which message categories, and which speciﬁc messages, were
the most compelling to American adults. Speciﬁcally, we evaluated
messages in terms of their ability to promote political advocacy on
climate change. While individual mitigation actions have a role to
play in reducing emissions [17], such efforts need to be comple-
mented by greater systemic emissions reductions that can only be
brought about through policy change [18,19]. Increasing citizen
advocacy is one means to cultivate the political will necessary for pol-
icy change [20,21]. Building on previous research in this area, we
examined several key questions.
First, we evaluated the effects of information about various types
of health harms caused or exacerbated by climate change to identify
their relative effectiveness in encouraging advocacy actions. Prior
studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of exposure to informa-
tion about the health impacts of climate change on pro-mitigation
cognitive and affective outcomes [11,14], and one study examined
audience evaluations of speciﬁc types of climate change-related
health harms and found that food-, water-, and vector-borne illnesses
were especially worrisome to Americans [13]. However, research has
not yet assessed the effects of exposure to speciﬁc types of health
impact information on political advocacy. Our ﬁrst research question
thus asked:
RQ1. Which types of health impacts from climate change are consid-
ered most compelling in prompting advocacy actions?
Second, because there is an extensive literature demonstrating
that many of the proposed climate change mitigation and adaptation
measures also have direct or indirect beneﬁts for human health (typi-
cally called “health co-beneﬁts”) [22,23], we also examined the effect
of presenting information on health beneﬁts of climate change solu-
tions. Extant research has primarily focused on conveying climate
change impacts on health, but some studies suggest advantages to
adding solution information, especially when such information is
framed in terms of health solutions. Maibach et al. [11] found that
information on the health beneﬁts of mitigation policies was rated as
clearer and more useful than information on impacts. Moreover, per-
ceived beneﬁts of mitigation have been shown to be positively
related to intentions to engage in advocacy [24]. These ﬁndings are
consistent with the Extended Parallel Process Model [25] which pos-
tulates: Risk information is more inﬂuential in changing behaviors
when accompanied by efﬁcacy information, or information indicat-
ing the presence and effectiveness of a solution. Therefore, we
hypothesized:
H1. Messages with health solution information will be considered
more compelling in prompting advocacy actions than messages with-
out such information.
Similar to impact information, we are also interested in identify-
ing the most compelling types of health solutions and thus asked the
second research question:
RQ2. Which types of health solutions to climate change are consid-
ered most compelling in prompting advocacy actions?
Third, we tested multiple ways to enhance the call-to-action pre-
sented after the impact and solution information. A call-to-action is
an explicit request for the audience to engage in a certain action or
behavior (e.g., ‘donate now’, ‘click to learn more’, etc.), often contain-
ing assertive or directive language [26]. It can be accompanied by an
incentive (e.g., ‘50% off’) [27] or appeal (e.g., ‘76% of people in your
neighborhood save regularly’) [28] for the recommended action or
behavior. Calls-to-action are frequently included as part of the design
of environmental and climate change messages [29,30], but their
effectiveness has not been speciﬁcally tested.
Among the appeals to accompany a call-to-action, we were partic-
ularly interested in descriptive norms [31] and external efﬁcacy
[32,33]. Positive descriptive norms −when a majority of the refer-
ence group engages in the behavior −have previously been found to
increase climate change advocacy actions [34,35]. The evidence for
negative descriptive norms −when only a minority of the reference
group engages in the behavior −is more mixed. In their recommen-
dations for climate change messaging, Fielding and Hornsey [36]
advised against using negative descriptive norms. Hassell and Wyler
[37], however, found that negative descriptive norms had a positive
impact on willingness to take advocacy actions. Hence, there is a
need to directly compare the effectiveness of these two descriptive
norms appeals in the climate change context.
External efﬁcacy refers to individuals’ beliefs about how respon-
sive the government and political system are to public opinions and
demands. This type of efﬁcacy has been shown to positively inﬂuence
people’s willingness to take climate change advocacy actions [38,39].
However, media coverage of climate change rarely includes this type
of information [40,41], potentially creating the impression that gov-
ernment actions are effective but not feasible, or that individual
efforts cannot instigate such actions [42]. Thus, an external efﬁcacy
appeal may be effective in motivating people to engage in advocacy
action. Here, two different operationalizations of external efﬁcacy
were created and tested, which we refer to as surplus efﬁcacy −
which emphasizes that policy makers are responsive and individual
actions are already making a difference −and deﬁcit efﬁcacy −which
emphasizes that policy makers will be responsive once they learn
what the public demands. This latter operationalization was inspired
by past research which found that policymakers and their staff often
J. Kotcher, L. Feldman, K.T. Luong et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
2
do not have an accurate perception of their constituents’ preferences
[43,44]. Our ﬁnal research question is concerned with the effective-
ness of these different types of appeals.
RQ3. Which type of call-to-action appeal is considered most compel-
ling in prompting advocacy actions?
2. Material and Methods
2.1. Sample
We surveyed a large, demographically diverse group of U.S.
adults, quota-sampled to approximate a nationally representative
sample (n = 7,596). Respondents were recruited by Climate Nexus
Polling (June 26-30, 2020), which utilized several market research
panels in the U.S. and recruited respondents using stratiﬁed sampling
methods. Each panel vendor recruited individual respondents into
their panel using various methods (cold calls, in person recruitment
at shopping malls/events, email, online ads, etc.). Climate Nexus
directly sampled from these panels and worked with all partners to
de-duplicate and uniquely identify each respondent to eliminate
overlap that may occur across panels. Climate Nexus utilizes ﬁxed
stratum proportions of the population, sets quotas, and identiﬁes
population parameters for sampling from their certiﬁed vendors.
Respondents that met the speciﬁc quota requirements became part
of the target population and a select random set of respondents were
contacted (via email or application notiﬁcation) to take the survey.
Contact and recruitment into the survey was directly handled by
their panel vendors. Quotas for this study were set to match census
parameters for sex, race, age, education, income, and geographic
region. Demographic characteristics of the sample can be found in
Table A.1 in Appendix A.
2.2. Protocol
All of the following procedures were reviewed and approved by
the George Mason University Ofﬁce of Research Integrity and Assur-
ance (IRBNet #1576828). After informed consent was obtained, par-
ticipants engaged in a choice-based conjoint (CBC) exercise that
revealed which message categories and speciﬁc message types were
most likely to motivate them to contact their member of Congress.
CBC is a method typically used to ascertain which attributes in a
product or message are most inﬂuential on consumers’ or respond-
ents’ decision-making.
The messages all had the same basic structure, beginning with a
section titled “The Problem” that brieﬂy described one type of health
harm associated with climate change; followed by a second section
titled “The Solution” that described a type of climate solution and its
health beneﬁts; and concluding with a section titled “How you can
help” that included a call to action which speciﬁcally asked partici-
pants to contact their member of Congress and urge them to address
this issue. Thus, each section represented a different information cat-
egory and each category had multiple information types or variations
of content that were randomly generated on each screen of the CBC
exercise.1 On each screen, participants were presented two messages
and asked to select the message that would make them most likely to
contact their member of Congress (see Figure 1 for an example of
how the messages were presented to participants). Every participant
evaluated four pairs of randomly selected messages presented across
multiple screens.
The ﬁrst information category varied in terms of the type of health
impact described; we tested 8 different types of health impacts
derived from past research [13,46], including extreme heat, poor air
quality, extreme weather, water-borne illness, food-borne illness,
vector-borne illness, hunger and malnutrition, and mental health.
The second information category varied in terms of the type of solu-
tion proposed; we tested 7 different types of solutions partially
inspired by those outlined by Project Drawdown [47], including solu-
tions focused on more sustainable energy, cities and communities,
consumption, nature spaces, transportation, buildings, and food. The
third information category varied in terms of the language used to
strengthen the call-to-action, including positive descriptive norms,
negative descriptive norms, surplus efﬁcacy, and deﬁcit efﬁcacy. Each
information category included a variation which omitted that cate-
gory of information from the message in order to estimate the effect
of excluding that information category (e.g., an appeal without
impact information). The exact language used in the stimulus mate-
rial is available in Tables 1-3.
Using a Hierarchical Bayesian estimation method developed by
Sawtooth Software [45], we used responses from the choice exercise
to calculate individual, respondent-level utility scores for each spe-
ciﬁc type of information within an information category and an
importance score for each information category. In CBC analysis, utili-
ties are numerical interval-level variables that represent the relative
preference for each speciﬁc type of information within an informa-
tion category, with higher values indicating greater preference. Utili-
ties are scaled to sum to zero within each information category.
Utilities cannot be compared between information categories. For
example, we can compare the average utility for the poor air quality
impact to the mental health impact, but we cannot compare the aver-
age utility for the poor air quality impact to the energy solution.
Importance scores allow us to compare the relative importance of
each information category in shaping overall message preference.
Importance scores represent the range in utility scores within each
information category, such that information categories with larger
ranges have larger importance scores. In sum, this process allowed us
to identify the most compelling speciﬁc types of information within
each information category, as well as the most compelling combina-
tion of information out of a total of 360 different possible message
combinations.
3. Results
Based on the average utility scores, we found that the most com-
pelling type of health impact was poor air quality (RQ1), followed by
food-borne illness, and extreme weather (Table 1). The least compel-
ling impact was extreme heat.
The most compelling type of solution focused on the health bene-
ﬁts of transitioning to clean energy (RQ2), followed by more healthy
cities/communities,
and
more
healthy
forms
of
consumption
(Table 2). The least effective solution was focused on healthy food.
The most effective call-to-action leveraged positive descriptive
norms to encourage people to contact their member of Congress
(RQ3), followed by negative descriptive norms and surplus efﬁcacy
(Table 3). The least compelling call-to-action was the deﬁcit efﬁcacy
statement.
Importantly, the presence of each category of information, includ-
ing solution information (H1), substantially increased the effective-
ness
of
the
appeal.
When
we
excluded
certain
information
categories, the effectiveness of the appeals declined greatly (indi-
cated by the lower utility scores for the no information control within
each information category). For example, this means that an appeal
with both impacts and solutions together was more far more compel-
ling than focusing on just impacts or just solutions alone.
When we compared the relative inﬂuence of each information
category, the solutions category had a greater impact on the overall
effectiveness of an appeal than the impacts category (Table 4). The
call-to-action category was the least inﬂuential of the three informa-
tion categories we tested.
1 In the language of CBC analysis, each information category represented an attribute
and the information types represented different levels within an attribute (45).
J. Kotcher, L. Feldman, K.T. Luong et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
3
In a supplementary analysis, we found little variation in terms of
how participants ranked the different types of information across
race and party identiﬁcation (Tables B.1-B.8 in Appendix B). The air
quality impact/energy solution/positive descriptive norm call-to-
action combination was the most effective overall message for every
racial and partisan subgroup with one exception: Republicans viewed
the solution focused on cities and communities as slightly more com-
pelling than the energy solution, but otherwise ranked the other
information categories similarly to Democrats and Independents.
4. Discussion
Our ﬁndings extend prior research by helping to identify the spe-
ciﬁc categories and types of information about climate change and
health that are likely to generate greater public demand for policy-
makers to address this issue. Importantly, we found that the inclusion
of each information category (i.e., impact information, solution infor-
mation, and call-to-action appeal) enhanced the effectiveness of the
overall message. Of these categories, the solution information was
the most important in determining overall message effectiveness,
consistent with prior research showing that statements regarding
solutions were perceived more positively than those regarding
impacts [11], and that including information about solutions in cli-
mate change communication is beneﬁcial [39,48]. Speciﬁcally, we
found that the most compelling message is comprised of information
about the negative impacts of climate change on air quality, how
clean energy can address this problem, and how this solution is
supported by and advocated for by most Americans. Moreover, we
found that this message had consistently broad appeal across racial
and partisan groups (see Appendix B).
Although a previous study found that people viewed food- and
water-borne illness as especially novel and worrisome health impacts
of climate change [13], we found that poor air quality was more com-
pelling in a message designed to increase advocacy. This may partly
be due to the intuitive links between the burning of fossil fuels, air
pollution, and respiratory illness. Surprisingly, we found that extreme
heat was the least compelling impact, which may be due to the fact
that many Americans fail to perceive the health risks associated with
extreme heat, even those with increased vulnerability [46].
To our knowledge, our study is the ﬁrst to evaluate public
responses to different categories of solutions to address the health
effects of climate change. We found that in the context of promoting
advocacy on climate change, emphasizing the beneﬁts of clean
energy was the most effective. This may be partly attributable to the
heavy emphasis on energy-related actions in government efforts to
educate people about individual mitigation behaviors [49]. Prior
research has also found that people tend to underestimate the miti-
gation potential of transportation and food-related actions, which
could explain why these solutions were less compelling as a justiﬁca-
tion for advocacy [50].
Among the appeals accompanying the call-to-action, we found
that descriptive norms were more effective than efﬁcacy appeals, and
that positive descriptive norms were more compelling than negative
descriptive norms. These ﬁndings accord with past research which
Fig. 1. Example of how messages were presented to participants
J. Kotcher, L. Feldman, K.T. Luong et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
4
Table 1
Rankings, means, and 95% conﬁdence intervals for impact information utilities.
Type
Text
Rank
Mean
LLCI
ULCI
Poor air quality
Climate change reduces air quality by increasing smog, smoke from more wildﬁres, pollen, and mold from
higher humidity and ﬂooding. This can lead to more lung infections, asthma and allergy attacks, bronchi-
tis, chest pains, and even death.
1
18.37
17.69
19.04
Food-borne disease
Climate change is causing higher water temperatures, heavier downpours, and more ﬂooding that can
spread bacteria, viruses, and parasites from animal and human feces into ﬁelds where food is growing.
People who eat contaminated food can suffer from diarrhea, vomiting, and in severe cases, paralysis,
organ failure, and death.
2
14.91
14.29
15.53
Extreme weather
Climate change is causing increases in the frequency and severity of some extreme weather events such as
major storms, ﬂoods, and droughts, which can lead to injury, displacement, reduced availability of safe
food and water, and can make it harder to get medical care by damaging roads, bridges, and power lines.
3
13.06
12.57
13.55
Water-borne disease
Climate change is causing higher water temperatures, heavier downpours, and more ﬂooding that can
spread bacteria, viruses, and parasites from animal and human feces into waterways. People who drink or
swim in the contaminated water can suffer from diarrhea, vomiting, and in severe cases, paralysis, organ
failure, and death.
4
10.96
10.38
11.54
Vector-borne disease
Climate change is increasing temperatures and changing rainfall in ways that increase the geographic range
of disease-carrying mosquitoes, ﬂeas, ticks, and rodents that can spread harmful illnesses like Lyme dis-
ease, West Nile virus, Dengue fever, Malaria, and Zika virus.
5
1.12
0.47
1.76
Hunger and malnutrition
The level of carbon dioxide in our air is increasing, and the resulting climate change is increasing tempera-
tures, heavy rainfall, and ﬂooding. More carbon dioxide in the air decreases the nutritional value of food
by causing plants to produce less protein, more starch and sugar, and take in fewer essential minerals.
6
-0.67
-1.35
0.01
Mental health
Climate change is causing increases in extreme weather events such as ﬂoods, droughts, and major storms.
Many people exposed to the worst of these events experience severe stress and mental health effects
including depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and increases in suicidal thoughts.
7
-4.69
-5.25
-4.13
Extreme heat
Climate change is causing more very hot days, greater humidity, and longer, hotter, and more frequent heat
waves, which can lead to heat-related illness and death from heat stroke and dehydration, and can make
some chronic diseases worse.
8
-8.72
-9.28
-8.16
Control (no impact info)
N/A
9
-44.34
-45.11
-43.57
Note: LLCI and ULCI represent the lower and upper levels of the 95% conﬁdence interval around the mean; Control means that information category was absent
Table 2
Rankings, means, and 95% conﬁdence intervals for solution information utilities.
Type
Text
Rank
Mean
LLCI
ULCI
Energy
Using cleaner forms of energy such as solar and wind power in homes, schools and businesses will give us
cleaner air and water, and reduce the pollution that causes climate change.
1
27.25
26.43
28.06
Cities and communities
Improving the design of our communities by adding trees and parks, and making it easier and safer to get
around on foot, bike and mass transit will help people become more physically active and lose weight,
and reduce the pollution that causes climate change.
2
25.19
24.58
25.80
Consumption
Encouraging recycling and reusing materials at home, work, and in factories will give us cleaner air and
water, save energy, reduce waste, and reduce the pollution that causes climate change.
3
23.27
22.70
23.84
Nature spaces
Restoring and protecting forests will give us cleaner air and water, and capture and store carbon dioxide,
the main form of pollution that causes climate change.
4
14.53
13.91
15.15
Transportation
Using cleaner forms of transportation, such as electric vehicles and more fuel-efﬁcient airplanes will give us
cleaner air and water, and reduce the pollution that causes climate change.
5
-7.10
-7.74
-6.47
Buildings
Upgrading our homes and buildings to be better insulated, use more energy-efﬁcient heating, cooling, and
lighting will give us cleaner air−both outside and indoors−and reduce the pollution that causes climate
change.
6
-7.32
-7.93
-6.71
Food
Encouraging local and organic farming, reducing food waste at stores and in restaurants, and encouraging
consumption of more fruits and vegetables and less beef will help people eat more healthfully and reduce
the pollution that causes climate change.
7
-14.04
-14.99
-13.09
Control (no solution info)
N/A
8
-61.77
-62.52
-61.03
Note: LLCI and ULCI represent the lower and upper levels of the 95% conﬁdence interval around the mean; Control means that information category was absent
Table 3
Rankings, means, and 95% conﬁdence intervals for call-to-action information utilities.
Type
Text
Rank
Mean
LLCI
ULCI
Positive descriptive norms
Most Americans agree that we want healthy communities and a healthy climate, and many of us are
taking action.
1
8.84
8.39
9.30
Negative descriptive norms
Most Americans agree that we want healthy communities and a healthy climate, but not enough of us
are taking action.
2
6.85
6.46
7.24
Surplus efﬁcacy
The actions of people like you are already making a difference. Policymakers are listening.
3
4.66
4.16
5.17
Control (no call-to-action info)
N/A
4
-9.60
-10.11
-9.08
Deﬁcit efﬁcacy
Policymakers don’t know what we want, but they will listen if we tell them.
5
-10.76
-11.29
-10.23
Note: LLCI and ULCI represent the lower and upper levels of the 95% conﬁdence interval around the mean; Control means that information category was absent
5
J. Kotcher, L. Feldman, K.T. Luong et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
found that positive descriptive norms are strongly associated with
climate advocacy [34,35]. Interestingly, we found that the deﬁcit efﬁ-
cacy information was the least effective call-to-action, and less com-
pelling than the control version that omitted this information
category. It is possible that some people found the suggestion that
policymakers are simply unaware of constituent preferences to be
implausible and reacted more negatively to this appeal as a result,
though more research is needed to develop a more deﬁnitive expla-
nation for this ﬁnding.
Finally, the high degree of consistency in how participants ranked
the various types of information across racial and partisan groups is
notable given that climate change is a politically polarized issue. That
said, it is important to be mindful that choice-based conjoint analysis
only provides an estimate of the relative effectiveness of certain mes-
sages compared to others. For example, although Republicans and
Democrats ranked the messages similarly, it is still reasonable to
expect that Democrats would be more responsive to the same mes-
sage relative to Republicans given their higher willingness to engage
in climate advocacy.
Our study is not without limitations. Our ﬁndings rely upon par-
ticipants' perceptions of which messages are most likely to motivate
them to contact their member of Congress, and no observations of
actual advocacy behavior in response to the messages tested were
obtained. Although some validation studies suggest that preferences
revealed through conjoint experiments correspond to actual behavior
in the real world [51], the larger question of whether measures of
perceived message effectiveness are valid predictors of actual mes-
sage effectiveness remains a subject of debate [52]. Future research
could address this limitation by testing a range of message combina-
tions included in this study in a ﬁeld experiment to assess the eco-
logical validity of our ﬁndings. Participants in our study were limited
to adults in the United States. Given the importance of increasing
public support for climate action globally [53], future research should
endeavor to understand how well these ﬁndings generalize to other
national contexts.
The compelling climate-health information identiﬁed in our study
is especially useful for the large numbers of health professionals who
are interested in and willing to promote sustainability [54] and cli-
mate actions [55−58]. Although some may worry that advocating for
speciﬁc climate solutions could harm their credibility, research sug-
gests that as long as experts advocate for popular solutions, such
advocacy can actually enhance their perceived credibility relative to
discussing impacts alone [51,52]. Furthermore, health professionals
are especially well-positioned to communicate about climate change
to a variety of audiences. For example, they can explain the health
relevance of climate change and climate solutions to patients, clients,
colleagues, and the general public; advocate to hospital systems and
policy makers; and educate future practitioners [4]. Notably, a 2014
survey found that primary care physicians were rated the most
trusted source of information about the health effects of climate
change, with the CDC as the second most trusted [9]. Thus, there
exists a strong and established relationship between health profes-
sionals and the lay public, as well as a commitment to viewing cli-
mate and health as connected issues −both of which can facilitate
the dissemination of climate change and health information.
Increasing public demand for more ambitious government action
to address climate change is essential to improving global health [2].
Our study provides useful insights for health professionals and other
advocates seeking to advance public engagement and political will
around this issue, and we hope it catalyzes further research on how
best to communicate the health implications of climate change.
Author statement
John Kotcher - Conceptualization, formal analysis, funding acqui-
sition, investigation, methodology, project administration, supervi-
sion, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing
Lauren Feldman - Conceptualization, writing - review & editing
Kate T. Luong - Writing - original draft, writing - review & editing
James Wyatt - Funding acquisition, investigation, methodology,
writing - review & editing
Edward Maibach - Conceptualization, funding acquisition, writing
- review & editing
Declaration of Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
We thank The Energy Foundation for providing grant funding to
support this research. The funder had no role in the study design,
data collection, analysis and interpretation of the data, the writing of
the report, or in the decision to submit the article for publication.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100030.
References
[1] Ebi KL, Balbus J, Luber G, Bole A, Crimmins A, Glass G, et al. Human health editors.
In: Reidmiller DR, Avery CW, Easterling DR, Kunkel KE, Lewis KLM, Maycock TK,
et al., editors. Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National
Climate Assessment, Volume II [Internet]. Washington, DC, USA: U.S: Global
Change Research Program; 2018. p. 539–71 Available from: doi:. doi: 10.7930/
NCA4.2018.CH14.
[2] Watts N, Amann M, Arnell N, Ayeb-Karlsson S, Beagley J, Belesova K, et al. The
2020 report of the lancet countdown on health and climate change: responding
to converging crises. Lancet 2021 Jan;397(10269):129–70.
[3] Haines A, Kovats RS, Campbell-Lendrum D, Corvalan C. Climate change and
human health: Impacts, vulnerability and public health. Public Health 2006
Jul;120(7):585–96.
[4] Maibach E, Miller J, Armstrong F, El Omrani O, Zhang Y, Philpott N, et al. Health
professionals, the Paris agreement, and the ﬁerce urgency of now. J Clim Change
Health 2021 Mar;1:100002.
[5] Watts N, Amann M, Arnell N, Ayeb-Karlsson S, Belesova K, Berry H, et al. The 2018
report of the Lancet Countdown on health and climate change: shaping the health
of nations for centuries to come. Lancet [Internet]; [cited 2018 Nov 30]Available
from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673618325947.
[6] Fox M, Zuidema C, Bauman B, Burke T, Sheehan M. Integrating public health into
climate change policy and planning: state of practice update. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 2019 Jan3232;16(18).
[7] Morton S, Pencheon D, Bickler G. The sustainable development goals provide an
important framework for addressing dangerous climate change and achieving
wider public health beneﬁts. Public Health 2019 Sep;174:65–8.
[8] Leiserowitz A, Maibach E, Rosenthal S, Kotcher J, Bergquist P, Goldberg M, et al.
Climate Change in the American Mind. New Haven, CT: Yale University and
George Mason University; April 2020. p. 2020.
[9] Maibach EW, Kreslake JM, Roser-Renouf C, Rosenthal S, Feinberg G, Leiserowitz
AA. Do Americans understand that global warming is harmful to human health?
Evidence from a national survey. Ann Glob Health 2015 May;81(3):396–409.
[10] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Rosenthal S, Gustafson A, Leiserowitz A. Americans Increas-
ingly Understand that Climate Change Harms Human Health. New Haven, CT:
Yale University and George Mason UniversityYale Program on Climate Change
Communication; 2020.
Table 4
Rankings, means and 95% conﬁdence intervals for importance scores
Information category
Rank
Mean
LLCI
ULCI
Solutions
1
44.29
44.12
44.45
Impacts
2
35.63
35.47
35.78
Call-to-action
3
20.09
19.94
20.24
Note: LLCI and ULCI represent the lower and upper levels of the 95% conﬁdence inter-
val around the mean
6
J. Kotcher, L. Feldman, K.T. Luong et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
[11] Maibach EW, Nisbet M, Baldwin P, Akerlof K, Diao G. Reframing climate change as
a public health issue: an exploratory study of public reactions. BMC Public Health
2010 Jun;10(1):299.
[12] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Choi W-T. Fossil fuels are harming our brains: identifying
key messages about the health effects of air pollution from fossil fuels. BMC Public
Health 2019 Aug;19(1):1079.
[13] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Montoro M, Hassol SJ. How Americans respond to informa-
tion about global warming’s health impacts: evidence from a national survey
experiment. GeoHealth 2018;2(9):262–75.
[14] Myers T, Nisbet M, Maibach E, Leiserowitz A. A public health frame arouses hope-
ful emotions about climate change. Clim Change 2012;113(3):1105–12.
[15] Fischhoff B. Nonpersuasive communication about matters of greatest urgency:
climate change. Environ Sci Technol 2007 Nov 1;41(21):7204–8.
[16] Maibach E. Increasing public awareness and facilitating behavior change: Two
guiding heuristics editors. In: Hannah L, Lovejoy T, editors. Climate Change and
Biodiversity. 2nd ed. Yale University Press; 2019.
[17] Dietz T, Gardner GT, Gilligan J, Stern PC, Vandenbergh MP. Household actions can
provide a behavioral wedge to rapidly reduce US carbon emissions. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2009 Nov 3;106(44):18452–6.
[18] Ockwell D, Whitmarsh L, O’Neill S. Reorienting climate change communication for
effective mitigation forcing people to be green or fostering grass-roots engage-
ment? Sci Commun 2009 Mar;30(3):305–27.
[19] Wynes S, Motta M, Donner SD. Understanding the climate responsibility associ-
ated with elections. One Earth 2021 Mar;4(3):363–71.
[20] Han H, Barnett-Loro C. To Support a Stronger Climate Movement, Focus Research
on Building Collective Power. Front Commun. 2018;3:55.
[21] Leiserowitz A. Building public and political will for climate change action editor..
In: Esty D, editor. A Better Planet: 37 Big Ideas for a Sustainable Future. Yale Uni-
versity Press; 2019. p. 155–62.
[22] Haines A. Health co-beneﬁts of climate action. Lancet Planet Health 2017 Apr 1;1
(1):e4–5.
[23] West JJ, Smith SJ, Silva RA, Naik V, Zhang Y, Adelman Z, et al. Co-beneﬁts of miti-
gating global greenhouse gas emissions for future air quality and human health.
Nat Clim Change 2013 Oct;3(10):885–9.
[24] Hart PS, Feldman L. The beneﬁt of focusing on air pollution instead of climate
change: how discussing power plant emissions in the context of air pollution,
rather than climate change, inﬂuences perceived beneﬁts, costs, and political
action for policies to limit emissions. Sci Commun 2021 Apr;43(2):199–224.
[25] Witte K. Fear control and danger control: a test of the extended parallel process
model (eppm). Commun Monogr 1994 Jun;61(2):113.
[26] Reavey B, Puzakova M, Andras TL, Kwak H. The multidimensionality of anthropo-
morphism in advertising: the moderating roles of cognitive busyness and asser-
tive language. Int J Advert 2018 May;37(3):440–62.
[27] Li H, Li A, Zhao S. Internet advertising strategy of multinationals in China. Int J
Advert 2009 Jan 1;28(1):125–46.
[28] Yoon HJ, Ferle CL, Edwards SM. A normative approach to motivating savings
behavior: the moderating effects of attention to social comparison information.
Int J Advert 2016 Sep 2;35(5):799–822.
[29] Newman CL, Howlett E, Burton S, Kozup JC, Tangari AH. The inﬂuence of con-
sumer concern about global climate change on framing effects for environmental
sustainability messages. Int J Advert 2012 Jan;31(3):511–27.
[30] Wilson RT, Lohmeier JH, Lustick DS, Chen RF. Using transit advertising to improve
public engagement with social issues. Int J Advert 2020 Aug;0(0):1–27.
[31] Cialdini RB, Reno RR, Kallgren CA. A focus theory of normative conduct: Recycling
the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. J Pers Soc Psychol
1990;58(6):1015–26.
[32] Balch GI. Multiple indicators in survey research: the concept" sense of political
efﬁcacy". Polit Methodol 1974:1–43.
[33] Finkel SE. Reciprocal effects of participation and political efﬁcacy: a panel analy-
sis. Am J Polit Sci 1985;29(4):891–913.
[34] Ballew MT, Goldberg MH, Rosenthal SA, Cutler MJ, Leiserowitz A. Climate change
activism among latino and white Americans. Front Commun 2019;3.
[35] Doherty KL, Webler TN. Social norms and efﬁcacy beliefs drive the Alarmed seg-
ment’s public-sphere climate actions. Nat Clim Change 2016 May.
[36] Fielding KS, Hornsey MJ. A social identity analysis of climate change and environ-
mental attitudes and behaviors: insights and opportunities. Front Psychol [Inter-
net] 2016 Feb 11;7 Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC4749709/.
[37] Hassell HJG, Wyler EE. Negative descriptive social norms and political action:
people aren’t acting, so you should. Polit Behav 2019 Mar;41(1):231–56.
[38] Feldman L, Hart PS. Using political efﬁcacy messages to increase climate activism
the mediating role of emotions. Sci Commun 2016 Feb;38(1):99–127.
[39] Hart PS, Feldman L. The inﬂuence of climate change efﬁcacy messages and efﬁ-
cacy beliefs on intended political participation. PLOS ONE 2016 Aug;11(8):
e0157658.
[40] Feldman L, Hart PS, Milosevic T. Polarizing news? Representations of threat and
efﬁcacy in leading US newspapers’ coverage of climate change. Public Underst Sci
2017 May;26(4):481–97.
[41] Hart PS, Feldman L. Threat without efﬁcacy? Climate Change on U.S. Network
News. Sci Commun. 2014 Jun;36(3):325–51.
[42] Crosman KM, Bostrom A, Hayes AL. Efﬁcacy foundations for risk communication:
how people think about reducing the risks of climate change. Risk Anal 2019;39
(10):2329–47.
[43] Broockman DE, Skovron C. Bias in perceptions of public opinion among political
elites. Am Polit Sci Rev 2018 Aug;112(3):542–63.
[44] Hertel-Fernandez A, Mildenberger M, Stokes LC. Legislative staff and representa-
tion in congress. Am Polit Sci Rev 2019 Feb;113(1):1–18.
[45] Orme B, Chrzan K. Becoming an Expert in Conjoint Analysis: Choice Modeling for
Pros. Orem, UT: Sawtooth Software, Inc.; 2017.
[46] USGCRP. In: Crimmins A,, editor. editor312 p, 2016, editor. The Impacts of Climate
Change on Human Health in the United States: A Scientiﬁc Assessment. Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program; 2016. editor312 p.
[47] Solutions [Internet]. Project Drawdown.
[cited 2021 May 17]. Available from:
https://www.drawdown.org/solutions.
[48] Feldman L, Hart PS. Is there any hope? How climate change news imagery and
text inﬂuence audience emotions and support for climate mitigation policies.
Risk Anal 2018;38(3):585–602.
[49] Wynes S, Nicholas KA. The climate mitigation gap: education and government
recommendations miss the most effective individual actions. Environ Res Lett
2017 Jul;12(7):074024.
[50] Wynes S, Zhao J, Donner SD. How well do people understand the climate impact
of individual actions? Clim Change 2020 Oct;162(3):1521–34.
[51] Hainmueller J, Hangartner D, Yamamoto T. Validating vignette and conjoint sur-
vey experiments against real-world behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2015 Feb;112
(8):2395–400.
[52] Nabi RL. On the value of perceived message effectiveness as a predictor of actual
message effectiveness: an introduction. J Commun 2018 Oct 1;68(5):988–9.
[53] Leiserowitz A, Carman J, Buttermore N, Rosenthal S, Mulcahy K. International
Public Support for Climate Action. New Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate
Change Communication; 2021.
[54] Hubbert B, Ahmed M, Kotcher J, Maibach E, Sarfaty M. Recruiting health profes-
sionals as sustainability advocates. Lancet Planet Health 2020 Oct;4(10):e445–6.
[55] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Miller J, Campbell E, Alqodmani L, Maiero M, et al. Views of
health professionals on climate change and health: a multinational survey study.
Lancet Planet Health 2021 May;5(5):e316–23.
[56] Sarfaty M, Mitchell M, Bloodhart B, Maibach EW. A survey of African american
physicians on the health effects of climate change. Int J Environ Res Public Health
2014 Dec;11(12):12473–85.
[57] Sarfaty M, Kreslake J, Ewart G, Guidotti TL, Thurston GD, Balmes JR, et al. Survey of
international members of the american thoracic society on climate change and
health. Ann Am Thorac Soc N Y. 2016 Oct;13(10):1808–13.
[58] Sarfaty M, Kreslake JM, Casale TB, Maibach EW. Views of AAAAI members on
climate change and health. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract Amst 2016 Mar;4(2):
333–5.
7
J. Kotcher, L. Feldman, K.T. Luong et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100030
