Research article
Protecting women’s health in a changing climate: The role of community-
based adaptation
Emma Duus, Doreen Montag$,*
Unit for Global Health, Wolfson Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University London, London, United Kingdom
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 22 December 2021
Accepted 6 February 2022
Available online 10 February 2022
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: Community-based adaptation is an emerging approach to mitigating the health consequences
of climate change, yet, the interactions amongst climate change, community-based adaptation, health and
gender have not been explored as a single nexus in a low-income setting. The paper uses the Adaptation
Learning Programme as a case to explore this nexus. The Adaptation Learning Programme was a gender-inte-
grated community-based adaptation programme implemented from 2010 to 2015 in Garissa County in
Kenya.
Methods: A case study methodology with an interpretivist epistemological approach was chosen to explore
the complexity underlying the unique context of the Adaptation Learning Programme‘s implementation in
Garissa. Data was collected from grey literature published and was analysed using a systematic framework.
Results: Adaptation Learning Programme community-based adaptation interventions enhanced adaptive
capacity, through enhancing women’s access to markets and economic assets, teaching women adaptive
agricultural practices, including women in decision-making processes, and disseminating gender-sensitive
climate information to communities. These processes mitigated several climate-related health risks faced by
women in Garissa, but also failed to address the structural causes of their health vulnerabilities. The ﬁndings
can be scaled up to inform further community-based adaptations and national policies on gender-sensitive
approaches to climate change.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Gender
Kenia
Community based adaptation
1.0. Introduction
Climate change is arguably the biggest global health threat of the
21st century [1], with its health consequences being inherently gen-
dered [2]. Climate-related natural resource depletion causes unequal
health detriment to women in many low-income settings, who are
ascribed with livelihood roles that rely mainly on natural systems [3].
This calls for gender-sensitive approaches to climate change adapta-
tion [4]. Adaptation is the adjustment of systems in response to actual
or expected climate stimuli or their effects which moderates harm
[5]. Community-based adaptation (CBA) is an empowering, bottom-
up approach to climate change adaptation, which prioritizes local,
context-speciﬁc needs of adaptation [6]. It aims to enhance commu-
nities’ adaptive capacity to climate change, which is deﬁned as the
ability to adjust behaviors and expand coping strategies under cli-
mate variability [7]. While CBA is a recognized approach to enhancing
adaptive capacity, gender remains under-represented within the
realm of climate change adaptation [8].
The potentiality of CBA in mitigating climate-related health effects
has been explored in the literature [9], as has the gendered nature of
climate-related health outcomes [3]. Equally, literature has addressed
the value of integrating gender into CBA [8]. However, climate
change, CBA, health and gender have not been explored as a single
nexus in a low-income context. Given the potentiality of CBA, and
the detrimental gendered health effects of climate change in low-
income settings, these concepts must be explored in conjunction.
This paper aims to address this literature gap by conducting a case
study on the Adaptation Learning Programme (ALP) - a gender-inte-
grated CBA program implemented in low-income, climate-vulnerable
communities in Garissa County in Kenya. The case provides an ideal
context for addressing the literary gap, as women in Garissa experience
profound and unequal climate-related health consequences [10]. The
climate change-CBA-health-gender nexus is explored by analyzing if
and how the program’s integration of gender enhanced women’s adap-
tive capacity inﬂuences climate-related health impacts.
1.1. Introduction to the ALP
The Adaptation Learning Program was a 5-year CBA program
implemented in 2010 by “CARE International” in six climate-
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: d.montag@qmul.ac.uk (D. Montag).
$ 0000−0003−1365−1913
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100120
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
vulnerable communities in Garissa County [11]. The ALP aimed to
enhance communities’ adaptive capacity to climate change through
CBA, using an approach informed by Africa Climate Change Resilience
Alliance’s (ACCRA) framework, which highlights ﬁve components of
adaptive capacity; innovating with conﬁdence, being involved in for-
ward-looking decision-making, having access to assets, institutions
and entitlements, and climate knowledge and information [7]. The
ALP aimed to enhance women’s adaptive capacity to climate change
by implementing gender-sensitive CBA strategies, which will be
explored in this paper [12].
1.2. The climate and health context of Garissa County
Garissa County is located in north-eastern Kenya, and consists of
arid and semi-arid lands with scarce water sources [13]. Recently,
Garissa has experienced more severe ﬂooding and droughts as a
result of climate change [14]. Consequently, rates of malnutrition
have increased, as communities rely heavily on climate-sensitive
livelihood strategies such as crop production and livestock rearing
[12]. Climate variability has also contributed to an increase in vector-
borne diseases such as malaria and Rift Valley fever [10].
1.3. Conceptualizing climate change, community-based adaptation and
health in Garissa
CBA’s potential in mitigating the localized nature of climate
change-related health risks lies in its ability to engage the local com-
munity in identifying context-speciﬁc health vulnerabilities, which
depend on contextual biogeophysical, sociocultural and economic
factors [15]. For example, CBA allows communities in Garissa to iden-
tify malnutrition as a climate-related health risk, which consequently
guides adaptation strategies [13]. Moreover, CBA integrates local
value systems into the adaptation process, which enhances conﬁ-
dence, and empowers individuals to make informed health-protec-
tive decisions in a changing climate [16].
Despite this evidence, the positive health outcomes associated
with CBA have received little academic attention [9]. Thus, the poten-
tiality of CBA in protecting human health should be urgently
supported.
1.4. Conceptualizing the gendered health effects of climate change and
women’s barriers to adaptive capacity in Garissa
The health impacts of climate change are unequally detrimental to
women, especially in rural sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) communities,
where women rely heavily on natural systems for livelihood genera-
tion [17]. In Garissa, social norms assign women the responsibility of
water collection [10]. Due to increasingly intense droughts and water
deprivation, women must walk signiﬁcantly longer distances to col-
lect water, which exposes them to exhaustion and early spine dam-
age [2,18]. Moreover, gendered food hierarchies dictate that women
in Garissa should decrease their meal intake to prioritise men’s nutri-
tional requirements [19]. This makes women more prone to nutri-
tional deﬁciencies during climate-induced food shortages [20].
Kariuki et al. [21] also emphasize the role of gender relations when it
comes to goat and sheep breeding in relation to stock and productiv-
ity in Garissa and other Kenian regions. Women in Garissa are
ascribed with nutritional responsibilities, and therefore, climate-
related food insecurities signify women’s failure to maintain liveli-
hoods. This often leads to domestic violence against women [22]. Fur-
thermore, while facing a climate-related increase in vector-borne
diseases in Garissa, women are twice as likely to contract malaria in
pregnancy, which increases the risk of spontaneous abortions and
low birthweight [10,18].
A recent analysis by Haret et al. [39] evaluates the “impact of
country climate change fund on community resilience to climate
change in Garissa”, which had been introduced in 2018. The authors
emphasise a need for a participatory approach to adaptation inter-
ventions, but do not address gender as a factor in their evaluation.
However, in Garissa, women face multiple sociocultural and eco-
nomic barriers to enhancing their adaptive capacity [12,23]. Firstly,
women have unequal access to and control over assets, such as trac-
tors. This limits their capacity to adapt to climate-related crop failures
[22,24]. Moreover, cultural beliefs dictate that women should be
excluded from most areas of decision-making [10]. This impedes
women from voicing their health vulnerabilities and adaptive needs
in community meetings [25]. Gender norms, which assign women to
household and childrearing responsibilities, create “time poverty”,
creating less time for women to contribute to decision-making pro-
cesses and adaptation strategies such as climate-smart agriculture
[3,26,27]. Similarly, women’s restricted social mobility impedes them
from accessing markets to expand their economic opportunities
away from climate-sensitive strategies [22]. Moreover, women in
Garissa have limited access to reproductive healthcare services and
education, and are disproportionately illiterate. Resultantly, they face
restricted access to information and technology relevant to health
and climate adaptation, such as written weather information [10,22].
Thus, women become disempowered and their health autonomy
becomes impeded [28].
1.5. Conceptualizing gender-mainstreaming into CBA
Gender-mainstreaming assesses the implications for women and
men of any planned action, which ensures that gendered determi-
nants of health, such as power relations and livelihood strategies, are
not excluded from CBA [18,25]. This legitimizes women’s voices, for
example, by involving them in decision-making processes, and allow-
ing women to voice gender-speciﬁc health needs that must be incor-
porated into adaptation strategies [29]. This is vital in the CBA
process, as climate-related health vulnerabilities are speciﬁc to wom-
en’s sociocultural contexts [20]. CBA could, for example, enable
women in Garissa to voice their disproportionate risk of nutrient
deﬁciency, which could be addressed by training women in climate-
resilient farming [20].
To date, many CBA processes have failed to address the social con-
texts that create gendered climate vulnerabilities [29]. Therefore,
acknowledging CBA’s use in addressing gendered climate-related
health impacts is an urgent public health need.
2.0. Methods
The paper uses a single case study design. Single case studies are
useful when researching a phenomenon in a unique environment
[30]. This approach is appropriate, since the gendered health impacts
of climate change are unique to the geophysical and socioeconomic
context of Garissa. Equally, the concept of CBA is grounded in the
concept of context-speciﬁcity [6], thereby justifying the use of a sin-
gle case study.
This paper takes an interpretivist epistemological stance to the
research problem, which assumes that social reality is produced and
reproduced through the actions and interactions of people, and that
any social truth is interpreted rather than objectively known [31].
The interpretivist perspective enables the authors to explore the
complexity underlying the unique context of a phenomenon [32].
The case study methodology ﬁts the epistemology of the paper, as it
embraces an interpretivist theoretical orientation, which is applied to
the Adaptation Learning Programme [30,33].
The chosen case is the Adaptation Learning Programme in Garissa
County, from 2010 to 2015. Only the ﬁve years of implementation
were analysed due to a lack of publications related to the ALP’s long-
lasting impacts. To address the research question, the authors investi-
gated how gender was integrated into ALP’s four CBA interventions
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
2
implemented in Garissa. The way in which gender integration
enhanced women’s adaptive capacity to the health effects of climate
change was then analysed. The four CBA interventions, implemented
by the ALP, are outlined below:
2.1 Community vulnerability and capacity analysis (CVCA)
The CVCA enabled communities to inform local adaptation needs
through community meetings [22]. This allowed for traditional
knowledge to be incorporated into adaptation planning, thereby pro-
viding an evidence base for tailoring adaptation strategies to the
community’s context-speciﬁc climate vulnerabilities [13].
2.2. Income-generating strategies
Income-generating strategies consisted of “Business Skills Devel-
opment” (BSD) and “Village Savings and Loans Associations” (VSLA).
Through community meetings, women in Garissa identiﬁed that a
lack of business skills was a major gap to generating income through
less climate-sensitive strategies. Diversifying away from pastoralism,
a livelihood strategy under severe climate threat, aimed to increase
women’s asset base and enable women to take more ﬁnancial risks. It
furthermore aimed to enable more ﬂexible investment decisions,
using climate forecasts and information [34]. BSD taught individuals
about market dynamics to enhance their market access. Moreover, it
connected people to sources of government funding to aid funding
proposals submissions [34]. The VSLA organized self-selected groups
to ﬁnance small loans into shared accounts. This aimed to enhance
ﬁnancial security and enable the diversiﬁcation away from climate-
sensitive livelihoods strategies [34].
2.3. Participatory scenario planning (PSP)
The PSP promoted access to effective dissemination and interpre-
tation of climate information at the community level by enabling dia-
logue between community actors and other stakeholders. This was
aimed at making climate information relevant to various adaptive
needs [35].
2.4. Adaptive agricultural practices
Adaptive
agricultural
practices
consisted
of
“Climate
Field
Schools” (CFS), “conservation agriculture”, “dryland livestock” and
“improved seeds”. The overarching goal was to enhance livelihood
security by making crop production and livestock rearing more resis-
tant to extreme weather [12].
2.5. Data collection
Data were collected from ALP publications. Given the absence of
peer-reviewed publications, data were retrieved from grey literature
only. The list of ALP publications was retrieved from two sources;
ALP's ofﬁcial outcome report1 and CARE’s ofﬁcial website2, in which a
search ﬁlter was used.
To ensure the collection of relevant data, inclusion and exclusion
criteria were formulated (see Annex 1). The inclusion and exclusion
criteria with their justiﬁcation were formulated for 8 criteria, encom-
passing: Criteria #1: ALP; Criteria #2: Gender; Criteria #3: CBA inter-
ventions; Criteria #4: Document type; Criteria #5: Timeframe;
Criteria #6: Location; Criteria #7: Language; Criteria #8: Availability.
The exclusion process, as guided by these criteria, is demonstrated in
the ﬂowchart in Fig. 2. Through this process, six relevant ALP publica-
tions were retrieved for generating the results.
2.6. Data analysis
The data were analyzed systematically (Fig. 3). The following sub-
section details and justiﬁes the process of data analysis using this
table.
The paper investigates how each of the four CBA strategies imple-
mented by the ALP in Garissa integrated gender to enhance women’s
adaptive capacity to the health impacts of climate change. Each table
analyses one CBA strategy, creating a total of four results tables (dem-
onstrated in Annexes 2-5). The horizontal row of the table represents
women’s adaptive capacity to climate change, which is the primary
outcome being studied. To systematically analyse this outcome, ACC-
RA’s ﬁve components of adaptive capacity are used, which are repre-
sented as ﬁve separate columns in the horizontal row.
The vertical column includes three different approaches to mea-
suring the outcomes of the CBA interventions. The ﬁrst row of the
vertical column analyses how gender is integrated into each interven-
tion design to promote each component of adaptive capacity. To illus-
trate, how did the CVCA attempt to enhance women’s opportunity to
participate in decision-making? The second row of the vertical col-
umn represents the primary, secondary and tertiary outcomes of the
CBA interventions. Again, the primary outcomes represent ACCRA’s
ﬁve components of adaptive capacity. For example, the primary out-
come of the CVCA is whether it enhanced women’s opportunity to
participate in decision-making. Secondary and tertiary outcomes
were added to illustrate the “knock-on” effects of the primary out-
comes, such as, what is the secondary outcome associated with
enhancing women’s opportunity to participate in decision making?
And, what is the tertiary outcome associated with this secondary out-
come? Secondary and tertiary outcomes aim to illustrate the process
by which enhancing women’s adaptive capacity in turn affected
women’s health outcomes. The last row of the vertical column repre-
sents the negative or unintended consequences of enhancing wom-
en’s adaptive capacity.
3.0. Results
The results were generated using the six ALP publications identi-
ﬁed in the ﬂow chart in Fig. 2. The outcomes of the four CBA interven-
tions were analysed using the data analysis table in Fig. 3, thereby
generating four tables of results (displayed in Annexes 2-5). A con-
ceptual framework was created to display and visualize the results
(Fig. 4).
3.1. Introducing the conceptual framework of results
The conceptual framework visualizes the mechanisms through
which the ALP’s four CBA interventions enhance women’s adaptive
capacity to climate change (the primary outcomes), and the resultant
outcomes of these mechanisms (the secondary, tertiary, and nega-
tive/unintended outcomes). The primary outcomes (displayed in the
yellow box) represent ACCRA’s ﬁve components of adaptive capacity.
The mechanisms by which the CBA interventions enhance each adap-
tive capacity component are displayed in coloured arrows (which are
explained in the key). The secondary and tertiary outcomes, visual-
ised in the green and red boxes respectively, illustrate the “knock-
on” effects of the primary outcomes. They illuminate the outcomes
associated with enhacing women’s adaptive capacity, including
health-related outcomes. The framework’s blue tier illustrates the
negative and unintended outcomes.
1 “Adaptation Learning Programme for Africa. ALP Results, Outcomes and Impacts
Report. January 2010 to June 2015” (Percy et al., [12])
2 careclimatechange.org
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
3
3.2. Primary outcomes
The subsequent paragraphs will systematically address each of
ACCRA’s ﬁve components of adaptive capacity, and outline how the
CBA interventions achieved each component.
The ﬁrst component of adaptive capacity, according to ACCRA, is
empowering individuals to be innovative [36]. By allowing women to
access markets, the BSD and VSLA empowered women to be innova-
tive with less climate-sensitive livelihood strategies such as selling
milk and honey. Moreover, the VSLA increased women’s access to
loans, which enabled them to start innovative businesses to sell non-
perishable goods [12,34]. These processes are demonstrated by the
red arrow pathway on the conceptual framework.
The second component of adaptive capacity is enhancing access to
and control over assets [36]. This was achieved by the BSD and the
VSLA (visualized by the red arrow pathways on the conceptual
framework), which trained women in business skills, and thus
enhanced their ﬁnancial assets [34]. Moreover, adaptive agricultural
strategies enhanced women’s access to critical livelihood resources
such as land, and livestock. Women were also able to generate a big-
ger agricultural asset base by adopting climate-resistant agricultural
measures [22,37]. These mechanisms are displayed by the green
arrow pathways on the conceptual framework. Despite women
increasing their asset base through the ALP, men still remained
largely in control over agriculture and ﬁnances [12,22].
The third component of adaptive capacity is the connection to
institutions and entitlements [36]. This was achieved by the PSP, BSD
and VSLA. The PSP created dialogue between women and stakehold-
ers from the meteorological sector, to scale up women’s climate-
related adaptive priorities, and promote gender-sensitive designing
of adaptation strategies [22]. The BSD and VSLA linked women to
national banks to operate accounts and access loans, and connected
women with government funding sources to enhance ﬁnancial secu-
rity [34].
The fourth component of adaptive capacity consists of enhancing
access to climate-related knowledge and information [36]. The Cli-
mate Field Schools informed women on adapting their agricultural
livelihood practices to unfavourable climactic conditions, though
which, women received resources in the form of tools, seeds and les-
sons about crop diversiﬁcation [12,37]. Moreover, the PSP developed
an approach which made climate information more relevant and
equally accessible for both genders (as displayed by the yellow arrow
pathway on the conceptual framework). Through this, women used
climate information to inform adaptation approaches which were rel-
evant to their livelihood strategies [34,37].
The ﬁfth component of adaptive capacity consists of enhancing
individuals’ decision-making power and governance [36]. The PSP
achieved this by engaging women in collective scenario planning for
extreme weather events. Moreover, the CVCA empowered women to
voice how climate was impacting their health and livelihoods, which
pushed for adaptation strategies to become more gender-sensitive
[11,12,37]. This is represented by the blue arrow pathways on the
framework.
3.3. Secondary outcomes
The secondary outcomes display the changes in women’s lives,
and in the dynamics between men and women, which resulted as a
“knock-on effect” of women acquiring greater adaptive capacity
through the ALP’s CBA interventions.
As demonstrated on the conceptual framework, each component
of adaptive capacity led to women being empowered and feeling con-
ﬁdent [11,12,22,37]. For example, as active members of decision-
making processes, women became empowered to become active
members of change [12]. Moreover, having access to climate informa-
tion, market resources, and high-level institutions such as banks
enabled women to have greater control over their livelihoods
[11,12,37]. Consequently, men and women collaborated more, and
women gained more respect from the community as agents of
change [12].
By increasing women’s access to climate information, institutional
structures, and access to ﬁnancial assets through markets and loans,
women achieved greater ﬁnancial and food security [12,34,37]. For
example, access to climate-smart agriculture and climate information
Fig. 1. Interaction between climate change, CBA, health and gender in Garissa County.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
4
Fig. 2. Data Collection Flow Chart.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
5
enabled women to obtain better crop yields under harsh weather
conditions [12,34]. Moreover, through improved business skills and
market access, women were able to sell more products, such as milk
and fruit juice. This allowed women to diversify away from climate-
sensitive agricultural livelihoods [34].
3.4. Tertiary outcomes
The following tertiary outcomes represent the “knock-on” effects
of the secondary outcomes outlined above. Through the tertiary out-
comes, the impacts of the CBA interventions on women’s health are
illuminated.
By generating a greater income through market strategies, and by
enhancing food security through adaptive agricultural practices and
market participation, women had greater capacity to pay for health-
care fees and to support healthcare needs [37]. Greater ﬁnancial and
livelihood security equally gave households greater capacity to send
children to school [37].
Moreover, by increasing food security, women experienced less
physical and psychological pressure to turn available resources into a
meal. Resultantly, men had greater respect for women as important
contributors to livelihoods, which consequently reduced domestic
violence against women [11]. This also resulted in a shift in gender
roles, in which men became increasingly involved with domestic
chores, which decreased the physical strain of large workloads for
women [12,37].
3.5. Negative and unintended outcomes
This section highlights the unintended consequences of the ALP’s
CBA interventions, which resulted in adverse health outcomes for
Fig. 3. Data Analysis Table.
6
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
women. Further, it demonstrates the underlying causes of climate
change vulnerability that the ALP failed to address.
The ALP’s CBA interventions brought about several unintended
outcomes for women. Firstly, increasing women’s ﬁnancial security
and asset base through income-generating strategies created an
incentive for husbands to contribute less to livelihoods, which in
some cases increased women’s workloads and physical exhaustion
[22]. Secondly, through participating in CBA interventions, women
transgressed patriarchal boundaries by mixing with the opposite sex
in trade markets and community meetings. By violating cultural
norms, some women faced discrimination and domestic violence
[22]. This mechanism is illustrated by the brown arrows on the con-
ceptual framework.
Moreover, the CBA interventions failed to address several of the
underlying causes of women’s vulnerability to climate change (dem-
onstrated by the purple arrows on the conceptual framework).
Firstly, illiteracy, which prevents most women in Garissa from under-
standing climate-related information in written form, was not
addressed by the CBA interventions [12,22,37]. Moreover, women’s
reproductive healthcare needs were not integrated into the ALP. In
fact, none of the CBA interventions focused on mitigating climate-
related health risks for women and men alike. Although several ter-
tiary outcomes represent health-related outcomes, the mitigation of
health risks was not an explicit goal of the ALP and was not systemat-
ically integrated into the program [11,12,22,34,37].
4.0. Discussion
4.1. Addressing restricted social mobility and time poverty
The ALP enhanced women’s social mobility by increasing their
market access through the BSD and VLSA [34], and integrating
women into decision-making processes through the CVCA and PSP
[11,37]. BSD and VLSA allowed women to increase their ﬁnancial and
food security, thereby generating greater ﬁnancial and time capacity
to address healthcare needs. It also caused less pressure on women
to maintain livelihood security, and decreased their time poverty
[22]. Reducing time—poverty and increasing social mobility enables
women to participate in community meetings, in which they can
voice their health vulnerabilities to climate change [22,26]. Firstly,
this allows for women’s adaptive needs to be addressed [16,28]. Sec-
ondly, it empowers women to make informed decisions to protect
their health [15,16].
While CBA engagement increased women’s social mobility to an
extent, the ALP did not address women who cannot leave the house
unaccompanied by men [11,12,22,34,35,37]. The ALP thereby failed
to address the underlying gendered structures which restrict wom-
en’s social mobility. Restricted social mobility limits women’s adap-
tive capacity in many low-income settings globally, and CBA
interventions in other contexts have demonstrated how this barrier
can be addressed. For example, through a United Nations Develop-
ment Programme (UNDP)-led CBA program in Morocco, women held
community meetings in their homes because they were not allowed
to participate in public meetings. This allowed women to meet with-
out restrictions, and empowered them to ﬁnd shared solutions on
enhancing their adaptive capacity [3].
4.2. Addressing women’s restricted ability to diversity away from
climate-sensitive livelihoods
Women’s restricted ability to diversify away from climate-sensi-
tive livelihood strategies results from gendered labor divisions which
dictate women’s dependence on natural systems for livelihood gen-
eration [17,27]. The BSD and VSLA addressed this barrier by increas-
ing women’s ﬁnancial capital. Moreover, climate-smart agricultural
activities taught women adaptive agricultural practices, thereby
enhancing their food security [12,37], which is vital for women who
risk nutrient deﬁciency due to gendered food hierarchies [18,19,20].
Fig. 4. Conceptual Framework Demonstrating the Outcomes of the ALP’s CBA Interventions.
7
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
Furthermore, restructuring gendered labor divisions by engaging
women with the “masculine” economic sector consequently incenti-
vizes men to take up “feminine” labor tasks, which can protect wom-
en’s health. This was illustrated in a CBA program in Cambodia,
where men taking up “feminine” tasks protected women from physi-
cal exhaustion related to feminized labor [8].
The importance of income-generating strategies is recognized on
a governmental level in Kenya. According to Kenya’s 2015−2030
National Adaptation Plan, enhancing women’s economic resilience is
key to developing adaptive capacity to climate change. The report
recognizes that women face barriers to adaptive capacity largely
because of an inequitable gendered labor force, and restricted access
to capital and credit. The ongoing governmental initiative “Youth and
Women Enterprise Fund” aims to provide accessible and affordable
credit to support women with starting or expanding business oppor-
tunities and creating employment, in order to enhance climate resil-
ience [14].
The ALP’s CBA interventions did not, however, address gendered
water collection roles [22]. It thereby failed to address women’s risk
of exhaustion and spine damage, which result from long walking dis-
tances associated with climate-induced water scarcity [2,18].
4.3. Addressing women’s restricted decision-making power
Through the PSP and CVCA, the ALP enhanced women’s decision-
making power [12], which empowered women to become active
agents of change. This resulted in improved working relationships
between men and women, which consequently lowered domestic
violence against women [22]. Moreover, enhancing community
members’ voice in decision-making processes empowers individuals
to voice climate-related health vulnerabilities [3,15,28]. This is dem-
onstrated by a CBA intervention in Northern Canada, which engaged
should aboriginal communities reac Indigenous Peoples? such as lim-
ited sea ice access resulting in food insecurities. It informed the
design of adaptation policies such as education programs on how to
minimize food insecurity, thereby allowing communities to make
informed decisions regarding their health [28]. This illustrates that if
women’s health needs are voiced in decision-making processes and
addressed through adaptation strategies, it enables women to gain
health autonomy in a changing climate [15,16,28].
While literature and case examples show that addressing health
vulnerabilities through decision-making processes can mitigate cli-
mate-related health risks, it is worth noting that the mitigation of
health risks was not an integral goal of the ALP. Therefore, ALP publi-
cations do not specify whether women’s decision-making power
allowed them to voice their health concerns in community meetings,
and whether these were addressed at all. Finally, this made women's
climate-related health outcomes difﬁcult to analyze.
4.4. Addressing women’s limited access to climate-related information
and technology
Lack of access to climate-related information and technology in
Garissa is guided by norms which distribute less control over resour-
ces to women [22]. The PSP addressed this barrier by disseminating
gender-sensitive climate information [37]. Having better access to
these resources empowered women, and increased their ﬁnancial
and food security, consequently increasing their capacity to address
healthcare needs [37]. Moreover, it reduced levels of domestic vio-
lence, as women became more respected by men as important liveli-
hood contributors [12].
Despite the success of the PSP, illiteracy impeded many women
from interpreting climate information in written form [22]. More-
over, men remained in control of information dissemination tools
such as phones and radios [12]. Thus, due to unequal power distribu-
tions,
the
PSP
beneﬁted
men
more
than
women
[22].
This
contextualizes a scenario in which CBA interventions risk perpetuat-
ing gender inequalities, by reafﬁrming the structures that give men
more control over assets [6].
4.5. Addressing women’s restricted access to reproductive healthcare
services
Enhancing the access to reproductive healthcare was not inte-
grated into the ALP’s interventions, thereby failing to address preg-
nant women’s climate-related susceptibility to malaria [18]. This
afﬁrms the need to integrate primary healthcare into CBA, given the
sector’s expertise on protecting local populations from climate-
related health risks such as vector-borne diseases [9,16]. Haines et al.
[38] note that CBA programs are an effective way to deliver critical
primary healthcare services at the local level. This is illuminated by
the UNDP/World Health Organization (WHO) CBA project in Bhutan,
in which strong engagement from the health ministry successfully
enhanced communities’ protection from climate-related health risks
[9]. Furthermore, by not enhancing women’s access to contracep-
tives, the ALP did not address childrearing responsibility and time
poverty as an adaptive barrier and underlying structural vulnerability
to climate change [22].
4.6. Addressing the negative and unintended consequences of the ALP
The unintended consequences of the CBA interventions in some
cases resulted in men contributing less to livelihoods, perpetuated
workloads for women, and domestic violence faced by some women
who transgressed cultural boundaries [22]. This illuminates that CBA
should not be viewed within a faultless narrative and that CBA inter-
ventions must be sensitive to the sociocultural contexts of communi-
ties, and to the complex structures that shape women’s social
identities [6,8].
4.7. Global implications of the case study: applying lessons learned to
other contexts
While this case study explores women’s adaptive capacity, and
the outcomes of a CBA programme in a highly speciﬁc context, les-
sons learned from in-depth studies on CBA programs can identify
patterns which can be applied to other contexts [8]. For example, the
adaptive barriers faced by women in Garissa apply to women in
many other low-income settings [3]. A UNDP-led CBA program
implemented in 10 low-income countries,3 found that like in Garissa,
women’s adaptive capacity is restricted by limited social mobility
and decision-making power, time in poverty, the reliance on natural
systems for livelihood generation, and limited access to education
and healthcare [3]. While this does not imply that women globally
face identical climate-related health risks, the adaptive barriers
shared by women in multiple contexts implies that this analysis of
the ALP may inform the questions that shape the implementation of
future CBA programs, to protect women’s health in other contexts
[8].
4.8. Scaling up ﬁndings from the case study
Bottom-up approaches to adaptation generate meaningful under-
standings that can be scaled up to inform national policies on gen-
der-sensitive climate change adaptation [8]. Scaling up this case
study’s ﬁndings can inform national-level stakeholders in Kenya of
the need to effectively disseminate primary healthcare and educa-
tional opportunities for women at the local level. Up-scaling of
locally-identiﬁed vulnerabilities are vital, because they require top-
3 Bangladesh, Bolivia, Guatemala, Jamaica, Kazakhstan, Morocco, Namibia, Niger,
Samoa and Vietnam
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
8
down input from stakeholders with political power to be effectively
addressed [28].
4.9. Limitations of the analysis
The authors acknowledge that the ALP conducted a gender analy-
sis in Garissa, which is publicly inaccessible [11,12,37]. A gender anal-
ysis explores the relationships between men and women, their
control over resources, and their roles in the community and house-
hold [18]. Without access to Garissa’s gender analysis, the ALP’s inte-
gration of social structures that shape women’s health vulnerabilities
could not be assessed with maximum validity. The lack of accessible
ALP follow-up reports, meant that programme’s lasting impacts could
not be assessed.
5.0. Conclusion
This case study situates the climate change-CBA-gender-health
nexus in the context of Garissa, showing that to successfully enhance
women’s adaptive capacity to the climate-related health impacts,
CBA interventions must integrate access to education and reproduc-
tive healthcare, and address women’s restricted social mobility. This
ﬁnding can frame questions for the future implementation of gender-
sensitive CBA strategies in other low-income settings.
The conceptual framework demonstrates how the ALP’s CBA led
to both positive and negative health outcomes through enhacing
women’s adaptive capacity to climate change. This framework pro-
vides internal value for future research, as it can be used to systemati-
cally structure case study ﬁndings, which explore the climate change-
CBA-health-gender nexus in other contexts. Equally, the literature
review framework enables the systematic analysis of CBA programs
in settings which share similar climate and gender norm contexts
with Garissa. Moreover, the contextual ﬁndings on the gendered
implications of climate change adaptation from this case can be used
to frame recommendations for health adaptation in other low-
income contexts, in which gender norms inﬂuence adaptive capacity.
Author agreement
We conﬁrm that the manuscript has been read and approved by
all named authors.
Ethical approval
Ethical approval for this type of study is not required by our
institute.
Declaration of Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
The authors declare the following ﬁnancial interests/personal
relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests:
Appendix
Annex 1−5
References
[1] Costello A, Allen E. Managing the health effects of climate change. Lancet North
Am Ed 2009;373(9676):1693–733.
[2] WHO. Gender, climate change and health. Geneva: World Health Organization;
2014.
[3] Vincent K, Wanjiru L, Aubry A, Mershon A, Nyandiga C, Cull T, et al. Gender, cli-
mate change and community-based adaptation. New York: United Nations Devel-
opment Programme; 2010.
[4] Watts N, Adger N, Agnolucci P, Blackstock J, Byass P, Cai W, et al. Health and cli-
mate change: policy responses to protect public health. Lancet North Am Ed
2014;386(10006):1861–914.
[5] IPCC. Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press; 2007.
[6] Ford J, Sherman M, Berrang-Ford L, Llanos A, Carcamo C, Harper S, et al.
Preparing for the health impacts of climate change in indigenous communi-
ties: the role of community-based adaptation. Glob Environ Chang 2018;
49:129–39.
[7] Berger R, Ensor J, Wilson K, Phukan I, Dasgupta S. Adaptive capacity. in: commu-
nity-based adaptation to climate change. scaling it up. New York: Routledge; 2014.
p. 22–35.
[8] Jerneck A. Taking gender seriously in climate change adaptation and sustainabil-
ity science research: views from feminist debates and sub-saharan small-scale
agriculture. Sustain Sci 2018;13(2):403–16.
[9] Ebi KL, Barrio MOD. Lessons Learned on Health Adaptation to Climate Variability
and Change: Experiences Across Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Environ
Health Perspect 2017;125(6):1−7.
[10] Council of Governors. Garissa county government: county integrated develop-
ment plan 2013-2017. Nairobi: Government of Kenya; 2017.
[11] Nottawasaga Institute. Adaptation learning programme (ALP) care international.
mid-term review. ﬁnal report. Nairobi: Nottawasaga Institute; 2012.
[12] Percy F, Ward N, Muecke P. Adaptation learning programme for africa: alp results,
outcomes and impacts report. january 2010 to june 2015. Nairobi: CARE Interna-
tional; 2015.
[13] Daze A. Climate change vulnerability and adaptive capacity: synthesis and lessons
from ghana, kenya and niger. Nairobi: CARE International; 2015.
[14] Government of Kenya. Kenya national adaptation plan 2015-2030. Nairobi: Min-
istry of Environment and Natural Resources; 2016.
[15] Ebi KL. Facilitating climate justice through community-based adaptation in the
health sector. Environ Justice 2009;2(4):191–5.
[16] Shumake-Guillemot J, Ebi K, Kabir I, Nguyen T, Malkawi M. Scaling up commu-
nity-based adaptation to protect health from climate change. in: community-
based adaptation to climate change. scaling it up. New York: Routledge; 2014. p.
155–71.
[17] Bryan E, Bernier Q, Espinal M, Ringler C. Making climate change adaptation pro-
grammes more gender responsive: insights from implementing organisations on
the barriers and opportunities. Clim Develop 2017;10(5):417–31.
[18] Haddad Z, Prats EV. Mainstreaming gender in health adaptation to climate change
programmes. Geneva: WHO; 2012.
[19] Goh A. A literature review of the gender-differentiated impacts of climate change
on women and men’s assets and well-being in developing countries, 106. IFPRI
Publications; 2012.
[20] Bryan E, Behrman JA. Community-based adaptation: a theoretical framework,
overview of key issues and discussion of gender differentiated priorities and par-
ticipation. CAPRI 2013;Volume 109:1–31.
[21] Kariuki J, Galie A, Birner R, Chagunda M, Jakinda S, Milia D, et al. Does the gender
of farmers matter for improving small ruminant productivity? A Kenyan case
study. Small Ruminant Res 2022;206:106574.
[22] Webb J. Gender dynamics in a changing climate: how gender and adaptive capac-
ity affect resilience. Nairobi: CARE International; 2015.
[23] Chepkoech W, Mungai N, St€ober S, Lotze-Campen H. Understanding adaptive
capacity of smallholder African indigenous vegetable farmers to climate change
in Kenya. Clim Risk Manage 2020;27:100204.
[24] Wanjiku J, Manyengo JU, Oluoch-Kosura W, Karugia JT. Gender differentiation in
the analysis of alternative farm mechanization choices on small farms in Kenya.
Food insecurity, vulnerability and human rights failure. London: Palgrave Mac-
millan; 2007. p. 94–218.
[25] Wright H, Chandani A. Gender in scaling up community-based adaptatin to cli-
mate change. in: community-based adaptation to climate change: scaling it up. New
York: Routledge; 2014. p. 226–38.
[26] Deering K. Gender-Transformative adaptation. Nairobi: CARE International;
2019.
[27] Ngigi M, Mueller U, Birner R. Gender differences in climate change adaptation
strategies and participation in group-based approaches: an intra-household anal-
ysis from Rural Kenya. Ecol Econ 2017;138:99–108.
[28] Ebi KL, Semenza JC. Community-based adaptation to the health impacts of climate
change. Am J Prev Med 2008;35(5):501–7.
[29] Otzelberger A, Ward N. Understanding gender in community based adaptation.
Nairobi: CARE International; 2016.
[30] Yin RK. Case study research and applications: designs and methods. sixth edition.
Los Angeles: SAGE Publications; 2018.
[31] Greenhalgh T, Russell J. Evidence-based policymaking: a critique. Perspect Biol
Med 2009;52(2):304–18.
[32] Pham L., 2018. A Review of key paradigms: positivism, interpretivism and critical
inquiry.
[Online].
Available
at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
324486854_A_Review_of_key_paradigms_positivism_in
terpretivism_and_criti-
cal_inquiry [Accessed 06 May 2020].
[33] Baxter P, Jack S. Qualitative case study methodology: study design and implemen-
tation for novice researchers. The Qual Report 2008;13(4):544–59.
[34] Wagner R, Ward N, Percy F. ALP adaptation strategies compendium. Nairobi:
CARE International; 2015.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
9
[35] Ambani M, Percy F. Decision-Making for climate resilient livelihoods and risk reduc-
tion: a participatory scenario planning approach. Nairobi: CARE International; 2012.
[36] Jones L, Ludi E, Levine S. Towards a characterisation of adaptive capacity:a frame-
work for analysing adaptive capacity at the local level. London: ODI; 2010.
[37] Nottawasaga Institute. Adaptation learning programme (ALP) ﬁnal evaluation
report. Nairobi: Nottawasaga Institute; 2015.
[38] Haines A, Sanders D, Lehmann U, Rowe A, Lawn J, Jan S, et al. Achieving child sur-
vival goals: potential contribution of community health workers. Lancet North
Am Ed 2007;369(9579):2121–31.
[39] Haret A, Huho J, Mohamed A, Golicha H. Evaluation of the impact of county cli-
mate change fund on community resilience to climate change in Garissa county,
Kenya. American J Clim Stud 2021;2(1):38–59.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
10
Annex 1
Inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Criteria type
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
Justiﬁcation
Criteria #1: ALP.
Must be directly linked to the Adap-
tation Learning Programme (ALP).
Any publication that is not directly
linked to the Adaptation Learning
Programme (ALP).
CARE has several publications within the ﬁeld of gender and CBA,
which are not directly linked to the ALP.
Criteria #2: Gender.
Must contain gender-focused
sections.
Any publications which do not
include gender-focused sections.
The gender/CBA discourse is at the center of the case study.
Criteria #3
CBA interventions.
Must include the four CBA interven-
tions used in Garissa.
Any publications which do not
include gender-focused sections.
The case study attempts to answer the research question by ana-
lysing how gender was integrated into ALP’s four CBA inter-
ventions in Garissa County.
Criteria #4: Document type.
Anything other than practitioner
briefs.
Practitioner Briefs.
Given that primary research was not undertaken, practitioner
briefs were not deemed relevant.
Criteria #5: Timeframe.
Publications related to the ALP’s ini-
tial years of implementation (2010
−2015).
Publications on the ALP extension
programme (2015−2017).
The extension programme was implemented in Embu County in
Kenya and was therefore excluded from the case study.
Criteria #6: Location.
Garissa County, Kenya.
Any location other than Garissa
County, Kenya.
ALP works in four countries: Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique and
Niger. This case study focuses on the ALP work carried out in
Garissa in Kenya.
Criteria #7: Language.
English.
Non-English.
Unable to interpret ﬁndings in languages other than English.
Criteria #8: Availability.
Published reports.
Unpublished reports.
The authors was unable to access data that was not published.
Annex 2
Table Showing Results for the CVCA Intervention.
Component of adaptive capacity
Opportunity to participate in decision-making and
governance
Access to
knowledge and
information
Access to
institutions and
entitlements
Access to and
control over
assets
Empowerment
to be
innovative
Design
Sources: [11,37] Aimed to:
 Ensure men and women’s equal participation in
decision-making.
Allow women to raise points about gender-speciﬁc
adaptation needs.
Outcomes:
primary, secondary and tertiary
Sources: [11,12,37]
Primary outcome:
Enhanced women’s decision-making role by
allowing women to voice which adaptation strat-
egies should be prioritized to meet their adaptive
needs.
Secondary outcomes:
Gender-sensitive adaptation strategies identiﬁed
such as business skills training for women.
Empowered women and increased their conﬁ-
dence by allowing them to contribute to decision-
making processes.
Negative/ unintended outcomes
Source: [22]
 Women who participated in decision-making
processes risked facing discrimination due to
transgression of cultural boundaries.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
11
Annex 3
Table showing results for income generating activities: Business Skills Development (BSD) and Village Savings and Loans Association (VSLA) interventions.
Component of adaptive capacity
Opportunity to participate in
decision-making and
governance
Access to knowledge and
information
Access to institutions and
entitlements
Access to and control over of assets
Empowerment to be innovative
Design
Source: [34] Designed to
increase women’s access to:
 Information
on
market
dynamics.
 Information on loan applica-
tions.
Source: [34] Designed to:
 Connect women to sources of
government funding.
 Link women to national banks
to open and operate accounts.
Source: [34] Designed to:
 Diversify women’s livelihood strategies by
increasing their market access, and thus to
provide greater access to and control over
assets.
Source: [34]Designed to:
 Empower women to be inno-
vative by allowing them to
diversify away from climate-
sensitive livelihood strategies
by increasing their access to
markets and loans.
Outcomes: primary, secondary
and tertiary
Sources: [12,34]
Primary outcomes
" women’s access to ﬁnancial
resources.
Provided women with infor-
mation on loan applications.
Secondary outcomes
"social protection in face of
new/unexpected risks.
" women’s conﬁdence
"food and ﬁnancial security
#reliance on men for generat-
ing an asset base.
Tertiary outcomes
"money spent on children’s
education.
"ﬁnancial capacity to address
healthcare needs.
#levels of domestic violence as
women were under pressure
to maintain livelihoods.
Source: [34]
 Primary outcomes
Women were connected with
organisational structures which
enabled them to write funding
proposals to the UNDP.
More women were linked to
national banks.
Secondary outcomes
"ﬁnancial security and social
protection in face of unexpected
risks.
" women’s conﬁdence to engage
directly with markets.
 "food security.
 #reliance on men for generat-
ing an asset base.
Tertiary outcomes
 "money spent on children’s
education.
 "ﬁnancial capacity to address
healthcare needs.
 #levels of domestic violence
as women were under pres-
sure to maintain livelihoods.
Sources: [12,34] Primary outcomes Women
increased their asset base and diversiﬁed liveli-
hoods by becoming more ﬁnancially indepen-
dent.
Women increased their proﬁts from existing
practices such as milk and honey sales.Wom-
en’s groups in Ninighi started small-scale fruit
juice and milk businesses. This resulted a proﬁt
of US$ 225 per month.
 Secondary outcomes#reliance on men for
generating an asset
base."food security.
"social protection in face of new/unexpected
risks.Tertiary outcomes#levels of domestic vio-
lence as women were under pressure to maintain
livelihoods."ﬁnancial capacity to address health-
care needs.
Sources: [11,34,37] Primary
outcomes
 " women’s conﬁdence to be
innovative with less climate-
sensitive livelihood strategies.
Secondary outcomes" women’s
conﬁdence and empowerment
through "economic independen-
ceMen had greater respect for
women.
" women’s conﬁdence to speak
at community meetings and to
take part in decision-making.
Tertiary outcomes
 #levels of domestic violence
secondary to increased
respect for women.
 "collaboration between men
women. Men increasingly
helped with water, fuel and
wood collection, and child-
care.
Negative/ unintended
outcomes
Source: [22]
 " women’s income resulted in
men deciding to contribute
less to household work. This
resulted in a greater workload
for women. access to asset
base and livelihood resources
did not lead to signiﬁcant
increase in control over
resources.
Source: [22]
 " women’s income resulted in
men deciding to contribute
less to household work. This
resulted in a greater workload
for women.
Source: [22]
Women who transgressed societal and cultural
boundaries by mixing with the opposite sex in
trade markets risked facing criticism, domestic
violence, social stigma and discrimination.
" women’s income resulted in men deciding to
contribute less to household work. This
resulted in a greater workload for women.
" women’s asset base resulted in men migrat-
ing away in search for other new work. This led
to female-headed households facing discrimi-
nation and having greater workloads.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
12
Annex 4
Table showing results for Participatory Scenario Planning (PSP) intervention.
Component of adaptive capacity
Opportunity to participate in decision-making
and governance
Access to knowledge and information
Access to institutions and entitlements
Access to and control
over of assets
Empowerment to be
innovative
Design
Sources: [11,35] Designed to:
 " women’s decision-making power by engag-
ing them in PSP meetings. This aimed to give
women a bigger say in which adaptation strat-
egies were relevant for them.
Sources: [22,35,37] Designed to:
 Make climate information equally accessible to
men and women.
 Make presentation formats and dissemination
channels of climate information tailored to
women’s adaptive needs.
 Make early warning systems more accessible
to women.
Source: [22] Designed to:
 Create dialogue between women and
local government as well as meteoro-
logical staff.
Outcomes: primary, sec-
ondary and tertiary
Sources:[11,12,22,37]
Primary outcomes
Engaged women in collective scenario plan-
ning and decision-making.
Secondary outcomes:
Women’s climate concerns and adaptive needs
were addressed.
" women’s conﬁdence and empowerment
through greater involvement in community
leadership.
Men gained respect for women as powerful
drivers of change.
Tertiary outcomes:
" collaboration between men and women.
Sources: [11,37] Primary outcomes
Enhanced women’s access to climate informa-
tion.
Early warning systems became more accessible
to women.
Secondary outcomes:
Helped women acknowledge the existence of
climate change despite religious doctrines stat-
ing that futuristic predictions of the weather
are illegal.Women’s adaptive needs were
addressed.
 Tertiary
outcomes"collaboration
between
men and women.
Source: [11,22]
Primary outcomes
"access collaboration between meteo-
rological institutions and women.
Secondary outcomes
Enhanced women’s empowerment
and conﬁdence through increased con-
nections to governmental structures,
as their voices were being heard by
people outside their community.
Negative/ unintended
outcomes
Source: [22]
Women who participated in decision-making
processes risked facing discrimination due to
transgression of cultural boundaries.
Sources: [11,12,37]
Low literacy levels amongst women was not
adequately addressed. Climate information
was often distributed in written form.
Men remained in greater control over mobile
phones and radios. This resulted in unequal
control over resources, and thus risking magni-
ﬁcation of gender inequalities.
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
13
Annex 5
Table showing results for Adaptive Agricultural Strategies interventions: Climate Field Schools (CFS), Conservation agriculture, Dryland livestock and Improved seeds.
Component of adaptive capacity
Opportunity to participate in
decision-making and
governance
Access to knowledge and information
Access to institutions
and entitlements
Access to and control over assets
Empowerment to be
innovative
Design
Source: . [12]
Designed to:
 CFSs were aimed to address learning needs in
the ﬁeld of agriculture. Most CFSs were led by
women.
Source: [22] Designed to:
 Enhance women’s access to livelihood resour-
ces through agricultural training to promote
diversiﬁcation of economic opportunities.
Outcomes:
Primary, secondary and
tertiary
Sources: [12, 37] Primary outcomes Women
received information and resources in the form
of tools, seeds and learning visits to learn about
crop diversiﬁcation and efﬁcient irrigation sys-
tems.
Secondary outcomes" food security
Shift from nomadic way of life.
Tertiary outcomes.
 Women under less pressure to turn livelihood
resources into a meal.
 "money spent on children’s education.
 Less young children taken out of school.
"ﬁnancial capacity to address healthcare
needs.
Sources: : [12,22,37] Primary outcomes:
Access to livelihood resources such as land, and
involvement in livestock trade.
Enable women to accumulate assets through
improved agricultural practices.
Secondary outcomes
"food securityShift from nomadic way of life.
Tertiary outcomes.
 Women under less pressure to turn livelihood
resources into a meal.
 "money spent on children’s education.
 Less young children taken out of school.
"ﬁnancial capacity to address healthcare
needs.
Negative/ unintended
outcomes
Source: [12]
More men than women took part in the agri-
cultural practices (except for CFS).
E. Duus and D. Montag
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 6 (2022) 100120
14
