Research article
“No matter how hot it is, you just have to do the work”: Examining
farmworkers’ experiences with heat and climate change in Idaho
Carly Hylanda,b,*, Delmy Floresb, Grace Augustob, Irene Ruizc, Marielena Vegac, Rulon Woodd
a Division of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
b School of Public and Population Health, Boise State University, Boise, ID USA
c Idaho Organization of Resource Councils, Boise, ID USA
d Department of Theatre, Film, and Creative Writing, Boise State University, Boise, ID USA
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 4 December 2023
Accepted 19 January 2024
Available online 23 January 2024
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: Farmworkers are one of the populations most vulnerable to climate change. In addition to dis-
proportionate exposure to climate-intensiﬁed hazards such as extreme heat and wildﬁre smoke, many farm-
workers face situational and psychosocial stressors that also impact their health.
Methods: We conducted open-ended interviews with 16 farmworkers in Southcentral Idaho during June-
August 2023 as part of a digital storytelling project in partnership with the Idaho Organization of Resource
Councils (IORC). Interviews assessed participants’ experiences with climate change, perceived impacts on
their health, and strategies and barriers to protecting themselves. Bilingual (English/Spanish) study staff
translated and transcribed all video recordings verbatim, and we abstracted representative quotes from
interviews.
Results: Participants primarily discussed the health impacts of heat, recounting personal experiences and sto-
ries of other farmworkers feeling dizzy, wanting to vomit, or passing out from occupational heat stress.
Despite these experiences, they reported feeling like they needed to keep working regardless of the condi-
tions in order to get paid and support their family. Experiences with climate change were underscored by
participants’ discussions of co-exposure to situational and psychosocial stressors such as lack of access to
healthcare, poor housing without air conditioning, and racism, discrimination, and fear of family separation.
Discussion: This project highlights farmworkers’ ﬁrst-hand experiences regarding climate change and under-
scores the interconnected impacts of occupational, environmental, and psychosocial stressors on their health
and wellbeing. These ﬁndings emphasize the importance of shifting the burden of climate resiliency from
individual farmworkers to systemic workplace, residential, and community interventions.
© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Keywords:
Farmworker
Heat
Wildﬁre smoke
Climate change
Environment
Disparities
1. Introduction
Farmworkers are disproportionately impacted by many climate-
intensiﬁed exposures [1,2] and will continue to be one of the popula-
tions most vulnerable to global climate change. Speciﬁcally, farm-
workers face numerous environmental and occupational threats to
their health that will continue to worsen with climate change, includ-
ing exposure to pesticides, extreme heat, wildﬁre smoke and other
air pollutants, and biological agents such as viruses and bacteria [3].
Latinx farmworkers, who represent over 80 % of the agricultural
workforce in the U.S. [4], are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of
these exposures due to situational and structural factors such as lim-
ited control over workplace exposures and added barriers to health
protection, including limited economic, health, and social resources
[3,5−7]. While quantitative studies have begun to characterize these
climate-intensiﬁed stressors, data gaps exist regarding farmworkers’
own perceptions and experiences with climate change, including
strategies to protect themselves and barriers to protection.
Despite being deemed “essential workers” during the Covid pan-
demic, farmworkers across the United States have reported feeling
“invisible” [8,9] and “expendable” [10] in recent years. These feelings
are supported in recent ﬁndings highlighting disconnects between
consumers’ interest in food production systems and their knowledge
regarding the processes required to get food to their table. For exam-
ple, a nationwide survey commissioned by the U.S. Farmers & Ranch-
ers Alliance in 2011 indicated that while nearly 70 % of consumers
reported thinking about food production at least “somewhat often”,
Abbreviations: HRI, Heat related illness; IORC, Idaho organization of resource coun-
cils; IPCC, intergovernmental panel on climate change; PPE, personal protective
equipment
* Corresponding author at: Carly Hyland, 2121 Berkeley Way West, Berkeley, CA
94704, USA.
E-mail address: chyland@berkeley.edu (C. Hyland).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2024.100300
2667-2782/© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 16 (2024) 100300
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
72 % reported knowing “nothing” or “very little” about farming and
ranching [11], underscoring the importance of elevating farm-
workers’ perspectives and experiences to educate the general public
about how their food is produced.
Data suggest that story-based media can shift social norms, val-
ues, and beliefs more effectively than fact-based messaging [12] and
can also reach wider audiences. We conducted a digital storytelling
project with Latinx farmworkers in which we aimed to (1) humanize
this essential workforce, (2) provide safe spaces for farmworkers to
share their experiences and build community, (3) understand farm-
workers’ experiences with climate change, and (4) educate consum-
ers regarding the processes required to produce our food. We have
created various public-facing written and visual materials from this
project; here, we report ﬁndings regarding participants’ experiences
with extreme heat and climate change.
2. Methods
2.1. Recruitment and enrollment
We recruited a convenience sample of participants in partnership
with farmworker-serving organizations including the Idaho Organi-
zation of Resource Councils (IORC) and Latinx Farmworkers of South-
ern Idaho, as well as through snowball sampling. Bilingual (English/
Spanish) study staff approached potential participants, assessed their
eligibility to participate (i.e., 18 years or older, spoke English or Span-
ish, currently working as agricultural worker in Idaho), and read a
short recruitment script describing the background and goals of the
project. If the individual was interested in participating, study staff
read an Information Sheet that detailed the goals and procedures of
the project and emphasized that participation was voluntary and
that the individual could withdraw at any time. The Information
Sheet also detailed various options for participation, including partic-
ipating in a video recording, an audio recording without any video or
images, or simply talking with us while a study member transcribed
the conversation without any recording. If the participant selected to
participate in a video and/or audio recording, we provided them the
option to have their face and/or voice blurred to protect their ano-
nymity.
We took various other steps to protect the anonymity and conﬁ-
dentiality of study participants. Notably, we did not collect any iden-
tifying or demographic information from the participants. We gave
each participant a copy of the Information Sheet with a unique ID
number and the Principal Investigator’s contact information and indi-
cated that they could contact us at any time if they wanted to with-
draw from the project, and that we would not use any of their data.
We labelled all recordings and transcriptions with the individual’s
anonymous participant ID that cannot be linked to any identifying
information and stored all materials in a password-protected data-
base in a locked lab at Boise State University. Each participant
received a $25 gift card. All procedures were reviewed and approved
by the Boise State Institutional Review Board.
2.2. Data collection and analysis
All data collection occurred in the participant’s preferred language
(English or Spanish). We conducted semi-structured interviews with
16 farmworkers in Southcentral Idaho from June-August 2023 using
an interview guide with open-ended questions assessing partici-
pants’ experiences working in agriculture, the biggest challenges
they faced as a farmworker, what they would like the public to know
about their work, and their perceptions of the impacts of climate
change on their work and overall health, including strategies and bar-
riers to protecting themselves from heat. All participants elected to
participate in the video recording. Two bilingual (English/Spanish)
study staff translated and transcribed all video recordings verbatim,
and we abstracted quotes to identify overarching themes related to
participants’ experiences with heat and climate change.
3. Results
We identiﬁed six main themes regarding participants’ experien-
ces with climate change and extreme heat, including: (1) personal
experiences with heat, (2) other farmworkers’ experiences with heat,
(3) strategies and barriers to protect from heat, (4) impacts of heat on
the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), and (5) experiences
with other climate-intensiﬁed exposures (representative quotes
shown in Table 1), as well as (6) situational and structural factors
exacerbating the health impacts of occupational heat exposure (rep-
resentative quotes shown in Table 2).
3.1. Personal experiences with heat
Participants reported various health symptoms from working in
heat, including dizziness, headaches, feeling lethargic, and wanting
to vomit. One participant noted how each season seemed to be get-
ting hotter, indicating that by 6 A.M. it feels like “you’re already suffo-
cating with the heat”. One participant also discussed how it is difﬁcult
to cool down when they return from work and when they are trying
to sleep because it is still very hot. Despite these impacts, one partici-
pant noted that even when they want to give up, they know “the
work must be done and [they] continue”.
3.2. Other farmworkers’ experiences with heat
Multiple participants reported observing a coworker or hearing of
another farmworker having an acute health event as a result of occu-
pational heat exposure, including losing focus and orientation,
becoming dizzy, fainting, and developing allergies. Similar to partici-
pants’ descriptions of their own responses in which they reported
continuing to work regardless of the conditions, one participant
reported hearing stories of people who had become dizzy or fainted
and who couldn’t continue working until they “hydrated again, or
took a longer break”.
3.3. Strategies and barriers to protect from heat
The primary strategies participants reported to cool down and
protect themselves from heat included carrying cold water, trying to
ﬁnd shade, and wearing a bandana, hat, or long clothes. For example,
one participant reported that they wear a handkerchief, and when it
gets really hot, they sweat a lot and the handkerchief gets wet and
this keeps them cooler. Participants consistently reported that the
frequency and duration of breaks were insufﬁcient to help them cool
down. Speciﬁcally, two participants reported getting 15-minute
breaks where they can “recover a little”, with another indicating that
additional water breaks could help, but “not everyone gives you
more water breaks”. One participant indicated that they could take
additional unpaid breaks, however many people do not because they
need the money. These ﬁndings are underscored by participants
reporting working extremely long shifts of 10−16 h (Table 2). Partici-
pants also reported that shade can help them cool down, but there is
rarely enough shade for everyone.
3.4. Impacts of heat on PPE use
Responses from participants highlighted a tension in the use of
Personal Protection Equipment (PPE) to protect from the sun and
heat versus pesticides. While one participant noted that they con-
tinue to wear PPE regardless of how hot it is in to protect themselves
against pesticides and skin cancer, another reported that they wear
C. Hyland, D. Flores, G. Augusto et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 16 (2024) 100300
2
less PPE when it is very hot, indicating the feel “suffocated” if they
wear additional layers in the heat.
3.5. Other climate-intensiﬁed exposures −wildﬁre
One participant discussed their experiences with wildﬁre smoke
as another climate-intensiﬁed occupational exposure they are con-
cerned about. This participant noted that farmworkers continue to
work during wildﬁre events and while some may cover their faces
with a bandana this does “little to nothing”. This participant dis-
cussed how damaging conducting intense physical labor during wild-
ﬁre events can be on their lungs and overall health, noting that even
after work they feel “all this pressure in your lungs from having to
breathe really bad air and just overworking yourself”.
3.6. Situational and structural factors exacerbating impacts of heat
Participants identiﬁed and discussed various situational and
structural factors that exacerbate the impacts of these climate-inten-
siﬁed occupational exposures, including fear of law enforcement and
family separation and a lack of regulation, control in deciding to
engage in farm work (including as a child), access to healthcare, and
ability to be involved in advocacy efforts. Notably, we did not ask spe-
ciﬁc questions on these “non-chemical” exposures, and these themes
emerged without prompting from the study staff.
One participant discussed how they feel there is already a lack of
regulations to protect farmworkers, and no additional protections
have been put in place even as climate change continues to worsen
with increased heat and more wildﬁres. A participant also talked
about how many farmworkers would like to be engaged in policy-
making but are excluded from this process and would not be able to
afford to do so if invited because they cannot afford to miss work.
Some individuals also discussed the lack of control they had in choos-
ing whether or not to engage in agricultural work as an occupation,
even as a child, and that it is necessary “because we need to support
our family and we need to put food on the table”.
Participants also discussed stressors such as lack of access to health-
care. Speciﬁcally, one participant noted that they often do not go to the
doctor, even if they have felt ill for days, because they do not have
health insurance and it would be more costly than going to work.
Themes regarding fear of law enforcement and family separation also
emerged. One participant noted that even as a child they lived with
fear that they would be separated from their family, and multiple par-
ticipants discussed fear of the police in relation to being racially pro-
ﬁled while driving and not being able to obtain a driver’s license.
One ﬁnal theme that emerged is the potential disproportionate
impacts and vulnerability of women farmworkers. One participant
alluded to the additional difﬁculties women face in advocating for
themselves for fear of losing their job, and another discussed her
observations of pregnant farmworkers continuing to work in the
ﬁelds, including during Covid. This participant highlighted the lack of
paid leave or care during the perinatal period and that women farm-
workers often do not have time to recover or bond with their child
before needing to return to work.
Finally, one participant shared the following quote that sum-
marizes many of the experiences we heard regarding the impacts
Table 1
Representative quotes regarding participants’ experiences with climate-intensiﬁed environmental and occupational exposures.
Theme
Representative Quotes
Personal experiences with
heat
“We deﬁnitely noticed how much hotter the seasons just came to be. . . I mean, it’d be like 06:00 a.m. and you’re already suffocating with the
heat, especially when you were detasseling corn.”
“I have had a headache and wanted to vomit because of the heat. . .you feel the pressure and the head hurts and, well, it makes you dizzy. . .”
“When it is very hot, I experience a lot of lethargy. There are even times where I want to give up, but then I know work must be done, and I
continue.”
“I’ve seen it in the amount of just how hot it is every year and how it doesn’t die down. It’s like nine and it’s still pretty much hot out there.
And you’re like, barely getting home from work or at night when you’re trying to sleep, you’ve been in the heat all day long and then at
night you’re trying to cool down and it’s still very hot.”
Other farmworkers’ experi-
ences with heat
“I have heard incidents of heat, where they have gotten bad. . .The story is that they were working and it was very hot weather, then sud-
denly he became weak and fainted.”
“I have heard of incidents that have happened because of the heat. I have heard speciﬁcally of sickness, but I have heard how many people
become anxious, start losing their focus and orientation. Also, they start developing pimples and/or develop some sort of allergies in their
body.”
“I have heard about an incident of someone getting sick because of the heat. . .There are stories are about people that experience so much
heat, they have fainted or have gotten dizzy, and cannot continue working, until they are hydrated again, or took a longer break.”
Strategies and behaviors to
protect from heat
“Besides drinking water on those hot days, I take a small break, and try to go to a cooler area. However, there are just a few trees in the area to
get shade and get cooler.”
“The opportunities to cool off are very low because very often are you in a place where there’s a tree nearby but it’s not enough for everyone
to sit by, right? The breaks, they’re not that long. It’d be great if we had more breaks that were paid. . .maybe you get, like, a paid 15 min
break, and then you get an unpaid 30 min break. And a lot of people, they’re like, they would want to not take breaks to get that money. But
it’d be great if we had opportunities to take breaks that were paid.”
“When it is hot our job is a lot harder. It is just insanely hot. No matter how hot it is, you just have to do the work. . . I drink a lot of water
when it is hot to combat the heat. I also wear a long sleeve shirt, a hat, and hydrate to overcome it.”
“. . .with a break that they give us of 15 min, we recover a little, we hydrate ourselves. In fact, we each carry frozen water to stay hydrated and
not have more serious consequences.”
“I have the handkerchief. We put on this scarf like this because when it’s very hot, you sweat and this scarf gets wet. And that keeps you
fresh. . .the day I forget it and don’t wear it, I feel like I’m around a bonﬁre that burns my face”
“The only thing that you can do is have more water breaks but not everyone gives you more water breaks.”
Impacts of Heat on PPE Use
“We have to continue to be fully clothed because of other elements are out there that can harm us like pesticides. . .also just covering yourself
because you don’t want to deal with skin cancer. . . When I worked in the ﬁeld, we did not we did not take off our long-sleeved shirts. . .no
matter how hot it got we stay fully clothed.”
“When it is hot outside, I tend to wear the least PPE for the heat. I only use a sweater, because if I put on more layers, I start sweating so much.
I feel suffocated.”
“The only protection I use in the heat is sunscreen. I also cover myself with a face covering when it’s hot. Here in my skin, you can see the dif-
ference in my skin tone. I do have access to shade.”
Other Climate-Intensiﬁed
Exposures - Wildﬁres
It’s so hard to breathe. I’m like, but there’s still some people outside, like, working in that freaking smoke because they have to and they cover
their faces with a bandana, but that does little to nothing. And you breathe out all day and it’s just hard on your lungs. So, when you get
home, not only are you achy from your joints from doing this position all day, carrying stuff on you or bending down, you have all this
pressure in your lungs from having to breathe really bad air and just overworking yourself.
C. Hyland, D. Flores, G. Augusto et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 16 (2024) 100300
3
of chemical and non-chemical stressors on their health and well-
being:
“There’s so much that it means to be a farm worker outside from
picking and doing what we think about with the job. It means taking
on the heat. It means taking out the smoke. It means trying to ﬁnd
work wherever possible, no matter what season it is. It means driving
in fear even though you shouldn’t, right? You’re a good driver and
you might want to have a driver’s license, but your local state doesn’t
want to give you that. It means having to take a lot of unnecessary
comments and unnecessary emotional and mental damage by people
who are supposed to be looking out for you. Your crew bosses, the
farmers and employers. You don’t realize how cruel people can be in
those positions because you are a worker. They think it’s okay to yell
at you, it’s okay for them to tell you do this to overwork you. And if
you want to take a bite of an apple, take a handful of cherries that
you help pick. It’s like being reprimanded for even wanting to take a
little bit because you’re taking away from the farm, right? Even
though you’ve already given so much. So, there’s so much to being a
farm worker, right”
4. Discussion
Climate change has led to a rapid increase in exposures such as
extreme heat and wildﬁre smoke, the effects of which have been and
will continue to be borne disproportionately by farmworkers. In addi-
tion to the intense physical nature of their occupation, which is often
outdoors with little access to shade, many farmworkers are co-
exposed to psychosocial stressors that exacerbate the impact of cli-
mate-intensiﬁed exposures, including food insecurity, poor housing
conditions, racism and discrimination, lack of social support, and bar-
riers to accessing healthcare [3,5−7]. This project highlighted some
of the impacts of these exposures on farmworkers’ health, and also
illuminated the limited individual control that many farmworkers
have over their occupational exposures or opportunities for protec-
tion. These ﬁndings underscore the need for systemic changes inside
and outside of the workplace to improve climate resiliency in this
essential population, as well as shifting the burden of protection
from individual farmworkers to upstream interventions.
Farmworkers are at particularly high risk of Heat Related Illnesses
(HRIs) due to factors such as performance of intense physical labor
[13−15]. Notably, data suggest that farmworkers in the United States
have 35 times the risk of heat-related mortality compared to the gen-
eral workforce population [16]. Further, the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) has identiﬁed populations of low socioeco-
nomic status at particular risk for HRIs due to factors such as inability
to access healthcare and quality housing [17], factors that have been
well documented among farmworkers [3]. In addition to limited con-
trol over workplace health and safety factors (e.g., access to water,
Table 2
Representative quotes regarding participants’ experiences with situational factors and psychosocial stressors exacerbating the impacts of climate-intensiﬁed exposures.
Theme
Representative Quotes
Lack of regulation or ability
to be involved in policy to
protect from climate-
intensiﬁed exposures
“The usual schedule for seasons has changed so much where people start working earlier, start working later, people are having a hard time
adjusting to what these changes and seasons are because of changes in climate. . .We’ve seen that there’s a lot more wildﬁres. We’ve seen
that it’s been getting hotter, that the heat is lasting for longer throughout the day. And that’s what’s challenging because there’s already no
rules or standards set in place to protect farm workers. That we’re just expecting farm workers to just go with the ﬂow. That as our climate
and as the world is getting hotter that we’re just expected to kind of fall down because there have been no changes, no advocacy towards
like, this is what you should do, because it is getting hotter. Maybe we should give an hour, 30 min break for folks, right? That we’re just
expected to follow through with what’s going on and still expected to do the work that we’re doing but without getting any kind of help,
assistance or aid at all, that we’re just supposed to continue to do what we’re doing and have that not change even though the world
around us is changing.”
“I know a lot of people in the farm worker community who would love to be at the table and share stories and do listening sessions and be
part of policy making, but they can’t because they cannot afford to do so. They cannot afford to take time off work. And whatever time they
do have, they try to enjoy it at home, to be resting and be with their families.”
Lack of control to choose
whether to engage in agri-
cultural work
“It wasn’t really a choice I think a lot of us who are from workers do it because we need to support our families and we need to put food on
our table”
“I was 10 when I started working and I know that’s young but and a lot of farms you know even kids start working at a young age.”
“I’ve done farm work since I as long as I can remember in some capacity. My parents didn’t have enough money to pay for a babysitter and
they didn’t really trust anyone in the area.”
Lack of healthcare
“My parents used to not go to the doctor or even get checkups visits or even vaccinations because it all came out of pocket for them.”
“It’d be great if we had access to health insurance, so when we felt sick, instead of complaining and being you know what, I’ve had a stom-
achache for days. Let me go check it out. It’s like I had a stomachache for days, but I’m still here. Yeah, I might look really bad, but I’m still
here because I need the money. I can’t afford the doctor visit. The doctor visit is going to be more costly than me coming here and working
and possibly fainting, right? So, it’d be great to have that, and especially for mothers, it’d be so great to have that paid maternity leave.”
Fear of law enforcement and
family separation
“My parents were undocumented at the time. Asking them for a ride was a no go. Asking our godparents or other family members for rides
was a no go because they were also undocumented and already scared of driving to work. Why would we put them in danger of getting
stopped by police being undocumented?”
“I always grew up with that fear of when a police ofﬁcer is passing you by the road, be calm, look straight ahead, make sure everyone has
their seatbelts. Even though we always did, we always kind of held our breath as a police car would pass by because we just didn’t want to
be recognized. We did not want to be noticeable because our parents were undocumented. And we live with that fear that we would be
separated from our family. And that’s something that wasn’t fair and shouldn’t have been something for a kid to kind of have to go
through.”
“There’s so much that it means to be a farm worker outside from picking and doing what we think about with the job. . .it means driving in
fear even though you shouldn’t, right? You’re a good driver and you might want to have a driver’s license, but your local state doesn’t want
to give you that.”
Work schedule
“The difference between hours from Mexico and here, is that in Mexico I work 8 h only, the most 10 h. Here I work 12 h, 14 h, even
16 h. Sixteen hours without stopping.”
“My routine of the day is that you wake up at 4 am in the morning and then do breakfast. By 6 am we start working. We work until 4:30
pm. Then after that time, we can work extra hours if we want. Sometimes we stay working until 8 or 9 pm at night. The latest I have stayed
working has been 10 pm.”
Disproportionate impacts
among women
“So, for women, it’s so easy for us not to say anything, not to complain, because we’re out there alone and we want to keep our jobs and we’ll
handle whatever we have to handle in order to keep those jobs and feed our family, and that’s not okay.”
“A lot of mothers who I’ve seen are pregnant, working in the ﬁelds. I had someone, like, picking apples next to my parents. . .during COVID.
And she’s like, I’m a single mom. I’m not going to have any maternity leave. I’m going to be out of work for at least one or two months
while I recover, and then I’m going to go back. And women are forced to not even have time or space to recover after giving birth because
they have to go back, right? And they don’t have time to really bond with their kid or really have to take care of themselves.”
C. Hyland, D. Flores, G. Augusto et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 16 (2024) 100300
4
shade, and rest), Latinx farmworkers experience multiple situational
factors including poor housing conditions without air conditioning
[14] and limited access to federal aid, legal assistance, and health pro-
grams that exacerbate the impacts of occupational exposure to heat
and wildﬁre smoke [2]. This is underscored by overwhelming evi-
dence that farmworkers’ exposure to wildﬁre smoke and heat are
only going to continue to worsen in the coming decades. For exam-
ple, the number of days agricultural workers spend in conditions
exceeding heat safety standards is expected to double by 2050 [18],
and data suggest wildﬁre-related air pollution may double to triple in
the Paciﬁc Northwest by the end of the century [19].
Participants in our study discussed various experiences with occu-
pational heat exposure among themselves and other farmworkers,
describing impacts on their health such as feeling dizzy, wanting to
vomit, and hearing of others fainting or passing out due to the heat.
One theme that emerged when discussing participants’ experiences
with heat is how much hotter it appears to be getting each season,
and how difﬁcult it is to cool off or sleep at night due to the heat.
These personal experiences are supported by mounting evidence of
the increasing frequency, duration, and intensity of heatwaves, as
well as historical trends in increasing daytime and nighttime temper-
atures [20,21]. In addition to impacts on sleep quality [22], as
observed in this study, increasing nighttime temperatures may be
particularly dangerous for populations without air conditioning, as
this is a vital time for them to cool off and get reprieve from the heat.
Emerging evidence suggests that higher nighttime temperatures con-
tribute to heat-related mortality [22−24], even when controlling for
daytime temperatures, underscoring the importance of populations
working outdoors being able to get relief at night.
Many studies investigating interventions aimed at mitigating heat
stress among agricultural workers have focused on behavioral
changes, such as drinking more water or wearing cooling vests [25
−28]. However, individual-level interventions will likely be insufﬁ-
cient in preventing heat stress due to structural barriers farmworkers
face [29]. Notably, in this and previous studies, farmworkers shared
that they would often choose not to take additional breaks even if
they were feeling unwell from the heat, as they would be unpaid and
they feel pressure to make enough money to care for their family.
Further, it is necessary to holistically examine potential unforeseen
consequences and engage farmworkers in the development of inter-
ventions. For example, one of the most common recommendations
to prevent occupational heat illness is to drink water, yet farm-
workers have widely reported that they do not have consistent access
to clean bathrooms and sometimes intentionally avoid hydrating. In
previous work by our group, farmworkers have reported avoiding
using the bathrooms because they are so dirty, or relieving them-
selves in the ﬁeld; women, in particular, have reported ‘holding it’
until after work. These ﬁndings suggest that without engaging
employers and labor contractors and developing workplace interven-
tions (e.g., structured team breaks, access to cold water and electro-
lyte drinks, access to clean and safe bathrooms, workplace misting or
shade canopies, team education on HRI signs, symptoms, and preven-
tion strategies), efforts to prevent occupational heat illness and death
may fall short.
Notably, while states like California have passed heat illness pre-
vention regulations to protect outdoor workers, a recent data review
suggests that heat-related mortalities among farmworkers in the
state may be severely undercounted [30]. This report also suggested
that heat-related morbidity and mortality may occur among farm-
workers at temperatures below the regulatory threshold in which
employers are required to provide water, rest, and shade, suggesting
that current regulatory efforts may not sufﬁciently protect this popu-
lation, even in a state with some of the most stringent heat laws.
It is notable that participants in our study brought up experiences
with ‘non-chemical’ stressors such as racism and discrimination, fear
of family separation, lack of healthcare, and lack of control and
individual autonomy to decide whether to engage in agricultural
work without prompting from our study team. Questions in our
semi-structured interview guide related primarily to participants’
experiences with climate change and what they would like the gen-
eral public to know about their work, and we did not ask them specif-
ically about access to healthcare, experiences with law enforcement,
discrimination, or similar topics. That these themes emerged organi-
cally from study participants underscores how ever-present many of
these psychosocial stressors are in farmworkers’ lives; further, efforts
to improve climate resiliency and farmworker wellbeing must con-
sider interconnected environmental, occupational, residential, situa-
tional, and psychosocial threats to health.
Agricultural workers are and will continue to be one of the groups
most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, and this work
highlights some farmworkers’ experiences with climate change in
their own words. However, it is important to note that the primary
intention of this work was to conduct a digital storytelling project to
humanize this essential population and not to conduct an extensive
qualitative analysis. Future work should consider examining farm-
workers’ suggestions for improving climate resiliency and adapta-
tion, including policy changes and interventions.
5. Conclusion
This qualitative digital storytelling project highlighted farm-
workers’ experiences with climate change, including health impacts
and their limited perceived ability to protect themselves due to situa-
tional factors such as limited access to shade or ability to take breaks
at work. Participants also reported various psychosocial stressors
such as discrimination, lack of access to healthcare, and fear of depor-
tation and family separation that will continue to exacerbate the
impacts of these climate-intensiﬁed exposures. Farmworkers are one
of the groups most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, and
exposure to extreme heat, wildﬁre smoke, and climate disasters will
continue to worsen in the coming decades. Findings from this work
underscore the importance of shifting the burden of climate resil-
iency from individuals to systemic workplace, residential, and com-
munity interventions to protect and improve the health and
wellbeing of this essential population.
Author statement
All authors have read the manuscript, accept responsibility for the
contents, and are in agreement that the work is ready for submission
to the journal. The authors have no potential competing ﬁnancial
interest regarding this manuscript. This manuscript presents original
research, and has not been previously published and has not been
submitted elsewhere for publication.
Funding
This work was supported by the Food and Farms Communication
Fund at the Greater Kansas City Community Foundation.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Carly Hyland: Writing −review & editing, Writing −original
draft, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Investigation,
Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Delmy Flores: Writing −
review & editing, Investigation. Grace Augusto: Writing −review &
C. Hyland, D. Flores, G. Augusto et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 16 (2024) 100300
5
editing, Investigation. Irene Ruiz: Writing −review & editing, Inves-
tigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Marielena Vega:
Writing −review & editing, Investigation. Rulon Wood: Writing −
review
&
editing,
Supervision,
Resources,
Funding
acquisition,
Conceptualization.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge all of the individuals that participated
in this project and shared their important stories.
References
[1] Roelofs C, Wegman D. Workers: the climate canaries. Am J Public Health
2014;104(10):1799–801.
[2] El Khayat M, Halwani DA, Hneiny L, Alameddine I, Haidar MA, Habib RR. Impacts
of climate change and heat stress on farmworkers’ health: a scoping review. Front
Public Health 2022;10:782811.
[3] Castillo F, Mora AM, Kayser GL, Vanos J, Hyland C, Yang AR, Eskenazi B. Environ-
mental health threats to latino migrant farmworkers. Annu Rev Public Health
2021.
[4] Gold A, Fung W, Gabbard S, Carroll D. Findings from the national agricultural
workers survey (NAWS) 2019−2020: a demographic and employment proﬁle of
United States farmworkers. U.S. Department of labor, employment and training
administration. Off Policy Dev Res 2022.
[5] Philbin MM, Flake M, Hatzenbuehler ML, Hirsch JS. State-level immigration and
immigrant-focused policies as drivers of Latino health disparities in the United
States. Soc Sci Med 2018;199:29–38.
[6] Winkelman SB, Chaney EH, Bethel JW. Stress, depression and coping among
Latino migrant and seasonal farmworkers. Int J Environ Res Public Health
2013;10(5):1815–30.
[7] Torres JM, Deardorff J, Gunier RB, Harley KG, Alkon A, Kogut K, Eskenazi B. Worry
About Deportation and Cardiovascular Disease Risk Factors Among Adult
Women: the Center for the Health Assessment of Mothers and Children of Salinas
Study. Ann Behav Med 2018;52(2):186–93.
[8] Bail KM, Foster J, Dalmida SG, Kelly U, Howett M, Ferranti EP, Wold J. The impact
of invisibility on the health of migrant farmworkers in the southeastern United
States: a case study from georgia. Nurs Res Pract 2012;2012:760418.
[9] Saldanha K. The invisibility of farmworkers: implications and remedies. Lat Stud
2022;20(1):28–49.
[10] Handal AJ, Iglesias-Ríos L, Fleming PJ, Valentín-Cortes MA, O’Neill MS. Essential"
but expendable: farmworkers during the COVID-19 pandemic-The michigan
farmworker project. Am J Public Health 2020;110(12):1760–2.
[11] PR Newswire. Nationwide Surveys Reveal Disconnect Between Americans and
their Food 2011 [Available from: https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/
nationwide-surveys-reveal-disconnect-between-americans-and-their-food-
130336143.html]. Accessed Jan 23 2024.
[12] World Economic Forum. Storytelling can be a force for social change. Here’s how.
2018 [Available from: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2018/06/storytelling-
for-social-change-communication-initiative/]. Accessed January 23, 2024.
[13] Stall Wasterlund D. Managing heat in agricultural work: increasing worker safety
and productivity by controlling heat exposure. Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) of the United Nations; 2018. [Available from: https://www.fao.org/3/
i9179en/I9179EN.pdf]. Accessed January 23, 2024.
[14] Quandt SA, Wiggins MF, Chen H, Bischoff WE, Arcury TA. Heat index in migrant
farmworker housing: implications for rest and recovery from work-related heat
stress. Am J Public Health 2013;103(8):e24–6.
[15] Bethel JW, Harger R. Heat-related illness among oregon farmworkers. Int J Envi-
ron Res Public Health 2014;11(9):9273–85.
[16] Gubernot DM, Anderson GB, Hunting KL. Characterizing occupational heat-
related mortality in the United States, 2000-2010: an analysis using the census of
fatal occupational injuries database. Am J Ind Med 2015;58(2):203–11.
[17] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Climate Change 2007: Impacts,
Adaptation and Vulnerability. 2007. [Available from: https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/
uploads/2018/03/ar4_wg2_full_report.pdf]. Accessed January 23, 2024.
[18] Tigchelaar M, Battisti DS, Spector JT. Work adaptations insufﬁcient to address grow-
ing heat risk for U.S. agricultural workers. Environ Res Lett 2020;15(9):094035.
[19] Xie Y, Lin M, Decharme B, Delire C, Horowitz LW, Lawrence DM, et al. Tripling of
western US particulate pollution from wildﬁres in a warming climate. Proc Natl
Acad Sci 2022;119(14):e2111372119.
[20] Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). Heat injury and illness
prevention in outdoor and indoor work settings. A proposed rule by the Occu-
pational Safety and Health Administration. Department of Labor; 2021. [Avail-
able
from:
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2021/10/27/2021-
23250/heat-injury-and-illness-prevention-in-outdoor-and-indoor-work-set-
tings]. Accessed January 23, 2024.
[21] Mera R, Massey N, Rupp DE, Mote P, Allen M, Frumhoff PC. Climate change,
climate justice and the application of probabilistic event attribution to sum-
mer heat extremes in the California central valley. Clim Change 2015;133
(3):427–38.
[22] He C, Kim H, Hashizume M, Lee W, Honda Y, Kim SE, et al. The effects of night-
time warming on mortality burden under future climate change scenarios: a
modelling study. Lancet Planet Health 2022;6(8):e648–e57.
[23] Murage P, Hajat S, Kovats RS. Effect of night-time temperatures on cause and age-
speciﬁc mortality in London. Environ Epidemiol 2017;1(2):e005.
[24] Kim SE, Hashizume M, Armstrong B, Gasparrini A, Oka K, Hijioka Y, et al. Mortality
risk of hot nights: a nationwide population-based retrospective study in Japan.
Environ Health Perspect 2023;131(5):57005.
[25] Chicas R, Xiuhtecutli N, Elon L, Scammell MK, Steenland K, Hertzberg V, McCauley
L. Cooling interventions among agricultural workers: a pilot study. Workplace
Health Saf 2021;69(7):315–22.
[26] Jackson LL, Rosenberg HR. Preventing heat-related illness among agricultural
workers. J Agromedicine 2010;15(3):200–15.
[27] Krisher L, Butler-Dawson J, Yoder H, Pilloni D, Dally M, Johnson EC, et al. Electro-
lyte beverage intake to promote hydration and maintain kidney function in gua-
temalan sugarcane workers laboring in hot conditions. J Occup Environ Med
2020;62(12):e696–703.
[28] Choi JW, Kim MJ, Lee JY. Alleviation of heat strain by cooling different body areas
during red pepper harvest work at WBGT 33 °C. Ind Health 2008;46(6):620–8.
[29] Fleischer NL, Tiesman HM, Sumitani J, Mize T, Amarnath KK, Bayakly AR, Murphy
MW. Public health impact of heat-related illness among migrant farmworkers.
Am J Prev Med 2013;44(3):199–206.
[30] Aldhous P. Farmworker deaths, temperature, and air pollution in California. Inside
Climate News. 2023. [Available from: https://github.com/InsideClimateNews/
2023-12-ca-farmworkers.git]. Accessed January 2023, 2024.
C. Hyland, D. Flores, G. Augusto et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 16 (2024) 100300
6
