Research article
Bridging the divide on climate solutions: Development, implementation,
and evaluation of an online workshop for climate volunteers
Beth A. Malowa,c,*, Maryanne Colterc, Connie Shortesc, Steve E. Saltwickc, Bruce W. Morlanc,
M. Susan Adamsc, William J. Dohertyb,c
a Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 1161 21st Avenue South, Room A-0116, Nashville, TN 37232-2551, USA
b Family Social Science Department, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN, USA
c Braver Angels, 733 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 27 May 2022
Accepted 22 September 2022
Available online 30 September 2022
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: A critical component to addressing climate change is effective communication with the public
and legislators about urgency for action. Health professionals have a vital role to play in climate advocacy.
However, several key barriers to public advocacy have been identiﬁed, including limited communication
skills to effectively advocate with others.
Methods: We describe the development, implementation, and evaluation of a novel online workshop, whose
goal is to teach volunteers to communicate more effectively on climate change with those holding differing
views regarding potential solutions (e.g., role of government vs. private sector). The development phase
included seeking input from multiple stakeholders about the workshop’s focus and creating speciﬁc exam-
ples and prompts. The workshop was then pilot-tested, and reﬁnements were made based on evaluations.
Volunteers within a climate organization then took the workshop and evaluations were collected.
Results: Evaluations from 312 attendees were analyzed, including 14% in healthcare-related ﬁelds. On a 10-
point scale (10 being highest), volunteers reporting a median score of 8 in their conﬁdence level for setting a
constructive tone in conversations with people holding differing views on climate solutions. Qualitative anal-
ysis of participants’ responses “Single most important learning?”, “What was most important to share?”, and
“What would you like to see changed?” by two independent observers supported almost perfect agreement
(kappa of 0.88) in themes that included Learning New Skills, Developing New Ways of Being, Format, and
Additional Training/Suggested Enhancements.
Discussion: Our workshop increased participant conﬁdence in having conversations on climate change solu-
tions, an important part of climate advocacy.
© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Communication
Education
Introduction
A stable climate is a critical component of human health [1].
Advocacy related to promoting a stable climate requires effective
communication with the public and legislators about the urgency for
action. The United States population’s perspective on climate change
forms a spectrum, described by Leiserowitz et al, as the Six Americas,
consisting of the Alarmed, Concerned, Cautious, Disengaged, Doubt-
ful, and Dismissive [2]. Political afﬁliation plays an important role in
this spectrum, as Democrats have migrated over time to the Con-
cerned and Alarmed segments, while the Doubtful and Dismissive
are more likely to be politically conservative Republicans. As of Sep-
tember 2021, most Americans sorted into the Alarmed (33%)
segments, followed by concerned (25%) and cautious (17%). However,
5% were Disengaged, 10% were Doubtful, and 9% were Dismissive [3].
Climate advocates often encounter political sectarianism, deﬁned
as the “tendency to adopt a moralized identiﬁcation with one politi-
cal group and against another” [4], which poses a major barrier to
accomplishing policy decisions around climate change. This political
sectarianism, which has also been termed “affective polarization” [5]
(an offshoot of partisan group identity in which Americans divide the
world into an in group being their own political party and an out-
group being the opposing party) threatens democracy and a nation’s
ability to address challenges. Political party differences and polariza-
tion around climate change have been described as the product of
contrasting, deeply entrenched worldviews that play on fear, distrust,
and intolerance [6].
Effective climate change advocacy requires mitigation of affective
polarization, allowing people to work together to solve problems.
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: beth.malow@vumc.org (B.A. Malow).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100177
2667-2782/© 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
Bipartisan organizations like Braver Angels (braverangels.org, a non-
proﬁt citizens’ organization uniting conservative and liberal Ameri-
cans in a working alliance to depolarize America) were created to
help overcome affective polarization. These organizations have
developed a variety of forums on political issues, and workshops, for
members to learn communications skills for talking less divisively
with others with whom they disagree.
Health professionals represent an important subset of climate
advocates who may beneﬁt from these communication skill work-
shops. First, given the importance of a stable climate in human
health, health professionals have a vital role to play in addressing cli-
mate change [1]. Second, the health sector contributes a sizable pro-
portion (4.4−4.6%) of net global greenhouse gas emissions and 8.5%
of domestic US greenhouse gas emissions [7]. Most health professio-
nals are keenly aware of climate change, and place themselves on the
Alarmed portion of the Six Americas spectrum, reporting that climate
change will harm their patients (77%) or communities (81%) [8].
However, while supportive of engaging in climate advocacy, health
professionals identify a range of barriers to advocating for climate
change solutions, including lack of time, knowledge, and perception
that the topic is too controversial to engage in professionally [8,9].
On a more hopeful note, these same health professionals also identi-
ﬁed a high degree of interest in developing the communication skills
necessary to effectively advocate for a stable climate.
In this report, we describe the development and implementation
of an online workshop designed by Braver Angels within a national
climate organization. The volunteers, which include health professio-
nals, share common values that climate change is happening and
needs to be addressed, but differ on solutions to climate change,
including the role of government vs. the private sector [10]. The
workshop is novel given its goal of teaching this targeted audience to
communicate more constructively with each other and with the gen-
eral public, including how they message solutions to climate change,
and moving away from binary solutions that are “either/or” to those
that are “yes/and.” We were speciﬁcally interested in building volun-
teer conﬁdence in setting a constructive tone in conversations with
people holding differing views on climate change solutions, a ﬁrst
step toward reducing affective polarization.
Materials and methods
Vanderbilt
University’s
Institutional
Review
Board
provided
approval for this study. Bridging the Divide on Climate Solutions
(BTD/CS) was designed for volunteers in a non-proﬁt, national cli-
mate organization that empowers members to meet with their mem-
bers of Congress, write letters to the editor, and engage in related
outreach activities. The workshop is based on an existing online
Braver Angels workshop, Skills for Bridging the Divide, that teaches
skills for having respective conversations that clarify differences,
search for common ground, and afﬁrm the importance of relation-
ships with others who hold differing political views [11].
Workshop structure
The workshops were conducted using Zoom, a popular on-line
meeting system that includes the ability to share visuals and to hold
sub-group meetings (breakout rooms) that are the on-line equivalent
to moving to a separate room for discussions. Participants were asked
to share their breakout room experiences in the main meeting after
breakouts.
At the start of the workshop, a volunteer from the climate organi-
zation welcomed participants, reviewed logistical details related to
the online experience, and described the importance of the workshop
to the work of the organization and its resonance with the organiza-
tion’s mission. One or two Braver Angels moderator(s), who previ-
ously completed a structured training program, then led participants
through goals and principles, including (1) Respect, curiosity, and
openness tend to elicit the same from the other person; (2) Everyone
needs to save face—no one is portrayed as ignorant, duped, or ill-
motivated; and (3) Most people who know each other have some
common values and concerns that can be unearthed. A Participant
Guide (Supplemental Materials) was provided summarizing work-
shop content.
An overview of the speciﬁc skills was then presented. Each spe-
ciﬁc skill was introduced, accompanied by examples. Listening skills
included: (a) Paraphrasing— to repeat back in one’s own words what
the conversational partner said, in order to show understanding and
that they were heard, such as — “You want to ensure the environ-
ment is protected for future generations”; (b) Clarifying— asking
questions to increase understanding, such as “I’m curious about how
you came to your viewpoint on climate change”; and (c) Agreeing
(when possible)/Acknowledging values and concerns— “It sounds
like we both want to limit the role of the federal government in cli-
mate policy.” Speaking skills included (a) Pivoting— signaling that
one is about to share their point of view, and asking permission to do
so, as in “I see things somewhat differently. Can I share an article I
read last week that got me thinking?” and (b) providing Perspective
— sharing one’s point of view using “I” statements (“I believe we can
solve climate change and strengthen the economy at the same time
through free-market solutions”), expressing worry or concern (“I’m
very concerned that we will run out of time to solve this problem
unless we get going now”), or sharing personal stories. Participants
were provided with examples of statements that would shut down
the dialogue because they represent dogmatically stated views lack-
ing “I” statements, such as “If we don’t act now, our coastal cities will
be abandoned in 75 years,” or “If we listen to the climate change acti-
vists, we are going to destroy our way of life and go back to the stone
age.” Participants were also provided with a section on “Handling Dif-
ﬁcult Moments,” with education on staying focused on the topic, not
returning provocative statements, and exiting the conversation when
needed to avoid escalating a heated encounter.
Characters were introduced that served as prompts for partici-
pants to take part in the interactive activities—reﬂections, breakout
sessions, and group shares—in which they practiced the speciﬁc
skills. These interactive activities were used throughout the work-
shop, usually in combination (reﬂection followed by breakout ses-
sion, followed by group share) and sometimes as stand-alone
activities (group share only). The character prompts focused equally
on “Red” (conservative in Braver Angels terminology) and “Blue” (lib-
eral/progressive) characters. Example characters and their corre-
sponding prompts are presented in Fig. 1.
For example, in learning the Paraphrasing Skill, participants were
ﬁrst presented with example text and asked to paraphrase what was
said (Table 1).
They were then presented with one of the characters and their
corresponding statement and asked to paraphrase, ﬁrst in individual
reﬂection, then in a breakout room, and ﬁnally in a group share. As
the workshop progressed, additional skills were introduced and prac-
ticed (Table 1). To maintain participants’ focus throughout the 2 1/2 h
workshop, brief stretch breaks and one longer ten-minute break
were included. The moderator and a second presenter also engaged
in role-plays for the participants, concluding with a “Putting it All
Together” demo in which the two characters had a conversation
using all of the skills and participants were asked to follow along.
They were encouraged to identify skills on their Participant Guide
and provided with an answer key.
The workshop closed with an anonymous evaluation, during
which participants were asked to answer questions related to the
content
of
the
workshop
and
provide
optional
demographic
responses (Table 2). A group share summarizing what participants
gained from the workshop, followed by additional ways they could
extend their learning, and a group photo completed the workshop.
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
2
After each workshop, the presenting team debriefed on how the
workshop went and what could be improved upon, referencing the
evaluations along with their own observations.
Development of focus of workshop, and characters and examples
Development of the online workshop occurred between July and
October 2020. It was accomplished by involving multiple stakehold-
ers from across the political spectrum within the national climate
organization (progressive and moderate liberals and conservatives,
staff, leaders of speciﬁc volunteer teams, and volunteers). While our
initial focus was on developing skills for communicating with those
who were skeptical about climate change, after receiving feedback
from our stakeholders, the focus shifted to that of climate change sol-
utions. This focus on solutions was in response to the needs of the
Fig. 1. Character prompts. These prompts were used in the workshop for participants to practice skills.
Table 1
Example prompt for paraphrasing.
Consider an individual who thinks averting climate change does not require
aggressive action who says:
“I know you’re into the climate thing and you think we need to take drastic meas-
ures. Lots of efforts are being done now with little federal intervention. We have
more efﬁcient appliances and lots of people are recycling and composting. Those
individual actions along with a few new initiatives, like planting more trees,
should be enough to avert climate change. I favor an approach to stopping cli-
mate change that incentivizes people −I don’t want punitive measures like
more taxes and bigger government!”
Before you respond with your counter points, paraphrase what
you heard.
“So you understand that the climate is changing. You want to see changes
at the federal level only if they provide incentives.”
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
3
climate organization, whose members were accepting of climate
change and wanted to be able to communicate better with each other
and with local and national policymakers about how to address cli-
mate change effectively. Stakeholders reviewed the character depic-
tions and prompts, along with examples that were drafted by two of
the authors (BAM and CS). They suggested modiﬁcations to the char-
acters to make their positions less extreme and more realistic. To
avoid gender bias (women being associated with the more liberal
position and men with the more conservative position), the woman
character (Margaret) was portrayed as having more conservative
views and the male character (Lester) was portrayed as having more
liberal views. Examples were also modiﬁed to provide a more bal-
anced view and promote credibility. For example, in Margaret’s
prompt (Fig. 1), we included the statement “our carbon emissions
have steadily dropped since 2005” to reﬂect that, while the pace of
reduction in emissions has been slow, there has been a true reduction
in carbon dioxide emissions [12].
Pilot testing
We performed pilot testing of the online workshop in November
2020, recruiting volunteers nationally. There were 45 participants.
The original workshop was planned to be 2 h in duration, but was
closer to 2 1/2 h in practice, and therefore was extended to 2 1/2 h for
future sessions. Time in breakout sessions was viewed as appropriate
by volunteers completing an end-of-session survey. In response to
the evaluations, a complete “Putting it All Together” dialogue going
through all of the steps—paraphrase, clarify, acknowledge, pivot, and
perspective—was added. In addition, a group share for Handling Dif-
ﬁcult Moments was added to give participants more experience with
this part of the workshop.
Workshop implementation and evaluation within the climate
organization
After the workshop was pilot tested, 403 adults participated in
eight workshops between December 2020 and October 2021. These
workshops were presented to volunteers in the climate organization,
with volunteers from across the United States participating. Most of
these workshops attracted a national audience while a few were held
as part of regional conferences. A consistent structure was provided,
following the outline in Table 2.
See Table 3 for questions asked of participants on the evaluation
form. Questions assessed skills learned in ﬁve categories (scale of 1 to
10), and whether the length of speciﬁc sections (e.g., breakout rooms)
was appropriate, qualitative questions with open-ended responses,
and optional demographics questions. As these were ordinal data,
the Mann-Whitney U test was performed. We described responses
for the entire sample. For the questions assessing skills learned in
ﬁve categories, we compared responses for health professionals and
non-health professionals. Using the median number of participants
in workshops (n = 30) as a cut-off, we also compared workshops that
were relatively small (30 or fewer attendees) vs. those that were rela-
tively large (more than 30 attendees). Age range (18-50 years vs.
51 years and older) and sex (female vs. male) were also compared for
health professionals and non-health professionals using a chi-square
test for equality of proportions. Data were analyzed using R (The R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). Signiﬁcance
was set at a p value ≤0.05.
Qualitative questions included: (a) the single most important
learning or what was most important to share, (b) what the partici-
pant would like to see changed, and (c) how the online experience
could be improved. Two authors (BAM and MC), after meeting to dis-
cuss options for themes, independently categorized the responses to
questions (a) and (b) into themes (Table 4). Some participants pro-
vided responses to both the single most important learning and what
was most important to share, although the two parts to this question
shared common themes. A kappa analysis was performed to deter-
mine inter-rater agreement [13]. The two raters, BAM and MC,
reviewed the few discrepant ratings and came to a consensus on the
appropriate theme.
Table 2
Bridging the divide on climate solutions workshop outline.
I. Goals, Expectations to Abandon, Core Principles
a Reﬂection on what points presented so far would be most useful to keep in
mind as we approach conversations with someone who has a different per-
spective on climate change solutions
b Breakout rooms to discuss
c Group Share
II. Listening Skills
a Introduction −Paraphrasing and Clarifying Skills
b Presentation of characters, Margaret and Lester
c Role Play Example of Listening Skills
d Reﬂection
e Breakout rooms to discuss
f Group share
g Introduction −Agreeing/Acknowledging Values and Concerns
h Reﬂection
i Group share to identify Margaret’s and Lester’s values
Break
III.Speaking Skills
a Introduction- Pivot
b Role Play Example of Pivot
c Reﬂection
d Breakout rooms to discuss
e Group share
f Introduction −Perspective
g Reﬂection
h Breakout rooms to discuss
i Group share
IV.Putting it All Together
a Role Play (Entire Sequence of Skills)
b Group Share
V. Handling Difﬁcult Moments
a Introduction of Skills
b Group Share
VI.Evaluation
VII. Check out- What will you work on?
Table 3
Evaluation questions.
1 How fully did you participate in today’s workshop? (Scale of 1-10)
2 How conﬁdent do you feel that you can set a constructive tone when start-
ing conversations with someone who differs with you on climate solutions?
(Scale of 1-10)
3 Can you listen to people on the other side in a way that they feel heard?
(Scale of 1-10)
4 Can you express your views in a way that helps people on the other side
hear you? (Scale of 1-10)
5 To what extent was this workshop well designed and run? (Scale of 1-10)
6 Your single most important learning, or the most important thing you want
to share about this workshop.
7 The one aspect of the workshop you would like to see changed
8 Time in the breakout rooms was... about right, too short, too long
9 Time in the group shares was... about right, too short, too long
10 Gender
11 Race/Ethnicity
12 Education
13 Occupation
14 State
15 Political leaning
16 Age
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
4
Best practices for online workshops
We carried out speciﬁc practices that helped us conduct effective
workshops. First, moderators were trained in how to moderate work-
shops online, supplementing the standardized training curriculum
that Braver Angels provides to all moderators. The workshop orga-
nizer [BAM], a Braver Angels moderator herself, also met with each
moderator prior to their conducting this speciﬁc workshop, to pro-
vide an overview of the workshop and of the climate organization.
Second, we provided our workshop team with a manual that
included details related to breakout room conﬁguration, messages to
place in the chat, and instructions for how to handle latecomers and
Zoom bombers. Each workshop team met before each workshop to
carry out a practice run to ensure that Zoom settings were optimized
and that each team member understood their role. Third, we ensured
that participants were comfortable and competent in the online envi-
ronment. We overcame this limitation by including time in our work-
shops for a participant orientation to Zoom, including muting/
unmuting, hand raising, renaming, and other features.
Results
We received 312 evaluations from attendees (77% response rate).
Demographics are illustrated in Fig. 2. The majority of participants
were white, older than 50 years, female, and college graduates (many
with additional post-graduate training). Of those specifying an occu-
pation, 14% were in health care or counselling (Table 5). Health pro-
fessionals did not differ from non-health professionals in age groups
(18−50 years vs. 51 years or older). There was a higher proportion of
women in the health professional group (Table 6).
Attendance ranged from 15 to 65 participants per workshop
(mean 36.6, standard deviation of 17.8) and a median number of 30
participants.
Quantitative analyses
Fig. 3 illustrates the ratings for the following questions: (a) How
fully did you participate in today’s workshop? (median = 9 on a 10-
point scale); (b) How conﬁdent do you feel that you can set a construc-
tive tone when starting conversations with someone who differs from
you on climate solutions? (median = 8); (c) Can you listen to people on
the other side in a way that they feel heard? (median = 9); (d) Can you
express your views in a way that helps people on the other side hear
you? (median = 8); and (e) To what extent was this workshop well
designed and run? (median = 10). Health professionals did not differ
from non-health professionals on these ratings (Table 6). Workshops
with 30 or fewer participants (relatively smaller workshops) did not dif-
fer from workshops with more than 30 participants (relatively larger
workshops) on these ratings (p > 0.10).
Qualitative analyses
Responses to each of the qualitative questions were characterized
by several themes. For Question 1 “Your single most important learn-
ing,” or “What was most important to share" themes included: (a)
New Skills; (b) Need to Practice; (c) Need to develop “New Ways of
Being”; (d) Format; and (e) Overall Comments. Some participants
answered Question 1 by providing a response better suited for Ques-
tion 2-what the participant would like to see changed—and in that
case, these responses were analyzed along with the Question 2
responses. The kappa value for interobserver agreement on Question
1 was 0.879, supporting almost perfect agreement.
The most common response to Question 1 was “Learn New Skills,”
(44% of responses) consisting of Paraphrasing, Clarifying, Acknowledg-
ing/Agreeing, Pivot, Sharing Perspective. “Develop New Ways of Being”
was the second most common response (13.5%), consisting of cultivat-
ing patience, acknowledging where others are coming from, cultivating
respect, developing new values, building conﬁdence, and developing
curiosity. “Need to Practice” was recognized in 7.9% of responses and
“Format” in 7% of responses (e.g., value of breakout room structure,
interactive nature). Others commented on the value of combining activ-
ities focused on practice with scripted scenarios—reﬂections, breakouts,
and group shares. Overall comments were provided in 27%
of
responses. Examples of the different themes are provided in Table 5.
Speciﬁc responses are provided in Table 7, and included comments
about the complementary nature of breakout rooms and group shares,
Table 4
Themes.
Question 1: n= 341
Your single most important learning,” or “What was most important to share"
Learn New Skills
PCAPP Overall (Paraphrasing, Clarifying, Acknowledging/Agreeing, Pivot, Sharing Perspective)
44.6%
Listening Overall
Speaking Overall
Paraphrasing
Clarifying
Acknowledging/Agreeing
Pivot
Sharing Perspective
Need to Practice
7.9%
Develop New Ways of Being
Cultivate Patience
13.5%
Acknowledge where others are coming from
Cultivate Respect
Develop New Values
Build Conﬁdence
Develop Curiosity
Format
Breakout Rooms, Group Shares
7.0%
Overall Comments
27.0%
Question 2: n=267
Additional Training/Suggested Enhancements/Content of Examples
More practice, another workshop
33.0%
Audience Composition
.7%
Format
Less/more time for breakout sessions, extend time for discussion
27.7%
Moderator Delivery
Less reading of scripts, more expressive delivery
1.9%
Logistics/Availability
Registration, Accessing Participant Guide, Availability of Offerings
5.6%
Technical
Zoom challenges
2.6%
Participant Management
Encouraging people to speak, not calling on same person
2.2%
No Changes Recommended
26.2%
5
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
Fig. 2. Demographics. Participant age, gender, political leaning, geographic distribution, level of education, and race/ethnicity. Number of participants is on x-axis.
6
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
along with speciﬁc ways on how the material could be used in advo-
cacy (e.g., lobbying meetings, letters to the editor).
For Question 2 “What the participant would like to see changed,”
themes included: (a) Additional Training/Suggested Enhancements/
Content of Examples; (b) Audience Composition; (c) Format; (d)
Moderator Delivery; (5) Logistics/Availability; (f) Technical; (g) Par-
ticipant Management; and (h) No Changes Recommended. Some par-
ticipants answered Question 2 by providing a response better suited
for Question 1−for what their single most important learning was or
what was most important to share—and in that case, these responses
were analyzed along with the Question 1 responses. The kappa value
for Question 2 was 0.88, supporting almost perfect agreement.
The most common response to Question 2 was “Additional Train-
ing/Suggested
Enhancements/Content
of
Examples,”
(33%
of
responses) such as providing more practice or taking another work-
shop. Format was the second most common response (27.7%), with
comments focused on the amount of time devoted to breakout ses-
sions and group shares. No changes were recommended by 26.2% of
participants. Examples of the different themes are provided in Table 4.
Discussion
In this manuscript, we describe the development, implementa-
tion, and evaluation of a novel skills workshop designed to help
participants, including health professionals, communicate more con-
structively on climate change solutions. Participants provided posi-
tive evaluations about the workshop, with a median score of 10
describing the extent to which the workshop was well designed/run
and a median score of 9 describing how fully they participated. They
gained conﬁdence in their ability to engage in conversations with
those they differed with, including setting a constructive tone, listen-
ing, and expressing their views (median scores of 8 and 9). Partici-
pants appreciated the time devoted to practicing skills through
reﬂections, small groups, and larger group shares. This workshop
provided brief training (one 2 1/2 h session) which resonates with the
needs of health professionals [8,9]. Our workshop design also appeals
to the concerns of health professionals in advocating for the climate
being too risky personally or professionally, or too controversial. This
is because our workshop teaches communication strategies that are
grounded in respect and curiosity. These strategies foster building
relationships with others, instead of divisiveness which can contrib-
ute to personal/professional risk and controversy.
Our workshop design had several unique features. First, we
engaged a variety of stakeholders in the development process to
ensure that our workshop met the needs of the sponsoring organiza-
tion, which was nonpartisan and consisting of volunteers who
accepted that climate change was real. This proved to be critical to
the relevance of the workshop. The focus was on practical solutions
to climate change, rather than convincing others that climate change
was happening. While a rare attendee asked for more workshop
prompts to deal with those dismissive of climate change, the majority
of attendees found the prompts focused on solutions to be compel-
ling and useful. Second, we grounded our workshop in a multiple-
year foundation of workshops developed by Braver Angels, overseen
by a seasoned professor in family studies and licensed psychologist
and marriage/family therapist [WJD]. Taking a systematic approach
to online content design, as has been recommended by others con-
ducting online teaching [14], contributed to our success. For example,
we started with the desired outcomes for our workshop and designed
learning activities that were aligned with these outcomes. Third, we
used a mixed methods approach, combining both quantitative and
qualitative data which were analyzed simultaneously. This proved to
be an informative approach given this novel area of inquiry. The qual-
itative responses allowed for a more in-depth examination of the par-
ticipant experience.
Workshops had a variable number of participants. While work-
shop size did not affect qualitative ratings, we did observe that
smaller workshops provided more opportunities for individual par-
ticipants to speak in the group shares, sometimes on repeated occa-
sions. However, the larger workshops allowed for a greater variety of
responses in the group shares. By including breakout rooms, in which
the same group of four participants met repeated times throughout
the workshop, each person had an equal opportunity to contribute.
One participant noted this allowed for development of a relationship
where they could honestly express their concerns and feelings
(Table 7). This held even if the workshop was relatively large, which
served to normalize the experience across workshops. Participants
speciﬁcally commented on how they enjoyed both the breakout
rooms and the group shares.
Our workshop shares common features with other approaches to
improving communication skills, such as motivational interviewing.
nonviolent communication, active listening, and deep engagement.
Motivational interviewing (MI) uses reﬂective listening to draw out a
person’s concern [15]. Grounded in social-psychological theory,
including cognitive dissonance, social cognitive theory, and self-efﬁ-
cacy, MI has been used by healthcare professionals to address COVID-
19 vaccine hesitancy [16]. MI has also been used to communicate cli-
mate-related health impacts during patient encounters [17]. Nonvio-
lent
communication
(NVC)
strengthens
relationships,
defuses
conﬂict, promotes awareness of self and personal responsibility, and
Table 6
Comparison of health professionals and non-health professionals.
Characteristics
Health
Professionals
Non-Health
Professionals
p- value
N = 43
N = 257
Age count (percentage)
0.14
18-50 years
6 (14%)
55 (21.4)
51 years and older
36 (84%)
195 (75.9)
Missing
1 (2.3)
7 (2.7)
Sex count (percentage)
0.01
Female
34 (79%)
151 (59%)
Male
7 (16%)
98 (38%)
Missing
2 (5%)
8 (3%)
Ratings on Quantitative
Questions median (minimum,
maximum, IQR)
Fully participate?
9 (4, 10, 2)
9 (4, 10, 2)
0.72
Conﬁdent in setting constructive
tone?
8 (4, 10, 2)
8 (3, 10, 2)
0.67
Listen to people in a way they
feel heard?
8 (6, 10, 1)
9 (1, 10, 2)
0.24
Express views in a way that
helps people hear you?
8 (3, 10, 2)
8 (2, 10, 2)
0.19
Workshop well designed and
run?
10 (7, 10, 1.5)
10 (3, 10, 1)
0.44
SD = standard deviation; IQR = interquartile range.
Table 5
Categories of health professions represented by participants (Number of participants in
that category in parenthesis).
Dentist (1)
Health Care (5)
Medical writer (2)
Nurse (10)
Nurse practitioner (2)
Nutritionist (2)
Physician (4)
Physical Therapist (1)
Psychologist (4)
Psychotherapist (1)
Speech-Language Pathologist (2)
Social Worker/Counselor/Therapist (9)
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
7
Fig. 3. Responses to ﬁve qualitative skill questions. Response (scale of 1 to 10 with 10 being highest) is on x-axis and number of participants with that response is on y-axis.
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
8
increases empathy [18]. Active listening allows participants (who are
receiving the active listening responses) to feel more understood and
satisﬁed with their conversations [19]. Deep engagement involves
having one’s conversational partner generate active thinking about
climate change, thereby connecting themselves to the issue, rather
than relying on persuasive appeal [20]. The skills taught in our work-
shop, along with other skills focused on MI, NVC, active listening, and
deep engagement, are critical to climate change conversations. These
conversation skills, rooted in public engagement and other participa-
tory models, are receiving increasing attention in the science com-
munity. They represent an alternative to one-way conversations on
climate that focus on providing evidence to ﬁll deﬁcits in public
knowledge [21].
Our workshop had several limitations. First, all phases were con-
ducted entirely online. The online manner in which our workshops
were conducted may have affected participant engagement (e.g.,
more distractions when skills were presented- people may have cho-
sen to turn their cameras off and engage in other activities such as
checking email or social media) but also provided an opportunity to
reach more stakeholders during the development phase, and more
diverse national audiences during the implementation phase. The
online environment also was characterized by occasional technical
challenges, such as loss of connectivity on the part of participants,
who had to re-enter the Zoom meeting, or on the part of the work-
shop team. Some of these challenges, such as reminding people to
unmute themselves to speak and re-mute themselves after speaking,
were mitigated by building in an orientation to Zoom for our partici-
pants within the workshop. Over the course of our workshops,
as participants became more familiar with Zoom, these challenges
subsided.
Second, with a good but not universal 77% response rate, our
results may have been subjected to non-response bias (people chose
not to respond to the evaluation if they did not ﬁnd the workshop
useful). Third, the demographics of participants were not reﬂective
of the US population as a whole—our participants were predomi-
nantly older (highest category was 61−70 years followed by 71 years
or older), female, white, and liberal, with the majority having gradu-
ated college. This limitation is particularly relevant when consider-
ing that those from the same demographic group are believed to
have an advantage as “trusted messengers” in interactions about cli-
mate change with others [22]. A community of political conserva-
tives, racial minorities, or younger individuals may be more willing
to listen to those receiving communications training who resemble
them. Fourth, we did not speciﬁcally assess whether participants
did participate in conversations with others who disagreed with
them on climate change solutions, and what the outcome was (e.g.,
did they feel conﬁdent in these situations, did they express their
beliefs in these conversations, did they feel heard by their conversa-
tional partner).
We developed, pilot tested, and implemented the workshop during
the COVID-19 pandemic which may have inﬂuenced our project in
other ways beyond taking it online. For example, the pandemic was
characterized by conﬂict between self-interest and collective interest
(e.g., vaccine mandates, mask wearing) in the face of uncertainty about
outcomes; similarities in respect to short-term self-interests vs. long-
term collective interests have also been noted in relation to climate
change [23]. While we did not speciﬁcally collect data on this aspect, it
is possible that the presence of the COVID-19 pandemic may have moti-
vated participants to take part in our workshops to explore this conﬂict.
For example, they may have wished to gain a deeper understanding of
human cooperation and its relationship to the pull of in-groups, as
reviewed by VanLange and Rand [23]. Others may have recognized par-
allels between the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change in terms of
social inequality [24] and misinformation [23] and wished to engage in
Table 7
Examples of participant responses to themes for qualitative questions.
Question 1: “Your single most important learning,” or “What was most important to share"
Theme
Example
A Learn New Skills
“The importance of respectful curiosity and openness as applied through clarifying questions and
pivot statements. I really want to focus on applying those steps in real life conversations”
“Not to launch into a lecture, especially without making sure the person feels heard, and without
doing a pivot ﬁrst.”
B Need to Practice
“Practicing is key. I feel it will give me more conﬁdence and courage to take on the difﬁcult
conversations.”
C New Ways of Being
“In spite of the urgency of addressing climate change, patience and respect are essential. Better to
walk away and try again later (or not) than compromise those two values.”
D Format
“I liked the combination of sharing in small groups (breakouts), and in the larger group.”
“Lots of breakout rooms with the same four people were great because we began to develop a rela-
tionship where we could honestly express our concerns and feelings”
E Overall Comments
“I’m thinking how I can apply this in lobbying meetings or in writing Letters to the Editor”
“I feel empowered on how to broach the topic of climate change. . . beforehand I had lacked
conﬁdence. . .”
“To convey climate knowledge in a fruitful manner”
Question 2: “The one aspect of the workshop you would like to see changed”
A Additional Training/Suggested Enhancements/Content of Examples
“Have some workshops that we can come back to for practicing the skills”
“How to start a conversation about climate change”
“Add diversity by invoking words of wisdom from people of color”
“Deal with harder climate denier conversations”
B Format
“Slightly longer breakout rooms”
“Some of the tasks needed more time to really reﬂect”
C Logistics/Availability
“Emphasize that the participant guide should be printed out beforehand”
D Technical
“Zoom aspects did not always run smoothly (ﬂow to breakout rooms)”
E Participant Management
“Encourage everyone to speak”
F Moderator Delivery
“I’d like to see more examples that weren’t in the participant guide and more ‘ad-libbing’”
G Audience Composition
“Bring more conservatives who care about climate change to future trainings”
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
9
our workshops to gain practical skills, given the perceived impact of
COVID-19 on their lives.
Conclusions and future directions
We present our experiences with a novel workshop designed to
improve communication skills related to climate change solutions.
There are several important future directions for this work. First, a
study limited to health professionals, with a large and diverse total
sample, would allow us to characterize quantitative and qualitative
responses more thoroughly and also examine the role of age, gender,
race/ethnicity, political afﬁliation and other factors. Second, future
studies should incorporate speciﬁc questions to determine if speciﬁc
volunteer advocacy goals are achieved based on workshop trainings -
such as meeting with Congress, writing a letter to the editor, engag-
ing in outreach, and other advocacy activities. While our qualitative
responses did include statements about some of these activities,
being explicit about whether the workshop furthered engagement in
these activities would provide clear relevance for climate advocacy
organizations. Third, having participants practice skills with those
who disagree on climate solutions, rather than with other partici-
pants who were generally in agreement on climate solutions, would
help solidify these skills and make it easier to apply in real-world set-
tings, such as when advocating for climate solutions to legislators.
Finally, harnessing multimedia (e.g., brief video roleplays of people
with differing positions on climate solutions that model skills for vol-
unteers) may be appealing to younger volunteers and those who
have limited time to attend workshops. They can be incorporated
into chapter meetings and other venues within climate organizations
as a springboard for practice among volunteers.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found,
in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2022.100177.
References
[1] Maibach EM, Miller J, Armsterong F, El Omrani O, Zhang Y, Philpott N, et al. Health
professionals, the Paris agreement, and the ﬁerce urgency of now. J Clim Change
Health 2021;1. doi: 10.1016/j.joclim.2020.100002.
[2] Leiserowitz A, Roser-Renouf C, Marlon J, Maibach E. Global warming’s Six Ameri-
cas: a review and recommendations for climate change communication. Curr
Opin Behav Sci 2021;42:97–103. doi: 10.1016/j.cobeha.2021.04.007.
[3] Leiserowitz A, Maibach E, Rosenthal S, Kotcher J, Neyens L, Marlon J, et al. Global
warming’s six Americas September 2021. Yale University and George Mason Uni-
versity. New Haven, CT: Yale Program on Climate Change Communication;
2022https://climatecommunication.yale.edu/publications/global-warmings-six-
americas-september-2021/ [accessed 28 August 2022].
[4] Finkel EJ, Bail CA, Cikara M, Ditto PH, Iyengar S, Klar S, et al. Political sectarianism
in America. Science 2020;370(6516):533–6. doi: 10.1126/science.abe1715.
[5] Iyengar S, Lelkes Y, Levendusky M, Nalhotra N, Westwood SJ. The origins and con-
sequences of affective polarization in the United States. Annu Rev Political Sci
2019;22:129–46. doi: 10.1146/annurev-polisci-051117-073034.
[6] Hoffman A. How culture shapes the climate change debate. California: Stanford
University Press; 2015.
[7] Eckelman MJ, Huang K, Lagasse R, Senay E, Dubrow R, Sherman JD. Health care
pollution and public health damage in the United States: an update: study exam-
ines health care pollution and public health damage in the United States. Health
Affairs 2020;39(12):2071–9 Dec 1.
[8] Kotcher J, Maibach E, Miller J, Campbell E, Alqodmani L, Maiero M, et al. Views of
health professionals on climate change and health: a multinational survey
study. Lancet Planet Health 2021;5(5):e316–23. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(21)
00053-X.
[9] Luong KT, Kotcher J, Miller J, Campbell E, Epel E, Sarfaty M, et al. Prescription for
healing the climate crisis: insights on how to activate health professionals to
advocate for climate and health solutions. J Clim Change Health 2021;4. doi:
10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100082.
[10] Gilligan JM, Vandenbergh MP. A framework for assessing the impact of private cli-
mate governance. Energy Res Soc Sci 2020;60. doi: 10.1016/j.erss.2019.101400.
[11] Braver Angels Skills for Bridging the Divide. https://braverangels.org/what-we-
do/skills-bridging-divide/; 2022 [accessed 28 August 2022].
[12] CarbonBrief. Analysis: why US carbon emissions have fallen 14% since 2005.
https://www.carbonbrief.org/analysis-why-us-carbon-emissions-have-fallen-14-
since-2005/; 2017 [accessed 28 August 2022].
[13] Cohen J. A coefﬁcient of agreement for nominal scales. Educ Psychol Meas
1960;20:37–46.
[14] Martin F, Ritzhaupt A, Kumar S, Budhrani K. Award-winning faculty online teach-
ing practices: course design, assessment and evaluation, and facilitation. Internet
High Educ 2019;42:34–43. doi: 10.1016/j.iheduc.2019.04.001.
[15] Rollnick S, Butler CC, Kinnersley P, Gregory J, Mash B. Motivational interviewing.
BMJ 2010;340:c1900. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c1900.
[16] Gabarda A, Butterworth SW. Using best practices to address COVID-19 vaccine
hesitancy: the case for the motivational interviewing approach. Health Promot
Pract 2021;22(5):611–5. doi: 10.1177/15248399211016463.
[17] Sun MD, Boos MD, Coates SJ. Addressing climate-related health impacts during
the patient encounter: a practical guide for pediatric dermatologists. Dermatol
Clin 2022;40(1):109–16. doi: 10.1016/j.det.2021.09.007.
[18] Museux AC, Dumont S, Careau E, Milot É. Improving interprofessional collabora-
tion: the effect of training in nonviolent communication. Soc Work Health Care
2016;55(6):427–39. doi: 10.1080/00981389.2016.1164270.
[19] Weger H, Castle Bell G, Minei EM, Robinson MC. The relative effectiveness of
active listening in initial interactions. Int J Listening 2022;28(1):13–31. doi:
10.1080/10904018.2013.813234.
[20] Goldberg MH, Gustafson A, van der Linden S. Leveraging social science to gener-
ate lasting engagement with climate change solutions. One Earth 2020;3(3):314–
24. doi: 10.1016/j.oneear.2020.08.011.
[21] Pearce W, Brown B, Nerlich B, Koteyko N. Communicating climate change: con-
duits, content, and consensus. Wiley Interdiscip Rev 2015;6(6):613–26. doi:
10.1002/wcc.366.
[22] Moser SC. Communicating climate change: history, challenges, process and future
directions. Wiley Interdiscip Rev 2010;1(1):31–53. doi: 10.1002/wcc.11.
[23] Van Lange PA, Rand DG. Human cooperation and the crises of climate change,
COVID-19, and misinformation. Annu Rev Psychol 2022;73(1):379–402. doi:
10.1146/annurev-psych-020821-110044.
[24] Manzanedo RD, Manning P. COVID-19: Lessons for the climate change emer-
gency. Sci Total Environ 2020;742:140563. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140563.
B.A. Malow, M. Colter, C. Shortes et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 7 (2022) 100177
10
