Research article
Teaching medical students about the impacts of climate change on
human health
Jason Gomeza,b, Anna Goshuaa,c, Nicholas Pokrajacd, Barbara Ernye,j, Paul Auerbachf,
Kari Nadeaug, Michael A. Gisondih,i,*,1
a Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, 94305, United States
b Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, CA, 94305, United States
c New York University School of Journalism, New York, NY, 10003, United States
d Department of Emergency Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, United States
e American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery Foundation, Fairfax, Virginia, United States
f Department of Emergency Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United States
g Sean N. Parker Center for Allergy and Asthma Research at Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States
h Department of Emergency Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States
i The Precision Education and Assessment Research Lab, , United States
j Environmental Health Committee, Physicians for Social Responsibility, Washington, DC, United States
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 19 April 2021
Accepted 26 May 2021
Available online 8 June 2021
A B S T R A C T
Climate change is among the greatest threats to human health, yet most medical schools fail to adequately
teach students about its impact. To address this educational gap, we designed and implemented a new elec-
tive course for Stanford medical students, “The Impact of Climate Change on Human Health.” Students (40/
74, 54% response rate) evaluated its effectiveness by completing a pre/post-course survey that measured
changes in their beliefs, attitudes, and knowledge about the health effects of climate change. We found signif-
icant increases in students' beliefs about the need for climate change education and related physician respon-
sibilities. Intentions to change personal behaviors and apply new knowledge in future clinical practice also
signiﬁcantly increased. Our ﬁndings illustrate the importance of a medical school course on climate science
and health. Additionally, we describe the curriculum design and program evaluation of our course.
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate change
Medical education
Climate health
Introduction
Climate change is one of the greatest threats to human health. The
World Health Organization attributes 23% of all global deaths to envi-
ronmental factors, and it projects an additional 250,000 climate-
related deaths annually by 2030 [1]. Despite calls for action [2-5] by
the American Medical Association and other health policy advocates
[6], few medical schools offer climate education in their formal cur-
ricula. In a 2019 survey, the International Federation of Medical Stu-
dents’ Associations found that only 15.9% of medical schools across
112 countries teach climate science [5].
Inadequate climate education in medicine does not reﬂect a pau-
city of research on climate and health. Climate change exacerbates
chronic diseases, and exposure to extreme temperatures and envi-
ronmental pollutants is associated with higher rates of injury and
death [1, 7, 8]. Broadly, climate change disrupts food and water secu-
rity, reduces biodiversity, worsens air quality, and alters the geo-
graphic distribution and seasonality of infectious diseases [8]. These
changes disproportionately impact vulnerable populations, especially
those in low-resource settings, including children, the elderly, and
those burdened by disease or health inequities [8]. Moreover, the US
health system is the world’s seventh-largest producer of carbon diox-
ide emissions, which is the source of an estimated loss of 381,000 dis-
ability-adjusted life years, deﬁned as the sum of years of potential life
and productive life lost to death or disability [9,10].
Healthcare providers must be trained to recognize and treat these
clinical challenges. To date, there has been little guidance for imple-
menting climate science [2-5] within our current constructs of a ‘tra-
ditional’ medical school curriculum, with even fewer attempts at
programmatic evaluation of teaching effectiveness. Wellberry et al.
provide examples of how to incorporate climate science into medical
school curricula throughout all stages of medical training, but do not
describe student or curriculum assessments for their suggestions [4].
Similarly, Omrani et al. detail the current state of planetary health in
medical education without exploring the teaching strategies and
* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: jasngomz@stanford.edu (J. Gomez), mgisondi@stanford.edu
(M.A. Gisondi).
1 Twitter: @MikeGisondi
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100020
2667-2782/© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100020
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
assessment tools required for implementation [5]. The lack of pub-
lished medical school curricula in climate science represents an
important educational gap.
In response, Stanford School of Medicine now offers an elective
seminar entitled, “The Impact of Climate Change on Human Health.”
[2] Two conceptual models informed the course design and evalua-
tion methods. We used Kern’s Six Steps of Curriculum Development
[11] to design and implement the course, and Fink’s Taxonomy of Sig-
niﬁcant Learning to frame student assessments. [12]. We sought to
evaluate the effectiveness of this course in its ﬁrst year and to gather
data that might inform future iteration cycles. The speciﬁc objective
of this study was to measure the change in student self-assessment
of beliefs and knowledge about the impact of climate change as a
result of this educational intervention.
Materials and methods
Study design, setting, participants
This was a pre / post intervention survey of students enrolled in a
graduate school seminar course about the impact of climate change
on human health in January - March 2020. This elective course is
sponsored by the Stanford School of Medicine and it is open to enroll-
ment by students from any of the schools at the University, both
graduate and undergraduate. Our roster of eligible participants
included all students who completed the course regardless of their
degree program. For the purposes of this report, the 10-week seminar
course is the ‘educational intervention’ (Table 1), course evaluations
serve as the ‘survey instruments’ (Appendix 1), and ‘medical student’
is deﬁned as any student enrolled in the Doctorate of Medicine (MD)
degree program. The Stanford School of Medicine Institutional
Review Board deemed the study exempt (Protocol #54,624.) Design
of the educational intervention is summarized in Table 1.
Survey methods and outcomes
No course evaluation template exists in the literature that was rel-
evant to our intervention; thus, there were no prior survey instru-
ments on which to base this study. Accordingly, we designed a new
tool in consultation with experts in medical education research
methods and chose Fink’s Taxonomy of Signiﬁcant Learning and Kern’s
six-step approach to curriculum development as the conceptual
models. The Taxonomy is a curriculum design framework comprising
6 domains: Learning to Learn, Foundational Knowledge, Application,
Integration, Caring, and Human Dimension. Each domain encom-
passes a unique perspective on the learning process, and when col-
lectively applied to curriculum design, signiﬁcant learning occurs.
[12] Kern’s six-step approach to curriculum design are as follows: (i)
Problem identiﬁcation, (ii) targeted needs assessment, (iii) goals and
objectives, (iv) educational strategies, (v) implementation and (vi)
evaluation and feedback [11]. We organized survey items that
mapped these domains into two broad categories of ‘Beliefs and Atti-
tudes’ and ‘Knowledge and Application.’ In the Kirkpatrick Evaluation
Model, these items reﬂect student learning (level 2) and intention to
incorporate target behaviors in future clinical practice (level 3.) Stu-
dent evaluations of teaching (level 1) were solicited separately in a
Table 1
Curriculum Design of Stanford’s “The Impact of Climate Change on Human Health” based on Kern’s Six-Step Approach to Curriculum Development [11].
Kern’s Six Steps to Curriculum
Development
Design Decisions
Problem Identiﬁcation
Climate change impacts many aspects of human health.
Physicians lack formal training in climate-related conditions.
There is an educational gap in most US medical schools.
Needs Analysis
There is no formal climate science course at our medical school.
Student interest and demand for training is high.
A required course is not practical at this time.
Learning Objectives
Through active engagement with and successful completion of this course, students will be able to:
1. Explain links between the environmental effects of climate change and human health.
2. Describe how climate change shapes healthcare delivery, from individuals to systems.
3. Form and defend a position on the effects of climate change on human health.
4. Apply principles of sustainability and environmental health counselling to clinical practice.
5. List 3 behavioral changes in one's personal or professional life that may potentially counteract the environmental effects of cli-
mate change.
Educational Strategies
Course design mirrors a traditional, graduate level, seminar style elective.
Class sessions include both didactic and small group work weekly.
As a survey course, different topics are presented weekly to provide a broad overview.
We include medical content, regulations, and physician advocacy.
Implementation
Syllabus by topic:
Week 1: Climate Change and Health Overview
Week 2: Climate Change and Mental Health
Week 3: Climate Change and Infectious Disease
Week 4: Climate Change and Pediatric Health
Week 5: Climate Change and Women’s Health
Week 6: Environmental Justice
Week 7: Climate-Related Disasters and Disaster Response
Week 8: Climate-Smart Health Care
Week 9: Food Waste, Security, and Nutrition
Week 10: From Clinic To Community- Patient and Community Panel
Students enrolled for 1 unit are assigned readings weekly; 2 units require writing projects.
The course is offered weekly for 1 hour as a lunchtime seminar that is open to all students.
Speaker training is provided to reﬁne content and review session format.
Evaluation
Evaluations of course content, instructional methods, and attainment of stated goals are required by the university using standard
templates.
We conduct weekly debriefs with guest speakers.
We hold an end-of-term debrief with course directors and teaching assistants.
A pre/-post intervention survey evaluates changes in student self-assessment of course goals.
Each annual iteration of the course is reﬁned based on these sources of evaluation data.
J. Gomez, A. Goshua, N. Pokrajac et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100020
2
standard university course evaluation; such satisfaction data is often
biased by site-speciﬁc characteristics and not generalizable to other
institutions, and therefore not reported in this study.
We iterated our survey instrument to optimize content and inter-
nal structure. This included extensive testing among three authors
(JG, AG, MAG; two teaching assistants and the course director,
respectively) for item generation, survey functionality, matching of
item content to the construct, optimal item phrasing, and overall
quality control. We piloted the survey within the author group prior
to full distribution and cross-checked results for consistency as evi-
dence of response process validity. We surveyed all eligible partici-
pants before and after the intervention. The solicitation letter
explained study risks, and survey completion implied voluntary,
informed consent. We did not solicit identifying information to
ensure participant anonymity, however unique numeric codes
allowed matching of pre/post surveys by individual participants. We
were blinded to these codes and did not maintain a code book.
The survey tool consisted of 29 closed and open-ended items that
used a combination of Likert style, multiple choice, and open com-
ment prompts. We used open-ended or suggested options for those
items expected to have highly variable responses in order to capture
unanticipated or atypical data. Changes in participant beliefs, atti-
tudes, self-assessments of knowledge, and conﬁdence in skills were
key outcome measures of the intervention.
Data analysis
We performed data analysis using SPSS for Macintosh, Version 27
(IBM Corp., Armonk, NY). A Cronbach’s alpha statistic was calculated
as a measure of survey tool internal consistency. A paired Wilcoxon
signed-rank
test
determined
differences
in
individual
survey
responses before and after the educational intervention.
Results
Of the 74 students who completed the pre-intervention survey, 40
(54% response rate) completed the post-intervention survey and 2
students unenrolled from the class. Therefore, the sample size was 72
students and the survey response rate from that sample was 55.5%
(40/72 eligible participants). The sample included 14 medical stu-
dents, 2 physician assistant students, 9 graduate students in various
sciences, 41 undergraduates, 5 distinguished career scholars, and 1
law student. Internal consistency of the survey instrument was good
(Cronbach’s ɑ = 0.715) and did not change if an item was deleted.
Behaviors and attitudes
Nearly all respondents agreed or strongly agreed with these state-
ments in the pre-intervention survey: “I believe our climate is chang-
ing” (68/72; 94.4%), “I am concerned about climate change” (72/72;
100%), “There is evidence of climate change” (72/72; 100%), “Climate
change will impact future generations” (72/72; 100%), “Climate
change negatively impacts our lives” (67/72; 93.1%), “It is important
for me to be informed about environmental problems” (72/72; 100%),
and
“Hospitals
should
implement
environmentally
sustainable,
energy-efﬁcient practices” (72/72;100%).
After completion of the educational intervention, median agree-
ment level on survey responses signiﬁcantly increased for items, “It is
important for physicians to be educated on climate change,” “Physi-
cians should inform the public about climate change,” “I feel prepared
to manage the health effects of climate change,” “A climate change
curriculum should be included in medical education,” and “Medical
school has educated me on climate change.” (Table 2)
Foundational knowledge and application
On pre-intervention survey, respondents reported they were not
at all conﬁdent or only somewhat conﬁdent to “Explain the links
between the environmental effects of climate change and human
health” (36/72; 50%), “Describe how climate change shapes health-
care delivery, from individuals to systems” (59/72; 81.9%), “Defend
your position on the effects of climate change on human health” (39/
72; 54.2%), “Apply principles of sustainability and environmental
health counseling to clinical practice” (60/72; 83.3%), and “List 3
behavioral changes in your personal or professional life that may
potentially counteract the environmental effects of climate change”
(26/72; 36.1%). Median conﬁdence level reported by respondents sig-
niﬁcantly improved for all items after the educational intervention
(Table 3).
Discussion
We found that a climate science course for preclinical medical stu-
dents improved several measures of student learning that extend
beyond foundational knowledge alone. These included positive
changes in student self-reported knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes
about the health impacts of climate change and the need for physi-
cians to treat climate-related conditions in their future practice. Such
effects may shape a student’s appreciation of this issue, their sense of
Table 2
Student beliefs and attitudes regarding climate change before and after the educational intervention.
Survey Item
Median Pretest (IQR)
Median Posttest (IQR)
Difference (95%CI)
p-value
I believe our climate is changing
7 (0)
7 (0)
−
0.180
I am concerned about climate change
7 (0)
7 (0)
−
0.739
There is evidence of climate change
7 (0)
7 (0)
−
0.739
Climate change will impact future generations
7 (0)
7 (0)
−
0.705
Climate change negatively impacts our lives
7 (1)
7 (0)
−
0.251
Humans are responsible for climate change
7 (1)
7 (0)
−
0.218
Individual actions make no impact on climate change
2 (2)
2 (2)
−
0.721
Climate change is irreversible
3 (2)
4 (2.75)
−
0.286
The severity of climate change is exaggerated
2 (1)
1 (1)
−
0.451
I can make a positive contribution to the environment
6 (0)
6 (1)
−
0.115
It is important for me to be informed about environmental problems
7 (1)
7 (0)
−
0.285
It is important for physicians to be educated on climate change
6 (1)
7 (0)
0.5 (0 to 1)
0.001
Physicians should inform the public about climate change
6 (2)
7 (1)
0.5 (0 to 1)
0.002
I feel prepared to manage the health effects of climate change
2.5 (1.75)
5 (3)
1.5 (1 to 2.5)
< 0.001
A climate change curriculum should be included in medical education
6 (1)
7 (1)
0.5 (0 to 0.5)
0.008
Medical school has educated me on climate change
4 (0)
4 (2)
1 (0 to 1.5)
0.002
Hospitals should implement environmentally sustainable, energy-efﬁcient practices
7 (0)
7 (0)
−
0.796
CI, conﬁdence interval, IQR, interquartile range.
Likert items range from 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree).
Bolded items indicate a signiﬁcant value.
J. Gomez, A. Goshua, N. Pokrajac et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100020
3
duty, notion of professional responsibilities, and their accountability
to patients −which all may be practice-changing. For these reasons,
our course design and evaluation method demonstrate that a gradu-
ate seminar is an effective format for incorporating this new material
within the larger medical school curriculum.
After careful consideration of student needs and implementation
issues unique to our school, we opted for a traditional, survey-style,
graduate seminar. Different topics were presented weekly and con-
cepts did not necessarily build upon material from earlier in the
course. This design allowed for a broad introduction to the many cli-
mate-related issues that affect clinical practice. The learning objec-
tives for the course are listed in Table 1 and the observed changes in
post-intervention survey responses suggests that each was met. We
chose pre/post intervention self-assessments of learning rather than
a ﬁnal exam, given the wide range of introductory topics offered.
Introductory level course material aligns with lower knowledge and
cognitive skills on Bloom’s Taxonomy of Higher Order Thinking; test-
ing learning objectives at that level seemed less important than mea-
suring changes to students’ beliefs about climate change that will
shape their future clinical practice.
We believe that our deliberate use of the Kern framework in the
ﬁrst iteration of the course achieved many objectives. Speciﬁcally,
students reported an increased understanding of the importance of
climate science, conﬁdence in their abilities to apply concepts later in
practice, and intention to incorporate sustainable changes in their
personal and professional habits. Kern emphasizes robust assessment
of global and local problems when developing a curriculum that is
truly tailored to student needs and their local learning environment.
Attainment of our stated learning objectives were predicted on the
intentional choice of relevant materials as much as the classroom
instruction itself. A similar course at another institution may be exe-
cuted quite differently based on the results of their local needs
assessments.
The design of our survey instrument informed by Fink’s Taxon-
omy captured student intentions and beliefs that reﬂect signiﬁcant
learning. These changes cannot be captured by a multiple-choice
exam and require separate assessment instruments. Fink deﬁnes sig-
niﬁcant learning as a change in the application of knowledge and
skills extending well beyond the course, affecting a deep and lasting
impact on the learner. The Fink model includes ‘Human Dimension’
and ‘Caring’ domains that we believe are critical to a climate science
course intended to impact personal agency with this issue. The pair-
ing of the Kern and Fink frameworks allowed a linear course design
from student needs, goals, content, and assessment of learning. We
found this pairing especially useful and recommend a similar
approach when developing climate science courses.
Low pre-intervention survey responses suggested a baseline lack
of student knowledge and conﬁdence with this introductory material.
Such ﬁndings are notable among a cohort of students motivated
enough to take a climate science elective, as they might be more
likely to have previous exposure to the content. Consistent with prior
studies, this observation further highlights an important educational
gap in our traditional medical school curriculum during an era of
rapid and signiﬁcant climate change. As we learned in discussions
with students throughout the term, this speciﬁc educational gap
exacerbates climate anxiety and has been described in previous stud-
ies with younger participants. There is a deep sense of dread that
stems from perceived inaction by our leaders, which drives this stress
response known as climate anxiety; a lack of training in this domain
reduces student conﬁdence in their ability to enact change and may
worsen climate anxiety. In this way, our course represented a call to
action and source of empowerment, for both individual students and
the school of medicine community.
Limitations to our study include standard biases associated with
self-assessments, reﬂexivity issues related to instructor biases, and
survey design. Data analysis and subsequent conclusions are certainly
impacted by these issues, though our rigorous survey design and
pilot testing attempted to mitigate these biases. We observed some
course attrition early in the term, with 2 students who completed
the pre-survey later unenrolled and post-intervention data from
these subjects may have diverged from those reported. However, all
participants in this study had high class attendance and engagement
with all syllabus assets; this strengthens our conﬁdence in the
results.
Future iterations of this elective course will further explore com-
petency-based learning objectives for climate education. Now that
the course is framed, content will become an even greater focus in
subsequent cycles. While our ﬁndings demonstrate that an elective
course can positively impact learning outcomes, greater integration
across the continuum of physician training is required as climate
change evolves. Medical schools must heed curriculum recommenda-
tions for longitudinal education experiences, including application to
clinical practice during clerkships and residency training. The climate
science elective we report offers one example of early preclinical
training on which to build larger curriculum efforts.
Funding
This research did not receive any grants or support by funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found
in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2021.100020.
Table 3
Self-reported student conﬁdence regarding knowledge and application of course material before and after the educational intervention.
Self-Assessment Item
Median Pretest (IQR)
Median Posttest (IQR)
Difference (95%CI)
p-value
Explain the links between the environmental effects of climate change and human health
2 (2)
4 (0)
2 (1.5 to 2.5)
< 0.001
Describe how climate change shapes healthcare delivery, from individuals to systems
1 (1)
4 (1)
2.5 (2 to 2.5)
< 0.001
Defend your position on the effects of climate change on human health
2 (2)
4 (1)
2 (1.5 to 2.5)
< 0.001
Apply principles of sustainability and environmental health counseling to clinical practice
1 (1)
3 (1)
2 (1.5 to 2.5)
< 0.001
List 3 behavioral changes in your personal or professional life that may potentially counteract
the environmental effects of climate change
2 (2)
4 (1)
1.5 (1 to 2)
< 0.001
CI, conﬁdence interval, IQR, interquartile range.
Likert items range from 1 (Not at all conﬁdent) to 5 (Fully conﬁdent).
Bolded items indicate a signiﬁcant value.
J. Gomez, A. Goshua, N. Pokrajac et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100020
4
References
[1] Hales S, Kovats S, Lloyed S, Campbell-Lendrum D. Quantitative risk assessment of
the effects of climate change on selected causes of death, 2030s and 2050s.
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2014 http://www.who.int/
globalchange/publications/quantitative-risk-assessment/en Accessed May 5th,
2019.
[2] Goshua A., Gomez J., Erny B., Burke M., Luby S., Sokolow S., LaBeaud D., Auerbach
P., Gisondi M., Nadeau K. Climate change and the impact on human health: a call
to
action
for
medical
schools.
(2020).
Acad
Med,
doi:
10.1097/
ACM.0000000000003861.
[3] Haines A., Ebi K. The imperative for climate action to protect health. (2020). NEJM,
doi: 10.1056/NEJMra1807873.
[4] Wellbery C., Shefﬁeld P., Timmireddy K., Sarfaty M., Teherani A., Fallor R. It’s time
for medical schools to introduce climate change into their curricula. (2018). Acad
Med, doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000002368.
[5] Omrani O.E., Dafallah A., Paniello Castillo B., Amaro B.Q.R.C., Taneja S., Amzil Met
al. Envisioning planetary health in every medical curriculum: an international
medical student organization’s perspective. (2020). Med Teach, doi: 10.1080/
0142159X.2020.1796949
[6] Global climate change and human health. In: Proceedings of 62nd interim meet-
ing. American Medical Association House of Delegates; 2008. p. 279–93 http://
ama.nmtvault.com/jsp/viewer.jsp?
doc_id=ama_arch%2FHOD00005%2F00000011&page_name=293.
[7] NASA. Global climate change. https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/ Accessed Feb
26th, 2021
[8] Crimmins A, Balbus J, Gamble JL, et al. The impacts of climate change on human
health in the United States: a scientiﬁc assessment. Washington, DC: U.S. Global
Change Research Program; 2016.
[9] Eckelman MJ, Sherman JD. Estimated global disease burden from US health care
sector greenhouse gas emissions. Am J Public Health 2018;108(S2). doi: 10.2105/
ajph.2017.303846.
[10] U.S. health system will need to adapt to climate change. (n.d.). Retrieved from
https://www.commonwealthfund.org/blog/2018/be-high-performing-us-health-
system-will-need-adapt-climate-change 2018
[11] Kern DE, Thomas PA, Hughes MT. Curriculum development for medical educa-
tion: a six-step approach. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: The John's Hopkins University
Press; 2009.
[12] Fink LD. Creating signiﬁcant learning experiences: an integrated approach to
designing college courses. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 2003. p. 295.
J. Gomez, A. Goshua, N. Pokrajac et al.
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 3 (2021) 100020
5
