Understanding human vulnerability to climate change: A global
perspective on index validation for adaptation planning
Joern Birkmann a,⁎, Ali Jamshed a, Joanna M. McMillan a, Daniel Feldmeyer a, Edmond Totin b, William Solecki c,
Zelina Zaiton Ibrahim d, Debra Roberts e, Rachel Bezner Kerr f, Hans-Otto Poertner g, Mark Pelling h,
Riyanti Djalante i, Matthias Garschagen j, Walter Leal Filho k, Debarati Guha-Sapir l, Andrés Alegría m
a Institute of Spatial and Regional Planning (IREUS), Pfaffenwaldring 7, 70569, University of Stuttgart, Germany
b Ecole de Foresterie Tropicale, Université Nationale d'Agriculture du Benin, Kétou, Benin
c City University New York (CUNY), Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, New York, United States of America
d Faculty of Forestry and Environment, Department of Environmental Management, University Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia
e School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal and eThekwini Municipality, Sustainable and Resilient City Initiatives Unit, Durban, South Africa
f Department of Global Development, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States of America
g Alfred-Wegener-Institute, Bremen, Germany
h King's Centre for Integrated Research on Risk and Resilience, Department of Geography, King's College London, United Kingdom
i United Nations University - Institute for the Advanced Study of Sustainability (UNU-IAS), Tokyo, Japan
j Department of Geography, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Munich, Germany
k Department of Natural Sciences, Manchester Metropolitan University. Oxford Road, Manchester M15 6BH, UK and Hamburg University of Applied Sciences, Research and Transfer Centre
“Sustainable Development and Climate Change Management”, Ulmenliet 20, D-21033 Hamburg, Germany
l Centre for Research On the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED), Institute of Health and Society (IRSS), Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium
m IPCC Technical Support Unit, Alfred-Wegener-Institute, Bremen, Germany
H I G H L I G H T S
• Internal and external validation is cru-
cial for global vulnerability assessments.
• Vulnerability of WRI and INFORM index
partially explains mortality and eco-
nomic losses.
• Hazard mortality is 15 times higher in
most compared to least vulnerable
countries.
• Vulnerability shows different starting
points towards climate resilient devel-
opment.
G R A P H I C A L
A B S T R A C T
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 7 May 2021
Received in revised form 27 August 2021
Accepted 27 August 2021
Available online 1 September 2021
Climate change is a severe global threat. Research on climate change and vulnerability to natural hazards has
made signiﬁcant progress over the last decades. Most of the research has been devoted to improving the quality
of climate information and hazard data, including exposure to speciﬁc phenomena, such as ﬂooding or sea-level
rise. Less attention has been given to the assessment of vulnerability and embedded social, economic and histor-
ical conditions that foster vulnerability of societies. A number of global vulnerability assessments based on
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: joern.birkmann@ireus.uni-stuttgart.de (J. Birkmann), ali.jamshed@ireus.uni-stuttgart.de (A. Jamshed), joanna.mcmillan@ireus.uni-stuttgart.de (J.M. McMillan),
daniel.feldmeyer@ireus.uni-stuttgart.de (D. Feldmeyer), edmond.totin@gmail.com (E. Totin), wsolecki@hunter.cuny.edu (W. Solecki), zelina@upm.edu.my (Z.Z. Ibrahim),
debra.roberts@durban.gov.za (D. Roberts), rbeznerkerr@cornell.edu (R.B. Kerr), hans.poertner@awi.de (H.-O. Poertner), mark.pelling@kcl.ac.uk (M. Pelling), djalante@unu.edu
(R. Djalante), m.garschagen@geographie.uni-muenchen.de (M. Garschagen), walter.leal2@haw-hamburg.de (W. Leal Filho), debarati.guha@uclouvain.be (D. Guha-Sapir),
andres.alegria@ipcc-wg2.awi.de (A. Alegría).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150065
0048-9697/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Science of the Total Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv
Editor: Scott Sheridan
indicators have been developed over the past years. Yet an essential question remains how to validate those as-
sessments at the global scale. This paper examines different options to validate global vulnerability assessments
in terms of their internal and external validity, focusing on two global vulnerability indicator systems used in the
WorldRiskIndex and the INFORM index. The paper reviews these global index systems as best practices and at the
same time presents new analysis and global results that show linkages between the level of vulnerability and di-
saster outcomes. Both the review and new analysis support each other and help to communicate the validity and
the uncertainty of vulnerability assessments. Next to statistical validation methods, we discuss the importance of
the appropriate link between indicators, data and the indicandum. We found that mortality per hazard event
from ﬂoods, drought and storms is 15 times higher for countries ranked as highly vulnerable compared to
those classiﬁed as low vulnerable. These ﬁndings highlight the different starting points of countries in their
move towards climate resilient development. Priority should be given not just to those regions that are likely
to face more severe climate hazards in the future but also to those confronted with high vulnerability already.
© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Keywords:
Vulnerability
Climate change
Validity and applicability of indicators
Societal impacts
Natural hazards
1. Introduction
The need and relevance to assess vulnerability to climate change and
natural hazards is based on the assumption that climate risks and actual
losses caused by hazard events such as storms, ﬂoods or droughts are
not solely a result of the climate hazard, but also determined by societal
and economic preconditions that shape the way in which people are
prepared for or respond to such events (Birkmann, 2013; Cardona
et al., 2012; Cutter et al., 2003; IPCC, 2012; UNDRR, 2019). The discourse
about vulnerability within climate change and climate risk research en-
compasses various interpretations of the concept of vulnerability, such
as vulnerability as a starting point versus vulnerability as an outcome
(Füssel, 2007). Since the IPCC SREX report (IPCC, 2012) and within the
newer conceptualization of climate risks in the ﬁfth assessment report
(IPCC, 2014b), there is an emerging consensus that vulnerability of soci-
eties or ecosystems is better framed as a starting point, rather than an
outcome. Approaches that conceptualize vulnerability as an outcome
often include hazard information and therewith do not sufﬁciently dif-
ferentiate between vulnerability and risk. In this paper we use the
term vulnerability to refer to the broader concept and systemic societal
vulnerability to emphasise the vulnerability of societies and systemic
barriers within societies in particular, as opposed to, for example, vul-
nerability of ecosystems.
Systemic societal vulnerability refers to characteristics of society or
sub-systems of it (e.g. demographic groups or built infrastructures)
and is largely independent of the speciﬁc climatic hazard. The term sys-
temic refers to inherent barriers that people experience in terms of their
ability to cope and adapt to climatic change and natural hazards. While
there is still tension on how to precisely deﬁne risk, hazard or vulnera-
bility (Garschagen et al., 2016; Hagenlocher et al., 2019), the scientiﬁc
discourse (IPCC, 2014b; UNDRR, 2017) has reached a consensus that
risks in the context of climate change result from the dynamic interac-
tion of hazard, exposure and vulnerability of human and ecological sys-
tems. In contrast to climate and hazard information that often
characterizes the physical phenomena—such as the mean temperature
change, frequency or intensity of droughts, ﬂoods or storms—vulnera-
bility is deﬁned as the propensity and the predisposition of a system
to be adversely affected by external shocks and thus is linked to the
characteristics of a social-ecological system or community that deter-
mine their level of preparedness to anticipate or respond to risks
(IPCC, 2014b; Sharma and Ravindranath, 2019). Systemic societal vul-
nerability acknowledges the signiﬁcance of the vulnerability of individ-
ual elements – people, buildings, livelihoods – but aggregates, aiming to
provide a comprehensive view of vulnerability of societies. Challenges
of aggregation and data availability always exist in the assessment of
systemic societal vulnerability at global scale and therefore the valida-
tion of such assessments (given their different methodologies) is crucial
and lies at the heart of this paper.
Quantitative assessments of risk and vulnerability are often based on
indicators that capture vulnerability as a hazard dependent or as a
hazard independent phenomenon (EC-DRMKC, 2020; Peduzzi, 2013;
Welle and Birkmann, 2015). While comparison of global scale vulnera-
bility and risk assessments with national resolution underscores that
different assessments of vulnerability show a relatively high agreement
regarding global hotspots of vulnerability (see Birkmann et al., 2021;
Hagenlocher et al., 2019; de Sherbinin et al., 2019; Feldmeyer et al.,
2021; Garschagen et al., 2021), less attention has been given to the
question of how to validate such assessments. This question is complex
since vulnerability and systemic societal vulnerability in particular is not
just an outcome of a speciﬁc event or a simple phenomenon, but rather
a predisposition to be adversely affected that is often hidden until a con-
crete crises or hazard events reveals it.
Various researchers underscore signiﬁcant knowledge gaps and un-
certainty regarding the quantitative relationship between societal and/
or social vulnerability measures and disaster outcomes (Bakkensen
et al., 2017; Burton, 2010; Rufat et al., 2019; Schmidtlein et al., 2011).
They conclude that because there is an increasing use of vulnerability
metrics in planning and decision making, it is critical to better character-
ize and understand these relations between vulnerability or systemic
societal vulnerability and disaster outcomes and in a broader sense to
explore the validity of vulnerability assessments and models (Rufat
et al., 2019). These studies often validate vulnerability indices at the
subnational and local level with a focus on a speciﬁc hazard
(Bakkensen et al., 2017; Rufat et al., 2019). While they stress the need
to validate vulnerability assessments against their prognostic function
to project areas where the highest fatalities and losses will occur or
have occurred in the past due to natural or climate-induced hazards
(Rufat et al., 2019), other authors argue that the validation needs careful
assessment as social contexts and the perception of risk are speciﬁc
(Fekete, 2009; Simpson et al., 2021). Other papers examine the validity
of vulnerability assessments in terms of speciﬁc disaster outcomes ob-
served in speciﬁc regions or with regard to a speciﬁc hazard event
(Bakkensen et al., 2017; Rufat et al., 2019; Schmidtlein et al., 2011).
While these studies are important, it is generally questionable whether
or not a single hazard event and its outcomes can really be used to val-
idate such assessments.
In this paper, we differentiate between internal validation methods
that consist of reliability and sensitivity questions and external valida-
tion that explores whether and how vulnerability metrics can explain
outcomes in the context of disasters or extreme events. Some vulnera-
bility assessment approaches use their own reliability measures, such
as the INFORM Risk Index (Marin-Ferrer et al., 2017, p. 16) that classiﬁes
reliability in terms of the availability and quality of data available for a
speciﬁc country. We rather base our assessment on the relevance of in-
dicators for explaining vulnerability. Such investigation has been rarely
done or discussed in the literature (using most recent data) and there-
fore these results can increase the reliability and usability of vulnerabil-
ity metrics by the broader research community. In addition, we explore
the linkages between data, indicators and the underlying indicandum
that need to be considered when assessing the appropriateness of
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
2
indicators to measure very complex phenomena (e.g. inequality or re-
sponse capacities) and dynamics (e.g. forced migration). Also, blind
spots and limitations of global or national indicator based vulnerability
assessments are examined and discussed.
Overall, the paper presents novel ﬁndings regarding internal and ex-
ternal validation options of indicator based vulnerability assessments
focusing on the vulnerability components of the WorldRiskIndex
(WRI) and the INFORM1 index using national and regional boundaries.
The WRI and the INFORM index are two approaches that cover issues
of vulnerability more comprehensively compared to other approaches.
We show that next to data quality issues and statistical validation of
such indicator systems, the link between an indicator and the underly-
ing indicandum is key, including the vision and goal. In this regard, the
paper focuses on the following questions:
1. What has to be considered when assessing the validity of global com-
parative vulnerability indicator systems?
2. How statistically reliable are existing indicators and index ap-
proaches in capturing different aspects of vulnerability (internal
validation)?
3. What is the quantitative relationship between these vulnerability as-
sessments, their results and actual loss data from past disasters due
to climate inﬂuenced hazards (external validation)?
4. What are blind spots and missing data within such global assess-
ments?
5. To what extent and how can global vulnerability approaches be used
to inform adaptation planning?
6. What are priority issues for further research and development to en-
hance such assessments and their linkages to sub-national or local
context speciﬁc assessments?
2. Two approaches: the WorldRiskIndex and the INFORM Risk Index
The purpose of risk and vulnerability indicators and index systems is
to capture the multidimensional phenomena and better understand the
different components, spatial structures and levels of the risk and vul-
nerability, of countries and regions exposed to various climatic and nat-
ural hazards. These approaches aim to support decision making in terms
of disaster prevention, preparedness and response (IPCC, 2019; UNDRR,
2019). The components and indicators of such index systems are based
on speciﬁc assumptions about the relevance of each indicator for de-
scribing vulnerability and systemic societal vulnerability in particular.
These assumptions need to be critically revisited.
The WorldRiskIndex (WRI) and the INFORM approaches are two
prominent indices offering global assessments with national scale reso-
lution, used in the context of climate change adaptation and disaster
risk reduction to assess risks and vulnerabilities (Birkmann and Welle,
2016; EC-DRMKC, 2020; Welle and Birkmann, 2015). The paper exam-
ines the WRI and INFORM index since both indicator systems have
global coverage and a comprehensive approach for assessing vulnera-
bility quantitatively, including, for example, aspects of poverty, inequal-
ity and governance. Moreover, both indicator systems have been
published over several years.
The key aim of WRI is to analyse and visualize the level of vulnerabil-
ity and risk of a country to experience adverse consequences due to
natural hazards and climate related events. It allows the comparison
of 171 countries (Welle and Birkmann, 2016, 2015). The INFORM
index focuses on risks and humanitarian crises by including present
and projected conﬂict aspects as well as hazard and exposure aspects.
A core component of the index is also the assessment of vulnerability.
The INFORM index captures 191 countries (EC-DRMKC, 2020). Table 1
provides an overview of both indicator systems.
2.1. Selection of components, subcomponents and indicators
The components used in the WRI differentiate between the natural
hazard sphere and the vulnerability sphere. The WRI is composed of ex-
posure (natural hazard sphere), susceptibility, lack of coping capacity
and lack of adaptive capacity (vulnerability sphere). These components
are further sub-categorized, for example focusing on the availability of
basic infrastructure, medical services, etc. The development and
systematization of the different components and sub-categories were
evaluated by scientists and practitioners during an international work-
shop as well as supported by international literature (see Buendnis
Entwicklung Hilft, 2011; Birkmann et al., 2011; Welle and Birkmann,
2016, 2015). In 2019 some subcomponents of the index were modiﬁed,
which on the one hand shows the ability to include new knowledge, on
the other hand, these changes make a comparison of changes of vulner-
ability over time difﬁcult.
The INFORM index consists of three components of risk, namely
hazard and exposure, vulnerability and lack of coping capacity. Each of
these components has additional sub-categories. Hazard dependent
factors are captured in the exposure and hazard component while
hazard independent factors are considered in the vulnerability and the
lack of coping capacity dimension (see in detail EC-DRMKC, 2020).
The development of these risk components is based on scientiﬁc litera-
ture and also the involvement of experts from over ten UN organiza-
tions (e.g. OCHA, UNDP, WFP or FAO), multiple other international
organizations (such as IFRC or GFDRR) as well as scientists from univer-
sities and other research institutes. The Joint Research Centre (JRC) of
1 For the INFORM index, not just the vulnerability component was considered but also
the “Lack of Coping Capacity" component. These two components were considered in or-
der to make the values comparable to the WRI vulnerability component, which does not
only capture the fragility of a society, but also the differential capacities to cope and adapt
to natural hazards and climate change. In order to underscore the fact that we focus on the
vulnerability components of the WRI and INFORM, we use the abbreviation “WRIv” and
“INFORMv” respectively in the paper.
Table 1
Comparison of the WorldRiskIndex and the INFORM Risk Index.
Criteria
WorldRiskIndex
INFORM Risk Index
Main purpose/goal
Analysis of the risk level of
countries to natural and
climatic hazards
Assessment of risk of countries
to inform disaster and
humanitarian crisis responses
First published
2011
2012
Revision/update
Once per year
Once per year
Conceptualization
Risk is seen as a product of
exposure and vulnerability,
where vulnerability includes
susceptibility and lack of
coping and adaptive capacity
Risk is seen as a product of
exposure, vulnerability
(socioeconomic vulnerability
and vulnerable group) and
lack of coping capacity
Number of countries
171
191
Treatment of
missing data
Missing values are
estimated using various
accounting techniques
depending on the data
available for each country
Systematic imputation of
missing values using the
data from the most recent
year available within a
5 years timespan
Multicollinearity
test
Pearson correlation matrix
Pearson correlation matrix
Transformation and
normalization
approach
Multiple approaches are
applied depending on the
data
Log transformation for some
indicators and Min-max
normalization [0–10]
applied to all indicators
Aggregation method
Additive function for
vulnerability
subcomponents and
multiplicative function for
exposure and vulnerability
A mix of arithmetic and
geometric means and
minimum-, maximum
aggregation
Validation
(internal)
Reliability test
Sensitivity analysis
Factor analysis
Uncertainty test
Index regarding the lack of
reliability; it takes into account
missing data, out-of-date data
and conﬂict status.
Validation
(external)
No
No
Key Source
Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft,
2011; Welle and Birkmann,
2015, 2016
EC-DRMKC, 2020
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
3
the European Commission has been an important actor within this de-
velopment process of the index, with close support, expert consultation
and user validation of the different participating organizations (see
Marin-Ferrer et al., 2017). The INFORM risk index has been published
annually since 2012. Its data and results are fully accessible online
(https://drmkc.jrc.ec.europa.eu/inform-index/) and have been widely
used in the programming of the participating and other organizations.
Next to yearly vulnerability scores and ranks, INFORM also provides re-
sults on vulnerability trends of each country. Vulnerability in the
INFORM index is deﬁned as a pre-existing vulnerability before a disaster
and independent of a speciﬁc hazard (Marin-Ferrer et al., 2017).
Quality criteria used for the indicator selection were quite similar in
both approaches. Both consider, for example, the availability of data and
that the indicators should be statistically and analytically sound, repro-
ducible, appropriate in scope, comparable and easy to interpret and un-
derstand (see Birkmann et al., 2011; Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft, 2017;
EC-DRMKC, 2020).
The WRI is based on 28 indicators: 5 indicators assess hazard and ex-
posure, 7 capture aspects of susceptibility, 5 indicators assess the lack of
coping capacities and 11 the lack of adaptive capacity (Birkmann et al.,
2011; Welle and Birkmann, 2016). The INFORM index is based on a
larger number of indicators, encompassing 22 indicators for the assess-
ment of hazard and exposure, 18 indicators to assess vulnerability and
14 indicators for measuring lack of coping capacity (see in detail
Marin-Ferrer et al., 2017). The number of indicators used (see Tables 2
and 3), however, does not mean that each indicator can be calculated
for all countries. In terms of internal validation, at ﬁrst, statistical valida-
tion processes were undertaken in the development process of both
indices. These internal validation methods within the construction
process of the indicator system encompassed, for example, a
multicollinearity analysis to explore redundancies among indicators.
Next to statistical analysis (correlations), both index development
processes also encompassed expert judgements and literature-based
assessments on how the different indicators selected allow the visuali-
zation of core topics of societal vulnerability to natural hazards and cli-
mate change. INFORM further applies regular rounds of expert
evaluation and validation among its core users.
2.2. Data collection and transformation
Both indicator systems—WRI and INFORM—are primarily based on
indicators that can be calculated and visualized with global databases,
such as poverty and inequality data or access to certain basic infrastruc-
ture stemming from the World Bank, the United Nations and other rep-
utable international organizations. A list of the indicators is shown in
Tables 2 and 3 while the data sources used by both indices for each in-
dicator is shown in the Supplementary material (see Tables A and B).
Data for each indicator was transformed in dimensionless rank levels
between 0 and 1 for the WRI and between 0 and 10 for the INFORM
index (see Welle and Birkmann, 2015 for WRI and Marin-Ferrer et al.,
2017 for the INFORM index). Within the WRI, different transformation
methods were used including min-max normalization and logarithm
transformation, while for the INFORM index only min-max normaliza-
tion was applied.
2.3. Weighting and aggregation methods
Weighting and aggregation methods are often a contested ﬁeld, how-
ever, for a robust scientiﬁc methodology, it is most important that these
weights and aggregation methods are transparent and clearly outlined
for external readers and users (OECD, 2008). The scientiﬁc literature
and also various disciplines use different methods to allocate weights
to indicators or subcomponents for the index construction. The WRI ap-
proach uses weights for each subcomponent that were generated using
the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP) as a statistical tool and these
weights were further complemented with expert judgements as an
additional input to weigh the importance of each indicator for the assess-
ment (see weights for indicators and subcomponents in Supplementary
material, Table-A). This approach keeps the option open to modify vari-
ables and weights of components in later years if expert knowledge
changes, the risk context changes or additional data for different aspects
of societal vulnerability become available. While indicators were
weighted differently, each component (susceptibility, lack of coping
capacity and lack of adaptive capacity) of the WRI was equally weighted.
In terms of the INFORM approach, equal weights were assigned for the
components and were justiﬁed with Pearson's correlation analysis (see
Table-B in Supplement and Marin-Ferrer et al., 2017 for details).
In terms of the aggregation method for the components, the WRI
used a multiplicative function for exposure and vulnerability for the
ﬁnal risk index while the vulnerability component is calculated using
Table 2
Overview of indicators used within the WorldRiskIndex (WRI) for measuring vulnerability
including data sources and subcomponents.
(Source: Welle and Birkmann, 2015; Birkmann et al., 2021)
Subcomponents and their Indicators
Data source
Susceptibility
Public Infrastructure (PUIR)
Share of population without access to
improved sanitation (Sus_A)
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme (JMP) and World,
Development Indicators World Bank
Share of the population without access to
an improved water source (Sus_B)
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring
Programme (JMP) and World,
Development Indicators World Bank
Nutrition (NUTR)
Share of under nourished population
(Sus_C)
Millennium Development Goals
Indicators Database based on FAO
Statistics Division
Poverty and Dependencies (PVDP)
Dependency ratio (Sus_D)
Human Development Index, UNDP
Extreme poverty (Sus_E)
Human Development Report, World
Development Indicators
Economic capacity and Income distribution
(ECID)
GDP per capita (PPP) (Sus_F)
World Bank, World Development
Indicators
GINI index (Sus_G)
World Bank and UN WIDER
Coping capacity
Governance and Authorities (GOVA)
Corruption perception index (LCC_A)
Transparency International
Good governance (Failed State Index)
(LCC_B)
Foreign Policy
Medical Services (MEDS)
Number of physicians per 10,000
inhabitants (LCC_C)
World Health Statistics
Number of hospital beds per 10,000
inhabitants (LCC_D)
World Health Statistics
Material Coverage (MCOV)
Insurances (LCC_E)
Munich Re
Adaptive capacity
Education and Research (EDRE)
Adult literacy rate (LAC_A)
UNESCO Institute for Statistics
Combined gross school enrolment
(LAC_B)
UNESCO Institute for Statistics
Gender equity (GDEQ)
Gender parity in education (LAC_C)
UNESCO Institute for Statistics
Share of female representatives in the
National Parliament (LAC_D)
Millennium Development Goals
Indicators
Environmental Status/Ecosystem Protection
(ESEP)
Water resources (LAC_E)
Environmental Performance Index
Biodiversity and habitat protection
(LAC_F)
Environmental Performance Index
Forest management (LAC_G)
Environmental Performance Index
Agricultural management (LAC_H)
Environmental Performance Index
Investment (INVT)
Public health expenditure (LAC_I)
World Health Statistics
Life expectancy at birth (LAC_J)
Human Development Index, UNDP
Private health expenditure (LAC_K)
World Health Statistics
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
4
additive function between susceptibility and lack of coping and adaptive
capacity (see Table 1). For individual indicator aggregation within each
subcomponent of the WRI, an additive function was used. The INFORM
index applied a multiplicative function for calculating the risk index
based on its core components (see Table 1) and for the individual
aggregation of subcomponents a mix of arithmetic and geometric
means were applied. In terms of the underlying methodological
assumptions, an additive aggregation assumes certain substitutability
between the indicators. That means an increase of one indicator can
be counterbalanced by another, for example, a higher dependency
ratio (due to a high number and percentage of elderly of the total pop-
ulation like in Japan) might make society more susceptible to heat
stress, but at the same time, a good health care system or strong social
networks might counterbalance this. In contrast to an additive
aggregation, a multiplicative aggregation assumes non-linear substitut-
ability and introduces a knock-out criterion in terms of the fact that if
one of the indicators is zero, the entire equation will be zero. The results
of the vulnerability assessment of the WRI and the INFORM index with a
national scale resolution are shown in Fig. 1.
3. Methodology
3.1. Index validation options
We examine index validity through internal and external analytical
approaches. Validation is a broad term that contains a range of different
methods for validating vulnerability indices. In scientiﬁc literature in-
ternal statistical validation (e.g. Tate, 2012; Sorg et al., 2018; Jamshed
et al., 2020a), external statistical validation (e.g. Burton, 2010; Rufat
et al., 2019; Bakkensen et al., 2017) and stakeholder/expert opinion
based validation (e.g. Fekete, 2009) have been widely used particularly
at the local scale. Our paper focuses on global comparative vulnerability
index systems therefore opportunities to validate these with local par-
ticipatory tools are limited. We differentiate between internal and
external validation. Internal validation explores the inner coherence
and reliability of the indicator systems based on actual data—often
using statistical methods, such as sensitivity analysis. Internal validation
also requires the assessment of indicator quality in relation to the
underlying indicandum. External validation evaluates the relationship
between calculated vulnerability and disaster outcomes or revealed
vulnerability (e.g. fatalities, losses) within speciﬁc events. External
validation investigates how well such indices explain losses and disaster
outcomes of such events, even though it is important to note that
vulnerability only represents one core determinant of overall risk
(see IPCC, 2014b). We conduct this external validation at two spatial
scales—national and regional scales (based on the regions deﬁned by
the United Nations Statistical Division, UNSD) to see whether and how
validation values change with different spatial scales. Larger geographic
regions cover a broader spectrum of hazard impacts and show a slightly
different picture compared to results at the country level.
In addition to the analysis of the individual WRI and INFORM index
systems, we combine the ﬁnal vulnerability scores of the WRIv and
INFORMv index to provide a presentation of a combined index. This
combination requires transforming scales and taking an average. This
transformation does not affect the actual index values or vulnerability
ranking. Some of the indicators and subcomponents are similar in
both indices (e.g. Gini-index, see also Table 1) which suggest there is
an agreement between those indices. On the other hand, several indica-
tors and subcomponents in both indices are different (e.g. development,
disaster preparedness and environmental indicators; see also Table 1)
but both indices still validate each other (in terms of the agreement)
by identifying similar vulnerability hotspots and giving similar scores
and rankings to countries for vulnerability and its subcomponents.
This has been conﬁrmed by recent studies (e.g. Garschagen et al.,
2021, in review; Feldmeyer et al. 2021, in review), which provide new
evidence and information about the agreement between the indices.
We provide the results of each index system separately and also com-
bined results that show the high agreement on spatial vulnerability
hotspots at a global scale.
3.2. Data used in the analysis of the indices
In this analysis, we use the quantitative data from 2019 for both
WRIv and INFORMv indices. The indices were constructed according to
the method outlined above and documented for the WRI in Welle and
Birkmann (2015) and for INFORM in Marin-Ferrer et al. (2017). In the
INFORM index, lack of coping capacity is considered as an own compo-
nent. However, for this analysis, we include this lack of coping capacity
component, since vulnerability and systemic societal vulnerability in
particular, according to widely accepted literature, should encompass
Table 3
Overview of indicators used within the INFORM index for measuring vulnerability and
lack of coping capacity including data sources and subcomponents.
(Source: Marin-Ferrer et al., 2017; Birkmann et al., 2021)
Subcomponents and their indicators
Data source
Socioeconomic vulnerability
Development and Deprivation (DEVP)
Human Development Index (SEV1)
Human Development
Report, UNDP
Multidimensional Poverty Index (SEV2)
Human Development
Report, UNDP
Inequality (INQT)
GINI Index (SEV3)
World Bank
Gender Inequality Distribution (SEV4)
Human Development
Report, UNDP
Aid Dependency (AIDD)
Public Aid per capita (SEV5)
OECD
Net ODA Received (SEV6)
World Bank
Vulnerable groups
Uprooted People (UPPL)
Number of refugees, returned refugees, internally
displaced persons (absolute) (VG1)
UNHCR, IDMC
Number of refugees, returned refugees, internally
displaced persons (relative) (VG2)
UNCHR, IDMC, World
Bank
Other Vulnerable Groups (OTVG)
Prevalence of HIV-AIDS above 15 years (VG3)
WHO
Tuberculosis prevalence (VG4)
WHO
Malaria mortality rate (VG5)
WHO
Children underweight (VG6)
Unicef, WHO
Child mortality (VG7)
Unicef, WHO
The relative number of affected populations by natural
disasters in the last three years (VG8)
EM-DAT, CRED
Prevalence of undernourishment (VG9)
FAO
Average dietary energy supply adequacy (VG10)
FAO
Domestic Food Price Level Index (VG11)
FAO
Domestic Food Price Volatility Index (VG12)
FAO
Lack of coping capacity
Institutional
Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR)
Hyogo Framework for Action self-assessment reports
(LCC1)
UNISDR
Government effectiveness (LCC2)
World Bank
Corruption Perception Index (LCC3)
Transparency
International
Infrastructure
Communication (COMM)
Access to electricity (LCC4)
World Bank
Internet users (LCC5)
World Bank
Mobile cellular subscriptions (LCC6)
World Bank
Adult literacy rate (LCC7)
UNESCO
Physical infrastructure (PINF)
Roads density (LCC8)
OpenStreetMap
Access to an improved water source (LCC9)
WHO/Unicef
Access to improved sanitation facilities (LCC10)
WHO/Unicef
Access to health systems (AHLC)
Physicians density (LCC11)
WHO
Health expenditure per capita (LCC12)
WHO
Measles immunisation coverage (LCC13)
WHO
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
5
both susceptibility or fragility and capacities of countries or societies to
cope and adapt (see e.g. Adger, 2006; Birkmann et al., 2013; Cardona
et al., 2012; Cardona, 2001; IPCC, 2014a, 2014b; Jamshed et al.,
2020b). Furthermore, a comparison of the INFORM vulnerability assess-
ment results with and without the lack of coping capacity component
found that there is no major difference in the resulting global picture
of hotspots of vulnerability (see Figure-A in Supplement).
In a second comparison, we aggregate national data to the regional
level. For the deﬁnition of regions, we use the geographic regions de-
ﬁned in the United Nations publication “Standard Country or Area
Codes for Statistical Use” commonly referred to as the M49 standard
(https://unstats.un.org/unsd/methodology/m49/). We use the smallest
regions available for each country (i.e. the intermediate region or subre-
gions). This aggregation allows us to examine the external validity of
the indices at a different (smaller) spatial scale. For external validation,
we use the number of events, mortality and economic loss data from the
Emergency
Events
Database—EM-DAT
(https://www.emdat.be/
database) for climate-related hazards, namely storms, droughts and
ﬂoods. The EM-DAT database encompasses also other natural hazards,
such as tsunamis and earthquakes, however, these are excluded from
the analysis since the focus is on selected climate inﬂuenced hazards.
3.3. Internal validation of the indices
Internal validation assesses the quality of the index based on the in-
dicator, the data used and the overall index values in terms of reliability
and sensitivity (Jamshed et al., 2020a; Welle and Birkmann, 2015). We
conduct both sensitivity and reliability analyses. Reliability analysis
measures the internal consistency of an index and describes the degree
of accuracy of an index structure (OECD, 2008). It helps to increase the
conﬁdence in a composite index and has been used in natural hazard
and climate change research (see for example Cutter et al., 2014;
Welle and Birkmann, 2015; Sorg et al., 2018; Jamshed et al., 2020c).
As quality measures, we apply the Cronbach's alpha and Guttmann
lambda tests—commonly used in statistical validation for assessing the
reliability and internal consistency (OECD, 2008). Secondly, we perform
a sensitivity analysis to further increase the conﬁdence in the index
construction and its predictions by examining how the output variables
(vulnerability index) respond to changes in the input variables (indica-
tors or subcomponents) (see Oakley and O'Hagan, 2004). In this regard,
we apply global sensitivity analysis which takes into account the
measure of uncertainty in the output variable to the uncertainty in
each input variable (Feldmeyer et al., 2020; Jamshed et al., 2020a;
Fig. 1. Global vulnerability maps based on (A) WorldRiskIndex and (B) INFORM index. Fig. 1A shows the values for each country of the vulnerability component (with subcomponents
susceptibility, lack of coping capacity and lack of adaptive capacity) of WorldRiskIndex. Fig. 1B shows the values for each country of the vulnerability component (with subcomponents
socioeconomic vulnerability and lack of coping capacity). For both maps, the quantile classiﬁcation method was used and Small Island Developing States are made visible at this scale
using enlarged centroid dot symbols.
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
6
Oakley and O'Hagan, 2004; Sorg et al., 2018). For conducting the sensi-
tivity analysis, very few countries had to be excluded from the analysis
due to their high number of missing values for various indicators. The
sensitivity analysis was carried out in Rstudio using the sensitivity func-
tion in tgp-package.
Next to statistical methods to evaluate indicator systems, validation
needs to be based on assessing the appropriateness of the indicator to
represent and characterize the actual indicandum. Therefore, we
assessed the quality of each indicator also in terms of its indicative func-
tion for the underlying subject of interest—the indicandum. In this re-
gard, we conducted a literature research and assessed the relevance of
the indicators used for the speciﬁc characteristic of systemic societal
vulnerability they aim to measure and quantify (see Section 4.1). Be-
sides these aspects, the applicability of any indicator requires that the
indicator can be measured and visualized with data. Therefore, we
also analysed the data sources used for each indicator (see Tables 2
and 3) and found both indices primarily use data from the known inter-
national organizations, however, small countries are underrepresented
within global data (see also section on blind spots).
3.4. External validation of the indices
External validation is based on Pearson's correlation analysis of cal-
culated vulnerability and observed disaster outcome data. That means
the correlation explores the statistical relation between calculated vul-
nerability (vulnerability categories) and the observed severity (number
of deaths per hazard event) of selected hazards – namely ﬂoods,
droughts and storms - in the decade between 2010 and 2019 focusing
on national and regional scales. This allows for the exploration of the
differential consequences of hazards for most vulnerable versus least
vulnerable countries, independent of the speciﬁc hazard intensity or ex-
posure. It is likely that next to the general level of vulnerability of a
country or region also the hazard intensity, exposure and speciﬁc cir-
cumstances within a single hazard event determine the overall loss out-
come. Recent studies that explored speciﬁc outcomes of hazard events
and vulnerability, such as Hurricane Sandy (Rufat et al., 2019), suggest
there might be no signiﬁcant quantitative relation, since other factors
such as exposure or hazard speciﬁc characteristics largely determine
loss levels due to a speciﬁc event. Therefore, external validation is a
very open question and challenge.
4. Results: evaluating the validity and limitations of the WRIv and
INFORMv index
4.1. Validation in terms of the indicandum and the link between indicators,
goals and data
Since vulnerability indicators need to be evaluated also against the
quality on how they represent different characteristics of vulnerability,
we conducted an intensive literature analysis. The analysis revealed
that all indicators used within the two assessments for assessing vulner-
ability (see overview Tables 2 and 3) can be justiﬁed in terms of their
link to the overall indicandum—vulnerability—with evidence from sci-
entiﬁc literature (see Tables A and B in Supplement). Several scientiﬁc
papers and studies underscore the relevance of the respective indicator
to assess and measure characteristics of vulnerability to climate change
and natural hazards (e.g. Cardona et al., 2012; Cutter et al., 2003; Fekete,
2009; Sorg et al., 2018). Consequently, a close link between the indica-
tors used within both assessments and aspects of the underlying
indicandum is evident. However, it is important to note that speciﬁc
goals for vulnerability reduction or for the development of capacities
to cope and adapt were not found. Moreover, only a little information
exists on whether or not the indicator-indicandum nexus is sufﬁciently
valid for all countries. Tables 2 and 3 provide an overview of the sub-
components and indicators used to assess vulnerability and capacities
in the WorldRiskIndex and the INFORM index. The Supplementary
material (see Tables A and B) also contains more information about
the supporting scientiﬁc literature for each indicator and the respective
transformation rules applied to calculate it.
Furthermore, the conceptualization of risk within the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) differentiates hazard, exposure
and vulnerability (IPCC 2014, 2019). Thus, in terms of the validation of
the vulnerability indicators it is important to evaluate whether the indi-
cators capture vulnerability or rather aspects of the hazard or exposure.
For example, the widely cited ND-Gain index to assess vulnerability
to climate change differentiates exposure and sensitivity as well as
adaptive capacities within the indicator system along different sectors
(see Chen et al., 2015). The list of indicators to assess sensitivity in the
context of climate risk includes among other indicators, the population
living in areas where elevation is 5 m below sea-level (as % of the total
population) based on data of the World Bank (Chen et al., 2015,
p. 31). While this indicator is statistically valid, it is rather an indicator
of exposure to the hazard of sea-level rise. About 59% of the total popu-
lation in the Netherlands is living in areas where the elevation is 5 m
below sea-level, while in Bangladesh it is about 9% (see The World
Bank, 2021 [World Development Indicators; http://wdi.worldbank.
org/table/3.11]).
However, the Netherlands has high ﬁnancial and institutional capac-
ities to protect people in low-lying coastal areas with large technical and
infrastructure measures; the overall poverty is low and few people live
in slums (housing poverty). In contrast, in Bangladesh, about 47% of the
overall population live in informal settlements and slums (data from
2018) and approximately 14% of the population live in extreme poverty
based on the assessment of the poverty headcount ratio at $US 1.9 a day
(The World Bank, 2021, 2019). This example underscores that hazard,
exposure and vulnerability indicators need to be differentiated, since
their meaning and also measures to assess these aspects are quite differ-
ent. Likewise, strategies to reduce vulnerability and exposure are not
necessarily the same. For example, exposure reduction through reloca-
tion of inhabitants can lead to livelihood insecurity at the new location,
thereby increasing vulnerability. Thus, the conceptual differentiation
between exposure and susceptibility or exposure and vulnerability is
quite important (IPCC, 2019, 2014b). Our analysis of the structure of
the WRI and INFORM index revealed that both index systems have
clearly differentiated exposure and vulnerability within their conceptu-
alization. This differentiation is also documented in part in background
studies and methodological guidelines.
4.2. Internal validation of WRIv and INFORMv index
A reliability test and sensitivity analysis were performed for internal
validation of both index systems.
4.2.1. Reliability test
Cronbach's alpha and Guttmann Lambda were calculated based on
the indicators in each subcomponent of vulnerability as well as consid-
ering all the indicators irrespective of their subcomponents. A
Cronbach's Alpha and Lambda value of 0.7 is considered acceptable in
terms of internal reliability as a threshold (Jamshed et al., 2020a;
OECD, 2008; Sorg et al., 2018). Some authors use a 0.6 value as a cut-
off line in the ﬁeld of disaster risk and resilience research (for example,
Cutter et al., 2014). The analysis revealed that the Cronbach's alpha and
Guttman's Lambda for all indicators of the WRIv (all vulnerability com-
ponents) were 0.949 and 0.965 respectively while for all vulnerability
subcomponents these values were more than 0.850 suggesting that in-
dicators or items are suitable and internally consistent to assess and
characterize vulnerability. Table 4 provides an overview of the internal
consistency and reliability values based on statistical validation using
standard quality measures such as Cronbach's alpha and Guttman's
Lambda (see Table 4).
For all vulnerability indicators (including lack of coping capacity) in
INFORMv index, Cronbach's alpha and Guttman's Lambda values were
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
7
0.948 and 0.954 respectively. Moreover, each component showed a
value of more than 0.75 (0.9 for lack of coping capacity) both for
Cronbach's alpha and Guttman's Lambda (see Table 4). Overall, the reli-
ability analysis for both indicator systems — WRIv and INFORMv — sug-
gested a high level of inherent consistency among the indicators that
characterize vulnerability. Nevertheless, it is still necessary to evaluate
the logical link between the indicators used and the underlying
indicandum (see Section 4.1).
4.2.2. Sensitivity analysis
Sensitivity analyses can be carried out for subcomponents or indi-
vidual indicators (see Sorg et al., 2018; Jamshed et al., 2020a;
Feldmeyer et al., 2020). In terms of sensitivity analysis with subcompo-
nents, each subcomponent represents a speciﬁc number of indicators
(sensitivity analyses for the complete set of indicators is provided in
the Supplementary material, Figure-B). The analysis provided new in-
sights into both the WRIv and the INFORMv index as shown in Fig. 2.
Each ﬁgure (Fig. 2, A and B) contains three elements. The ﬁrst part
(left-hand side) shows curves that represent each subcomponent and
its respective indicators. The x-axis depicts the original values of each
subcomponent scaled between −0.5 and + 0.5 while the y-axis
shows the variance of indicators representing subcomponents. The
steeper the curve, the stronger the inﬂuence of the subcomponents
and the respective indicators. Curves that are fully horizontal mean
that the subcomponent has nearly no inﬂuence on the overall index re-
sult. The second part (in the middle—named “1st order sensitivity indi-
ces”) shows boxplots with subcomponents on the x-axis and the
sensitivity on the y-axis. The size of the box describes how a subcompo-
nent (and its indicators) inﬂuences the index. A smaller boxplot size
suggests a more precise inﬂuence on the index. The bold line in the
boxplot shows the median. The higher scores on the y-axis imply the
strength of inﬂuence of each subcomponent on the overall risk index.
The third part of the ﬁgure (on the right— named “total effect sensitivity
indices”) also displays the boxplots and explains the total sensitivity ef-
fect. It shows how indicators in each vulnerability subcomponent
change or interact if there is a change of one indicator. If the median
of a subcomponent (and its indicators) in total sensitivity effect is
above zero it means that the subcomponent is meaningful for and inﬂu-
ences the vulnerability index.
Fig. 2 shows the differential inﬂuence of each indicator within the
WRIv and the INFORMv index. Both ﬁgures clearly reveal that curves
are steep and that the median values of all boxplots are above zero in
both the ﬁrst-order sensitivity (middle graphs) and the total sensitivity
effect (right graphs) for WRIv and INFORMv. Consequently, it can be
concluded that the indicators and the respective subcomponents are
statistically meaningful and relevant for the overall assessment of vul-
nerability and their respective indices. The sensitivity analysis suggests
that the index results are internally valid. In terms of the WRIv these re-
sults conﬁrm the internal reliability evaluation done also within an ear-
lier version of the WRIv (see Welle and Birkmann, 2015).
4.3. External validation: the quantitative relationship between vulnerability
and loss of life
Understanding past disaster losses due to climate-related hazards,
such as storms, droughts or ﬂoods can not only be explained in terms
of the magnitude and frequency of hazards. Rather hazard intensity
and frequency, exposure and vulnerability all play an important role.
We argue that independent of the speciﬁc hazard, it is essential to re-
duce systemic societal vulnerability in order to close the adaptation
gap – the difference between current levels of vulnerability and expo-
sure and risk management capability. This is especially important
given the increasing recognition that climate change hazards have
emergent, indirect and cascading impacts—for example when a drought
in one country leads to food insecurity in another country. In this regard,
the assessment of vulnerability can also shift the prioritisation of coun-
tries for supporting the development of climate resilience and adaptive
capacities. Developing vulnerability indicators independently of speciﬁc
hazards and exposure means vulnerability reduction measures can be
put in place even where there is no current climate hazard or exposure.
Considering this, external validation of indices is imperative to examine
their explanatory power by investigating how well they describe disas-
ter or climatic event outcomes. This is one way of avoiding impacts from
unexpected events.
There are several ways to measure the magnitude of impacts of haz-
ard events, and the choice of metric results in different outcomes of
which countries are most affected by disasters. Visser et al. (2020)
show that if economic losses are considered as a disaster outcome
then OCED countries are most affected by disasters. In contrast, if “num-
ber of people affected” is considered as the metric it is the “BRICS” coun-
tries (e.g. Brazil, Russia, India, China) that emerge as most impacted, and
if “number of people killed” is considered it is developing countries that
rank the most affected (Visser et al., 2020).
In our analysis, we use mortality per hazard event as the measure of
disaster outcome as death is the most severe and irreversible impact.
Mortality due to natural and climate-related hazards is captured in the
EM-DAT database. The mortality (deaths per event) is likely to be
underestimated in low income countries or remote areas due to incom-
plete reporting. Essential data sources for mortality are from vital regis-
tration or life insurance claims, neither of which are widely prevalent in
poorer countries. Thus the difference that we present here in terms of
mortality per hazard between high vulnerable versus low vulnerable
countries is likely to be higher rather than lower.
As in Section 4.4.2 for vulnerability, we aggregated mortality per
event (national EM-DAT data) to the regional level (Fig. 3) using the
same UNSD regions as described in Section 3.2. Fig. 3B shows the aver-
age mortality per hazard event for each region as well as the number of
hazard events per region. Signiﬁcant spatial differences become visible
for example in terms of the difference between South-East Asia and
East-Africa.
Furthermore, we analysed how vulnerability in the WRIv and
INFORMv indices and their combined values relate with hazard-
induced losses of different types and thus investigated if vulnerability
can statistically explain disaster outcomes or parts of it (see Table 5
and Fig. 4). Mortality per hazard event and the number of people af-
fected per hazard event had a positive and signiﬁcant correlation with
vulnerability values of WRIv, INFORMv and the combined indices (see
Table 5). The correlation coefﬁcient of mortality per event (r = 0.421,
p = 0.05) and people affected per event (r = 0.434, p = 0.05) at the re-
gional level was found to be slightly higher than national level coefﬁ-
cients. Fig. 3 presents the maps of mortality per event at the national
and regional levels. In terms of economic losses per event, a negative
and signiﬁcant correlation to vulnerability was found with a higher cor-
relation coefﬁcient at the regional level (r = 0.500, p = 0.01) than at the
national level (see Table 5).
In short, the correlation analyses revealed that vulnerability at the
national and regional levels does correlate with average mortality per
Table 4
Internal consistency and reliability of the vulnerability components in the WRI and the IN-
FORM Risk Index.
Source: Own calculation.
Subcomponents
Cronbach's alpha
Guttman's Lambda
WRI
Susceptibility
0.881
0.926
Lack of coping capacity
0.861
0.891
Lack of adaptive capacity
0.870
0.901
All indicators
0.949
0.965
INFORM Index
Socioeconomic vulnerability
0.751
0.788
Vulnerable groups
0.790
0.851
Lack of coping capacity
0.933
0.940
All indicators
0.948
0.954
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
8
event, people affected and economic losses caused by each event. In
other words, higher vulnerability means higher mortality and less eco-
nomic loss per event. Overall, correlation results suggested that both
the WRIv and INFORMv index, as well as their combined form, have ex-
planatory power for disaster outcomes and thus are externally valid
both at the national and regional levels.
Fig. 2. Sensitivity analysis results for the vulnerability main components of the (A) WRIv and (B) INFORMv index.
In WRI: Public Infrastructure (PUIR); Nutrition (NUTR); Poverty and Dependencies (PVDP); Economic capacity and Income distribution (ECID); Governance and Authorities (GOVA);
Medical Services (MEDS); Material Coverage (MCOV); Education and Research (EDRE); Gender equity (GDEQ); Environmental Status/Ecosystem Protection (ESEP); Investment
(INVT). In INFORM Index: Development and Deprivation (DEVP); Inequality (INQT); Aid Dependency (AIDD); Uprooted People (UPPL); Other Vulnerable Groups (OTVG); Disaster
Risk Reduction (DRR); Governance (GOVR); Communication (COMM); Physical infrastructure (PINF); Access to health systems (AHLC).
(Source: Own ﬁgure)
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
9
We further analysed the validity of these indices along vulnerability
categories by exploring the magnitude of mortality and absolute eco-
nomic losses. This analysis shows how many times higher or lower
these impacts are in countries categorized as very highly vulnerable
compared to countries in other vulnerability categories (see Fig. 4).
Fig. 4 further underscores that mortality per hazard event in countries
according to ﬁve vulnerability categories differs signiﬁcantly as sug-
gested by the nonparametric test.
Fig. 5A shows that loss of life per hazard event is 15 and 7 times
higher in countries with very high vulnerability compared to countries
with very low and low vulnerability, respectively, based on the com-
bined index. In WRIv and INFORMv indices, mortality per event in
Fig. 3. Mortality per climate related hazard event (ﬂoods, storms and droughts) between 2010 and 2019 at the national (Fig. 3A) and regional level (Fig. 3B). Both maps are based on
national scale data from the Emergency Events Database—EM-DAT (https://www.emdat.be/database) for storms, ﬂoods and droughts hazards. Fig. 3A was classiﬁed using a manually
modiﬁed classiﬁcation in order to account for extreme outliers (i.e. Somalia). Fig. 3B shows the average mortality per event for each UNSD region classiﬁed using the natural breaks method
and labelled with the number of hazard events over the 10 year period for each region.
Table 5
Correlation of loss due to past disaster events (ﬂoods, droughts and storms) and vulnerability.
Hazard dependent variables
WRI vulnerability
(National level)
INFORM vulnerability
(National level)
Combined vulnerabilitya
(National level)
Combined vulnerabilitya
(Regional level)
Number of events
−0.002
0.040
0.041
0.048
Mortality per event
0.316⁎⁎
0.274⁎⁎
0.285⁎⁎
0.421⁎
Economic losses per event
−0.278⁎⁎
−0.211⁎⁎
−0.230⁎⁎
−0.500⁎
People affected per hazard event
0.260⁎⁎
0.235⁎⁎
0.255⁎⁎
0.434⁎
**, * correlation is signiﬁcant at the 0.01 and 0.05 levels, respectively.
a Combined vulnerability is calculated based on both WRI and INFORM index.
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
10
Fig. 4. Clustered boxplots of mortality per hazard event by vulnerability categories and type of index.
Fig. 5. Magnitude of (A) death per hazard event [number of time higher] and (B) economic losses per hazard* event [number of times lower] (C) population affected [number of time higher] in
the past 10 years in countries categorized as very highly vulnerable compared to countries in other vulnerability categories. Only vulnerability components of WRI and INFORM are
included in the analysis and represented with WRIv and INFORMv. [* selected hazards: ﬂoods, droughts, storms].
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
11
countries that are very highly vulnerable is 6 times and 24 times higher,
respectively, than in countries with very low vulnerability. The signiﬁ-
cantly higher magnitude in the INFORMv index compared to the WRIv
index is due to a greater number of countries (classiﬁed as highly vul-
nerable) included in the INFORMv index particularly Somalia,
Dominica, the Democratic Republic of Congo and North Korea (see
also Fig. 1A/B). We also examine the mortality per 100,000 inhabitants
in the last ten years along different vulnerability classes. The results
show that mortality per 100,000 inhabitants is higher in countries cate-
gorized as high and very high vulnerable compared to low and very low
vulnerable. For the combined index and the INFORMv index, results
show 3 to 5 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants in very high vulnerable
countries while this number is below 1 in low and very low vulnerable
countries (see Figure-C in Supplement). Thus, even though the speciﬁc
numbers differ depending on the index used, it is evident that high
and
very
high
vulnerable
countries
in
Africa
(e.g.
Somalia,
Mozambique, Madagascar), Asia (e.g. Philippines, Nepal, Afghanistan,
Pakistan) and the Small Island States (e.g. Haiti, Vanuatu, Micronesia)
had a higher mortality per 100,000 inhabitants compared to other coun-
tries classiﬁed e.g. as low vulnerable.
In terms of economic damages, it was found that economic damages
per event are higher in countries with low vulnerability than in very
highly vulnerable countries (see Fig. 5B). The economic damages per
event in countries categorized as very highly vulnerable in the combined
index are 16 times lower compared to countries with very low vulnera-
bility. In the WRIv and INFORMv indices, very highly vulnerable countries
have 18 times and 8 times less economic damages per event to report
compared to countries categorized as having very low vulnerability2 .
With regard to people affected, the quantitative analysis shows that the
number of people affected per hazard event was signiﬁcantly higher in
very high vulnerable countries compared to low and very low vulnerable
countries. The results of the combined index (see Fig. 5C) underscores
that number of affected people per hazard event was about 11 times
higher in countries categorized as very high vulnerable compared to
very low vulnerable. In terms of WRIv and INFORMv indices, the popula-
tion affected per hazard event was found to be about 12 times higher in
very high vulnerable countries compared to very low vulnerable coun-
tries. Similar trends were observed for the affected population per 1000
people (see Figure-D in Supplement). The results underscore that the
overall magnitude of mortality, economic losses and population affected
differs signiﬁcantly between all vulnerability categories regardless of the
speciﬁc index used (see Table-D in Supplement).
Also, the regional level assessment of vulnerability and mortality
(Fig. 4) reveals that large UN regions with a nearly similar number of
hazard events in the last 10 years, such as North America compared to
East Africa, faced signiﬁcantly different mortality per event. It is very un-
likely that this is primarily a result of hazard intensity or exposure.
Moreover, all three indices show a similar trend between all four
vulnerability categories with respect to mortality and economic losses.
Thus, this analysis also shows the validity of these indices in explaining
disaster outcomes. The high mortality per hazard event in countries
with very high and high vulnerability is associated with limited medical
services and coverage, poverty and inequality, development depriva-
tion, as well as governance issues (see Supplement, Table-E). The eco-
nomic losses per event are higher in less vulnerable countries which
are mainly high income countries. This ﬁnding is supported by other
studies (UNDESA, 2020; Wallemacq and House, 2018). The main reason
for this relationship is that countries with higher economic losses have
more economic assets exposed and wealth to lose. For example, if a
ﬂood damages an expensive light-rail system in one country and
washes away a dirt road in another, the residents of both may have re-
stricted mobility and associated impacts to their lives but the economic
loss in the ﬁrst case will be much higher. However, the ﬁrst country
most likely has greater ﬁnancial, technical and infrastructural resources
and capacities to repair and recover without signiﬁcant long-term con-
sequences (Rentschler, 2013). For example, the analysis of the insur-
ance coverage per region revealed that SIDS like Micronesia or
Polynesia, but also various regions in Africa, such as Middle Africa and
Western Africa have signiﬁcantly lower insurance coverage compared
to regions like Australia and New Zealand or Western Europe and
North America (see Figure-E in Supplement). Thus, part of the losses
in the latter countries might be compensated by insurance.
In summary, the highest absolute economic losses are found in
countries with wealth and exposed capital assets, while BRICS countries
(including South Africa) face the highest number of affected people par-
ticularly in absolute numbers (in part due to large populations sizes e.g.
in China or India), however, the mortality per hazard event is lower
compared to most vulnerable countries or least developed countries.
When calculating the economic damage per country as a proportion of
GDP along different country income groups, the disproportional high
losses in low-income countries become visible (Wallemacq and
House, 2018). However, the calculation of economic damages in propor-
tion to the GDP for the vulnerability country classes is less clear or
shows a more diverse picture also due to the fact that vulnerability clas-
siﬁcations are not equal to income groups. We found that – even though
economic losses (in the last ten years) as a percentage of GDP is higher
in very high vulnerable countries compared to very low vulnerable
countries as per INFORMv – there is not always a signiﬁcant difference
between very high, high, medium and low vulnerability country groups
(see Figure-F in Supplement). Our analysis revealed that some countries
that are categorized as very low or low vulnerable face relatively high
economic losses as a percentage of GDP, such as Japan, USA, Oman,
Kazakhstan, Cuba, Argentina and Serbia. The WRIv index provided dif-
ferent results also due to a lower number of countries (see also discus-
sion in Section 4.4.1).
4.4. Blind spots, data gaps and limitations
4.4.1. Data gaps
Global indicator systems and indices, such as the WRI and INFORM,
can only be as accurate as the available data. The INFORM approach cal-
culates its own measure of the internal validity of the index (reliability
index – see also Section 2) for each country based on the number of
missing indicators, the recentness of the data available, and whether
or not the country is experiencing violent conﬂict. The resulting “Lack
of Reliability” value for each country was calculated in the INFORM
Risk Index 2019. Our analysis of these values found that the lack of reli-
ability is not signiﬁcantly higher for countries with high levels of vulner-
ability according to INFORM. Out of the 50 countries most lacking
reliable values in the INFORM assessment in 2019, 18 countries had
high to very high vulnerability scores, 16 had low to very low vulnera-
bility scores and 16 had medium vulnerability scores. That means next
to instability within a country, it is also the size of the country that
seems to inﬂuence data availability independent of the level of vulnera-
bility. For example, there is also a lack of reliability for the scores of small
countries with low vulnerability in Europe like Lichtenstein.
The WorldRiskIndex does not calculate reliability but instead does
not calculate an index value for those countries for which there is a
lack of recent data. This also largely explains why the WRI provides re-
sults for fewer countries compared to INFORM. The WRI omits 20 coun-
tries, 18 of which the INFORM index includes. Of these 20 countries
missing from the WRI, 13 are Small Island Developing States (SIDS).
SIDS and Antarctica are examples of blind spots of the indices due to
limited data collection. In the case of Antarctica, an emerging place of in-
vestment, it is not a nation and thus data is missing from nation-based
datasets.
While SIDS-dedicated vulnerability indices have been developed
(Pelling and UITTO, 2001), missing data is a challenge when trying to
2 Economic loss trends from EMDAT database must be interpreted with caution, since
economic loss reporting is often underdeveloped and contains missing or underestimated
data for many disasters. This leads to higher uncertainties of this impact data.
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
12
incorporate SIDS into wider indexing approaches. In the calculation of
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) index and the Dashboards
Report, 25 SIDS were omitted from analysis due to missing data
(Gosling-Goldsmith et al., 2020; Nurse et al., 2014; Sachs et al., 2017).
In the WRI, 34% of SIDS are omitted of the 38 SIDS that are United Nation
Member States (see https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/topics/
sids/list). The INFORM Index includes all SIDS, however, 37% of the
SIDS are in the top 25% of countries lacking reliable data based on the re-
liability index developed within the INFORM approach. Some of these
data gaps could be addressed using data interpolation and training
using machine learning techniques (see e.g. Jia and Ma, 2017;
Mikhailiuk and Faul, 2018).
Our own analysis of SIDS data and vulnerability (see Fig. 6) found
that the vulnerability rankings of various SIDS differ, for example, the
SIDS in the Paciﬁc have a higher vulnerability compared to the various
SIDS in the Caribbean, even though all SIDS are highly exposed to cli-
mate threats like sea-level rise. The most vulnerable SIDS according to
both INFORMv and WRIv are Haiti in the Caribbean (with a vulnerability
value of 7.0 for INFORMv and 0.75 for WRIv) followed by Gineau-Bissau
(5.6 for INFORM and 0.71 for WRI) in West Africa. INFORM rates the
Paciﬁc Islands of Micronesia (Federated States of Micronesia), Marshall
Islands, Papua New Guinea and Tuvalu (all between 5.5 and 5.0) as the
next most vulnerable. WRIv rates Papua New Guinea as the third most
vulnerable, followed by Comoros in East Africa and the Solomon
Islands and Timor-Leste in the Paciﬁc (all between 0.60 and 0.68).
4.4.2. Regional aggregation
In a further analysis that highlights and differentiates the SIDS as
well as landlocked countries, we calculated the average of the two indi-
ces (WRI and INFORM vulnerability components) and aggregated them
to the level of regions (UNSD intermediate and subregions as described
in Section 3.2). This regional classiﬁcation includes four regions domi-
nated by SIDS, namely Caribbean, Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia
(see Figs. 6 and 7), the latter three being regions in the Paciﬁc Ocean.
This analysis shows that all three Paciﬁc regions have a higher vulnera-
bility compared to the average according to the combined indices. In ad-
dition, an analysis of landlocked vs non-landlocked countries was
performed. In terms of landlocked countries, a clear difference in the
level of vulnerability can be observed between landlocked and non-
landlocked countries in Africa, Southern Asia and South America
where landlocked countries have a higher average vulnerability com-
pared to non-landlocked countries (see Figure-G in Supplement). How-
ever, landlocked countries for example in Europe (e.g. Austria,
Switzerland, Lichtenstein) do not show such differences.
The boxplot in Fig. 6 shows a pattern of differentiated vulnerability
not only between regions but also within regions. Countries of all re-
gions of Northern America, Australia and New Zealand and Europe, ex-
cept Eastern Europe, show limited variation in vulnerability. In contrast,
all other regions show a higher variation of vulnerability within the re-
gion. For example, in Eastern Asia, Japan (19.89) and South Korea
(20.84) were found to have a very low vulnerability, but China (39.6)
and North Korea (53) had medium and high vulnerability respectively.
Southern Asia has quite an even distribution of quartiles since countries
had different vulnerability levels, for example, Afghanistan (very high),
Pakistan, India, Nepal and Bangladesh (high), Iran and Bhutan (me-
dium) and Maldives (low) (see Figure-H in Supplement). Landlocked
countries in Southern Asia and Africa have overall a slightly higher vul-
nerability. In Eastern Africa, the higher position in the ﬁgure and smaller
box size indicates that most of the countries have high vulnerability ex-
cept Mauritius (31.8) and Seychelles (32.5) (which are represented
with the ‘*’ symbol). Similarly, Western and Middle Africa show a
large distribution of vulnerability, but the majority of countries (except
Cabo Verde and Sao Tome and Principe) have vulnerability values be-
tween 50 and 82 and are considered as high to very highly vulnerable.
Overall, results suggested that the inner distribution of vulnerability dif-
fers signiﬁcantly in the Global South particularly in regions of Asia and
Fig. 6. Boxplots of the vulnerability of regions including SIDS (in brown). ‘°’ represent mild outliers2 and ‘*’ extreme outliers (see Table-C in the Supplementary material for number of
countries in each region).
Footnote 2. An outlier is deﬁned as value with is numerically distant from the rest of the data (Schwertman et al. (2004). Mild outliers indicate the values which beyond the upper inner
fence of the boxplot and calculated as {Third quartile or 75th percentile (Q3) + 1.5 × (Interquartile range)}. Extreme outliers indicate the values which beyond the upper outer fence of the
boxplot and calculated as {Third quartile or 75th percentile (Q3)+3 × (Interquartile range)}. Interquartile range can be obtained by subtracting value of 75th percentile (Q3) and 25th
percentile (Q1) i.e., Q3 - Q1.
Source: (Own ﬁgure based on WRIv and INFORMv index calculations using UNSD regions; the number of countries that fall into one of these regions is shown in Table-C of the Supplement).
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
13
Africa including their landlocked countries, unlike most high income re-
gions where countries have more or less similar values as shown by the
size of boxplots.
5. Discussion: different starting points, limits and levers for action
The results of the internal and external validation of the vulnerability
indicators and components of the WRIv and INFORMv Index underscore
that global vulnerability assessments can provide an important layer of
information, linked to core characteristics of systemic societal vulnera-
bility and explain (a part of) observed disaster impacts. The following
section interprets core results of the analysis focused on three issues:
1) different starting points revealed through the assessment, 2) limita-
tions and uncertainties and 3) how these results provide levers of
action.
5.1. Vulnerability results reveal different starting points
The analysis presented here argues for a reframing of risk to climate
change related hazards and to the policy responses taken to reduce risk
through climate change adaptation and wider acts of climate sensitive
development. To date, global assessments of climate change risk typi-
cally start with hazard analysis, then layer exposure (population distri-
butions) and ﬁnally vulnerability. This is echoed for example in the logic
of IPCC Assessment Review process with Working Group I (hazards)
followed by Working Group II (Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability).
While people often assume that the mortality of storms, ﬂoods and
droughts is mainly determined by hazard intensity, frequency and ex-
posure, our analysis revealed the inﬂuence of vulnerability and systemic
societal vulnerability in particular. The internal and external validation
of the vulnerability assessments (INFORMv and WRIv) offers an addi-
tional argument for using vulnerability and systemic societal vulnerabil-
ity (core focus on societal issues and barriers) as the entry point for
adaptation planning. In contrast to many adaptation concepts that
focus on climatic hazards or climate scenarios as the primary informa-
tion basis, we argue that it is equally important to deﬁne goals for reduc-
ing vulnerability. The validation results showed that those countries
suffering most in terms of human losses and severe impacts (people ad-
versely affected) were also among the most vulnerable. Future national
adaptation plans for example could take up some of this information to
deﬁne goals for adaptation and vulnerability reduction, e.g. poverty re-
duction, reducing inequality or improving the access to basic services
for most vulnerable groups (water and sanitation). Next to adaptation
plans at a regional or national level, the quantitative vulnerability infor-
mation could also be used to inform larger international adaptation pro-
jects (Muccione et al., 2017). For example, the International Climate
Initiative (see BMU, 2021) ﬁnances projects to support vulnerable coun-
tries. All projects have to report on standard impact indicators, including
the reduction of Green House Gas emissions, the number of people di-
rectly supported by the project to adapt to climate change, the number
of improved policy frameworks developed, and the number of new or
improved institutional structures and processes to address climate
change and conserve biodiversity (see BMU, 2021). While these impact
indicators are important, a stronger emphasis on aspects of systemic so-
cietal vulnerability could strengthen the overall intention to support
vulnerable countries and to reduce vulnerability. Also, the question of
what can be achieved in terms of strengthening adaptive capacities
might need to be evaluated according to the level of vulnerability of a
country or region. Thus, there is a need to acknowledge that countries
have very different starting points in terms of their way towards climate
resilience and these differences are also linked to the level of vulnerabil-
ity.
5.1.1. Prioritizing countries
Interestingly, the external validation revealed that larger absolute
economic losses per hazard event occur in less vulnerable countries.
While this might be an argument for prioritizing less vulnerable coun-
tries as well, we observe that these countries that experience the
highest absolute economic losses are often those that have wealth and
measures that support recovery processes, such as higher levels of in-
surance coverage. In contrast, in poor communities, households whose
houses and possessions have lower monetary value or who experience
non-economic losses are not sufﬁciently visible within existing loss
metrics. This is particularly true for informal economies, which make
up a large proportion of the economic activity and value-adding in
many of the most vulnerable countries. Consequently, our analysis un-
derscores that there is a need to critically revisit whether economic
damage as often used for the allocation of funding (after major events)
is an appropriate indicator to assess the severity of impacts to climatic
hazards.
While there is a need to account for the costs of climate change in
terms of real estate losses or water costs, it is particularly the irrevers-
ible impact—like mortality or small scale chronic and irreversible
losses—that require more attention. Moreover, a further disaggregation
Fig. 7. Vulnerability at the regional level (based on UNSD intermediate regions and subregions). Level of vulnerability calculated by averaging the WorldRiskIndex vulnerability and
INFORM vulnerability and lack of coping capacity values for each region. Regional averages classiﬁed into 5 classes (i.e. very low ≤28, Low 28 to 37, Medium 37 to 44, High 44 to 51,
Very high >51) using the quantile method. For the region names see Table-C in Supplement.
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
14
of mortality data by gender and other social categories would help
global assessments to better account for these differences. Since this
data is not available for most countries yet, it is recommendable to in-
troduce and ﬁnancially support such loss and damage reporting tools
that also account for gender and social categories also in national adap-
tation strategies and through international adaptation funding. Only on
the basis of a better understanding of societal impacts of climate inﬂu-
enced hazards, more speciﬁc adaptation and risk reduction goals can
be formulated.
Even if in the past climatic hazard mortality has been relatively low
in terms of absolute or relative numbers of fatalities per hazard event, it
is essential to strengthen climate resilient development in these vulner-
able regions. This is also crucial given the increasing number of affected
people and economic damages due to natural hazards modiﬁed by
climate change (Wallemacq and House, 2018) since it is likely that
even smaller increases in hazard frequency and intensity will have
adverse consequences.
5.2. Limitation and uncertainty
Despite improvements for example in terms of the representation of
SIDS in global maps of vulnerability, the study shows clear limitations
and constraints of the global vulnerability indicators and index ap-
proaches studied. Next to the uncertainty about the deﬁnition used for
vulnerability or the data quality for the assessment (see Visser et al.,
2020), indicator approaches only measure a part of the underlying
indicandum—the phenomena of interest. Consequently, indicators are
intentionally reductionist in that an indicator system can only focus
on particular elements of the broader complex of vulnerability. For ex-
ample, income inequality measured with the GINI index is just one as-
pect of inequality and there might be countries where such income
differences are just one layer of inequality. Another example is that
the adult literacy rate or the combined gross school enrolment is used
as indicators for measuring adaptive capacity. The assumption is that a
higher level of education allows one to be better prepared for livelihood
transitions and future hazards and climate change. However, the quality
of the schooling programme and the content of curricula are not cap-
tured in this assessment.
Gender parity in education or the share of female representatives in
the national parliament are just two indicators that hint towards the rel-
evance of the topic, but more speciﬁc structures of gender inequality
cannot be captured with these global indicators and the present data. Is-
sues of ethnicity are also often absent within global databases. The
INFORM index uses the indicator “other vulnerable groups” to assess
the vulnerability of speciﬁc marginalized groups, however, the aggre-
gated indicator is also not in the position to include very local or context
speciﬁc aspects, due to the intention of international comparison. That
means global vulnerability assessment approaches have some limita-
tions in considering local context and social diversity. Some ﬂexibility
can be used while implementing the assessment framework at sub-
national or local scale. For example, during the assessment indicators
can be operationalized in a way that captures communities' priorities,
values and aspirations.
Both the INFORM and WRI concepts assume that vulnerable groups
do not just have deﬁciencies, but also different coping and adaptive ca-
pacities that need to be captured in the indicator list. Consequently, also
the relationships between the indices and indicators are important and
should receive more attention in the future. Furthermore, the rising im-
portance of everyday risks and extensive impacts needs further atten-
tion in global datasets and assessments. In contrast to conventional
risk assessments that often use absolute economic losses as a core
focus, which means that high value physical assets and high hazard in-
tensities are placed as a priority, we argue that vulnerability and sys-
temic societal vulnerability in particular is a more appropriate metric
since it points towards places where even a normal (non-extreme)
storm, ﬂood or drought are likely to result in ill health or damage to
physical assets particularly for the poor. That means, even though
these indicator based assessments provide only one layer of information
and show a selected piece of a more complex picture, the ﬁndings
underscore that we need to broaden our focus from the identiﬁcation
of how climate change causes physical impacts towards a perspective
that accounts for the existing differences in vulnerability and thus better
acknowledges the different starting points for climate resilient
development.
5.3. Information for different levels for action
Promoting progress towards climate resilient development requires
not only visions and tools for future development, but also the consider-
ation of pre-existing adaptation gaps revealed when looking through
the lens of different levels of vulnerability. The majority of the most vul-
nerable countries have contributed little to global greenhouse gas emis-
sions but still face the major burden of climate change if we consider
that human fatalities are key (see Fig. 5). Recent studies (Arnell et al.,
2019; Tabari, 2020) that assess the future development direction of cli-
matic hazards in different regions show, for example, that there is a high
probability that droughts as well as ﬂash ﬂoods, will increase, particu-
larly in Africa. Various world regions are also likely to experience ex-
treme heat events and coastal ﬂooding and sea-level rise in the future
(IPCC, 2018, 2014b).
5.3.1. Vulnerability assessments can also complement climate information
The newest IPCC AR6 report of the WG I (IPCC, 2021) includes, for
example, synthesis of observed changes in agricultural and ecological
droughts differentiating four types: increase (1), decrease (2), low
agreement in the type of change (3) and limited data (4) (see Figure-I
in Supplement). The assessment reveals for Africa that four climate
zones are characterized by an increase of agricultural and ecological
droughts, while for North Eastern Africa and South Eastern Africa solely
“low agreement in the type of change” and for the Sahara “limited data”
was found. While the assessment is of high quality, it is important to
note that North Eastern and South Eastern Africa are areas that rank
among the most vulnerable regions globally. The region of Eastern
Africa (including North Eastern and South Eastern Africa) was exposed
to over 200 hazard events (droughts, ﬂoods and storms) and faced more
than 100 fatalities per event between 2010 and 2019. In contrast,
Eastern Asia (e.g. encompassing China) faced more than 300 hazard
events during the same period but had a mortality of 15 to 31 fatalities
per event. Thus, vulnerability information and the external validation
results can provide an important additional layer of information for
deﬁning adaptation needs and priorities. Thus, considering both –
climate and vulnerability information can be highly relevant to inform
adaptation policies since hazard information alone would point towards
the urgent adaptation needs in Eastern Africa.
5.3.2. Vulnerability assessments can inform adaptation
Considering aforementioned discussion, adaptation measures for
protecting communities from droughts or ﬂoods requires signiﬁcant ﬁ-
nancial, institutional and human resources, the identiﬁed already
existing adaptation gap has to be addressed as a priority, next to hazard
speciﬁc adaptation projects. It is essential that we better understand the
contributions that speciﬁc adaptation options can make to climate
resilient development and vulnerability reduction.
Enhanced warning systems for drought risks are needed, alongside
investments that address the existing vulnerability and adaptation gap,
for example, in terms of access of most vulnerable people to basic
infrastructure services, such as water, energy, sanitation and medical
services. The correlation analysis (see Supplement, Table-E) underscored
that signiﬁcant but not very strong correlations exist between mortality
per hazard event and vulnerability components such as inequality,
vulnerable groups, infrastructure and development and deprivation in
terms of INFORMv and governance, medical services, economic capacity
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
15
and public infrastructure in terms of the WRIv. While indicators and indi-
cator systems can only capture some elements of larger structures and
systems, in this case, it can be argued that access to basic infrastructure
and measures that reduce inequality and improve the access of vulnera-
ble groups to basic infrastructure services is an important element of the
solution space. Also, investments in improving medical infrastructure and
access to it for most vulnerable groups within vulnerable countries are a
valid resulting recommendation. Consequently, hazard speciﬁc adapta-
tion programmes and local adaptation projects need to be complemented
with larger scale infrastructure programmes at the national level if cli-
mate resilient development is to be achieved.
Increasingly recognized as fundamental for vulnerability reduction
and adaptation are social insurances and infrastructure programmes
as well as legislation that improves the access of poor and marginalized
groups towards basic infrastructure services and basic security. Social
insurance or protection programmes are not yet routinely included in
indicator systems of vulnerability. The “free basic service programme”
of the national government of South Africa (GovSA, 2021) is one exam-
ple where the government of South Africa has committed itself to pro-
vide a basic amount of free water, electricity and sanitation to low
income households, particularly indigent people such as those living
in informal settlements or remote rural areas. This is an important mea-
sure for reducing systemic societal vulnerability since many countries
that rank high in terms of vulnerability have a large proportion of peo-
ple without access to such basic services. Coupled with incentives, for
example in terms of a higher use of renewable energy (e.g. solar home
systems in rural areas see GovSA, 2021) these investments can support
vulnerability reduction and mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions.
However, there is also a critique of the programme design and imple-
mentation (see Muller, 2008; Nel and Rogerson, 2005) as is witnessed
by ongoing service delivery protests (Mutyambizi et al., 2020). The
National Infrastructure Plan of South Africa also directs national invest-
ments into education, medical, water and sanitation infrastructure.
These national plans address (in part) inequality and spatial disparities
and might provide enabling conditions for local adaptation approaches.
Overall, the “free basic service programme” that targets particu-
larly poor and most vulnerable groups shows that current national
programmes can be linked to different aspects assessed within
global vulnerability approaches. Hence, these indicators can, directly
and indirectly, support the identiﬁcation of levers for action. At the
same time, it is important to acknowledge that drivers and root
causes of systemic vulnerabilities and development challenges are
not always new, and sometimes—for example in various countries
in the Caribbean, Africa and Asia—can be linked to histories of impe-
rialism, colonial structures, and subsequent development and gover-
nance contexts.
6. Conclusions
The most vulnerable countries and regions should become priority
sites for climate resilient development since these regions and countries
need support in reducing vulnerability and adapting the economic and
social systems to a changing climate. The analysis and validation of vul-
nerability indicators of the WRIv and INFORMv index have revealed that
the most vulnerable regions and countries have been suffering dispro-
portionately already from climate-related hazards. While individual
hazard events and local context conditions inﬂuence speciﬁc disaster
outcomes it is important to note that the external validation clearly re-
vealed that signiﬁcant differences exist as to whether and how such nat-
ural phenomena (ﬂoods, droughts and storms) translate into disasters
in most versus least vulnerable countries. Considering that the mortality
per hazard event due to ﬂood, storm or drought is already 15 times
higher in the most vulnerable countries compared to countries with
low vulnerability—based on the average of two global index systems
(WRIv and INFORMv) and disaster impact data of the past 10 years– it
is essential to acknowledge these facts when deﬁning adaptation
priorities. Past and existing climate impacts undermine resilience and
sustainable development.
Our ﬁndings support calls for Loss and Damage policy to promote
risk reduction through addressing inequalities that lie behind the vul-
nerability differences (Roberts and Pelling, 2020). In this regard, it is in-
teresting to note that some regions that are highly vulnerable have not
yet seen high mortality ﬁgures in the past 10 years. Climate change is
likely to intensify particular climate hazards and modify their spatial oc-
currence so that places not yet exposed may be so in the future. Hence,
the vulnerability information can be coupled with information on the
future intensiﬁcation of hazards and the spatial shift of hazards towards
regions that have not been exposed in the past. This information would
allow the identiﬁcation of regions that might need to prepare for new or
changing hazard patterns. Moreover, vulnerability and systemic societal
vulnerability in particular is not static, rather it is dynamic and therefore
monitoring tools are needed that are ﬂexible (i.e. be able to integrate
new topics and indicators), but at the same time also allow for longitu-
dinal studies.
Our ﬁndings showed that the WRIv and INFORMv index can be val-
idated in terms of the internal and external validation tests, however,
clear limitations are also revealed. The ﬁrst limitation is that the valida-
tion results apply to the sampled areas and the data available at this mo-
ment in time. Data limitations, especially due to missing data for some
countries, could be addressed in future using machine learning tech-
niques (e.g. Jia and Ma, 2017; Mikhailiuk and Faul, 2018). Consequently,
the analysis of the internal and external reliability of the index systems
might need to be repeated on a regular basis. Moreover, temporal dy-
namics of vulnerability should also receive more attention as shown
by Feldmeyer et al. for the WRI (see in detail Feldmeyer et al., 2017).
Our internal validation conﬁrms former studies (see Welle and
Birkmann, 2015), however, it provides new insights in terms of the ex-
ternal validation and the link between indicators and the underlying
indicandum. We have shown that at broader scales and within a time
span of 10 years the vulnerability level of a country or region signiﬁcantly
inﬂuences disaster outcomes when focusing on mortality and economic
losses due to ﬂoods, droughts and storms. The mortality associated with
climate inﬂuenced hazards can also have other causes (e.g. malnutrition,
no access to basic services like water, sanitation) which may be exacer-
bated due to climate change, and are not exclusively caused by it.
These factors can be captured with assessments of vulnerability.
In terms of future improvement, there is a need to improve the link-
ages and capacities of assessing sub-national and more context speciﬁc
vulnerability aspects. While global comparative approaches can account
for some heterogeneity of countries in terms of the inclusion of speciﬁc
indicators, the core of the assessments is still based on the development
of an indicator set that allows the comparison of countries and regions
with each other. Thus, most concepts focus on a relative vulnerability
approach that means vulnerability does not appear when a speciﬁc
threshold is reached, but rather these assessments measure the differ-
ences in terms of the vulnerability level between countries and regions.
In order to promote stronger linkages between global assessments and
sub-national or local assessments, the subcomponents of these global
index systems should allow for ﬂexibility. That means, themes and
sub-components such as the access to basic services or gender inequal-
ity might need to be operationalized differently within a speciﬁc coun-
try or local context.
It is important to acknowledge that global comparative vulnerability
assessment approaches like WRI and INFORM can provide one layer of
aggregated overview information that needs to be complemented
with more context speciﬁc information and additional methods at
sub-national and local scales. Data available at the global level with na-
tional scale resolution, however, neither aims to provide nor would be
able to deliver adequate knowledge for informing and guiding more
local risk reduction, including the vast problems related to inner-
country inequalities and disparities, both spatial and socioeconomic
(Pelling and Garschagen, 2019).
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
16
Besides sub-national and local scales, also the regional scale needs
more attention. A low variance of the level of vulnerability within a re-
gion (Fig. 6), points towards the fact that within this region it is not a
single country or single community that is particularly vulnerable, but
rather a cluster of countries that are characterized by a high level of vul-
nerability. This means local or national adaptation programmes need to
be complemented with regional scale adaptation strategies, including
incentives for transboundary cooperation.
Overall, there is a need to improve measurement tools to track and
support climate resilient development at various scales, particularly in
the most vulnerable countries. This should also include monitoring
tools that account for interventions to reduce systemic societal vulnera-
bility such as measures of social security and free basic services. It is im-
portant that the indicators and maps of a vulnerability assessment are
valid and accurate (as discussed within this paper), however, it is simi-
larly important to acknowledge that indicators do not replace the need
for making informed decisions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Joern Birkmann: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing –
original draft, Supervision. Ali Jamshed: Formal analysis, Methodology,
Writing – original draft, Visualization. Joanna M. McMillan: Visualiza-
tion, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Daniel
Feldmeyer: Formal analysis, Data curation. Edmond Totin: Formal
analysis, Writing – review & editing. William Solecki: Writing – review
& editing. Zelina Zaiton Ibrahim: Writing – review & editing. Debra
Roberts: Writing – review & editing. Rachel Bezner Kerr: Writing –
review & editing. Hans-Otto Poertner: Writing – review & editing.
Mark Pelling: Writing – review & editing. Riyanti Djalante: Writing –
review & editing. Matthias Garschagen: Writing – review & editing.
Walter Leal Filho: Writing – review & editing. Debarati Guha-Sapir:
Writing – review & editing. Andrés Alegría: Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.150065.
References
Adger, W.N., 2006. Vulnerability. Glob. Environ. Chang. 16, 268–281. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.02.006.
Arnell, N.W., Lowe, J.A., Challinor, A.J., Osborn, T.J., 2019. Global and regional impacts of
climate change at different levels of global temperature increase. Clim. Chang. 155,
377–391. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02464-z.
Bakkensen, L.A., Fox-Lent, C., Read, L.K., Linkov, I., 2017. Validating resilience and vulner-
ability indices in the context of natural disasters. Risk Anal. 37, 982–1004. https://doi.
org/10.1111/risa.12677.
Birkmann, J., 2013. Measuring vulnerability to promote disaster-resilient societies and to
enhance adaptation: conceptual frameworks and deﬁnitions. In: Birkmann, J. (Ed.),
Measuring Vulnerability to Natural Hazards: Towards Disaster Resilient Societies.
United Nations University Press, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 9–79.
Birkmann, J., Cardona, O.D., Carreño, M.L., Barbat, A.H., Pelling, M., Schneiderbauer, S.,
Kienberger, S., Keiler, M., Alexander, D., Zeil, P., Welle, T., 2013. Framing vulnerability,
risk and societal responses: the MOVE framework. Nat. Hazards 67, 193–211. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-013-0558-5.
Birkmann, J., Feldmeyer, D., McMillan, J.M., Solecki, W., Totin, E., Roberts, D., Trisos, C.,
Jamshed, A., Boyd, E., Wrathall, D., 2021. Regional clusters of vulnerability show the
need for transboundary cooperation. Environ. Res. Lett. https://doi.org/10.1088/
1748-9326/ac1f43 In press.
Birkmann, J., Welle, T., 2016. The WorldRiskIndex 2016: reveals the necessity for regional
cooperation in vulnerability reduction. J. Extr. Even. 03, 1650005. https://doi.org/10.
1142/S2345737616500056.
Birkmann, J., Welle, T., Krause, D., Wolfertz, J., Suarez, D.-C., Setiadi, N., 2011.
WorldRiskIndex: concept and results. In: Hilft, Buendnis Entwicklung (Ed.),
WorldRiskIndex 2011. Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft, Berlin, pp. 13–42.
BMU, 2021. Guidelines on Project Planning and Monitoring in the International Climate
Initiative (IKI). Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nu-
clear Safety BMU (accessed 5 August 2021) https://www.international-climate-ini-
tiative.com/ﬁleadmin/Dokumente/2021/20210416_IKI_Guidelines_on_Project_Plan-
ning_and_Monitoring.pdf.
WorldRiskIndex 2011. In: Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft (Ed.), WorldRiskIndex 2011.
Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft, Berlin.
Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft (Ed.), 2017. WorldRiskReport: Analysis and Prospects 2017.
Buendnis Entwicklung Hilft, Berlin.
Burton, C.G., 2010. Social vulnerability and hurricane impact modeling. Nat. Hazards Rev.
11, 58–68. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)1527-6988(2010)11:2(58).
Cardona, O.D., 2001. Estimación Holística del Riesgo Sísmico Utilizando Sistemas
Dinámicos Complejos. Technical University of Catalonia, Barcelona (accessed 20
May 2015) http://www.desenredando.org/public/varios/2001/ehrisusd/index.html.
Cardona, O.D., van Aalst, M.K., Birkmann, J., Fordham, M., McGregor, G., Perez, R.,
Pulwarty, R.S., Schipper, E.L.F., Sinh, 2012. Chapter 2: determinants of risk: exposure
and vulnerability. In: Field, C.B., Barros, V., Stocker, T.F., Dahe, Q., Dokken, D.J., Ebi, K.L.,
Mastrandrea, M.D., Mach, K.J., Plattner, G.-K., Allen, S.K., Tignor, M., Midgley, P.M.
(Eds.), Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate
Change Adaption: Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, New York, pp. 67–96.
Chen, C., Noble, I., Hellmann, J., Coffee, J., Murillo, M., Chawla, N., 2015. University of Notre
Dame Global Adaptation Index Country Index Technical Report (ND-GAIN). Univer-
sity of Notre Dame, Notre Dame (accessed 17 March 2020) https://gain.nd.edu/as-
sets/254377/nd_gain_technical_document_2015.pdf.
Cutter, S.L., Ash, K.D., Emrich, C.T., 2014. The geographies of community disaster resilience.
Glob. Environ. Chang. 29, 65–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.08.005.
Cutter, S.L., Boruff, B.J., Shirley, W.L., 2003. Social vulnerability to environmental hazards*.
Soc. Sci. Q. 84, 242–261. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-6237.8402002.
EC-DRMKC, 2020. INFORM Risk. European Commission Disaster Risk Management
Knowledge Centre EC-DRMKC (accessed 1 February 2021) https://drmkc.jrc.ec.eu-
ropa.eu/inform-index/INFORM-Risk/Results-and-data/moduleId/1782/id/419/con-
troller/Admin/action/Results.
Fekete, A., 2009. Validation of a social vulnerability index in context to river-ﬂoods in
Germany. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 9, 393–403. https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-9-
393-2009.
Feldmeyer, D., Birkmann, J., Welle, T., 2017. Development of human vulnerability
2012–2017. J. Extr. Even. 04, 1850005.
Feldmeyer, D., Wilden, D., Jamshed, A., Birkmann, J., 2020. Regional climate resilience
index: a novel multimethod comparative approach for indicator development, em-
pirical validation and implementation. Ecol. Indic. 119, 106861. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.ecolind.2020.106861.
Feldmeyer, D., et al., 2021. Global vulnerability hotspots: differences and agreement be-
tween international indicator-based assessments. Clim. Chang. (Accepted, In press).
Füssel, H.-M., 2007. Vulnerability: a generally applicable conceptual framework for cli-
mate change research. Glob. Environ. Chang. 17, 155–167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2006.05.002.
Garschagen, M., Doshi, D., Reith, J., Hagenlocher, M., 2021. Comparing global climate and
disaster risk indices – how consistent 1 and robust are their results? Clim. Chang.
(Accepted, In press).
Garschagen, M., Fekete, A., Fiedrich, F., Welle, T., Birkmann, J., Bussing, J.,
Chojnowska, P., Hagenlocher, M., Sabelfeld, R., Sandholz, S., 2016. Länderanalyse
zum Katastrophen-und Risikomanagement(LAKARI). TH Cologne; IREUS Uni
Stuttgart; UNU Bonn; Bergische University, Cologne (accessed 3 May 2021)
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333614223_Identiﬁcation_of_Priority_
Countries_and_Topics_for_International_Research_on_Disaster_Risk_Reduction_
Landeranalyse_zum_Katastrophen-_und_Risikomanagement.
Gosling-Goldsmith, J., Ricker, B., Jan Kraak, M., 2020. Topographic and thematic (in)visi-
bility of Small Island developing states in a world map. J. Maps 16, 50–56. https://
doi.org/10.1080/17445647.2020.1736194.
GovSA, 2021. Government Programmes, Projects and Campaigns. South African Govern-
ment GovSA (accessed 30 April 2021) https://www.gov.za/about-government/gov-
ernment-programmes/projects-and-campaigns#Rural.
Hagenlocher, M., Meza, I., Anderson, C.C., Min, A., Renaud, F.G., Walz, Y., Siebert, S.,
Sebesvari, Z., 2019. Drought vulnerability and risk assessments: state of the art, per-
sistent gaps, and research agenda. Environ. Res. Lett. 14, 83002. https://doi.org/10.
1088/1748-9326/ab225d.
IPCC, 2012. Summary for policy makers. In: Field, C.B., Barros, V., Stocker, T.F., Dahe, Q.,
Dokken, D.J., Ebi, K.L., Mastrandrea, M.D., Mach, K.J., Plattner, G.-K., Allen, S.K.,
Tignor, M., Midgley, P.M. (Eds.), Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters
to Advance Climate Change Adaptation: Special Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 3–24.
IPCC, 2014a. Annex-II: glossary of terms. In: Agard, J., Schipper, E.L.F., Birkmann, J.,
Campos, M., Dubeux, C. (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vul-
nerability. Part A, Global and Sectoral Aspects. Cambridge University Press, New
York, NY.
IPCC, 2014b. Summary for policy makers. In: Field, C.B., Barros, V.R., Dokken, D.J., Mach,
K.J., Mastrandrea, M.D., Bilir, T.E., Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K.L., Estrada, Y.O., Genova, R.C.,
Girma, B., Kissel, E.S., Levy, A.N., MacCracken, S., Mastrandrea, P.R., White, L.L.
(Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, New York, pp. 1–34.
Summary for Policymakers. In: IPCC (Ed.), Global Warming of 1.5°C. IPCC, Geneva,
Switzerland, pp. 3–29.
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
17
IPCC, 2019. Summary for policymakers. In: Pörtner, H.-O., Roberts, D., Masson-Delmotte,
V., Zhai, P., Tignor, M., Poloczanska, E., Mintenbeck, K., Alegría, A., Nicolai, M., Okem,
A., Petzold, J., Rama, B., Weyer, N.M. (Eds.), IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate. In Press.
IPCC, 2021. Summary for policy makers. In: Masson-Delmotte, V., Zhai, P., Pirani, A.,
Connors, S., Péan, C., Berger, S., Caud, N., Chen, Y., Goldfarb, L., Gomis, M.I., Huang,
M., Leitzell, K., Lonney, E., Matthews, J., Maycock, T.K., Wateﬁeld, T., Yelekçi, O., Yu,
R., Zhou, B. (Eds.), Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Cambridge University Press In Press.
Jamshed, A., Birkmann, J., Ahmad Rana, I., Feldmeyer, D., 2020a. The effect of spatial prox-
imity to cities on rural vulnerability against ﬂooding: an indicator based approach.
Ecol. Indic. 118, 106704. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2020.106704.
Jamshed, A., Birkmann, J., Feldmeyer, D., Rana, I.A., 2020b. A conceptual framework to un-
derstand the dynamics of rural-urban linkages for rural ﬂood vulnerability. Sustain-
ability 12, 2894. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12072894.
Jamshed, A., Birkmann, J., Rana, I.A., McMillan, J.M., 2020c. The relevance of city size to the
vulnerability of surrounding rural areas: an empirical study of ﬂooding in Pakistan.
Int. J. Disaster Risk Reduct. 101601.. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101601.
Jia, Y., Ma, J., 2017. What can machine learning do for seismic data processing? An inter-
polation application. Geophysics 82, V163–V177. https://doi.org/10.1190/geo2016-
0300.1.
Marin-Ferrer, M., Vernaccini, L., Poljanšek, K., 2017. Index for Risk Management - IN-
FORM: Concept and Methodology, Version 2017. Joint Research Center of European
Commission, Luxembourg 85 pp.
Mikhailiuk, A., Faul, A., 2018. Deep learning applied to seismic data interpolation. 80th
EAGE Conference and Exhibition 2018. 80th EAGE Conference and Exhibition 2018,
Copenhagen, Denmark. 06/11/2018 - 06/14/2018. EAGE Publications BVNetherlands.
Muccione, V., Allen, S.K., Huggel, C., Birkmann, J., 2017. Differentiating regions for adapta-
tion ﬁnancing: the role of global vulnerability and risk distributions. WIREs Clim.
Chang. 8. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.447.
Muller, M., 2008. Free basic water — a sustainable instrument for a sustainable future in
South Africa. Environ. Urban. 20, 67–87. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247808089149.
Mutyambizi, C., Mokhele, T., Ndinda, C., Hongoro, C., 2020. Access to and satisfaction with
basic Services in Informal Settlements: results from a baseline assessment survey. Int.
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 17. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17124400.
Nel, E., Rogerson, C.M., 2005. Local Economic Development in the Changing World: The
Experience of Southern Africa. Routledge, New York NY.
Nurse, L.A., McLean, R.F., Agard, J., Briguglio, L.P., Duvat-Magnan, V., Pelesikoti, N.,
Tompkins, E., Webb, A., 2014. Small Islands. In: Agard, J., Schipper, E.L.F., Birkmann,
J., Campos, M., Dubeux, C. (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vul-
nerability: Part B: Regional Aspects. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY,
pp. 1613–1654.
Oakley, J.E., O'Hagan, A., 2004. Probabilistic sensitivity analysis of complex models: a
Bayesian approach. J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B 66, 751–769. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
9868.2004.05304.x.
Oecd, 2008. Handbook on Constructing Composite Indicators: Methodology and User
Guide. OECD, Paris, p. 158.
Peduzzi, P., 2013. The global risk analysis for the 2009 global assessment report on disas-
ter risk reduction. In: Birkmann, J. (Ed.), Measuring Vulnerability to Natural Hazards:
Towards Disaster Resilient Societies. United Nations University Press, Tokyo, Japan,
pp. 197–218.
Pelling, M., Garschagen, M., 2019. Put equity ﬁrst in climate adaptation. Nature 569,
327–329. https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-01497-9.
Pelling, M., Uitto, J., 2001. Small island developing states: natural disaster vulnerability
and global change. Global Environ. Change B. Environ. Hazard 3, 49–62. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1464-2867(01)00018-3.
Rentschler, J.E., 2013. Why Resilience Matters: The Poverty Impacts of Disasters. Policy
Research Working Paper 6699. World Bank Group, Washington, DC (accessed 19
April 2021) https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16915.
Roberts, E., Pelling, M., 2020. Loss and damage: an opportunity for transformation? Clim.
Pol. 20, 758–771. https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2019.1680336.
Rufat, S., Tate, E., Emrich, C.T., Antolini, F., 2019. How valid are social vulnerability
models? Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr. 109, 1131–1153. https://doi.org/10.1080/
24694452.2018.1535887.
Sachs, J., Schmidt-Traub, G., Kroll, C., Durand-Delacre, D., Teksoz, K., 2017. SDG Index and
Dashboards Report 2017: Global Responsibilities. Bertelsmann Stiftung and Sustain-
able Development Solutions Network (SDSN). (accessed 21 April 2021) https://s3.
amazonaws.com/sustainabledevelopment.report/2017/2017_sdg_index_and_dash-
boards_report.pdf.
Schmidtlein, M.C., Shafer, J.M., Berry, M., Cutter, S.L., 2011. Modeled earthquake losses and
social vulnerability in Charleston, South Carolina. Appl. Geogr. 31, 269–281. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2010.06.001.
Schwertman, N.C., Owens, M.A., Adnan, R., 2004. A simple more general boxplot method
for identifying outliers. Comput. Stat. Data Anal. 47, 165–174. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.csda.2003.10.012.
Sharma, J., Ravindranath, N.H., 2019. Applying IPCC 2014 framework for hazard-speciﬁc
vulnerability assessment under climate change. Environ. Res. Commun. 1, 51004.
https://doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/ab24ed.
de Sherbinin, A., Emerson, J.W., Bukvic, A., Rohat, G., Gall, M., McCusker, B., Preston, B.,
Apotsos, A., Fish, C., Kienberger, S., Muhonda, P., Wilhelmi, O., Macharia, D., Shubert,
W., Sliuzas, R., Tomaszewski, B., Zhang, S., 2019. Climate vulnerability mapping: a sys-
tematic review and future prospects. WIREs Clim. Chang. 10. https://doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.600.
Simpson, N.P., Mach, K.J., Constable, A., Hess, J., Hogarth, R., Howden, M., Lawrence, J.,
Lempert, R.J., Muccione, V., Mackey, B., New, M.G., O'Neill, B., Otto, F., Pörtner, H.-O.,
Reisinger, A., Roberts, D., Schmidt, D.N., Seneviratne, S., Strongin, S., van Aalst, M.,
Totin, E., Trisos, C.H., 2021. A framework for complex climate change risk assessment.
One Earth 4, 489–501. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.03.005.
Sorg, L., Medina, N., Feldmeyer, D., Sanchez, A., Vojinovic, Z., Birkmann, J., Marchese, A.,
2018. Capturing the multifaceted phenomena of socioeconomic vulnerability. Nat.
Hazards 11, 308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-018-3207-1.
Tabari, H., 2020. Climate change impact on ﬂood and extreme precipitation increases with
water availability. Sci. Rep. 10, 13768. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-70816-2.
Tate, E., 2012. Social vulnerability indices: a comparative assessment using uncertainty
and sensitivity analysis. Nat. Hazards 63, 325–347. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-
012-0152-2.
The World Bank, 2019. Bangladesh Poverty Assessment: Facing Old and New Frontiers in
Poverty Reduction. The World Bank, Washington, D.C (accessed 6 May 2021) http://
documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/793121572582830383/pdf/Bangladesh-Pov-
erty-Assessment-Facing-Old-and-New-Frontiers-in-Poverty-Reduction.pdf.
The World Bank, 2021. World Development Indicators. World Bank (accessed 19 April
2021) http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/3.11.
Undesa, 2020. World Social Report 2020: Inequality in a Rapidly Changing World. United
Nations, New York, p. 213.
UNDRR, 2017. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction: Unveiling Global Di-
saster Risk. UNDRR, Geneva, Switzerland (accessed 19 April 2021) https://www.
preventionweb.net/ﬁles/53086_garatlaslr2.pdf.
UNDRR, 2019. Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. United Nations,
Geneva, Switzerland.
Visser, H., de Bruin, S., Martens, A., Knoop, J., Ligtvoet, W., 2020. What users of global risk
indicators should know. Glob. Environ. Chang. 62, 102068. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2020.102068.
Wallemacq, P., House, R., 2018. Economic Losses, Poverty & Disasters: 1998-2017. United
Nations Ofﬁce for Disaster Risk Reduction UNDRR; Centre for Research on the Epide-
miology of Disasters CRED, Geneva (accessed 19 April 2021) https://www.undrr.org/
publication/economic-losses-poverty-disasters-1998-2017.
Welle, T., Birkmann, J., 2015. The world risk index – an approach to assess risk and vulner-
ability on a global scale. J. Extr. Even. 02, 1550003. https://doi.org/10.1142/
S2345737615500037.
Welle, T., Birkmann, J., 2016. The World Risk Index 2016. In: Jeschonnek, L., Mucke, P.,
Walter, J., Kirch, L. (Eds.), World Risk Report 2016: Logistics, Infrastructure and Risk
Analysis. ündnis Entwicklung Hilft and United Nations University – EHS, Berlin and
Bonn, pp. 42–51.
J. Birkmann, A. Jamshed, J.M. McMillan et al.
Science of the Total Environment 803 (2022) 150065
18
