Research article
Climate emotions and anxiety among young people in Canada: A national
survey and call to action
Lindsay P. Galwaya,*, Ellen Fieldb
a Department of Health Sciences, PhD, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada
b Department of Education, PhD, Lakehead University, Orillia, Ontario, Canada
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article History:
Received 21 September 2022
Accepted 6 January 2023
Available online 10 January 2023
A B S T R A C T
Introduction: Young people have a unique positionality in relation to the mental and emotional dimensions of
climate change: they have contributed the least to the crisis, they are and will be disproportionately
impacted, and they have limited opportunities and invaluable perspectives for inﬂuencing action. Evidence
increasingly illustrates that young people are particularly vulnerable to climate distress and anxiety.
Methods: The purpose of this study was to generate knowledge about climate emotions and climate anxiety
among young people using a representative survey. We surveyed 1000 young people (aged 16−25) across
Canada. The online survey asked respondents about: (i) climate emotions and their impacts, (ii) perspectives
on the future due to climate change, (iii) perspectives and feelings about government (in)action, (iv) perspec-
tives on supports, programs, and resources needed to cope with climate emotions and anxiety, and (v) per-
spectives on climate change education (including socio-emotional dimensions). Data were weighted to
improve representativeness according to age, gender, and region. Descriptive analyses were conducted,
scales were generated, and textual responses were analyzed using thematic analysis.
Results: Young Canadians are experiencing a diversity of challenging climate emotions. At least 56% of
respondents reported feeling afraid, sad, anxious, and powerless. 78% reported that climate change impacts
their overall mental health and 37% reported that their feelings about climate change negatively impact daily
functioning. Data also illustrate that climate change is contributing to negative perceptions about their
future. For example, 39% of respondents report hesitation about having children due to climate change, 73%
report thinking that the future is frightening, and 76% report that people have failed to take care of the
planet. Respondents rated governmental responses to climate change negatively and reported greater feel-
ings of betrayal than of reassurance. The data show that young Canadians need a diversity of coping supports
and believe the formal education system should be doing more to support them.
Conclusion: This study adds to the emerging and increasingly concerning evidence base on climate emotions
and anxiety among young people. We conclude by summarizing key directions for future research.
© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
Keywords:
Climate anxiety
Climate emotions
Climate action
Climate education
Youth
Young people
Survey
1. Introduction
Climate change is a formidable threat to human and planetary
health and an immense injustice [1]. The mental and emotional
health dimensions of climate change are increasingly concerning as
extreme events become more severe and common, extractivism and
ecosystem destruction advance unheeded, and people become more
knowledgeable about climate impacts and injustices [2−4]. Although
the connections between the climate crisis and mental and emotional
health have historically been overlooked, scholarly work in this realm
has grown exponentially in the last decade [5]. One speciﬁc line of
inquiry within this emerging body of research has focused on the
experiences and implications of climate emotions and climate anxi-
ety. Climate emotions are understood here as feelings, emotions, and
affects related to climate change and climate injustices [5,6].
Although there is no consistently agreed-upon deﬁnition of climate
anxiety, it can be understood as heightened distress related to the cli-
mate crisis that is characterised by a constellation of strong and inter-
connected emotions such as worry, fear, sadness, anger, and
powerlessness [7]. Climate anxiety is future-oriented and related to
eco-anxiety more broadly; some scholars understand climate anxiety
as a speciﬁc form of eco-anxiety [8,9]. The lived experiences of cli-
mate emotions and climate anxiety are inﬂuenced by numerous fac-
tors including geographic and social location, experiences of climate
impacts, sense of agency and efﬁcacy, and knowledge of climate
change and climate injustice [7,10−12] (see [4,5,7−10,13] for recent
reviews and discussions around climate/eco-anxiety).
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: lgalway@lakeheadu.ca (L.P. Galway).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100204
2667-2782/© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Climate Change and Health
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/joclim
As the American Psychological Association outlines, strong cli-
mate emotions and climate anxiety “do not constitute mental illness”
[3]; climate anxiety is likely non-pathological for most [3,9]. How-
ever, climate anxiety can be paralyzing and problematic [7]. Some
evidence indicates that strong emotions and climate anxiety can be
problematic for certain people and populations with impacts on func-
tioning and overall well-being [4,14]. Despite the potential for cli-
mate
emotions
and
climate
anxiety
to
result
in
negative
consequences for well-being, many scholars and practitioners argue
that strong emotional responses are appropriate considering the
scale and urgency of the crisis [11,13,15,16]. Particularly concerning,
the mental and emotional burden of climate change is disproportion-
ately borne by young people who have contributed the least to rising
greenhouse gas emissions (GHG) and the systems and structures that
cause and fuel climate change [10,17−19].
There is increasing evidence that climate anxiety is particu-
larly prevalent among, and relevant to, youth and young adults
[11,18,20]. Moreover, young people currently have limited oppor-
tunities for inﬂuencing policy-making on climate change given
that decision-making systems generally exclude them [21]. A
recent multinational study by Hickman et al. [19] examined cli-
mate anxiety in 10,000 young people in 10 countries with varying
climate-related vulnerabilities: a concerning proportion of young
people reported high levels of distressing emotions, associated
impacts on functioning, and negative perceptions of their future.
Distressing emotions, climate anxiety, and impacts on functioning
were correlated with perceptions of inadequate action by govern-
ments and feelings of betrayal [19]. The lack of meaningful and
transformative climate action from governments, and the contin-
ued lack of reparations for damages and impacts already caused,
exacerbates the mental and emotional health impacts of climate
change itself. Canada was not included in this global study, con-
ducted by Hickman et al. [19], and no existing empirical and rep-
resentative
survey research has
focused on the experiences,
perspectives, and needs of young Canadians in relation to climate
emotions and/or climate anxiety (at the time of publishing). Can-
ada is a relevant context to explore climate emotions and anxiety
among young people. As a country, Canada is warming twice as
fast as the rest of the planet and impacts are rapidly unfolding
[22]. Moreover, per capita GHG emissions are among the highest
in the world, and Canada has a dismal record when it comes to
cutting
carbon
emissions,
fossil
fuel
extraction,
and
taking
responsibility for climate injustices [23]. Calls for rigorous empiri-
cal studies prioritizing young people’s voices and experiences of
climate-induced distress [4], the inﬂuential Hickman et al. study
[19], and existing knowledge gaps have inspired the research pre-
sented herein. Importantly, although the literature on climate
emotions and anxiety is rapidly advancing, many unanswered
questions remain about lived experiences across diverse contexts
and about how to best support young people coping with com-
plex and challenging climate emotions. As Wu et al. argue, exist-
ing data in this realm “preclude our ability to take action” [20].
The purpose of this study was to generate knowledge about
climate emotions and climate anxiety among young people (aged
16−25) in Canada. We replicated the methods used by Hickman
et al. [19] while also expanding on this existing research by col-
lecting perspectives on the supports, programs, and/or resources
that young people identify as helpful to cope with climate emo-
tions and climate anxiety, as well as youth perspectives on
advances needed in the formal education system. Replicating and
expanding on the Hickman et al. [19] study enables global com-
parisons while addressing knowledge gaps to inform action and
making novel contributions to the literature. Furthermore, the
data collected here will serve as a robust baseline for longitudinal
monitoring of climate emotions and climate anxiety among young
people in Canada.
2. Methods
2.1. Study context: climate impacts, (in)justice, and (in)action in Canada
Across the country, climate-related impacts include more extreme
heat, less extreme cold, changing growing seasons, shorter snow and
ice cover seasons, thinning glaciers, thawing permafrost, rising sea
levels, and increased frequency and severity of extreme events [22].
Losses from extreme events are increasing: from 1983 to 2008, the
cost of extreme weather events in insured damage averaged
$420 million annually while between 2010 and 2020, it averaged
$2.1 billion annually. For context, in 2021, the province of British
Columbia experienced a fatal heat dome with 595 people dying from
extreme heat [24]. The heat was followed by 1600 wildﬁres across
the province affecting 9000 km2 of forest and increased climate
change anxiety among British Columbians [25]. While many parts of
Canada have been experiencing severe climate impacts, Canada’s
action on climate policy is not aligned with calls for GHG reductions.
Canada’s 2030 reduction plan is consistent with 2°C of warming
rather than the Paris Agreement’s 1.5°C of warming limit [23]. Can-
ada submitted a Nationally Determined Contribution commitment in
2021 to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 40−45% below 2005 lev-
els, which would bring Canada’s rating from “highly insufﬁcient”
(policies on track for 3°C of warming) to “almost sufﬁcient” (policies
on track for 2°C of warming) [23]; however, the Canadian govern-
ment has a track record of missing every climate target that has been
set. Moreover, Canada continues to advance fossil fuel extraction,
production, and export (crude oil in particular) while providing bil-
lions of dollars in subsidies, tax breaks and ﬁnancial support to the
fossil fuel industry annually [26].
Beyond this, the existing inequities in Canada, such as poverty,
social inequality, the ongoing effects of colonialism, and systemic rac-
ism exacerbate how marginalised peoples experience and adapt to
climate impacts [27]. The youth climate justice movement has grown
to the largest environmental social movement in history. As many
youth activists have continually asserted, climate injustices are not
merely environmental issues but are racial and gender injustices
[28]. The claims and experiences of youth climate activists are not
homogenous and may be better understood as a ‘polyphonic move-
ment’ [29]; however, youth climate activist messaging has a common
characteristic that focuses on intergenerational injustices of climate
impacts—that is, climate change will affect their futures and adults
have not acted with moral responsibility and obligation [28].
2.2. Data collection
Study participants included young people in Canada aged 16−25
(n = 1000). Abacus Data, an online Canadian polling and research
ﬁrm, was contracted to administer the survey. The survey was trans-
lated into French (second ofﬁcial language), programmed, and ﬁelded
by Abacus Data.
Potential participants were invited to complete the online survey
from the Lucid exchange platform marketplace. A set of 21 partner
panels, representing a total potential participant pool of approxi-
mately 1,000,000 Canadians, was used. The panels are double opt-in
survey panels and are blended to address any potential bias that
could arise from a panel single source. De-duplication methods were
to ensure that there was no duplication of respondents. The elec-
tronic invitation included details about the study and informed con-
sent. Potential participants were not able to access the survey, and no
data were collected, before consent was obtained. A unique link was
used to track each potential participant and enable the completion of
the survey over more than one session. The Lucid exchange platform
panel providers compensate survey takers in either cash, gift cards,
or reward points. Incentives offered are minimal and unlikely to
impact the voluntariness of participation or consent. The data
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
2
collection process was compliant with the Canadian Research
Insights Council’s Public Opinion Research Standards, the ESOMAR
Code of Conduct as well as Marketing Research and Intelligence Asso-
ciation standards. The study received ethical approval from the Lake-
head University Research Ethics Board.
The survey instrument included 15 questions (a mix of yes/no/
prefer not to answer, Likert scale, and open-ended questions) and
took 10−15 min to complete. The questions asked about: i) climate
emotions and their impacts, ii) perspectives on the future due to cli-
mate change, iii) perspectives and feelings about government (in)
action, and iv) perspectives on supports, programs, and resources
that young people identify as needed to cope with climate emotions
and anxiety, and iv) perspectives on climate change education
(including socio-emotional dimensions) in the formal education sys-
tem. Information on age, gender, language, ethnicity, and region
were also collected (See Supplemental ﬁle, indicating questions repli-
cated from Hickman et al. [19] and additional questions for this
study).
Data collection began on February 23, 2022 and ended March 2,
2022 once 1000 complete responses were obtained. The data were
weighted (according to 2016 Census data) to improve representative-
ness of the Canadian population according to age, gender, and region
(following the approach used by Hickman et al. [19]. Descriptive ﬁnd-
ings reported below use weighted data. Prior to weighting, the mean
age of respondents was 21.2 years (SD 2.60), 54% were female, 44%
were male, and 3% were non-binary or preferred not to answer. Most
respondents completed the survey in English (84%). In terms of eth-
nicity, half of the respondents identiﬁed as White/European, 13% as
Southeast Asian, 12% as South Asian, 11% as Black, 5% as Indigenous
(i.e., Inuit/First Nations/Metis), 5% as Arab and West Asian, 4% as Latin
American, and 1% selected ‘Other’. We did not weight data by ethnic-
ity as the question in our survey used different population groups
than Statistics Canada suggests (following more recent best practices
[30]. Statistics Canada is in the process of “consulting partners, stake-
holders and the general public to establish a suitable terminology
and classiﬁcation” to describe and gather data on ethnic population
and racialized groups [31].
2.3. Data analysis
Descriptive statistics were calculated, and tables and graphs gen-
erated where appropriate. We also generated the following 4 scales
following Hickman et al. [19]: i) negative thoughts about climate
change; ii) beliefs about government response; iii) feeling betrayed
by government; and iv) feeling reassured by government. The nega-
tive thoughts about climate change scale is a summative score rang-
ing from 0 to 7 including all items for the question, “Does climate
change make you think any of the following . . .” where “Yes” was coded
as 1 and “No” was coded as “000. The beliefs about the government
response scale included 9 items from the question, “In relation to cli-
mate change, I believe that my government is . . .”. In this scale, “Yes”
was coded as 2 and “No” was coded as “100. Reverse coding was
applied where needed, total score ranged from 9 to 18. The feeling
reassured by government scale reports a mean across 4 items mea-
suring speciﬁc emotions related to government action indicating feel-
ings of reassurance (“When I think about my government’s response to
climate change, I feel . . . hopeful /valued/protected”) and reassurance
generally (“I am reassured by my federal government’s action on climate
change.”). All items were measured using a 5-point Likert scale. The
feeling betrayed by government scale was constructed from the “neg-
ative” emotions in response to government action (i.e., anguished,
abandoned, afraid, angry, ashamed, belittled) on a 5-point Likert scale
(1=not at all, 5=extremely). The score is a mean across 5 items. Those
respondents selecting “Prefer not to say” were excluded resulting in
varying sample sizes. Cronbach’s alpha was calculated for the
betrayal and reassurance scales to assess internal consistency. Finally,
a coding scheme was developed for the responses to all open-ended
questions using an iterative thematic analysis approach and NVivo
software. Non-responses and nonsensical responses were removed.
2.4. Limitations
There are limitations of this study in terms of design and methods
that should be recognized when interpreting ﬁndings. First, given the
cross-sectional design, data collection was conducted at one point in
time. Emotional responses and impacts associated with climate
change are likely transient and dynamic over time but our data are
unable to capture such trends [32]. Second, the data have been
weighted by age, gender, and region thereby increasing conﬁdence
that our ﬁndings represent experiences and perspectives of our target
population (young Canadians aged 16−25) on these factors, thereby
reducing potential bias. However, we did not weight by ethnicity
such that ﬁndings may under or overrepresent some population
groups compared to Canadians aged 16−25 overall. Third, all meas-
ures are self-reported which may threaten validity. Fourth, as [19]
report, the survey instrument uses non-standardised measures and a
three-factor scale (yes/no/prefer not to answer) to measure the exis-
tence of speciﬁc climate emotions (not a Likert scale). Fifth, although
these ﬁndings are very likely generalizable to Canada and similar
contexts, they may not hold in all settings. Finally, although we pro-
vided an opportunity for youth to share their experiences and per-
spectives, the ﬁndings are still framed by, interpreted through, and
shared from adult perspectives (the researchers).
3. Results
3.1. Climate emotions, climate anxiety, and coping
Overall, the survey data illustrate that young people across Can-
ada are experiencing a diversity of climate emotions at high rates. In
terms of speciﬁc emotional impacts and responses, young people
most commonly report feeling afraid (66%), sad (65%), anxious (63%),
helpless (58%), and powerless (56%). The least commonly reported
feelings were grief (34%), optimism (21%), and indifference (20%)
(Fig. 1). Participants were also asked “I am worried that climate change
threatens people and the planet.” Nearly half (48%) of all respondents
reported feeling “very” or “extremely worried”: only 5% reported
feeling “not at all” worried.
Given the extent to which young Canadians are experiencing difﬁ-
cult emotions, it is not surprising that young people also reported
impacts on daily functioning and overall mental health. Only 22% of
respondents reported that climate change does not at all impact their
overall mental health and 37% reported that their feelings about cli-
mate change negatively affect daily life at least moderately. The sur-
vey data also illustrate that climate change is contributing in myriad
ways to negative thoughts about their future. For example, 39%
report hesitation about having children due to climate change, 48%
believe that humanity is doomed, 53% think that they will not have
access to the same opportunities that their parents had, 73% report
thinking that the future is frightening, and 76% report that people
have failed to take care of the planet. The negative thoughts about cli-
mate change score was 4.13 out of 7 (SD 2.60) illustrating a generally
negative outlook about the future.
Our survey also collected perspectives on the supports, programs,
and/or resources that young people think do and/or would help them
cope with climate emotions and climate anxiety using an open-ended
question. Table 1 summarizes the 8 themes, illustrative examples
from the data, and the proportion of respondents coded under each
theme. Variations of “don’t know” or cases where coders could not
make sense of responses were excluded. Also, although talking about
climate emotions is likely an important coping mechanism support-
ing the processing of big and challenging emotions like anxiety,
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
3
powerlessness, and sadness, 32% of participants reported that they do
not talk about climate change with other people and 36% reported
that when they do, they feel ignored or dismissed.
3.2. Beliefs and feelings about government (in)action
Our data illustrate that inaction at the systemic and structural lev-
els shape the lived experiences of climate emotions and climate
anxiety among young Canadians. Notably, 64% of survey respondents
do not think that the Canadian government is doing enough to avoid
climate catastrophe. The beliefs about government response scale
indicates a negative perception of the Canadian government’s
response to climate change, with a summative score of 14.96 (SD
2.60) on a scale ranging from 9 to 18 (Table 2). The feeling betrayed
by government scale is higher than the feeling reassured by govern-
ment scale, with mean scores of 2.55 (SD 1.00) and 2.19 (SD 0.89).
Table 1
Coding scheme for open-ended question on the kinds of supports, programs, and/or resources that do or would help young people cope with feelings about climate change.
Theme
Illustrative Examples
% of coded responses
Seeking emotional and mental health support from/with others
- "Psychologist”
- "Talking with family and friends"
- "Support groups about climate change"
- ". . . a community of like-minded people who feel the same as I do, that might
make me feel less alone in my efforts to make a difference."
25
Taking individual and collective climate action
- "Trying to take part in initiatives that ﬁght against climate change from the
ground, as well as become a less wasteful consumer."
- "Donate to charities"
25
Formal education initiatives or programs
- "Programs that educate people about climate change and all the ways we can
contribute towards working on a solution."
- "Awareness programs"
- "Programs where they gave more information about the situation and provided
possible long-term solutions."
12
Managing feelings and emotions through activities
- "Meditation"
- "I try to go outside on hikes."
- "Video games"
- "Music and reading are some coping mechanisms I used to help ease my
feelings."
11
Not coping/not doing anything to cope
- "I don’t cope, I stay miserable."
- "Nothing, I suck it up."
- "I don’t think support programs would help, because trying to make me feel
better about things doesn’t change the fact that climate change is still happening
and no one in power is doing anything to try and change it."
8
Seeking out information and solutions through informal learning
- "Blogs discussing small things I can do to help."
- "News Channels that give me hope."
7
Shifting perceptions and positive thinking
- "I just stay optimistic"
- "Taking it more seriously"
6
Systemic action needed from governments
- "Maybe if our government started taking climate change seriously. Not just ours
in Canada but all of them, worldwide."
- "I also think the government taking more accountability and action would
greatly improve people’s anxieties."
4
*Note: nonsensical responses and “Don’t know” were not coded.
Fig. 1. Climate emotions reported by young people (aged 16−25) in Canada (n = 1000, weighted).
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
4
The Cronbach’s alpha for the betrayal and reassurance scales were
0.88 and 0.82 respectively, illustrating high internal consistency.
When asked how the government’s response to climate change
makes them feel, 35% of the sample report feeling “not at all” valued,
32% report feeling “not at all” protected.
3.3. Perspectives on social and emotional dimensions of climate change
education
Survey participants were asked their opinions about the formal
education system and climate change education. Approximately 65%
believe that the education system in Canada should be doing more or
a lot more to educate young people about climate change. Similarly,
60% believe that the formal education system should focus more on
the social and emotional dimensions of climate change (described as
“developing the emotional intelligence and/or interpersonal skills that
enable learners to constructively cope with the emotions and feelings
about climate change and its impacts and to more effectively collaborate,
negotiate, and communicate with others to address climate change”). To
elicit detailed perspectives on possible opportunities for integrating
social and emotional dimensions into education, we also asked the
participants to share their perspectives on “the most important thing
the education system can do to support your mental and emotional
health in the context of the climate crisis”. Table 3 reports 5 key themes
which illustrate that young Canadians want more climate change
content in schools and want to learn about solutions.
4. Discussion and conclusion
Using a national survey and replicating and expanding on the
methods and ﬁndings from Hickman et al. [19], this study illustrates
that climate emotions and climate anxiety are prevalent among 16 to
25 year old Canadians. Overall, our ﬁndings illustrate a constellation
of challenging climate emotions, negative thoughts around climate
change and the future, concerning levels of climate change-related
distress, and negative perceptions and emotional consequences of
Canada’s response to climate change. The ﬁndings also highlight
diverse supports that young Canadians are calling for to cope with
challenging emotions and advancements needed in the education
system to address the growing mental health burden of the climate
crisis.
A majority of young Canadians surveyed reported feeling afraid,
sad, anxious, helpless, powerless, and angry while a minority
reported feeling optimistic in relation to climate change. These ﬁnd-
ings align closely with the global ﬁndings reported by Hickman et al.
[19] where feeling afraid, sad, anxious, powerless, and angry were
the most commonly reported climate emotions across 10 countries. A
small minority, 5% of respondents in our study and across all 10
Table 2
Beliefs about the federal government’s response to climate change reported by young people (aged 16−25) in Canada (n = 1000,
weighted).
In relation to climate change, I believe that my government is ...
Yes (n)
No (n)
Prefer not to say (n)
Doing enough to avoid a climate catastrophe
26.7% (267)
63.8% (638)
9.2% (92)
Taking my concerns seriously enough
26.9% (269)
61.5% (615)
11.9% (116)
Protecting me, the planet and/or future generations
31.8% (319)
57.5% (575)
10.7% (107)
Failing young people across the world
56.4% (564)
33.4% (334)
10.2% (102)
Lying about the effectiveness of the actions they’re taking in relation to climate
change
53.5% (535)
34.7% (347)
11.8% (118)
Acting in line with climate science
36.5% (365)
53.2% (532)
10.3% (103)
Can be trusted
31.9% (319)
52.4% (524)
15.8% (158)
Dismissing people’s distress
47.9% (479)
41.3% (413)
10.7% (107)
Betraying me and/or future generations
48.4% (484)
38.9% (389)
12.7% (127)
Table 3
Coding scheme for open-ended question on the most important thing the education system can do to support mental and emotional health in the context of the climate crisis.
Theme
Illustrative Examples
% of coded responses
Increase climate change content in school
- “Launch a variety of environmental programs.”
- “Make climate change courses mandatory.”
- “Education and accessible resources are key for youth understanding
the climate crisis.”
23
Teach solutions
- “Teach about what can be done to help climate change.”
- “Educate us on the ways we can contribute to solving the climate
crisis.”
16
Provide mental health supports and programming in the education system
- “Offer counselling services.”
- “Create student support groups.”
- “Teach students about how to cope and take care of their mental and
emotional health around the climate crisis.”
- Make it feel safe to speak about our feelings and hold a safe space with
training.
16
Engage in reassurance, positive, and hopeful messaging
- “Reassure the youth and have resources for them if they want to learn
and help.”
- “Give supports to individuals who feel distress and help reassure
them.”
9
Teach about climate risk and urgency
- “Teach the real reality.”
- “Educate about the danger.”
- “Be honest and not give students false hope.”
- “Simply telling the truth about climate change.”
7
*Note: nonsensical responses and “Don’t know” were not coded.
5
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
countries in the Hickman et al. [19] study, reported feeling not at all
worried about climate change. Our ﬁndings are also consistent with
an emerging consensus in the literature highlighting that fear, sad-
ness, anger, powerlessness, and worry about the future are core char-
acteristics of climate anxiety among young people [9]. Although this
study adds to the rapidly growing literature on experiences of climate
emotions among young people, more work is needed to better under-
stand how lived experiences vary across identity, culture, and con-
text, to better understand those factors inﬂuencing experiences and
impacts of climate emotions, and to advance our collective under-
standing of the interplay between climate emotions and (in)
action. We plan to further analyze these survey data to better under-
stand how and why climate emotions vary across age, gender, and
ethnicity and are currently undertaking qualitative research to com-
plement this work.
Concerningly, our data illustrate that the climate crisis is impact-
ing the overall mental health and daily functioning of young Cana-
dians: 8 in 10 reported that climate change impacts their overall
mental health and 4 in 10 reported that their feelings about climate
change negatively impact daily functioning. In terms of impacts on
daily functioning, our ﬁndings align closely with data from Australia
(32%), France (35%), and Portugal (37%) but differ markedly from
countries in the Global South including Nigeria (66%), India (74%) and
the Philippines (75%) as reported by Hickman et al. [19]. Overall, our
ﬁndings align most closely with the so-called Global North countries
suggesting that contributions to GHG emissions, vulnerability, and
levels of governmental (in)action that vary across countries and con-
texts likely play a role in shaping experiences and impacts of climate
emotions and climate anxiety among young people. Also noteworthy,
beliefs about governmental response to climate change and negative
emotional impacts of government response (as measured by the
betrayal scale) illustrate consistency with Australian and American
data [19]. This is perhaps not surprising given similarities in terms of
government failings to take meaningful action against climate
change, economies that are heavily reliant on resource extraction,
ongoing settler-colonialism, and high levels of per capita GHG emis-
sions.
Like others, we consider strong climate emotions and anxiety
appropriate responses to the climate crisis, while also recognizing
the mental and emotional that burden young people are bearing
[11,33]. Supports, policies, and programmes are necessary to enable
young people to cope with climate-related distress, foster emotional
resiliency, and prevent harm. However, it is essential to recognize
that young Canadians are experiencing distress and mental health
consequences because of the failure of adults, decision-makers, and
governments to adequately address the climate crisis. As one survey
participant expressed, “. . .the government taking more accountabil-
ity and action would greatly improve people’s anxieties”. The inac-
tion from adults and the wholly inadequate response to the climate
crisis in Canada and globally illustrates a lack of care, and can also be
seen as a form of youth mistreatment, harm, and neglect [16]. Echo-
ing the voices and perspectives of young Canadians, we call for
urgent and transformative climate action to protect the mental and
emotional health of young people.
Our data illustrate that young people feel powerless and betrayed
and do not feel cared for, valued, or protected when it comes to cli-
mate change and Canada’s response. It is therefore also imperative
that young people are heard by decision makers, feel heard, and have
access to diverse safe spaces to voice their experiences of climate
change and priorities for climate action [34]. Beyond a moral impera-
tive, being heard and feeling heard by adults can address feelings of
powerlessness and betrayal while building allyship and support
through social networks. Implementing participatory models [35] for
meaningful youth engagement in decision-making can address struc-
tural and actual disempowerment experienced by young people
[21,36]. However, existing models of youth engagement—youth
councils for example—can be tokenistic or exploitative if equity and
positionality are not considered throughout youth-adult engagement
and governance [37] or if adult involvement is not focused on listen-
ing to and empowering young people [38]. Another pitfall of youth-
adult engagement can occur when adult allies download the respon-
sibility for climate action to young people or future generations. This
reinforces a view that young people are isolated, and neglects the
role of adults and communities to engage in systemic and societal
responses to climate change in conjunction with youth-led move-
ments [39]. Meaningful engagement with young people requires
adult-allies
that
work
to
support
youth
empowerment
while
acknowledging intergenerational injustices, respecting and support-
ing young people’s capabilities, and validating emotional experien-
ces.
An important contribution of this study is hearing young people’s
perspectives on speciﬁc programs and/or resources that can support
coping with challenging climate emotions. The most frequently
coded theme from our data was Seeking emotional and mental health
support from/with others, talking with family and friends or seeing a
psychologist for example. Notably, approximately two-third of young
Canadians reported that they either don’t talk to others about climate
change or feel dismissed or ignored if they do. Similar ﬁndings were
reported by in the UK, the USA, and Australia [19] illustrating what
we call a ‘climate of silence’ in these contexts [19,40]. Breaking this
constructed silence by creating and offering a diversity of safe spaces
for young people to talk about climate change and their experiences
of climate emotions is therefore critical [34]. There are a growing
number of support groups, networks, and group therapy approaches
offering non-judgemental and safe spaces for young people to come
together to recognize, voice, and work with their emotions related to
the climate crisis. However, these tend to be through non-proﬁt
organizations rather than widely available to youth through school
programs and may not be accessible to marginalised groups. Our
study emphasizes the growing need for accessible initiatives and
spaces pointing to the importance of enhanced ﬁnancial support,
research, and policy to expand this work. These ﬁndings also high-
light the need for increased training and knowledge about climate
emotions generally and among professionals who work with young
people; educational and mental health professionals in particular
[41]. The second most frequently coded theme was Taking individual
and collective climate action. Our data support the emerging consen-
sus in the literature on the important links between climate emotions
and climate action. Speciﬁcally, there is emerging evidence indicating
that emotions can motivate and promote climate action and that
engaging in climate action, collective action in particular, can help
people cope with challenging emotions and climate anxiety [42].
Overall, the 8 themes illustrating young people’s perspectives on pro-
grams and/or resources to support their coping exemplify the three
main coping strategies that Ojala has identiﬁed working with young
people in Northern Europe: “(1) Problem-focused coping, i.e., think-
ing about, planning, and trying to do something to ﬁght climate
change; (2) Emotion-focused coping, for instance getting rid of nega-
tive emotions with distancing strategies; (3) Meaning-focused coping
and hope, i.e., being able to switch perspective and see both negative
and positive trends, and putting trust in more powerful societal
actors.” [43]
An additional contribution of this work is in identifying possibili-
ties for change within the formal education system. Secondary and
post-secondary institutions provide formative learning experiences
and the knowledge and skills that young people need for their lives
post-graduation; schools are where young people spend much of
their time. As reported above, 6 in 10 young Canadians believe that
the education system in Canada should do more, or a lot more, to
educate them about climate change and should focus more, or a lot
more, on the social and emotional dimensions of climate change. We
interpret these ﬁndings as a call to action from young people and
6
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
point to the thematic analysis results as suggested direction from
young people to improve their experiences through providing sup-
ports within education systems. Speciﬁcally, young people want the
formal education system to support their mental and emotional
health by integrating more climate change content in schools.
Respondents suggested a variety of environmental and climate-
focused extra-curricular programs and activities, such as making cli-
mate change courses mandatory and integrating project-based and
design-thinking learning processes focused on addressing climate
issues into classroom instruction. The data also indicate that young
people want solutions-focused instruction and learning opportunities
within the education system. This is supported by analysis of regional
curricula across Canada [44] and ﬁndings internationally on how to
improve climate change education [45]. In the words of one survey
participant, “Educate us on the ways we can contribute to solving the
climate crisis”. Teaching about climate solutions and providing
opportunities to take and support climate action may address feel-
ings of powerlessness, betrayal, fear, and worry while also providing
opportunities to talk about climate change with peers and adult-
allies. Our ﬁndings also show that young people want mental health
supports within the education system, such as access to counselling
services, student support/discussion groups, and instruction that
integrates explicit teaching on coping strategies in response to cli-
mate change. These ﬁndings add to the currently limited research on
climate change education gaps in formal education systems [45] and
challenge formal education systems to provide relevant knowledge
and understanding, skills, and mental or emotional supports that
young people indicate they need.
Drawing on our ﬁndings and existing knowledge and practice
gaps we conclude with a set of directions that we see as priorities for
advancing this ﬁeld of research and protecting the mental and emo-
tional well-being of young people in the context of the climate crisis.
First, we argue for additional empirical research on climate emotions
among young people across diverse places and cultures, generally,
and a focus on understanding the ways in which social location, iden-
tity,
and
marginalization
shape
climate
emotions
speciﬁcally.
Although more survey data and analytical work is certainly needed,
qualitative data is also needed to deepen our understanding of com-
plex climate emotions and intersections with identity and (in)action.
Therefore, both quantitative and qualitative methodologies are
needed and an intersectional approach, rooted in the notion that
multiple socially constructed positions intersect to shape experiences
[46], will be particularly helpful here. Second, more research is
needed on the ways in which youth are (or are not) coping with chal-
lenging climate emotions and the ways in which adult-allies can sup-
port the development of adaptive and culturally-relevant coping
skills within and beyond the formal education system [4]. Relatedly,
research to better understand unique challenges and possibilities for
schools (primary, secondary, and higher education) to become safe
spaces to foster coping skills and emotional resiliency to climate
change is currently lacking. Third, there is a growing need for
research to better understand the knowledge, attitudes, and skills of
mental health professionals and educators in relation to climate
change generally and the emotional dimensions of climate change
speciﬁcally. Robust evidence is needed to inform training and skill-
building opportunities with mental health professionals and educa-
tors around climate literacy and best practices for supporting young
people in relation to the emotional burden of the climate crisis [33].
Fourth, efforts are needed to explicitly examine and learn from the
existing interventions aimed at offering non-judgemental and safe
spaces for young people to recognize, voice, and process climate
emotions with others. Finally, research that not only prioritizes
young people’s voices and experiences but also empowers young
people through the research process itself is promising direction
[21].
Participatory
methodologies
oriented
towards
conducting
research with the people affected by a given issue and aimed at
change are particularly relevant. For example, participatory action
research with young people aimed at learning how best to involve
them in climate action and policy-making processes or curricular
reform that also acknowledges and recognizes emotional dimensions
of the climate crisis is a promising direction forward. Participatory
action research can also explicitly foster intergenerational relation-
ship building and youth-adult allyship which we see as imperative to
both addressing climate distress and co-creating a safe, healthy, and
equitable future.
Contributions
LPG and EF contributed to conceptualization, literature synthesis,
study design, data collection, data analysis, writing and editing. Both
authors had full access to the data and accept responsibility for publi-
cations.
Data sharing
Authors
will
consider
making
de-identiﬁed
data
available
between 5 months and 5 years after publishing to parties submitting
rigorous and justiﬁed proposals for analysis. Those requesting data
would have to sign a data access agreement.
Author agreement statement
We the undersigned declare that this manuscript is original, has
not been published before and is not currently being considered for
publication elsewhere.
We conﬁrm that the manuscript has been read and approved by
all named authors and that there are no other persons who satisﬁed
the criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further conﬁrm that
the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by
all of us.
We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact
for the Editorial process. He/she is responsible for communicating
with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and
ﬁnal approval of proofs.
Funding
This study was funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council which had no role in data collection, analysis, or
reporting.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu-
ence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council and the Canada Research Chair program for sup-
porting this research. We would also like to acknowledge Paul Berger,
Carmen Kinniburgh, and Aynsley Klassen for their thoughtful review
and copyediting. Finally, we acknowledge Brigitte Champaigne-Klas-
sen for support with thematic data analysis.
Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found
in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.joclim.2023.100204.
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
7
References
[1] P€ortner H.O., Roberts D.C., Adams H., et al. Climate change 2022: impacts, adapta-
tion and vulnerability. 2022.
[2] Hayes K, Blashki G, Wiseman J, et al. Climate change and mental health: risks,
impacts and priority actions. Int J Ment Health Syst 2018;12:1–12.
[3] Clayton S, Manning C, Krygsman K, et al. Mental health and our changing climate:
impacts, implications, and guidance. Washington, D.C: American Psychological
Association and ecoAmerica; 2017 https://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?
title=Mental%20Health%20and%20Our%20Changing%20Climate%3A%20Impacts%
2C%20Implications%2C%20and%20Guidance&author=S.%20Clayton&
publication_year=2017 accessed 25 February 2022.
[4] Ojala M, Cunsolo A, Ogunbode CA, et al. Anxiety, worry, and grief in a time of
environmental and climate crisis: a narrative review. Annu Rev Environ Resour
2021;46:35–58.
[5] Pihkala P. Toward a taxonomy of climate emotions. Front Clim 2022;3:738154.
[6] Galway LP, Beery T. Exploring climate emotions in canada’s provincial north.
Front
Psychol
2022;13
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpsyg.2022.920313 2022, accessed 30 August.
[7] Ray S.J. A ﬁeld guide to climate anxiety: how to keep your cool on a warming
planet. 2020.
[8] Coffey Y, Bhullar N, Durkin J, et al. Understanding eco-anxiety: a systematic scop-
ing review of current literature and identiﬁed knowledge gaps. J Clim Change
Health 2021;3:100047.
[9] Pihkala P. Anxiety and the ecological crisis: an analysis of eco-anxiety and climate
anxiety. Sustainability 2020;12:7836.
[10] Cianconi P, Betro S, Janiri L. The impact of climate change on mental health: a sys-
tematic descriptive review. Front Psychiatry 2020;11:74.
[11] Crandon TJ, Scott JG, Charlson FJ, et al. A social−ecological perspective on climate
anxiety in children and adolescents. Nat Clim Chang 2022;12:123–31.
[12] Clayton S. Climate anxiety: psychological responses to climate change. J Anxiety
Disord 2020;74:102263.
[13] Charlson F, Ali S, Augustinavicius J, et al. Global priorities for climate change and
mental health research. Environ Int 2022;158:106984.
[14] Searle K, Gow K. Do concerns about climate change lead to distress? Int J Clim
Change Strat Manag 2010;2:362–79.
[15] Wullenkord MC, Tr€oger J, Hamann KRS, et al. Anxiety and climate change:
a validation of the Climate Anxiety Scale in a German-speaking quota
sample
and
an
investigation
of
psychological
correlates.
Clim
Change
2021;168:20.
[16] Benoit L, Thomas I, Martin A. Review: ecological awareness, anxiety, and actions
among youth and their parents −a qualitative study of newspaper narratives.
Child Adoles Ment Health 2022;27:47–58.
[17] Palinkas LA, Wong M. Global climate change and mental health. Curr Opin Psy-
chol 2020;32:12–6.
[18] Clayton S, Karazsia BT. Development and validation of a measure of climate
change anxiety. J Environ Psychol 2020;69:101434.
[19] Hickman C, Marks E, Pihkala P, et al. Climate anxiety in children and young people
and their beliefs about government responses to climate change: a global survey.
Lancet Planet Health 2021;5:e863–73.
[20] Wu J, Snell G, Samji H. Climate anxiety in young people: a call to action. Lancet
Planet Health 2020;4:e435–6.
[21] Arora R, Spikes ET, Waxman-Lee CF, et al. Platforming youth voices in planetary
health leadership and advocacy: an untapped reservoir for changemaking. Lancet
Planet Health 2022;6:e78–80.
[22] Bush E., Lemmen D.S. Canada’s changing climate report; government of Canada.
Ottawa, Ontario, 2019.
[23] Climate Action Tracker. Canada, https://climateactiontracker.org/countries/can-
ada/(2022, accessed 29 August 2022).
[24] Kotyk A., ca ReporterCtvn, F| Contact. 595 people died due to B.C.’s extreme sum-
mer heat, latest coroner data reveals. British Columbia, https://bc.ctvnews.ca/
595-people-died-due-to-b-c-s-extreme-summer-heat-latest-coroner-data-
reveals-1.5646936 (2021, accessed 30 August 2022).
[25] Bratu A, Card KG, Closson K, et al. The 2021 Western North American heat dome
increased climate change anxiety among British Columbians: results from a natu-
ral experiment. J Clim Change Health 2022;6:100116.
[26] FUnd EnvironmentalDefence. The running list of federal fossil fuel subsidies in
Canada in 2022. Environ Defence 2022 https://environmentaldefence.ca/federal-
fossil-fuel-subsidies-tracking/(accessed 30 August.
[27] Berry P., Schnitter R. Health of Canadians in a changing climate: advancing our
knowledge for action. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada.
[28] Karsgaard C, Davidson D. Must we wait for youth to speak out before we listen?
International youth perspectives and climate change education. Educ Rev
2021;0:1–19.
[29] Bowman B. They don’t quite understand the importance of what we’re doing
today’: the young people’s climate strikes as subaltern activism. Sustain Earth
2020;3:16.
[30] Canadian Institute for Health Information. Guidance on the use of standards for
race-based and indigenous identity data collection and health reporting in Can-
ada. Ottawa, Canada: Canadian Institute for Health Information; 2022.
[31] Visible minority concept consultative engagement, https://www.statcan.gc.ca/en/
consultation/2022/visible-minority-concept (accessed 8 December 2022).
[32] Brosch T. Affect and emotions as drivers of climate change perception and action:
a review. Curr Opin Behav Sci 2021;42:15–21.
[33] Cunsolo A, Harper SL, Minor K, et al. Ecological grief and anxiety: the start of a
healthy response to climate change? Lancet Planet Health 2020;4:e261–3.
[34] Hickman C. We need to (ﬁnd a way to) talk about. . . Eco-anxiety. J Soc Work Pract
2020;34:411–24.
[35] Hart RA. Stepping back from ‘The ladder’: reﬂections on a model of participatory
work with children. Springer; 2008. p. 19–31.
[36] Hart R., Fisher S., Kimiagar B. Beyond projects: involving children in community
governance as a fundamental strategy for facing climate change. Chall Clim
Change Children Front 2014; 92−97.
[37] Spajic L, Behrens G, Gralak S, et al. Beyond tokenism: meaningful youth engage-
ment in planetary health. Lancet Planet Health 2019;3:e373–5.
[38] Elsen F, Ord J. The role of adults in “youth led” climate groups: enabling empow-
erment. Front Political Sci 2022;3 https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fpos.2021.641154 (2021, accessed 8 September.
[39] Wood B. Youth-led climate strikes: fresh opportunities and enduring challenges
for youth research - commentary to Bowman. Fennia 2020;198:217–22.
[40] Galway LP, Beery T, Buse C, et al. What drives climate action in Canada’s provin-
cial north? Exploring the role of connectedness to nature, climate worry, and talk-
ing with friends and family. Climate 2021;9:146.
[41] Allen KA. Climate change, a critical new role for educational and developmental
psychologists. Educ Dev Psychol 2020;37:1–3.
[42] Bright ML, Eames C. From apathy through anxiety to action: emotions as motiva-
tors for youth climate strike leaders. Aust J Environ Educ 2022;38:13–25.
[43] Ojala M. Young people and global climate change: emotions, coping, and engage-
ment in everyday life. In: Ansell N, Klocker N, Skelton T (eds) Geographies of
global issues: change and threat. Singapore: Springer, pp. 329−46.
[44] Wynes S, Nicholas KA. Climate science curricula in Canadian secondary schools
focus on human warming, not scientiﬁc consensus, impacts or solutions. PLoS
One 2019;14:e0218305.
[45] McKenzie M. Climate change education and communication in global review:
tracking progress through national submissions to the UNFCCC Secretariat. Envi-
ron Educ Res 2021;27:631–51.
[46] Bauer GR. Incorporating intersectionality theory into population health research
methodology: challenges and the potential to advance health equity. Soc Sci Med
2014;110:10–7.
L.P. Galway and E. Field
The Journal of Climate Change and Health 9 (2023) 100204
8
