P   U   S
https://doi.org/10.1177/09636625231223425
Public Understanding of Science
2024, Vol. 33(4) 504­–520
© The Author(s) 2024
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/09636625231223425
journals.sagepub.com/home/pus
Counteracting climate denial:  
A systematic review
Laila Mendy
, Mikael Karlsson
  
and Daniel Lindvall
Uppsala University, Sweden
Abstract
Despite scientific consensus on climate change, climate denial is still widespread. While much research has 
characterised climate denial, comparatively fewer studies have systematically examined how to counteract 
it. This review fills this gap by exploring the research about counteracting climate denial, the effectiveness 
and the intentions behind intervention. Through a systematic selection and analysis of 65 scientific articles, 
this review finds multiple intervention forms, including education, message framing and inoculation. The 
intentions of intervening range from changing understanding of climate science, science advocacy, influencing 
mitigation attitudes and counteracting vested industry. A number of divergent findings emerge: whether to 
separate science from policy; the disputed effects of emotions and the longitudinal impacts of interventions. 
The review offers guiding questions for those interested in counteracting denialism, the answers to which 
indicate particular strategies: identify the form of climate denial; consider the purpose of intervention and 
recognise one’s relationship to their audiences.
Keywords
climate change, denial, public understanding of science, science attitudes and perceptions
1. Introduction
Despite scientific consensus on climate change reflected by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2021), climate science denial is still widespread 
(Hornsey and Lewandowsky, 2022) and upheld by organisations motivated by economic and polit-
ical interests (Brulle, 2014; Oreskes and Conway, 2010a). False narratives are pushed by individu-
als, think tanks and media outlets, repeated by policy makers (Franta, 2022; Harvey et al., 2018) 
and targeted towards citizens, whose legitimate concerns about government interventions can be 
weaponised, to reduce public understanding and support for mitigation policies (Lewandowsky, 
2021a) and delay achievement of climate targets (Karlsson and Gilek, 2020). While much research 
has characterised and explained resistance to environmental science as a whole, climate science 
Corresponding author:
Laila Mendy, Department of Earth Sciences, Uppsala University, Villavägen 16, 75236 Uppsala, Sweden. 
Email: Laila.mendy@geo.uu.se
1223425 PUS0010.1177/09636625231223425Public Understanding of ScienceMendy et al.
review-article2024
Review article
Mendy et al.	
505
denial is found to be the most pervasive issue (Björnberg et al., 2017). Despite much academic 
focus on the issue, comparatively few studies have systematically examined counteractive inter-
ventions and their effectiveness (Björnberg et al., 2017). Considering further the multiple harms 
that climate denial can have on society, the literature seldom contextualises the intended aims of 
counteraction in this way.
This review article explores what the scientific literature concludes about counteracting climate 
science denial, based on a systematic review of journal publications. The objective is to elaborate 
upon strategies to counteract different forms of climate science denial, to inform scientists, policy-
makers and others encountering such misrepresentation. We also aim to disclose the reasons behind 
proposing counteractive strategies, which has not been done before in the literature. More specifi-
cally, we answer the following research questions:
••
What counteraction interventions of climate science denial are described in the scientific 
literature?
••
What does the literature say about the effectiveness of such interventions?
••
What are the intentions of the various types of conducted or proposed interventions being 
studied?
Next follows a background on the research about climate science denial and a section on the mate-
rial and method of this review. The results are subsequently presented in a description of proposed 
interventions and the empirical support for these, and an analysis of the underlying intentions. The 
final section discusses the results and identifies research gaps.
2. Climate denial
In this article, we use the terms ‘climate science denial’ and ‘climate denial’ as labels for a cluster 
of terms in the literature in combination with ‘climate’ or ‘climate science’, such as denial, doubt 
and scepticism. This label has been considered polarising (Van Rensburg, 2015) but several enquir-
ies argue that climate science denial is a form of pseudoscience, suffering from ‘a severe lack of 
reliability’, while being presented as the most reliable knowledge on the issue in question (Hansson, 
2017). We therefore agree with those who argue that the alternative term ‘scepticism’ confuses 
pseudo-scepticism with scientific scepticism (Busch, 2021; Torcello, 2016).
Theories of denial of human atrocities establish the difference between literal, interpretive and 
implicatory denial (Cohen, 2001). Lifted into the climate context by Norgaard (2006b), it can be 
argued that literal denial is the idea that global warming is not happening; interpretive is the 
acknowledgement of a changing climate but denial of this being a crisis; and implicatory is the 
denial of what can be inferred from the issue in terms of ‘psychological, political or moral implica-
tions’ (Cohen, 2001: 8). Another spectrum is trend-attribution-impact denial (Rahmstorf, 2005), all 
constituting parts of Cohen’s (2001) literal denial. Here, trend denial is attached to the global 
warming phenomenon, attribution to the anthropogenic causes and impact to the negative effects. 
Capstick and Pidgeon (2014) explored scepticism in the British public and distinguished between 
epistemic denial, that is, denial of climate science, and response denial, that is, denial of the neces-
sity of responding to climate change, echoing Cohen’s (2001) implicatory denial. These clarifica-
tions are important, as they describe varying focus and reasons for denial.
Multiple methods and actors spread climate denial, including right-wing media, politicians, 
religious organisations, vested-interest industry, as well as the general public (Björnberg et al., 
2017; Lewandowsky, 2021a). Oreskes and Conway (2010b) explain that people are confused 
about climate science because they have been deliberately misled. Multiple publications provide 
506	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
evidence of the broad spread of disinformation through, for example, think tanks using false 
experts to exaggerate mitigation costs, subsequently referenced by politicians (Franta, 2022), fake 
alternatives to scientific consensus bodies (Medimorec and Pennycook, 2015; Taylor-Neu, 2020) 
and attacks on social movements in Europe (Moreno et al., 2022). Other studies explore misinfor-
mation on social media, for example, through twitter bots (Marlow et al., 2021).
The susceptibility to believe misrepresentations is also explored. Multiple studies focus on 
worldviews of climate science denying actors and find multiple motivations and predictors such as 
libertarian ideologies (Lewandowsky, 2021a), political identities (Feygina et al., 2010; Whitmarsh 
and Corner, 2017), religious evangelism (Edvardsson Björnberg and Karlsson, 2022), anti-feminist 
and anti-immigrant values (Jylhä et al., 2020) and social construction and emotional protections 
(Norgaard, 2006a). Much of this literature addresses the political implications, particularly in terms 
of rejection of climate policy.
The focus of the literature has been on understanding causes and characteristics of climate sci-
ence denial, but ‘the scientific community ignored the question of how to effectively counter argu-
ments of science denialism for too long’, even though leaving denial unaddressed can result in 
further negative attitudes (Schmid and Betsch, 2019: 931). Hornsey and Lewandowsky (2022) thus 
offer six strategies for reducing the damage of climate scepticism, both ‘before and after misinfor-
mation takes seed in people’s minds’. These studies are recent answers to calls for ‘more research. . . 
that focuses on assessing, developing and comparing speciﬁc strategies to counter science denial’ 
(Björnberg et al., 2017: 239). The present article further responds to this knowledge gap.
3. Materials and method
This study follows the process of a systematic review, aiming for a transparent, non-biased selec-
tion and analysis of literature corresponding to the objective and research questions described 
above (Denyer and Tranfield, 2009). The study is limited to peer-reviewed articles in scientific 
journals up to year-end 2021, found through applying the following Scopus search string:
(TITLE-ABS-KEY ((denial* OR deny OR skeptic* OR doubt* OR disinform* OR misinform*) AND 
(scien* OR evidence OR *inform*)) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY (climate OR ‘global warming’)) AND 
PUBYEAR < 2022 AND (LIMIT-TO (SRCTYPE, ‘j’)) AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, ‘ar’) OR 
LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, ‘re’)) AND (LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE, ‘English’))
These terms intend to capture all literature focused on climate science denial and the search 
resulted in 1354 hits. A selection process was carried out, guided by a protocol (Supplement A), 
resulting in a final list of 65 articles. Given the breadth of research interest in the issue of climate 
science denial, we do not presume that the search terms necessarily result in identifying all relevant 
articles. The selection may have led to overlooking some relevant articles, but we are nevertheless 
confident to cover, with margin, the core of the relevant area.
The selected 65 articles were analysed based on a series of topics linked to the research ques-
tions, mainly concerned with (1) the form of climate science denial in focus and the counteracting 
strategy proposed, (2) the effectiveness of the strategy and (3) the intentions behind interventions.
4. Results
More than half of the selected articles are published in 2018–2021, and the first one came just 
10 years earlier (McCaffrey and Buhr, 2008). Spanning 44 journals, the publications have no obvi-
ous ‘home journal’, though are typically found in journals of social sciences and psychology as 
Mendy et al.	
507
well as environmental and earth sciences. Cook, Lewandowsky, Feygina and Hansson are the most 
common authors, with Feygina et al. (2010), Cook et al. (2017) and Bain et al. (2012) being the 
three most cited articles. There is furthermore a clear US focus, followed by Australia and the 
United Kingdom, in the retrieved material.
Of the 65 articles, 27 are empirical studies that test different interventions and explore the meas-
ured impact on attitudes, political preferences and personal behaviour intentions. Tables 1 and 2 
provide overviews of these studies. Twenty-seven studies are reviews, overviews and perspectives. 
In these, counteractions are asserted without necessarily providing empirical evidence of their 
impact. In addition, 11 articles make claims towards promising counteractions based upon empiri-
cal studies. See Supplement B for a full list of the articles in review.
The next section accounts for the different strategies explored within the literature to counteract 
climate science denial (henceforth labelled ‘climate denial’). Thereafter, empirical studies with 
evidence for the effectiveness on different forms of climate denial are extracted. Finally, the inten-
tions within the counteraction of climate denial are categorised.
Counteractive responses to climate denial
This section accounts for all counteraction interventions explored within the 65 reviewed articles, 
as well as the theoretical underpinnings supporting different strategies.
Understanding the form of denial is central for the counteraction.  We found 13 review and overview 
papers that discuss multiple counteraction strategies in relation to multiple forms of denial, scepti-
cism or wider climate attitudes. Three of these emphasise the importance of understanding peoples’ 
positions as fundamental to the different messaging and communication strategies (Hornsey and 
Fielding, 2017; Rode et al., 2021; Van Rensburg, 2015). A meta-analysis exploring methods for 
changing all forms of climate attitudes in the United States found that the ‘type of climate change 
attitude matters more than the type of intervention’ (Rode et al., 2021). This approach was repeated 
in terms of ‘jiu-jitsu’, the martial art that uses an attacker’s own moves against them; understanding 
the roots of an attitude is central to change it (Hornsey and Fielding, 2017). Van Rensburg (2015) 
explain in two taxonomies of climate scepticism that the decision to intervene to change an attitude 
should be based upon understanding how strongly one holds those attitudes, and whether it is 
directed towards climate science, the knowledge-making process or the responses to climate 
change.
An alternative categorisation of strategies is based on the time of exposure to misinformation 
(Treen et al., 2020). During pre-exposure to climate misinformation, education and inoculation are 
suggested. Inoculation appears successful to reduce the effects of misinformation (Compton et al., 
2021; Cook et al., 2017; Lewandowsky, 2021b). Technological solutions are proposed, including 
detection of bots and adjusting social media algorithms. Post-misinformation, factual correction 
and punitive measures are suggested. The categorisation by Treen et al. (2020) resonates with 
another review (Cook, 2017), which discusses how strategies produced post-exposure had limited 
success: debunking is less effective in dislodging misinformation and may lead to backfire if con-
flicting with worldviews.
In the remaining review papers, multiple counteractions are detailed or clustered in a manner 
that echoes the categorisations described by Björnberg et al. (2017): ‘the need for change’ in aca-
demic messaging, ‘the need for context-dependent strategies’, ‘communication strategies’, ‘educa-
tion’ and ‘changing the focus of scientists’. These include, among other techniques, improving 
education (Das, 2020; Goodwin and Dahlstrom, 2014; McCaffrey and Buhr, 2008; Ranney and 
Velautham, 2021), message framing (Wong-Parodi and Feygina, 2020), inoculation against 
508	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
Table 1.  Epistemic denial forms and the strategies explored in empirical studies.
Strategies
Outcomes and impacts
Weaknesses (in strategy and 
methods of study)
GBM
Knowledge 
dissemination
Reduces denial, increases political 
action support
Motivated reasoning challenging, 
pre-tests sensitise participant; 
inconsistent results
Elite cue 
correction
Republican decision-maker 
effectively corrects misperceptions 
in participants of all political 
backgrounds
Democratic decision-maker not 
effective, conservatives remain 
least likely to believe in climate 
change
Content-based 
Inoculation
Inoculation immediately prior to 
misinformation increases perception; 
resistance to misinformation lasts up 
to 1 week
Specific to issue only; unclear 
whether this can be attributed 
to inoculation or scientific 
consensus messaging
Logic-based 
inoculation
Neutralises effect, increases beliefs, 
policy support
 
Trend
Message 
framing
Localising impacts increases beliefs; 
empathic messages increases 
acceptance; free-market frames 
can increase conservatives’ beliefs; 
national security and economic frames 
of emissions reductions neutralises 
the effect of denial statements
Informative, persuasive frames 
limited; religious frames do not 
significantly affect conservatives’ 
beliefs; free-market frames 
increase beliefs only in 
conservatives
Co-benefits
Mitigation co-benefits in response 
to misinformation leads to more 
engagement and agreement on social 
media.
 
Correction
Can neutralise presidential falsehoods, 
lead to more factual accuracy; does 
not necessarily backfire
Correction of presidential 
misinformation does not increase 
wider beliefs in climate change
Attribution
Critical 
thinking
Focus on logic flaws reduces 
denialist claim influence, increases 
beliefs, increases pro-environmental 
behaviour intentions; leveraging 
cognitive consistency of trusting other 
science increases stated beliefs
Study methods may have 
sensitised participants
Message 
framing
Frames that explain the mechanism in 
greenhouse gas effect more effective 
in increasing attribution beliefs than 
risk frames
Relies upon an open-minded 
attitude
Co-benefits of 
behaviour
Community care, economic and 
technological development co-
benefits increase pro-environmental 
behavioural intentions
Avoids communicating mitigation 
benefits, thus may not increase 
beliefs in climate change science
Impact
Certainty 
range
Increases trust in projections and 
concern about climate change
Not assessed in terms of general 
climate change beliefs
Deliberation
Deliberation, impact scenarios 
reduces strength, type of scepticism
A year later sceptical participants 
return to original discourse 
position
Visualisation of 
hazards
Increases acceptance of climate 
science and political interventions, 
effective across political spectrum
 
GBM: gateway belief model.
Mendy et al.	
509
misinformation (Compton et al., 2021), appeals to conservative values and policies that favour the 
status quo (Hornsey and Fielding, 2017), and emphasising scientific consensus (Lewandowsky, 
2021b; Rode et al., 2021). The latter technique, however, is reported to have mixed effectiveness, 
despite its popularity (Rode et al., 2021: 11): ‘emotion, psychological distance (near) and religious 
interventions displayed the most promise’ in changing general attitudes.
Message frames can appeal to targeted audiences.  Multiple studies explore message framing, a pro-
cess used to emphasise particular aspects of an issue through language choices to create or enforce 
different narratives (Busch, 2021). Studies assert the effectiveness of using particular frames for 
reducing denial by aligning messages to audiences’ cultures (McCright et al., 2016), identities and 
values (Das, 2020; Dixon et al., 2017; Lo, 2014; Romero-Canyas et al., 2019; Turnpenny, 2012), 
concerns and risks of hazards (Bolsen et al., 2019; Sterman, 2011; Watts, 2019) or co-benefits of 
climate mitigation (Lawrence and Estow, 2017). Frames can also target specific climate beliefs: 
framing a message about climate change mechanisms rather than climate change risks can increase 
the belief in human attribution (Rotman et al., 2020). Message framing is theoretically linked to the 
roots, contexts and ideological belief systems through which denial is constructed (Hornsey and 
Fielding, 2017); appealing to those contexts and belief systems can more effectively reach audi-
ences (Rode et al., 2021; Rudiak-Gould, 2013; Van Rensburg, 2015).
Message framing not only increases audience receptivity to information, it can also affect 
behaviour change and support for mitigation (Bain et al., 2012; Feygina et al., 2010). Where behav-
iour change is the aspired outcome, it can be effective to disassociate climate from behaviours to 
avoid politically contentious issues; communicators can rather assert benefits of behaviour change, 
for example, for household economy and health (Shirley, 2021). For those sceptical about behav-
iour change, it may be beneficial to acknowledge a low impact of individual behaviour on the cli-
mate while asserting other advantages (Capstick and Pidgeon, 2014).
Four key message frames are proposed to foster climate mitigation: emphasising systems-sanc-
tioned change for those with systems-justification ideologies; relating actions to political and cul-
tural affiliations and identities; removing misperceptions of social norms to demonstrate that action 
is socially sanctioned; and enabling self-affirmation by allowing people to be open with their 
beliefs and curating deeper conversation space (Wong-Parodi and Feygina, 2020).
Table 2.  Counteractions in relation to response denial found in the empirical studies.
Outcomes and impacts
Weaknesses
Trusted elite cues
Conservative politicians, military sources increase 
political support in students; evangelical climate 
change scientist increases beliefs in evangelical 
students; military cues increase concern and beliefs
May not necessarily 
increase support for 
political action
Message Frames
Negative emotional experience increases climate 
change concern, mitigation support; nature videos 
with mixed emotional tones are effective in 
increasing environmental concern; preservation 
of socio-political system frames increases pro-
environmental behavioural intentions
Support for mitigation 
may pre-exist for other 
reasons, these methods are 
vulnerable to exposure bias
Education
Increases belief in conservatives; overcomes 
scepticism in adolescents with individualistic 
worldviews; reduces denialism in those with high 
levels of social dominance orientation
Selective exposure bias 
could deter conservatives 
from climate change 
education and information
510	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
Framing messages to be more or less empathic, informative and persuasive can also reduce 
denial (Munoz-Carrier et al., 2020). Nature videos with a mixture of both positive and negative 
tones were more effective in increasing environmental concern, rather than one or neither tone 
(Franzen and Mader, 2020). Where denial is the emotional protection in face of alarming scientific 
information, emotionally empowering communication can reduce denialism and increase behav-
iour change (Haltinner and Sarathchandra, 2018). While some literature argues against using fear 
in messaging (Das, 2020), some state that negative emotional experience can also increase concern 
and mitigation support (Wong-Parodi and Feygina, 2021). The contradictory assertions of utilising 
emotional experiences in communication indicate research gaps.
Inoculation reduces the uptake of misinformation.  Misinformation can confuse the public and increase 
climate denial. Inoculation can counteract these causes (Farrell et al., 2019; Lewandowsky, 2021b; 
Treen et al., 2020; Trémolière and Djeriouat, 2021). The strategies vary in the literature to focus on 
specific content or logic in misinformation (Cook et al., 2017, 2018). Inoculation is typically studied 
immediately prior to exposure; however some limited longitudinal effects have been found (Mae-
rtens et al., 2020). One review of inoculation explains the method of exposing individuals to a mild 
form of misinformation to equip people with mental defences without becoming victim to the mis-
information within the inoculation (Compton et al., 2021). Active and passive methods exist, respec-
tively where rebuttals are made by participants or provided for them. There are, however, research 
gaps, particularly with regard to wider spread of inoculation (Compton et al., 2021). It is elsewhere 
argued that some attribution of the impact of inoculation underplays the factor of consensus messag-
ing within these studies (Williams and Bond, 2020). Earlier literature discussed the study of igno-
rance, agnotology, in schools as a method to counter climate misinformation (Bedford, 2010).
Education and science communication remain central.  According to Lewandowsky (2021b: 67), ‘knowl-
edge matters’. Communicating scientific consensus is widely discussed (Benegal and Scruggs, 2018; 
Björnberg et al., 2017; Chinn and Hart, 2021; Cook, 2017; Dixon et al., 2017; Hansson, 2018; Lewan-
dowsky, 2021b; Maertens et al., 2020; Rode et al., 2021; Romero-Canyas et al., 2019; Sauer et al., 
2021; Williams and Bond, 2020). A recent study argues that inconsistent results with consensus mes-
saging may be attributed to sensitising participants through pre-tests in study methods (Chinn and 
Hart, 2021). Three studies provide evidence for the knowledge deficit thesis, that education can reduce 
misperceptions and increase beliefs in spite of, though still limited by, different motivated reasoning 
barriers (Häkkinen and Akrami, 2014; Hess and Maki, 2019; Stevenson et al., 2014). Others found that 
correcting misinformation could increase factual accuracy, though did not necessarily influence other 
attitudes towards climate science (Porter et al., 2019; Watts, 2019).
Increasing climate literacy (Busch, 2021; Hansson, 2018; McCaffrey and Buhr, 2008) or social 
media literacy (Chen et al., 2021) have been proposed. Improved communication methods for the 
IPCC are asserted based on the premise that low scientific understanding risks denial in the public 
(Sterman, 2011). Accordingly, accommodating to the skillsets of audiences through reducing com-
plexity, considering enquiry skills, using relatable models and experiential learning techniques is 
all suggested (Sterman, 2011). Specific pedagogical techniques are mentioned including agnotol-
ogy (Bedford, 2010), humbling experiences (Ferkany, 2015) and the use of extra-curricular pro-
jects and social justice perspectives in climate courses (Ranney and Velautham, 2021). Including 
images and certainty ranges could also improve science messages (Bolsen et al., 2019; Joslyn and 
LeClerc, 2016), and more clearly communicating scientific methods (Sarathchandra and Haltinner, 
2020). Increasing critical thinking skills and cognitive consistency is suggested (Ferkany, 2015; 
Gehlbach et al., 2019; Johnson, 2017). Improving educators’ understandings of climate science 
was also of focus in the literature (Sezen-Barrie et al., 2019).
Mendy et al.	
511
There is some debate over how scientists, themselves, should increase trust in their science. 
Public outreach is asserted in a number of studies (Das, 2020; Hansson, 2018; Harvey et al., 2018). 
Increasing trustworthiness of the scientist is considered a four-step process by Goodwin and 
Dahlstrom (2014): (1) demonstrating vulnerability in meeting with sceptical audiences, (2) provid-
ing an empowering opportunity to assess scientists’ statements, (3) being transparent about previous 
errors and (4) separating policy from science. It is elsewhere argued that scientists can advocate for 
the credibility of their colleagues to increase uptake of information (Sarathchandra and Haltinner, 
2020). Alternatively, finding trusted leaders for climate communication can reach audiences who 
otherwise may be alienated (Motta et al., 2021; Sauer et al., 2021; Webb and Hayhoe, 2017).
Lewandowsky et al. (2015) argue that scientists should not allow pseudoscientific thinking to 
set the agenda, and caution against debating with someone unwilling to change their mind as it can 
lend legitimacy to a denialist position. This is questioned, however, since unconvinced individuals 
should not be disregarded prima facie as some, particularly those without vested motivations, may 
be open to discussion (Van Rensburg and Head, 2017). Considering the trends in post-normal sci-
ence, such as deliberation and co-production, it is also claimed to be important that scientists rec-
ognise a shared influence with other epistemes in policy-making: a scientist should contend with 
the socio-political underpinnings of science-making in the current era (Turnpenny, 2012). This 
contradicts the assertions from Goodwin and Dahlstrom (2014) to separate science from policy. An 
alternative suggestion is to explain the epistemology of science (Mason, 2020). Again, contradic-
tory findings underline research gaps.
Meeting conflicting worldviews and deliberation may shift beliefs.  Few studies explore deliberation or 
intergroup relations. These are clustered together here, despite considerable difference in the meth-
ods, predominantly due to underlying theories of purposefully meeting with conflicting world-
views. An empirical study finds that denialism is associated with intergroup conflicts and asserts 
the value of improving intergroup relations (Bliuc et al., 2015). It was found that denialists could 
temporarily migrate their beliefs across different discourses of denialism through participating in 
deliberative forums (Hobson and Niemeyer, 2013).
Methods to expose motivated agendas are understudied.  Some of the reviewed articles focus on those 
who spread denial. Farrell et al. (2019) propose that coinciding with methods to change beliefs, 
legal efforts should also be directed towards the economic and political structures of misinforma-
tion. Online, climate misinformation can be targeted through detecting malicious accounts or 
through punitive measures (Treen et al., 2020). It could also be strategic for scientists to reveal the 
funding of different false experts and the economic interests in sowing doubt (Harvey et al., 2018), 
not least as it provides to the public a reason for believing that some information might be consid-
ered false (Leuschner, 2018). Hansson (2017) summarises that scientists should not:
. . . act as if the denialists’ fake controversies were real controversies, and neither should we accept the 
deviant criteria of scientiﬁc assent that they try to impose on us. Our task is instead to expose their 
strategies, their agenda, and the pseudoscientiﬁc characteristics of their argumentation. And above all it is 
our task to explain what science really is, why it should not be politicized, and how it can provide humanity 
with a better common understanding of the world we are living in (p. 45).
Evidence of the effectiveness of counteraction strategies
Twenty-seven of the reviewed articles are empirical studies exploring the effectiveness of counter-
action strategies. In line with Capstick and Pidgeon (2014), we describe these in the two broad 
categories of epistemic and response denial.
512	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
Reduction of epistemic climate denial.  The studies exploring interventions towards epistemic denial 
can be divided into four types (Table 1): the perception of scientific consensus, as depicted in the 
so-called gateway belief model (GBM),1 and trend, attribution and impact denial (Rahmstorf, 
2005). These types are matched with the counteraction strategies found in the reviewed articles.
Counteracting misperceptions about the scientific consensus.  Several studies attempt to improve 
factually accurate understanding of scientific consensus, including through knowledge dissemina-
tion (Chinn and Hart, 2021), elite cue correction (Benegal and Scruggs, 2018) and content- and 
logic-based inoculation (Cook et al., 2017; Maertens et al., 2020; Williams and Bond, 2020), all 
found effective in changing perceptions and beliefs, and neutralising misinformation. However, 
only one study found results in terms of policy support (Cook et al., 2017). Some weaknesses 
of this approach are also accounted for, particularly that motivated reasoning continued to bias 
information reception (Chinn and Hart, 2021). Knowledge dissemination was found inconsistent 
in changing beliefs and policy support in the wider literature in review (Dixon et al., 2017; Sauer 
et al., 2021). Conservatives remained the least likely to believe in climate change, despite cor-
rections from a republican decision-maker, though more effective than a democrat (Benegal and 
Scruggs, 2018). Content based inoculation, here about the scientific consensus, has limited effect 
(Cook et al., 2017). In addition, effectiveness could be attributed to other aspects under study or 
methodological limitations (Chinn and Hart, 2021; Williams and Bond, 2020).
Counteracting denial of climate change trends.  Multiple studies explored how message framing 
could reduce selective information uptake on trend denial. Empathic messages (Munoz-Carrier 
et al., 2020), free-market frames (Dixon et al., 2017) and localising impacts (Romero-Canyas et al., 
2019) were all found to increase beliefs and acceptance of climate change. Informative and per-
suasive message frames were found less effective in changing beliefs (Munoz-Carrier et al., 2020). 
One study shows that emphasising economic benefits and national security of emissions reductions 
is effective in counteracting denialist statement on individual beliefs, and more effective than using 
stewardship or public health frames (McCright et al., 2016). Religious frames were found to be 
ineffective in influencing beliefs in conservatives, and free-market frames were found to be effec-
tive only on conservative participants (Dixon et al., 2017). In response to misinformation, using 
cold weather as proof against global warming, communication of co-benefits was highly regarded 
and led to increased engagement on social media (Lawrence and Estow, 2017).
Following misinformation spread, correcting president Trump’s false statements on climate 
change could lead to more factually accurate information in study participants, but did not impact 
wider climate change beliefs (Porter et al., 2019). Despite the concern of backfire, correcting online 
misinformation does not lead to increased climate denial (Lawrence and Estow, 2017).
Counteracting denial of the anthropogenic cause of climate change.  The studies in this group 
explore two forms of counteraction strategy: increasing critical thinking and communicating co-
benefits. Inviting participants to focus on the flawed logic in misinformation resulted in reducing 
influence of misinformation, increasing overall climate change beliefs and pro-environmental 
behaviour intentions (Johnson, 2017). A survey study explored leveraging cognitive consistency, 
through demonstrating that participants trusted other fields of science and, therefore, to remain 
consistent, reported higher beliefs in climate science (Gehlbach et  al., 2019). The effective-
ness of framing messages to explain climate change was more pronounced than risk frames, 
had a lasting effect, and could promote environmental behaviour (Rotman et  al., 2020). On 
co-benefits, one study shows that caring for one’s community, or behaviour that contributes 
towards economic or technological development, increases pro-environmental behaviour inten-
tions (Bain et al., 2012).
Mendy et al.	
513
Counteracting the denial of climate change impacts.  Two studies used scientific communication 
methods to reduce misperceptions of climate impacts. Visualisations of hazards were shown to 
increase acceptance of science and support for mitigation policy irrespective of political beliefs and 
preferences (Bolsen et al., 2019). By including the certainty range of projections, the trust in sci-
ence increased (Joslyn and LeClerc, 2016). The use of climate scenarios in deliberation forums can 
temporarily reduce strength and change form of denial (Hobson and Niemeyer, 2013). It was found, 
however, that those who were interviewed a year later had re-migrated to their original positions.
Reduction of response climate denial in empirical studies.  Based upon literature that has found higher 
levels of response denial in conservatives, particularly among Republican voters in the United 
States, the studies in this category typically explore intervention strategies and then test averages 
of beliefs. Table 2 accounts for studies specifically exploring the effectiveness of different counter-
action strategies on conservative, right-wing or Republican beliefs in relation to response denial.
Trusted elite cues.  Three studies support the thesis that trusted sources can be effective informa-
tion transmitters. Considered here as trusted elite cues, it was found that conservative politicians 
and military could increase reported levels of support for mitigation policy in conservative students 
(Sauer et al., 2021). Evangelical students increased their climate change beliefs following a lecture 
by an evangelical climate scientist (Webb and Hayhoe, 2017). Military cues were found to increase 
levels of concern and beliefs about climate change in conservatives more generally, but unlike 
with conservative students, this did not increase support for mitigation policy (Motta et al., 2021).
Message framing.  Using emotional narratives to curate a negative experience in participants 
increased conservative concern about climate change and support for mitigation (Wong-Parodi and 
Feygina, 2021). Nature videos increased environmental concern in sceptical research participants 
when they contained both positive and negative tones (Franzen and Mader, 2020). Messages that 
reinforce and preserve socio-political systems preferred by conservatives with systems-justification 
reasoning were found to increase pro-environmental behaviour intentions (Feygina et al., 2010).
Education.  Arguably all the methods presented in the ‘Reduction of response climate denial in 
empirical studies’ section relate to education in terms of knowledge dissemination. Education was 
found to increase belief levels in conservatives (Hess and Maki, 2019) and overcome individualis-
tic worldviews in adolescents (Stevenson et al., 2014). An IPCC newscast was effective in reduc-
ing levels of denial in those with social dominance orientation, an ideology that presumes natural 
social hierarchies (Häkkinen and Akrami, 2014). These studies, however, rely on the willingness 
of participants to be exposed to information, and selective exposure bias may deter, for example, 
students taking climate change courses (Hess and Maki, 2019). This suggests a limited effective-
ness of all knowledge dissemination techniques.
Intentions of counteracting climate denial
Counteracting climate denial can be done for different reasons. Here we categorise the intentions 
of intervention from all 65 reviewed articles. Four types emerged from the systematic review: two 
relating to science and knowledge and two concerning mitigation and public debate. The first 
intention is to increase accurate public understanding of climate change science: ‘Targeting 
Epistemic Beliefs’. The second is ‘Science Advocacy’, related to the responsibilities of the scien-
tist, asserting the value of science to the public. The third, ‘Changing Response Attitudes’, is to 
increase support for climate mitigation, from personal behaviours, increasing policy support, or 
otherwise. The fourth is ‘Countering Motivated Denial’, targeted towards vested-interest groups 
514	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
and their activities. The intentions behind the counteraction strategies in the reviewed articles are 
either explicitly stated or appear implicitly, for example, from the study aim or the framing of cli-
mate denial, or in terms of intended effects of interventions.
Targeting epistemic beliefs.  Most counteraction efforts can be considered to aim for affecting the 
public understanding of climate science, though deliberative methods and the strategies that expose 
agendas appear least likely to consider influencing epistemic beliefs. By contrast, inoculating the 
public against misinformation, and education and scientific communication, overwhelmingly 
focus on these outcomes.
Science advocacy.  There are strong assertions within the reviewed articles about the important role 
of the scientist and of science in society. As such, a few strategies aim to advocate for climate sci-
ence. Science advocacy stands out as a complex and divisive issue though and there are differing 
assertions about the separation of science and policy in the public eye.
Changing response attitudes.  Based upon theorisations that values underpinning policy and behav-
iour preferences could be swayed, message framing largely focuses on influencing response atti-
tudes. Inoculation and exposing agendas are least likely to consider these outputs. It can be 
assumed, though, that reducing the capacities of vested interests, or neutralising their spread of 
disinformation by inoculation, could produce long-term outcomes related to response attitudes and 
successful climate mitigation.
Counteracting motivated denial.  The fourth intention is the aspiration to counteract vested-interest 
groups and their work. Such intentions can be realised through reducing the risk of misperceptions 
through inoculation. Some studies argue for revealing funding, networks and techniques of denial 
organisations. Education and scientific communication and message framing were least likely to 
aim to counteract motivated denial.
Linking intentions to strategies.  Figure 1 illustrates how the strategy types described in the ‘Counter-
active responses to climate denial’ section had multiple intentions and how common the intentions 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Message Framing
Inoculaon
Educaon
Conﬂict and
Deliberaon
Exposing Agendas
Number of Intenons
Strategy Types according to secon 4.1
Targeng Epistemic Beliefs
Changing Response Atudes
Science Advocacy
Countering Movated Denial
Figure 1.  A representation of the multiple intentions for counteraction from all reviewed articles.
Note: please refer to online version for colour figure.
Mendy et al.	
515
were in each strategy. A strategy may have more than one intended outcome. Different strategies 
had different intentions, except for a strong general commitment to foster the public understanding 
of climate science. The reviewed studies also focus on the reputation of climate change science, 
albeit message framing strategies appear more interested in influencing response attitudes, for 
example, support for mitigation policies. For inoculation strategies, counteracting vested interests 
was the second most common preferred outcome.
5. Discussion
The research on climate denial is well established, with extensive documentation of long-standing 
denial campaigns (Franta, 2022), and detailed analysis of the characteristics and explanations of 
denialism. This review adds a systematic and comprehensive description and analysis of the 
research focusing on counteractive interventions to climate denial. It further accounts for the 
empirical evidence of the effectiveness of various interventions and documents the intentions of 
counteractions. The many divergent findings identified within the literature indicate significant 
research gaps.
Our first observation is that the research on ways to counteract climate denial, despite a growing 
interest in the field since the review by Björnberg et al. (2017), is still limited, and to a large extent 
still theoretical rather than empirical or focused on the effectiveness of interventions. Recent over-
views (Hornsey and Lewandowsky, 2022) provide important contributions and recommendations, 
but as shown here, results and conclusions still point in different directions on some key issues. 
Some of this may be attributed to the different drivers of climate denial and the different purposes 
for intervention. However, it is not clear to what extent this is the case, and more specificity in the 
intentions could be helpful in future research. A main issue concerns whether to separate science 
and policy in public, or to acknowledge the interconnectedness of these issues to depolarise 
responses to climate information. While some studies consider empathising with the roots of cli-
mate attitudes, others emphasise the risk of this on diverting scientists’ energies where these atti-
tudes can be illegitimate or pseudoscientific. Furthermore, the effects of using emotional narratives 
are disputed. More research on these aspects would be welcomed.
A second observation concerns the challenge that change in the public understanding of climate 
science due to successful interventions, in unchanged social, political or economic systems, may 
still be ineffective for climate mitigation (Lewandowsky, 2021b). Changing views without provid-
ing hopeful opportunities could, namely, lead to a sense of alarm or helplessness in the public, 
backfiring in terms of a renewed cause of denial for emotional protection (Norgaard, 2006a). 
Adding that most claims of effectiveness are time and context specific, underlines a considerable 
research gap. Besides pointing out that counteractive measures ought to be considered in parallel 
with climate governance and societal dialogue more broadly, additional studies are needed to better 
understand the long-term and contextual aspects of counteractive interventions. Moreover, since 
much focus in the reviewed studies is placed on individuals and their beliefs, plausibly due to the 
overwhelming representation of science communication, sociology and psychological studies 
within the literature, studies are needed on counteracting measures at the societal level, for exam-
ple, on legislation for the spread of disinformation.
A third observation is that the reviewed studies seldom explore why intervention efforts of sci-
entists, science communicators, and climate governance actors have often been insufficient. 
Arguably, by engaging in activities that aim to counteract those who spread denial, these groups 
run the risk of being considered partisan in a manner principally similar to vested fossil fuel inter-
ests being accused. This may explain why several researchers are reluctant to engage with the full 
spectrum of climate misrepresentations and points towards both research gaps and the necessity for 
researchers to increasingly reflect on their roles (Pielke, 2007), and how to uphold academic 
516	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
independence and integrity when counteracting climate denial. More research is nevertheless 
needed to better understand how scholars and experts may engage with climate misrepresentations 
in public debate, politics and courtrooms.
Evidently, this review shows that no advice can be given on how to universally counteract cli-
mate denial. For those interested in doing so, however, three guiding questions can be of value: first, 
is it epistemic or response denial that is to be engaged with? As our review shows, different strate-
gies are suitable for specific forms of denial, and for specific drivers (see Tables 1 and 2 for a guide). 
Second, what are the preferred outcomes of a counteraction intervention; is it changing minds, 
behaviour or policies? If the intention is to increase support for behaviour change or political action 
(response denial), then message framing strategies might be more helpful than inoculation against 
misinformation. Our review accounts for the different ways in which strategies have been developed 
to affect a number of different outcomes. Third, what is one’s own role – for example, a scientist, 
expert or politician – and how might it be perceived and the intervention be interpreted? In some 
cases, using other trusted sources to communicate the message may be necessary.
Finally, we assert that much work remains to be done. Despite the IPCC’s most recent assess-
ments, demonstrating the urgency for rapid climate mitigation, the widespread delay of goal 
achievement, rooted in epistemic but predominantly response denial, persists. As mitigation efforts 
continue to advance, it is important to understand how to gain enhanced public acceptance. 
Counteracting denial is critical in that endeavour.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publica-
tion of this article: We are grateful for financial support from Mistra (DIA 2019/28)–Formas (2021-00416).
ORCID iDs
Laila Mendy 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8597-8301
Mikael Karlsson 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3869-9729
Daniel Lindvall 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8950-6854
Supplemental material
Supplemental material for this article is available online.
Note
1.	
The GBM proposes that understanding the scientific consensus about climate trends and human attribu-
tion is an indicator of wider positive attitudes about climate change science (Cook et al., 2017).
References
Bain PG, Hornsey MJ, Bongiorno R and Jeffries C (2012) Promoting pro-environmental action in climate 
change deniers. Nature Climate Change 2(8): 600–603.
Bedford D (2010) Agnotology as a teaching tool: Learning climate science by studying misinformation. 
Journal of Geography 109(4): 159–165.
Benegal SD and Scruggs LA (2018) Correcting misinformation about climate change: The impact of partisan-
ship in an experimental setting. Climatic Change 148(1–2): 61–80.
Björnberg KE, Karlsson M, Gilek M and Hansson SO (2017) Climate and environmental science denial: A 
review of the scientific literature published in 1990–2015. Journal of Cleaner Production 167: 229–241.
Bliuc AM, McGarty C, Thomas EF, Lala G, Berndsen M and Misajon R (2015) Public division about climate 
change rooted in conflicting socio-political identities. Nature Climate Change 5(3): 226–229.
Bolsen T, Palm R and Kingsland JT (2019) Counteracting climate science politicization with effective frames 
and imagery. Science Communication 41(2): 147–171.
Mendy et al.	
517
Brulle RJ (2014) Institutionalizing delay: Foundation funding and the creation of U.S. climate change coun-
ter-movement organizations. Climatic Change 122(4): 681–694.
Busch KC (2021) Textbooks of doubt, tested: The effect of a denialist framing on adolescents’ certainty about 
climate change. Environmental Education Research 27(11): 1574–1598.
Capstick SB and Pidgeon NF (2014) What is climate change scepticism? Examination of the concept using a 
mixed methods study of the UK public. Global Environmental Change 24: 389–401.
Chen CF, Shi W, Yang J and Fu HH (2021) Social bots’ role in climate change discussion on Twitter: 
Measuring standpoints, topics, and interaction strategies. Advances in Climate Change Research 12(6): 
913–923.
Chinn S and Hart PS (2021) Effects of consensus messages and political ideology on climate change attitudes: 
Inconsistent findings and the effect of a pretest. Climatic Change 167(3): 47.
Cohen S (2001) States of Denial: Knowing About Atrocities and Suffering. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Compton J, Van der Linden S, Cook J and Melisa B (2021) Inoculation theory in the post-truth era: Extant 
findings and new frontiers for contested science, misinformation, and conspiracy theories. Social and 
Personality Psychology Compass 15(6): e12602.
Cook J (2017) Understanding and countering climate science denial. Journal and Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of New South Wales 150(2): 207–219.
Cook J, Ellerton P and Kinkead D (2018) Deconstructing climate misinformation to identify reasoning errors. 
Environmental Research Letters 13(2): 024018.
Cook J, Lewandowsky S and Ecker UKH (2017) Neutralizing misinformation through inoculation: Exposing 
misleading argumentation techniques reduces their influence. PLoS ONE 12(5): e0175799.
Das A (2020) Combatting climate change denial. Resonance 25(7): 933–945.
Denyer D and Tranfield D (2009) Producing a systematic review. In: Buchanan DA and Bryman A (eds) The 
Sage Handbook of Organizational Research Methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 671–689.
Dixon G, Hmielowski J and Ma Y (2017) Improving climate change acceptance among U.S. conservatives 
through value-based message targeting. Science Communication 39(4): 520–534.
Edvardsson Björnberg K and Karlsson M (2022) Faithful stewards of god’s creation? Swedish evangelical 
denominations and climate change. Religions 13(5): 465.
Farrell J, McConnell K and Brulle R (2019) Evidence-based strategies to combat scientific misinformation. 
Nature Climate Change 9(3): 3.
Ferkany M (2015) Is it arrogant to deny climate change or is it arrogant to say it is arrogant? Understanding 
arrogance and cultivating humility in climate change discourse and education. Environmental Values 
24(6): 705–724.
Feygina I, Jost JT and Goldsmith RE (2010) System justification, the denial of global warming, and the 
possibility of ‘system-sanctioned change’. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36(3): 326–338.
Franta B (2022) Weaponizing economics: Big oil, economic consultants, and climate policy delay. 
Environmental Politics 31(4): 555–575.
Franzen A and Mader S (2020) Can climate skeptics be convinced? The effect of nature videos on environ-
mental concern. Sustainability 12(7): 7.
Gehlbach H, Robinson CD and Vriesema CC (2019) Leveraging cognitive consistency to nudge conservative 
climate change beliefs. Journal of Environmental Psychology 61: 134–137.
Goodwin J and Dahlstrom MF (2014) Communication strategies for earning trust in climate change debates. 
WIREs Climate Change 5(1): 151–160.
Häkkinen K and Akrami N (2014) Ideology and climate change denial. Personality and Individual Differences 
70: 62–65.
Haltinner K and Sarathchandra D (2018) Climate change skepticism as a psychological coping strategy. 
Sociology Compass 12(6): e12586.
Hansson SO (2017) Science denial as a form of pseudoscience. Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 
Part A 63: 39–47.
Hansson SO (2018) Dealing with climate science denialism: Experiences from confrontations with other 
forms of pseudoscience. Climate Policy 18(9): 1094–1102.
518	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
Harvey JA, Van den Berg D, Ellers J, Kampen R, Crowther TW, Roessingh P, et al. (2018) Internet blogs, 
polar bears, and climate-change denial by proxy. BioScience 68(4): 281–287.
Hess DJ and Maki A (2019) Climate change belief, sustainability education, and political values: Assessing 
the need for higher-education curriculum reform. Journal of Cleaner Production 228: 1157–1166.
Hobson K and Niemeyer S (2013) ‘What sceptics believe’: The effects of information and deliberation on 
climate change scepticism. Public Understanding of Science 22(4): 396–412.
Hornsey MJ and Fielding KS (2017) Attitude roots and Jiu Jitsu persuasion: Understanding and overcoming 
the motivated rejection of science. American Psychologist 72(5): 459–473.
Hornsey MJ and Lewandowsky S (2022) A toolkit for understanding and addressing climate scepticism. 
Nature Human Behaviour 6(11): 11.
Johnson DR (2017) Improving skeptics’ reasoning when evaluating climate change material: A cognitive 
intervention. Ecopsychology 9(3): 130–142.
Joslyn SL and LeClerc JE (2016) Climate projections and uncertainty communication. Topics in Cognitive 
Science 8(1): 222–241.
Jylhä KM, Strimling P and Rydgren J (2020) Climate change denial among radical right-wing supporters. 
Sustainability 12(23): 23.
Karlsson M and Gilek M (2020) Mind the gap: Coping with delay in environmental governance. Ambio 49(5): 
1067–1075.
Lawrence EK and Estow S (2017) Responding to misinformation about climate change. Applied Environmental 
Education & Communication 16(2): 117–128.
Leuschner A (2018) Is it appropriate to ‘target’ inappropriate dissent? On the normative consequences of 
climate skepticism. Synthese 195(3): 1255–1271.
Lewandowsky S (2021a) Climate change disinformation and how to combat it. Annual Review of Public 
Health 42(1): 1–21.
Lewandowsky S (2021b) Liberty and the pursuit of science denial. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 
42: 65–69.
Lewandowsky S, Oreskes N, Risbey JS, Newell BR and Smithson M (2015) Seepage: Climate change denial 
and its effect on the scientific community. Global Environmental Change 33: 1–13.
Lo AY (2014) The right to doubt: Climate-change scepticism and asserted rights to private property. 
Environmental Politics 23(4): 549–569.
Maertens R, Anseel F and Van der Linden S (2020) Combatting climate change misinformation: Evidence 
for longevity of inoculation and consensus messaging effects. Journal of Environmental Psychology 70: 
101455.
Marlow T, Miller S and Roberts JT (2021) Bots and online climate discourses: Twitter discourse on President 
Trump’s announcement of U.S. withdrawal from the Paris agreement. Climate Policy 21(6): 765–777.
Mason SE (2020) Climate science denial as willful hermeneutical ignorance. Social Epistemology 34(5): 
469–477.
Masson-Delmotte V, Zhai P, Pirani A, Connors SL, Péan C, Chen Y, et al. (eds) (2021) Climate Change 
2021: The Physical Science Basis: Contribution of WGI to the Sixth Assessment Report of the IPCC. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCaffrey MS and Buhr SM (2008) Clarifying climate confusion: Addressing systemic holes, cognitive 
gaps, and misconceptions through climate literacy. Physical Geography 29(6): 512–528.
McCright AM, Charters M, Dentzman K and Dietz T (2016) Examining the effectiveness of climate change 
frames in the face of a climate change denial counter-frame. Topics in Cognitive Science 8(1): 76–97.
Medimorec S and Pennycook G (2015) The language of denial: Text analysis reveals differences in language 
use between climate change proponents and skeptics. Climatic Change 133(4): 597–605.
Moreno JA, Kinn M and Narberhaus M (2022) A stronghold of climate change denialism in Germany: 
Case study of the output and press representation of the think tank EIKE. International Journal of 
Communication 16: 267–288.
Motta M, Ralston R and Spindel J (2021) A call to arms for climate change? How military service member con-
cern about climate change can inform effective climate communication. Environmental Communication 
15(1): 85–98.
Mendy et al.	
519
Munoz-Carrier G, Thomsen D and Pickering GJ (2020) Psychological and experiential factors affecting cli-
mate change perception: Learnings from a transnational empirical study and implications for framing 
climate-related flood events. Environmental Research Communications 2(4): 045003.
Norgaard KM (2006a) ‘People want to protect themselves a little bit’: Emotions, denial, and social movement 
nonparticipation. Sociological Inquiry 76(3): 372–396.
Norgaard KM (2006b) ‘We don’t really want to know’: Environmental justice and socially organized denial 
of global warming in Norway. Organization & Environment 19(3): 347–370.
Oreskes N and Conway EM (2010a) Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on 
Issues From Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming. London: Bloomsbury Press.
Oreskes N and Conway EM (2010b) Defeating the merchants of doubt. Nature 465(7299): 686–687.
Pielke RA Jr (2007) The Honest Broker: Making Sense of Science in Policy and Politics. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Porter E, Wood TJ and Bahador B (2019) Can presidential misinformation on climate change be corrected? 
Evidence from Internet and phone experiments. Research & Politics 6(3): 2053168019864784.
Rahmstorf S (2005) The Climate Sceptics Weather Catastrophes and Climate Change: Is There Still Hope for 
Us? Munich: Munich Re Group. Available at: http://www.pik-potsdam.de/~stefan/Publications/Other/
rahmstorf_climate_sceptics_2004.pdf
Ranney MA and Velautham L (2021) Climate change cognition and education: Given no silver bullet for 
denial, diverse information-hunks increase global warming acceptance. Current Opinion in Behavioral 
Sciences 42: 139–146.
Rode JB, Dent AL, Benedict CN, Brosnahan DB, Martinez RL and Ditto PH (2021) Influencing climate 
change attitudes in the United States: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental 
Psychology 76: 101623.
Romero-Canyas R, Larson-Konar D, Redlawsk DP, Borie-Holtz D, Gaby K, Langer S, et al. (2019) Bringing 
the heat home: Television spots about local impacts reduce global warming denialism. Environmental 
Communication 13(6): 740–760.
Rotman JD, Weber TJ and Perkins AW (2020) Addressing global warming denialism: The efficacy of mech-
anism-based explanations in changing global warming beliefs. Public Opinion Quarterly 84(1): 74–103.
Rudiak-Gould P (2013) Cross-cultural insights into climate change skepticism. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society 94(11): 1707–1713.
Sarathchandra D and Haltinner K (2020) Trust/distrust judgments and perceptions of climate science: A 
research note on skeptics’ rationalizations. Public Understanding of Science 29(1): 53–60.
Sauer KA, Capps DK, Jackson DF and Capps KA (2021) Six minutes to promote change: People, not facts, 
alter students’ perceptions on climate change. Ecology and Evolution 11(11): 5790–5802.
Schmid P and Betsch C (2019) Effective strategies for rebutting science denialism in public discussions. 
Nature Human Behaviour 3(9): 931–939.
Sezen-Barrie A, Shea N and Borman JH (2019) Probing into the sources of ignorance: Science teachers’ prac-
tices of constructing arguments or rebuttals to denialism of climate change. Environmental Education 
Research 25(6): 846–866.
Shirley BJ (2021) Post-fact fact sheets: Dissociative framing as a strategy to work past climate change denial. 
Technical Communication 68(2): 41–60.
Sterman JD (2011) Communicating climate change risks in a skeptical world. Climatic Change 108(4): 811.
Stevenson KT, Peterson MN, Bondell HD, Moore SE and Carrier SJ (2014) Overcoming skepticism with edu-
cation: Interacting influences of worldview and climate change knowledge on perceived climate change 
risk among adolescents. Climatic Change 126(3–4): 293–304.
Taylor-Neu RH (2020) Parasites and post-truth climate. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 30(1): 4–26.
Torcello L (2016) The ethics of belief, cognition, and climate change pseudoskepticism: Implications for 
public discourse. Topics in Cognitive Science 8(1): 19–48.
Treen KM, d’I Williams HTP and O’Neill SJ (2020) Online misinformation about climate change. WIREs 
Climate Change 11(5): e665.
Trémolière B and Djeriouat H (2021) Exploring the roles of analytic cognitive style, climate science literacy, 
illusion of knowledge, and political orientation in climate change skepticism. Journal of Environmental 
Psychology 74: 101561.
520	
Public Understanding of Science 33(4)
Turnpenny JR (2012) Lessons from post-normal science for climate science-sceptic debates. WIREs Climate 
Change 3(5): 397–407.
Van Rensburg W (2015) Climate change scepticism: A conceptual re-evaluation. SAGE Open 5(2): 
2158244015579723.
Van Rensburg W and Head BW (2017) Climate change scepticism: Reconsidering how to respond to core 
criticisms of climate science and policy. SAGE Open 7(4): 2158244017748983.
Watts E (2019) Teaching climate science to increase understanding & receptivity. The American Biology 
Teacher 81(5): 308–316.
Webb BS and Hayhoe D (2017) Assessing the influence of an educational presentation on climate change 
beliefs at an evangelical Christian college. Journal of Geoscience Education 65(3): 272–282.
Whitmarsh L and Corner A (2017) Tools for a new climate conversation: A mixed-methods study of language 
for public engagement across the political spectrum. Global Environmental Change 42: 122–135.
Williams MN and Bond CMC (2020) A preregistered replication of ‘Inoculating the public against misinfor-
mation about climate change’. Journal of Environmental Psychology 70: 101456.
Wong-Parodi G and Feygina I (2020) Understanding and countering the motivated roots of climate change 
denial. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 42: 60–64.
Wong-Parodi G and Feygina I (2021) Engaging people on climate change: The role of emotional responses. 
Environmental Communication 15(5): 571–593.
Author biographies
Laila Mendy is a PhD student at Uppsala University, exploring climate denial in Sweden. She is interested in 
the ways in which climate research influences and is influenced by public debates about climate mitigation.
Mikael Karlsson is Associate Professor in Environmental Science and studies environmental governance with 
a focus on climate change and biodiversity loss. He takes strong interest in issues concerning science denial 
and decision-making processes.
Daniel Lindvall has a PhD in Sociology, and his research focus is climate and energy policy acceptance, and 
aspects related to justice and democracy in the climate transition. He has also a background working as a civil 
servant in the Swedish government and in international institutions.
