Vol.:(0123456789)
1 3
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-19718-6
REVIEW ARTICLE
A review of the global climate change impacts, adaptation, 
and sustainable mitigation measures
Kashif Abbass1 · Muhammad Zeeshan Qasim2 · Huaming Song1 · Muntasir Murshed3,4   · Haider Mahmood5   · 
Ijaz Younis1
Received: 26 August 2021 / Accepted: 10 March 2022 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022
Abstract
Climate change is a long-lasting change in the weather arrays across tropics to polls. It is a global threat that has embarked on 
to put stress on various sectors. This study is aimed to conceptually engineer how climate variability is deteriorating the sus-
tainability of diverse sectors worldwide. Specifically, the agricultural sector’s vulnerability is a globally concerning scenario, 
as sufficient production and food supplies are threatened due to irreversible weather fluctuations. In turn, it is challenging the 
global feeding patterns, particularly in countries with agriculture as an integral part of their economy and total productivity. 
Climate change has also put the integrity and survival of many species at stake due to shifts in optimum temperature ranges, 
thereby accelerating biodiversity loss by progressively changing the ecosystem structures. Climate variations increase the 
likelihood of particular food and waterborne and vector-borne diseases, and a recent example is a coronavirus pandemic. 
Climate change also accelerates the enigma of antimicrobial resistance, another threat to human health due to the increasing 
incidence of resistant pathogenic infections. Besides, the global tourism industry is devastated as climate change impacts 
unfavorable tourism spots. The methodology investigates hypothetical scenarios of climate variability and attempts to describe 
the quality of evidence to facilitate readers’ careful, critical engagement. Secondary data is used to identify sustainability 
issues such as environmental, social, and economic viability. To better understand the problem, gathered the information 
in this report from various media outlets, research agencies, policy papers, newspapers, and other sources. This review is a 
sectorial assessment of climate change mitigation and adaptation approaches worldwide in the aforementioned sectors and 
the associated economic costs. According to the findings, government involvement is necessary for the country’s long-term 
development through strict accountability of resources and regulations implemented in the past to generate cutting-edge 
climate policy. Therefore, mitigating the impacts of climate change must be of the utmost importance, and hence, this global 
threat requires global commitment to address its dreadful implications to ensure global sustenance.
Keywords  Climate change · COVID-19 · Antimicrobial resistance · Biodiversity · Mitigation measures
Responsible Editor: Philippe Garrigues.
 *	 Huaming Song 
	
huaming@njust.edu.cn
	
Kashif Abbass 
	
kashifabbass@njust.edu.cn
	
Muhammad Zeeshan Qasim 
	
zeeshanqasim888@outlook.com
	
Muntasir Murshed 
	
muntasir.murshed@northsouth.edu
	
Haider Mahmood 
	
haidermahmood@hotmail.com
	
Ijaz Younis 
	
ijazyounis@njust.edu.cn
1	
School of Economics and Management, Nanjing 
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210094, 
People’s Republic of China
2	
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Chemical Pollution Control 
and Resources Reuse, School of Environmental 
and Biological Engineering, Nanjing University of Science 
and Technology, Xiaolingwei 200, Nanjing 210094, 
People’s Republic of China
3	
School of Business and Economics, North South University, 
Dhaka 1229, Bangladesh
4	
Department of Journalism, Media and Communications, 
Daffodil International University, Dhaka, Bangladesh
5	
Department of Finance, College of Business Administration, 
Prince Sattam Bin Abdulaziz University, 173, Alkharj 11942, 
Saudi Arabia
/ Published online: 4 April 2022
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Introduction
Worldwide observed and anticipated climatic changes for 
the twenty-first century and global warming are significant 
global changes that have been encountered during the past 
65 years. Climate change (CC) is an inter-governmental 
complex challenge globally with its influence over various 
components of the ecological, environmental, socio-polit-
ical, and socio-economic disciplines (Adger et al. 2005; 
Leal Filho et al. 2021; Feliciano et al. 2022). Climate 
change involves heightened temperatures across numer-
ous worlds (Battisti and Naylor 2009; Schuurmans 2021; 
Weisheimer and Palmer 2005; Yadav et al. 2015). With 
the onset of the industrial revolution, the problem of earth 
climate was amplified manifold (Leppänen et al. 2014). 
It is reported that the immediate attention and due steps 
might increase the probability of overcoming its devastat-
ing impacts. It is not plausible to interpret the exact conse-
quences of climate change (CC) on a sectoral basis (Izagu-
irre et al. 2021; Jurgilevich et al. 2017), which is evident 
by the emerging level of recognition plus the inclusion of 
climatic uncertainties at both local and national level of 
policymaking (Ayers et al. 2014).
Climate change is characterized based on the compre-
hensive long-haul temperature and precipitation trends 
and other components such as pressure and humid-
ity level in the surrounding environment. Besides, the 
irregular weather patterns, retreating of global ice sheets, 
and the corresponding elevated sea level rise are among 
the most renowned international and domestic effects 
of climate change (Lipczynska-Kochany 2018; Michel 
et al. 2021; Murshed and Dao 2020). Before the indus-
trial revolution, natural sources, including volcanoes, 
forest fires, and seismic activities, were regarded as the 
distinct sources of greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as 
­CO2, ­CH4, ­N2O, and ­H2O into the atmosphere (Murshed 
et al. 2020; Hussain et al. 2020; Sovacool et al. 2021; 
Usman and Balsalobre-Lorente 2022; Murshed 2022). 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) struck a major agreement to tackle 
climate change and accelerate and intensify the actions 
and investments required for a sustainable low-carbon 
future at Conference of the Parties (COP-21) in Paris on 
December 12, 2015. The Paris Agreement expands on 
the Convention by bringing all nations together for the 
first time in a single cause to undertake ambitious meas-
ures to prevent climate change and adapt to its impacts, 
with increased funding to assist developing countries in 
doing so. As so, it marks a turning point in the global 
climate fight. The core goal of the Paris Agreement 
is to improve the global response to the threat of cli-
mate change by keeping the global temperature rise this 
century well below 2 °C over pre-industrial levels and to 
pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5° C 
(Sharma et al. 2020; Sharif et al. 2020; Chien et al. 2021.
Furthermore, the agreement aspires to strengthen nations’ 
ability to deal with the effects of climate change and align 
financing flows with low GHG emissions and climate-resil-
ient paths (Shahbaz et al. 2019; Anwar et al. 2021; Usman 
et al. 2022a). To achieve these lofty goals, adequate financial 
resources must be mobilized and provided, as well as a new 
technology framework and expanded capacity building, allow-
ing developing countries and the most vulnerable countries 
to act under their respective national objectives. The agree-
ment also establishes a more transparent action and support 
mechanism. All Parties are required by the Paris Agreement 
to do their best through “nationally determined contribu-
tions” (NDCs) and to strengthen these efforts in the coming 
years (Balsalobre-Lorente et al. 2020). It includes obligations 
that all Parties regularly report on their emissions and imple-
mentation activities. A global stock-take will be conducted 
every five years to review collective progress toward the agree-
ment’s goal and inform the Parties’ future individual actions. 
The Paris Agreement became available for signature on April 
22, 2016, Earth Day, at the United Nations Headquarters in 
New York. On November 4, 2016, it went into effect 30 days 
after the so-called double threshold was met (ratification by 55 
nations accounting for at least 55% of world emissions). More 
countries have ratified and continue to ratify the agreement 
since then, bringing 125 Parties in early 2017. To fully opera-
tionalize the Paris Agreement, a work program was initiated 
in Paris to define mechanisms, processes, and recommenda-
tions on a wide range of concerns (Murshed et al. 2021). Since 
2016, Parties have collaborated in subsidiary bodies (APA, 
SBSTA, and SBI) and numerous formed entities. The Confer-
ence of the Parties functioning as the meeting of the Parties 
to the Paris Agreement (CMA) convened for the first time in 
November 2016 in Marrakesh in conjunction with COP22 and 
made its first two resolutions. The work plan is scheduled to 
be finished by 2018. Some mitigation and adaptation strategies 
to reduce the emission in the prospective of Paris agreement 
are following firstly, a long-term goal of keeping the increase 
in global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-
industrial levels, secondly, to aim to limit the rise to 1.5 °C, 
since this would significantly reduce risks and the impacts of 
climate change, thirdly, on the need for global emissions to 
peak as soon as possible, recognizing that this will take longer 
for developing countries, lastly, to undertake rapid reductions 
after that under the best available science, to achieve a bal-
ance between emissions and removals in the second half of 
the century. On the other side, some adaptation strategies are; 
strengthening societies’ ability to deal with the effects of cli-
mate change and to continue & expand international assistance 
for developing nations’ adaptation.
42540
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
However, anthropogenic activities are currently 
regarded as most accountable for CC (Murshed et al. 
2022). Apart from the industrial revolution, other 
anthropogenic activities include excessive agricultural 
operations, which further involve the high use of fuel-
based mechanization, burning of agricultural residues, 
burning fossil fuels, deforestation, national and domestic 
transportation sectors, etc. (Huang et al. 2016). Conse-
quently, these anthropogenic activities lead to climatic 
catastrophes, damaging local and global infrastructure, 
human health, and total productivity. Energy consump-
tion has mounted GHGs levels concerning warming tem-
peratures as most of the energy production in developing 
countries comes from fossil fuels (Balsalobre-Lorente 
et al. 2022; Usman et al. 2022b; Abbass et al. 2021a; 
Ishikawa-Ishiwata and Furuya 2022).
This review aims to highlight the effects of climate 
change in a socio-scientific aspect by analyzing the exist-
ing literature on various sectorial pieces of evidence glob-
ally that influence the environment. Although this review 
provides a thorough examination of climate change and its 
severe affected sectors that pose a grave danger for global 
agriculture, biodiversity, health, economy, forestry, and 
tourism, and to purpose some practical prophylactic meas-
ures and mitigation strategies to be adapted as sound sub-
stitutes to survive from climate change (CC) impacts. The 
societal implications of irregular weather patterns and other 
effects of climate changes are discussed in detail. Some 
numerous sustainable mitigation measures and adaptation 
practices and techniques at the global level are discussed in 
this review with an in-depth focus on its economic, social, 
and environmental aspects. Methods of data collection sec-
tion are included in the supplementary information.
Review methodology
Related study and its objectives
Today, we live an ordinary life in the beautiful digi-
tal, globalized world where climate change has a deci-
sive role. What happens in one country has a massive 
influence on geographically far apart countries, which 
points to the current crisis known as COVID-19 (Sarkar 
et al. 2021). The most dangerous disease like COVID-
19 has affected the world’s climate changes and eco-
nomic conditions (Abbass et al. 2022; Pirasteh-Anosheh 
et  al.  2021). The purpose of the present study is to 
review the status of research on the subject, which is 
based on “Global Climate Change Impacts, adaptation, 
and sustainable mitigation measures” by systematically 
reviewing past published and unpublished research work. 
Furthermore, the current study seeks to comment on 
research on the same topic and suggest future research 
on the same topic. Specifically, the present study aims: 
The first one is, organize publications to make them easy 
and quick to find. Secondly, to explore issues in this area, 
propose an outline of research for future work. The third 
aim of the study is to synthesize the previous literature 
on climate change, various sectors, and their mitigation 
measurement. Lastly, classify the articles according to 
the different methods and procedures that have been 
adopted.
Review methodology for reviewers
This review-based article followed systematic literature 
review techniques that have proved the literature review as 
a rigorous framework (Benita 2021; Tranfield et al. 2003). 
Moreover, we illustrate in Fig. 1 the search method that we 
have started for this research. First, finalized the research 
theme to search literature (Cooper et al. 2018). Second, 
used numerous research databases to search related articles 
and download from the database (Web of Science, Google 
Scholar, Scopus Index Journals, Emerald, Elsevier Science 
Direct, Springer, and Sciverse). We focused on various arti-
cles, with research articles, feedback pieces, short notes, 
debates, and review articles published in scholarly journals. 
Reports used to search for multiple keywords such as “Cli-
mate Change,” “Mitigation and Adaptation,” “Department 
of Agriculture and Human Health,” “Department of Bio-
diversity and Forestry,” etc.; in summary, keyword list and 
full text have been made. Initially, the search for keywords 
yielded a large amount of literature.
Since 2020, it has been impossible to review all the articles 
found; some restrictions have been set for the literature exhi-
bition. The study searched 95 articles on a different database 
mentioned above based on the nature of the study. It excluded 
40 irrelevant papers due to copied from a previous search after 
readings tiles, abstract and full pieces. The criteria for inclu-
sion were: (i) articles focused on “Global Climate Change 
Impacts, adaptation, and sustainable mitigation measures,” 
and (ii) the search key terms related to study requirements. 
The complete procedure yielded 55 articles for our study. We 
repeat our search on the “Web of Science and Google Schol-
ars” database to enhance the search results and check the ref-
erenced articles.
In this study, 55 articles are reviewed systematically and 
analyzed for research topics and other aspects, such as the 
methods, contexts, and theories used in these studies. Fur-
thermore, this study analyzes closely related areas to provide 
unique research opportunities in the future. The study also 
discussed future direction opportunities and research questions 
by understanding the research findings climate changes and 
other affected sectors. The reviewed paper framework analysis 
process is outlined in Fig. 2.
42541
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Natural disasters and climate change’s 
socio‑economic consequences
Natural and environmental disasters can be highly variable 
from year to year; some years pass with very few deaths 
before a significant disaster event claims many lives (Syman-
ski et al. 2021). Approximately 60,000 people globally died 
from natural disasters each year on average over the past dec-
ade (Ritchie and Roser 2014; Wiranata and Simbolon 2021). 
So, according to the report, around 0.1% of global deaths. 
Annual variability in the number and share of deaths from 
natural disasters in recent decades are shown in Fig. 3. The 
number of fatalities can be meager—sometimes less than 
10,000, and as few as 0.01% of all deaths. But shock events 
have a devastating impact: the 1983–1985 famine and drought 
in Ethiopia; the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami; 
Cyclone Nargis, which struck Myanmar in 2008; and the 2010 
Port-au-Prince earthquake in Haiti and now recent example 
is COVID-19 pandemic (Erman et al. 2021). These events 
pushed global disaster deaths to over 200,000—more than 
0.4% of deaths in these years. Low-frequency, high-impact 
events such as earthquakes and tsunamis are not preventable, 
but such high losses of human life are. Historical evidence 
shows that earlier disaster detection, more robust infrastruc-
ture, emergency preparedness, and response programmers 
have substantially reduced disaster deaths worldwide. Low-
income is also the most vulnerable to disasters; improving 
living conditions, facilities, and response services in these 
areas would be critical in reducing natural disaster deaths in 
the coming decades.
The interior regions of the continent are likely to 
be impacted by rising temperatures (Dimri et al. 2018; 
Goes et al. 2020; Mannig et al. 2018; Schuurmans 2021). 
Weather patterns change due to the shortage of natural 
resources (water), increase in glacier melting, and rising 
mercury are likely to cause extinction to many planted 
species (Gampe et al. 2016; Mihiretu et al. 2021; Shaf-
fril et al. 2018).On the other hand, the coastal ecosys-
tem is on the verge of devastation (Perera et al. 2018; 
Phillips 2018). The temperature rises, insect disease 
outbreaks, health-related problems, and seasonal and 
lifestyle changes are persistent, with a strong probability 
of these patterns continuing in the future (Abbass et al. 
2021c; Hussain et al. 2018). At the global level, a short-
age of good infrastructure and insufficient adaptive capac-
ity are hammering the most (IPCC 2013). In addition to 
the above concerns, a lack of environmental education 
and knowledge, outdated consumer behavior, a scarcity 
of incentives, a lack of legislation, and the government’s 
lack of commitment to climate change contribute to the 
general public’s concerns. By 2050, a 2 to 3% rise in mer-
cury and a drastic shift in rainfall patterns may have seri-
ous consequences (Huang et al. 2022; Gorst et al. 2018). 
Natural and environmental calamities caused huge losses 
Fig. 1   Methodology search for finalized articles for investigations.  Source: constructed by authors
42542
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
globally, such as decreased agriculture outputs, rehabili-
tation of the system, and rebuilding necessary technolo-
gies (Ali and Erenstein 2017; Ramankutty et al. 2018; 
Yu et al. 2021) (Table 1). Furthermore, in the last 3 or 
4 years, the world has been plagued by smog-related eye 
and skin diseases, as well as a rise in road accidents due 
to poor visibility.
Fig. 2   Framework of the analysis Process.  Source: constructed by authors
Fig. 3   Global deaths from 
natural disasters, 1978 to 2020.  
Source EMDAT (2020)
42543
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Climate change and agriculture
Global agriculture is the ultimate sector responsible for 
30–40% of all greenhouse emissions, which makes it a leading 
industry predominantly contributing to climate warming and 
significantly impacted by it (Grieg; Mishra et al. 2021; Ortiz 
et al. 2021; Thornton and Lipper 2014). Numerous agro-envi-
ronmental and climatic factors that have a dominant influence 
on agriculture productivity (Pautasso et al. 2012) are signifi-
cantly impacted in response to precipitation extremes includ-
ing floods, forest fires, and droughts (Huang 2004). Besides, 
the immense dependency on exhaustible resources also fuels 
the fire and leads global agriculture to become prone to dev-
astation. Godfray et al. (2010) mentioned that decline in 
agriculture challenges the farmer’s quality of life and thus 
a significant factor to poverty as the food and water supplies 
are critically impacted by CC (Ortiz et al. 2021; Rosenzweig 
et al. 2014). As an essential part of the economic systems, 
especially in developing countries, agricultural systems affect 
the overall economy and potentially the well-being of house-
holds (Schlenker and Roberts 2009). According to the report 
published by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, i.e., 
­CH4, ­CO2, and ­N2O, are increased in the air to extraordinary 
levels over the last few centuries (Usman and Makhdum 
2021; Stocker et al. 2013). Climate change is the compos-
ite outcome of two different factors. The first is the natural 
causes, and the second is the anthropogenic actions (Karami 
2012). It is also forecasted that the world may experience a 
typical rise in temperature stretching from 1 to 3.7 °C at the 
end of this century (Pachauri et al. 2014). The world’s crop 
production is also highly vulnerable to these global tempera-
ture-changing trends as raised temperatures will pose severe 
negative impacts on crop growth (Reidsma et al. 2009). Some 
of the recent modeling about the fate of global agriculture is 
briefly described below.
Decline in cereal productivity
Crop productivity will also be affected dramatically in the 
next few decades due to variations in integral abiotic factors 
such as temperature, solar radiation, precipitation, and ­CO2. 
These all factors are included in various regulatory instru-
ments like progress and growth, weather-tempted changes, 
pest invasions (Cammell and Knight 1992), accompanying 
disease snags (Fand et al. 2012), water supplies (Panda et al. 
2003), high prices of agro-products in world’s agriculture 
industry, and preeminent quantity of fertilizer consumption. 
Lobell and field (2007) claimed that from 1962 to 2002, 
wheat crop output had condensed significantly due to rising 
temperatures. Therefore, during 1980–2011, the common 
wheat productivity trends endorsed extreme temperature 
events confirmed by Gourdji et al. (2013) around South 
Asia, South America, and Central Asia. Various other stud-
ies (Asseng, Cao, Zhang, and Ludwig 2009; Asseng et al. 
2013; García et al. 2015; Ortiz et al. 2021) also proved that 
wheat output is negatively affected by the rising tempera-
tures and also caused adverse effects on biomass productiv-
ity (Calderini et al. 1999; Sadras and Slafer 2012). Hereafter, 
the rice crop is also influenced by the high temperatures at 
night. These difficulties will worsen because the temperature 
will be rising further in the future owing to CC (Tebaldi 
et al. 2006). Another research conducted in China revealed 
that a 4.6% of rice production per 1 °C has happened con-
nected with the advancement in night temperatures (Tao 
et al. 2006). Moreover, the average night temperature growth 
also affected rice indicia cultivar’s output pragmatically dur-
ing 25 years in the Philippines (Peng et al. 2004). It is antici-
pated that the increase in world average temperature will 
also cause a substantial reduction in yield (Hatfield et al. 
2011; Lobell and Gourdji 2012). In the southern hemisphere, 
Parry et al. (2007) noted a rise of 1–4 °C in average daily 
temperatures at the end of spring season unti the middle of 
Table 1   Main natural danger statistics for 1985–2020 at the global level
Source: EM-DAT (2020)
Key natural hazards statistics from 1978 to 2020
Country
1978 change
2018
Absolute change
Relative
Drought
63
0
 − 63
 − 100%
Earthquake
25,162
4,321
 − 20,841
 − 83%
Extreme temperature
150
536
 + 386
 + 257%
Extreme weather
3676
1,666
 − 2,010
 − 55%
Flood
5,897
2,869
 − 3,028
 − 51%
Landslide
86
275
 + 189
 + 220%
Mass movement
50
17
 − 33
 − 66%
Volcanic activity
268
878
 + 610
 + 228%
Wildfire
2
247
 + 245
 + 12,250%
All − natural disasters
35,036
10,809
 − 24,227
 − 69%
42544
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
summers, and this raised temperature reduced crop output 
by cutting down the time length for phenophases eventually 
reduce the yield (Hatfield and Prueger 2015; R. Ortiz 2008). 
Also, world climate models have recommended that humid 
and subtropical regions expect to be plentiful prey to the 
upcoming heat strokes (Battisti and Naylor 2009). Grain pro-
duction is the amalgamation of two constituents: the average 
weight and the grain output/m2, however, in crop produc-
tion. Crop output is mainly accredited to the grain quantity 
(Araus et al. 2008; Gambín and Borrás 2010). In the times 
of grain set, yield resources are mainly strewn between hith-
erto defined components, i.e., grain usual weight and grain 
output, which presents a trade-off between them (Gambín 
and Borrás 2010) beside disparities in per grain integration 
(B. L. Gambín et al. 2006). In addition to this, the maize 
crop is also susceptible to raised temperatures, principally 
in the flowering stage (Edreira and Otegui 2013). In reality, 
the lower grain number is associated with insufficient accli-
matization due to intense photosynthesis and higher respi-
ration and the high-temperature effect on the reproduction 
phenomena (Edreira and  Otegui 2013). During the flower-
ing phase, maize visible to heat (30–36 °C) seemed less 
anthesis-silking intermissions (Edreira et al. 2011). Another 
research by Dupuis and Dumas (1990) proved that a drop in 
spikelet when directly visible to high temperatures above 
35 °C in vitro pollination. Abnormalities in kernel number 
claimed by Vega et al. (2001) is related to conceded plant 
development during a flowering phase that is linked with the 
active ear growth phase and categorized as a critical phase 
for approximation of kernel number during silking (Otegui 
and Bonhomme 1998).
The retort of rice output to high temperature presents 
disparities in flowering patterns, and seed set lessens and 
lessens grain weight (Qasim et al. 2020; Qasim, Hammad, 
Maqsood, Tariq, & Chawla). During the daytime, heat 
directly impacts flowers which lessens the thesis period 
and quickens the earlier peak flowering (Tao et al. 2006). 
Antagonistic effect of higher daytime temperature d on pol-
len sprouting proposed seed set decay, whereas, seed set was 
lengthily reduced than could be explicated by pollen grow-
ing at high temperatures 40◦C (Matsui et al. 2001).
The decline in wheat output is linked with higher tem-
peratures, confirmed in numerous studies (Semenov 2009; 
Stone and Nicolas 1994). High temperatures fast-track the 
arrangements of plant expansion (Blum et al. 2001), diminu-
tion photosynthetic process (Salvucci and Crafts‐Brandner 
2004), and also considerably affect the reproductive opera-
tions (Farooq et al. 2011).
The destructive impacts of CC induced weather extremes 
to deteriorate the integrity of crops (Chaudhary et al. 2011), 
e.g., Spartan cold and extreme fog cause falling and dis-
coloration of betel leaves (Rosenzweig et al. 2001), giving 
them a somehow reddish appearance, squeezing of lemon 
leaves (Pautasso et al. 2012), as well as root rot of pineapple, 
have reported (Vedwan and Rhoades 2001). Henceforth, in 
tackling the disruptive effects of CC, several short-term and 
long-term management approaches are the crucial need of 
time (Fig. 4). Moreover, various studies (Chaudhary et al. 
2011; Patz et al. 2005; Pautasso et al. 2012) have demon-
strated adapting trends such as ameliorating crop diversity 
can yield better adaptability towards CC.
Climate change impacts on biodiversity
Global biodiversity is among the severe victims of CC 
because it is the fastest emerging cause of species loss. 
Studies demonstrated that the massive scale species dynam-
ics are considerably associated with diverse climatic events 
(Abraham and Chain 1988; Manes et al. 2021; A. M. D. 
Ortiz et al. 2021). Both the pace and magnitude of CC are 
altering the compatible habitat ranges for living entities 
of marine, freshwater, and terrestrial regions. Alterations 
in general climate regimes influence the integrity of eco-
systems in numerous ways, such as variation in the rela-
tive abundance of species, range shifts, changes in activ-
ity timing, and microhabitat use (Bates et al. 2014). The 
geographic distribution of any species often depends upon 
its ability to tolerate environmental stresses, biological 
interactions, and dispersal constraints. Hence, instead of 
the CC, the local species must only accept, adapt, move, or 
face extinction (Berg et al. 2010). So, the best performer 
species have a better survival capacity for adjusting to new 
ecosystems or a decreased perseverance to survive where 
they are already situated (Bates et al. 2014). An important 
aspect here is the inadequate habitat connectivity and access 
to microclimates, also crucial in raising the exposure to 
climate warming and extreme heatwave episodes. For exam-
ple, the carbon sequestration rates are undergoing fluctua-
tions due to climate-driven expansion in the range of global 
mangroves (Cavanaugh et al. 2014).
Similarly, the loss of kelp-forest ecosystems in various 
regions and its occupancy by the seaweed turfs has set the 
track for elevated herbivory by the high influx of tropical fish 
populations. Not only this, the increased water temperatures 
have exacerbated the conditions far away from the physio-
logical tolerance level of the kelp communities (Vergés et al. 
2016; Wernberg et al. 2016). Another pertinent danger is the 
devastation of keystone species, which even has more per-
vasive effects on the entire communities in that habitat (Zar-
netske et al. 2012). It is particularly important as CC does 
not specify specific populations or communities. Eventually, 
this CC-induced redistribution of species may deteriorate 
carbon storage and the net ecosystem productivity (Weed 
et al. 2013). Among the typical disruptions, the prominent 
ones include impacts on marine and terrestrial productivity, 
42545
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
marine community assembly, and the extended invasion of 
toxic cyanobacteria bloom (Fossheim et al. 2015).
The CC-impacted species extinction is widely reported 
in the literature (Beesley et al. 2019; Urban 2015), and the 
predictions of demise until the twenty-first century are dread-
ful (Abbass et al. 2019; Pereira et al. 2013). In a few cases, 
northward shifting of species may not be formidable as it 
allows mountain-dwelling species to find optimum climates. 
However, the migrant species may be trapped in isolated and 
incompatible habitats due to losing topography and range 
(Dullinger et al. 2012). For example, a study indicated that the 
American pika has been extirpated or intensely diminished in 
some regions, primarily attributed to the CC-impacted extinc-
tion or at least local extirpation (Stewart et al. 2015). Besides, 
the anticipation of persistent responses to the impacts of CC 
often requires data records of several decades to rigorously 
analyze the critical pre and post CC patterns at species and 
ecosystem levels (Manes et al. 2021; Testa et al. 2018).
Nonetheless, the availability of such long-term data records 
is rare; hence, attempts are needed to focus on these profound 
aspects. Biodiversity is also vulnerable to the other associated 
impacts of CC, such as rising temperatures, droughts, and 
certain invasive pest species. For instance, a study revealed 
the changes in the composition of plankton communities 
attributed to rising temperatures. Henceforth, alterations in 
such aquatic producer communities, i.e., diatoms and calcar-
eous plants, can ultimately lead to variation in the recycling 
of biological carbon. Moreover, such changes are character-
ized as a potential contributor to ­CO2 differences between 
the Pleistocene glacial and interglacial periods (Kohfeld et al. 
2005).
Climate change implications on human health
It is an understood corporality that human health is a sig-
nificant victim of CC (Costello et al. 2009). According to 
the WHO, CC might be responsible for 250,000 additional 
deaths per year during 2030–2050 (Watts et al. 2015). These 
deaths are attributed to extreme weather-induced mortal-
ity and morbidity and the global expansion of vector-borne 
diseases (Lemery et al. 2021; Yang and Usman 2021; Meier-
rieks 2021; UNEP 2017). Here, some of the emerging health 
issues pertinent to this global problem are briefly described.
Climate change and antimicrobial resistance 
with corresponding economic costs
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is an up-surging complex 
global health challenge (Garner et al. 2019; Lemery et al. 
2021). Health professionals across the globe are extremely 
worried due to this phenomenon that has critical potential 
to reverse almost all the progress that has been achieved 
so far in the health discipline (Gosling and Arnell 2016). 
A massive amount of antibiotics is produced by many 
Fig. 4   Schematic description of potential impacts of climate change on the agriculture sector and the appropriate mitigation and adaptation 
measures to overcome its impact.  Source: constructed by authors
42546
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
pharmaceutical industries worldwide, and the pathogenic 
microorganisms are gradually developing resistance to 
them, which can be comprehended how strongly this aspect 
can shake the foundations of national and global economies 
(UNEP 2017). This statement is supported by the fact that 
AMR is not developing in a particular region or country. 
Instead, it is flourishing in every continent of the world 
(WHO 2018). This plague is heavily pushing humanity to 
the post-antibiotic era, in which currently antibiotic-suscep-
tible pathogens will once again lead to certain endemics and 
pandemics after being resistant(WHO 2018). Undesirably, 
if this statement would become a factuality, there might 
emerge certain risks in undertaking sophisticated inter-
ventions such as chemotherapy, joint replacement cases, 
and organ transplantation (Su et al. 2018). Presently, the 
amplification of drug resistance cases has made common 
illnesses like pneumonia, post-surgical infections, HIV/
AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, etc., too difficult and costly to 
be treated or cure well (WHO 2018). From a simple exam-
ple, it can be assumed how easily antibiotic-resistant strains 
can be transmitted from one person to another and ultimately 
travel across the boundaries (Berendonk et al. 2015). Talk-
ing about the second- and third-generation classes of anti-
biotics, e.g., most renowned generations of cephalosporin 
antibiotics that are more expensive, broad-spectrum, more 
toxic, and usually require more extended periods whenever 
prescribed to patients (Lemery et al. 2021; Pärnänen et al. 
2019). This scenario has also revealed that the abundance of 
resistant strains of pathogens was also higher in the Southern 
part (WHO 2018). As southern parts are generally warmer 
than their counterparts, it is evident from this example how 
CC-induced global warming can augment the spread of 
antibiotic-resistant strains within the biosphere, eventually 
putting additional economic burden in the face of develop-
ing new and costlier antibiotics. The ARG exchange to sus-
ceptible bacteria through one of the potential mechanisms, 
transformation, transduction, and conjugation; Selection 
pressure can be caused by certain antibiotics, metals or pes-
ticides, etc., as shown in Fig. 5.
Certain studies highlighted that conventional urban 
wastewater treatment plants are typical hotspots where most 
bacterial strains exchange genetic material through horizon-
tal gene transfer (Fig. 5). Although at present, the extent of 
risks associated with the antibiotic resistance found in waste-
water is complicated; environmental scientists and engineers 
have particular concerns about the potential impacts of these 
antibiotic resistance genes on human health (Ashbolt 2015). 
At most undesirable and worst case, these antibiotic-resistant 
genes containing bacteria can make their way to enter into 
the environment (Pruden et al. 2013), irrigation water used 
for crops and public water supplies and ultimately become 
a part of food chains and food webs (Ma et al. 2019; D. Wu 
et al. 2019). This problem has been reported manifold in 
several countries (Hendriksen et al. 2019), where wastewater 
as a means of irrigated water is quite common.
Climate change and vector borne‑diseases
Temperature is a fundamental factor for the sustenance of 
living entities regardless of an ecosystem. So, a specific liv-
ing being, especially a pathogen, requires a sophisticated 
temperature range to exist on earth. The second essential 
component of CC is precipitation, which also impacts 
numerous infectious agents’ transport and dissemination 
patterns. Global rising temperature is a significant cause of 
many species extinction. On the one hand, this changing 
environmental temperature may be causing species extinc-
tion, and on the other, this warming temperature might favor 
the thriving of some new organisms. Here, it was evident 
that some pathogens may also upraise once non-evident or 
reported (Patz et al. 2000). This concept can be exempli-
fied through certain pathogenic strains of microorganisms 
Fig. 5   A typical interaction 
between the susceptible and 
resistant strains.  Source: 
Elsayed et al. (2021); Karkman 
et al. (2018)
42547
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
that how the likelihood of various diseases increases in 
response to climate warming-induced environmental 
changes (Table 2).
A recent example is an outburst of coronavirus (COVID-
19) in the Republic of China, causing pneumonia and severe 
acute respiratory complications (Cui et al. 2021; Song et al. 
2021). The large family of viruses is harbored in numerous 
animals, bats, and snakes in particular (livescience.com) 
with the subsequent transfer into human beings. Hence, it is 
worth noting that the thriving of numerous vectors involved 
in spreading various diseases is influenced by Climate 
change (Ogden 2018; Santos et al. 2021).
Psychological impacts of climate change
Climate change (CC) is responsible for the rapid dissemina-
tion and exaggeration of certain epidemics and pandemics. 
In addition to the vast apparent impacts of climate change on 
health, forestry, agriculture, etc., it may also have psychologi-
cal implications on vulnerable societies. It can be exemplified 
through the recent outburst of (COVID-19) in various coun-
tries around the world (Pal 2021). Besides, the victims of this 
viral infection have made healthy beings scarier and terrified. 
In the wake of such epidemics, people with common colds 
or fever are also frightened and must pass specific regulatory 
protocols. Living in such situations continuously terrifies the 
public and makes the stress familiar, which eventually makes 
them psychologically weak (npr.org).
CC boosts the extent of anxiety, distress, and other issues 
in public, pushing them to develop various mental-related 
problems. Besides, frequent exposure to extreme climatic 
catastrophes such as geological disasters also imprints post-
traumatic disorder, and their ubiquitous occurrence paves the 
way to developing chronic psychological dysfunction. More-
over, repetitive listening from media also causes an increase 
in the person’s stress level (Association 2020). Similarly, 
communities living in flood-prone areas constantly live in 
extreme fear of drowning and die by floods. In addition to 
human lives, the flood-induced destruction of physical infra-
structure is a specific reason for putting pressure on these 
communities (Ogden 2018). For instance, Ogden (2018) 
comprehensively denoted that Katrina’s Hurricane aug-
mented the mental health issues in the victim communities.
Climate change impacts on the forestry sector
Forests are the global regulators of the world’s climate (FAO 
2018) and have an indispensable role in regulating global 
carbon and nitrogen cycles (Rehman et al. 2021; Reich-
stein and Carvalhais 2019). Hence, disturbances in forest 
ecology affect the micro and macro-climates (Ellison et al. 
2017). Climate warming, in return, has profound impacts 
on the growth and productivity of transboundary forests by 
influencing the temperature and precipitation patterns, etc. 
As CC induces specific changes in the typical structure and 
functions of ecosystems (Zhang et al. 2017) as well impacts 
forest health, climate change also has several devastating 
consequences such as forest fires, droughts, pest outbreaks 
(EPA 2018), and last but not the least is the livelihoods of 
forest-dependent communities. The rising frequency and 
intensity of another CC product, i.e., droughts, pose plenty 
of challenges to the well-being of global forests (Diffen-
baugh et al. 2017), which is further projected to increase 
Table 2   Examples of how various environmental changes affect various infectious diseases in humans
Source: Aron and Patz (2001)
Environmental modifications
Potential diseases
The causative organisms and pathway of effect
Construction of canals, dams, 
irrigation pathways
Schistosomiasis
Snail host locale, human contact
Malaria
Upbringing places for mosquitoes
Helminthiases
Larval contact due to moist soil
River blindness
Blackfly upbringing
Agro-strengthening
Malaria
Crop pesticides
Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever
Rodent abundance, contact
Suburbanization
Cholera
deprived hygiene, asepsis; augmented water municipal assembling pollution
Dengue
Water-gathering rubbishes Aedes aegypti mosquito upbringing sites
Cutaneous leishmaniasis
PSandfly vectors
Deforestation and new tenancy
Malaria
Upbringing sites and trajectories, migration of vulnerable people
Oropouche
upsurge contact, upbringing of directions
Visceral leishmaniasis
Recurrent contact with sandfly vectors
Agriculture
Lyme disease
Tick hosts, outside revelation
Ocean heating
Red tide
Poisonous algal blooms
42548
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
soon (Hartmann et al. 2018; Lehner et al. 2017; Rehman 
et al. 2021). Hence, CC induces storms, with more signifi-
cant impacts also put extra pressure on the survival of the 
global forests (Martínez-Alvarado et al. 2018), significantly 
since their influences are augmented during higher winter 
precipitations with corresponding wetter soils causing weak 
root anchorage of trees (Brázdil et al. 2018). Surging tem-
perature regimes causes alterations in usual precipitation 
patterns, which is a significant hurdle for the survival of 
temperate forests (Allen et al. 2010; Flannigan et al. 2013), 
letting them encounter severe stress and disturbances which 
adversely affects the local tree species (Hubbart et al. 2016; 
Millar and Stephenson 2015; Rehman et al. 2021).
Climate change impacts on forest‑dependent communities
Forests are the fundamental livelihood resource for about 
1.6 billion people worldwide; out of them, 350 million are 
distinguished with relatively higher reliance (Bank 2008). 
Agro-forestry-dependent communities comprise 1.2 billion, 
and 60 million indigenous people solely rely on forests and 
their products to sustain their lives (Sunderlin et al. 2005). 
For example, in the entire African continent, more than 2/3rd 
of inhabitants depend on forest resources and woodlands 
for their alimonies, e.g., food, fuelwood and grazing (Wasiq 
and Ahmad 2004). The livings of these people are more 
intensely affected by the climatic disruptions making their 
lives harder (Brown et al. 2014). On the one hand, forest 
communities are incredibly vulnerable to CC due to their 
livelihoods, cultural and spiritual ties as well as socio-eco-
logical connections, and on the other, they are not familiar 
with the term “climate change.” (Rahman and Alam 2016). 
Among the destructive impacts of temperature and rainfall, 
disruption of the agroforestry crops with resultant downscale 
growth and yield (Macchi et al. 2008). Cruz (2015) ascribed 
that forest-dependent smallholder farmers in the Philippines 
face the enigma of delayed fruiting, more severe damages 
by insect and pest incidences due to unfavorable temperature 
regimes, and changed rainfall patterns.
Among these series of challenges to forest communities, 
their well-being is also distinctly vulnerable to CC. Though 
the detailed climate change impacts on human health have 
been comprehensively mentioned in the previous section, 
some studies have listed a few more devastating effects 
on the prosperity of forest-dependent communities. For 
instance, the Himalayan people have been experiencing fre-
quent skin-borne diseases such as malaria and other skin 
diseases due to increasing mosquitoes, wild boar as well, and 
new wasps species, particularly in higher altitudes that were 
almost non-existent before last 5–10 years (Xu et al. 2008). 
Similarly, people living at high altitudes in Bangladesh have 
experienced frequent mosquito-borne calamities (Fardous; 
Sharma 2012). In addition, the pace of other waterborne 
diseases such as infectious diarrhea, cholera, pathogenic 
induced abdominal complications and dengue has also been 
boosted in other distinguished regions of Bangladesh (Cell 
2009; Gunter et al. 2008).
Pest outbreak
Upscaling hotter climate may positively affect the mobile 
organisms with shorter generation times because they can 
scurry from harsh conditions than the immobile species 
(Fettig et al. 2013; Schoene and Bernier 2012) and are also 
relatively more capable of adapting to new environments 
(Jactel et al. 2019). It reveals that insects adapt quickly to 
global warming due to their mobility advantages. Due to 
past outbreaks, the trees (forests) are relatively more sus-
ceptible victims (Kurz et al. 2008). Before CC, the influ-
ence of factors mentioned earlier, i.e., droughts and storms, 
was existent and made the forests susceptible to insect pest 
interventions; however, the global forests remain steadfast, 
assiduous, and green (Jactel et al. 2019). The typical reasons 
could be the insect herbivores were regulated by several tree 
defenses and pressures of predation (Wilkinson and Sherratt 
2016). As climate greatly influences these phenomena, the 
global forests cannot be so sedulous against such challenges 
(Jactel et al. 2019). Table 3 demonstrates some of the par-
ticular considerations with practical examples that are essen-
tial while mitigating the impacts of CC in the forestry sector.
Climate change impacts on tourism
Tourism is a commercial activity that has roots in multi-
dimensions and an efficient tool with adequate job gen-
eration potential, revenue creation, earning of spectacular 
foreign exchange, enhancement in cross-cultural promulga-
tion and cooperation, a business tool for entrepreneurs and 
eventually for the country’s national development (Arshad 
et al. 2018; Scott 2021). Among a plethora of other dis-
ciplines, the tourism industry is also a distinct victim of 
climate warming (Gössling et al. 2012; Hall et al. 2015) 
as the climate is among the essential resources that enable 
tourism in particular regions as most preferred locations. 
Different places at different times of the year attract tourists 
both within and across the countries depending upon the 
feasibility and compatibility of particular weather patterns. 
Hence, the massive variations in these weather patterns 
resulting from CC will eventually lead to monumental chal-
lenges to the local economy in that specific area’s particular 
and national economy (Bujosa et al. 2015). For instance, the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report 
demonstrated that the global tourism industry had faced a 
considerable decline in the duration of ski season, including 
the loss of some ski areas and the dramatic shifts in tourist 
destinations’ climate warming.
42549
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Furthermore, different studies (Neuvonen et al. 2015; 
Scott et al. 2004) indicated that various currently perfect 
tourist spots, e.g., coastal areas, splendid islands, and ski 
resorts, will suffer consequences of CC. It is also worth 
noting that the quality and potential of administrative 
management potential to cope with the influence of CC 
on the tourism industry is of crucial significance, which 
renders specific strengths of resiliency to numerous 
destinations to withstand against it (Füssel and Hildén 
2014). Similarly, in the partial or complete absence of 
adequate socio-economic and socio-political capital, the 
high-demanding tourist sites scurry towards the verge 
of vulnerability. The susceptibility of tourism is based 
on different components such as the extent of exposure, 
sensitivity, life-supporting sectors, and capacity assess-
ment factors (Füssel and Hildén 2014). It is obvious cor-
porality that sectors such as health, food, ecosystems, 
human habitat, infrastructure, water availability, and 
the accessibility of a particular region are prone to CC. 
Henceforth, the sensitivity of these critical sectors to 
CC and, in return, the adaptive measures are a hallmark 
in determining the composite vulnerability of climate 
warming (Ionescu et al. 2009).
Moreover, the dependence on imported food items, 
poor hygienic conditions, and inadequate health pro-
fessionals are dominant aspects affecting the local 
terrestrial and aquatic biodiversity. Meanwhile, the 
greater dependency on ecosystem services and its 
products also makes a destination more fragile to 
become a prey of CC (Rizvi et al. 2015). Some signifi-
cant non-climatic factors are important indicators of a 
particular ecosystem’s typical health and functioning, 
e.g., resource richness and abundance portray the 
picture of ecosystem stability. Similarly, the species 
abundance is also a productive tool that ensures that 
the ecosystem has a higher buffering capacity, which 
is terrific in terms of resiliency (Roscher et al. 2013).
Climate change impacts on the economic sector
Climate plays a significant role in overall productivity and 
economic growth. Due to its increasingly global existence 
and its effect on economic growth, CC has become one of the 
major concerns of both local and international environmental 
policymakers (Ferreira et al. 2020; Gleditsch 2021; Abbass 
et al. 2021b; Lamperti et al. 2021). The adverse effects of 
CC on the overall productivity factor of the agricultural sec-
tor are therefore significant for understanding the creation 
of local adaptation policies and the composition of produc-
tive climate policy contracts. Previous studies on CC in the 
world have already forecasted its effects on the agricultural 
sector. Researchers have found that global CC will impact 
the agricultural sector in different world regions. The study 
of the impacts of CC on various agrarian activities in other 
demographic areas and the development of relative strategies 
to respond to effects has become a focal point for researchers 
(Chandioet al. 2020; Gleditsch 2021; Mosavi et al. 2020).
With the rapid growth of global warming since the 
1980s, the temperature has started increasing globally, 
which resulted in the incredible transformation of rain 
and evaporation in the countries. The agricultural devel-
opment of many countries has been reliant, delicate, and 
susceptible to CC for a long time, and it is on the devel-
opment of agriculture total factor productivity (ATFP) 
Table 3   Essential considerations while mitigating the climate change impacts on the forestry sector
Source: Fischer (2019)
Attributes
Description
Forestry example
Purposefulness
Autonomous
Includes continuing application of prevailing informa-
tion and techniques in retort to experienced climate 
change
Thin to reduce drought stress; construct breaks in 
vegetation to
Stop feast of wildfires, vermin, and ailments
Timing
Preemptive
Necessitates interactive change to diminish future 
injury, jeopardy, and weakness, often through plan-
ning, observing, growing consciousness, structure 
partnerships, and ornamental erudition or investiga-
tion
Ensure forest property against potential future losses; 
transition to
species or stand erections that are better reformed to 
predictable
future conditions; trial with new forestry organization
practices
Scope
Incremental
Involves making small changes in present circum-
stances to circumvent disturbances
and ongoing to chase the same purposes
Condense rotation pauses to decrease the likelihood 
of harm to storm Events, differentiate classes to 
blowout jeopardy; thin to lessening compactness and 
defenselessness of jungle stands to tension
Goal
Opposition
Shield or defend from alteration; take procedures to 
reservation constancy and battle change
Generate refugia for rare classes; defend woodlands 
from austere fire and wind uproar; alter forest 
construction to reduce harshness or extent of wind 
and ice impairment; establish breaks in vegetation to 
dampen the spread of vermin, ailments, and wildfire
42550
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
influence different crops and yields of farmers (Alhassan 
2021; Wu 2020).
Food security and natural disasters are increasing rap-
idly in the world. Several major climatic/natural disas-
ters have impacted local crop production in the countries 
concerned. The effects of these natural disasters have 
been poorly controlled by the development of the econo-
mies and populations and may affect human life as well. 
One example is China, which is among the world’s most 
affected countries, vulnerable to natural disasters due 
to its large population, harsh environmental conditions, 
rapid CC, low environmental stability, and disaster power. 
According to the January 2016 statistical survey, China 
experienced an economic loss of 298.3 billion Yuan, and 
about 137 million Chinese people were severely affected 
by various natural disasters (Xie et al. 2018).
Mitigation and adaptation strategies 
of climate changes
Adaptation and mitigation are the crucial factors to 
address the response to CC (Jahanzad et  al. 2020). 
Researchers define mitigation on climate changes, and 
on the other hand, adaptation directly impacts climate 
changes like floods. To some extent, mitigation reduces 
or moderates greenhouse gas emission, and it becomes 
a critical issue both economically and environmentally 
(Botzen et al. 2021; Jahanzad et al. 2020; Kongsager 
2018; Smit et al. 2000; Vale et al. 2021; Usman et al. 
2021; Verheyen 2005).
Researchers have deep concern about the adaptation 
and mitigation methodologies in sectoral and geographi-
cal contexts. Agriculture, industry, forestry, transport, 
and land use are the main sectors to adapt and mitigate 
policies(Kärkkäinen et al. 2020; Waheed et al. 2021). Adap-
tation and mitigation require particular concern both at the 
national and international levels. The world has faced a sig-
nificant problem of climate change in the last decades, and 
adaptation to these effects is compulsory for economic and 
social development. To adapt and mitigate against CC, one 
should develop policies and strategies at the international 
level (Hussain et al. 2020). Figure 6 depicts the list of cur-
rent studies on sectoral impacts of CC with adaptation and 
mitigation measures globally.
Fig. 6   Sectoral impacts of climate change with adaptation and mitigation measures.  Source: constructed by authors
42551
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Conclusion and future perspectives
Specific socio-agricultural, socio-economic, and physical 
systems are the cornerstone of psychological well-being, and 
the alteration in these systems by CC will have disastrous 
impacts. Climate variability, alongside other anthropogenic 
and natural stressors, influences human and environmen-
tal health sustainability. Food security is another concern-
ing scenario that may lead to compromised food quality, 
higher food prices, and inadequate food distribution systems. 
Global forests are challenged by different climatic factors 
such as storms, droughts, flash floods, and intense precip-
itation. On the other hand, their anthropogenic wiping is 
aggrandizing their existence. Undoubtedly, the vulnerability 
scale of the world’s regions differs; however, appropriate 
mitigation and adaptation measures can aid the decision-
making bodies in developing effective policies to tackle its 
impacts. Presently, modern life on earth has tailored to con-
sistent climatic patterns, and accordingly, adapting to such 
considerable variations is of paramount importance. Because 
the faster changes in climate will make it harder to survive 
and adjust, this globally-raising enigma calls for immediate 
attention at every scale ranging from elementary commu-
nity level to international level. Still, much effort, research, 
and dedication are required, which is the most critical time. 
Some policy implications can help us to mitigate the con-
sequences of climate change, especially the most affected 
sectors like the agriculture sector;
1.	 Seasonal variations and cultivation practices
	
  Warming might lengthen the season in frost-prone 
growing regions (temperate and arctic zones), allowing 
for longer-maturing seasonal cultivars with better yields 
(Pfadenhauer 2020; Bonacci 2019). Extending the plant-
ing season may allow additional crops each year; when 
warming leads to frequent warmer months highs over 
critical thresholds, a split season with a brief summer 
fallow may be conceivable for short-period crops such as 
wheat barley, cereals, and many other vegetable crops. 
The capacity to prolong the planting season in tropical 
and subtropical places where the harvest season is con-
strained by precipitation or agriculture farming occurs 
after the year may be more limited and dependent on 
how precipitation patterns vary (Wu et al. 2017).
2.	 New varieties of crops
	
  The genetic component is comprehensive for many 
yields, but it is restricted like kiwi fruit for a few. Ali 
et al. (2017) investigated how new crops will react to cli-
matic changes (also stated in Mall et al. 2017). Hot tem-
perature, drought, insect resistance; salt tolerance; and 
overall crop production and product quality increases 
would all be advantageous (Akkari 2016). Genetic map-
ping and engineering can introduce a greater spectrum 
of features. The adoption of genetically altered culti-
vars has been slowed, particularly in the early forecasts 
owing to the complexity in ensuring features are expe-
diently expressed throughout the entire plant, customer 
concerns, economic profitability, and regulatory impedi-
ments (Wirehn 2018; Davidson et al. 2016).
3.	 Changes in management and other input factors
	
  To get the full benefit of the ­CO2 would certainly 
require additional nitrogen and other fertilizers. Nitro-
gen not consumed by the plants may be excreted into 
groundwater, discharged into water surface, or emitted 
from the land, soil nitrous oxide when large doses of fer-
tilizer are sprayed. Increased nitrogen levels in ground-
water sources have been related to human chronic ill-
nesses and impact marine ecosystems. Cultivation, grain 
drying, and other field activities have all been examined 
in depth in the studies (Barua et al. 2018).
4.	 The technological and socio-economic adaptation
The policy consequence of the causative conclusion is 
that as a source of alternative energy, biofuel production 
is one of the routes that explain oil price volatility separate 
from international macroeconomic factors. Even though 
biofuel production has just begun in a few sample nations, 
there is still a tremendous worldwide need for feedstock to 
satisfy industrial expansion in China and the USA, which 
explains the food price relationship to the global oil price. 
Essentially, oil-exporting countries may create incentives in 
their economies to increase food production. It may accom-
plish by giving farmers financing, seedlings, fertilizers, and 
farming equipment. Because of the declining global oil price 
and, as a result, their earnings from oil export, oil-produc-
ing nations may be unable to subsidize food imports even 
in the near term. As a result, these countries can boost the 
agricultural value chain for export. It may be accomplished 
through R&D and adding value to their food products to 
increase income by correcting exchange rate misalignment 
and adverse trade terms. These nations may also diversify 
their economies away from oil, as dependence on oil exports 
alone is no longer economically viable given the extreme 
volatility of global oil prices. Finally, resource-rich and 
oil-exporting countries can convert to non-food renewable 
energy sources such as solar, hydro, coal, wind, wave, and 
tidal energy. By doing so, both world food and oil supplies 
would be maintained rather than harmed.
IRENA’s modeling work shows that, if a comprehensive 
policy framework is in place, efforts toward decarbonizing 
the energy future will benefit economic activity, jobs (out-
weighing losses in the fossil fuel industry), and welfare. 
Countries with weak domestic supply chains and a large 
reliance on fossil fuel income, in particular, must undertake 
structural reforms to capitalize on the opportunities inherent 
42552
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
in the energy transition. Governments continue to give major 
policy assistance to extract fossil fuels, including tax incen-
tives, financing, direct infrastructure expenditures, exemp-
tions from environmental regulations, and other measures. 
The majority of major oil and gas producing countries intend 
to increase output. Some countries intend to cut coal out-
put, while others plan to maintain or expand it. While some 
nations are beginning to explore and execute policies aimed 
at a just and equitable transition away from fossil fuel pro-
duction, these efforts have yet to impact major producing 
countries’ plans and goals. Verifiable and comparable data 
on fossil fuel output and assistance from governments and 
industries are critical to closing the production gap. Govern-
ments could increase openness by declaring their produc-
tion intentions in their climate obligations under the Paris 
Agreement.
It is firmly believed that achieving the Paris Agreement 
commitments is doubtlful without undergoing renewable 
energy transition across the globe (Murshed 2020; Zhao 
et al. 2022). Policy instruments play the most important 
role in determining the degree of investment in renewable 
energy technology. This study examines the efficacy of 
various policy strategies in the renewable energy industry 
of multiple nations. Although its impact is more visible in 
established renewable energy markets, a renewable portfolio 
standard is also a useful policy instrument. The cost of pro-
ducing renewable energy is still greater than other traditional 
energy sources. Furthermore, government incentives in the 
R&D sector can foster innovation in this field, resulting in 
cost reductions in the renewable energy industry. These 
nations may export their technologies and share their policy 
experiences by forming networks among their renewable 
energy-focused organizations. All policy measures aim to 
reduce production costs while increasing the proportion of 
renewables to a country’s energy system. Meanwhile, long-
term contracts with renewable energy providers, government 
commitment and control, and the establishment of long-term 
goals can assist developing nations in deploying renewable 
energy technology in their energy sector.
Author contribution  KA: Writing the original manuscript, data col-
lection, data analysis, Study design, Formal analysis, Visualiza-
tion, Revised draft, Writing-review, and editing. MZQ: Writing the 
original manuscript, data collection, data analysis, Writing-review, 
and editing. HS: Contribution to the contextualization of the theme, 
Conceptualization, Validation, Supervision, literature review, Revised 
drapt, and writing review and editing. MM: Writing review and editing, 
compiling the literature review, language editing. HM: Writing review 
and editing, compiling the literature review, language editing. IY: Con-
tribution to the contextualization of the theme, literature review, and 
writing review and editing.
Availability of data and material  Data sources and relevant links are 
provided in the paper to access data.
Declarations 
Ethics approval and consent to participate  Not applicable.
Consent for publication  Not applicable.
Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.
References
Abbass K, Begum H, Alam ASA, Awang AH, Abdelsalam MK, Egdair 
IMM, Wahid R (2022) Fresh Insight through a Keynesian Theory 
Approach to Investigate the Economic Impact of the COVID-19 
Pandemic in Pakistan. Sustain 14(3):1054 
Abbass K, Niazi AAK, Qazi TF, Basit A, Song H (2021a) The after-
math of COVID-19 pandemic period: barriers in implementation 
of social distancing at workplace. Library Hi Tech 
Abbass K, Song H, Khan F, Begum H, Asif M (2021b) Fresh insight 
through the VAR approach to investigate the effects of fiscal 
policy on environmental pollution in Pakistan. Environ Scie Poll 
Res 1–14 
Abbass K, Song H, Shah SM, Aziz B (2019) Determinants of Stock 
Return for Non-Financial Sector: Evidence from Energy Sector 
of Pakistan. J Bus Fin Aff 8(370):2167–0234
Abbass K, Tanveer A, Huaming S, Khatiya AA (2021c) Impact of 
financial resources utilization on firm performance: a case of 
SMEs working in Pakistan
Abraham E, Chain E (1988) An enzyme from bacteria able to destroy 
penicillin. 1940. Rev Infect Dis 10(4):677
Adger WN, Arnell NW, Tompkins EL (2005) Successful adaptation to 
climate change across scales. Glob Environ Chang 15(2):77–86
Akkari C, Bryant CR (2016) The co-construction approach as approach 
to developing adaptation strategies in the face of climate change 
and variability: A conceptual framework. Agricultural Research 
5(2):162–173
Alhassan H (2021) The effect of agricultural total factor productivity 
on environmental degradation in sub-Saharan Africa. Sci Afr 
12:e00740
Ali A, Erenstein O (2017) Assessing farmer use of climate change 
adaptation practices and impacts on food security and poverty 
in Pakistan. Clim Risk Manag 16:183–194
Allen CD, Macalady AK, Chenchouni H, Bachelet D, McDowell N, 
Vennetier M, Hogg ET (2010) A global overview of drought 
and heat-induced tree mortality reveals emerging climate change 
risks for forests. For Ecol Manag 259(4):660–684
Anwar A, Sinha A, Sharif A, Siddique M, Irshad S, Anwar W, Malik S 
(2021) The nexus between urbanization, renewable energy con-
sumption, financial development, and CO2 emissions: evidence 
from selected Asian countries. Environ Dev Sust. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1007/​s10668-​021-​01716-2
Araus JL, Slafer GA, Royo C, Serret MD (2008) Breeding for yield 
potential and stress adaptation in cereals. Crit Rev Plant Sci 
27(6):377–412
Aron JL, Patz J (2001) Ecosystem change and public health: a global 
perspective: JHU Press
Arshad MI, Iqbal MA, Shahbaz M (2018) Pakistan tourism indus-
try and challenges: a review. Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism 
Research 23(2):121–132
Ashbolt NJ (2015) Microbial contamination of drinking water and 
human health from community water systems. Current Environ-
mental Health Reports 2(1):95–106
42553
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Asseng S, Cao W, Zhang W, Ludwig F (2009) Crop physiology, model-
ling and climate change: impact and adaptation strategies. Crop 
Physiol 511–543
Asseng S, Ewert F, Rosenzweig C, Jones JW, Hatfield JL, Ruane AC, 
Cammarano D (2013) Uncertainty in simulating wheat yields 
under climate change. Nat Clim Chang 3(9):827–832
Association A (2020) Climate change is threatening mental health, 
American Psychological Association, “Kirsten Weir, . from 
<https://​www.​apa.​org/​monit​or/​2016/​07-​08/​clima​te-​change>, 
Accessed on 26 Jan 2020.
Ayers J, Huq S, Wright H, Faisal A, Hussain S (2014) Mainstreaming 
climate change adaptation into development in Bangladesh. Clim 
Dev 6:293–305
Balsalobre-Lorente D, Driha OM, Bekun FV, Sinha A, Adedoyin FF 
(2020) Consequences of COVID-19 on the social isolation of the 
Chinese economy: accounting for the role of reduction in carbon 
emissions. Air Qual Atmos Health 13(12):1439–1451 
Balsalobre-Lorente D, Ibáñez-Luzón L, Usman M, Shahbaz M (2022) 
The environmental Kuznets curve, based on the economic com-
plexity, and the pollution haven hypothesis in PIIGS countries. 
Renew Energy 185:1441–1455
Bank W (2008) Forests sourcebook: practical guidance for sustaining 
forests in development cooperation: World Bank
Barua S, Valenzuela E (2018) Climate change impacts on global agri-
cultural trade patterns: evidence from the past 50 years. In Pro-
ceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Sustainable 
Development (pp. 26–28)
Bates AE, Pecl GT, Frusher S, Hobday AJ, Wernberg T, Smale DA, 
Colwell RK (2014) Defining and observing stages of climate-
mediated range shifts in marine systems. Glob Environ Chang 
26:27–38
Battisti DS, Naylor RL (2009) Historical warnings of future 
food insecurity with unprecedented seasonal heat. Science 
323(5911):240–244
Beesley L, Close PG, Gwinn DC, Long M, Moroz M, Koster WM, 
Storer T (2019) Flow-mediated movement of freshwater catfish, 
Tandanus bostocki, in a regulated semi-urban river, to inform 
environmental water releases. Ecol Freshw Fish 28(3):434–445
Benita F (2021) Human mobility behavior in COVID-19: A systematic 
literature review and bibliometric analysis. Sustain Cities Soc 
70:102916
Berendonk TU, Manaia CM, Merlin C, Fatta-Kassinos D, Cytryn E, 
Walsh F, Pons M-N (2015) Tackling antibiotic resistance: the 
environmental framework. Nat Rev Microbiol 13(5):310–317
Berg MP, Kiers ET, Driessen G, Van DerHEIJDEN M, Kooi BW, 
Kuenen F, Ellers J (2010) Adapt or disperse: understanding 
species persistence in a changing world. Glob Change Biol 
16(2):587–598
Blum A, Klueva N, Nguyen H (2001) Wheat cellular thermotolerance 
is related to yield under heat stress. Euphytica 117(2):117–123
Bonacci O (2019) Air temperature and precipitation analyses on a small 
Mediterranean island: the case of the remote island of Lastovo 
(Adriatic Sea, Croatia). Acta Hydrotechnica 32(57):135–150
Botzen W, Duijndam S, van Beukering P (2021) Lessons for climate 
policy from behavioral biases towards COVID-19 and climate 
change risks. World Dev 137:105214
Brázdil R, Stucki P, Szabó P, Řezníčková L, Dolák L, Dobrovolný P, 
Suchánková S (2018) Windstorms and forest disturbances in the 
Czech Lands: 1801–2015. Agric for Meteorol 250:47–63
Brown HCP, Smit B, Somorin OA, Sonwa DJ, Nkem JN (2014) Cli-
mate change and forest communities: prospects for building insti-
tutional adaptive capacity in the Congo Basin forests. Ambio 
43(6):759–769
Bujosa A, Riera A, Torres CM (2015) Valuing tourism demand attrib-
utes to guide climate change adaptation measures efficiently: 
the case of the Spanish domestic travel market. Tour Manage 
47:233–239
Calderini D, Abeledo L, Savin R, Slafer GA (1999) Effect of tem-
perature and carpel size during pre-anthesis on potential grain 
weight in wheat. J Agric Sci 132(4):453–459
Cammell M, Knight J (1992) Effects of climatic change on the popu-
lation dynamics of crop pests. Adv Ecol Res 22:117–162
Cavanaugh KC, Kellner JR, Forde AJ, Gruner DS, Parker JD, Rod-
riguez W, Feller IC (2014) Poleward expansion of mangroves 
is a threshold response to decreased frequency of extreme cold 
events. Proc Natl Acad Sci 111(2):723–727
Cell CC (2009) Climate change and health impacts in Bangladesh. 
Clima Chang Cell DoE MoEF
Chandio AA, Jiang Y, Rehman A, Rauf A (2020) Short and long-
run impacts of climate change on agriculture: an empirical 
evidence from China. Int J Clim Chang Strat Manag
Chaudhary P, Rai S, Wangdi S, Mao A, Rehman N, Chettri S, Bawa 
KS (2011) Consistency of local perceptions of climate change 
in the Kangchenjunga Himalaya landscape. Curr Sci 504–513
Chien F, Anwar A, Hsu CC, Sharif A, Razzaq A, Sinha A (2021) 
The role of information and communication technology in 
encountering environmental degradation: proposing an SDG 
framework for the BRICS countries. Technol Soc 65:101587 
Cooper C, Booth A, Varley-Campbell J, Britten N, Garside R (2018) 
Defining the process to literature searching in systematic 
reviews: a literature review of guidance and supporting stud-
ies. BMC Med Res Methodol 18(1):1–14
Costello A, Abbas M, Allen A, Ball S, Bell S, Bellamy R, Kett M 
(2009) Managing the health effects of climate change: lancet 
and University College London Institute for Global Health 
Commission. The Lancet 373(9676):1693–1733
Cruz DLA (2015) Mother Figured. University of Chicago Press. 
Retrieved from, https://​doi.​org/​10.​7208/​97802​26315​072
Cui W, Ouyang T, Qiu Y, Cui D (2021) Literature Review of the 
Implications of Exercise Rehabilitation Strategies for SARS 
Patients on the Recovery of COVID-19 Patients. Paper pre-
sented at the Healthcare
Davidson D (2016) Gaps in agricultural climate adaptation research. 
Nat Clim Chang 6(5):433–435
Diffenbaugh NS, Singh D, Mankin JS, Horton DE, Swain DL, Touma 
D, Tsiang M (2017) Quantifying the influence of global warm-
ing on unprecedented extreme climate events. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci 114(19):4881–4886
Dimri A, Kumar D, Choudhary A, Maharana P (2018) Future changes 
over the Himalayas: mean temperature. Global Planet Change 
162:235–251
Dullinger S, Gattringer A, Thuiller W, Moser D, Zimmermann N, 
Guisan A (2012) Extinction debt of high-mountain plants under 
twenty-first-century climate change. Nature Publishing Group, 
Nat Clim Chang
Dupuis I, Dumas C (1990) Influence of temperature stress on in vitro 
fertilization and heat shock protein synthesis in maize (Zea mays 
L.) reproductive tissues. Plant Physiol 94(2):665–670
Edreira JR, Otegui ME (2013) Heat stress in temperate and tropical 
maize hybrids: a novel approach for assessing sources of kernel 
loss in field conditions. Field Crop Res 142:58–67
Edreira JR, Carpici EB, Sammarro D, Otegui M (2011) Heat stress 
effects around flowering on kernel set of temperate and tropical 
maize hybrids. Field Crop Res 123(2):62–73
Ellison D, Morris CE, Locatelli B, Sheil D, Cohen J, Murdiyarso D, 
Pokorny J (2017) Trees, forests and water: Cool insights for a hot 
world. Glob Environ Chang 43:51–61
Elsayed ZM, Eldehna WM, Abdel-Aziz MM, El Hassab MA, Elkaeed 
EB, Al-Warhi T, Mohammed ER (2021) Development of novel 
isatin–nicotinohydrazide hybrids with potent activity against 
42554
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
susceptible/resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis and bronchi-
tis causing–bacteria. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem 36(1):384–393
EM-DAT (2020) EMDAT: OFDA/CRED International Disaster Data-
base, Université catholique de Louvain – Brussels – Belgium. 
from http://​www.​emdat.​be
EPA U (2018) United States Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 
Year in Review
Erman A, De Vries Robbe SA, Thies SF, Kabir K, Maruo M (2021) 
Gender Dimensions of Disaster Risk and Resilience
Fand BB, Kamble AL, Kumar M (2012) Will climate change pose 
serious threat to crop pest management: a critical review. Int J 
Sci Res Publ 2(11):1–14
FAO (2018).The State of the World’s Forests 2018 - Forest Pathways 
to Sustainable Development.
Fardous S Perception of climate change in Kaptai National Park. 
Rural Livelihoods and Protected Landscape: Co-Management 
in the Wetlands and Forests of Bangladesh, 186–204
Farooq M, Bramley H, Palta JA, Siddique KH (2011) Heat stress in 
wheat during reproductive and grain-filling phases. Crit Rev 
Plant Sci 30(6):491–507
Feliciano D, Recha J, Ambaw G, MacSween K, Solomon D, Wol-
lenberg E (2022) Assessment of agricultural emissions, climate 
change mitigation and adaptation practices in Ethiopia. Clim 
Policy 1–18
Ferreira JJ, Fernandes CI, Ferreira FA (2020) Technology transfer, 
climate change mitigation, and environmental patent impact on 
sustainability and economic growth: a comparison of European 
countries. Technol Forecast Soc Change 150:119770
Fettig CJ, Reid ML, Bentz BJ, Sevanto S, Spittlehouse DL, Wang T 
(2013) Changing climates, changing forests: a western North 
American perspective. J Forest 111(3):214–228
Fischer AP (2019) Characterizing behavioral adaptation to climate 
change in temperate forests. Landsc Urban Plan 188:72–79
Flannigan M, Cantin AS, De Groot WJ, Wotton M, Newbery A, Gow-
man LM (2013) Global wildland fire season severity in the 21st 
century. For Ecol Manage 294:54–61
Fossheim M, Primicerio R, Johannesen E, Ingvaldsen RB, Aschan 
MM, Dolgov AV (2015) Recent warming leads to a rapid bore-
alization of fish communities in the Arctic. Nat Clim Chang 
5(7):673–677
Füssel HM, Hildén M (2014) How is uncertainty addressed in the 
knowledge base for national adaptation planning? Adapting to 
an Uncertain Climate (pp. 41–66): Springer
Gambín BL, Borrás L, Otegui ME (2006) Source–sink relations and 
kernel weight differences in maize temperate hybrids. Field Crop 
Res 95(2–3):316–326
Gambín B, Borrás L (2010) Resource distribution and the trade-off 
between seed number and seed weight: a comparison across crop 
species. Annals of Applied Biology 156(1):91–102
Gampe D, Nikulin G, Ludwig R (2016) Using an ensemble of regional 
climate models to assess climate change impacts on water scar-
city in European river basins. Sci Total Environ 573:1503–1518
García GA, Dreccer MF, Miralles DJ, Serrago RA (2015) High 
night temperatures during grain number determination reduce 
wheat and barley grain yield: a field study. Glob Change Biol 
21(11):4153–4164
Garner E, Inyang M, Garvey E, Parks J, Glover C, Grimaldi A, Edwards 
MA (2019) Impact of blending for direct potable reuse on prem-
ise plumbing microbial ecology and regrowth of opportunistic 
pathogens and antibiotic resistant bacteria. Water Res 151:75–86
Gleditsch NP (2021) This time is different! Or is it? NeoMalthusians 
and environmental optimists in the age of climate change. J Peace 
Res 0022343320969785
Godfray HCJ, Beddington JR, Crute IR, Haddad L, Lawrence D, Muir 
JF, Toulmin C (2010) Food security: the challenge of feeding 9 
billion people. Science 327(5967):812–818
Goes S, Hasterok D, Schutt DL, Klöcking M (2020) Continental lith-
ospheric temperatures: A review. Phys Earth Planet Inter 106509
Gorst A, Dehlavi A, Groom B (2018) Crop productivity and adaptation 
to climate change in Pakistan. Environ Dev Econ 23(6):679–701
Gosling SN, Arnell NW (2016) A global assessment of the impact of 
climate change on water scarcity. Clim Change 134(3):371–385
Gössling S, Scott D, Hall CM, Ceron J-P, Dubois G (2012) Consumer 
behaviour and demand response of tourists to climate change. 
Ann Tour Res 39(1):36–58
Gourdji SM, Sibley AM, Lobell DB (2013) Global crop exposure to 
critical high temperatures in the reproductive period: historical 
trends and future projections. Environ Res Lett 8(2):024041
Grieg E Responsible Consumption and Production
Gunter BG, Rahman A, Rahman A (2008) How Vulnerable are Bang-
ladesh’s Indigenous People to Climate Change? Bangladesh 
Development Research Center (BDRC)
Hall CM, Amelung B, Cohen S, Eijgelaar E, Gössling S, Higham J, 
Scott D (2015) On climate change skepticism and denial in tour-
ism. J Sustain Tour 23(1):4–25
Hartmann H, Moura CF, Anderegg WR, Ruehr NK, Salmon Y, Allen 
CD, Galbraith D (2018) Research frontiers for improving our 
understanding of drought-induced tree and forest mortality. New 
Phytol 218(1):15–28
Hatfield JL, Prueger JH (2015) Temperature extremes: Effect on 
plant growth and development. Weather and Climate Extremes 
10:4–10
Hatfield JL, Boote KJ, Kimball B, Ziska L, Izaurralde RC, Ort D, Wolfe 
D (2011) Climate impacts on agriculture: implications for crop 
production. Agron J 103(2):351–370
Hendriksen RS, Munk P, Njage P, Van Bunnik B, McNally L, Lukjan-
cenko O, Kjeldgaard J (2019) Global monitoring of antimicrobial 
resistance based on metagenomics analyses of urban sewage. Nat 
Commun 10(1):1124
Huang S (2004) Global trade patterns in fruits and vegetables. USDA-
ERS Agriculture and Trade Report No. WRS-04–06
Huang W, Gao Q-X, Cao G-L, Ma Z-Y, Zhang W-D, Chao Q-C (2016) 
Effect of urban symbiosis development in China on GHG emis-
sions reduction. Adv Clim Chang Res 7(4):247–252
Huang Y, Haseeb M, Usman M, Ozturk I (2022) Dynamic association 
between ICT, renewable energy, economic complexity and eco-
logical footprint: Is there any difference between E-7 (develop-
ing) and G-7 (developed) countries? Tech Soc 68:101853
Hubbart JA, Guyette R, Muzika R-M (2016) More than drought: pre-
cipitation variance, excessive wetness, pathogens and the future 
of the western edge of the eastern deciduous forest. Sci Total 
Environ 566:463–467
Hussain M, Butt AR, Uzma F, Ahmed R, Irshad S, Rehman A, Yousaf 
B (2020) A comprehensive review of climate change impacts, 
adaptation, and mitigation on environmental and natural calami-
ties in Pakistan. Environ Monit Assess 192(1):48
Hussain M, Liu G, Yousaf B, Ahmed R, Uzma F, Ali MU, Butt AR 
(2018) Regional and sectoral assessment on climate-change in 
Pakistan: social norms and indigenous perceptions on climate-
change adaptation and mitigation in relation to global context. J 
Clean Prod 200:791–808
Intergov. Panel Clim Chang 33 from https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​
81107​415324
Ionescu C, Klein RJ, Hinkel J, Kumar KK, Klein R (2009) Towards 
a formal framework of vulnerability to climate change. Environ 
Model Assess 14(1):1–16
IPCC (2013) Summary for policymakers. Clim Chang Phys Sci Basis 
Contrib Work Gr I Fifth Assess Rep
Ishikawa-Ishiwata Y, Furuya J (2022) Economic evaluation and cli-
mate change adaptation measures for rice production in viet-
nam using a supply and demand model: special emphasis on the 
Mekong River Delta region in Vietnam. In Interlocal Adaptations 
42555
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
to Climate Change in East and Southeast Asia (pp. 45–53). 
Springer, Cham
Izaguirre C, Losada I, Camus P, Vigh J, Stenek V (2021) Cli-
mate change risk to global port operations. Nat Clim Chang 
11(1):14–20
Jactel H, Koricheva J, Castagneyrol B (2019) Responses of forest insect 
pests to climate change: not so simple. Current opinion in insect 
science
Jahanzad E, Holtz BA, Zuber CA, Doll D, Brewer KM, Hogan S, Gau-
din AC (2020) Orchard recycling improves climate change adap-
tation and mitigation potential of almond production systems. 
PLoS ONE 15(3):e0229588
Jurgilevich A, Räsänen A, Groundstroem F, Juhola S (2017) A system-
atic review of dynamics in climate risk and vulnerability assess-
ments. Environ Res Lett 12(1):013002
Karami E (2012) Climate change, resilience and poverty in the develop-
ing world. Paper presented at the Culture, Politics and Climate 
change conference
Kärkkäinen L, Lehtonen H, Helin J, Lintunen J, Peltonen-Sainio P, 
Regina K, . . . Packalen T (2020) Evaluation of policy instru-
ments for supporting greenhouse gas mitigation efforts in agri-
cultural and urban land use. Land Use Policy 99:104991
Karkman A, Do TT, Walsh F, Virta MP (2018) Antibiotic-resistance 
genes in waste water. Trends Microbiol 26(3):220–228
Kohfeld KE, Le Quéré C, Harrison SP, Anderson RF (2005) Role 
of marine biology in glacial-interglacial CO2 cycles. Science 
308(5718):74–78
Kongsager R (2018) Linking climate change adaptation and mitigation: 
a review with evidence from the land-use sectors. Land 7(4):158
Kurz WA, Dymond C, Stinson G, Rampley G, Neilson E, Carroll A, 
Safranyik L (2008) Mountain pine beetle and forest carbon feed-
back to climate change. Nature 452(7190):987
Lamperti F, Bosetti V, Roventini A, Tavoni M, Treibich T (2021) Three 
green financial policies to address climate risks. J Financial Stab 
54:100875
Leal Filho W, Azeiteiro UM, Balogun AL, Setti AFF, Mucova SA, Ayal 
D, . . . Oguge NO (2021) The influence of ecosystems services 
depletion to climate change adaptation efforts in Africa. Sci Total 
Environ 146414
Lehner F, Coats S, Stocker TF, Pendergrass AG, Sanderson BM, Raible 
CC, Smerdon JE (2017) Projected drought risk in 1.5 C and 2 C 
warmer climates. Geophys Res Lett 44(14):7419–7428
Lemery J, Knowlton K, Sorensen C (2021) Global climate change and 
human health: from science to practice: John Wiley & Sons
Leppänen S, Saikkonen L, Ollikainen M (2014) Impact of Climate 
Change on cereal grain production in Russia: Mimeo
Lipczynska-Kochany E (2018) Effect of climate change on humic sub-
stances and associated impacts on the quality of surface water 
and groundwater: a review. Sci Total Environ 640:1548–1565
livescience.com. New coronavirus may have ‘jumped’ to humans from 
snakes, study finds, live science,. from <https://​www.​lives​cience.​
com/​new-​coron​avirus-​origin-​snakes.​html> accessed on Jan 2020
Lobell DB, Field CB (2007) Global scale climate–crop yield rela-
tionships and the impacts of recent warming. Environ Res Lett 
2(1):014002
Lobell DB, Gourdji SM (2012) The influence of climate change on 
global crop productivity. Plant Physiol 160(4):1686–1697
Ma L, Li B, Zhang T (2019) New insights into antibiotic resistome in 
drinking water and management perspectives: a metagenomic 
based study of small-sized microbes. Water Res 152:191–201
Macchi M, Oviedo G, Gotheil S, Cross K, Boedhihartono A, Wolfangel 
C, Howell M (2008) Indigenous and traditional peoples and cli-
mate change. International Union for the Conservation of Nature, 
Gland, Suiza
Mall RK, Gupta A, Sonkar G (2017) Effect of climate change on 
agricultural crops. In Current developments in biotechnology 
and bioengineering (pp. 23–46). Elsevier
Manes S, Costello MJ, Beckett H, Debnath A, Devenish-Nelson E, 
Grey KA, . . . Krause C (2021) Endemism increases species’ 
climate change risk in areas of global biodiversity importance. 
Biol Conserv 257:109070
Mannig B, Pollinger F, Gafurov A, Vorogushyn S, Unger-Shayesteh 
K (2018) Impacts of climate change in Central Asia Encyclo-
pedia of the Anthropocene (pp. 195–203): Elsevier
Martínez-Alvarado O, Gray SL, Hart NC, Clark PA, Hodges K, Rob-
erts MJ (2018) Increased wind risk from sting-jet windstorms 
with climate change. Environ Res Lett 13(4):044002
Matsui T, Omasa K, Horie T (2001) The difference in sterility due to 
high temperatures during the flowering period among japonica-
rice varieties. Plant Production Science 4(2):90–93
Meierrieks D (2021) Weather shocks, climate change and human 
health. World Dev 138:105228
Michel D, Eriksson M, Klimes M (2021) Climate change and (in) 
security in transboundary river basins Handbook of Security 
and the Environment: Edward Elgar Publishing
Mihiretu A, Okoyo EN, Lemma T (2021) Awareness of climate 
change and its associated risks jointly explain context-specific 
adaptation in the Arid-tropics. Northeast Ethiopia SN Social 
Sciences 1(2):1–18
Millar CI, Stephenson NL (2015) Temperate forest health in an era 
of emerging megadisturbance. Science 349(6250):823–826
Mishra A, Bruno E, Zilberman D (2021) Compound natural and 
human disasters: Managing drought and COVID-19 to sus-
tain global agriculture and food sectors. Sci Total Environ 
754:142210
Mosavi SH, Soltani S, Khalilian S (2020) Coping with climate 
change in agriculture: Evidence from Hamadan-Bahar plain 
in Iran. Agric Water Manag 241:106332
Murshed M (2020) An empirical analysis of the non-linear impacts of 
ICT-trade openness on renewable energy transition, energy effi-
ciency, clean cooking fuel access and environmental sustain-
ability in South Asia. Environ Sci Pollut Res 27(29):36254–
36281. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11356-​020-​09497-3
Murshed M (2022) Pathways to clean cooking fuel transition in low 
and middle income Sub-Saharan African countries: the rel-
evance of improving energy use efficiency. Sustainable Produc-
tion and Consumption 30:396–412. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
spc.​2021.​12.​016
Murshed M, Dao NTT (2020) Revisiting the CO2 emission-
induced EKC hypothesis in South Asia: the role of Export 
Quality Improvement. GeoJournal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s10708-​020-​10270-9
Murshed M, Abbass K, Rashid S (2021) Modelling renewable energy 
adoption across south Asian economies: Empirical evidence 
from Bangladesh, India, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Int J Finan 
Eco 26(4):5425–5450
Murshed M, Nurmakhanova M, Elheddad M, Ahmed R (2020) 
Value addition in the services sector and its heterogeneous 
impacts on CO2 emissions: revisiting the EKC hypothesis for 
the OPEC using panel spatial estimation techniques. Environ 
Sci Pollut Res 27(31):38951–38973. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11356-​020-​09593-4
Murshed M, Nurmakhanova M, Al-Tal R, Mahmood H, Elheddad M, 
Ahmed R (2022) Can intra-regional trade, renewable energy 
use, foreign direct investments, and economic growth reduce 
ecological footprints in South Asia? Energy Sources, Part B: 
Economics, Planning, and Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​
15567​249.​2022.​20387​30
Neuvonen M, Sievänen T, Fronzek S, Lahtinen I, Veijalainen N, 
Carter TR (2015) Vulnerability of cross-country skiing to 
42556
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
climate change in Finland–an interactive mapping tool. J Out-
door Recreat Tour 11:64–79
npr.org. Please Help Me.’ What people in China are saying about the 
outbreak on social media, npr.org, . from <https://​www.​npr.​org/​
secti​ons/​goats​andso​da/​2020/​01/​24/​79900​0379/​please-​help-​me-​
what-​people-​in-​china-​are-​saying-​about-​the-​outbr​eak-​on-​social-​
medi>, Accessed on 26 Jan 2020.
Ogden LE (2018) Climate change, pathogens, and people: the 
challenges of monitoring a moving target. Bioscience 
68(10):733–739
Ortiz AMD, Outhwaite CL, Dalin C, Newbold T (2021) A review 
of the interactions between biodiversity, agriculture, climate 
change, and international trade: research and policy priorities. 
One Earth 4(1):88–101
Ortiz R (2008) Crop genetic engineering under global climate change. 
Ann Arid Zone 47(3):343
Otegui MAE, Bonhomme R (1998) Grain yield components in maize: 
I. Ear growth and kernel set. Field Crop Res 56(3):247–256
Pachauri RK, Allen MR, Barros VR, Broome J, Cramer W, Christ R, . . 
. Dasgupta P (2014) Climate change 2014: synthesis report. Con-
tribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the fifth assessment 
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: Ipcc
Pal JK (2021) Visualizing the knowledge outburst in global research 
on COVID-19. Scientometrics 126(5):4173–4193
Panda R, Behera S, Kashyap P (2003) Effective management of irri-
gation water for wheat under stressed conditions. Agric Water 
Manag 63(1):37–56
Pärnänen KM, Narciso-da-Rocha C, Kneis D, Berendonk TU, Cacace 
D, Do TT, Jaeger T (2019) Antibiotic resistance in European 
wastewater treatment plants mirrors the pattern of clinical anti-
biotic resistance prevalence. Sci Adv 5(3):eaau9124
Parry M, Parry ML, Canziani O, Palutikof J, Van der Linden P, Hanson 
C (2007) Climate change 2007-impacts, adaptation and vulner-
ability: Working group II contribution to the fourth assessment 
report of the IPCC (Vol. 4): Cambridge University Press
Patz JA, Campbell-Lendrum D, Holloway T, Foley JA (2005) 
Impact of regional climate change on human health. Nature 
438(7066):310–317
Patz JA, Graczyk TK, Geller N, Vittor AY (2000) Effects of environ-
mental change on emerging parasitic diseases. Int J Parasitol 
30(12–13):1395–1405
Pautasso M, Döring TF, Garbelotto M, Pellis L, Jeger MJ (2012) 
Impacts of climate change on plant diseases—opinions and 
trends. Eur J Plant Pathol 133(1):295–313
Peng S, Huang J, Sheehy JE, Laza RC, Visperas RM, Zhong X, Cass-
man KG (2004) Rice yields decline with higher night temperature 
from global warming. Proc Natl Acad Sci 101(27):9971–9975
Pereira HM, Ferrier S, Walters M, Geller GN, Jongman R, Scholes 
RJ, Cardoso A (2013) Essential biodiversity variables. Science 
339(6117):277–278
Perera K, De Silva K, Amarasinghe M (2018) Potential impact of pre-
dicted sea level rise on carbon sink function of mangrove eco-
systems with special reference to Negombo estuary, Sri Lanka. 
Global Planet Change 161:162–171
Pfadenhauer JS, Klötzli FA (2020) Zonal Vegetation of the Subtropical 
(Warm–Temperate) Zone with Winter Rain. In Global Vegetation 
(pp. 455–514). Springer, Cham
Phillips JD (2018) Environmental gradients and complexity in coastal 
landscape response to sea level rise. CATENA 169:107–118
Pirasteh-Anosheh H, Parnian A, Spasiano D, Race M, Ashraf M (2021) 
Haloculture: A system to mitigate the negative impacts of pan-
demics on the environment, society and economy, emphasizing 
COVID-19. Environ Res 111228
Pruden A, Larsson DJ, Amézquita A, Collignon P, Brandt KK, Gra-
ham DW, Snape JR (2013) Management options for reducing 
the release of antibiotics and antibiotic resistance genes to the 
environment. Environ Health Perspect 121(8):878–885
Qasim MZ, Hammad HM, Abbas F, Saeed S, Bakhat HF, Nasim W, 
Fahad S (2020) The potential applications of picotechnology in 
biomedical and environmental sciences. Environ Sci Pollut Res 
27(1):133–142
Qasim MZ, Hammad HM, Maqsood F, Tariq T, Chawla MS Climate 
Change Implication on Cereal Crop Productivity
Rahman M, Alam K (2016) Forest dependent indigenous communi-
ties’ perception and adaptation to climate change through local 
knowledge in the protected area—a Bangladesh case study. Cli-
mate 4(1):12
Ramankutty N, Mehrabi Z, Waha K, Jarvis L, Kremen C, Herrero 
M, Rieseberg LH (2018) Trends in global agricultural land use: 
implications for environmental health and food security. Annu 
Rev Plant Biol 69:789–815
Rehman A, Ma H, Ahmad M, Irfan M, Traore O, Chandio AA (2021) 
Towards environmental Sustainability: devolving the influence of 
carbon dioxide emission to population growth, climate change, 
Forestry, livestock and crops production in Pakistan. Ecol Indic 
125:107460
Reichstein M, Carvalhais N (2019) Aspects of forest biomass in the 
Earth system: its role and major unknowns. Surv Geophys 
40(4):693–707
Reidsma P, Ewert F, Boogaard H, van Diepen K (2009) Regional crop 
modelling in Europe: the impact of climatic conditions and farm 
characteristics on maize yields. Agric Syst 100(1–3):51–60
Ritchie H, Roser M (2014) Natural disasters. Our World in Data
Rizvi AR, Baig S, Verdone M (2015) Ecosystems based adaptation: 
knowledge gaps in making an economic case for investing in 
nature based solutions for climate change. IUCN, Gland, Swit-
zerland, p 48
Roscher C, Fergus AJ, Petermann JS, Buchmann N, Schmid B, Schulze 
E-D (2013) What happens to the sown species if a biodiversity 
experiment is not weeded? Basic Appl Ecol 14(3):187–198
Rosenzweig C, Elliott J, Deryng D, Ruane AC, Müller C, Arneth 
A, Khabarov N (2014) Assessing agricultural risks of climate 
change in the 21st century in a global gridded crop model inter-
comparison. Proc Natl Acad Sci 111(9):3268–3273
Rosenzweig C, Iglesius A, Yang XB, Epstein PR, Chivian E (2001) 
Climate change and extreme weather events-implications for food 
production, plant diseases, and pests
Sadras VO, Slafer GA (2012) Environmental modulation of yield com-
ponents in cereals: heritabilities reveal a hierarchy of phenotypic 
plasticities. Field Crop Res 127:215–224
Salvucci ME, Crafts-Brandner SJ (2004) Inhibition of photosynthesis 
by heat stress: the activation state of Rubisco as a limiting factor 
in photosynthesis. Physiol Plant 120(2):179–186
Santos WS, Gurgel-Gonçalves R, Garcez LM, Abad-Franch F (2021) 
Deforestation effects on Attalea palms and their resident Rho-
dnius, vectors of Chagas disease, in eastern Amazonia. PLoS 
ONE 16(5):e0252071
Sarkar P, Debnath N, Reang D (2021) Coupled human-environment 
system amid COVID-19 crisis: a conceptual model to understand 
the nexus. Sci Total Environ 753:141757
Schlenker W, Roberts MJ (2009) Nonlinear temperature effects indicate 
severe damages to US crop yields under climate change. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci 106(37):15594–15598
Schoene DH, Bernier PY (2012) Adapting forestry and forests to cli-
mate change: a challenge to change the paradigm. Forest Policy 
Econ 24:12–19
Schuurmans C (2021) The world heat budget: expected changes Cli-
mate Change (pp. 1–15): CRC Press
Scott D (2021) Sustainable Tourism and the Grand Challenge of Cli-
mate Change. Sustainability 13(4):1966
42557
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Scott D, McBoyle G, Schwartzentruber M (2004) Climate change 
and the distribution of climatic resources for tourism in North 
America. Climate Res 27(2):105–117
Semenov MA (2009) Impacts of climate change on wheat in England 
and Wales. J R Soc Interface 6(33):343–350
Shaffril HAM, Krauss SE, Samsuddin SF (2018) A systematic review 
on Asian’s farmers’ adaptation practices towards climate change. 
Sci Total Environ 644:683–695
Shahbaz M, Balsalobre-Lorente D, Sinha A (2019) Foreign direct 
Investment–CO2 emissions nexus in Middle East and North 
African countries: Importance of biomass energy consumption. 
J Clean Product 217:603–614
Sharif A, Mishra S, Sinha A, Jiao Z, Shahbaz M, Afshan S (2020) The 
renewable energy consumption-environmental degradation nexus 
in Top-10 polluted countries: Fresh insights from quantile-on-
quantile regression approach. Renew Energy 150:670–690 
Sharma R (2012) Impacts on human health of climate and land use 
change in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region. Mt Res Dev 
32(4):480–486
Sharma R, Sinha A, Kautish P (2020) Examining the impacts of eco-
nomic and demographic aspects on the ecological footprint in 
South and Southeast Asian countries. Environ Sci Pollut Res 
27(29):36970–36982
Smit B, Burton I, Klein RJ, Wandel J (2000) An anatomy of adaptation 
to climate change and variability Societal adaptation to climate 
variability and change (pp. 223–251): Springer
Song Y, Fan H, Tang X, Luo Y, Liu P, Chen Y (2021) The effects of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
on ischemic stroke and the possible underlying mechanisms. Int 
J Neurosci 1–20
Sovacool BK, Griffiths S, Kim J, Bazilian M (2021) Climate change 
and industrial F-gases: a critical and systematic review of devel-
opments, sociotechnical systems and policy options for reducing 
synthetic greenhouse gas emissions. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 
141:110759
Stewart JA, Perrine JD, Nichols LB, Thorne JH, Millar CI, Goehring 
KE, Wright DH (2015) Revisiting the past to foretell the future: 
summer temperature and habitat area predict pika extirpations 
in California. J Biogeogr 42(5):880–890
Stocker T, Qin D, Plattner G, Tignor M, Allen S, Boschung J, . . . 
Midgley P (2013) Climate change 2013: The physical science 
basis. Working group I contribution to the IPCC Fifth assessment 
report: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 1535p
Stone P, Nicolas M (1994) Wheat cultivars vary widely in their 
responses of grain yield and quality to short periods of post-
anthesis heat stress. Funct Plant Biol 21(6):887–900
Su H-C, Liu Y-S, Pan C-G, Chen J, He L-Y, Ying G-G (2018) Per-
sistence of antibiotic resistance genes and bacterial community 
changes in drinking water treatment system: from drinking water 
source to tap water. Sci Total Environ 616:453–461
Sunderlin WD, Angelsen A, Belcher B, Burgers P, Nasi R, Santoso 
L, Wunder S (2005) Livelihoods, forests, and conservation in 
developing countries: an overview. World Dev 33(9):1383–1402
Symanski E, Han HA, Han I, McDaniel M, Whitworth KW, McCurdy 
S, . . . Delclos GL (2021) Responding to natural and industrial 
disasters: partnerships and lessons learned. Disaster medicine 
and public health preparedness 1–4
Tao F, Yokozawa M, Xu Y, Hayashi Y, Zhang Z (2006) Climate 
changes and trends in phenology and yields of field crops in 
China, 1981–2000. Agric for Meteorol 138(1–4):82–92
Tebaldi C, Hayhoe K, Arblaster JM, Meehl GA (2006) Going to the 
extremes. Clim Change 79(3–4):185–211
Testa G, Koon E, Johannesson L, McKenna G, Anthony T, Klintmalm 
G, Gunby R (2018) This article has been accepted for publica-
tion and undergone full peer review but has not been through the 
copyediting, typesetting, pagination and proofreading process, 
which may lead to differences between this version and the Ver-
sion of Record. Please cite this article as
Thornton PK, Lipper L (2014) How does climate change alter agricul-
tural strategies to support food security? (Vol. 1340): Intl Food 
Policy Res Inst
Tranfield D, Denyer D, Smart P (2003) Towards a methodology for 
developing evidence-informed management knowledge by means 
of systematic review. Br J Manag 14(3):207–222
UNEP (2017) United nations environment programme: fron-
tiers 2017. from https://​www.​unenv​ironm​ent.​org/​
news-​and-​stori​es/​press-​relea​se/​antim​icrob​ial-​resis​
tance- environmental-pollution-among-biggest
Usman M, Balsalobre-Lorente D (2022) Environmental concern in the 
era of industrialization: Can financial development, renewable 
energy and natural resources alleviate some load? Ene Policy 
162:112780
Usman M, Makhdum MSA (2021) What abates ecological footprint in 
BRICS-T region? Exploring the influence of renewable energy, 
non-renewable energy, agriculture, forest area and financial 
development. Renew Energy 179:12–28 
Usman M, Balsalobre-Lorente D, Jahanger A, Ahmad P (2022b) Pol-
lution concern during globalization mode in financially resource-
rich countries: Do financial development, natural resources, 
and renewable energy consumption matter? Rene. Energy 
183:90–102
Usman M, Jahanger A, Makhdum MSA, Balsalobre-Lorente D, Bashir 
A (2022a) How do financial development, energy consumption, 
natural resources, and globalization affect Arctic countries’ eco-
nomic growth and environmental quality? An advanced panel 
data simulation. Energy 241:122515
Usman M, Khalid K, Mehdi MA (2021) What determines environ-
mental deficit in Asia? Embossing the role of renewable and 
non-renewable energy utilization. Renew Energy 168:1165–1176
Urban MC (2015) Accelerating extinction risk from climate change. 
Science 348(6234):571–573
Vale MM, Arias PA, Ortega G, Cardoso M, Oliveira BF, Loyola R, 
Scarano FR (2021) Climate change and biodiversity in the Atlan-
tic Forest: best climatic models, predicted changes and impacts, 
and adaptation options The Atlantic Forest (pp. 253–267): 
Springer
Vedwan N, Rhoades RE (2001) Climate change in the Western Hima-
layas of India: a study of local perception and response. Climate 
Res 19(2):109–117
Vega CR, Andrade FH, Sadras VO, Uhart SA, Valentinuz OR (2001) 
Seed number as a function of growth. A comparative study in 
soybean, sunflower, and maize. Crop Sci 41(3):748–754
Vergés A, Doropoulos C, Malcolm HA, Skye M, Garcia-Pizá M, Mar-
zinelli EM, Vila-Concejo A (2016) Long-term empirical evi-
dence of ocean warming leading to tropicalization of fish com-
munities, increased herbivory, and loss of kelp. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci 113(48):13791–13796
Verheyen R (2005) Climate change damage and international law: 
prevention duties and state responsibility (Vol. 54): Martinus 
Nijhoff Publishers
Waheed A, Fischer TB, Khan MI (2021) Climate Change Policy Coher-
ence across Policies, Plans, and Strategies in Pakistan—implica-
tions for the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor Plan. Environ 
Manage 67(5):793–810
Wasiq M, Ahmad M (2004) Sustaining forests: a development strategy: 
The World Bank
Watts N, Adger WN, Agnolucci P, Blackstock J, Byass P, Cai W, 
Cooper A (2015) Health and climate change: policy responses 
to protect public health. The Lancet 386(10006):1861–1914
Weed AS, Ayres MP, Hicke JA (2013) Consequences of climate change 
for biotic disturbances in North American forests. Ecol Monogr 
83(4):441–470
42558
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
1 3
Weisheimer A, Palmer T (2005) Changing frequency of occurrence of 
extreme seasonal temperatures under global warming. Geophys 
Res Lett 32(20)
Wernberg T, Bennett S, Babcock RC, De Bettignies T, Cure K, Dep-
czynski M, Hovey RK (2016) Climate-driven regime shift of a 
temperate marine ecosystem. Science 353(6295):169–172
WHO (2018) WHO, 2018. Antimicrobial resistance
Wilkinson DM, Sherratt TN (2016) Why is the world green? The inter-
actions of top–down and bottom–up processes in terrestrial veg-
etation ecology. Plant Ecolog Divers 9(2):127–140
Wiranata IJ, Simbolon K (2021) Increasing awareness capacity of dis-
aster potential as a support to achieve sustainable development 
goal (sdg) 13 in lampung province. Jurnal Pir: Power in Interna-
tional Relations 5(2):129–146
Wiréhn L (2018) Nordic agriculture under climate change: a systematic 
review of challenges, opportunities and adaptation strategies for 
crop production. Land Use Policy 77:63–74
Wu D, Su Y, Xi H, Chen X, Xie B (2019) Urban and agriculturally 
influenced water contribute differently to the spread of antibi-
otic resistance genes in a mega-city river network. Water Res 
158:11–21
Wu HX (2020) Losing Steam?—An industry origin analysis of China’s 
productivity slowdown Measuring Economic Growth and Pro-
ductivity (pp. 137–167): Elsevier
Wu H, Qian H, Chen J, Huo C (2017) Assessment of agricultural 
drought vulnerability in the Guanzhong Plain. China Water 
Resources Management 31(5):1557–1574
Xie W, Huang J, Wang J, Cui Q, Robertson R, Chen K (2018) Climate 
change impacts on China’s agriculture: the responses from mar-
ket and trade. China Econ Rev
Xu J, Sharma R, Fang J, Xu Y (2008) Critical linkages between land-
use transition and human health in the Himalayan region. Envi-
ron Int 34(2):239–247
Yadav MK, Singh R, Singh K, Mall R, Patel C, Yadav S, Singh M 
(2015) Assessment of climate change impact on productiv-
ity of different cereal crops in Varanasi. India J Agrometeorol 
17(2):179–184
Yang B, Usman M (2021) Do industrialization, economic growth and 
globalization processes influence the ecological footprint and 
healthcare expenditures? Fresh insights based on the STIRPAT 
model for countries with the highest healthcare expenditures. 
Sust Prod Cons 28:893–910
Yu Z, Razzaq A, Rehman A, Shah A, Jameel K, Mor RS (2021) Disrup-
tion in global supply chain and socio-economic shocks: a lesson 
from COVID-19 for sustainable production and consumption. 
Oper Manag Res 1–16
Zarnetske PL, Skelly DK, Urban MC (2012) Biotic multipliers of cli-
mate change. Science 336(6088):1516–1518
Zhang M, Liu N, Harper R, Li Q, Liu K, Wei X, Liu S (2017) A global 
review on hydrological responses to forest change across multi-
ple spatial scales: importance of scale, climate, forest type and 
hydrological regime. J Hydrol 546:44–59
Zhao J, Sinha A, Inuwa N, Wang Y, Murshed M, Abbasi KR (2022) 
Does Structural Transformation in Economy Impact Inequality 
in Renewable Energy Productivity? Implications for Sustainable 
Development. Renew Energy 189:853–864. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​renene.​2022.​03.​050
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
42559
Environmental Science and Pollution Research (2022) 29:42539–42559
