Global Climate Implications for Homelessness: A Scoping
Review
Sean A. Kidd
& Susan Greco & Kwame McKenzie
Accepted: 4 September 2020
# The New York Academy of Medicine 2020
Abstract Homelessness is a persistent global challenge
with significant health impacts on those affected.
Homeless people are by definition the most exposed to
weather conditions and the social and economic prob-
lems caused by extreme weather and climate change and
variability. This systematic review was designed to syn-
thesize the academic literature that addresses the health
and social implications of global climate change for
homelessness. The question examined in this systematic
scoping review is the following: What is the current state
of knowledge in the scientific literature on the health and
social implications of global climate change for home-
lessness? A systematic scoping review method was used
to identify and synthesize the peer-reviewed literature
relevant to this question. The databases searched were
PsycINFO, Medline, Scopus, and Google Scholar. Of the
26 papers identified in this review, 20 employed original
data analyses with conclusions largely inferred from
cross-sectional associations. Themes included the poten-
tial influence of climate change on homelessness
prevalence, climate impacts that exacerbate specific vul-
nerabilities of homeless populations (e.g., chronic illness,
exposure, stigmatization), and health and social out-
comes. Service use and design implications were also
addressed. Given the scale of the impacts of climate
change on homelessness, the literature on this topic poses
promising directions but is under-developed in its current
state to adequately inform risk mitigation and response
planning. A systems framework is proposed here to
inform future research and service design.
Keywords Homelessness . Climate . Review . Systems
Global climate change has been described as “the defin-
ing issue of our time” [44]. Climate refers to weather
parameters such as temperature, rainfall, and wind speed
that occur in a given place over a given period of time
[46]. However, such a general definition belies the com-
plexity of the phenomenon and the dangers that it poses
[12]. To date, large volumes of evidence describe and
predict the potential adverse effects of climate change [7].
In this literature, human health and social impacts figure
prominently. Extremes of temperature, coupled with hu-
midity levels, significantly impact mortality rates as do
extreme weather events [18, 21]. Temperature and hu-
midity also influence illness morbidity (e.g., respiratory
and cardiovascular conditions) [17], and have implica-
tions for the progression of vector-borne diseases [33],
with differential risks as a function of age with risk
increasing at the youngest and oldest ends of the spec-
trum [3, 11]. The social impacts of climate extremes and
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-020-00483-1
S. A. Kidd : K. McKenzie
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada
S. A. Kidd (*)
Division Chief – Psychology, Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, 1001 Queen St. W., Unit 2-1, #161, Toronto, Ontario M6J
1H4, Canada
e-mail: sean_kidd@camh.net
S. Greco
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada
/ Published online: 23 September 2020
J Urban Health (2021) 98:385–393
changes include pronounced impacts on rates of interper-
sonal and intergroup violence [22], social and health
infrastructure [8], and migration [4]. A cross-cutting
theme of these various interactions is inequality—with
disproportionately larger effects on the lives of the
impoverished and stigmatized who also increase in num-
ber due to climate impacts. Gender figures prominently
with climate effects disproportionately higher for girls
and women in all domains (e.g., mortality, HIV infection,
education) [7].
Homelessness, in turn, is a persistent global chal-
lenge with major health impacts on those affected. It is
estimated that over 100 million people are homeless
globally, with 1 billion living in precarious housing
arrangements [43]. Homeless people are by definition
the most exposed to weather conditions and the social
and economic problems caused by extreme weather and
climate change. The umbrella term “homelessness” be-
lies a dimensional construct [14] ranging from being
roofless and sleeping rough, being houseless in shelter
environments, through to various forms of insecure and
inadequate housing—all of which have unique implica-
tions as they relate to climate change and weather ex-
posure. Thus, it is important to consider the possible
consequences of climate change for homeless popula-
tions. This topic has, to date, received relatively little
attention and preparedness for the impacts of a changing
climate on homelessness populations is in question.
Accordingly, this systematic review was designed to
synthesize the academic literature that addresses the
health and social implications of global climate change
for homelessness.
Methods
Scoping review methods are designed to identify and
articulate concepts and evidence in areas where the topic
of investigation is complex and (or) when the topic is
reviewed for the first time. Global climate change is
complex in terms of types of impact, systems involved,
and the associated fields of study. Furthermore, we did
not identify a previous systematic review that addresses
this topic. As such, we have followed the Arksey and
O’Malley [2] five-stage scoping review framework of
(1) identifying the research question, (2) identifying
relevant results, (3) selecting studies, (4) charting data,
and (5) reporting results. Our description of the scoping
review design was further informed by Levac et al. [29].
The authors of the present review have expertise in
homelessness (SK), population health and marginality
(KM), and the public health implications of weather and
climate change (SG).
First, the question examined in this review is as
follows: What is the current state of knowledge in the
scientific literature on the health and social implications
of global climate change for homelessness? The breadth
of this question was necessary due to the early stage of
the literature on this topic. Second, an a priori search
strategy was developed to identify the peer-reviewed
literature relevant to this question. The search, conduct-
ed in November 2019, covered the period from incep-
tion to November 2019, and was restricted to English
language peer-reviewed journals. The databases
searched were PsycINFO, Medline, Scopus, and
Google Scholar. The resulting search terms included
for group one: “homeless*” and “climate”, “weather”,
or “environment*”. Keywords were searched using
“OR” within groups and “AND” in two separate
searches to combine homelessness and keywords rele-
vant to the climate change phenomenon. For Google
Scholar, the search proceeded until 100 unsuccessful
hits occurred after the last successful hit in the identified
documents. In stage 3, we examined abstracts to ensure
that they focused on climate and homelessness. We
excluded papers at the abstract review level that did
not address this combined topic and removed duplicates.
We included papers that involved data collection and
papers that did not (e.g., commentaries) given the early
stage of the literature in this area and expert commen-
taries’ potential value. We also included papers that did
not overtly address global climate change as the impli-
cations of those papers would seem relevant. A full-text
review was completed of all articles selected through the
abstract review (extracted by SK), with some further
removal of papers that were out of scope and some
additional identification of papers from reference lists.
We charted [2, 38] the selected papers based upon (i)
basic descriptors (e.g., year and country of publication,
publication type, and method), (ii) a summary of the
findings of studies involving data, and (iii) a thematic
synthesis [30] of both research and commentary jointly
interpreting the thematic analysis framework which was
developed using the original text from the identified
papers. Findings were summarized as a function of both
coverage of key themes and methods used with a con-
sensus process determining the research, policy, and
practice implications of the findings. The consultation
386
Kidd et al. 
phase [29] of this program of work, of which the present
review is the first step, will take place in a subsequent
stage. That phase will involve the use of a Delphi
method [23] to engage international experts in the field
who will develop policy guidance based on their expe-
rience, the present review, and a review of reviews
(underway) examining the climate change–related hous-
ing implications for impoverished populations.
Results
The search results are detailed in Fig. 1. PsycINFO
generated 1420 results, which, in turn, were reduced to
873 when limited to English language and peer-
reviewed journals. Medline yielded 942 results that
were reduced to 898 when limited to English. Scopus
generated 517 results, and Google Scholar generated
7880 results. Of the papers identified in the search, 43
articles were selected as meeting the search criteria after
removing duplicates (n = 21). Additional 4 articles were
identified from reference lists. The full texts of these 47
papers were then reviewed, with 21 subsequently re-
moved as not meeting criteria, leaving 26 for which their
content was charted (Table 1). The 26 included publi-
cations spanned the years 1998 to 2019 (Fig. 2). The
majority were authored in the USA (n = 13), followed
by Australia (n = 4) and Canada (n = 4), with single
papers from Poland, Nigeria, India, the UK, and
Venezuela. Twenty-one papers involved data collection
with the remainder consisting of commentaries and
narrative reviews (none systematic). Of the 21 research
papers, 15 were quantitative, 5 were qualitative, and one
used mixed methods.
None of the identified papers provided causal data
that links global climate change with a change in home-
lessness prevalence, morbidity, or mortality. The effects
of climate change were typically inferred from observa-
tions of the associations between weather and the expe-
riences and outcomes of homeless persons. The degree
to which climate change was addressed varied. Some
papers concentrated solely on the effects of weather
extremes upon homelessness and change over time,
without overtly addressing global climate change [47].
The earliest paper that described climate change and
homelessness directly was authored by Ramin and
Svoboda in 2009. The proportions of papers that directly
addressed climate change versus weather impacts alone
are shown in Fig. 2. The impacts of temperature
extremes and climate change on homelessness were
viewed almost without exception as negative. Only
one paper made some conjectures about the possible
benefits of climate change for some homeless popula-
tions (e.g., those residing in Canada). Ramin and
Svoboda [37] noted that in generally colder climates,
warmer weather may lead to fewer deaths from cold
exposure and illnesses such as influenza, with the caveat
that risks may outweigh these benefits. There was also
considerable variability across papers regarding how the
construct of homelessness was defined. Five papers,
primarily commentaries, provided no clear definition
and used the term broadly, and 7 papers relied upon a
homeless categorization derived from electronic medi-
cal records or administrative data sets with little detail
on definition aside from the indication of no fixed abode
or similar. Six papers concentrated on shelter-using
populations, with service use status as the indicator of
homelessness, and 5 papers described their populations
as having experienced “absolute” or “primary” home-
lessness with some variability as how this categorization
addressed (i.e., sleeping rough (roofless) or some emer-
gency shelter use). These latter papers tended to address
the dimensionality of homelessness to a greater degree
(e.g., [45]), with Every et al. [13] applying the European
Typology of Homelessness and Housing Exclusion def-
inition of degrees of homelessness and housing
precarity. The most nuanced commentary on homeless-
ness as dimensional and intertwined with social ineq-
uities described these phenomena in low income coun-
tries where it was argued that housing precarity and
homelessness must be considered differently than the
situations in high income countries [1, 47].
This review is organized into four themes as they
emerged in the thematic synthesis. First is the topic of
weather and climate change as a driver of homelessness
prevalence. The second theme addresses how the con-
ditions of homelessness serve to increase vulnerability
to weather extremes. The third theme addresses the role
of extreme weather and variability in the health of
homeless populations. The fourth theme addresses ser-
vice access and design.
Weather and Climate Change and the Prevalence
of Homelessness
This literature provided little data-derived information
about how weather and climate change may serve as a
driver of increasing homeless numbers. This topic was
387
Homelessness:
Climate Implications for 
Global
A Scoping Review
generally addressed with broad statements about large-
scale risks inferred from climate data [16], with some
emphasizing unique vulnerabilities faced in low-income
countries (e.g., “The phenomenon of climate change
heralds distinctive challenges for sub-Saharan Africa’s
urban areas, with economic, social, and health impacts,
and severe effects on housing and infrastructure.”
[1], p.15; [47]). An exception was Every et al.
[13], wherein a survey of homeless sector service
providers in Australia indicated an estimate that
extreme weather was a pathway to homelessness
for 16.2% of service users.
Vulnerability and Exposure
The topic of vulnerability was addressed primarily
through commentary that emphasized the weather ex-
posure risks (both temperature and extreme weather
events such as flooding) that are greatly heightened for
the homeless [16, 41, 45]. This theme was highlighted
across settings internationally, including the Arctic and
icecap melting [34]. A case study of Lagos, Nigeria,
highlighted the flood and broader weather exposure
risks for slum dwellers and squatters that result from
both the quality and location of their dwellings [1], with
similar themes addressed by Wiesenfeld and Panza [47]
in Venezuela regarding vulnerability to landslides.
Papers addressing low-income contexts concentrated
on severe poverty and the challenges of very marginally
housed individuals who are more exposed and less able
to recover from extreme weather events. While most of
this literature concentrated on physical exposure, quali-
tative US research emphasized that exposure is an inter-
sectional phenomenon that includes not just greater
exposure to the elements but also intersects with factors
such as social stigma and unemployment [40].
Chronic health conditions common to homeless pop-
ulations create unique and increased vulnerability to
conditions such as heat stroke, dehydration, and respi-
ratory illness [13]. Malnourishment was referenced as a
problem that reduced the capacity to tolerate cold expo-
sure [45]. Also, the risk of death from heat is increased
for those with psychiatric disabilities, alcoholism, and
cognitive impairment—inferring risk from the high
prevalence of these conditions among the homeless
[37].
Access to means for mobility and social resources
were also highlighted as exacerbating exposure to
weather extremes. Authors commented on homeless
persons’ limited ability to escape extreme weather and
draw upon social resources in emergencies [13]. Social
isolation, common among the homeless, was also
flagged as a risk factor for death from extreme heat
[37] as was public access to water which is increasingly
privatized in urban environments [19]. Finally, some
commentary addressed the impacts of climate change
Number of arcles idenﬁed in database search:
PsycINFO, n = 873
Medline, n = 898
Scopus, n = 517
o
Google, n ≈7880 results (4 unique papers/14 duplicates)
Excluded at abstract level (PsycINFO, 
Medline, Scopus) = 2,228
Duplicates removed = 21
Papers idenﬁed as relevant to topic area, n = 43
Reference list addions, n = 4
Full texts reviewed, n = 47
Studies excluded as not relevant at full text 
review, n = 21
Studies included in scoping review N = 26
Fig. 1 Article selection flow
diagram
388
Kidd et al. 
on food security, with the homeless being particularly
vulnerable [6].
Some commentaries placed this increased exposure
to climate-related risks among the homeless in the
context of the “environmental injustices” experienced
by this population [16]. These authors highlight the
systemic inequities and discrimination that homeless
people face which, in turn, both increase exposure to
Table 1 Article summary
Paper
Country
Hale [19]. Fountains for environmental justice: public water, homelessness, and migration
in the face of global environmental change.
USA
Zhang et al. [48]. Cold weather conditions and risk of hypothermia among people experiencing
homelessness: implications for prevention strategies.
Canada
*Gibson [16]. Climate change for individuals experiencing homelessness: recommendations for
improving policy, research, and services.
USA
Every et al. [13]. There’s nowhere to go: counting the costs of extreme weather to the homeless community.
Australia
Corinth and Lucas [9]. When warm and cold do not mix: the implications of climate for the
determinants of homelessness.
USA
Romaszko et al. [39]. Mortality among the homeless: causes and meteorological relationships.
Poland
Settembrino [40]. “Sometimes You Cannot Even Sleep at Night:” social vulnerability to
disasters among men experiencing homelessness in Central Florida.
USA
Nicolay et al. [32]. A study of heat related illness preparedness in homeless veterans.
USA
Quilty et al. [36]. Factors contributing to frequent attendance to the emergency department
of a remote Northern Territory hospital.
Australia
Lee et al. [27]. Geographic distribution of disaster-specific emergency department use after
Hurricane Sandy in New York City.
USA
Adetokunbo and Emeka [1]. Urbanization, housing, homelessness and climate change.
Nigeria
*Campbell [6]. Let us not forget climate change in the food insecurity conversation: why
the homeless are most vulnerable.
Australia
Walters and Gaillard [45]. Disaster risk at the margins: homelessness, vulnerability and hazards.
India
Siordia et al. [42]. A geographically-aware multilevel analysis on the association between
atmospheric temperature and the “Emergency and transitional shelter population”.
USA
Pepper and Jocoy [35]. A climatological analysis of emergency homeless shelter openings
in Long Beach, California, USA.
USA
Cusack et al. [10]. Extreme weather-related health needs of people who are homeless.
Australia
Harlan et al. [20]. Neighborhood effects on heat deaths: social and environmental predictors
of vulnerability in Maricopa County, Arizona.
USA
*Parlee and Furgal [34]. Well-being and environmental change in the arctic: a synthesis of
selected research from Canada’s International Polar Year program.
Canada
*Shonkoff et al. [41]. The climate gap: environmental health and equity implications of climate
change and mitigation policies in California—a review of the literature.
USA
Klein and Riemer [24]. Experiences of environmental justice and injustice in communities
of people experiencing homelessness.
Canada
Brown et al. [5]. Do emergency department attendances by homeless people increase in cold weather?.
UK
Kloos et al. [25]. Investigating the roles of neighborhood environments and housing-based
social support in the relocation of persons made homeless by hurricane Katrina.
USA
*Ramin and Svoboda [37]. Health of the homeless and climate change.
USA
Koutsavlis and Kosatsky [26]. Environmental-temperature injury in a Canadian metropolis.
Canada
Wiesenfeld and Panza [47]. Environmental hazards and home loss: the social construction
of becoming homeless.
Venezuela
North et al. [31]. The association of psychiatric diagnosis with weather conditions in a
large urban homeless sample.
USA
*Primarily review and/or commentary
Number of articles identified in database search: PsycINFO, n = 873; Medline, n = 898; Scopus, n = 517; Google, n ≈7880 results (4 unique
papers/14 duplicates)
389
Homelessness:
Climate Implications for 
Global
A Scoping Review
environmental risks and decrease access to assistance
for the negative outcomes of those risks [16, 19].
However, homeless people themselves may be less like-
ly to hold this perspective [24].
Climate Change, Weather, and Health Outcomes
The health outcome risks that were associated with
weather events were the area with the most quantitative
data. In both Canada [26, 48] and Poland [39], height-
ened cold-related morbidity and mortality were ob-
served for homeless populations, and both moderately
cold and extremely cold temperatures present significant
risks. Zhang et al. [48] also demonstrated health out-
come risks related to increases in precipitation. Harlan
et al. [20] described heat-related mortality in Arizona,
noting that the mortality risk for homeless persons was
particularly concentrated in the inner core and industrial
corridor areas. They wrote of a “heat island” effect in
which higher temperatures are observed in places where
a large majority of homeless people seek shelter [37].
Another US study in this area described homeless indi-
viduals’ experiences, noted minimal recognition of the
symptoms of heat-related illness aside from dizziness
[32]. In an Australian study of homeless service provid-
er impressions about the impacts of extreme weather
[13], providers saw extreme weather events as negative-
ly affecting the physical health of 18% of their clients,
the mental health of 37%, and the drug and alcohol
consumption of 26%. This study’s qualitative suggested
that weather-related stressors such as the restriction of
movement and disrupted social connections due to loss
and evacuation create and compound mental health
challenges. These observations were reflected in another
qualitative study done in Australia in which the most
physical and mental suffering was ascribed to extremely
cold and wet weather—mainly due to wet bedding,
clothing, and shoes [10]. Similarly, a US study observed
greater rates of diagnoses of mental illnesses and addic-
tions among homeless men when diagnostic interviews
took place on days with cold and wet weather in St.
Louis [31].
Finally, one study of Australian service provider
perspectives suggested that interpersonal violence, as a
key health determinant, is strongly affected by extreme
weather for homeless populations. In this survey, pro-
viders attributed interpersonal violence and domestic
violence to extreme weather at rates of 26.5% and
18.5%, respectively, suggesting that this increase was
likely due to people unexpectedly being placed in close
quarters for extended periods [13]. The only additional
point in this area was that of Ramin and Svoboda [37].
They suggested the increased risk of water- and vector-
borne illness for more exposed homeless populations in
reference to both rising sea levels and extreme weather
events.
Services and Service Access
With respect to weather and service use, an Australian
study suggested a modest relationship between frequent
emergency service use by homeless persons in hotter,
wetter weather [36], with a UK study finding no differ-
ence in general emergency department use by homeless
persons as a function of cold weather [5]. Another US
study noted a greater likelihood of emergency depart-
ment use by homeless persons in weather emergencies
such as hurricanes [27]. It was also suggested that tran-
sience and many homeless persons’ hidden locations
hamper emergency response workers efforts in climate
emergencies [13]. This may be a problem compounded
by a lack of environmental emergency planning related
to homeless populations [45].
Quantitative research examined ambient temperature
as it related to emergency shelter availability. First,
across the USA, it was observed that the numbers/
concentrations of emergency and temporary shelter
users were positively associated with warmer climate
regions [42]. Another study examined the periods of
emergency shelter operation in California against days
with low temperature or rain and concluded that periods
of operation adequately aligned with weather condi-
tions, though noted that providers seemed primarily
concerned with extreme heat relative to cold [35].
While research into the outcomes of interventions in
this area was lacking, several authors made
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1998-2005 2006-2010 2011-2015 2015-2019
Number of
Publicaons
Direct Climate
Change
Reference
Fig. 2 Histogram of climate change and homelessness publica-
tions (1998–2019)
390
Kidd et al. 
recommendations for service and system improvements.
Suggestions included the education of homeless popu-
lations about the symptoms of heat-related illness [32],
improved access to public water fountains [19], land use
zoning and water management strategies to reduce ex-
posure [1], and developing improved host strate-
gies for individuals made homeless by natural
disasters [25]. Finally, there was some commentary
on how underfunding and poor planning adversely
impacts the response to climate-exposed homeless
populations in both an ongoing way and during
disasters [13, 16].
Tentative Model for Considering
Climate-Homelessness Interrelationships
Overall, this literature has several shortcomings, partic-
ularly due to the lack of data that might address causal
relationships between homelessness, weather impacts,
and climate change. However, there would seem to be
enough information at hand, even if purely hypothetical
at this stage, to posit a model that might capture the most
substantive variables and their respective influences
(Fig. 3). In this model the primary (e.g., increasing
temperature and temperature variability) and secondary
(e.g., water insecurity) impacts of climate change are
moderated by variables that are specific to vulnerably
housed and homeless populations from individual to
system levels (e.g., chronic respiratory illness, malnutri-
tion, location vulnerability, service planning, response,
and infrastructure). The interactions between weather-
related risks and variables that characterize homeless
populations will determine outcomes at individual
(e.g., mortality, violence exposure), system (e.g., emer-
gency service use), and population levels (e.g., home-
lessness prevalence and migration). This model is
supported in the literature reviewed, wherein the possi-
bility of variable impacts as a function of specific cli-
mate stressors and moderators such as chronic illness on
health and social outcomes was documented [13, 39].
What is attempted here, and what seemed to have yet to
happen in the modest literature to date, is to organize
these posited variables and relationships into a single
framework. Much more hypothetical are possible feed-
back loops such as how outcomes might affect moder-
ators over time from individual to population levels and,
potentially, how outcomes such as mass homelessness
and migration might themselves impact climate change.
Discussion
This systematic scoping review found that the literature
addressing the health and social impacts of weather and
climate change on homelessness is limited to a small
number of commentaries and analyses of primarily lo-
cal, cross-sectional data. Nonetheless, it can be inferred
from the small amount of data generated to date and the
consideration of the nature of climate change, weather,
and homelessness as conditions that homeless popula-
tions face unique vulnerabilities. These vulnerabilities
likely lead to serious mental and physical health conse-
quences. Furthermore, the prevalence of homelessness
globally may be increasing due to the climate and
weather vulnerabilities of marginally housed people.
Based on this review, we have proposed a model that
might capture this phenomenon (Fig. 3). While much
more data would be necessary to validate this model, it
is well-aligned with climate risk modeling initiatives
underway that are grappling with multiple interactions
and dynamic change from geographic to social levels
over time [15].
Risk Type
Moderators
Outcomes
Illness morbidity & 
mortality
Violence exposure
Emergency service 
use and 
infrastructure burden
Homelessness 
prevalence & 
migraon
Primary
Heat, cold, 
humidity
Water level, melt
Rapid change, 
disasters
Secondary
Food & water 
insecurity
Vector-borne 
disease
Exposure, locaon, 
dwelling vulnerability
Chronic illness & 
malnourishment
Mobility, adaptaon 
resources, educaon
Social inequity
Social/service 
infrastructure
Response planning
Geography
Fig. 3 Hypothetical model
for considering
climate-homelessness
relationships
391
Homelessness:
Climate Implications for 
Global
A Scoping Review
The generation of risk mitigation and response strat-
egies could, in turn, be developed and optimized with
more robust risk modeling data. It is conceivable that a
risk algorithm could help service systems and geograph-
ic regions develop multilevel and multistage ap-
proaches. For example, a given service system might
become able to employ, with better evidence, more
effective prevention, and risk mitigation strategies for
specific homeless subpopulations as it relates to partic-
ular weather risks. Systems might also become better
able to prepare for increases in numbers of homeless
people due to extreme weather events. Prevention ef-
forts might also be informed by feedback loops.
Hypothetical examples include increased exposure to
violence leading to an avoidance of services and the
exacerbation of weather-related problems such as
vector-borne disease. With some exceptions [16], the
literature to date has not substantively explored system-
atic responses—responses that are beginning to emerge
globally in the broader frame such as the Resilient Cities
Program [28]. However, there are promising initial steps
addressed in this review that might become a part of a
systemic response. Examples in the literature reviewed
include outreach and education for homeless and vul-
nerable populations [32], provider education [10], ser-
vice adaptations and disaster planning [16]. Such strat-
egies might be further developed using a model such as
the one proposed in the present review. The model could
inform how best to combine and sequence responses as
a function of stage (current state–projected future states,
risk mitigation, and prevention-crisis response) with
contingencies to attend the dynamic and complex nature
of climate impacts. More generally, as a function of
homeless people as a highly stigmatized group, this
review has highlighted the perspective that climate im-
pacts on homelessness may exacerbate systematic and
historical inequities along intersecting socioeconomic,
racial, and cultural lines [7, 16, 34].
In conclusion, this scoping review has highlighted a
potential model for considering the health and social
risks that global climate change pose for homeless pop-
ulations. The review must be regarded as preliminary,
given the ranging foci and methods described in the
identified papers. There is also ambiguity in how de-
grees of homelessness versus highly vulnerable housing
are considered and the influences of geographic context,
with relatively little coverage of phenomena relevant to
low and middle-income countries where weather vul-
nerabilities are the most acute. From research to the
design of service and system responses, clear articula-
tion of degrees of homelessness/housing vulnerability
(e.g., [14]) and the systemic inequities that they repre-
sent will be essential. Nonetheless, the themes highlight-
ed in this review might serve to guide future studies that
can address some of the knowledge gaps that reduce our
collective ability to respond to this global problem.
References
1.
Adetokunbo I, Emeka M. Urbanization, housing, homeless-
ness and climate change. J Des Built Env. 2015;15(2):15–28.
2.
Arksey H, O’Malley L. Scoping studies: towards a method-
ological framework. Int J Social Res Meth. 2005;8(1):19–32.
3.
Åström DO, Bertil F, Joacim R. Heat wave impact on
morbidity and mortality in the elderly population: a review
of recent studies. Maturitas. 2011;69(2):99–105.
4.
Bohra-Mishra P, Oppenheimer M, Hsiang SM. Nonlinear
permanent migration response to climatic variations but
minimal response to disasters. Proc Natl Acad Sci.
2014;111(27):9780–5.
5.
Brown AJ, Goodacre SW, Cross S. Do emergency depart-
ment attendances by homeless people increase in cold
weather? Emerg Med J. 2010;27(7):526–9.
6.
Campbell S. Let's not forget climate change in the food
insecurity conversation: why the homeless are most vulner-
able. Health Promot J Aust. 2015;26(2):161–2.
7.
Carleton TA, Hsiang SM. Social and economic impacts of
climate. Science. 2016;353(6304):aad9837.
8.
Chappin EJ, van der Lei T. Adaptation of interconnected
infrastructures to climate change: a socio-technical systems
perspective. Util Policy. 2014;31:10–7.
9.
Corinth K, Lucas DS. When warm and cold don’t mix: the
implications of climate for the determinants of homeless-
ness. J Hous Econ. 2018;41:45–56.
10.
Cusack L, van Loon A, Kralik D, Arbon P, Gilbert S.
Extreme weather-related health needs of people who are
homeless. Aust J Prim Health. 2013;19(3):250–5.
11.
Deschênes O, Greenstone M, Guryan J. Climate change and
birth weight. Am Econ Rev. 2009;99(2):211–7.
12.
Dessai S, Adger WN, Hulme M, Turnpenny J, Köhler J,
Warren R. Defining and experiencing dangerous climate
change. Clim Chang. 2004;64(1–2):11–25.
13.
Every D, Richardson J, Osborn E. There's nowhere to go:
counting the costs of extreme weather to the homeless com-
munity. Disasters. 2019;43(4):799–817.
14.
FEANTSA. European Typology of Homelessness and
H o u s i n g E x c l u s i o n . h t t p s : / / w w w . f e a n t s a .
org/download/ethos2484215748748239888.pdf (Accessed
June 24, 2020).
15.
Gallina V, Torresan S, Critto A, Sperotto A, Glade T,
Marcomini A. A review of multi-risk methodologies for
natural hazards: consequences and challenges for a climate
change impact assessment. J Environ Manag. 2016;168:
123–32.
392
Kidd et al. 
16.
Gibson A. Climate change for individuals experiencing
homelessness: recommendations for improving policy, re-
search, and services. Environ Just. 2019;12:159–63.
17.
Gronlund CJ, Sullivan KP, Kefelegn Y, Cameron L, O’Neill
MS. Climate change and temperature extremes: a review of
heat-and cold-related morbidity and mortality concerns of
municipalities. Maturitas. 2018;114:54–9.
18.
Guo Y, Gasparrini A, Armstrong B, Li S, Tawatsupa B,
Tobias A, et al. Global variation in the effects of ambient
temperature on mortality: a systematic evaluation.
Epidemiology. 2014;25(6):781–9.
19.
Hale MR. Fountains for environmental justice: public water,
homelessness, and migration in the face of global environ-
mental change. Envir Justice. 2019;12(2):33–40.
20.
Harlan SL, Declet-Barreto JH, Stefanov WL, et al.
Neighborhood effects on heat deaths: social and environ-
mental predictors of vulnerability in Maricopa County,
Arizona. Environ Health Perspect. 2012;121(2):197–204.
21.
Hsiang SM, Narita D. Adaptation to cyclone risk: evidence
from the global cross-section. Clim Change Econ.
2012;3(02):1250011.
22.
Hsiang SM, Burke M, Miguel E. Quantifying the influence
of climate on human conflict. Science. 2013;341(6151):
1235367.
23.
Jorm AF. Using the Delphi expert consensus method in
mental health research. Aust NZ J Psychiat. 2015;49(10):
887–97.
24.
Klein K, Riemer M. Experiences of environmental justice
and injustice in communities of people experiencing home-
lessness. Ecopsychol. 2011;3(3):195–204.
25.
Kloos B, Flory K, Hankin BL, Cheely CA, Segal M.
Investigating the roles of neighborhood environments and
housing-based social support in the relocation of persons
made homeless by hurricane Katrina. J Prev & Interv
Comm. 2009;37(2):143–54.
26.
Koutsavlis AT, Kosatsky T. Environmental-temperature in-
jury in a Canadian metropolis. J Environ Health.
2003;66(5):40–5.
27.
Lee DC, Smith SW, Carr BG, Doran KM, Portelli I,
Grudzen CR, et al. Geographic distribution of disaster-
specific emergency department use after hurricane Sandy
in New York City. Disaster Med Public. 2016;10(3):351–
61.
28.
Leitner H, Sheppard E, Webber S, Colven E. Globalizing
urban resilience. Urban Geogr. 2018;39(8):1276–84.
29.
Levac D, Colquhoun H, O'Brien KK. Scoping studies: ad-
vancing the methodology. Implement Sci. 2010;5(1):69.
30.
Ring N, Ritchie K, Mandava L, Jepson R. A guide to
synthesising qualitative research for researchers undertaking
health technology assessments and systematic reviews.
Glasgow: Quality Improvement Scotland (NHS QIS); 2010.
31.
North CS, Pollio DE, Thompson SJ, Spitznagel EL, Smith
EM. The association of psychiatric diagnosis with weather
conditions in a large urban homeless sample. Soc Psychiatry
Psychiatr Epidemiol. 1998;33(5):206–10.
32.
Nicolay M, Brown LM, Johns R, et al. A study of heat
related illness preparedness in homeless veterans. Int J
Disast Risk Re. 2016;18:72–4.
33.
Ogden NH. Climate change and vector-borne diseases of
public health significance. FEMS Microbiol Lett.
2017;364(19):fnx186.
34.
Parlee B, Furgal C. Well-being and environmental change in
the arctic: a synthesis of selected research from Canada’s
international polar year program. Clim Chang. 2012;115(1):
13–34.
35.
Pepper DA, Jocoy CL. A climatological analysis of emer-
gency homeless shelter openings in Long Beach, California,
USA. Appl Geogr. 2013;37:168–75.
36.
Quilty S, Shannon G, Yao A, Sargent W, McVeigh MF.
Factors contributing to frequent attendance to the emergency
department of a remote Northern Territory hospital. Med J
Aust. 2016;204(3):111–111.e7.
37.
Ramin B, Svoboda T. Health of the homeless and climate
change. J Urban Health. 2009;86(4):654–64.
38.
Ritchie J, Spencer L. Qualitative data analysis for applied
policy research by Jane Ritchie and Liz Spencer. In: Bryman
A, Burgess RG, editors. Analysing Qualitative Data.
London: Routledge; 1994. p. 173–94.
39.
Romaszko J, Cymes I, Dragańska E, Kuchta R, Glińska-
Lewczuk K. Mortality among the homeless: causes and
meteorological relationships. PLoS One. 2017;12(12):
e0189938.
40.
Settembrino MR. “Sometimes You Can’t Even Sleep at
Night:” social vulnerability to disasters among men
experiencing homelessness in Central Florida. Int J Mass
Emerg Disasters. 2017;35(2):30–48.
41.
Shonkoff SB, Morello-Frosch R, Pastor M, Sadd J. The
climate gap: environmental health and equity implications
of climate change and mitigation policies in California—a
review of the literature. Clim Chang. 2011;109(1):485–503.
42.
Siordia C, Smith C, Castañeda-Tinoco E. A geographically-
aware multilevel analysis on the association between atmo-
spheric temperature and the emergency and transitional shel-
ter population. Hum Geograph–J Stud Res Human
Geograph. 2014;8(2)
43.
United Nations (2005) Commission on human rights annual
r e p o r t
-
2 0 0 5 . h t t p s : / / w w w . o h c h r .
org/EN/Issues/Housing/Pages/AnnualReports.aspx.
Accessed January 3, 2020.
4 4 .
U n i t e d N a t i o n s ( 2 0 2 0 ) h t t p s : / / w w w . u n .
org/en/sections/issues-depth/climate-change/ Accessed
January 3, 2020.
45.
Walters V, Gaillard JC. Disaster risk at the margins: home-
lessness, vulnerability and hazards. Habitat Int. 2014;44:
211–9.
46.
Werndl C. On defining climate and climate change. Brit J
Phil Sci. 2016;67(2):337–64.
47.
Wiesenfeld E, Panza R. Environmental hazards and home
loss: the social construction of becoming homeless.
Community Work Fam. 1999;2(1):51–65.
48.
Zhang P, Wiens K, Wang R, Luong L, Ansara D, Gower S,
et al. Cold weather conditions and risk of hypothermia
among people experiencing homelessness: implications for
prevention strategies. Int J Environ Res Pub Health.
2019;16(18):3259.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
393
Homelessness:
Climate Implications for 
Global
A Scoping Review
