REVIEW
Building community resilience in a context of climate change: The
role of social capital
Esther Carmen
, Ioan Fazey, Helen Ross, Melissa Bedinger,
Fiona M. Smith, Katrin Prager, Kerri McClymont, David Morrison
Received: 24 February 2021 / Revised: 18 August 2021 / Accepted: 18 November 2021 / Published online: 11 January 2022
Abstract Social
capital
is
considered
important
for
resilience across social levels, including communities, yet
insights
are
scattered
across
disciplines.
This
meta-
synthesis
of
187
studies
examines
conceptual
and
empirical understandings of how social capital relates to
resilience,
identifying
implications
for
community
resilience
and
climate
change
practice.
Different
conceptualisations are highlighted, yet also limited focus
on underlying dimensions of social capital and proactive
types of resilience for engaging with the complex climate
change challenge. Empirical insights show that structural
and socio-cultural aspects of social capital, multiple other
factors and formal actors are all important for shaping the
role of social capital for guiding resilience outcomes. Thus,
ﬁnding ways to work with these different elements is
important. Greater attention on how and why outcomes
emerge, interactions between factors, approaches of formal
actors and different socio-cultural dimensions will advance
understandings about how to nurture social capital for
resilience in the context of climate change.
Keywords Community resilience building 
Climate change  Social capital  Socio-cultural factors
INTRODUCTION
With growing recognition of the potential severity of
human induced climate change (Goss et al. 2020; Steg
2018), interest in how local communities and diverse actors
can become more resilient in the face of climate related
shocks and stressors is rapidly growing (Brown 2014;
Elmqvist et al. 2019). This growing interest on resilience1
building—broadly deﬁned as the ability of place-based or
interest based communities to proactively cohere and
develop abilities to be able to adapt in the face of different
kinds of shocks and stressors (Berkes and Ross 2013; Patel
et al. 2017; Vaneeckhaute et al. 2017; Fazey et al. 2021)—
has occurred alongside a rapidly growing body of research
from diverse disciplines on resilience more generally and
in relation to a diversity of contexts and ﬁelds of study
(Matarrita-Cascante et al. 2017). Through such work a
plethora of different factors that enhance or constrain
resilience at community levels and other social levels2 have
been identiﬁed (Urquiza et al. 2021; Umamaheswari et al.
2021). Such work highlights, for example, how enhancing
community resilience requires approaches well beyond just
technical or infrastructural interventions to including con-
sideration of diverse social and psychological factors. For
example, in the ﬁeld of emergency management quality
infrastructure (e.g. roads and housing) is an important
factor to access vital services (e.g. food and health care)
(Javadpoor et al. 2021). In other ﬁelds, such as rural
development and urban studies, diverse incomes and
institutions that mediate interests and access to resources
and opportunities are important in shaping abilities to
overcome shocks and to adapt to long-term stresses (Ta-
juddin and Da˛browski 2021; Pandey et al. 2021).
A core subset of such research related to community
resilience building, and often resilience more generally, has
broadly focused on the role of different social factors that
shape potential or actual collective action for change and
resilience
(Maclean
et
al.
2014).
Such
work
has
1 The term resilience is used to refer to resilience at any social level,
and community resilience when referring speciﬁcally to the resilience
of communities.
2 We follow Gibson et al. (2000, p. 218) in differentiating between
scales (‘the spatial, temporal, quantitative, or analytical dimensions
used to measure and study any phenomenon’) and levels, the units of
analysis located on a scale.
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-021-01678-9
highlighted, for example, the importance of local knowl-
edge sharing, clear communication, social learning and
people–place connections which shape perceptions and
actions in relation to increased risk of extreme weather
events (Maclean et al. 2014; Bowser and Cutter 2015;
Wilson et al. 2020); or the importance of safety nets and
factors such as conﬁdence and aspirations for overcoming
threats to food security (Gambo Boukary et al. 2016; Smith
and Frankenberger 2018).
Many of these studies referring to different social factors
use the lens of social capital (e.g. Mngumi 2020). This
conceptual lens focuses attention on the social relation-
ships, networks and trust in shaping outcomes (Jordan
2015; MacGillivray 2018), such as in mobilising collective
action within and between different social groups for dis-
aster management, in general to respond to a range of
shocks (Aldrich and Meyer 2015) and in terms of speciﬁc
threats such as wildﬁres (Jacobs and Cramer 2017). Also
social capital to promote and coordinate collective actions
in communities to adapt to climate change (Adger 2003)
and informally within organisations (Pelling et al. 2008),
and for supporting community innovation for renewable
energy initiatives for climate mitigation (Morrison and
Ramsey 2019).
The literature on social capital and/or resilience is now
vast and drawing out its implications for informing com-
munity resilience building conceptually and in practice is a
signiﬁcant challenge. While there have been past reviews
(e.g. Aldrich and Meyer 2015; Rockenbauch and Sak-
dapolrak 2017), two important knowledge gaps remain.
First, there has been limited focus on the practical insights
emerging from studies of social capital and community
resilience building for action-orientated knowledge on how
to better navigate and work with the multiple factors (in-
cluding social capital) to actively enhance resilience across
community settings, with many reviews instead usually
focusing on higher level conceptual foundations. Second,
reviews have also tended to underplay the issue that the
way both resilience and social capital are framed together
has signiﬁcant implications for the research being con-
ducted and any conclusions being drawn from them. This
has limited the possibility for more nuanced understand-
ings of both the broader conceptual and practical insights
and identiﬁcation of the critical knowledge gaps that need
to be addressed in future research.
This paper therefore aims to review research on the role
of social capital in supporting resilience building to iden-
tify practical implications and knowledge gaps broadly
within the context of climate change. We ﬁrst provide a
brief overview of both social capital and resilience and
explain how the review was approached. We then present
our ﬁndings on how social capital and/or resilience is being
conceptualised and the empirical ﬁndings about how social
capital can shape resilience. Finally, critical research gaps
are identiﬁed to better understand how to apply social
capital approaches to promote community resilience in
relation to climate change.
RESILIENCE, SOCIAL CAPITAL AND CLIMATE
CHANGE
This review seeks to understand the role of social capital in
supporting community resilience building. Community
resilience is has been deﬁned as ‘the existence, develop-
ment and engagement of community resources by com-
munity members to thrive in an environment characterised
by
change,
uncertainty,
unpredictability
and
surprise
(Magis 2010, p. 402) or resilience ‘as a process linking a
set of adaptive capacities to a positive trajectory of func-
tioning and adaptation’ (Norris et al. 2008, p. 127).
Emphasis has also been placed on the way human social
aspects are closely intertwined with ecological dimensions
and dynamics (Folke 2006) with much of what happens at
community levels being inﬂuenced by interactions at
multiple levels and scales (Holling 2001; Folke 2006).
Importantly, and as highlighted by Ross and Berkes (2014),
much of the understanding of resilience requires ﬁnding
ways to combine different factors and inﬂuences to inform
how community resilience building may be advanced,
recognising that it is ultimately a process rather than nec-
essarily an end goal that involves developing different
forms of adaptive capacity and agency (Berkes and Ross
2013). Community resilience is thus often closely linked to
different aspects of economic development (Sherrieb et al.
2010) and requires attention to normative aspects, and
being driven by values and human agency that shape goals
and how social action unfolds. For example, to enhance
control of land by communities, land ﬁrst needs to be
collectively recognised as important, policy environments
also need to shift to enhance community control in prin-
ciple and different capacities and resources need to be
actively brought together to bring this about in practice
(Skerratt 2013).
A community perspective emphasises community actors
developing and engaging resources for the community to
thrive in the face of change (Magis 2010). Such change, for
example, can be more speciﬁc and, while being unantici-
pated, easily identiﬁable such as ﬁres or ﬂoods. Other
change may be more diverse or unanticipated. Different
kinds of resilience—generalised or speciﬁc—then require
different approaches to resilience building (Jacobs and
Cramer 2017). In the context of challenges such as climate
change a narrow focus on speciﬁed resilience (e.g. of
economic assets, to speciﬁc threats) may hinder more
generalised community resilience (Folke et al. 2010). Thus
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1372
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
some approaches to building resilience may have limited
potential for engaging with the complexities of climate
change (Pelling 2011; Urquiza et al. 2021). As such, there
has been a growing interest in developing integrated, sys-
temic approaches to enhance speciﬁed and generalised
resilience concurrently (Berkes and Ross 2016) and to
working with issues that may arise over longer time frames
(Fazey et al. 2018) and which more effectively integrate
normative dimensions such as values, social norms and
power (Walsh-Dilley et al. 2016). While there are many
different understandings of resilience, we broadly take the
view that community resilience building requires both
focus and holism, and thus requires attending to systemic
aspects and working with different actors, perspectives,
needs and diverse facets of the climate change challenge
(Table 1).
Like resilience, social capital is another contested con-
cept with many different interpretations. Social capital has
been applied in many disciplines from sociology (Bourdieu
1986; Coleman 1988), political science (Putnam 1995),
economics (Woolcock 1998); community and international
development (Tenzin and Natsuda 2016). The concept has
often been applied to highlight opportunities to enhance
initiatives or programmes at diverse levels—such as for
enhancing household food security through memberships
of farmers’ organisations and involvement in other com-
munity activities (Dzanja et al. 2015), at the community
level to maximise opportunities to enhance collective
social capital within different types of interventions (e.g.
participatory interventions) (Lang and Ramı´rez 2017), or
for large-scale regions to ensure social capital is main-
tained in the immediate aftermath of ﬂooding to strengthen
the potential for long-term recovery (Akbar and Aldrich
2018).
In studies at community levels, social capital is often
framed or deﬁned as social relationships or networks and
how this provides a utilitarian resource (e.g. for helping a
household manage challenges and risks or to seize oppor-
tunities) (Habibov and Afand 2017). Such conceptualisa-
tions are broadly structural and focus on connections
between actors, content-based approaches emphasising
attributes that shape outcomes (e.g. norms of reciprocity,
trust and shared goals), and approaches that aim to inte-
grate these (Phillips 2016). Recognition that diverse types,
qualities and magnitudes of outcomes emerge from social
relationships has involved a shift away from framing social
capital as being only positive (Portes 1998), such as with
many examples of social capital reinforcing socio-eco-
nomic exclusion and resistance (Wilshusen 2009; Adhikari
and Goldey 2010) and which has led to an increasing
emphasis on the importance of power and norms in shaping
what unfolds and for whom from social capital (Gelder-
blom 2018).
Given that much of the emphasis on community resi-
lience is often assumed to come from the way in which
individuals and groups are able to organise (Grube and
Storr 2014) and that the concept of social capital is often
assumed to be a core mechanism underpinning effective
individual and collective action (Adger 2003), it is then not
surprising that there have been a large number of studies
which, in some way have examined the interaction between
the two. The concept of social capital, for example, has
been widely used to understand interventions aiming to
enhance adaptive capacities and resilience. This includes
those directly related to climate change and the community
level, such as in relation to natural hazards (Babcicky and
Seebauer 2017) and more generally at the community level
in terms of supporting health outcomes (Cattell 2001),
Table 1 Key elements for community resilience and climate change practice [Adapted from Fazey et al. (2018)]
Developing and maintaining adaptability and ﬂexibility to continue to guide and draw on different resources and capacities when needed
Accounting for shocks (e.g. ﬂoods) and stresses (e.g. food insecurity), direct and indirect foreseen and unforeseen changes and outcomes to
build speciﬁc and generalised resilience
Including diverse perspectives by connecting horizontally (e.g. across social groups/ policy sectors) to develop novel synergistic solutions to
address multiple concerns
Strengthening vertical connections across social levels (individual, family, community, government organisations), engaging with issues of
social power to enhance support and enable collaborative action
Engaging in transformative action to proactively reduce carbon emissions
Drawing on positive climate narratives to create hope and inspire action
Fostering creativity and imagination to envisage alternative futures to guide change
Ensuring climate disadvantage and reducing inequities is a core dimension in decision-making to overcome injustices of climate change and
climate action
Crafting processes and pathways by encouraging meaningful participation, learning and empowering for and through change
Creating transformative change, rather than adjusting or reforming existing conditions
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1373
enhancing economic development (Flora et al. 1997), and
increasing
participation
in
collective
decision-making
(Cleaver 2005). Social capital has also often been viewed
conceptually as core for community resilience (Adger
2000; Berkes and Ross 2013).
In summary, building community resilience in the con-
text of climate change is an important but complex social
process (Fazey et al. 2018). It is inherently linked in
diverse ways to social dynamics such as social relation-
ships and networks that are often studied or understood
through the lens of social capital. While there have been
many different studies on the relationships between resi-
lience building and social capital, there has been rather
limited emphasis on reviews that draw out the implications
of social capital for the practice of resilience building more
generally. This has been hampered by the many different
interpretations of both resilience and social capital. This
review therefore seeks to draw out practical and empirical
insights from different studies in a way that considers the
different ways in which resilience and social capital have
been understood.
METHODOLOGY
This review was approached as a meta-synthesis employing
interpretivist and qualitative methods to generate substan-
tive and integrated ﬁndings (Finfgeld 2003; Zimmer 2006).
In this process a modiﬁed version of more systematic
review processes was used (Fazey et al. 2004). First, a wide
range of peer reviewed articles were identiﬁed through
search
engines
(e.g.
Scopus)
identifying
papers
by
searching using both the terms resilience and social capital
from titles, abstracts or key words. This resulted in 262
articles. Articles were excluded if they appeared in the
search multiple times, were not published in English, or
could not be accessed, reducing the set to 187 papers.
Qualitative and inductive methods were used for anal-
ysis. This included descriptive NVivo coding (Saldana
2016) to identify text in the articles relating to: (1) con-
ceptualisations of social capital, resilience and the role of
social capital; and (2) empirical ﬁndings, with care taken to
avoid subjective and speculative discussion about the
empirical ﬁndings (Bondas and Hall 2007). Codes were
developed and applied iteratively across studies to allow
for new interpretations and potential codes to emerge
through the process (Strauss and Corbin 1994). Codes and
their interconnections were then explored using visual
mapping techniques to develop themes (Ritchie et al.
2003). A modiﬁed version of the pattern matching (Cao
2007) was also used to compare and contrast patterns
(Trochim 1989).
It is important to note that this review was not exhaus-
tive; rather it provides an indicative account of what the
literature overall tells us about social capital and resilience
building. There are thousands of papers on resilience and
associated social issues, and many of these would broadly
relate to the topic. Many pragmatic judgments (e.g. level of
engagement with related concepts or understandings in
studies orientated to speciﬁc contexts, such as migration)
were needed to ensure the review was sufﬁciently focused
while also encompassing of a diversity of studies. As is the
case with many qualitative studies, the emphasis was
therefore on identifying broad patterns by seeking diversity
of different studies and interpretations, rather than trying to
present a more quantiﬁed view of what was present in the
literature as a whole. Finally, the included papers did not
always relate directly to climate change or to the com-
munity level. Our goal was to bring together more gener-
alised insights about the nature and role of social capital in
resilience that could then be applied more broadly to
community resilience building within a context of major
challenges like climate change.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
What ways have resilience, social capital
and the role of social capital been conceptualised?
Concepts of resilience and social capital
Around three quarters of studies provided deﬁnitions of
resilience. Among these, there were three general inter-
pretations
of
resilience:
(1)
reactive
resilience;
(2)
responsive resilience; or (3) proactive resilience. The vast
majority of studies viewed resilience as reactive or
responsive, with few (around one tenth) deﬁning it as
proactive.
Reactive resilience concerned actions to cope with the
immediate aftermath of a shock, with an assumed goal of
stability and a timely return to the status quo, i.e. to resume
‘business as usual’. This conceptualisation often assumed
the need for top-down command and control (Murphy
2007) or unsupported actions undertaken by local people
(Uekusa and Matthewman 2016).
In contrast, responsive resilience was viewed as learning
from shocks, to enact adjustments to social, environmental
or physical components, i.e. to strengthen the existing
system to reduce negative consequences from future
shocks. Here, resilience was viewed as multifaceted,
encompassing different actors, interests and capacities
(Vallance and Carlton 2015) as part of an ongoing process
of change (Exner et al. 2016).
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1374
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
Finally, proactive resilience involved an ongoing pro-
cess of foresight, experimentation, reﬂection and learning,
requiring systemic perspectives and multi-scalar approa-
ches involving norms, identities and values and potential
need for radical change. This view highlighted the inﬂu-
ence of governance arrangements, meanings and power
dynamics and the importance of redundancy, ﬂexibility and
proactively
working
to
shape
complex,
non-linear,
dynamic and context speciﬁc change processes (Kizos et al.
2014).
Considering the multiple dynamic ways climate change
interacts with multiple social levels, the climate challenge
is not likely to be addressed without such system-oriented
change that creates opportunities for alternative ways of
thinking and acting (Pelling et al. 2015). Enhancing
proactive resilience is therefore much more likely to be
relevant than resilience types that emphasise maintenance
of the status quo. Despite this, very few studies viewed
resilience as a proactive process, with most conceptualising
resilience as either reactive or responsive.
Turning to social capital, around three quarters of
studies deﬁned this explicitly. Four broad deﬁnitions of
social capital were identiﬁed as: (1) social networks; (2)
social networks and outcomes; (3) social networks, trust
and norms of reciprocity; and (4) social networks and
socio-cultural dimensions. Of the studies deﬁning social
capital, around a third deﬁned social capital as social net-
works (1), with other deﬁnitions each accounting for
around one ﬁfth of studies.
Within this, two typologies of network connections were
often used. These were: ‘strong/ weak ties’ or, more fre-
quently, ‘bonding/ bridging/ linking social capital’. These
differentiated along ideas of ‘homophily’ or ‘sameness’
and ‘heterogeneity’ or ‘difference’ between people and
groups. These distinguish ‘bonding social capital’ and
‘strong ties’ for interpersonal relationships (Barrett et al.
2011), ‘bridging social capital’ or ‘weak tie’ across dif-
ferent social groups (Islam and Walkerden 2014); and/or
‘linking social capital’, emphasising connection across
formal hierarchies, (e.g. between community and govern-
ment
actors)
(Pare´s
et
al.
2018)
which
implicitly
acknowledges underlying power differentials.
The ﬁrst conceptualisation viewed social capital as
social networks that connect people (Carpenter 2015), e.g.
though membership of formal groups (Kim and Mar-
couiller 2016). The second included social networks and
associated outcomes, e.g. improved health, information or
civil engagement (Barrett et al. 2011; Cairns-Nagi and
Bambra 2013). The third conceptualisation viewed social
capital as social networks combined with trust and norms
of reciprocity (Peters 2019). Here, social networks were
characterised as structural dimensions, while subjective
norms of trust and reciprocity were cognitive and/or
relational dimensions (e.g. (Brown and Sonwa 2018).
Structural and subjective aspects (trust and reciprocity)
were often argued to be closely intertwined and mutually
reinforcing in shaping outcomes (e.g. Bankoff 2007).
However, most studies emphasised the structural connec-
tivity between different types of actor more than subjective
aspects (Smith and Frankenberger 2018).
The fourth conceptualisation viewed social capital as a
dynamic relationship between social networks and socio-
cultural dimensions. Together these were considered to
shape
expectations,
attitudes,
actions
and
outcomes
(Wickes et al. 2017), such as willingness to cooperate and
experiment, pro-environmental actions and more sustain-
able environmental outcomes (Kizos et al. 2014). Here,
socio-cultural
dimensions
included
values,
identities,
norms, beliefs and traditions that encourage or constrain
actors’ actions, and resulting outcomes (Carrico et al.
2019). These socio-cultural and structural dimensions of
social capital interact dynamically to shape expected and
actual access to and control over different resources (Lisnyj
and Dickson-Anderson 2018).
Overall, few studies considered subjective socio-cultural
aspects in detail, usually focusing on outcomes for speciﬁc
social groups. At the community-level studies tended to
focus
on
trust
and
reciprocity.
Other
socio-cultural
dimensions (e.g. social norms and values) were often
considered superﬁcially, without explanation about con-
nections between multiple socio-cultural and structural
dimensions (Hurlbert and Mussetta 2016). Some recent
studies provide more integrative conceptualisations of
social capital (e.g. Bakker et al. 2019) by, for example,
emphasising social identities and norms of solidarity.
However, overall the limited acknowledgement of socio-
cultural dimensions may foster misleading interpretations
about the type of outcomes that emerge from different
social networks.
This is relevant for climate change as both mitigation
and adaptation are needed across all levels of society. Thus,
overlooking the role of underlying socio-cultural dimen-
sions may place undue emphasis on structural aspects (as
most studies did) that could hinder understanding how
outcomes may (or may not) come about to enhance resi-
lience to climate change.
Conceptualisations of the role of social capital
in resilience
When the two concepts were brought together, six different
conceptualisations emerged of how social capital was
expected to inﬂuence or give rise to community-level
resilience (Fig. 1).
The ﬁrst conceptualisation related to network quantity.
Here, the number of links among agents within social
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1375
networks was assumed to increase social support, infor-
mation and good will, which in turn was viewed as
important for enhancing the ability to respond to shocks
(i.e. reactive resilience) (Cassidy and Barnes 2012). Many
of these studies viewed ‘bonding’ social capital (social
networks of family and friends) as a key buffer to adversity
(Aldrich and Meyer 2015) which needed to be cultivated
before shocks (e.g. a ﬁre) and activated when needed
(Wickes et al. 2017). Such studies suggest social networks
develop over time, and provide critical collective resources
to minimise disruptions from climate related shocks.
However, these generally focused on quantiﬁable aspects,
and excluded consideration of more subjective dimensions
shaping resilience.
The second conceptualisation of how social capital leads
to resilience was through network diversity. Here, different
types of social capital (e.g. both bonding and bridging)
were considered important for moving beyond dealing with
an immediate crisis, to also identify areas for improvement
(Jordan 2015). In such studies bonding social capital was
emphasised as important for coping with adverse condi-
tions and shocks within communities (Barrett et al. 2011).
Bridging social capital was considered necessary for new
information, ideas, and knowledge to help shape learning,
decision-making and cooperation between groups (Black-
man et al. 2016), such as between communities and gov-
ernment
agencies
(Smith
et
al.
2012b).
This
conceptualisation often assumes that diverse social net-
works (those that enable access to existing sources of
support and new ideas) are important for more effective
responses to future climate change impacts. However,
these studies did not usually consider a wide range of
factors or their interactions as being important in shaping
resilience.
The third conceptualisation was that social capital in the
form of networks, trust and reciprocity was important for
resilience—but that other assets, capacities or collective
resources were also required (Singer et al. 2015). Here, a
need for active management of a combination of natural,
physical, economic and human factors was emphasised, but
with limited overall explicit consideration given to how such
factors interacted or to the wider cultural dimensions
involved (Kim and Marcouiller 2016). Thus, while this
conceptualisation suggests that resilience building is a
multifaceted social process, studies mostly focused on how
these gave rise to responsive resilience. These studies pro-
vided limited understanding of the less tangible and sub-
jective dimensions relating to social capital and resilience.
Fig. 1 Six ways social capital was considered to inﬂuence or give rise to resilience
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1376
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
The fourth conceptualisation emphasised the role of
formal organisations and how these contribute to respon-
sive forms of resilience. While considering social capital as
networks, trust and reciprocity, such studies underscored
the importance of laws, national policy, regulatory frame-
works and actors (local government and non-government
organisations), in helping or hindering social capital and,
resilience (Hossain and Rahman 2016). Linking social
capital, and the ideas and practices within formal organi-
sations, were considered important for shaping collective
action (Oteng-Ababio et al. 2015) and for identifying and
making adjustments in communities for building resilience
(Blackman et al. 2016). Socio-cultural dimensions relating
to power and access to formal processes were sometimes
considered (Jacobs and Cramer 2017), but the central focus
remained on behaviours of formal actors, rather than on
less visible underlying socio-cultural factors. Thus this
conceptualisation suggests that the goals and practices of
formal actors across levels of governance hold strong
inﬂuence over effective responses to climate change
impacts.
The ﬁfth conceptualisation involves network structures,
norms and trust being related to proactive resilience. These
emphasised the importance of enhancing slow-changing
factors (e.g. the nature of social relationships, experiential
knowledge and natural resources) that would, in the long
term, shape proactive resilience (Kizos et al. 2014). This
viewed changes over long periods of time in natural,
human, cultural and social capital as having important
implications for ﬂexibility and adaptability (Wilson 2010).
This perspective emphasises that joined-up management,
focused on slow-changing capitals across social scales, is
important for overcoming a range of climate challenges as
they emerge.
The ﬁnal conceptualisation highlighted the signiﬁcance
of socio-cultural dimensions of social capital in shaping
proactive resilience. Here the core assumption was that
socio-cultural dimensions (e.g. social norms, identities and
values that inﬂuence collective efﬁcacy and agency) are
central to proactive resilience processes (Skerratt 2013).
These
socio-cultural
dimensions
included
subjective
aspects such as sense of place, belonging, norms, identity
and values and considered these as closely entwined with
material aspects (e.g. place) (Cox and Perry 2011). For
example, resilience could be proactively developed by
overcoming collective norms that exclude or favour certain
types of actions, or that promote a willingness to change
(Be´ne´ et al. 2016; Smith et al. 2012b). This conceptuali-
sation also assumed there are dynamic interconnections
between multiple actors, identities and goals, and explicitly
emphasised an important role for power and agency in
shaping resilience (Jacobs and Cramer 2017). From this
perspective, socio-cultural factors are important in shaping
which aspects of climate change are recognised in deci-
sion-making and prioritised for action, which actors are
involved and who beneﬁts.
Overall these conceptualisations show the diverse ways
in which social capital is considered to give rise to, or
enhance, resilience, with some ways of thinking (e.g.
conceptual roles 1–4 in Fig. 1) more prevalent than more
nuanced understandings (e.g. conceptual roles 5 and 6 in
Fig. 1). This diversity is derived from the different ways in
which social capital and resilience are deﬁned, reﬂecting
different underlying epistemologies. For example, a focus
on purely structural dimensions of social capital and on
resilience to speciﬁc climate shocks (Cassidy and Barnes
2012) tended to reﬂect positivist perspectives. These pro-
mote a focus on ﬁnding ways to enhance resilience to
immediate shocks, with less attention paid to deeper social
aspects which affect disadvantage and resilience but
operate over longer timeframes. In contrast conceptuali-
sations that emphasised how diverse socio-cultural factors
related to social capital were more likely to view resilience
as
proactive.
These
reﬂect
interpretivist
perspectives
(e.g.Cox and Perry 2011), and place greater emphasis on
the deeper underlying causes of challenges that emerge for
communities. These differences are important as they
greatly inﬂuenced the kinds of approaches and practice that
might be adopted to enhance resilience (Moses and Knut-
sen 2012). For example, a focus on network quantity and
diversity, with emphasis on reactive resilience, leans
towards actions that focus on climate impacts and seek to
help a community return to normal, rather than responding
to climate change in a way that explores deeper causes.
Thus, the epistemological and ontological foundations of
different understandings of the role of social capital for
resilience matter for research and practice. Being more
explicit about such assumptions could help identify the
need for broader perspectives to advance understandings,
e.g. about how different connections and outcomes unfold
across settings and for different types of resilience.
How does social capital contribute to resilience?
This section turns to empirical insights from different
studies about how social capital shapes resilience and
identiﬁes implications for practice. These ﬁndings are
organised around three overarching themes of: (1) the role
of social capital in inﬂuencing resilience; (2) factors that
interact with social capital to inﬂuence resilience and; (3)
the inﬂuence of formal organisations (Table 2).
The role of social capital in inﬂuencing resilience
There were four key ﬁndings about how social capital
inﬂuences resilience. First, the ability of households to
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1377
Table 2 Empirical insights about the role of social capital in resilience and implications for community resilience and climate change practice
Theme
Empirical insights from social capital and
resilience literature
Example literature
Implications for community resilience practice
in the context of climate change
Role of social capital in
inﬂuencing community
resilience
Bonding social capital enhances reactive
resilience
Murphy (2007) and Baral and
Stern (2011)
Developing community resilience plans and
actions that build bonding social capital is
needed to help account for shocks to improve
the role of social capital in enhancing reactive
resilience
Bridging (including linking) social capital
contributes to responsive resilience at the
community level by providing access to new
resources (e.g. physical and ﬁnancial) but
bonding social capital shapes whether and
how action is undertaken
Smith et al. (2012b), Birhanu
et al. (2017), and Bakker
et al. (2019)
Building bridging social capital is important to
create opportunities for accessing and
including diverse perspectives, new resources
and ideas for decision-making, improving
collective capacity for understanding and
adapting to changing circumstances to
enhance responsive resilience
Perceptions of unequal access to resources can
cause distrust and a loss of social capital and
access to resources for future (responsive)
resilience. Such losses within a community
(e.g. between neighbours) may be buffered by
norms of community support
Berke et al. (2008) and Islam
and Walkerden (2014)
Working with less visible subjective and
normative dimensions of social capital is
necessary to maintain ﬂexibility to access
different types of resources over time,
supporting the role of social capital for
enhancing responsive community resilience
in the longer term
Social capital can facilitate learning but what is
learnt, by who and whether this informs
future decisions is shaped by norms of
inclusion/ exclusions, thus inﬂuencing the
type of resilience
Barrett et al. (2011), Wickes
et al. (2017), and Baehler
and Biddle (2018)
Promoting norms of inclusion within decision-
making spaces is essential to develop the role
of social capital for understanding different
needs and perspective to shape action to
enhances responsive community resilience,
e.g. to understand and engage with climate
disadvantage and to shape positive
community narratives
Factors that interact with
social capital to
inﬂuence resilience
Social capital is one of many other factors
involved in shaping resilience
Cassidy and Barnes (2012)
and Smith et al. (2012a)
Considering the role of multiple factors and how
these vary between settings is necessary when
developing strategies, plans and actions for
building resilience
Social capital connects in complex ways with
other slow and fast changing factors to shape
resilience. Feedbacks between slow-changing
factors relating to human, cultural and social
capital are particularly important
Kizos et al. (2014), Sinclair
et al. (2014), and
Guillotreau et al. (2017)
Working through the connections between
social, human and cultural factors is
important to shape how desirable futures are
imagined and pursued, and identify
transformative need and potential to shape
proactive community resilience
Social capital is necessary but insufﬁcient for
shaping resilience, even in settings with high
levels of social capital. But, social capital can
be an effective strategy to develop or access
hard-to-reach resources
Islam and Walkerden (2014),
Jordan (2015), and Be´ne´
et al. (2016)
Creating enabling socio-political environments
with diverse capacities and resources
orientated towards supporting proactive
community resilience is necessary to ensure a
central role for social capital in building
proactive community resilience in practice
Combinations of different types of social capital
and other resources will vary in importance
for shaping resilience across different social
settings and objectives
Smith et al. (2012b), Skerratt
(2013), and Oteng-Ababio
et al. (2015)
Applying social capital approaches in practice
needs to focus on working with combinations
of factors, which inﬂuence how problems,
solutions and desirable futures are imagined
and the type of spaces that emerge for new
ideas, understandings (e.g. positive
narratives) and outcomes to emerge (e.g.
address local needs while engaging with
climate action including emissions
reductions)
Social capital shifts as proximities, needs,
routines and practices of actors shift, thus the
role of social capital for resilience can also
change over time
Vallance and Carlton (2015) ,
Blackman et al. (2016), Tilt
and Gerkey (2016), and
Peters (2019)
Finding ways for practitioners to support and
strengthen bonding and bridging social capital
as circumstances shift (e.g. during crises) is
important for maintaining ﬂexibility and the
ability to work through vertical and horizontal
connections to enhance community resilience
in the longer term
Socio-cultural factors, e.g. norms of inclusions/
exclusion, sense of community and
sustainable use of shared resources, facilitate
collective agency to build community
resilience
Smith et al. (2012a), Pare´s
et al. (2018), Carrico et al.
(2019), and Moreno et al.
(2019)
Working with social capital approaches to
enhance resilience must involve engaging
with the underlying socio-cultural dimensions
to identify and build on opportunities and
needs to guide different resilience outcomes
to help give rise to proactive types of
community resilience
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1378
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
cope during crises was enhanced by bonding capital, such
as in the immediate aftermath of ﬂoods, cyclones, ﬁres and
during more prolonged crises such as droughts. Bonding
social capital enhanced access to psychological and mate-
rial support (Birhanu et al. 2017) and operated as a strategy
for households to cope more effectively with crises (Be´ne´
et al. 2016) and while directly contributing to reactive
resilience, this is important for all forms of resilience
building..
Bridging and linking social capital were also important
in the immediate aftermath of crises (e.g. within a few days
post-ﬂood) for enhancing access to new information,
resources and support to address immediate and future
material losses, e.g. access to building materials and
ﬁnancial aid (Birhanu et al. 2017). Bonding combined with
limited bridging social capital, however, was shown to
limit whether, and how, a need for change is perceived and
acted upon (Bakker et al. 2019), such as collectively
recognising climate change as a threat but with faction-
alised views on the type of action and change required
(Smith et al. 2012b). Thus the collective learning needed to
improve responsive resilience can be helped or hindered
through different combinations of social capital.
Tensions around the distribution of resources in the
immediate aftermath of crisis led to a longer-term loss of
bridging and linking social capital. For example, commu-
nity relationships between households (and to aid organi-
sations) were weakened from competition for accessing
scarce external support (Islam and Walkerden 2014).
Existing norms that emphasised community support fos-
tered the development of social capital prior to crises,
while also reducing tensions during crises, thus preventing
potential losses of social capital in the future once a crisis
had abated (Berke et al. 2008). Thus, underlying socio-
cultural norms focused around community support and
cohesion may support resilience building over time, by
both encouraging the development of social capital and
buffering against potential losses from conﬂict as com-
munities move through periods of scarcity.
Finally, crises created space for learning about how to
strengthen a local settings to reduce future negative con-
sequences (Wickes et al. 2017). Speciﬁc crises can con-
tributed to responsive resilience as the community learnt
and updated its understanding of issues and factors hin-
dering
resilience
generally. Critical aspects
affecting
whether learning contributes to responsive resilience were
the distribution of learning (e.g. the different actors
Table 2 continued
Theme
Empirical insights from social capital and
resilience literature
Example literature
Implications for community resilience practice
in the context of climate change
The inﬂuence of formal
institutions in shaping
the role of social capital
for resilience
Decisions at higher levels of governance that
shift the balance of power between actors can
inﬂuence different actors’ practices and social
capital (structural and norms of cooperation
or competition) that shape resilience
Kizos et al. (2014), Sinclair
et al. (2014)
Recognising and actively supporting all types of
social capital by national policy makers is
important to ensure high level decisions do
not undermine, and instead help strengthen
vertical and horizontal connections, to enable
the ﬂexibility for community actors to
enhance all types of community resilience
Limited recognition of the importance of linking
social capital can lead to missed opportunities
for more coordinated collective action and
further development of social capital for
enhancing resilience
LaLone (2012), Morris et al.
(2019), and Thompson and
Lopez Barrera (2019)
Working through vertical connections is
important to ensure local government
interventions are designed to connect with
local needs and capacities and build all types
of social capital in implementation, enhancing
the role of social capital in promoting
resilience in the long term
Linking social capital can help create new
opportunities to enhance social capital, e.g.
through the creation of voluntary and
transformational leadership programmes to
enhance community resilience
Madsen and O’Mullan (2014)
and Webb et al. (2016)
Building and working through linking social
capital helps create opportunities for
developing and strengthening government
supported interventions, including those
aimed at enhancing the role of social capital
to support resilience within communities.
Enhance proactive community resilience
however needs to involve opportunities for
meaningful participation in decision-making,
collective learning and for empowering forms
of change
Embedded institutional socio-cultural factors
(discourses, attitudes and practices) can
inﬂuence the access of social groups to
different spaces and resources that shape
resilience
Cox and Perry (2011), Oteng-
Ababio et al. (2015), and
Singer et al. (2015)
Engaging with and shaping government cultures,
values and practices of these actors is critical
to strengthening enabling policy
environments to develop the role of social
capital in building community resilience,,
particularly for engaging with complex
challenges including climate change
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1379
involved and the ﬂow of ideas and knowledge), the type of
learning
(e.g.
understanding
weaknesses
in
physical
infrastructure and/or the need for coproduction approaches
to build resilience), and whether and how this learning
informs collective decision-making (Blackman et al. 2016).
Social capital, however, can also limit learning and deci-
sion-making if it excludes different perspectives and
learning practices (Brown and Sonwa 2018). Thus although
social capital can support experiential learning, the type of
learning that emerges and for who, and thus the type of
resilience that unfolds, varies across contexts.
These results show that social capital has an important
yet dynamic role in resilience framed in terms of shocks
and crises (e.g. ﬂoods and droughts). This role is often
explained in terms of more visible structural dimensions of
social capital (the quality and diversity of bridging and
linking social capital) and the distribution of resources and
learning. However, less visible dimensions (e.g. percep-
tions and social norms) are also important to shape struc-
tural dimensions of social capital and for learning and
accessing resources. For example, social norms can lead to
trade-offs between structural types of social capital, can
mediate tensions and their impact, and how learning
informs action. Thus social network structures interact with
less visible, underlying social norms to help shape the type
of resilience that emerges. For resilience and climate
change practice working with structural aspects of social
capital is important for overcoming climate shocks. To
build proactive resilience and engage with the many
aspects
of
climate
change
and
future
uncertainties
involved, there is a need to work with less visible dimen-
sions within communities. This is important to support
social capital in ways that shape action suited to diverse
settings and actors, and to enhance ﬂexibility for the future.
Factors interacting with social capital to inﬂuence
resilience
There were a six key ﬁndings about different factors that
interacted with social capital to inﬂuence resilience. First,
while social networks were widely found to be a key
resource for times of change (Tilt and Gerkey 2016), a
range of other factors were important, including natural
resources, livelihoods, knowledge and experience, the built
environment and ﬁnancial resources that together shaped
decisions and actions for resilience (Baral and Stern 2011;
Jordan 2015). Studies often emphasised different combi-
nations of factors, such as the importance of natural capital
in rural settings and physical capital in more urban settings.
This reﬂects differentiation of potential resources across
settings at the community level and highlights a need to
consider the role of multiple factors for shaping community
resilience.
Second, social capital interacted in complex ways
through feedbacks with other social, human, cultural and
natural factors to shape goals and practices over temporal
(years and decades) and spatial scales (e.g. households to
industries) (Guillotreau et al. 2017). In these studies, faster
changing factors were suggested to have, overall, much
less importance than slower changing factors, even for
reactive and responsive resilience (Sinclair et al. 2014).
Furthermore, social capital was deliberately developed by
community actors to strengthen other factors for proac-
tively enhancing resilience (Skerratt 2013). This highlights
the importance of considering slow-changing factors (e.g.
social capital and cultural dimensions) in shaping different
types of resilience over longer timeframes.
Empirical studies also suggested that social capital is
important but insufﬁcient in shaping resilience for those
who are marginalised, excluded or in contexts of high
social inequality. Here, other inﬂuential factors constrained
opportunities for resilience, such as in systems where
bribery is common, thus hindering access to resources for
some (Islam and Walkerden 2014). In such circumstances,
no matter how much social capital is available, there was
limited possibility for building proactive resilience (Hos-
sain and Rahman 2016). When resources within or outside
communities were available but difﬁcult to access, as
social capital helped gain access to new opportunities and
resources (e.g. micro-credit) and thus helped enhance
resilience (Jordan 2015). The key point here for building
resilience is that although social capital may be central for
shaping action, the type of outcomes that unfold are also
shaped by the availability of other resources.
Fourth, different combinations of social capital, such as
bonding, bridging and linking, were also found to be
important for achieving different objectives (Skerratt
2013). For example, a combination of high bonding,
bridging and linking social capital was found to be
important for expressions of autonomy at the community
level, whereas bonding capital was important for consoli-
dating community identity (Smith et al. 2012b). Different
social networks within communities, the connections
between them, and the multi-functionality of these net-
works provided ﬂexibility through time to mobilise dif-
ferent resources in relation to a range of events, from
natural hazards to infrastructure failure (Murphy 2007;
Vallance and Carlton 2015). The implication for commu-
nity resilience practice is that collective goals and visions
and how they are pursued will vary, and this is in-part
shaped by different conﬁgurations of social capital.
Fifth, social capital can change over time short time
frames as actors’ proximity, needs, routines and practices
shifted, e.g. as crises unfolded and as neighbours were
dispersed (Singer et al. 2015). In social settings with
limited resources this led to a loss of resilience in the long
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1380
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
term (Tilt and Gerkey 2016). Such disruption also created
opportunities to form new relationships and shape new
shared initiatives to meet arising needs and to spread ideas
and information for enhancing responsive resilience
(Vallance
and
Carlton
2015).
This
highlights
that
although pre-crisis social capital is important for resi-
lience to shocks, the disruption involved can alter social
capital in the long term.
Finally, socio-cultural factors associated with social
capital played a substantial role in shaping resilience.
Norms, values and identities inﬂuenced the form and
function of networks, such as exclusionary norms that lead
to isolated factions, hindering the development of bridging
social capital or norms that perpetuated unsustainable
practices (Carrico et al. 2019). Cultural norms that con-
tribute to collective agency related to good neighbourli-
ness, solidarity and activism (Sinclair et al. 2014; Pare´s
et al. 2018). Community-level socio-cultural factors were
also identiﬁed as important in shaping how social capital
was applied in enhancing resilience, e.g. shaping accep-
tance of the status quo and thus the ability to collectively
imagine an alternative future (Birhanu et al. 2017). Speciﬁc
factors (or aspects of communities) that had particular
symbolic value for community identity were also shown as
important for collective agency (Smith et al. 2012a) and if
social capital was actively pursued as a resilience building
strategy (Skerratt 2013). Thus socio-cultural dimensions
within communities shape connections between agency,
social capital and resilience. For practice this implies the
need to work with socio-cultural dimensions within social
capital to guide how community resilience unfolds.
These results show social capital is one of many factors
that dynamically interact to shape resilience. Social capital
can be actively used to access hard-to-reach resources and
shape other aspects of communities. However, for resi-
lience building over longer timeframes, interconnections
between slower changing factors are particularly important.
These include social and human capital, and underlying
socio-cultural factors – such as values, social norms and
collective identities that shape overarching goals, per-
ceived resources and collective agency. Thus, systems
perspectives and the active engagement of multiple, inter-
connected factors, including social capital and the under-
lying socio-cultural factors involved, need to incorporated
into community resilience building strategies. With the
complexities of climate change proactive types of resi-
lience practice needs to account for multiple interacting
factors and scales while maintaining ﬂexibility for the
future. Such factors inﬂuence collective visions, goals and
perceived needs at the community level for building resi-
lience, (e.g. if adapting to and mitigating climate change
are both considered), the relevance of social capital for
shaping actions (e.g. the type and quality of social capital),
what emerges and for whom (e.g. group or community
scale). The ability to guide and work with social capital in
combination with other factors is important to avoid overly
simplistic approaches to social capital and resilience. In
terms of climate change this is important for applying
systemic approaches in practice, consideration of different
challenges and for building inclusive, positive climate
narratives to strengthen resilience practice.
The inﬂuence of formal organisations on the role of social
capital for resilience
Four key ﬁndings were also identiﬁed around the inﬂuence
of formal organisations in shaping the role of social capital
for resilience. This included a focus on ideas, decisions and
actions of different organisations, and national and local
level programmes and government policies.
First, decisions at higher levels of government were
found to shape local decisions and practices that reduced
social capital and resilience (Luthe and Wyss 2015). For
example by altering power dynamics between actors and
changing the way they interacted, bridging and bonding
social capital was eroded (Kizos et al. 2014). This loss of
community resilience occured through ideological shifts in
national-level policy processes, e.g. towards market-based
approaches that increase competition between local pro-
ducers (favouring individualism over cooperation) or
towards technical rather than holistic solutions (Sinclair
et al. 2014; Guillotreau et al. 2017). For community resi-
lience, the role of social capital can be unintentionally
eroded overtime through government change programmes.
Second, limited linking social capital between local
organisations and communities led to missed opportunities
for coordinating different resources (e.g. in response to a
crisis or shock). This lack of social capital can cause a
mismatch between actions of communities and local
organisations (LaLone 2012). Better coordination can
emerge from regular interactions between actors and
improve the quality of social capital for the future
(Thompson and Lopez Barrera 2019). This highlights that
social capital is a dynamic resource that can be strength-
ened when activated over time to enhance resilience.
Third, some formal organisations (e.g. state agencies
and non-government organisations) provided support via
funded programmes and linking social capital. These are
important for enhancing community resilience in direct
(e.g. providing access to micro-credit) or indirect (devel-
opment of transformational leadership skills) ways, that in
turn enhanced social capital (Madsen and O’Mullan 2014).
Here, the presence of linking social capital between formal
organisations and communities shaped programme out-
comes, such as increasing access to critical ﬁnancial sup-
port and indirectly supporting the development of social
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1381
capital within communities. This highlights that formal
institutions can have a role in strengthening social capital
for building community resilience, however in practice the
effectiveness of such interventions is shaped by linking
types of social capital.
Finally, socio-cultural dimensions of relations between
communities and local organisations were suggested to
shape community resilience indirectly. For example, per-
ceptions of injustice in the practices of formal organisations
(e.g. distributing resources) may indirectly hindered social
capital by exacerbating tensions between community-level
actors (i.e. between neighbours) (Tilt and Gerkey 2016).
Formal organisations with top-down leadership approaches
often lacked a social capital mind-set that may not create
sufﬁcient space for communities to lead decision-making to
understand and address current and future needs for
improving responsive resilience (Blackman et al. 2016).
Furthermore, practices with formal organisations that over-
looked the role of social capital led to indirect, unintended
losses of social capital and limited opportunities to enhance
community resilience (Cox and Perry 2011). This suggests
practices
and
norms
within
formal
organisations
are
important for shaping community resilience and over time,
the role of social capital in these processes.
These ﬁndings show that formal organisations are
important actors for shaping the nature and role of social
capital for community resilience. At a national level, policy
paradigm shifts may alter the nature of social capital and
thus the accessibility of resources for different actors. At a
community level, the behaviour, attitudes and actions of
organisational actors may directly and indirectly inﬂuence
the nature of social capital and its role in resilience
building. For resilience and climate change practice this
emphasises the need or enabling policy environments for
strengthening the role of social capital and for shaping
resilience approaches more broadly. To better enable
proactive resilience building at the community level, such
policy environments need to help bring diverse perspec-
tives, ideas and capacities together and adopt a social
capital approach to create spaces for exploring, learning
and synergistic actions.
Critical knowledge gaps for studies of resilience,
social capital and climate change
The
previous
sections
examined
conceptualisations
(Fig. 1) and empirical insights (Table 2) about the role of
social capital for resilience, drawing out insights for
community resilience and climate change practice. This
section identiﬁes four critical knowledge gaps to advance
understandings
on
this
subject
for
researchers
and
practitioners.
Why and how outcomes emerge through social capital,
not just what emerges
Across this diverse body of literature understandings of the
role of social capital are often framed in terms of type of
social capital, e.g. bonding, bridging and/or linking social
capital or strong and weak ties that connect different types
of actors and in terms of outcomes such as learning and
access to resources. This strong orientation towards struc-
tural understandings of the role of social capital (i.e. net-
work quantity and diversity) however provides limited
insights to understand how and why different outcomes
unfold. Empirical ﬁndings suggest that the binary existence
of social relationships and networks (i.e. whether or not
agents are connected) appears to be less important than the
nature of those relationships in shaping what emerges for
enhancing resilience. Improving understanding about why
and how different outcomes unfold (and for whom) through
social relationships requires greater attention to a wide
diversity of factors that inﬂuence the nature (i.e. type and
quality) of social capital, as well as different perspectives
and goals that also inﬂuence decisions that shape actions
and types of resilience. Addressing this gap is important to
better understand how to guide social capital approaches in
practice for engaging with complex challenges such as
climate change in ways that support proactive resilience
building at the community level.
Dynamic interactions between different factors and social
capital over time
Different factors, resources and/ or capacities are empha-
sised
within
conceptual
understandings
of
resilience
alongside social capital. Conceptually this includes a focus
on the importance of slow-changing capitals (i.e. human,
natural, cultural and social capital that changes over dec-
ades) for shaping resilience. Empirical studies have tended
to focus on tangible factors, e.g. infrastructure and indi-
cators of economic development in the emergency plan-
ning literature, with an emphasis on reactive resilience.
There is limited empirically understanding about how
multiple factors dynamically connect and inﬂuence each
other across levels to reinforce or dampen resilience
capacities. Better understanding of the dynamic relation-
ships between social capital and other diverse factors is
particularly important for resilience that explicitly recog-
nises the need for change (i.e. responsive and proactive
resilience processes), the systemic nature of climate change
and the potential for factors to combine in ways that may
enhance or weaken community resilience through time.
This is important to develop understanding of resilience as
a complex social process, and how to nurture it in practice.
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1382
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
Different ways formal organisations can shape social
capital and community resilience
Formal organisations (e.g. national and local government)
are often emphasised, both conceptually and empirically,
as important in shaping the role of social capital for com-
munity resilience. Currently studies tend to adopt top-
down,
hierarchical
perspectives
that
assume
formal
organisations and policies direct resilience building, and
often focus on reinforcing the status quo (i.e. reactive and
responsive resilience). This may hinder engagement at the
community level with the complexities of climate change
for proactive forms of resilience to emerge. By ignoring
questions of unequal power relations, opportunities are
missed to improve understanding about the different ways
formal organisations could potentially support social cap-
ital and resilience in communities. Alternative perspectives
on approaches within formal organisations are rare, par-
ticularly for supporting proactive resilience at the com-
munity level. Such perspectives may involve examining
how formal organisations can ‘ﬂatten’ hierarchies by
altering the dynamics between actors, and creating space
for the co-development of locally relevant resources and
actions for resilience. This may involve a subtle shift in
focus towards shaping change within formal organisations
to enhance social capital approaches in practice for
proactively building community resilience in the context of
climate change.
Socio-cultural dimensions shaping the nature and role
of social capital for community resilience
Socio-cultural factors are often conceptually underplayed.
When these factors are considered this is often within
studies that examine social capital in relation to proactive
resilience processes, such as how values and norms
inﬂuence
foresight,
reﬂection,
experimentation
and
learning, and hence resilience. This includes a particular
focus on social norms of exclusion in limiting the role of
social capital in resilience for marginalised social groups.
Empirical aspects of studies however highlight the role
that less visible socio-cultural dimensions (e.g. values,
norms and beliefs) play in social capital within different
community resilience processes, such as norms of com-
munity
support.
Such
dimensions
shape
meanings
attached to ideas, goals, resources and interactions
between actors and thus in part inﬂuence the type of
outcomes and who beneﬁts. Yet such socio-cultural
considerations are not common, especially in studies
focusing on resilience at the community level. However,
the need to consider such factors in change processes and
engage with social justice challenges is increasingly
recognised.
Improving
conceptual
recognition
and
empirical knowledge on how socio-cultural dimensions
shape community resilience processes (including those
shaping
connections
between
climate
action
and
marginalisation), and the nature and role of structural
aspects of social capital in these processes is therefore
critical for understanding how different local needs and
aspects of climate change are incorporated into resilience
building processes.
Addressing these knowledge gaps will involves inter-
pretivist perspectives to build on the positivist ways of
thinking about social capital and resilience that currently
dominate. This is important for more nuanced under-
standings about the role of social capital and how to guide
community-level resilience building that engages with the
complexities of challenges like climate change. Better
understanding how the different dimensions of social
capital (both structural and socio-cultural dimensions)
interact to shape the form of and different outcomes from
social networks and relationships, and how social capital
interconnects with other factors within community resi-
lience building processes are important for informing
practice. However, without intervention that explicitly
engages
with
multiple,
interconnected
challenges
to
enhance resilience, the potential for erosion of community
resilience over time is much greater. Thus greater attention
must be paid to proactive forms of resilience, its socio-
cultural aspects, and how to work dynamically through
social capital and with other factors to strengthen approa-
ches goal and actions to guide this in practice.
CONCLUSION
This review synthesised conceptual and empirical under-
standings of the role of social capital in resilience, and
implications for community resilience and climate change
practice. Multiple conceptualisations of resilience, social
capital and its role are highlighted. While resilience was
often framed in terms of shocks (e.g. climate change
impacts) and maintaining the status quo, social capital
often involved a strong emphasis on structural dimensions,
with socio-cultural elements underplayed. This inﬂuenced
how the role of social capital in resilience was understood,
with a strong emphasis on the quantity and diversity of
(structural) social capital, other factors alongside social
capital, and the inﬂuence of formal organisations. Empiri-
cal ﬁndings therefore reiterate the importance of social
capital for community resilience, while showing the com-
plex ways they can interact. The many nuances in empir-
ical ﬁndings, such as potential for certain forms of social
capital to constrain community resilience, suggest under-
lying socio-cultural factors are particularly key. They shape
structural dimensions of social capital (the type of actors
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1383
involved) and what emerges (the type of outcomes and for
whom) to contribute to different types of resilience.
Social capital approaches therefore provide important
leverage for catalysing action to build resilience. However,
resilience and climate change research needs to go beyond
simplistic, structural accounts of social capital to focus
more on socio-cultural factors and how different factors
interact across social levels and over time to shape different
approaches, actions and outcomes. This is important for
enabling more systemic, proactive approaches to commu-
nity resilience to fully engage with complex interconnected
climate change challenges.
Acknowledgements This research was funded by the UK Research
and INNOVATION Economic and Social Research Council award
number ES/J500136/1.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
REFERENCES
Adger, W.N. 2000. Social and ecological resilience: Are they related?
Progress in Human Geography 24: 347–364.
Adger, W.N. 2003. Social capital, collective action, and adaptation to
climate change. Economic Geography 79: 387–404.
Adhikari, K.P., and P. Goldey. 2010. Social Capital and its
‘‘Downside’’: The Impact on Sustainability of Induced Commu-
nity-Based Organizations in Nepal. World Development 38:
184–194.
Akbar, M.S., and D.P. Aldrich. 2018. Social capital’s role in recovery:
Evidence from communities affected by the 2010 Pakistan
ﬂoods. Disaters 42: 475–497.
Aldrich, D.P., and M.A. Meyer. 2015. Social capital and community
resilience. American Behavioral Scientist 59: 254–269.
Babcicky, P., and S. Seebauer. 2017. The two faces of social capital in
private ﬂood mitigation: Opposing effects on risk perception,
self-efﬁcacy and coping capacity. Journal of Risk Research 20:
1017–1037.
Baehler, K.J., and J.C. Biddle. 2018. Governance for adaptive
capacity and resilience in the US water sector. Ecology and
Society 23. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-10537-230424.
Bakker, Y.W., J. De Koning, and J. Van Tatenhove. 2019. Resilience
and social capital: The engagement of ﬁsheries communities in
marine spatial planning. Marine Policy 99: 132–139.
Bankoff, G. 2007. Dangers to going it alone: Social capital and the
origins of community resilience in the Philippines. Continuity
and Change 22: 327–355.
Baral, N., and M.J. Stern. 2011. Capital stocks and organizational
resilience in the Annapurna Conservation Area, Nepal. Society &
Natural Resources 24: 1011–1026.
Barrett, G., M. Vanderplaat, M.E.C. Gonzalez, J.F. Irmao, M.C.G.
Ampuero, and C.E.M. Vera. 2011. Civic networks and commu-
nity resilience in Brazil, Canada, Chile, and Cuba. Journal of
Civil Society 7: 333–362.
Be´ne´, C., R.M. Al-Hassan, O. Amarasinghe, P. Fong, J. Ocran, E.
Onumah, R. Ratuniata, T.V. Tuyen, et al. 2016. Is resilience
socially constructed? Empirical evidence from Fiji, Ghana, Sri
Lanka,
and
Vietnam.
Global
Environmental
Change
38:
153–170.
Berke, P.R., R. Chuenpagdee, K. Juntarashote, and S. Chang. 2008.
Human-ecological dimensions of disaster resiliency in Thailand:
Social capital and aid delivery. Journal of Environmental
Planning and Management 51: 303–317.
Berkes, F., and H. Ross. 2013. Community resilience: Toward an
integrated approach. Society & Natural Resources 26: 5–20.
Berkes, F., and H. Ross. 2016. Panarchy and community resilience:
Sustainability science and policy implications. Environmental
Science & Policy 61: 185–193.
Birhanu, Z., A. Ambelu, N. Berhanu, A. Tesfaye, and K. Wol-
demichael. 2017. Understanding resilience dimensions and
adaptive strategies to the impact of recurrent droughts in Borana
Zone, Oromia Region, Ethiopia: A grounded theory approach.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public
Health 14: 118.
Blackman, D., H. Nakanishi, and A.M. Benson. 2016. Disaster
resilience as a complex problem: Why linearity is not applicable
for long-term recovery. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change 121: 89–98.
Bondas, T., and E.O. Hall. 2007. Challenges in approaching
metasynthesis
research.
Qualitative
Health
Research
17:
113–121.
Bourdieu, P. 1986. The forms of capital. In Handbook of theory ands
research for the sociology of education, ed. J.G. Richardson.
New York: Greenwood Press.
Bowser, G.C., and S.L. Cutter. 2015. Stay or go? Examining decision
making and behavior in hurricane evacuations. Environment:
Science and Policy for Sustainable Development 57: 28–41.
Brown, H.C.P., and D.J. Sonwa. 2018. Diversity within village
institutions and its implication for resilience in the context of
climate change in Cameroon. Climate and Development 10:
448–457.
Brown, K. 2014. Global environmental change I: A social turn for
resilience? Progress in Human Geography 38: 107–117.
Cairns-Nagi, J.M., and C. Bambra. 2013. Defying the odds: A mixed-
methods study of health resilience in deprived areas of England.
Social Science and Medicine 91: 229–237.
Cao, G. 2007. The pattern-matching role of systems thinking in
improving research trustworthiness. Systemic Practice and
Action Research 20: 441–453.
Carpenter, A. 2015. Resilience in the social and physical realms:
Lessons from the Gulf Coast. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction 14: 290–301.
Carrico, A.R., H.B. Truelove, and N.E. Williams. 2019. Social capital
and resilience to drought among smallholding farmers in Sri
Lanka. Climatic Change 155: 195–213.
Cassidy, L., and G.D. Barnes. 2012. Understanding household
connectivity and resilience in marginal rural communities
through social network analysis in the village of Habu,
Botswana. Ecology and Society 17: 18.
Cattell, V. 2001. Poor people, poor places, and poor health: The
mediating role of social networks and social capital. Social
Science & Medicine 52: 1501–1516.
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1384
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
Cleaver, F. 2005. The inequality of social capital and the reproduction
of chronic poverty. World Development 33: 893–906.
Coleman, J. 1988. Social capital and the creation of human capital.
American Journal of Sociology 94: 95–120.
Cox, R., and K. Perry. 2011. Like a ﬁsh out of water: Reconsidering
disaster recovery and the role of place and social capital in
community disaster resilience. American Journal of Community
Psychology 48: 395–411.
Dzanja, J., M. Christie, I. Fazey, and T. Hyde. 2015. The Role of
social capital in rural household food security: The case study of
Dowa and Lilongwe Districts in Central Malawi. Journal of
Agricultural Science 7: 165–176.
Elmqvist, T., E. Andersson, N. Frantzeskaki, T. Mcphearson, P.
Olsson, O. Gaffney, K. Takeuchi, and C. Folke. 2019. Sustain-
ability and resilience for transformation in the urban century.
Nature Sustainability 2: 267–273.
Exner, A., E. Politti, E. Schrieﬂ, S. Erker, R. Stangl, S. Baud, H.
Warmuth, J. Matzenberger, et al. 2016. Measuring regional
resilience towards fossil fuel supply constraints. Adaptability
and vulnerability in socio-ecological Transformations-the case of
Austria. Energy Policy 91: 128–137.
Fazey, I., E. Carmen, F.S. Chapin, H. Ross, J. Rao-Williams, C. Lyon,
I.L.C. Connon, B.A. Searle, et al. 2018. Community resilience
for a 1.5 C world. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustain-
ability 31: 30–40.
Fazey, I., E. Carmen, H. Ross, J. Rao-Williams, A. Hodgson, B.
Searle, H. Al Waer, J. Kenter, et al. 2021. Social dynamics of
community resilience building in the face of climate change: The
case of three Scottish communities. Sustainability Science 16:
1731–1747.
Fazey, I., J.G. Salisbury, D.B. Lindenmayer, J. Maindonald, and R.
Douglas. 2004. Can methods applied in medicine be used to
summarize and disseminate conservation research? Environmen-
tal Conservation 31: 190–198.
Finfgeld, D.L. 2003. Metasynthesis: The state of the art - so far.
Qualitative Health Research 13: 893–904.
Flora, J.L., J. Sharp, C. Flora, and B. Newlon. 1997. Entrepreneurial
social infrastructure and locally initiated economic development
in the nonmetropolitan United States. The Sociological Quar-
terly 38: 623–645.
Folke, C. 2006. Resilience: The emergence of a perspective for
social-ecological
systems
analyses.
Global
Environmental
Change 16: 253–267.
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Chapin, T. &
Rockstro¨m, J. 2010. Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience,
adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society, 15.
Gambo Boukary, A., A. Diaw, and T. Wu¨nscher. 2016. Factors
affecting rural households’ resilience to food insecurity in Niger.
Sustainability 8: 181.
Gelderblom, D. 2018. The limits to bridging social capital: Power,
social context and the theory of Robert Putnam. The Sociological
Review 66: 1309–1324.
Gibson, C.C., E. Ostrom, and T.K. Ahn. 2000. The concept of scale
and the human dimensions of global change: A survey.
Ecological Economics 32: 217–239.
Goss, M., D.L. Swain, J.T. Abatzoglou, A. Sarhadi, C.A. Kolden, A.P.
Williams, and N.S. Diffenbaugh. 2020. Climate change is
increasing the likelihood of extreme autumn wildﬁre conditions
across California. Environmental Research Letters 15: 094016.
Grube, L., and V. Storr. 2014. The capacity for self-governance and
post-disaster resiliency. Review of Austrian Economics 27:
301–324.
Guillotreau, P., E.H. Allison, A. Bundy, S.R. Cooley, O. Defeo, V.
Lebihan, S. Pardo, R. Ianperry, et al. 2017. A comparative
appraisal of the resilience of marine social-ecological systems to
mass mortalities of bivalves. Ecology and Society 22: 21.
Habibov, N., and I.E. Afand. 2017. Community-level social capital and
household strategies for coping with global crisis in transitional
countries. Social Indicators Research 130 (2): 687–710.
Holling, C.S. 2001. Understanding the complexity of economic,
ecological, and social system. Ecosystems 4: 390–405.
Hossain, M.Z., and M.A.U. Rahman. 2016. Adaptation to climate
change as resilience for urban extreme poor: Lessons learned
from targeted asset transfers programmes in Dhaka city of
Bangladesh. Environment, Development and Sustainability 20:
407–432.
Hurlbert, M., and P. Mussetta. 2016. Creating resilient water
governance for irrigated producers in Mendoza, Argentina.
Environmental Science & Policy 58: 83–94.
Islam, R., and G. Walkerden. 2014. How bonding and bridging
networks contribute to disaster resilience and recovery on the
Bangladeshi coast. International Journal of Disaster Risk
Reduction 10: 281–291.
Jacobs, D.B., and L.A. Cramer. 2017. Applying information network
analysis to ﬁre-prone landscapes: Implications for community
resilience. Ecology and Society 22: 20.
Javadpoor, M., A. Shariﬁ, and M. Roosta. 2021. An adaptation of the
Baseline Resilience Indicators for Communities (BRIC) for
assessing resilience of Iranian provinces. International Journal
of Disaster Risk Reduction 66: 102609.
Jordan, J.C. 2015. Swimming alone? The role of social capital in
enhancing local resilience to climate stress: A case study from
Bangladesh. Climate and Development 7: 110–123.
Kim, H., and D.W. Marcouiller. 2016. Natural disaster response,
community resilience, and economic capacity: A case study of
Coastal Florida. Society & Natural Resources 29: 981–997.
Kizos, T., V. Detsis, T. Iosiﬁdes, and M. Metaxakis. 2014. Social
capital and social-ecological resilience in the Asteroussia
Mountains, Southern Crete, Greece. Ecology and Society 19: 11.
Lalone, M.B. 2012. Neighbors helping neighbors: An examination of
the social capital mobilization process for community resilience
to environmental disasters. Journal of Applied Social Science 6:
209–237.
Lang, T., and R. Ramı´rez. 2017. Building new social capital with
scenario
planning.
Technological
Forecasting
and
Social
Change 124: 51–65.
Lisnyj,
K.T.,
and
S.E.
Dickson-Anderson.
2018.
Community
resilience in Walkerton, Canada: Sixteen years post-outbreak.
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 31: 196–202.
Luthe, T., and R. Wyss. 2015. Introducing adaptive waves as a
concept to inform mental models of resilience. Sustainability
Science 10: 673–685.
Macgillivray, B.H. 2018. Beyond social capital: The norms, belief
systems, and agency embedded in social networks shape
resilience to climatic and geophysical hazards. Environmental
Science & Policy 89: 116–125.
Maclean, K., M. Cuthill, and H. Ross. 2014. Six attributes of social
resilience. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management
57: 144–156.
Madsen, W., and C. O’mullan. 2014. ‘‘Knowing me, knowing you’’:
Exploring the effects of a rural leadership programme on
community resilience. Rural Society 23: 151–160.
Magis, K. 2010. Community resilience: An indicator of social
sustainability. Society & Natural Resources 23: 401–416.
Matarrita-Cascante, D., B. Trejos, H. Qin, D. Joo, and S. Debner.
2017. Conceptualizing community resilience: Revisiting con-
ceptual distinctions. Community Development 48: 105–123.
Mngumi, L.E. 2020. Exploring the contribution of social capital in
building resilience for climate change effects in peri-urban areas,
Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. GeoJournal 86: 2671–2689.
Moreno, J., A. Lara, and M. Torres. 2019. Community resilience in
response to the 2010 tsunami in Chile: The survival of a small-
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1385
scale ﬁshing community. International Journal of Disaster Risk
Reduction 33: 376–384.
Morris, J.C., M.W. McNamara, and A. Belcher. 2019. Building
resilience through collaboration between grassroots citizen
groups and governments: Two case studies. Public Works
Management & Policy 24: 50–62.
Morrison, C., and E. Ramsey. 2019. Power to the people: Developing
networks through rural community energy schemes. Journal of
Rural Studies 70: 169–178.
Moses, J.W., and T. Knutsen. 2012. Ways of knowing. Bsingstoke,
UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Murphy, B.L. 2007. Locating social capital in resilient community-
level emergency management. Natural Hazards 41: 297–315.
Norris, F.H., S.P. Stevens, B. Pfefferbaum, K.F. Wyche, and R.L.
Pfefferbaum. 2008. Community resilience as a metaphor, theory,
set of capacities, and strategy for disaster readiness. American
Journal of Community Psychology 41: 127–150.
Oteng-Ababio, M., K.O. Sarfo, and E. Owusu-Sekyere. 2015.
Exploring the realities of resilience: Case study of Kantamanto
Market ﬁre in Accra, Ghana. International Journal of Disaster
Risk Reduction 12: 311–318.
Pandey, A., A. Prakash, and S.E. Werners. 2021. Matches, mis-
matches and priorities of pathways from a climate-resilient
development perspective in the mountains of Nepal. Environ-
mental Science & Policy 125: 135–145.
Pare´s, M., I. Blanco, and C. Ferna´ndez. 2018. Facing the great
recession in deprived urban areas: How civic capacity con-
tributes to neighborhood resilience. City and Community 17:
65–86.
Patel, S.S., M.B. Rogers, R. Amloˆt, and G.J. Rubin. 2017. What do
we mean by ‘‘community resilience’’? A systematic literature
review of how it is deﬁned in the literature. PLoS Currents 9.
Pelling, M. 2011. Adaptation to climate change: From resilience to
transformation. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Pelling, M., C. High, J. Dearing, and D. Smith. 2008. Shadow spaces
for social learning: A relational understanding of adaptive
capacity to climate change within organisations. Environment
and Planning A 40: 867–884.
Pelling, M., K. O’brien, and D. Matyas. 2015. Adaptation and
transformation. Climatic Change 133: 113–127.
Peters, D.J. 2019. Community resiliency in declining small towns:
Impact of population loss on quality of life over 20 years. Rural
Sociology 84: 635–668.
Phillips, M. 2016. Assets and affect in the study of social capital in
rural communities. Sociologia Ruralis 56: 220–247.
Portes, A. 1998. Social capital: Its orgins and applications in modern
sociology. Annual Review of Sociology 24: 1–24.
Putnam, R.D. 1995. Bowling alone: America’s declining social
capital. Journal of Democracy 6: 65–78.
Ritchie, J., L. Spencer, and W. O’connor. 2003. Carrying out
qualitative data analysis. In Qualitative research practice: A
guide for social science students and researchers, ed. J. Lewis.
London: Sage.
Rockenbauch, T., and P. Sakdapolrak. 2017. Social networks and the
resilience of rural communities in the Global South: A critical
review and conceptual reﬂections. Ecology and Society 22: 10.
Ross, H., and F. Berkes. 2014. Research approaches for understand-
ing, enhancing, and monitoring community resilience. Society &
Natural Resources 27: 787–804.
Saldana, J. 2016. The coding manual for qualitative researchers.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sherrieb, K., F.H. Norris, and S. Galea. 2010. Measuring capacities
for community resilience. Social Indicators Research 99:
227–247.
Sinclair, K., A. Curtis, E. Mendham, and M. Mitchell. 2014. Can
resilience thinking provide useful insights for those examining
efforts to transform contemporary agriculture? Agriculture and
Human Values 31: 371–384.
Singer, J., H. Hoang, and C. Ochiai. 2015. Post-displacement
community resilience: Considering the contribution of indige-
nous skills and cultural capital among ethnic minority Viet-
namese. Asia Paciﬁc Viewpoint 56: 208–222.
Skerratt, S. 2013. Enhancing the analysis of rural community
resilience: Evidence from community land ownership. Journal
of Rural Studies 31: 36–46.
Smith, J.W., D.H. Anderson, and R. Moore. 2012a. Social capital,
place meanings, and perceived resilience to climate change.
Rural Sociology 77: 380–407.
Smith, J.W., R.L. Moore, D.H. Anderson, and C. Siderelis. 2012b.
Community resilience in Southern Appalachia: A theoretical
framework and three case studies. Human Ecology 40: 341–353.
Smith, L.C., and T.R. Frankenberger. 2018. Does resilience capacity
reduce the negative impact of shocks on household food
security? Evidence from the 2014 ﬂoods in Northern Bangla-
desh. World Development 102: 358–376.
Steg, L. 2018. Limiting climate change requires research on climate
action. Nature Climate Change 8: 759–761.
Strauss, A., and J. Corbin. 1994. Grounded theory methodology: An
overview. In Handbook of qualitative research, ed. N.K. Denzin
and Y.S. Lincoln. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tajuddin, N., and M. Da˛browski. 2021. Enabling Socio-Ecological
Resilience in the Global South: Insights from Chennai, India.
Sustainability 13: 10522.
Tenzin, G., and K. Natsuda. 2016. Social capital, household income,
and community development in Bhutan: A case study of a dairy
cooperative. Development in Practice 26 (4): 467–480.
Thompson, D., and S. Lopez Barrera. 2019. Community resilience
and collective agency under signiﬁcant changes in the natural
and built environment: A community capitals framework
approach. Local Environment 24: 1156–1177.
Tilt, B., and D. Gerkey. 2016. Dams and population displacement on
China’s Upper Mekong River: Implications for social capital and
social-ecological resilience. Global Environmental Change 36:
153–162.
Trochim, W.M. 1989. Outcome pattern matching and program theory.
Evaluation and Program Planning 12: 355–366.
Uekusa, S., and S. Matthewman. 2016. Vulnerable and resilient?
Immigrants and refugees in the 2010–2011 Canterbury and
Tohoku disasters. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion 22: 355–361.
Umamaheswari, T., G. Sugumar, P. Krishnan, P.S. Ananthan, A.
Anand, J.J.J. Jeevamani, R.S. Mahendra, J.A. Infantina. 2021.
Vulnerability assessment of coastal ﬁshing communities for
building resilience and adaptation: Evidences from Tamil Nadu,
India. Environmental Science & Policy 123: 114–130.
Urquiza, A., C. Amigo, M. Billi, R. Calvo, L. Gallardo, C.I. Neira,
and M. Rojas. 2021. An integrated framework to streamline
resilience in the context of urban climate risk assessment.
Earth’s Future 9: e2020EF001508.
Vallance, S., and S. Carlton. 2015. First to respond, last to leave:
Communities’ roles and resilience across the ‘‘4Rs.’’ Interna-
tional Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 14: 27–36.
Vaneeckhaute, L.E., T. Vanwing, W. Jacquet, B. Abelshausen, and P.
Meurs. 2017. Community resilience 2.0: Toward a comprehen-
sive conception of community-level resilience. Community
Development 48: 735–751.
Walsh-Dilley, M., W. Wolford, and J. Mcccarthy. 2016. Rights for
resilience: Food sovereignty, power and resilience in develop-
ment practice. Ecology and Society 21: 11.
Webb, L., N. Cox, H. Cumbers, S. Martikke, E. Gedzielewski, and M.
Duale. 2016. Personal resilience and identity capital among
young people leaving care: Enhancing identity formation and life
123
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
1386
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
chances through involvement in volunteering and social action.
Journal of Youth Studies 20: 889–903.
Wickes, R., C. Britt, and L. Broidy. 2017. The resilience of
neighborhood social processes: A case study of the 2011
Brisbane ﬂood. Social Science Research 62: 96–119.
Wilshusen, P.R. 2009. Shades of social capital: Elite persistence and
the everyday politics of community forestry in southeastern
Mexico. Environment and Planning A 41 (2): 389–406.
Wilson, G.A. 2010. Multifunctional ‘‘quality’’ and rural community
resilience. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers
35: 364–381.
Wilson, R.S., A. Herziger, M. Hamilton, and J.S. Brooks. 2020. From
incremental to transformative adaptation in individual responses
to climate-exacerbated hazards. Nature Climate Change 10 (3):
200–208.
Woolcock, M. 1998. Social capital and economic development:
Toward a theoretical synthesis and policy framework. Theory
and Society 27: 151–208.
Zimmer, L. 2006. Qualitative meta-synethsis: A question of dialogu-
ing with texts. Journal of Advanced Nursing 53: 311–318.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
Esther Carmen (&) is a post-doctoral researcher at the University of
York with research interests in Social, political and cultural aspects of
climate change and community resilience.
Address: Department of Environment and Geography, University of
York, Heslington, York YO10 5NG, UK.
e-mail: esther.carmen78@yahoo.co.uk; esther.carmen@york.ac.uk
Ioan Fazey is Professor of Social Dimensions of Environment and
Change at the University of York. His research interests focus on how
to achieve societal transformations, enhance resilience and work with
novel knowledge production methods.
Address: Department of Environment and Geography, University of
York, Heslington, York YO10 5NG, UK.
e-mail: ioan.fazey@york.ac.uk
Helen Ross is Professor Emeritus in rural development at the
University of Queensland, Australia. Her research on diverse aspects
of
people-environment
relationships
includes
sustainable
rural
development and community resilience.
Address: School of Agriculture and Food Sciences, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.
e-mail: helen.ross@uq.edu.au
Melissa Bedinger is a post-doctoral researcher specialising in human
factors and sociotechnical systems methods with an interest in sus-
tainability, transport, urban systems, and human behaviour.
Address: School of Energy, Geoscience Infrastructure and Society,
Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh, UK.
e-mail: m.bedinger@hw.ac.uk
Fiona M. Smith is a lecturer in Human Geography and Environ-
mental Science with interests in community development and vol-
untary participation.
Address: Geography, School of Social Sciences, University of Dun-
dee, Perth Road, Dundee DD14HN, UK.
e-mail: f.m.smith@dundee.ac.uk
Katrin Prager is a lecturer in Geography and Environment with
interests in collaborative landscape management and governance.
Address: School of Geosciences, University of Aberdeen, St Mary’s,
Elphinstone Road, Aberdeen AB24 3UF, UK.
e-mail: katrin.prager@abdn.ac.uk
Kerri McClymont is a doctoral candidate at Heriot-Watt University
with research interests in ﬂood resilience, systems thinking and the
capability approach.
Address: School of Energy, Geoscience Infrastructure and Society,
Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh, UK.
e-mail: km39@hw.ac.uk
David Morrison is a doctoral candidate at Heriot Watt University
with research interests in ﬂood resilience and agent-based modelling.
Address: School of Energy, Geoscience Infrastructure and Society,
Heriot Watt University, Edinburgh, UK.
e-mail: dh48@hw.ac.uk
 The Author(s) 2022
www.kva.se/en
123
Ambio 2022, 51:1371–1387
1387
