CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH (J SEMENZA, SECTION EDITOR)
Climate Change: From Science to Practice
Nicola Wheeler1 & Nick Watts1
Published online: 5 March 2018
# The Author(s) 2018. This article is an open access publication
Abstract
Purpose of Review Climate change poses a significant threat to human health. Understanding how climate science can be
translated into public health practice is an essential first step in enabling robust adaptation and improving resiliency to climate
change.
Recent Findings Recent research highlights the importance of iterative approaches to public health adaptation to climate change,
enabling uncertainties of health impacts and barriers to adaptation to be accounted for. There are still significant barriers to
adaptation, which are context-specific and thus present unique challenges to public health practice. The implementation of
flexible adaptation approaches, using frameworks targeted for public health, is key to ensuring robust adaptation to climate
change in public health practice.
Summary The BRACE framework provides an excellent approach for health adaptation to climate change. Combining this with
the insights provided and by the adaptation pathways approach allows for more deliberate accounting of long-term uncertainties.
The mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into public health practice and planning is important in facilitating this approach
and overcoming the significant barriers to effective adaptation. Yet, the immediate and future limits to adaptation provide clear
justification for urgent and accelerated efforts to mitigate climate change.
Keywords Public health . Climate change . Barriers . BRACE . Adaptation pathways
Introduction
That anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases
(GHGs) are altering the Earth’s climate is unequivocal.
Human activities have now pushed atmospheric concentra-
tions of carbon dioxide above 400 ppm—a level not
exceeded for the last 400,000 years of Earth’s history [1].
The result is a global average increase in Earth’s tempera-
ture of over 0.85 °C since 1880 [2]. Mediated through
climatic systems, these rising temperatures result in stron-
ger and more frequent extremes of weather, changes to
precipitation patterns and arable land, greater ice melt,
and disruptions to many other environmental processes.
Humans are dependent upon the natural environment for
clean air, safe drinking water, nutritious food, and shelter,
with rapid changes having serious consequences for their
health and wellbeing. Indeed, climate change threatens the
last 50 years of gains made in public health [3•, 4].
Climate change affects human health through three path-
ways. The direct health impacts of climate change are associ-
ated with the changing frequency and severity of extreme
weather events, such as heat, drought, and heavy rain.
Secondly, climate change’s effects can be mediated through
natural systems, for instance, by altering the burden and pat-
tern of distribution of vector-, water-, and food-borne diseases.
Finally, climate change may impact health indirectly, via so-
cial institutions, resulting in undernutrition (for example,
when climatic factors interact with global food markets), men-
tal ill-health, and even violence and conflict [3•]. Whilst it is
widely recognised that climate change affects human health,
attributing morbidity and mortality to climate change is chal-
lenging, for the attribution of individual weather events to
climate change itself is difficult, even without accounting for
the associated human health consequences and mediation
through ecosystems and human institutions. Nonetheless, the
This article is part of the Topical Collection on Climate Change and
Health
* Nicola Wheeler
nicola.wheeler@ucl.ac.uk
1
University College London, Gower St, Bloomsbury, London WC1E
6BT, UK
Current Environmental Health Reports (2018) 5:170–178
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-018-0187-y
ability to attribute events to climate change is improving, and
consequently, there is growing evidence that climate change is
already impacting human health. For instance, the European
heatwave of 2003 killed over 70,000 people, with France be-
ing particularly badly affected; climate change exacerbated
the severity of this heatwave and is estimated to have in-
creased the risk of heat-related mortality in Paris by 70% [5,
6]. Such research on the health impacts of climate change is
vital to effectively addressing climate change; in particular,
understanding health impacts is important in enabling the pub-
lic health sector to adapt to climate change and reduce associ-
ated health burdens. Adapting to climate change is an im-
mense challenge for public health practice, owing to the un-
predictability of its impacts on health; the rapidity of changes
in the climate system relative to historical stability; and that it
simultaneously impacts multiple risk factors and determinants
of health, thus correlating previously uncorrelated risks.
Understanding how climate science can be translated into
public health practice is therefore an essential first step in
enabling robust adaptation to climate change.
Adaptation is “the process of adjustment to actual or ex-
pected climate and its effects”. In human systems, adaptation
is intended to reduce or avoid risks [7]. Health adaptation to
climate change can be categorised into three forms. Incidental
adaptation is associated with actions taken within the health
sector that aid climate change adaptation, but are not delivered
for this express purpose. Linear adaptation activities are re-
sponses to specific climate threats through the implementation
of adaptive practices that enable health systems to respond to
identified risks. Finally, building resilience is about system-
wide changes that improve the ability of a system and society
to cope with climate change.
This paper reviews the recent literature on health adap-
tation, considering the ways in which public health practice
can best make use of climate science to inform robust ad-
aptation. How the essential services of public health relate
and can be transferred to climate change adaptation will
then be discussed. Barriers to the public health sector
adapting to climate change will subsequently be outlined
and means of overcoming these barriers discussed through
some key frameworks on public health adaptation to cli-
mate change and mainstreaming climate change into public
health practice. Finally, the technological, financial, and
physiological limits to adaptation will be highlighted and
the implications they have on an effective response to cli-
mate change. It will be argued that combining an ‘adapta-
tion pathways approach’ with the BRACE framework
(Building Resilience Against Climate Effects) is important
in order to integrate long-term uncertainties into short-term
adaptation practices. Secondly, that mainstreaming climate
change into existing public health practice is the most ef-
fective way for public health practice to adapt to climate
change and overcome some barriers to adaptation. Finally,
this review will conclude with a brief note on the limits to
adaptation—noting the importance of a robust, comple-
mentary mitigation strategy in order to prevent the most
severe health impacts of climate change.
Applicability of Essential Public Health
Services to Climate Change
Given the degree of committed warming locked-in by his-
toric GHG emissions, some degree of adaptation to cli-
mate change is essential [8]. Whilst climate change is a
global phenomenon, its effects are felt locally, and hence,
effective health adaptation strategies are largely context-
specific, with the extent and nature of adaptation required
of health systems dependent upon the current health status
of a given population. Indeed, this is often one of the
most important factors in determining the health impacts
of, and responses to, climate change [9]. Whilst socioeco-
nomic and geographical factors are clearly important as
well, much of health adaptation planning has thus-far fo-
cused on strengthening existing health system functions
[10, 11, 12•]. In delivering this, public health practice
may be ideally placed, with its heavy reliance on data
and evidence to inform actions; its familiarity with the
need to engage multiple sectors and processes within
and beyond the formal healthcare system; and its pre-
paredness for responding to unexpected and non-linear
events. Indeed, many of the health impacts of climate
change represent challenges and threats the health system
is already facing in one way or another. To the extent that
health adaptation to climate change can be aligned with
efforts to strengthen health systems more generally, such
interventions represent “no-regrets” options, to be targeted
and maximised [13].
Despite these synergies, climate change demands two
primary responses from public health practice: the im-
provement and strengthening of existing core functions to
tackle amplified, but previously experienced, risks; and the
ability to respond to new and unseen health threats (at least
in that given geography), demanding novel management
strategies [12•, 14, 15].
Existing classifications of public health services—such
as the distinction of primary, secondary, and tertiary pre-
vention—can be helpfully applied to climate change adap-
tation, and can in turn, be used as guidelines for integrating
adaptation into public health practice. Primary prevention
is associated with the prevention of disease onset.
Secondary prevention works to reduce the body-wide im-
pacts diseases can have, through treatment to prevent fur-
ther and more severe risks in future. Tertiary prevention
aims to reduce the social and physical impacts of diseases
and their symptoms, to best ensure people can maintain a
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
171
good quality of life. These three principles directly relate to
climate change responses. Primary prevention involves re-
ducing population exposures to climate change; secondary
prevention is concerned with the avoidance of adverse
health outcomes given inevitable exposure; and tertiary
prevention decreases long-term, and more systemic health
impacts of climate change [8]. In much the same way as
prevention can be split into three tiers, so too can the ef-
fects of climate change on health be categorised as primary,
secondary, and tertiary impacts [16]. These are comple-
mentary to the three prevention categories outlined above
and can be used to help inform effective adaptation.
Beyond prevention, public health activities can be
broadly categorised into three functions: assessment
(collecting, analysing and disseminating data), policy de-
velopment (for policies within and relevant to the health
sector), and assurance (connecting people with services).
All of these can be applied to health adaptation to climate
change [12•]. Table 1 summarises ten essential public
health services (as described by the US Department of
Health and Human Services) within these three categories,
and provides examples of how these might be translated
for the purposes of climate change adaptation [12•, 17].
Whilst these principles provide an excellent basis to
build upon, health adaptation must carry out these func-
tions with relative uncertainty about the future [12•].
Public health already manages the projection of future
health risks, such as disease outbreaks; however, these
risks occur within relatively predictable and often previ-
ously observed boundaries. This added uncertainty
necessitates the need for public health practitioners to en-
gage with new expertise—such as climatologists—to bet-
ter understand the future risks and to inform planned
responses.
Building upon the ten essential public health services
presented above (and their translation to climate change
adaptation), it is important to consider what principles
characterise an effective approach. Frumkin, Hess, and
Luber argue that there are seven key characteristics of
the ideal public health response to climate change [12•].
Firstly, and perhaps most demandingly, it must have its
foundations in a robust public health system, able to de-
liver core health services across its whole population.
Secondly, any response requires clear understanding of
the nature of the environmental hazards, to ensure they
are robust and effectively and efficiently reduce health
risks associated with climate change. Thirdly, “all-hazard
preparedness” should be prioritised, ensuring a system is
able to cope with all climate hazards. Fourthly, health
systems should emphasise resilience, stressing the need
for building strong communities and systems with the
ability to cope with unpredictable stressors. Fifthly, any
potential co-benefits in addressing climate change should
be maximised; for example, ecosystem-based adaptation
can have mental health benefits in exposing people to
ecosystem services. Sixthly, strong and cross-sectoral
partnerships are essential, both for climate data provision
and interpretation for the health sector, but also because
climate change will impact a range of sectors and risk
factors, all of which must respond in order safeguard
Table 1
Essential public health services and their practical translation into climate change adaptation within public health practice
Public health service
Translation to climate change adaptation
1. Monitor health status to identify community health problems
Surveillance for environmental risks, vulnerability and disease
2. Diagnose and investigate health problems and health hazards
in the community
Vulnerability assessments and health impact assessments
3. Inform, educate and empower people about health issues
Public health communication about climate change
4. Mobilise community partnerships to identify and solve health
problems
Interdisciplinary and inter-sectoral collaboration among stakeholders
5. Develop policies and plans that support individual and community
health efforts
Climate-related event preparedness planning and mitigation policies
maximising health co-benefits
6. Enforce laws and regulations that protect health and ensure safety
Legislation to require enhanced building code and regulations
to respond to extreme weather events
7. Link people to needed personal health services
Personalised early-warning systems for patients with climate-sensitive
health problems
8. Ensure presence of a competent public health and personal
healthcare workforce
Training of health professionals about climate change and its health
impacts
9. Evaluate effectiveness, accessibility and quality of personal and
population-based health services
Evaluate preparedness plans, health communications strategies
and other initiatives
10. Conduct research to attain new insights and innovative solutions
to health problems
Research to provide data-based support for public health action
on climate change
(Sources: Adapted from Frumkin et al. 2015 [12•], by permission of Oxford University Press, USA; and adapted from Frumkin et al. 2008 [17])
172
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
public health. Lastly, adaptive management, which focus-
es on institutional learning and constant evaluation,
should be promoted [12•].
Barriers to Public Health Practice Adapting
to Climate Change
Few health systems have the financial or organisational capac-
ity to undertake whole-sale adaptation, incorporating all of the
interventions described above [12•]. Indeed, health systems in
low- and middle-income countries are often overwhelmed
with the day-to-day delivery of basic health services. These
interact with a range of other challenges to present significant
barriers to effective health adaptation. Broadly defined in this
context, barriers are factors that “make it harder to plan and
implement adaptation actions or that restrict options” avail-
able [18]. Defining barriers to adaptation is complex, as many
are highly context-specific and dependent upon the sectors,
geographies, and time scales involved [19]. That being said,
barriers generally fall within four broad categories: economic,
informational, institutional or political, and social [18–21].
Economic barriers are those associated with limited or absent
financial resources to invest in the research and interventions
required for adaptation. Whilst financial constraints are the
most commonly referenced barrier to adaptation, and that
which may prevent the initiation of an adaptation intervention,
they are clearly not the only important barrier. Adequate
resourcing is a necessary, but insufficient condition for effec-
tive adaptation. Informational barriers make long-term plan-
ning difficult, with climate modelling and interpretation of the
corresponding health outcomes, often resource intensive and
rarely available in a timely manner or at the spatial resolution
required. Institutional and political barriers limit organisa-
tions’ and governments’ abilities to understand and respond
to system-wide changes, with change management and man-
agement under significant uncertainty often particularly chal-
lenging. Finally, these issues are often compounded by highly
complex social barriers, arising as a result of specific values
and cultures both within organisations and affected
populations.
Financial, informational, institutional, and social barriers
can be identified in many of the adaptation responses to cli-
mate change. These often interact with other societal chal-
lenges in low- and middle-income countries, ranging from
high levels of poverty and hence of baseline vulnerability,
weak social institutions, and the perception of more pressing
issues to be managed. However, three climate change-specific
barriers are repeatedly referenced in the literature [19].
Firstly, reconciling the relatively long-term and distant im-
pacts of climate change (perceived or otherwise) with the
short-term dynamics of politics and decision-making is often
highly problematic. Across the world, demographic factors
and technological changes are placing health systems under
extraordinary pressure, consuming resources, and demanding
the attention of policymakers at the expense of long-term ad-
aptation planning, which is more easily put-off. Secondly, a
reliance on climate models to identify and inform problems
and solutions presents novel challenges to public health prac-
tice, introducing new and complex concepts to a profession
that is largely inexperienced and untrained in climate change.
Thirdly, and perhaps least-surprisingly, large uncertainties sur-
rounding the health impacts of climate change (and indeed,
what degree of climate change to account for) render tradition-
al, often linear, planning techniques less effective [19].
Overcoming Barriers to Adaptation in Public
Health Practice
Whilst a number of the barriers faced by countries and com-
munities may be planned for and successfully avoided ahead
of time, this is not always the case. Given the highly context-
specific nature of many of these barriers, they may not always
be identifiable a priori, but instead reveal themselves during
the implementation phase of an intervention (after initial fi-
nancial resourcing barriers may have been overcome) [20].
The often complex and uncertain nature of the links between
climate change and public health mean that linear approaches
to adaptation may be more likely to be insufficient.
Here, a flexible approach to adaptation management is
needed, with more iterative models that not only account for
unforeseen problems, but embrace them. Implementing itera-
tive models and reforming practices can be difficult. This is
seen regularly in rapidly emerging economies, where multiple
sectors are changing simultaneously. Often, capacity con-
straints result in institutions simply altering their structure
and appearance rather than their actions and functions,
resulting in “capability traps” which cause systems to stagnate
or deteriorate. To avoid these traps, Andrews et al. propose a
Problem-Driven Iterative Adaptation (PDIA) approach to
complex social interventions. PDIA is built upon four princi-
ples: it focuses on solving locally selected and defined prob-
lems; it encourages deviation and experimentation from
authorised decision-making; it embeds this experimentation
into feedback loops to facilitate quick learning; and it deliber-
ately engages a wide range of stakeholders to promote viable,
legitimate, relevant, and supportable reforms [22]. Such
models for iterative learning are well-established in the
broader development literature, simply requiring application
to public health adaptation to climate change.
PDIA and concepts of adaptive management—focusing on
continued learning, extensive stakeholder input, and a
Bayesian approach to evidence and decision-making—are
concepts familiar to much of public health practice [14, 15].
For adaptive management to be effective, it must regularly
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
173
assess management objectives; fully understand the needs of
the system adaptation is occurring within; implement a range
of management decisions; monitor and evaluate their out-
comes; be willing to adapt its approach based on this evalua-
tion, incorporating learning into future actions; and offer a
collaborative structure for stakeholder participation and learn-
ing [23]. Undertaking such an approach in the context of cli-
mate change requires specific tools, notably vulnerability as-
sessments (to identify the most at-risk populations), climate
modelling (to project health impacts), and decision-support
mechanisms (to avoid maladaptation).
Whilst the principles of PDIA and adaptive management
may be familiar to public health practice, there is still some
challenge in applying them to a novel issue such as health
adaptation to climate change [24•]. Indeed, for most public
health practitioners, translating climate science into public
health practice requires additional capacity and planning
[25]. Knowledge of climate change is incomplete in public
health practice, and there is generally inadequate staffing
and training to improve this understanding, leaving public
health systems feeling unprepared and unable to cope. Thus,
frameworks specifically outlining how public health systems
should adapt to climate change are invaluable. Here, the five
steps of the BRACE Framework (“building resilience against
climate effects”)—developed by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC)—provide a widely cited and
implemented example of an iterative approach:
1.
Anticipating climate impacts and assessing vulnerabilities
2.
Projecting the disease burden
3.
Assessing public health interventions
4.
Developing and implementing a climate and health adap-
tation plan
5.
Evaluating impacts and improving the quality of activities
The process encourages public health systems to use the best
available climate science to project health impacts and prioritise
adaptation interventions [26]. By reinforcing a well-established
commitment among health practitioners of evidence-based
practice, the BRACE framework also increases engagement
within the sector. Moreover, the framework recognises that
complex systems (such as climatic and social systems) may
not be fully understandable, interventions may have unintended
outcomes, and management strategies need to be updated reg-
ularly through iterative, learning-based approaches [24•].
Step one of the BRACE framework is aimed at improving
understanding of future climate change, probable health ef-
fects, and populations and systems which are most vulnerable;
this is obtained through climate data and vulnerability assess-
ments to understand exposures and sensitivities. The second
step models the burden of a range of climate-sensitive diseases
and is designed to be updated regularly with new information
fed into adaptive management processes. Step three requires
assessing and identifying the most appropriate adaptation op-
tions, both in terms of identifying adaptation responses to
specific health risks, and by developing strategies to improve
baseline community resilience. The fourth step incorporates
the first three steps of the framework to develop a comprehen-
sive health and adaptation plan; this should complement any
existing climate change plans and incorporate best practices.
The final stage encompasses the iterative element of the
framework, evaluating interventions and identifying barriers
to effective adaptation, feeding back into the relevant stage
[24•]. The BRACE framework provides a powerful means
of supporting health system adaptation to climate change
and is already being trialled in 16 states and two cities in the
USA. For instance, MN has developed an Extreme Heat
Toolkit; San Francisco is developing indicators to assess com-
munity resilience to climate change; ME is implementing im-
proved monitoring of vector-borne diseases; and MI has in-
creased state and local level capacity to undertake health im-
pact assessments that incorporate climate change [25].
Complementing the BRACE framework, an ‘adaptation
pathways approach’ has been designed to explicitly function
over longer timescales and scenarios, incorporating the long-
term evolution of climate change into short-term adaptation
decisions, and so promoting robust decision-making under
uncertainty (Fig. 1, right panel) [28]. An adaptation pathways
approach establishes a strategic vision for the future and plans
for a wide variety of possible climatic and social scenarios
over an extended time horizon, establishing adaptation re-
sponses to each of these combinations at successive moments
in the future. During this process, decision points are identi-
fied, at which point choices are made regarding the required
adaptation under a certain climate outcome.
For example, the Environment Agency in England has
adopted an adaptation pathways approach in planning the de-
fence of London and the Thames Estuary against sea level
rise. Future climate change scenarios and population projec-
tions were modelled, and the extent of sea level rise and pop-
ulations exposed associated with each scenario were estimat-
ed. Adaptation plans and interventions were then developed
for the full range of future climatic and social scenarios, with
various decision trigger-points identified (for example, adap-
tation action to be taken with 0.5 m of sea level rise with a
more exposed population), ensuring that the right decisions
were made at the right time and financial resource was
invested most effectively [29]. Ultimately, an adaptation path-
ways approach provides a route map reaching a common,
ideal end point (in this case, in-tact flood defences for
London). An adaptation pathways approach also helps to
avoid maladaptive choices, as it demands regular evaluation
and establishes strategic decision points designed to trigger
the implementation of the most effective adaptation action
given a specific scenario. However, it also gives a suite of
options leading to this end point (see Fig. 1). This enables
174
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
flexibility in short-term decisions, allowing appropriate adap-
tation actions to be adopted according to how climate change
evolves over time. Hence, robust, flexible and no-regret adap-
tation actions are promoted from the start [28].
Here, it is proposed that these two models might function
best together, with the BRACE framework conceptualised as
an individual decision point of each adaptation pathways ap-
proach, encouraging long-term health adaptation planning,
through a flexible pathways approach designed specifically
for climate change adaptation within public health practice
(Fig. 1) [24, 27•].
Mainstreaming Climate Change Into Public
Health Practice
Mainstreaming climate change adaptation as a core function
of public health planning provides an effective method for
overcoming many of the preliminary barriers described above
[30]. Whilst any such mainstreaming will present significant
challenges, the cost-savings and social benefits that result
should far exceed the upfront costs. Funding to improve the
ability of existing public health services to adapt to climate
change may be found in a variety of public and private
sources. In the context of low- and middle-income countries,
five funding mechanisms for climate change adaptation are
notable: the World Bank’s Pilot Program for Climate
Resilience, the European Commission’s Global Climate
Change Alliance of the European Union, the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change’s (UNFCCC)
Adaptation Fund, the UNFCCC’s Global Environmental
Fund, and the UNFCCC’s Green Climate Fund [13, 31]. In
the context of declining international funding for global public
health, such resources may be vital in supporting core health
system strengthening and improving public health adaptation
to climate change.
National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs) are
climate change adaptation plans undertaken by Least
Developed Countries under the UNFCCC, providing vital in-
formation on vulnerability and adaptation challenges. The
NAPAs are thus a key source of information in determining
the distribution of funding, which is allocated principally
based on assessed vulnerability. However, as the quality of
NAPAs is variable and the extent to which NAPAs incorporate
health is often limited, public health outcomes are not neces-
sarily fully accounted for when funding decisions are made;
for instance, only one in four NAPAs include a comprehensive
health vulnerability assessment, despite this being a key stip-
ulation under the UNFCCC [13, 32]. National Adaptation
Plans (NAPs) build upon NAPAs to identify priority actions
to respond to urgent adaptation requirements. The NAP pro-
cess aims to support medium- and long-term adaptation plan-
ning for all countries, and acts as a vital means of identifying
funding needs and adaptation priorities [33]. Whilst historical
engagement from the health sector in the development of the
Fig. 1 Adaptation pathways approach incorporating the BRACE
framework at each decision point along the pathways to adaptation to
the health impacts of climate change. The circular points represent the
decisions points where the next stages of adaptation are implemented.
The black arrows show different adaptation options that promote robust
adaptation and red arrows represent maladaptive choices. The end point
is successful adaptation to the health impacts of climate change, which
can be achieved by a range of pathways and is informed by the
implementation of the BRACE framework at each decision point [24•,
27•]. (Sources: Adapted from Marinucci et al. [24•]; and Reprinted from
Wise et al. [27•], with permission from Elsevier)
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
175
NAPs has been minimal, the World Health Organization
(WHO) is increasingly successful in supporting countries’
(most especially low- and middle-income countries) to devel-
op robust Health National Adaptation Plans (HNAPs).
Improved public health participation in these processes should
work to increase their access to adaptation funding (which has
so far been concerningly low, compared with other sectors)
and so contribute to mainstreaming adaptation throughout the
health sector [34].
Such engagement from the health sector should be met
with increased recognition from the main climate change
funding bodies, which do not currently focus on health nor
stipulate proportions of funding for health [13]. Commitments
to these funding mechanisms have increased in recent years;
for example, the Green Climate Fund is aiming to mobilise
USD 100 billion by 2050 and already has USD 10.3 billion at
its disposal [35, 36]. Such progress presents huge opportuni-
ties for public health practice to obtain funding for climate
change adaptation and to mainstream such actions into
existing health practices.
These high level considerations clearly form vital compo-
nents to mainstreaming climate change adaptation into public
health practice, and indeed provide the enabling mechanisms
to adapt, but ultimately, it is on-the-ground actions that show
the true extent to which mainstreaming is effective and thus
help build the evidence base of why such plans and funding
are needed. One area where significant progress has been
made in mainstreaming climate change adaptation into public
health practice is the provision of effective forecasting of
health-relevant weather and climate risks; this is a key element
of the BRACE framework and hence integral to health adap-
tation. Such health-tailored climate services are not only being
increasingly recognised for their importance, but they are also
being deployed evermore through partnerships between me-
teorological and health organisations. These climate services
are helping public health practitioners to improve the ability of
health services to detect, monitor, predict, and manage health
risks associated with climatic changes. There are important
tangible benefits to using these services, including reduced
deaths and numbers affected by climate and weather-related
events; more efficient and effective use of resources; and de-
creased strain on health delivery systems, via better planning
and increased awareness and preparedness of climate and
weather health risks. While potentially hugely beneficial, the
deployment of climate services for public health practice is
complex and context-specific. Some key considerations,
which should help to promote the most effective use of climate
services in public health practice, include: creating an en-
abling environment between health and meteorological ser-
vices; building the capacity of these services; researching
how climate services are most effective for public health in a
given context; developing appropriately tailored climate ser-
vices; applying these services into real public health practice;
and finally evaluating the effectiveness of the climate services
used to promote learning and improvement [26].
Limits to Adaptation
There is an important distinction between barriers to adapta-
tion and limits to adaptation. In general, barriers are possible
to overcome, whereas limits are absolute and unsurmountable
[20]. Having discussed the barriers to public health adaptation
to climate change, it is important to briefly acknowledge the
limits to adaptation. Largely, projections of the health burden
of climate change are based on assumptions of a global aver-
age 2 °C temperature rise; yet it is increasingly unlikely that
this target will be achieved [3•]. Therefore, understanding the
technological, financial, and physiological limits of health ad-
aptation are important in revealing the degree of climate
change mitigation required. For example, these may take the
form of technological limits to the size and strength of future
sea walls and flood defences; or to the financial limits associ-
ated with the cost of providing safe drinking water in water-
stressed regions of the world. A range of limits to human
physiology exist as well. Core body temperatures reach fatal
levels under sustained periods of wet-bulb temperatures over
35 °C [37]. By 2071, there is estimated to be 151,500 heat-
related deaths in Europe every year, representing a 5400%
increase from the average of 2700 annual deaths between
1981 and 2010, and equating to 99% of total future weather-
related deaths in Europe [38]. Furthermore, already 30% of
the world’s population is annually exposed to heat events that
could result in deaths among vulnerable populations; this is
expected to increase to 48% under a low emissions scenario,
and 74% under a high emissions scenario [39].
These, and many other significant limits to adaptation pro-
vide clear justification for urgent and accelerated reductions in
GHG emissions, with adaptation alone unable to protect pub-
lic health from climate change.
Conclusion
This paper has provided an overview of the ways in which
climate change and climate science might best be integrated
into existing public health practice, to strengthen and inform
health adaptation. Climate change presents a significant chal-
lenge for the health sector and public health practice.
However, the skills needed to adapt are already deployed in
public health—they just need to be translated to climate
change adaptation. Here, a modified version of the BRACE
framework has been proposed to help promote more effective
adaptation. By incorporating an adaptation pathways ap-
proach into the BRACE framework, this could help account
for the long-term uncertainties of climate change and
176
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
overcome some of the barriers to climate change.
Mainstreaming climate change into public health practice
should also streamline adaptation and help to overcome some
of the barriers to adaptation planning and implementation get-
ting underway; the benefits of this is already demonstrated by
the increasing deployment of climate services in public health
practice. However, there are clear limits to adaptation.
Mitigation of climate change is therefore absolutely essential,
for adaptation alone will not protect human health against all
of the impacts of climate change.
Compliance with Ethical Standards
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
Human and Animal Rights and Informed Consent
This article does not
contain any studies with human or animal subjects performed by any of
the authors.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appro-
priate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
References
Papers of particular interest, published recently, have been
highlighted as:
• Of importance
1.
Satellite data confirm annual carbon dioxide minimum above
400 ppm [press release]. 2017. https://climate.nasa.gov/news/
2535/satellite-data-confirm-annual-carbon-dioxide-
minimumabove-400-ppm/.
2.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Climate Change
2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. Pachauri and L.A.
Meyer (eds.)]. Geneva, Switzerland: IPCC; 2014.
3.• Smith KR, Woodward A, Campbell-Lendrum D, Chadee DD,
Honda Y, Liu Q, et al. Human health: impacts, adaptation, and
co-benefits. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ, Mach KJ,
Mastrandrea MD, Bilir TE, et al., editors. Climate change 2014:
Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability part a: global and sectoral
aspects contribution of working group II to the fifth assessment
report of the intergovernmental panel of climate change.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2014. p. 709–54. This
paper provides a thorough overview of the latest undrstanding
of health and climate change.
4.
Watts N, Adger WN, Agnolucci P, Blackstock J, Byass P, Cai W,
et al. Health and climate change: policy responses to protect public
health. Lancet. 2015;386(10006):1861–914. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0140-6736(15)60854-6.
5.
Robine J-M, Cheung SLK, le Roy S, van Oyen H, Griffiths C,
Michel JP, et al. Death toll exceeded 70,000 in Europe during the
summer of 2003. C R Biol. 2008;331(2):171–8. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.crvi.2007.12.001.
6.
Mitchell D, Heaviside C, Vardoulakis S, Huntingford C, Masato G,
Guillod BP, et al. Attributing human mortality during extreme heat
waves to anthropogenic climate change. Environ Res Lett.
2016;11(7):074006. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/7/
074006.
7.
Field CB, et al. Technical summary. Cambridge; 2014. https://
www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg2/WGIIAR5-TS_
FINAL.pdf.
8.
Ebi KL, Semenza JC. Community-based adaptation to the health
impacts of climate change. Am J Prev Med. 2008;35(5):501–7.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2008.08.018.
9.
Pandy K. Costs of adapting to climate change for human health in
developing countries. Discussion paper no. 11. The International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank:
Washington, DC; 2010. https://doi.org/10.1596/27750.
10.
Woodward A, Lindsay G, Singh S. Adapting to climate change to
sustain health. WIREs Clim Change. 2011;2(2):271–82. https://doi.
org/10.1002/wcc.103.
11.
Burton I. Climate change and the adaptation deficit. In: ELF
S, Burton I, editors. The Earthscan reader on adaptation to
climate change (Earthscane reader Serucues). Oxford:
Earthscan; 2009.
12.• Frumkin H, Hess J, Luber G. Public health policies and actions. In:
Levy BS, Patz JA, editors. Climate change and public health. New
York: Oxford University Press; 2015. This book offers vital in-
sights on the practicalities of how public health practice can
adapt to climate change, in particular how existing public
health framework can be translated into climate change
adaptation.
13.
Bowen KJ, Friel S. Climate change adaptation: where does global
health fit in the agenda? Glob Health. 2012;8(1):10. https://doi.org/
10.1186/1744-8603-8-10.
14.
Hess JJ, McDowell JZ, Luber G. Integrating Climate Change ad-
aptation into public health practice: using adaptive management to
increase adaptive capacity and build resilience. Environ Health
Perspect. 2012;120(2):171–9.
15.
Ebi K. Climate change and health risks: assessing and responding to
them through ‘adaptive management’. Health Aff. 2011;30(5):924–
30. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0071.
16.
Butler CD, Harley D. Primary, secondary and tertiary effects
of eco-climatic change: the medical response. Postgrad Med
J. 2010;86(1014):230–4. https://doi.org/10.1136/pgmj.2009.
082727.
17.
Frumkin H, Hess J, Luber G, Malilay J, McGeehin M. Climate
change: the public health response. Am J Public Health.
2008;98(3):435–45. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.119362.
18.
Klein RJT, et al. Adaptation opportunities, constraints, and limits.
Cambridge; 2014. https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/
wg2/WGIIAR5-Chap16_FINAL.pdf.
19.
Biesbroek GR, Klostermann JEM, Termeer CJAM, Kabat P. On the
nature of barriers to climate change adaptation. Reg Environ Chang.
2013;13(5):1119–29. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-013-0421-y.
20.
Moser SC, Ekstrom JA. A framework to diagnose barriers to cli-
mate change adaptation. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2010;107(51):22026–
31. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1007887107.
21.
Adger WN, Dessai S, Goulden M, Hulme M, Lorenzoni I, Nelson
DR, et al. Are there social limits to adaptation to climate change?
Clim Chang. 2009;93(3-4):335–54. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-008-9520-z.
22.
Andrews M, Pritchett L, Woolcock M. Escaping capability traps
through Problem-Driven Iterative Adaptation (PDIA). 2012.
https://www.cgdev.org/publication/escaping-capability-traps-
through-problem-driven-iterativeadaptation-pdia-working-paper.
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
177
23.
National Research Council. Adaptive Management for Water
Resources Project Planning. Washington DC; 2004. https://www.
nap.edu/catalog/10972/adaptive-management-for-water-resources-
project-planning.
24.• Marinucci GD, et al. Building resilience against climate ef-
fects—a novel framework to facilitate climate readiness in
public health agencies. Int J Environ Res Public Health.
2014;11:6433–58. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
24991665. This paper describes and explains the BRACE
framework.
25.
American Public Health Association. Adaptation in action: grantee
success stories from CDC’s climate and health program. 2015.
26.
World Meteorological Organization and World Health
Organization. Climate services for health: improving public health
decision-making in a new climate. Geneva; 2016 https://public.
wmo.int/en/media/news/climate-services-health.
27.• Wise RM, et al. Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as
part of pathways of change and response. Glob Environ Chang.
2014;28:325–36. This paper gives a useful overview of the ad-
aptation pathways approach and expands it beyond its previ-
ous application.
28.
Haasnoot M, Kwakkel JH, Walker WE, ter Maat J. Dynamic adap-
tive policy pathways: a method for crafting robust decisions for a
deeply uncertain world. Glob Environ Chang. 2013;23(2):485–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.12.006.
29.
Environment Agency. TE2100 plan: managing flood risk through
London and the Thames estuary. 2012. https://www.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/322061/
LIT7540_43858f.pdf.
30.
Eisenack K, Moser SC, Hoffmann E, Klein RJT, Oberlack C,
Pechan A, et al. Explaining and overcoming barriers to climate
change adaptation. Nat Clim Chang. 2014;4(10):867–72. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2350.
31.
Klein RJT, Mohner A. The political dimension of vulnerability:
implications for the green climate fund. IDS Bull. 2011;42(3):15–
22. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1759-5436.2011.00218.x.
32.
Manga L, et al. Overview of health considerations within National
Adaptation Programmes of Action for climate change in least de-
veloped countries and small island states. World Health
Organization; 2010. http://www.who.int/phe/Health_in_NAPAs_
final.pdf.
33.
UNFCCC/Least-developed Countries Expert Group. The National
Adaptation Plan process. A brief overview. Geneva; 2012. https://
unfccc.int/files/adaptation/application/pdf/nap_overview.pdf.
34.
World Health Organization. WHO guidance to protect health
from climate change through health adaptation planning.
Switzerland; 2014. http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/
137383/1/9789241508001_eng.pdf.
35.
United Nations Framework Convention on Change. Green Climate
Fund 2017 [Available from: http://unfccc.int/bodies/green_
climate_fund_board/body/6974.php.
36.
Green Climate Fund. GCF in Numbers 2017 [Available from:
http://www.greenclimate.fund/home.
37.
Sherwood SC, Huber M. An adaptability limit to climate change
due to heat stress. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010;104(1):9552–5.
38.
Forzieri G, et al. Increasing risk over time of weather-related haz-
ards to the European population: a data-driven prognostic study.
Lancet Planet Health. 2017;1(5):200–8.
39.
Mora C, Dousset B, Caldwell IR, Powell FE, Geronimo RC,
Bielecki CR, et al. Global risk of deadly heat. Nat Clim Chang.
2017;7(7):501–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3322.
178
Curr Envir Health Rpt (2018) 5:170–178
