Effects of Heat Stress on Working Populations when 
Facing Climate Change
Karin LUNDGREN1*, Kalev KUKLANE1, Chuansi GAO1 and Ingvar HOLMÉR1
1	Thermal Environment Laboratory, Institution of Design Sciences, Ergonomics and Aerosol Technology, Faculty 
of Engineering, Lund University, Sweden
Received July 3, 2012 and accepted November 16, 2012
Abstract: It is accepted that the earth’s climate is changing in an accelerating pace, with already 
documented implications for human health and the environment. This literature review provides 
an overview of existing research findings about the effects of heat stress on the working population 
in relation to climate change. In the light of climate change adaptation, the purpose of the literature 
review was to explore recent and previous research into the impacts of heat stress on humans in 
an occupational setting. Heat stress in the workplace has been researched extensively in the past 
however, in the contemporary context of climate change, information is lacking on its extent and 
implications. The main factors found to exacerbate heat stress in the current and future workplace 
are the urban ‘heat island effect’, physical work, individual differences, and the developing country 
context where technological fixes are often not applicable. There is also a lack of information on the 
effects on vulnerable groups such as elderly people and pregnant women. As increasing tempera-
tures reduce work productivity, world economic productivity could be condensed, affecting devel-
oping countries in the tropical climate zone disproportionately. Future research is needed taking an 
interdisciplinary approach, including social, economic, environmental and technical aspects.
Key words: Heat stress, Occupational health, Climate change, Developing countries
Introduction
Climate change affects, either directly or indirectly, 
a wide range of sustainable development issues such as 
health, food security, employment, incomes and liveli-
hoods, gender equality, education, housing and poverty. 
Existing policies and social protection systems are often 
inadequate to enhance resilience and adaptive capacity or 
to mitigate negative climate change impacts on employ-
ment. Arguably, climate change is also one of the largest 
environmental and health equity challenges as wealthy 
energy consuming nations are most responsible for the 
emissions that cause climate change, yet poor countries are 
most at risk. Negative health effects from climate change 
stem from heat stress, communicable disease, air pollution, 
lack of food and water security, extreme weather events, 
malnutrition, stress, mental health issues, vulnerable shel-
ter and population migration among others. Examples of 
climate-related hazards in the workplace include increased 
ambient temperature, air pollution, ultraviolet radiation 
exposure, extreme weather and vector-borne diseases such 
as malaria and expanded habitats1–3, 31).
Outdoor workers are the most vulnerable and the main 
sectors that are directly affected by climate change include 
agriculture, industry, fisheries, forestry, small and medium 
sized enterprises, indoor workplaces (for example without 
air conditioning), semi-outdoor workshops and construc-
tion work. Tourism, health, and finance/insurance sectors 
can be affected indirectly from for example extreme 
events4).
*To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: karin.lundgren@design.lth.se
©2013 National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
Review Article
K LUNDGREN et al.
4
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
Climate change can no longer be considered simply an 
environmental or developmental issue as it puts at risk the 
protection of human health and well-being.
In addition, while forecasts exist on the economic 
impact of climate change, the social impact on enterprises 
and workers, on employment and income, on working 
conditions, and on many other social dimensions is con-
siderably less understood. Coping with climate change 
(adaptation) is already unavoidable due to past emissions 
of greenhouse gases. Thus, it is important to come up 
with solutions to reduce the vulnerability of workers and 
enterprises to the negative effects of climate change and to 
enhance the capacity at the individual and society levels 
to adapt, respond to and prepare for climate change. This 
literature review concentrates on the effects of heat stress 
on the working population with a focus on developing 
countries in relation to climate change. So far, climate 
change impacts related to heat stress have often been 
examined in relation to heat wave-mediated effects on the 
general population, but recognition is lacking that climate 
change may exacerbate occupational heat-related risks5).
Methods
The extensive amount of information on heat stress 
made it necessary to have a strategic information search to 
find key articles. Climate change and occupational health 
is a highly multi-disciplinary field of study and requires 
scholarly information from a variety of sources. That 
is why the ‘pearl picking’ method was initially applied. 
This method uses one exceptionally useful article (often a 
review article) to track key articles in the field. The article 
chosen for the ‘pearl picking’ was: Kjellström, Holmér 
and Lemke: Workplace Heat Stress, Health and Productiv-
ity − an increasing challenge for low-and middle income 
countries during climate change6).
A thorough exploration of different databases and 
search engines was then carried out and several infor-
mation retrieval tools were selected. Most were broad 
multidisciplinary platforms and databases covering a wide 
variety of journals and hence, more likely to have the 
articles desired. The information retrieval tools chosen 
were PubMed, Lund University’s search engine Sum-
mons, Scopus, Google Scholar, Web of Science and the 
Science Citation Index7). Several search words were used 
such as ‘occupational heat exposure’, ‘occupational heat 
stress’, ‘occupational heat strain’, ‘heat in/at workplace’, 
‘work in the heat’, ‘occupational heat stress AND climate 
change’ and the more broad search words ‘heat stress’. 
Relevant articles were then selected. An internal database 
and library was also used together with the International 
Labour Organization’s Bookshelf on Occupational Safety 
and Health35).
Current Status
Climate change and its effects
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
(IPCC) Forth Assessment Report (AR4) which came out 
in 2007 stated clearly that ‘warming of the climate system 
is unequivocal, as is now evident from observations of 
increases in global average air and ocean temperatures, 
widespread melting of snow and ice and rising global av-
erage sea level’. Data records clearly show that the eleven 
years between 1995–2006, rank among the warmest in the 
instrumental record of global average surface temperature 
(since 1850). For the next two decades a warming of 
about 0.2°C per decade is projected for a range of future 
scenarios of emissions of greenhouse gases.
The AR4 reports that hot days, hot nights and heat 
waves have become and will become more frequent over 
most land areas8). The continuous rise of absolute humidi-
ty in the lower troposphere has also been reported in many 
regions which add substantial implications for human ther-
mal comfort and heat-related mortality and morbidity. In 
particular, this may add substantial risk in already humid 
countries, where a small increase in temperature can have 
profound consequences on heat stress9).
Heat waves are defined as ‘extended periods of unusu-
ally high atmospheric related heat stress, which cause 
temporary modification in lifestyle and which may have 
adverse health consequences for a population’10). Heat 
waves have already affected some aspects of human 
health, such as excess heat related mortality in Europe 
during the summer of 20038). This heat wave caused up to 
70,000 deaths11). In France, data on causes of deaths showed 
that psychiatric, cardiovascular and pulmonary illnesses 
were associated with a higher risk of death in heat waves, 
while good social contacts in the community, the use of 
fans, air-conditioning and showers were associated with 
lower risk2). Additionally, deaths and illnesses caused by 
air pollution (e.g. ozone, particles) tend to increase during 
extremely warm weather12). It is expected that European 
summer temperatures as high as those experienced in 2003 
will be the norm by the middle of the century2). Responses 
to some recent extreme climate events reveal high levels 
of vulnerability in both developing and developed coun-
tries8). There is also increasing evidence of greater vulner-
Occupational Heat Stress and Climate Change: A Review
5
ability of specific groups such as poor and elderly people 
in all countries3). High ambient temperature is a leading 
cause of weather related mortality in many regions of the 
world and heat exhaustion is the most common response 
to prolonged exposure to high outdoor temperatures3).
As the world gets warmer, populations will acclimatize 
to some extent, raising the optimum temperature13). The 
possible increased use of air conditioners, though, may 
hinder natural acclimatization and potentially increase 
the risk3, 12). Human populations have a great capacity to 
adapt physiologically, technologically, and by behavioural 
change, to gradual changes in climate. However, sudden 
changes in weather can have a significant impact on hu-
man physiology and therefore health. Assessing the impact 
of climate change on health is a complex task. There are 
often difficulties in obtaining data. Among them are the 
frequent interaction of climatic-environmental influences 
on health with factors such as level of economic develop-
ment, the state of public health systems, and individual 
and population behaviour. Climate change will result in the 
increased prevalence, distribution, and severity of known 
occupational hazards such as heat stress and accidents 
although; there is no evidence of unique or previously 
unknown hazards. However, such a possibility should not 
be excluded, since there is potential for interactions of 
known hazards and new conditions leading to new hazards 
and risks. Climate change will affect living and working 
environments and create health threats for millions of 
people14). For example, in the United States, 423 heat-
related fatalities among crop production workers occurred 
during 1992–2006 and this number was increasing over 
time. The heat related average annual death rate for these 
crop workers was 0.39 per 100,000 workers, compared 
with 0.02 for all U.S. civilian workers15). Eventually, this 
could hamper economic and social development6, 16).
Health effects and occupational heat exposure
Health effects
The physiological basis for the effects of heat on hu-
mans is well understood17–25) and extensive research have 
been done in military settings26–28). Still, all is not yet 
understood of the pathophysiology of heat exhaustion and 
heat stroke. Human heat tolerance is the result of a series 
of adaptations that have been genetically encoded. Hu-
mans are born with a highly specialized complex of ther-
moregulatory sweat glands and a sensitive control system. 
For those groups living in hot environments, the employ-
ment of behavioural and cultural mechanisms has served 
as a buffer and it is clear that physiological adaptations 
are still of dominant importance in daily survival29). A 
population has varying abilities to tolerate heat stress and 
it is increasingly recognized that social determinants and 
personal characteristics affect the vulnerability of people 
to heat exposure30). Factors such as pre-existing disease, 
clothing, age, gender, ability for heat acclimatization, 
level of physical activity, and body size, can influence the 
health impact of heat stress. Also, the most powerful form 
of human thermoregulation is behavioural and includes 
measures such as less movement, clothing, seeking shade 
and opening windows29).
When the ambient temperature reaches or exceeds 
the human core temperature of 37°C, there are well-
documented physiological effects on the human body, 
posing risks to some organ systems and also making it 
progressively harder to work productively31). As the core 
temperature begins to rise above its ‘set-point’ of 37°C, 
skin blood flow increases and sweating is initiated.
At core temperatures beyond 38−39°C, there is an 
increased risk of heat exhaustion and beyond these tem-
peratures, heat stroke can occur with an eventual failure 
of the central nervous thermoregulatory system32). Health 
consequences range from dehydration, injuries, and heat 
fatigue to a higher burden of respiratory and cardiovas-
cular diseases, cataract, kidney failure, weakening of the 
immune system and death2).
The body heat balance is determined by these six funda-
mental factors:
1.	Air temperature
2.	Radiant temperature
3.	Humidity
4.	Air movement6)
Non-climatic parameters:
5.	Clothing
6.	The metabolic heat generated by human physical 
activity6)
The human heat exchange with the environment is pic-
tured in Fig. 1.
In addition, acclimatization and hydration status, body 
posture, clothing permeability and other factors affect this 
balance33). An initial understanding of how environmental 
features can affect human heat tolerance may be gained 
through examination of the processes of heat transference 
between the body and the macro environment29). These 
processes are radiation, conduction, convection, and evap-
oration at the skin surface and the lungs28). Humans can 
maintain normal body (core and skin) temperatures within 
a wide range of environmental conditions, assuming heat 
transfer is not impaired. Heat dissipation occurs through 
K LUNDGREN et al.
6
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
dry heat loss (radiation and convection) and evapora-
tive heat loss (sweating)34). Acclimatization results in an 
increased sweat rate, leading to a lower core temperature 
and heart rate at the same work level and environmental 
heat load35). Clothing affects the transfer of heat from and 
to the body through resistance to air movement and water, 
permeability and ventilation. The insulating characteristics 
influence the transfer of heat36).
Connected to the human heat exchange is the heat bal-
ance equation, through which the balance between heat 
production and heat exchange can be calculated (can be 
modified to account for clothing):
S= (M- W) − (Hres + E + R + C + K)
S = body heat storage
M = metabolic heat production
W = external mechanical work
Hres = respiratory heat exchange
E = evaporative heat exchange
R = radiative heat exchange
C = convective heat exchange
K = conductive heat exchange
The largest source of heat results from metabolic heat 
production which adds to the heat stress in hot environ-
ments. The evaporation of sweat is extremely effective and 
therefore becomes more and more critical with increasing 
environmental temperature. Given the importance of 
sweat evaporation it is not surprising that wind velocity 
and air humidity are critical environmental factors in hot 
conditions. If the humidity is high, sweat is still produced 
but evaporation is reduced which reduces the cooling ef-
fect35). The thermoregulatory response can be powerful 
and effective but it can also incur a strain on the body 
which can lead to heat illness28). Heat disorder occurs 
for one or more of three reasons: dehydration/lack of ac-
climatization, lack of proper appreciation of the dangers 
of heat, and accidental and unforeseeable circumstances 
leading to exposure. Many deaths are attributed to neglect 
and lack of consideration28). Heatstroke has a high fatality 
rate and even nonfatal heatstroke can lead to long term 
effects. Sweating imposes the greatest strain on the body. 
Severe dehydration (at a water loss of about 6% of body 
weight) may lead to heat exhaustion and circulatory col-
lapse35). Together with water loss, sweating produces a 
loss of electrolytes, mainly sodium and chloride, but also 
to a lesser degree magnesium, potassium etc. If the sweat 
loss is replaced by water, this may cause cramps due to the 
malfunction of nerves and muscles. Dehydration of over 
3% of body weight should always be treated with water 
and electrolyte replacement35).
Occupational heat exposure
Workers in the outdoor occupations with high physical 
load are most at risk for severe heat exposure. Also at 
high risk are workers required to wear semipermeable or 
impermeable protective clothing and/or personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE) that severely impedes heat exchange 
through evaporation36, 37).
Heat can cause workers to take off protective clothing 
due to discomfort, putting the worker at high risk for 
dangerous exposure and injury38). There are also possible 
heat implications for indoor workers in buildings without 
air conditioning or proper ventilation systems in warm 
countries. Most of the heatstroke deaths reported have 
been associated with occupational exposure at construc-
tion sites, agricultural settings, and hot industrial jobs 
requiring heavy work. The increased cardiovascular load 
experienced during heat stress compromises the capacity 
for physical work39). Cognitive and physical performance 
decrements can occur at hyperthermic and/or dehydration 
levels lower than those causing heat injuries34). Further-
more, socioeconomic factors such as income and urbaniza-
tion can compound the adverse health outcomes from heat 
stress on workers as it may indirectly cause psychological 
distress due to reduced work productivity, lost income, 
and disrupted daily social activity40). Outdoor work is 
the most problematic and fatalities due to heat stress are 
associated with warm nights, hot days and hard physical 
work. Total physiological burden and the potential suscep-
tibility to heat disorders will be much higher if heat stress 
continues during off-duty hours through work at second 
jobs, strenuous leisure activities, or living in unremittingly 
hot quarters. In addition, nutritional status and hydration 
may reflect patterns of eating and drinking, which may 
Fig. 1.	
Human heat exchange; Holmér, 2007.
Occupational Heat Stress and Climate Change: A Review
7
also change with season or religious observances35). Heat 
exhaustion is most often preceded by dehydration and 
is usually associated with unacclimatized workers. Heat 
stroke in otherwise normal and healthy people results from 
a combination of excessive heat exposure and physical 
work36). Fluid requirements generally depend on work 
rate, the ambient climatic conditions, and on individual 
physiological and biochemical characteristics.
Implementation of strategies to maintain adequate 
hydration is the single most important intervention in 
the management of work in heat. Where this cannot be 
achieved, it is necessary to set dehydration limits of 
the percentage lost in body weight (e.g. a 2% decrease 
translates into 1–4 litres of liquid28)). Detailed limiting 
values for work in hot environments can be found in 
international standards such as ISO7933 for acclimatized 
and non-acclimatized workers41). Yet, it is found that even 
if water is readily available, men working in the heat will 
drink less than that lost through perspiration, referred to 
by researchers as ‘voluntary dehydration’28, 29). There-
fore, workers in hot environments must also be educated 
regarding the importance of drinking enough water while 
working and continuing generous rehydration during 
off-duty hours35, 42). Another intervention could be to 
implement traditional work-rest schedules developed for 
centuries to deal with heat, instead of simply implement-
ing an industrial model, or to develop individual work-
rest schedules. Urban workers may also be exposed to 
additional heat stress as a result of the urban ‘heat island 
effect’ of the urban built environments1).
The urban heat island effect
In 2007, the world’s population living in towns and 
cities surpassed 50% for the first time in history and this 
share is continuously growing; by 2050 it could be as high 
as two thirds2). Built-up areas influence the absorption and 
reflection of solar radiation, the ability to store heat, the 
absorption and emittance of long wave radiation, winds 
and evapotranspiration (the discharge of water from the 
earth’s surface to the atmosphere). The built environment 
is also characterized by human activities affecting the cli-
mate, such as the heating and cooling of buildings, motor 
traffic and industrial production.
These activities release heat and moisture but also 
pollute the air, which affects incoming and outgoing radia-
tion43). A limited number of trees and vegetation in urban 
areas also decreases the capacity to cool the air through 
transpiration (the loss of water by evaporation in terrestrial 
plants)3). The ‘urban heat island effect’ is thus the heat 
absorption in cities and refers to the difference in tempera-
tures measured inside and outside the city44). This is pri-
marily a nocturnal phenomenon, as during daytime, urban-
rural temperature differences are usually smaller because 
of the relatively high thermal capacity and energy storage 
of urban surface materials. After sunset, the energy stored 
is released causing an additional warming. The severity of 
the urban heat island decreases with increasing emissivity 
(emission of energy by radiation) from the sky (e.g. due 
to increased cloud cover) and with increased wind speed. 
These elevated temperatures can increase the magnitude 
and duration of heat waves. Some large cities, such as 
Mexico City, have shown a heat-island effect measuring an 
increase of up to 4−5°C in comparison to the surrounding 
rural areas43). Below is The US Environmental Protection 
Agency’s schematic view of the heat island effect profile 
(Fig. 2).
Individual aspects
Individual factors such as physical fitness and health 
status plays a fundamental role in heat tolerance28). When 
working in heat, people with the highest risk are those 
with small body size, overwheight, elderly and people with 
medical conditions such as cardivascular diseases, diabe-
tes, skin, liver, kidney and lung problems and pregnancy. 
Additional factors affecting heat tolerance include intake 
of alcohol, caffeine and nicotine46). Individual differences 
include the effects of age, gender, body morphology, dis-
ability, aerobic capacity, acclimatization, state of health, 
clothing and personal protection equipment47). How ethnic 
origin and cultural differences, including human behav-
iour, influence heat tolerance, is not fully understood28). 
Knowledge of the mechanisms behind subjective differ-
ences is important for risk assessment44) and the next sec-
tions will explore these aspects further.
Fig. 2.	
Heat island effect profile; US EPA, 201245).
K LUNDGREN et al.
8
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
Children and the Elderly People
Children and elderly people are likely to be more sensi-
tive to over-heating, in particular if they are working. An 
excess death rate due to heat illness has been reported 
among elderly people, infants and children44). This is part-
ly due to physiological difficulties in regulating heat, and 
restricted mobility, which decreases the ability to access 
fluids when needed48). Children are included in this review 
on occupational health as child labour is still common in 
many countries (this is against international conventions 
such as the International Labour Organizations Conven-
tion nr. 182 on the worst forms of child labour and nr.138 
on minimum age49)). Children may also be present in 
workplaces, and babies may sometimes be strapped on the 
back of their mothers as they are working. An excess death 
rate due to heat illness has been reported among infants 
and children during heat waves compared with adults50).
Babies have relatively large heads, large surface area to 
mass ratios, high blood flows and limited sweating capac-
ity, as their system of thermoregulation is still developing. 
It is also likely that thermo-neutral temperatures occur 
within a narrower range of conditions28). The limited abil-
ity to thermoregulate makes small children more at risk 
of dehydration44). Infants will experience a more rapid 
rise in body temperature and may not be able to respond 
by removing themselves from the stress environment or 
pursuing other behavioural defences51).
The reason why elderly people are particularly at such 
an increased risk of thermoregulatory deficits is not a new 
question, yet still unsolved52). Generally, body mass, size, 
and composition changes with age in addition to the de-
cline of homeostatic responses and the regulation of blood 
pressure24). These changes usually take place around the 
age of 8053) and as retirement age is increasing in many 
countries, or in some, workers continue working until they 
are unable to do so. As a result, examining the effects of 
heat stress on elderly people at work is essential. Available 
data suggest that heat tolerance is reduced in older people 
as they have lower metabolic rates and aerobic capacity 
(oxygen uptake) due to sedentary lifestyles (although 
core temperature remains the same)28). Due to a reduced 
activity level, old people tend to expose themselves less to 
physical strain which leads to a loss of heat acclimatiza-
tion, reduced ability to transport heat from the body core 
to the skin, and a lower cardiovascular stability35). Longer 
periods of hot weather, especially when little relief is 
given at night have hit primarily the older population. The 
percentage of people with illnesses and disabilities also 
increases with age54).
On the other hand, in a study by Kenney and Havenith 
in 1993, it was found that when fit healthy older subjects 
are matched with younger subjects of the same gender, 
size and body composition, metabolic rate, acclimation 
state and hydration level, the thermal tolerance is less a 
function of chronological age than of functional capacity 
and physiological health status. As a result, what is not so 
clear is whether aging per se is associated with poor heat 
tolerance, or whether alterations in other factors associated 
with the aging process play a larger role55).
Men and women
Men and women have slightly different physiology, 
endocrinal physiology and body characteristics; one 
example being men having on average greater body size, 
weight and strength. In general, yet with large individual 
differences, women have a larger surface to mass ratio, 
which implies that women are more prone to heat loss. 
On the other hand, women have a higher whole body and 
subcutaneous fat content than men, which in turn increases 
insulation. Women are known to have colder skin at distal 
areas, despite the increased body fat content relative to 
men. Part of this effect can be attributed to reproductive 
hormones and the menstrual phase. In general, relative 
to men, the thermoneutral zone of women is shifted 
upward (the temperature range at which the person feels 
‘comfortable’)56). When comparing the sexes, it has been 
observed that women tolerate humid heat better as females 
are superior in suppressing excess sweating and therefore 
conserve body water. Both sweating and vasoconstriction 
thresholds are 0.3−0.5°C higher in women than men, even 
during the first days of the menstrual cycle. Differences 
are even greater in between menstruations53). Males have 
higher maximal sweat rates, which may enhance tolerance 
for extremely hot and dry environments35).
In contrast, some studies have found that there is no 
or little difference between men and women in either 
metabolic heat production or in heat exchange by radia-
tion, convection or evaporation. The observed superior 
capacity of men for sustained exercise in desert heat is 
rather related to their higher aerobic capacity and not to a 
difference in capacity for thermoregulation. Differences in 
heart rate between men and women are mainly dependent 
on individual differences, fitness and stress level rather 
than differences in thermoregulation57).
Although in a study by Havenith in 2005, females had 
generally higher core temperatures, skin temperature, 
heart rates, blood pressure, and set points for sweating, in 
comparison to males57). Moreover, Witterseh et al., 2004, 
Occupational Heat Stress and Climate Change: A Review
9
found that the effects of heat stress on performance seem 
to be more adverse for males than for females58) and Ken-
ney et al., 2007 found that females show a greater increase 
in the core temperature onset threshold for sweating in 
both moderate and intense exercise (Fig. 3)59).
Two specific female processes do affect thermoregu-
lation: the menstrual cycle and menopause, although 
the effect of the menstrual cycle at rest (a higher core 
temperature in the postovulatory phase) seems to be 
almost absent during heat exposure. Postmenopausal hot 
flashes and night sweating provide anecdotal evidence that 
thermoregulation is affected by oestrogen withdrawal57). 
The effect of pregnancy on women’s heat tolerance is not 
clear, but altered hormone levels, added weight, reduced 
adaptive capacity and the increased circulatory demands 
of the foetus on the mother may increase the susceptibility 
to fainting. Severe maternal hyperthermia (over-heating) 
due to illness appears to increase the incidence of foetal 
malformation35). In a study by Hartgill et al., 2011, it was 
found that human temperature regulation is altered in 
pregnancy. Maternal core temperature was at its highest in 
the first trimester but fell during pregnancy with its lowest 
point 3 months post-delivery and persisted until 6 months 
after delivery in breast-feeding women. The causes of the 
delayed return to normal temperature can currently only 
be speculated on60). It also appears that women, especially 
older women, are more at risk, in both relative and abso-
lute terms, of dying in a heat wave44). Whether or not this 
is due to women generally living longer is not clear.
Ethnicity
Few studies were found in relation to ethnicity and heat 
tolerance. It is suggested that people living in high alti-
tudes, such as Tibet, in the hot climates of Africa, or in the 
cold environments of Lapland may have developed special 
physiological capabilities for coping with extremes. Such 
adaptations might even be genetic such as the Saharan 
Touareg, with tall slender bodies that maximize the surface 
cooling area in proportion to the amount of body tissue 
that produces heat.
Some adaptations, though, may well be acquired during 
one’s lifetime rather than being genetic61). In one study by 
Meese, 1983, it was found that Afro-American subjects 
show a performance reduction with falling temperature 
when compared to Caucasians62). In a recent case control 
study it was found that African-Americans had the highest 
risk of heat-related mortality, and that Caucasians had a 
higher risk than Hispanics48). On the other hand, this might 
be more related to socio-economic status than ethnic ori-
gin. It has also been found that people from New Guinea 
have lower sweat rates than Nigerians, showing some 
genetic factors in variations of sweat rate28). There is little 
evidence, though, of inherent or genetic differences in 
response to heat stress and all humans appear to function 
as tropical animals. The ability of humans to live and work 
in a range of thermal conditions rather reflects adaptation 
through complex behaviour and the development of hous-
ing, clothing and technology. Apparent ethnic differences 
probably relate more to body size, individual life history 
and nutritional status rather than to inherent traits35).
Productivity loss and economic impact
Productivity is strongly dependent on thermal condi-
tions, in particular during physically demanding work63). 
Studies of the influence of high ambient temperature on 
performance have examined variables such as reaction 
time, tracking and vigliance, as well as memory and 
mathematical calculations61). When the body is hot, va-
sodilation (a widening of blood vessels) enhances ease of 
body movement although sweating may affect grip, cause 
distraction due to discomfort, fatigue and psychological 
strain. Thermal conditions can affect output, accident 
rates, behavioural and cognitive performance28).
The results of many studies indicate that changes in 
temperature of a few degrees can significantly influence 
performance in several tasks including typewriting, fac-
tory work, signal recognition, time to respond to signals, 
learning performance, reading speed and comprehension, 
multiplication speed, and word memory. It is estimated 
Fig. 3.	
Gender differences in onset of sweating during exercise, 
Kenney et al., 200759).
K LUNDGREN et al.
10
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
that approximately a 7% increase in productivity is pres-
ent in a workplace maintained at the population-average 
neutral temperature of between 20–24°C64–66). It is also 
estimated that productivity is affected after about one hour 
of moderate physical work in temperatures above 32°C61). 
In an analysis of Thai industrial workers by Tawatsupa in 
2009, it was found that ~60% of the workers reported loss 
of working capacity in the heat, and about 20% were more 
vulnerable to heat illnesses during the summer months40). 
In a study by Kjellström et al., 2009, it was found that by 
the 2080s, the greatest absolute losses of population based 
labour work capacity (in the range 11 to 27%) will be seen 
under the IPCC A2 scenario in Southeast Asia, Andean 
and Central America, Eastern Sub-Saharan Africa and the 
Caribbean. The A2 scenario assumes a high population 
growth and medium rapid economic development and 
therefore represents a moderately ‘high’ emissions sce-
nario68).
A natural reaction of a working person to heat is to 
reduce physical activity, which reduces the body’s internal 
heat production. An outcome of this preventive reaction 
is reduced hourly work capacity and economic productiv-
ity during the exposure to heat. As a result, the worker’s 
action to prevent ill health will lower productivity and a 
loss of daylight work hours will occur. In the long term, 
this will affect individual, local, national and regional 
economic productivity.
An enterprise can compensate for this by carrying 
out heat sensitive work during the cooler night hours of 
the hot season or by scheduling such work in the cooler 
season, but as climate change progresses the duration of 
cooler periods will be shortened. In addition, some work 
has to be carried out during daylight67). Without adapta-
tion, the economic losses of reduced labour productivity 
relative to baseline could potentially be up to 20% of the 
gross domestic product (GDP)68).
Developing country context
The proportion of the world’s population living in the 
tropical climate zone, with normal daytime air tempera-
tures exceeding 30°C, is estimated to be about 40%. Con-
ditions are in some countries worsened by intense solar 
radiation and high humidity11). Most tropical countries are 
developing countries and most are experiencing rapid ur-
banization43). The impacts of climate change on vulnerable 
employment, working poverty (income below the poverty 
line), youth and women, wage losses and working condi-
tions may be exacerbated. This hits the most vulnerable 
even harder because of their exposure and least adaptive 
capacity69). Despite this, few comprehensive assessments 
on the effects of climate change on health have been com-
pleted in low-income countries, and none in Africa11).
Occupational health and safety is one of the basic rights 
that workers are being denied in many developing coun-
tries70). In general, developing countries also have higher 
occupational injury fatality rates compared to developed 
countries. Many workers lack work security and are paid 
according to output; as a result, workers have to work 
longer hours to reach production targets.
When working in heat, which limits the ability to 
produce, stress and serious mental and physical health 
problems may become a negative outcome. In addition, 
on the side of paid work, many workers also engage in 
water collection, firewood collection, residence building 
and repair, small-scale agriculture, fishing, cooking and 
so on. These tasks can sometimes be more hazardous than 
formal employment, and add to the heat strain and exhaus-
tion71). Moreover, commuting to and from work is a daily 
source of heat exposure for many people. Urban growth is 
extensive in these regions making populations especially 
vulnerable to climate change11).
Agriculture is generally a big employer in the develop-
ing world. Commonly, farm workers work are at high risk 
as they work under high pressure, perform extended hours 
of work in heat and high humidity, suffer dehydration and 
often do not have sufficient knowledge regarding preven-
tion from heat exposure. Additionally, cultural aspects and 
malnutrition, poverty and stress add to the high risk en-
vironment72). For example, fatality due to heat accounted 
for 11% of farm accidents in India during the heat wave 
of 1998–199973). Another example is in Central America, 
where authorities are overwhelmed by the high prevalence 
of chronic kidney disease (CKD). CKD is a worldwide 
public health problem and knowledge about the prevalence 
or incidence of early-stage CKD is scarce. One hypothesis 
is that heavy workloads in a hot climate lead to chronic 
dehydration, partly causing the problem74).
It has been found that this disease has a high prevalence 
in sugarcane workers where they are under constant heat 
stress. It may be partially due to chronic dehydration re-
lated to working conditions75).
In developing countries people may be more or less 
acclimatized although health and nutritional status, access 
to drinking water and widespread precaurious work are 
decisive factors39). In addition, small and medium sized 
enterprises (SME’s) are the most common employer. 
It is estimated that SME’s have a 33% greater accident 
rate than companies with 200 employees and more. It is 
Occupational Heat Stress and Climate Change: A Review
11
therefore essential to increase the likelihood of improve-
ments of the working conditions in SME’s76). In a study by 
Ayyappan et al. in 2009, multiple locations and industries 
were measured around India (400 measurements). The 
study showed that many processes even in organized 
large-scale industries have yet to control heat stress related 
hazards adequately5). Additional examples from industries 
in Thailand and Tanzania have shown that the workplaces 
frequently exceed international guideline values for 
heat40), such as ISO7243 and ISO7933, which describes 
appropriate heat stress indices and guidelines41, 77). These 
guidelines, however, have been assessed in developed 
countries and therefore are not fully applicable in warm 
developing countries where workers are more acclima-
tized78).
Preventative and control measures
Despite uncertainty in climate change impacts, it is 
assumed that humans will have to adapt to warmer tem-
peratures. Strategies to reduce the effects of future climate 
change involve an iterative risk management process that 
includes both mitigation (reducing emissions of green-
house gases) and adaptation (coping strategies). Whether 
or not humans will be able to adapt to future increasing 
heat is uncertain, although humans already inhabit various 
climatic spaces8).
Some risks can be managed by adaptation policies, the 
success of which will depend on the speed and extent of 
climate change, the sustainability of measures, and the 
level of global cooperation to implement measures to 
support and protect vulnerable regions and populations4). 
Generally, the aim of adaptation to climate change is to 
reduce vulnerability and increase resilience to impacts. 
The heat wave of 2003 in Europe suggests that adaptation 
is not occurring successfully even in developed countries 
and public health efforts in response to heat focus primar-
ily on reactive measures rather than long-term adaptation. 
The underlying perception that heat is not a high prior-
ity prevents the uptake of relevant information to avert 
heat stress. On the other hand, working practices for hot 
environments are well established (for example NIOSH, 
198679)), including the use of appropriate heat stress indi-
ces, acclimatization programmes, and the importance of 
water replacement, although, lessons seem to have to be 
re-learnt28).
The main factors for the protection against danger from 
heat at the workplace are to safeguard from and control 
the source of the heat40). Heat stress controls can also be 
divided into two broad categories: general and specific. 
General controls include thermal audit methods and per-
sonal monitoring using heart rate and internal body tem-
perature measuring equipment28). General controls should 
be implemented anytime there is a reasonable potential 
for heat stress on the job and are applicable across all heat 
stress jobs. Specific controls are directed to individual jobs 
and include specific training, heat stress hygiene practices 
and medical surveillance36). A heat stress assessment fol-
lows the traditional hierarchy of hazards control, being in 
the order of elimination, substitution, engineering controls, 
administrative controls and finally, personal protection.
Overall, there is a large variation in cost, capability and 
constraints with the different systems36).
Engineering control measures
Engineering solutions include those of risk alert sys-
tems, response plans, water delivery, portable shade struc-
tures, water based cooling, air based systems, decreased 
clothing insulation (e.g. through smart textiles), ventilated 
clothes, cooling centres, air conditioning, personal cooling 
systems (e.g. ice vest) protective clothing, wearing white 
and loose-fitted clothing, etc.72). Active cooling systems 
are widely available such as liquid cooling and air cooling 
garments28). Active cooling systems include external con-
nections to air or liquid supplies such as ventilated cooled 
air and circulated liquid cooling80). A practical solution is 
that of increasing ventilation in clothing by using air per-
meable clothes that are designed to increase possibilities 
for ventilation or by using fans for active ventilation. Pas-
sive cooling systems utilize phase change materials (PCMs) 
(e.g. ice, frozen gel, salt, wax) in vests and clothing. PCMs 
are latent heat storage materials and absorb or release heat 
when they change phases, such as from solid to liquid 
(heat of fusion), and back to solid (heat of crystallization). 
Therefore, a PCM has two types of thermal effects: a 
cooling effect when it melts and a heating effect when it 
solidifies81, 82). Wearable personal cooling integrated with 
PCMs has the advantage of cooling the human body’s 
micro-environment in contrast to stationary personalized 
or building cooling, thus providing greater mobility and 
saving energy80). Selection of the optimum active clothing 
system will depend upon the requirements of the task and 
consideration should be given to work organization and 
design. Any effective cooling system should be placed 
where a heat exchange occur, for example, by the neck, 
wrists and under arms, and should not restrict thermoregu-
lation.
For instance, when wearing a cooing vest running up a 
hill, the metabolic cost of carrying the vest might offset the 
K LUNDGREN et al.
12
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
benefit of cooling. The vest can also restrict the evapora-
tion of sweat, add weight, increase the metabolic rate, and 
so on. For a sedentary task in a hot environment, however, 
it may be useful if it does not cause too much cooling28). 
Moreover, these technical fixes may not be applicable to 
developing countries, especially in small businesses where 
room for investment is scarce. For instance, the price of 
a cooling vest ranges between $200−300, which is why 
preventative and managerial methods may be more appro-
priate in a developing country context. On the other hand, 
all workplaces around the world should follow the widely 
accepted traditional hierarchy of controls mentioned ear-
lier36).
Dehumidifying and cooling the indoor air may reduce 
heat stress and increase productivity in hot and humid 
indoor work places in developing countries. However, 
many work situations are such that air conditioning is not 
feasible and fans are not sufficient when the heat exposure 
is very high. In addition, air conditioning is costly as 
it uses plenty of energy, which also adds to the climate 
change problem. Moving the person to a cooler area and 
cooling off the person’s body may be an essential preven-
tive action40). An innovative solution is a solar-powered 
system for supplying dry air in offices, providing a low-
cost alternative to traditional air conditioning in hot and 
humid regions. The system can also be produced using lo-
cal skills and resources, representing a low-cost alternative 
to high-tech air conditioning83).
Preventative control measures
Preventative interventions include design of urban 
areas, trees in industrial areas83), design of housing and 
workplaces to reduce heat exposure, increase shading, and 
public and occupational health programmes that protect 
individuals at risk, among others40). One general control 
is that of work-rest regimes. However, determining safe 
work-rest regimens based on heat stress criteria is chal-
lenging. Relying on the self-pacing of the workers is not 
recommended especially when the task has an urgent 
character or involves productivity incentives. Studies 
have shown that self-paced work-rest regimes were poorly 
related to physiological parameters84). Self-chosen rest 
periods are too short to dissipate heat38). Therefore, self-
paced workers must be associated with close supervisory 
surveillance or predetermined work-rest schedules, which 
may constitute a better solution85). As a response to chal-
lenges in a warmer world, development of acclimatiza-
tion procedures, hazard communications, early warning 
systems and surveillance, and increased emphasis on 
prevention through design can present vital solutions1). 
Finally, education and training of workers and employers 
is essential for effective risk management. Measures that 
reduce thermal stress without compromising performance 
and productivity, together with being a low cost option, 
are more likely to be accepted23).
Conclusion and Future Research Needs
On the basis of the reviewed articles, it can be sum-
marized that heat stress has been researched extensively in 
the past. However, in the contemporary context of climate 
change, information is lacking on the extent of future heat 
stress and its consequences, especially in an occupational 
setting. It was also found that heat stress is often an over-
looked problem and that lessons seem to have to be re-
learnt. The main factors found to exacerbate heat stress in 
the current and future workplace are the urban ‘heat island 
effect’, physical work, individual differences, and the 
developing country context where technological fixes and 
certain control measures are often not applicable. There 
is also a lack of information on the effects on vulnerable 
groups such as elderly people and pregnant women.
Occupational health and safety is one of the basic rights 
that workers are being denied in many developing coun-
tries. In addition to this, as work productivity reduces with 
increasing temperatures, world economic productivity 
will be condensed, affecting developing countries dispro-
portionately as most of these already are located in warm 
climates. To address these current and future occupational 
health problems, sustainable solutions must be inter-
disciplinary and take into account the social, economic, 
environmental and technical aspects of the problem. Both 
mitigation and adaptation measures should be considered, 
sometimes in combination and including both preventative 
and control solutions, to achieve multiple benefits. Capac-
ity building such as education and awareness, and involve-
ment on all levels of society is needed to address this.
From the review it became apparent that research is 
needed in these areas:
•	 Occupational heat stress in different countries and ways 
of dealing with it; studies are especially needed in Af-
rica.
•	 Heat island effects on workplaces in urban areas.
•	 Current adaptation practices in warm countries.
•	 Heat stress control options and possible sustainable 
solutions (low cost).
•	 Analysis of future productivity losses due to heat stress 
and economic analysis.
Occupational Heat Stress and Climate Change: A Review
13
•	 Social and health effects of heat stress.
•	 Effects on vulnerable groups such as young and elderly 
people, women, pregnant women, and poor people.
References
	 1)	 Schulte PA, Chun H (2009) Climate change and 
occupational safety and health: establishing preliminary 
framew. J Occup Environ Hyg 6, 542–54. [Medline]
	 2)	 WHO Climate Change and Occupational Health. http://
www.ituc-csi.org/IMG/pdf/Occupational_Health_and_
Climate_Changes_presentation_Sept27.pdf. Accessed 
February 10, 2012.
	 3)	 Ford D, Berrang-Ford L (2011) Climate change adaptation 
in developed nations: from theory to practice, Quebec. 
Springer, Dordrecht.
	 4)	 Nilsson M, T Kjellström (2010) Climate change impacts 
on working people: how to develop intervention Policies. 3 
(5774).
	 5)	 Ayyappan R, Sankar S, Rajkumar P, Balakrishnan K (2009) 
Work-related heat stress concerns in automotive industries: 
a case study from Chennai, India. Global Health Action 2, 
58–64.
	 6)	 Kjellström T, Holmér I, Lemke B (2009) Workplace heat 
stress, health and productivity − an increasing challenge for 
low-and middle income countries during climate change. 
Global Health Action 2.
	 7)	 Moed H (2005) Citation analysis in research evaluation. 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
	 8)	 IPCC (2007) IPCC Forth Assessment Report: climate 
change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
	 9)	 Willett KM, Sherwood S (2012) Exceedance of heat index 
thresholds for 15 regions under a warming climate using 
the wet-bulb globe temperature. Int J Climatol 32, 161–77. 
[CrossRef]
	10)	 White-Newsome JL, et al. (2012) Climate change and 
health: indoor heat exposure in vulnerable populations. 
Environ Res 112, 20–7. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	11)	 Costello A, Abbas M (2009) Managing the Health Effects 
of Climate Change. Lancet 373, 1693–733. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
	12)	 Wasim Yahia M (2012) Microclimate and Thermal Comfort 
of urban Spaces in Hot Dry Damascus, in Faculty of 
Engineering., Lund University, Lund.
	13)	 Berrang-Ford L, Ford JD, Paterson J (2011) Are we 
adapting to climate change? Glob Environ Change 21, 
25–33.  [CrossRef]
	14)	 Hanna EG, Spickett JT (2011) Climate change and human 
health: building Australia’s adaptation capacity. Asia Pac J 
Public Health 23 (suppl 2) 7S–13S. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	15)	 CDC (2008) Heat-related deaths among crop workers − 
United States, 1992–2006, 1017–18, C. Centres for Disease 
and Prevention, (Eds).
	16)	 Auliciens A (1992) Greenhouse warmed Europe: 
thermoregulatory criteria for future indoor climate 
management. Int J Biometeorol 36, 201–9.  [CrossRef]
	17)	 Weiner JS, Van Heyningen RE (1952) Salt losses of men 
working in hot environments. Br J Ind Med 9, 56–64. 
[Medline]
	18)	 Ladell WSS (1955) The effects of water and salt intake 
upon the performance of men working in hot and humid 
environments. J Physiol 127, 11–46. [Medline]
	19)	 Burton AC (1933) The application of the theory of heat 
flow to the study of energy metabolism. J Nutr, 497–533.
	20)	 Budd GMA (1974) A field survey of thermal stress in new 
guinea villagers. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 268, 
393–400. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	21)	 Bell CR, Watts AJ (1971) Thermal limits for industrial 
workers. Br J Ind Med 28, 259–64. [Medline]
	22)	 Fernandez RHP (1980) Healthcare of people at work: 
controlling persons working in heat. Occup Med (Chic Ill) 
30, 40–2.  [CrossRef]
	23)	 Hales JRS, Richard DAB (1987) Heat Stress − Physical 
Exertion and Environment. Excerpta Medical 525, 
Amsterdam.
	24)	 Hellon RF, Lind AR, Weiner JS (1956) The physiolocigal 
reactions of men of two age groups to a hot environment. J 
Physiol 133, 118–31. [Medline]
	25)	 Ramsey JDA (1983) Effects of workplace thermal 
conditions on safe work behaviour. J Safety Res 14, 
105–14.  [CrossRef]
	26)	 Schrier RW, et al. (1970) Renal, metabolic and and 
circulatory responses to heat and exercise − Studies in 
military recruits during summer training, with implications 
for acute renal failure. Ann Intern Med 73, 213–23. 
[Medline]
	27)	 US Department of the Army and the Air Force (2003) Heat 
stress control and heat causality management. Technical 
Bulletin. USDAAF, Washington DC.
	28)	 Parsons K (2003) Human thermal environments, 2nd Ed., 
Taylor and Francis, New York.
	29)	 Hanna JM (1983) Human heat tolerance: an anthropological 
perspective. Annu Rev Anthropol 12, 259–89.  [CrossRef]
	30)	 Hollowell DR (2010) Perceptions of, and reactions to, 
Environmental heat: a brief note on issues of concern in 
relation to Occupational Health. Global Health Action, 3.
	31)	 Bennett CM, McMichael AJ (2010) Non-heat related 
impacts of climate change on working populations. Global 
Health Action 3.
	32)	 Jay O, Kenny GP (2010) Heat exposure in the Canadian 
workplace. Am J Ind Med 53, 842–53. [Medline]
	33)	 Kampmann B, Bröde P, Fiala D (2011) Physiological 
responses to temperature and humidity compared 
to the assessment by UTCI, WGBT and PHS. Int J 
Biometeorology.
	34)	 O’Brien C, Blanchard LA, Cadarette BS, Endrusick TL, Xu 
X, Berglund LG, Sawka MN, Hoyt RW (2011) Methods 
of evaluating protective clothing relative to heat and 
cold stress: thermal manikin, biomedical modeling, and 
K LUNDGREN et al.
14
Industrial Health 2013, 51, 3–15
human testing. J Occup Environ Hyg 8, 588–99. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
	35)	 International Labour Organization (1998) Safe Work 
Bookshelf. ILO, Geneva.
	36)	 Bernard TE, Dukes- Dobos FN, Ramsey JD (1994) 
Evaluation and control of hot working environments. Part 
II: the scientific basis (knowledge base) for the guide. Int J 
Ind Ergon 14, 129–38.  [CrossRef]
	37)	 Bernard TE (1999) Heat stress and protective clothing: and 
emerging approach from the United States. Ann Occup Hyg 
43, 321–7. [Medline]
	38)	 Wästerlund DS (1998) A review of heat stress research with 
application to forestry. Appl Ergon 29, 179–83. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
	39)	 Holmér I (2009) Heat and cold stress, in OSH for 
development, Elgstrand K and Petersson NF (Eds.), Royal 
Institue of Technology, Sweden.
	40)	 Tawatsupa B (2010) The association between overall 
Health, psychological distress, and Occupational Heat 
Stress among a large national cohort of 40, 913 Thai 
workers. Global Health Action 3.
	41)	 ISO7933. http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/catalogue_
tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=37600. Accessed May 
16, 2012.
	42)	 Miller VS, Bates GP (2010) Hydration, hydration, 
hydration. Ann Occup Hyg 54, 134–6. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
	43)	 Johansson E (2006) Urban design and outdoor thermal 
comfort in warm climates. Studies in Fez and Colombo, in 
housing development and management. Lund University, 
Lund.
	44)	 Kovats RS, Hajat S (2008) Heat stress and public health: 
a critical review. Annu Rev Public Health 29, 41–55. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
	45)	 US Environmental Protection Agency Reducing Urban 
Heat Islands: Compendium of Strategies Urban Heat Island 
Basics. 2012. http://www.epa.gov/heatisld/resources/pdf/
BasicsCompendium.pdf. Accessed October 5, 2012.
	46)	 Gavhed D, Holmér I (2006) Det Termiska Klimatet på 
Arbetsplatsen 2006, Arbetslivsinstitutet, Stockholm (in 
Swedish).
	47)	 Brake DJ, Bates GP (2002) Limiting metabolic rate (thermal 
work limit) as an index of thermal stress. Appl Occup 
Environ Hyg 17, 176–86. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	48)	 Hattis D, Ogneva-Himmelberger Y, Ratick S (2012) 
The spatial variability of heat-related mortality in 
Massachusetts. Appl Geogr 33, 45–52.  [CrossRef]
	49)	 International Labour Organization (2012) I. International 
Programme on the Elimination of Child Labour (IPEC); 
ILO Conventions and Recommendations. http://www.ilo.
org/ipec/facts/ILOconventionsonchildlabour/lang–en/index.
htm. Accessed May 16, 2012.
	50)	 Tsuzuki-Hayakawa K (1995) Thermoregulation during heat 
exposure of young children compared to their mothers. 
Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 72, 12–7. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
	51)	 Keim SM, Guisto JA, Sullivan JB (2002) Environmental 
thermal stress. Ann Agric Environ Med 9, 1–15. [Medline]
	52)	 Van Someren EJW (2006) Thermolregulation and Aging. 
American Journal of Physiology − Regulatory. Integr Comp 
Physiol 292, 99–102.  [CrossRef]
	53)	 Sessler DI (2008) Temperature monitoring and 
perioperative thermoregulation. Anesthesiology 109, 
318–38. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	54)	 Havenith Ga (1995) Age predicts cardiovascular, but not 
thermoregulatory responses, to humid heat stress. Eur J 
Appl Occup Physiol 70, 88–96. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	55)	 Kenney LW, Havenith G (1993) Thermal physiology of 
the elderly and handicapped. J Therm Biol 18, 341–4. 
[CrossRef]
	56)	 Kingma B, Frijns A, van Marken Lichtenbelt W (2012) The 
thermoneautral zone: implications for metabolic studies. 
Front Biosci E4, 1975–85.
	57)	 Havenith G (2005) Temperature regulation, heat balance 
and climatic stress. Extreme Weather Events and Public 
Health Responses 7, 69–80.
	58)	 Witterseh T, Wyon DP, Clausen G (2004) The effects of 
moderate heat stress and open-plan office noice distraction 
on SBS symptoms and of the performance of office work. 
Indoor Air 14, 30–40. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	59)	 Kenny GP, Olley J (2007) Evidence of a greater onset 
threshold for sweating in females following intense 
exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 101, 487–93. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
	60)	 Hartgill TW, Bergersen TK, Pirhonen J (2011) Core body 
temperature and the thermoneutral zone: a longitudinal 
study of normal human pregnancy. Acta Physiol (Oxf) 201, 
467–74. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	61)	 Bell P, et al. (2005) Environmental Psychology, 5th Ed. 
Taylor and Francis, London.
	62)	 Meeser GB, Kok R, Lewis MI (1982) The effect of 
moderate thermal stress on the potential work performance 
of factory workers—An interim report. Energy Build 4, 
289–94.  [CrossRef]
	63)	 Lloyd, EL (1994) ABC of sports medicine: temperature and 
performance II: Heat. BMJ 309, 587. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	64)	 Fisk WJ (2000) Health and productivity gains from better 
indoor environments and their relationships with building 
energy efficiency. Annu Rev Energy Environ 25, 537–66. 
[CrossRef]
	65)	 Wyon DP (2004) The effects of indoor air quality on 
performance and productivity. Indoor Air 14, 92–101. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
	66)	 Balakrishnan K, Ramalingam A, Dasu V, Stephen JC, 
Sivaperumal MR, Kumarasamy D, Mukhopadhyay K, 
Ghosh S, Sambandam S (2010) Case studies on heat stress 
related perceptions in different industrial sectors in southern 
India. Glob Health Action 3, 1–11. [Medline]
	67)	 Kjellström T (2011) Occupational heat exposure − a 
forgotten threat from climate change, in climate change and 
Occupational Heat Stress and Climate Change: A Review
15
occupational health expert meeting. Lund University, Lund.
	68)	 Kjellström T (2009) The direct impact of climate change on 
regional labour productivity. Arch Environ Occup Health 
64, 217–27. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	69)	 International Labour Office (2011) Towards an ILO 
approach to climate change adaptation, E. Sector. ILO, 
Geneva.
	70)	 Ahasan MR (1999) Work related problems in metal 
handling tasks in Bangladesh: obstacles to the development 
of safety and health measures. Ergonomics 42, 385–96. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
	71)	 Hogstedt C, Kjellström T (2009) A global perspective on 
OSH, in OSH for development, Elgstrand K and Petersson 
NF (Eds.), Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
	72)	 Schenker M (2011) Occupational heat-related illness among 
agricultural workers, in climate change and occupational 
health expert meeting. Lund University, Lund.
	73)	 Nag PK, Nag A, Ashtekar SP (2007) Thermal limits of men 
in moderate to heavy work in tropical farming. Ind Health 
45, 107–17. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	74)	 Torres C, et al. (2010) Decreased kidney function of 
unknown cause in Nicaragua: a community-based survey. 
Am J Kidney Dis 55, 485–96. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	75)	 Crowe J, van Wendel, de Joode B, Wesseling C (2009) A 
pilot field evaluation on heat stress in sugarcane workers in 
Costa Rica: what to do next? Global Health Action 2.
	76)	 Malchaire J (1999) Strategy for evaluation and prevention 
of risk due to work in thermal environments. Ann Occup 
Hyg 43, 367–76. [Medline]
	77)	 ISO7243 (1989) http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_catalogue/
catalogue_tc/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=13895. 
Accessed May 16, 2012.
	78)	 Holmér I (2010) Climate change and occupational heat 
stress. Global Health Action 3.
	79)	 National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
(1986) Criteria for a recommended standard: occupational 
exposure to hot environments, 86–113, NIOSH, Atlanta.
	80)	 Gao C, Kuklane K, Wang F, Holmér I (2012) Personal 
cooling with phase change materials to improve thermal 
comfort from a heat wave perspective. Indoor Air 22, 
523–30.  [CrossRef]. [Medline]
	81)	 Gao C, Kuklane K, Holmér I (2011) Cooling vests with 
phase change materials: the effects of melting temperature 
on heat strain alleviation in an extremely hot environment. 
Eur J Appl Physiol 111, 1207–16. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	82)	 Gao C, Kuklane K, Holmér I (2010) Cooling vests with 
phase change material packs: the effects of temperature 
gradient, mass and covering area. Ergonomics 53, 716–23. 
[Medline]  [CrossRef]
	83)	 Gunnarsen L, Santos AMB (2002) Reduced heat stress 
in offices in the tropics using solar powered drying of the 
Supply Air. Indoor Air 12, 252–62. [Medline]  [CrossRef]
	84)	 Kjellström T, Lemke B, Otto M (2011) Climate change, 
occupational heat stress, and impacts on health and 
Productivity in Africa. Afr Newsl Occup Health Saf 21, 44.
	85)	 Mairiaux P, Malchaire J (1985) Workers self-pacing in hot 
conditions: a case study. Appl Ergon 16, 85–90. [Medline] 
[CrossRef]
