 
 
INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCTION 
This Adaptation Framework was created by Up North on Climate (Laurentian University) in collaboration with 
Prepared by: 
Kim Fram, Cassidy McAuliffe, Chantal Sarrazin-Delay, and David Pearson (Laurentian University) 
With input from: 
Barb Duffin (Mushkegowuk Council), Geneva Kejick (Grand Council Treaty #3), Chris Koostachin 
(Keewaytinook Okimakanak), Roxanne Metlin (Mushkegowuk Council), Cristina Ross (Matawa First Nations 
Management), Erica Tropea (Nokiiwin Tribal Council), and Vivian Waswa (Shibogama First Nations Council) 
Thanks to: 
Sarah Cockerton and Kim Jorgenson (Matawa First Nations Management), Dan Duckert and predecessor 
Donald Meekis (Keewaytinook Okimakanak), Lucas King (Grand Council Treaty #3), Roger Rozon and 
predecessor Tara Ingram (Nokiiwin Tribal Council), and Laura Sayers (Shibogama First Nations Council) 
© Up North on Climate 2021. 
We welcome the use of this document for adaptation planning and kindly request it be referenced as follows: 
Up North on Climate. 2021. Adaptation Framework. Laurentian University, Ontario. 
https://www.upnorthonclimate.ca/adaptation-planning 
 Reproduction of this document is permitted provided that it is not modified or used for commercial purposes. 
For more information, reach out to upnorthonclimate@laurentian.ca 
Developed with financial support from Natural Resources Canada's Building Regional Adaptation Capacity and 
Expertise (BRACE) Program as part of the co-lead project Building Climate Change Adaptation Capacity of First 
Nations in Far Northern Ontario Through Knowledge-Exchange and Collaboration. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
•
LEARNING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE SCIENCE……………..………………………….…………… 2 
•
LEARNING ABOUT PROBABLE FUTURE CLIMATE……………………..……………….………….. 2 
•
BECOMING FAMILIAR WITH THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE…..…………...…….... 4
•
LEARNING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATIONS............................................... 4 
•
BEGINNING TO MAKE CONNECTIONS IN THE COMMUNITY..................................... 5 
•
WHAT KIND OF KNOWLEDGE? ............................................................................... 7 
•
WAYS TO GATHER KNOWLEDGE............................................................................. 8 
•
WHAT AN ADAPTATION WORKSHOP COULD COVER........................................... 12 
•
FINALIZING THE ADAPTATION CHOICE(S).............................................................. 16 
•
CREATING A DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION PLAN................................................... 18 
•
EVALUATING THE SUCCESS OF THE ADAPTATION.................................................. 21 
•
EVALUATING THE ADAPTATION PROCESS ALONG THE WAY.................................. 21 
•
LEARNING FROM THE ADAPTATION PROCESS....................................................... 23 
•
WHAT IF THE ADAPTATION HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL?..................................... 23 1. 
SET THE GROUNDWORK 2. 
CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY 3. 
ADAPTATION WORKSHOP 4. 
MOVING INTO ACTION 5. 
IS IT WORKING? 
OVERVIEW 
INTRODUCTION 
RESOURCES 
 
First Nation peoples have always had to adapt, whether it be to changing weather from year to year, 
changes in where to find animals and plants for wild food and medicine, or changes on the land affecting 
travel and personal safety. However, human-caused greenhouse gas emissions are causing the Earth’s 
atmosphere and climate to change toward a warmer world at a faster and faster rate, with 
temperatures in the north rising at twice the rate of other regions. These changes, coupled with the 
close ties First Nation communities have with the land, make the need to prepare and adapt to the 
impacts of climate change increasingly important. 
As part of a Building Regional Adaptation Capacity and Expertise (BRACE) project co-led by First Nations 
and Laurentian University, the Tribal Councils of Keewaytinook Okimakanak, Matawa, Mushkegowuk, 
Nokiiwin and Shibogama, as well as Grand Council Treaty #3, each appointed a Climate Change Specialist 
with the role of advancing climate change adaptation in their member communities. The goal of this 
document is to provide a framework that the Climate Change Specialists (or those who fulfill a similar 
role) can use to move towards successful adaptations for the communities they serve. The aim is to help 
implement adaptations that are in line with a community’s needs, mesh with the community’s values 
and goals, and incorporate Traditional Knowledge as well as science. 
This Adaptation Framework is organized into 5 major steps:
1. SET THE GROUNDWORK
Solidify your knowledge of climate change science, local knowledge of impacts in the north, and
possible ways of adapting. Foster a relationship with the community or communities you hope to
work with.
2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY
Learn how climate change is impacting the community you’re working with.
3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP
Together with community members, decide what climate change impact or impacts will be
addressed and what adaptation or adaptations the community would like to use.
4. MOVING INTO ACTION
Finalize adaptation choice and create a plan to put the chosen adaptation(s) into practice.
5. IS IT WORKING?
Evaluate the success of the adaptation and the adaptation process.
INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCTION 
Because each situation and each community is unique, flexibility is important. With this in mind, this
Adaptation Framework suggests a variety of options and resources that could be used to work through 
the steps outlined in the adaptation process. As an example, the framework suggests the possibility of 
combining steps 2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY and 3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP into a 
single workshop event, an adjustment which may be necessary due to circumstances of time, money, 
travel, etc.  
How exactly the Climate Change Specialist (or whoever who is facilitating the adaptation process) 
decides to accomplish the steps within the framework is ultimately up to them. This flexible approach 
also allows the Climate Change Specialist as the facilitator to incorporate the Indigenous practices and 
traditions appropriate to the community they are working with.  
There isn’t one “right way” to adapt to climate change and every community will have its own goals and 
face its own challenges. By incorporating flexibility while still providing a clear path towards adaptation, 
this framework aims to be a useful tool for climate change adaptation projects in First Nation 
communities across the north. 
1
2
 
The process of adapting to climate change has to be based on an understanding of climate change. 
Recognizing, at least in broad strokes, what is causing climate change, what changes we will see as a 
result, and what impacts those changes will have on the land, communities and people is fundamental 
to adaptation planning. Learning about these topics, especially impacts and adaptations, will likely be 
ongoing throughout the adaptation planning process. 
LEARNING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE SCIENCE 
During the course of adaptation planning, it will be necessary to speak about why and 
how climate change is happening. A good knowledge base on the topic can help when 
presenting information to community members or answering any questions. A 
collection of trusted resources can also be useful for finding answers to climate 
change questions you may be unfamiliar with. 
Learn about climate change science with: 
Resources from Up North on Climate: 
•
Science Climate Story
•
Climate Change Infosheets
•
Climate Change Quick Guide
•
Up North on Climate Facebook page
•
Up North on Climate Website
Other resources like: 
•
“Global Warming: The Complete Briefing”, 5th edition by John Houghton
•
The Royal Society – Climate Change: Evidence and Causes
•
Skeptical Science
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions in the Resources Table
LEARNING ABOUT PROBABLE FUTURE CLIMATE 
Knowing how global climate change is likely to change local temperature, rainfall, snow amounts, 
growing season, severe weather events and more, is important for adaptation planning. These 
predictions of future climate (called climate change projections) can be found online at several user-
friendly sites like: 
•
Climate Atlas of Canada
•
Climate Data Canada
•
Canadian Climate Data and Scenarios
SET THE GROUNDWORK 
1. SET THE GROUNDWORK 
1. 
 
3
Climate change will impact different regions in different ways, so 
knowing the projections for the area you are working in is 
important. Projections include many different variables such 
as “very hot days” that are stressful for Elders, “growing 
degree days” useful to know for growing vegetables, and the 
number of “very cold days” important for winter road 
building. Exploring the projections for your community is a 
good way to become familiar with projections.  
Climate projections are usually given for three different 
scenarios (also called Pathways): a future where there is little 
to no reduction in greenhouse gas emissions (Representative 
Concentration Pathway 8.5), a future where greenhouse gas 
emissions start to decline after the year 2050 (RCP 4.5), or 
a future in which greenhouse gas emissions are 
dramatically reduced now (RCP 2.6). Currently, emissions 
are most closely following RCP 8.5 and planning for this 
possibility might be the most practical option as 
adaptations designed for RCP 8.5 will also be valuable 
under lower greenhouse gas emissions. Plans designed for 
lower concentration pathways, however, will likely be 
ineffective if we stay on the 8.5 pathway.   
When working with a community on an adaptation plan, it 
will be important to share local climate projections with 
community members and leaders. 
Learn about climate change models with: 
Resources from Up North on Climate: 
• 
Climate Modelling & RCP Infosheet 
Other resources like: 
• 
Carbon Brief's Series on Climate Modelling 
• 
Skeptical Science - How do Climate Models Work? 
• 
A Guidebook on Climate Scenarios 
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions in the Resources Table 
 
CLIMATE PROJECTIONS 
Climate depends on many complex 
processes happening in the 
atmosphere, the oceans, and on 
the land. To predict future climate, 
a computer model can be created 
that mimics these processes.  
It is important to understand that 
climate projections may vary from 
model to model because each is 
based on a slightly different 
understanding of climate 
processes. Most mapped 
projections (like climatedata.ca) 
are, therefore, based on the 
average of many models. 
4
BECOMING FAMILIAR WITH THE IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
Start to become familiar with what climate change means for people and communities in the north and 
how it has and will impact the land and resources they rely on. For example, what exactly are the results 
of having warmer winters? What happens when seasonal amounts of rainfall and snowfall 
(precipitation) change? 
Although the specifics of how a community is being affected may vary from place to place (gathering 
these specific observations is the focus of step 2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY), building a 
knowledge base for climate change impacts in the broader area like northeastern Ontario or 
northwestern Ontario, or along the coast will be helpful as a starting point. 
Learn about climate change impacts with: 
Resources from Up North on Climate: 
•
Fictional Community Climate Adaptation Report
Other resources like: 
•
Canada’s Changing Climate Report
•
The Indigenous Climate Change Observation Network (Alberta)
•
Climate Atlas of Canada - Topics
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions in the Resources Table
LEARNING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATIONS 
The goal of an adaptation plan is to prepare ways of reducing the harmful and dangerous impacts of a 
changing climate on people, life on the land, and on homes and infrastructure. Putting adaptations into 
practice will help people and communities deal with the changes that are happening now and will likely 
continue into the future.  
Begin to discover the adaptation options that are out there. Look to other communities that are 
preparing for climate change for examples. In the north and around the world, a wide range of 
adaptation options are being put into action, from small to large scale, low to high cost, and individual to 
community initiatives.  Start thinking about what options could be feasible for the area you’re working 
in and the communities you’re working with. Keep in mind that you may have to describe and 
present potential adaptation options to community members. 
New ways of reducing climate impacts in communities are always coming up, so learning 
about adaptation options will likely continue throughout the adaptation planning 
process. Keep an eye out for articles, news reports, or social media posts that might 
outline adaptations taking place in other communities. Good descriptions and 
photos of successful adaptations can encourage action if people are feeling 
uncertain about trying something.   
This report is an example based on 
reports created for more than 20 
northern Ontario communities by 
the Up North on Climate project.  
Community reports were based on 
Traditional Knowledge related to 
climate change and are the 
property of the communities.  
If a community you are working 
with has a report, Up North on 
Climate may be able to guide you 
to an appropriate community 
contact for access to the report.  
5
Learn about climate change adaptation options with: 
Resources from Up North on Climate: 
•
Adapting to a Changing Climate Report
•
Impact and Adaptation Infosheets
•
Up North on Climate Website
•
Climate Change Adaptation Quick Guide
Other resources like: 
•
Climate Atlas of Canada – Take Action
•
Climate Adaptation Knowledge Exchange (USA)
•
Climate Change Adaptation Planning Guidebooks for Indigenous Communities – Resources for
Winter Roads, Wildfires, Flooding, & Coastal Erosion
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions in the Resources Table
BEGINNING TO MAKE CONNECTIONS IN THE COMMUNITY 
Creating an adaptation plan for a community will depend on the participation of community members, 
especially Elders, who remember the weather of the past and ways that it has changed. Reach out to 
communities and begin to build relationships. Ways to do this might include:  
•
Reaching out to any contacts you already have in the community
•
Introducing yourself to community leadership and community professionals
•
Seeking out hunters, trappers, or other land-users in the community who might have
observations to share
Connecting with community members who have an interest in addressing the impacts of climate change 
may go a long way towards moving adaptation planning forward. Putting adaptation ideas into practice 
in the community will likely require a team of people working together.  
Be on the look-out for people who may be able to fulfill these roles. Having a project “champion” in the 
community (a person or group of people dedicated to seeing the project through) will be especially 
important. The role of a project champion is outlined in more detail in step 4. MOVING INTO ACTION. 
6
7
 
 
Adaptation planning must be guided by the needs, concerns, and observations of the community you’re 
working with. As such, it is important to learn how climate change is being experienced by people in the 
community and what impacts it is having on their lives. 
WHAT KIND OF KNOWLEDGE? 
How the climate in the area has changed over time 
Elders in the community, and perhaps even younger members, 
will have observations about how seasons and weather have 
changed since they were children.  Long term records from 
Environment Canada weather stations are also available for a 
handful of northern communities. Historical climate for the rest 
of the north has been modeled based on these few weather 
stations and can be found on Climate Atlas and Climate Data. 
How climate change is impacting community infrastructure 
How are roads, buildings, and homes being affected? What 
about community services like electricity, water, and sewage? 
Could climate change make these issues worse? 
How climate change is impacting the land 
What changes are happening to forests, lakes, rivers, and 
wetlands? How are traditional plants, animals, and other 
resources that people rely on being affected? 
How climate change is impacting people 
How has climate change impacted the lives of people in the 
community? For example, has their health and safety been 
impacted? Is travel over the land more difficult? Are berries 
harder to find? 
What community members are most concerned about 
What issues have widespread agreement among community 
members? Are there any issues that could pose serious risk to 
human health or safety? What do community members identify 
as priorities? 
2.
CLIMATE CHANGE
IN THE COMMUNITY
2. 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IN THE COMMUNITY 
8
WAYS TO GATHER KNOWLEDGE 
Learning about climate change in a community could happen in several ways. You 
are not limited to one approach and can choose whichever option or options work 
best for your situation. Time frame, financial considerations, or your ability to travel 
to communities may all play a role in determining how this information is collected.  
Speak to community members 1-on-1 or in small groups 
Learn about climate change directly from community members by asking questions 
about what they’ve observed, how things have changed, and what impacts they are 
noticing. This could be done in person, or over telephone or video chat if appropriate. A 
trusted contact or project champion in the community could also be the one to speak 
to community members. Conversations could be guided by your own set of questions 
or by using resources provided by Up North on Climate such as the APP rapid risk 
assessment or Questions for interviewing First Nations Elders and community 
members. 
Reach out to any contacts you have in the community to 
start looking for people who may be interested in 
participating. Meeting with community members this 
way could also be a good way to foster interest in the 
project and help keep it moving forward. 
Sharing circle 
Community members may be open to sharing their 
experiences of climate change as part of a sharing 
circle or talking circle. Sharing circles can allow people 
to voice their thoughts in a comfortable environment 
that respects Indigenous oral tradition and the spirit 
of reciprocal learning. Reach out to any contacts you 
have in the community to start looking for people 
who may be interested in participating. A sharing 
circle could also be organized and led by a trusted 
community contact or project champion. Connecting 
with community members this way may also help to 
foster interest in the project and keep it moving 
forward. 
Community meeting or workshop 
Speaking as part of a community meeting 
or hosting your own workshop could be a 
good way of gathering information from 
community members in a shorter 
amount of time. Discussion could be 
Assessing risks, Prioritizing action, 
Preparing for climate change (APP) 
Rapid Risk Assessment 
The APP Rapid Risk Assessment is a tool 
created by Up North on Climate to help 
gather information on climate change 
observations, risks, and impacts in 
northern Ontario communities.  
Climate change impacts are divided into 
8 categories (wildfire, infrastructure, 
ecosystems, health, food security, 
drought, transportation, flood) and a 
series of questions are provided for each 
category to start the discussion process.  
A planning table is also included to help 
link climate change observations to 
possible adaptation actions. 
Example 
8 
9
guided by your own set of questions or by using resources provided by Up North on Climate such as our 
APP rapid risk assessment. To begin this sort of discussion, it may be helpful to first outline aspects of 
climate change science such as the greenhouse effect, carbon emissions, and recorded changes. 
If you’re hosting your own workshop, it might be appropriate or necessary to 
combine gathering knowledge about climate change in the community (current step 
2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY) and discussing and choosing adaptation
options (next step 3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP) into one workshop event.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How should I ask about climate change? 
Tips for learning from community members 
Talking to community members can be a great way to learn about the climate change impacts they’re 
seeing and feeling. Here are some tips that could help you guide those conversations. 
Use friendly words – Always use common words, instead of technical ones, whenever possible. The 
word ‘infrastructure’, for example, might be replaced with ‘roads’, ‘buildings’ or ‘power lines’. Instead 
of asking if the ‘climate’ has changed, try using the word ‘weather’. 
Ask people for their observations – A question like “What have you noticed about climate change?” 
can feel technical and intimidating. Instead, try asking questions that let people speak to their own 
observations and experience, like “How has snowfall changed since you were a child?” or “Have you 
noticed changes in how hot or cold the summer is?” 
Different people can speak to different experiences – Not all community members will actively hunt, 
fish, or use the land, and they may not feel comfortable answering questions about impacts in those 
areas. If that’s the case, you can gear your questions towards changes they may have noticed in the 
community (like flooded crawl spaces or damage to roads) or with weather (like changes in storms, 
snow, or heat). If you feel you’re missing information about impacts in specific areas (like hunting and 
gathering, for example), you might consider approaching community members who can fill those gaps 
and asking if they’d like to be interviewed. 
Practice your interview skills – Conducting a good interview can take practice. Consider brushing up on 
your interviewing skills by learning some tips and tricks and practicing on friends or coworkers. 
Check out the APP rapid risk assessment or Questions for interviewing First Nations Elders and 
community members for questions you can use to talk to community members about climate change 
or use them as inspiration to create your own! 
10
Self-directed surveys or questionnaires 
It may be possible to engage community members with surveys or questionnaires either filled out online 
or delivered to households. This option might be appropriate if circumstances prevent you from meeting 
with community members in person before a planned meeting or workshop to discuss the issue further. 
Do some research or inquire with your community contacts to determine how well received this option 
might be in the community. It should also be noted that the response rate to these kinds of initiatives 
can be low. 
Let the community take the lead 
Community leadership may want to take the lead in collecting information about current, and possible 
future, climate impacts in the community. Chief and Council could establish a group or task force to look 
at ways their community is likely to be affected by climate change. Their work could be supported by a 
team of young people whose task would be to collect memories and evidence of the ways the 
community and community members have been affected by weather events in the past. 
Do your research 
It may be possible to find information through other sources, like past reports, news articles, or 
available data, to help add to your knowledge of the community. This could include:  
•
Adapting to a Changing Climate community reports
(complied by Up North on Climate from in-community
collected Traditional Knowledge related to climate
change impacts) *
•
Vulnerability or infrastructure assessments that have
already been conducted by the community
•
Any adaptation projects that have already been
planned or carried out in the community
•
Long-term temperature/precipitation data from
Environment Canada weather stations (however
weather stations across the north are sparse)
•
Estimates of historical weather data can be found at
Climate Atlas and Climate Data
•
News reports detailing events like floods, wildfire, winter road conditions, etc.
Resources  
Available from Up North on Climate: 
•
The Assessing risks, Prioritizing action, Preparing for climate change (APP): Adapting to climate
change in northern Ontario, rapid risk assessment
•
Questions for interviewing First Nations Elders and community members
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions in the Resources Table*NOTE: Adapting to a Changing Climate community reports, belong to the community. Sharing of the report is at the discretion of the community. Reach out to the Up North on Climate team to see if a report was compiled for the community you’re working with and to help find a community contact who can 
share the report with you. 
11 
12
 
Once it’s clear how the community is being impacted by climate change, the community can begin to 
discuss possible adaptation options. This could be done with community members in a workshop 
setting. Having community leadership (Chief, Council members, decision makers) involved in the 
workshop could be helpful since they may need to be involved in the implementation of adaptations in 
the community. 
As discussed in the past step, it may be necessary or appropriate to use one workshop that combines 
both step 2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY and step 3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP. If steps are 
combined into a single workshop, make sure that adequate time is allotted to cover both topics. 
AN ADAPTATION WORKSHOP COULD COVER: 
A brief review/introduction of climate change and climate change science 
Outline what climate change is and why it’s happening. This information should be 
presented with plain language and friendly graphics to be accessible to all 
community members. 
A summary of climate change projections for the community 
What might the future climate of the community look like as a result of climate 
change? How will things like temperature, rain, and snow change in each season? 
What about weather events like heavy rains, extreme storms, or drought? Again, 
this information should be presented in a way that’s accessible to all community 
members. 
A review of the climate change impacts/observations/concerns expressed by 
community members 
The focus of step 2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY was to learn from the 
community how climate change impacts were being seen and felt and to get an 
idea of what impacts seemed to be priorities to address.  Briefly outline those 
findings and try to determine:  
•
If the group, in general, agrees with the findings
•
If any impacts have been missed
•
Which impacts are of greatest concern or are the highest priority to address
(If steps 2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY and 3. ADAPTATION 
WORKSHOP have been combined into a single workshop and priority impacts have 
already been identified, this review is not necessary.) 
ADAPTATION WORKSHOP
3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP 
3.
13
Determining what impacts to address 
The community has likely created a long list of climate change impacts and addressing them all may not 
be possible. Focus instead on a “short-list” of priority impacts. How many items are included in the 
short-list can be discussed with the community. Perhaps the decision is to focus on one issue, or maybe 
you have the time to discuss three issues. Through dialogue and conversation, the group can decide 
what impacts to include on the short-list. Short-listed impacts might be ones that: 
•
The majority of community members find important
•
Affect the greatest number of people
•
Can most effectively be addressed
•
Pose the greatest threat to human safety
Discussion of adaptation options for selected impacts 
Once the community has determined what climate change 
impacts it would like to address, they can begin to consider 
adaptation options. Focus on one impact from your short-
list at a time. Adaptation options can be discussed with the 
group as a whole or, if your workshop has enough 
participants, by breaking into smaller groups.  
Up North on Climate has created an Adaptation Options 
Worksheet (included in the Resources section) that you may 
find helpful when discussing the adaptation options for an 
impact. You can also take the general idea and adapt it to 
suit your needs. Encourage participants to share their 
thoughts in whatever way makes them feel comfortable. 
Beginning a discussion around adaptation options might be 
difficult. Community members participating in the workshop 
may not be familiar with the adaptation options available to 
address a particular problem. Discussing how cultural or 
traditional practices can guide adaptation (how the issue 
might have been dealt with in the past, for example) could 
be a good way to begin an adaptation conversation. You 
could also present adaptation options for the community to 
consider. Presenting some options may help spark 
discussion and lead to other ideas.  
Up North on Climate has created a guide to adaptation 
options (the Climate Change Adaptation Quick Guide) that 
could be useful as part of the adaptation workshop or 
similar community meetings. The guide is designed for a 
community audience and uses a visual approach to outline 
adaptation options in a northern community.  Climate Change Adaptation Quick Guide Example
14
Choosing adaptation options 
There isn’t one “right way” to address a climate change impact. It’s up to the community to 
decide which adaptation option or options would be best for their unique situation. Even when 
focusing on one impact, discussing adaptation options will likely lead to a range of possible actions. 
Deciding which options to put into practice can be challenging. Here are some points to consider when 
trying to choose an adaptation option: 
•
How long will this adaptation take to put in place? How long will it last?
•
Will this adaptation help all people who are impacted?
•
Will this adaptation still work under future climate conditions?
•
Is this adaptation in line with social and cultural values?
•
What is the cost of this adaptation? What funding sources could be used?
The Adaptation Options Worksheet could be helpful when discussing adaptation options with the 
community. It provides space to list what the community feels are the pros and cons of each adaptation 
being considered and allows you to classify options as either an adaptation the community would like to 
put into action, an adaptation the community would like to investigate further, or an adaptation the 
community would like to reject. Encourage dialogue and discussion around these topics. The adaptations 
chosen from this workshop will be the basis of the next steps of this Adaptation Framework.
Resources 
Available from Up North on Climate: 
•
Climate Change Adaptation Quick Guide
(check out the Resources section for a
sample page)
•
Adaptation Options Worksheet
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions
in the Resources Table
15
16
 
The ultimate goal of the Adaptation Framework is to see adaptations put in place in communities. Once 
the community has chosen the adaptations they would like to pursue, planning can begin. This step 
involves two main components: finalizing the adaptation choice(s) and creating a detailed 
implementation plan.
Turning adaptation plans into adaptation actions will take time and dedication. It will be important to 
find a “champion” or “champions” in the community. A champion could be a person or a group of 
people who are dedicated to moving the adaptation plan forward. These may be community members 
who have taken a particular interest in the adaptation process, community groups or associations, a 
community professional, or someone in community leadership. Ideally, champions will be able to 
dedicate the time necessary to put the project into action and remain in the role until the project is 
complete. 
The community champion(s) may want to work together with you to move through the final stages of 
the adaptation process, or it might be the champion or the community’s wish to work through the final 
steps independently.  
FINALIZING THE ADAPTATION CHOICE(S) 
From the adaptation workshop (step 3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP), you know what adaptation options 
community members would like to put into practice, but further research, conversations, and decisions 
may still be required.  This could include:  
Gathering feedback from community members who were not part of the adaptation 
workshop 
This might include those who hold appropriate Traditional Knowledge, those in key 
positions in the community, or those most impacted by the issues being addressed. 
Continuing to speak about adaptation and sharing the results of the adaptation workshop 
may also grow community support for adaptation actions. 
Connecting with community leadership 
Putting adaptations into practice in the community may require the involvement of 
community leadership (Chief, Council members, decision makers). If leadership was not 
involved in the adaptation workshop, share the results with them and discuss the desire 
community members have to work towards adaptation strategies. 
MOVING INTO ACTION
4. MOVING INTO ACTION 
4. 
17
Determining which adaptations are most possible 
Constraints of time, money, or circumstance may mean that some adaptations just aren’t 
feasible or practical for the community. It may take some research or consultations with 
professionals to determine if and how a given adaptation could work in your community. 
Connecting with other adapters 
If an adaptation project has already been attempted or carried out in the community, reach 
out to those who were involved and ask about their experience. If other communities have 
done similar adaptations, consider connecting with them and learning about their projects.  
Looking for “quick wins” 
 Adaptations that are relatively easy and can be done relatively quickly could be considered 
“quick wins” for the community. Quick win projects can get the ball rolling on the adaptation 
process and help build community support for adaptation. 
 
 
 
I’ve done the adaptation workshop, but I can’t take it any further. What now? 
Exiting the process at step 3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP 
Limits of time or money, a lack of community interest, the absence of a community champion, or other 
circumstances may mean that you can’t take the adaptation process for the community further than 
step 3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP. If this is the case, you can still promote the findings of the 
adaptation workshop in the community.  
You can: 
•
Create a report summarizing the findings of the adaptation workshop, including the adaptations
chosen by community members. Share this report with community leadership, community
departments, community professionals, etc. and reinforce the idea that community members want
to adapt.
•
Create a presentation that outlines the adaptation workshop and its findings. The presentation
could be used to communicate with community leadership, community professionals, given at
community meetings, etc.
•
Consider inviting a guest who can speak to the community about successful adaptation and
provide encouragement.
•
Continue your search for a community champion to put the chosen adaptations into action or
consider turning the community champion role into a paid part-time or honorarium supported
position.
•
Continue to look for funders/funding streams that can help to carry out the adaptation.
•
Keep the conversation about adaptation active in the community.
18
CREATING A DETAILED IMPLEMENTATION PLAN 
Putting an adaptation into practice will require a detailed plan that includes budgeting, timelines, 
assigning responsibilities, approvals, etc. Each adaptation you wish to put into practice should have its 
own implementation plan. Keep in mind that adaptation projects can range in scope and scale. The 
planning process for a project aimed at individual or household adaptation, for example, may look 
completely different from the planning process required for a large infrastructure project. The planning 
stage is also when you should begin to think about how you might evaluate the effectiveness of the 
adaptation after it is complete. 
To create an implementation plan for the adaptation project, you may have to: 
Create a budget and seek out funding 
Breaking down the expected costs and creating a budget is an important part of any project.
Having a good idea of total project cost will also be helpful when looking for project money.  
Funding for the adaptation project could come from grants, partnerships, or internal 
community sources.  
Create a project team and assign responsibilities 
Depending on the scope of the project, a team of people may be needed to implement it. This 
could mean working with other community members, with professionals from inside or 
outside the community, or working with departments within the community. 
Get necessary approvals 
Depending on the scope of the project, it may be necessary to get approval or permits from 
government agencies, Chief and Council, Band staff, etc.  
Define timelines and set targets along the way 
Having a reasonable timeline can help move a project along. Timelines are especially 
important in projects that have multiple steps or seasonal constraints (for example, items that 
need to arrive on the winter road). Setting targets along the way can provide a good 
opportunity to update the community on the progress of the adaptation and create 
enthusiasm for the project.  
Outline the criteria that will measure success 
Step 5. IS IT WORKING? will involve evaluating how well the completed adaptation is working. 
Start to define what a successful project will look like and what criteria you might use to 
measure it. For example, you may want to know how many more people have access to local 
food now than before the project began, or how often hunters are using the safety equipment 
that is now available in the community. Some information that will be used for evaluation 
may have to be gathered before the project begins to compare to after the project has been 
19
completed, so planning for evaluation now can be important. For more guidance on evaluating your 
project, see step 5. IS IT WORKING?. 
When planning your project, it may be helpful to look to other successful community projects and learn 
from their experience. This might include learning about successful funding applications, getting an idea 
of realistic timelines, learning what approaches worked well (or didn’t work well) in the community, etc. 
Considering ways to include youth in the adaptation process might also be a priority for some 
communities. Some projects might provide the opportunity to involve youth directly in activities like 
tree planting, community monitoring, or habitat restoration. In other cases, it could mean using the 
project as an opportunity to talk to youth about climate change and the importance of adaptation.  
20
21
 
Once an adaptation has been put into place, it’s important to ask, “Is it working?”. Checking in during 
the adaptation implementation process and learning from it afterward can also be helpful steps towards 
ensuring successful adaptations now and in the future. Here, general guidance is provided for program 
evaluation and gauging adaptation success.
EVALUATING THE SUCCESS OF THE ADAPTATION 
To gauge the success of your adaptation, you can begin by asking questions like: 
Does the adaptation meet your criteria for success?  
As discussed in step 4. MOVING INTO ACTION, part of planning an adaptation is 
outlining what success would mean for your community. Does the completed 
adaptation meet those criteria?  
Is the adaptation reaching everyone it was intended to? 
Are there people or groups who are not experiencing the benefits of this adaptation? 
Are people utilizing the adaptation as expected? Why or why not? 
Is the adaptation affecting anyone negatively? 
Did the adaptation have any unexpected consequences? For example, did attempting 
to stop flooding in one area cause flooding in another? 
Will this adaptation still work into the future? 
Given the projections for future climate, is it likely this adaptation will continue to work 
into the future? Will maintenance or updates for the adaptation be required to keep it 
working? Could this adaptation work even for extreme events? 
EVALUATING THE ADAPTATION PROCESS ALONG THE WAY
It is also important, especially for projects that take months or years to complete, that the project be 
monitored and evaluated along the way. Questions to ask could include: 
•
Is this adaptation still on track to accomplish our goal?
•
Has any new information come to light that could change how effective this adaptation will be?
•
Is this adaptation still in line with climate change projections? With our community goals?
•
Are we on track to meet our timeline? Are we on track to meet our budget?
IS IT WORKING?
5. IS IT WORKING? 
5. 
22
CHOOSING CRITERIA FOR SUCCESS – POINTS TO CONSIDER 
Every community wants their adaptations to be successful, but what does success look like for your 
community? For some adaptations, success may be obvious. If the goal of the adaptation is to stop 
a section of local road from flooding during heavy rains, for example, then success would be that 
the road no longer floods during heavy rain. But in other instances, measures of success may be 
more difficult to define. Here are some points that may be helpful to keep in mind: 
It’s hard to know what would have happened in the absence of the adaptation. It can be hard to 
judge an adaptation against what might have happened without the adaptation in place. If a 
community starts an ice-thickness monitoring program, for example, it’s impossible to know how 
many people would have fallen through the ice without it. Focus instead on what the adaptation 
contributes to the community. In this example, maybe success can be measured by the number of 
people who use the ice-thickness information to plan their travel.  
Before and after comparisons may be possible. It may be possible to compare numbers from 
before the adaptation to numbers from after the adaptation. For example, if your adaptation is 
aimed at increasing the number of blueberry plants in an area, then the number of blueberry plants 
in the area before the adaptation was put in place can be compared to the number of blueberry 
plants in the area after. In some cases, historical data (like weather records) or data from 
monitoring programs in the area may be able to contribute to the “before” data. In other cases, 
baseline data for the “before” will have to be collected prior to putting the adaptation in place. It 
might also be possible for the memories of Elders to provide a “before” narrative. 
Be realistic about how long it is going to take to see results. Some adaptations are going to take 
longer to show results than others. If a community plants trees to provide shade or as a wind break, 
for example, the full effects of the adaptation might not be seen until the trees have grown for 10 
years. Long term projects may require long term monitoring for success to be shown. Measuring 
the success of long term projects in steps may also be helpful (see below). 
Success can be measured in steps. For long term or complex projects, it may be beneficial to define 
success for different steps along the way. For example, in our shade tree adaptation from above, 
success might first be measured as the number of trees planted. Then, as time goes on, success 
could be measured in the number of trees that survive or their rate of growth. Once trees are large 
enough, it may then be possible to measure the effect of their shading. 
23
LEARNING FROM THE ADAPTATION PROCESS 
Learning from the implementation process can help future projects run more smoothly 
and effectively. Once the project has been completed, or when targets have been 
reached along the way, it may be helpful to ask questions like:  
•
Have there been any barriers to putting this adaptation in place? What solutions
were found?
•
Were there any aspects of this project that you wish you had done differently?
How would you change them?
•
What aspects of the project went well? What was the reason for their success?
•
Have there been any co-benefits we hadn’t anticipated? This could include things
like improved air quality, reduced reliance on winter roads, youth engagement,
etc.
•
Were there other stakeholders or people who should have been involved?
•
Was the project timeline realistic? Did the project follow the expected timeline?
•
Was the project budget realistic? Did the project stay on budget?
WHAT IF THE ADAPTATION HAS NOT BEEN SUCCESSFUL? 
Despite the best laid plans, it’s possible that an adaptation won’t perform as expected. If 
this is the case, the first course of action is to examine why the adaptation failed to meet 
expectations. You may want to explore questions like:  
•
Were we missing some information about the impact or adaptation?
•
What areas did the adaptation miss?
•
Was the scale of the adaptation too small to address the problem?
•
Was the design of the adaptation satisfactory?
•
Did the adaptation fail as the result of an extreme or unexpected event?
•
Have people been using the adaptation as expected?
•
Were our expectations for the adaptation realistic?
Once the cause has been identified, it may be possible to adjust the adaptation to yield 
better results. If not, the adaptation process can start again. Identify the vulnerability that 
needs to be addressed, choose an adaptation to use, and put a plan in place to 
implement it. The lessons learned during the course of the previous adaptation, including 
why it may have failed to meet expectations, can help inform the new project.  Once the 
new adaptation has been completed, measure its success. 
Resources 
•
AdaptME toolkit – Adaptation monitoring and evaluation
*Find web addresses and resource descriptions in the Resources Table
 
Climate change is making adaptation necessary for many northern First Nation communities. This 
framework outlines a path for pursuing climate change adaptations that are driven by a community’s 
needs, goals, and values. By breaking the adaptation process down into manageable pieces and offering 
flexible approaches, the Up North on Climate Adaptation Framework aims to be a useful tool for First 
Nation communities in the north of Ontario and beyond. 
Find the FRAMEWORK CHECKLIST on the next page for a visual flow chart of the adaptation process. 
Use the check boxes to track your progress and see your next step. 
In the RESOURCES section you can find the Resources Table which houses a summary of the resources 
listed throughout the Framework, organized by step, with web addresses and hyperlinks. There is also a 
sample of the Climate Change Adaptation Quick Guide to give you an idea of the visuals and information 
that the Guide provides. Finally, both a blank and an example Adaptation Options Worksheet is 
included. Use the worksheet as is or take the idea and modify it to suit your needs. 
OVERVIEW 
OVERVIEW 
LEARN ABOUT CLIMATE 
CHANGE SCIENCE
LEARN ABOUT PROBABLE 
FUTURE CLIMATE FOR 
YOUR REGION
LEARN ABOUT CLIMATE 
CHANGE IMPACTS IN 
YOUR REGION
LEARN ABOUT CLIMATE 
CHANGE ADAPTATION 
OPTIONS
BEGIN TO MAKE 
CONNECTIONS IN THE 
COMMUNITIES & BE ON 
THE LOOKOUT FOR A 
PROJECT CHAMPION
FIND OUT HOW CLIMATE 
HAS CHANGED OVER TIME
FIND OUT HOW CLIMATE 
CHANGE IS IMPACTING 
INFRASTRUCTURE
FIND OUT HOW CLIMATE 
CHANGE IS IMPACTING 
THE LAND
FIND OUT HOW CLIMATE 
CHANGE IS IMPACTING 
PEOPLE
FIND OUT WHAT 
COMMUNITY MEMBERS 
ARE MOST CONCERNED 
ABOUT
OUTLINE CLIMATE 
CHANGE SCIENCE
SUMMARIZE PROBABLE 
FUTURE CLIMATE FOR 
THE COMMUNITY
CONFIRM CLIMATE 
CHANGE IMPACTS & 
OBSERVATIONS
CHOOSE IMPACTS 
TO ADDRESS
DISCUSS ADAPTATION 
OPTIONS
CHOOSE ADAPTATION(S)
FINALIZE ADAPTATION 
CHOICE(S)
CREATE DETAILED 
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
Gather feedback
Get leadership involved
Which is most possible?
Connect with other adapters
Look for quick win
Seek out/secure funding
Create project team including 
a champion
Get necessary approvals
Define timeline/targets
Outline evaluation criteria
WE CAN’T MOVE 
FORWARD RIGHT NOW
Create a report
Create a presentation
Have guest speakers talk 
about a successful adaptation
Continue search for funding
Keep the conversation active
Continue search for 
community champion
EVALUATE ADAPTATION 
PROCESS ALONG THE WAY
EVALUATE THE SUCCESS 
OF THE ADAPTATION
LEARN FROM THE 
ADAPTATION PROCESS
EVALUATE WHAT DID NOT 
WORK AS EXPECTED
Likely to continue 
throughout entire 
process
May be lengthy 
process depending 
on scope of project
Could be combined into 
one workshop event
FRAMEWORK CHECKLIST
 
RESOURCES FOR LEARNING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE 
Science Climate Story 
This document discusses past climate, current 
climate warming, the greenhouse effect, and 
what the climate of northern Ontario might be 
like in 2050 and beyond (24 pages). 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/what-is-climate-change 
Climate Change 
Infosheets 
2-page information sheets covering 9 topics
related to the science of climate change.
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/what-is-climate-change 
Climate Change 
Quick Guide 
A series of graphics covering climate change 
science topics. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/what-is-climate-change 
Up North on Climate 
Facebook page 
Conversations about climate change impacts 
and adaptation in northern Ontario. 
https://facebook.com/upn
orthonclimate1 
Up North on Climate 
website 
Information about climate change science, 
climate change impacts, and climate change 
adaptation with a focus on northern Ontario 
First Nations. Also find all the resources created 
by UNOC.  
www.upnorthonclimate.ca 
Global Warming: The 
Complete Briefing, 
5th Edition 
A textbook style guide to climate change 
science and its physical and human impacts. 
The author was instrumental in forming and 
shaping the International Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) and a distinguished physicist. 
Author: John Houghton 
The Royal Society - 
Climate change: 
evidence and causes 
Questions and answers about climate change 
with documents available for download. A 
collaboration between The Royal Society (UK) 
and the US National Academy of Sciences. 
https://royalsociety.org/to
pics-
policy/projects/climate-
change-evidence-causes/ 
Skeptical Science 
Addresses misinformation about climate 
change and refutes the arguments made by 
climate change deniers. Created and 
maintained by John Cook, research fellow at 
the Climate Change Communication Research 
Hub at Monash University.  
https://www.skepticalscie
nce.com 
RESOURCES FOR LEARNING ABOUT PROBABLE FUTURE CLIMATE 
Climate change projections for your community 
Climate Atlas of 
Canada 
Learn about climate change in your area with 
an interactive map. Explore videos, articles, or 
other materials to learn more about climate 
change impacts and actions.  
https://climateatlas.ca/ 
Climate Data Canada 
Find and download local or regional climate 
data in easy-to-use formats. Includes training 
modules to help you find and use the data.   
https://climatedata.ca/ 
Canadian Climate 
Data and Scenarios 
Find historical climate data, climate scenarios, 
guidebooks, resources, and more. 
http://climate-
scenarios.canada.ca/ 
Resources for learning about climate change models 
RESOURCES 
RESOURCES 
1. SET THE GROUNDWORK 
 
Up North on Climate 
Modelling and RCP 
Infosheet 
2-page information sheet explaining the basics 
of climate models and RCPs. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/what-is-climate-change 
 
Carbon Brief's series 
on climate modelling 
A question-and-answer series about how 
climate models work from Carbon Brief, an 
award-winning website about climate change 
science and policy. 
https://www.carbonbrief.
org/qa-how-do-climate-
models-work 
Skeptical Science - 
How do climate 
models work? 
An explanation of climate models from 
Skeptical Science, a website that addresses 
climate change misinformation and refutes the 
arguments made by climate change deniers. 
https://www.skepticalscie
nce.com/how-do-climate-
models-work.html 
 
A Guidebook on 
Climate Scenarios 
A guidebook for understanding and using 
climate data and climate projections from 
OURANOS: Consortium on regional climatology 
and adaptation to climate change (100 pages). 
https://www.ouranos.c
a/publication-
scientifique/Guidebook-
2016.pdf 
 
 
RESOURCES FOR LEARNING ABOUT IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
Fictional Community 
Climate Adaptation 
Report  
The Fictional Community Report is a way to 
illustrate the sort of information northern 
Ontario First Nation communities have been 
able to gather about climate change on their 
lands without sharing any confidential 
information. Climate change science, climate 
projections and adaptation options are also 
discussed (100 pages). 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/community-report 
 
Canada's Changing 
Climate Report 
From Environment and Climate Change Canada, 
this 2019 report talks about how and why 
Canada’s climate has changed and what 
changes are projected for the future (440 
pages, but summaries, key messages, and 
breakdown by section is offered). 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
maps-tools-
publications/publications/
climate-change-
publications/canada-
changing-climate-
reports/canadas-changing-
climate-report/21177 
 
The Indigenous 
Climate Change 
Observation Network 
(Alberta) 
Videos that "document and communicate 
community-specific climate change-related 
impacts and identify culturally relevant 
indicators of change." This pilot project 
included participants from Kainai First Nation 
and Samson Cree Nation.  
https://climateatlas.ca/foc
using-climate-change 
Climate Atlas of 
Canada - Topics 
Climate Atlas is organized into some key topics 
to help you explore various aspects of climate 
change and how to take action. 
https://climateatlas.ca/top
ics 
 
 
RESOURCES FOR LEARNING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION 
 
Adapting to a 
Changing Climate 
Explores climate change impacts in northern 
Ontario First Nation communities and discusses 
possible adaptation options (100 pages). 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/impacts-and-adaptations 
Impact and 
Adaptation 
Infosheets 
2-page information sheets about climate 
change impacts and adaptation options. 
Presented under 8 themes: drought, 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/impacts-and-adaptations 
ecosystems, flooding, food security, health, 
infrastructure, transportation, and wildfire. 
Up North on Climate 
website 
Information about climate change science, 
climate change impacts, and climate change 
adaptation with focus on northern Ontario First 
Nations. Also find all the resources created by 
UNOC. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca 
 
Climate Atlas of 
Canada – Take Action 
Find out how groups and communities are 
taking action on climate change with videos 
and articles from Climate Atlas. 
https://climateatlas.ca/top
ic/take-action 
Climate Adaptation 
Knowledge Exchange 
(CAKE) (USA) 
Explore climate change adaptation projects in 
the United States. 
https://www.cakex.org/ 
 
Climate Change 
Adaptation Planning 
Guidebooks for 
Indigenous 
Communities – 
Resources for Winter 
Roads, Wildfires, 
Flooding, & Coastal 
Erosion  
From the Centre for Indigenous Environmental 
Resources, this document is designed to 
support Indigenous communities in climate 
adaptation for key climate risks (68 pages). Part 
of the Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation 
Planning Toolkit. 
http://www.yourcier.org/c
limate-change-adaptation-
planning-toolkit-for-
indigenous-
communities.html 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Atlas of 
Canada 
Learn about climate change in your area with 
an interactive map. Explore videos, articles, or 
other materials to learn more about climate 
change impacts and actions.  
www.climateatlas.ca 
Climate Data Canada 
Find and download local or regional climate 
data in easy-to-use formats. Includes training 
modules to help you find and use the data.  
www.climatedata.ca 
Environment Canada 
Historical Weather 
Station Data 
Access historical data from Environment 
Canada weather stations. 
https://climate.weather.gc
.ca/historical_data/search
_historic_data_e.html 
 
The Assessing risks, 
Prioritizing action, 
Preparing for climate 
change (APP) 
Tool for gathering climate change observations, 
risks and impacts. Includes questions to spark 
discussion and a planning table to help link 
climate change observations to adaptation 
actions. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/adaptation-planning 
Questions for 
interviewing First 
Nations Elders and 
community members  
Set of interview questions for learning about 
climate change impacts and observations in 
northern communities. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/adaptation-planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE COMMUNITY 
 
 
Climate Change 
Adaptation Quick 
Guide 
A series of illustrations that present possible 
adaptation options for 8 climate impact themes 
relevant to northern First Nation communities. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/impacts-and-adaptations 
Adaptation Options 
Worksheet 
Worksheet for discussing and comparing 
adaptation options. Available as part of this 
Framework. 
www.upnorthonclimate.ca
/adaptation-planning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AdaptME toolkit – 
Adaptation 
monitoring and 
evaluation 
A guide to monitoring and evaluating climate 
adaptation projects from UKCIP (a UK- based 
group focusing on climate change adaptation at 
the Environmental Change Institute, University 
of Oxford) (37 pages). 
https://www.ukcip.org.uk/
wp-content/PDFs/UKCIP-
AdaptME.pdf 
  
5. IS IT WORKING? 
* This Adaptation Framework can be found online at: www.upnorthonclimate.ca/adaptation-planning 
3. ADAPTATION WORKSHOP 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Change Adaptation Quick Guide Sample 
 Also available are: Food Security, Drought and Dry Periods, Health, Winter Road Travel, Travel on Land, Water and Ice, 
Flooding, and Infrastructure. You can find them here: http://www.upnorthonclimate.ca/impacts-and-adaptations 
 
 
 
Impact – What issue are we concerned about? What effect is it having? 
Objective – What would we like to change? 
Adaptation Option 
 
 
 
Pros: 
 
 
 
Cons: 
 
Adaptation Option 
 
 
 
Pros: 
 
 
 
Cons: 
 
Adaptation Option 
 
 
 
Pros: 
 
 
 
Cons: 
 
ADAPTATION OPTIONS WORKSHEET 
ADAPTATION OPTIONS WORKSHEET 
 
Put into 
action 
Investigate 
further 
Reject 
 
Put into 
action 
Investigate 
further 
Reject 
 
Put into 
action 
Investigate 
further 
Reject 
Decision (circle one) 
Decision (circle one) 
Decision (circle one) 
 
 
 
Impact – What issue are we concerned about? What effect is it having? 
Spring melt floods basements and crawlspaces in some areas of the community 
Objective – What would we like to change? 
Prevent crawl spaces from flooding 
Adaptation Option 
Assess the community’s drainage 
system and improve it 
 
 
Pros: 
-benefits the whole community 
 
Cons: 
-could be expensive 
-will take time 
 
Adaptation Option 
Better drainage for homes – 
sloping the ground, trenches to 
direct water, sump pumps, etc. 
 
Pros: 
-some steps, like digging trenches, can 
happen quickly and be done by 
residents 
Cons: 
-may work better at some homes than 
others 
 
Adaptation Option 
Raise and move homes onto gravel 
pads or move people out of homes 
that flood often 
 
Pros: 
-gets people out of water damaged houses 
-new houses will be less likely to flood 
Cons: 
-will be expensive 
-will take time 
-people may not want to leave their 
homes 
ADAPTATION OPTIONS WORKSHEET 
ADAPTATION OPTIONS WORKSHEET 
 
Put into 
action 
Investigate 
further 
Reject 
 
Put into 
action 
Investigate 
further 
Reject 
 
Put into 
action 
Investigate 
further 
Reject 
EXAMPLE 
Decision (circle one) 
Decision (circle one) 
Decision (circle one) 
