 
 
 
 
 
Rapid Review 
Adaptation Strategies for Reducing 
Extreme Heat Health Impacts: A Rapid 
Review 
June 2022 
 
 
INSTITUTE OF HEALTH ECONOMICS 
The Institute of Health Economics (IHE) is an independent, not-for-profit organization with key 
competencies in health economics and decision analytic modelling, health technology assessment, 
and knowledge transfer/exchange. Our mission is to inform coordinated, innovative, evidence-
guided health policy and practice. 
 
IHE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
Chair 
Mr. Robert Seidel, QC – Canada Managing Partner, DLA Piper 
Government and Public Authorities 
Mr. Paul Wynnyk – Deputy Minister, Alberta Health 
Mr. Shawn McLeod – Deputy Minister, Alberta Jobs, Economy and Northern Development 
Mr. Tim Murphy – Vice-President, Health, Alberta Innovates 
Dr. Francois Belanger –Vice-President and Chief Medical Officer, Alberta Health Services 
Academia 
Dr. Jason Acker – Associate Vice-President (Research Integrity Support), University of Alberta 
Dr. Todd Anderson – Dean of the Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary 
Dr. Brenda Hemmelgarn – Dean, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta 
Dr. Christine Hughes – Interim Dean, Faculty of Pharmacy & Pharmaceutical Sciences, University 
of Alberta 
Dr. Braden Manns – Svare Professor in Health Economics, University of Calgary 
Dr. Valentina Galvani – Chair, Department of Economics, University of Alberta 
Dr. Bill Ghali – Vice-President Research, University of Calgary 
IHE 
Mr. Douglas Gilpin – Chair, Audit & Finance Committee, IHE 
Dr. Kate Harback – Interim CEO and Executive Director, IHE 
Mr. John Sproule – Board Secretary; Senior Policy Director, IHE 
Ms. Kaitlin Froehlich – Treasurer; Director of Finance and Administration, IHE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rapid Review  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adaptation Strategies for Reducing Extreme 
Heat Health Impacts: A Rapid Review 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: 
Lindsey Warkentin, MSc, Research Associate 
Carmen Moga, MD MSc, Principal Research Lead 
Lisa Tjosvold, MLIS, IHE Information Specialist 
 
 
 
Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
i 
Correspondence 
Please direct any inquiries about this report to Ken Bond, Director, Evidence Synthesis at 
kbond@ihe.ca. 
Funding 
This report was supported by a financial contribution from Alberta Health through a Health 
Evidence Review grant.  
The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the official policy of Alberta Health.  
Declared Competing Interest of Authors 
Competing interest is considered to be financial interest or non-financial interest, either direct or 
indirect, that would affect the research contained in this report or create a situation in which a 
person’s judgement could be unduly influenced by a secondary interest, such as personal 
advancement.  
The authors of this publication claim no competing interest. 
Suggested Citation 
Institute of Health Economics. Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts: a rapid 
review. Edmonton (AB): Institute of Health Economics; 2022.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Institute of Health Economics, 2022 
This work may be copied or redistributed for non-commercial purposes, provided that attribution is given to the 
Institute of Health Economics. Modification is prohibited without the express written permission of the Institute of 
Health Economics. 
 
 
Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
ii 
Executive Summary 
Background 
In the summer of 2021, Alberta experienced unusually high atmospheric temperatures, with record 
daily high temperatures in numerous locations and near record highs experienced across much of 
the province. Extreme heat events pose a growing public health threat. Various adaptation strategies 
(that is, adjusting to actual or expected future climate in order to reduce one’s vulnerability to the 
harmful effects of extreme heat) have been proposed, but uncertainty remains regarding their uptake 
and effectiveness for reducing heat-related morbidity and mortality. 
Methods 
The objective of the rapid review was to identify strategies to protect individuals’ health during 
extreme heat events, to describe the effectiveness of those strategies for reducing health effects of 
heat, and to report the cost of these strategies. These strategies should be ones that might be feasibly 
implemented before and during summer 2022 (that is, within 3-4 months). The IHE information 
specialist conducted a targeted literature search to identify evidence on extreme-heat events and 
individual-focused adaptation strategies. One reviewer screened the titles and abstracts of all 
citations retrieved by the searches, and assessed the full text of any potentially relevant articles for 
inclusion. The list of strategies was developed iteratively, and the interventions were described, 
focusing on evidence for the vulnerable populations of interest.  
Results 
A total of 47 articles were included in this rapid review, which proposed and/or described one or 
more adaptation interventions. Eleven articles provided effectiveness evidence and 15 articles 
discussed facilitators and barriers to implementation and/or utilization of the strategies. In total, 51 
strategies were identified, with 10 strategies having effectiveness data, and 12 strategies having 
information on the facilitators and barriers to implementation/utilization. The individual-focused 
heat adaptation strategies included 
• 
Individual and care provider behaviour strategies; 
• 
Care provider preparedness strategies to identify those who may be at increased risk for 
heat-related illnesses and ensuring supports are in place; 
• 
Community strategies that encourage providing items or infrastructure, and assisting people 
with adapting their behaviours; 
• 
Communication strategies for education and awareness, and 
• 
Government policy strategies to develop heat response plans and provide financial resources 
or infrastructure. 
Most strategies were implemented as part of a heat health action plan or heat health warning system. 
Many strategies were modified for or targeted vulnerable populations, with the majority focused on 
protecting the elderly or those experiencing homelessness during extreme heat events. Effectiveness 
outcomes typically measured mortality, and there were comparatively few studies reporting on health 
care utilization and cost. The effectiveness evidence exclusively reported the combined impact of 
concurrent strategies, and was favourable for the combined strategies/heat health actions plans, 
suggesting that intervening during extreme heat events reduced population-level morbidity and/or 
 
 
Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
iii 
mortality risk. Factors affecting implementation or utilization highlighted the need for awareness and 
motivation in both individuals and decisions makers, as well as the capability, and opportunity to 
adapt. The influence of population characteristics, setting or institutional factors, and the 
involvement of government and participating organizations on the development and 
implementation of successful extreme heat strategies remains poorly understood. 
Conclusion 
A variety of adaptation strategies for reducing the health impacts of extreme heat events have been 
proposed or implemented. The majority of strategies focused on reactive approaches, such as 
adapting individual behaviours during extreme heat, or providing cooling items or infrastructure. 
Strategies that focused on preparing for extreme heat centered around education and awareness, as 
well as identifying those who may be at increased risk for heat-related illnesses. Strategies were often 
implemented concurrently in heat health actions plans or as part of heat health warning systems for 
the general population. Overall, extreme heat adaptation options are available, but the evidence 
supporting their effectiveness and implementation is lacking and those wishing to adopt such 
strategies will need to prioritize those deemed feasible and fit-for-purpose within the local context.  
 
 
 
 
Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
iv 
Table of Contents 
Background ......................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Objective and Research Question ................................................................................................................... 1 
Methods ............................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Literature Search ............................................................................................................................................ 1 
Study Selection ............................................................................................................................................... 2 
Data Extraction and Synthesis .................................................................................................................... 3 
Results .................................................................................................................................................................. 4 
Literature Search ............................................................................................................................................ 4 
Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies ............................................................................................. 5 
Overall Effectiveness .................................................................................................................................... 5 
Overall Implementation and Utilization Facilitators and Barriers ......................................................... 8 
Elderly Populations ....................................................................................................................................... 9 
Those Experiencing Homelessness .......................................................................................................... 11 
Chronically Ill Populations ......................................................................................................................... 12 
Those with Low Socioeconomic Status ................................................................................................... 13 
Infants and Children ................................................................................................................................... 14 
Pregnant Persons ......................................................................................................................................... 15 
Indigenous Populations .............................................................................................................................. 15 
Rural Populations ........................................................................................................................................ 15 
Discussion ......................................................................................................................................................... 16 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................................... 17 
References ......................................................................................................................................................... 18 
Appendix A: Heat and Health Search Strategy............................................................................................ 22 
Appendix B: Evidence for Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies ................................................ 29 
Author Contributions ...................................................................................................................................... 61 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
v 
Tables  
Table 1: Study Selection Criteria ...................................................................................................................... 2 
Table 2: List of Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies ...................................................................... 6 
Table 3: Number and Type of Effectiveness Studies for Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies
 .............................................................................................................................................................................. 8 
Table 4: Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies for the Elderly...................................................... 10 
Table 5: Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies for those Experiencing Homelessness ............. 12 
Table 6: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for the Chronically Ill .................................. 13 
Table 7: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for those with Low Socioeconomic Status
 ............................................................................................................................................................................ 14 
Table 8: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for Infants and Children ............................. 14 
Table 9: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for Rural Populations .................................. 16 
 
Figures 
Figure 1: PRISMA Diagram ............................................................................................................................. 4 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
1 
Background  
Extreme heat, which is defined as a period of excessively hot weather, can have negative impacts on 
health, both directly (for example, dehydration and heat stroke) or by making pre-existing conditions 
worse (for example, cardiovascular or respiratory conditions). In the summer of 2021 Alberta 
experienced unusually high atmospheric temperatures, with record daily high temperatures in 
numerous locations and near record highs experienced across much of the province.1 It is expected 
that extreme heat events will increase in frequency, length, and severity, with the potential to 
increase utilization of health care services, including calls to Emergency Medical Services, emergency 
department visits, and physician visits/hospitalization for heat-relate illnesses. Extreme heat events 
pose a growing public health threat, and various adaptation strategies (that is, adjusting to actual or 
expected future climate in order to reduce one’s vulnerability to the harmful effects of extreme heat) 
have been proposed. Uncertainty remains regarding their uptake and effectiveness for reducing heat-
related morbidity and mortality. 
 
Objective and Research Question  
The objective of this rapid review was to identify strategies to protect individuals’ health in times of 
high temperatures, and to describe the effectiveness of those strategies for reducing health 
consequences of heat, and cost of the strategies. The strategies should be ones that might be feasibly 
implemented before and during summer 2022 (that is, within 3-4 months).  
To achieve the objective, the following research questions were proposed:  
• 
What are the adaptation strategies for reducing the health impacts of extreme heat events?  
o How, where, and by whom are these interventions provided? 
o How do these interventions compare in terms of their effectiveness?  
o Are there interventions to address the needs of specific populations or settings (for 
example, elderly, chronically ill, persons experiencing homelessness, those with low 
socioeconomic status, infants and children, pregnant persons, Indigenous 
populations, rural locations) or strategies to tailor or adapt broader strategies to 
address the specific needs of these populations or settings? 
To produce a list of strategies that might be considered, the rapid review focused on identifying 
interventions that were individual-driven and that could leverage existing infrastructure within 
Alberta. 
 
Methods 
Literature Search  
The IHE information specialist conducted a targeted literature search to identify evidence on 
extreme-heat events and individual-focused adaptation strategies (Appendix A). Literature was sought 
through a search in Medline and Google Scholar for English language articles focusing on extreme 
heat adaptation, published from 2012 onward (last 10 years) in Canadian or similar temperate 
jurisdictions (for example, Australia, Europe, United States, Japan, China), using a combination of 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
2 
relevant keywords and medical subject health (MeSH) terms. Relevant grey literature was sought 
through advanced searches of Google and relevant websites including the National Collaborating 
Centre for Environmental Health (https://ncceh.ca/), the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences (https://tools.niehs.nih.gov/cchhl/index.cfm),  the European Health and Climate Observatory 
(https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/) and the Global Heat Health Information Initiative 
(https://ghhin.org/).  
 
Study Selection 
One reviewer screened the titles and abstracts of all citations retrieved by the searches, and assessed 
the full text of any potentially relevant articles for inclusion (Table 1). All definitions for extreme heat 
events/heat waves, and heat related illness were included.  Heat health alerts were not considered an 
intervention, nor were adjustments to the information used to develop the heat alert thresholds.  
Because the focus of the review was on strategies that are implementable in summer 2022, strategies 
that may require large individual or collective time/investment, mitigation strategies designed to 
reduce climate changes/extreme temperature occurrences (for example, green roofs, reflective 
surfaces) and national or international frameworks and guidance on climate change/extreme heat 
plans (for example, the World Health Organizations’ guidance for heat-health actions plans) were 
excluded from the rapid review. 
Table 1: Study Selection Criteria 
 
Description 
Study 
Design/Type 
Included 
• Systematic reviews, reviews of reviews, narrative reviews 
• Effectiveness, implementation, ecological, case studies 
• Evidence-based lists, governments’ grey literature 
Excluded 
• Modelling, efficacy, physiological, simulation studies 
Population 
Included 
• General population (any age) exposed to extreme heat events (as defined in the literature), 
and are at risk of suffering from direct or indirect heat-related illness.  
• Emphasis will be placed on populations of potentially vulnerable individuals (e.g., elderly, 
infants and toddlers, chronically ill, pregnant persons, those experiencing homelessness, 
those with low socioeconomic status, Indigenous populations) and those living in rural 
communities 
Excluded 
• Athletes or occupational groups that may be exposed to high atmospheric temperatures and 
are at risk to exertion or occupation heat stress 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
3 
 
Description 
Intervention  
Included 
• Any extreme heat health adaptation strategies (e.g., hydration, limb immersion, electric fans, 
cooling centres, outreach, preparedness) 
• Emphasis will be placed on identifying interventions that are individual-driven, that leverage 
existing health supports and/or general infrastructure within Alberta.  
Excluded 
• Mitigation strategies designed to reduce climate changes/extreme temperature occurrences 
• Heat-related illness treatments (i.e., strategies employed after the onset of heat-related 
illness)  
• Alterations/improvements to heat warning alerts (e.g., temperature thresholds, regional 
division, vulnerability data incorporation) 
Comparator 
• Any comparator (e.g., historical, another strategy) 
• No comparator 
Outcomes of 
Interest 
Included 
• Description of the heat health adaptation strategy 
And/or 
• Heat-related illness incidence (as defined in the literature; e.g., dehydration, heat stroke, heat 
exhaustion, preterm or stillbirth, exacerbation of cardiovascular, respiratory, kidney and/or 
mental health conditions)   
• Mortality 
• Heat-related health care utilization (e.g., emergency calls, physician visits, emergency room 
visits, hospitalization) 
• Self-reported individual behaviour change 
• Cost 
• Factors effecting implementation or utilization (facilitators and/or barriers) 
Excluded 
• Physiological measures (e.g., temperature, heat rate)  
• Risk factors for heat-related illness 
 
Data Extraction and Synthesis  
The list of strategies was developed iteratively, in collaboration with the Health Protection Branch. 
First, an initial list of interventions was developed from the identified evidence, with feedback 
sought from the Health Protection Branch to identify interventions that may not have been captured 
in the literature, as well as identifying those that are least likely to be feasible for summer 2022. 
Second, the interventions were described, including intervention details (for example, description, 
population, setting, providers), study details (for example, study type, publication date) and 
outcomes (for example, effectiveness and implementation/utilization considerations). Relevant data 
was extracted by one reviewer into pre-developed summary tables. Interventions were also described 
narratively, focusing on evidence for the vulnerable populations of interest. Quality assessment of 
the included studies was not conducted for this review.  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
4 
Results  
Literature Search  
From a total of 1083 citations (titles/abstracts) identified, 47 articles were included in this rapid 
review which proposed and/or described one or more an adaptation interventions2-48 (Figure 1). 
Eleven articles2, 16, 23, 31, 34, 35, 37, 41, 46-48 provided effectiveness evidence and 15 articles3, 8-11, 13, 19, 22, 27, 29, 30, 39, 
43, 45, 47 discussed facilitators and barriers to implementation and/or utilization of the strategies.  
There was a broad range of study types, including reviews, government reports and intervention 
descriptions, and primary studies. The literature was also diverse in where studies were conducted, 
including Australia, United States, Europe, Canada, and Japan (Appendix B).  
Figure 1: PRISMA Diagram  
         
 
 
 
 
Records identified from 
database searching 
(n=1,089) 
Records screened 
(n=1,158) 
Records excluded 
(n =1,023) 
Full-text articles assessed for 
eligibility 
(n=135) 
Records excluded (N=88) 
Reason for exclusion: 
• Study type (n=33) 
• No adaptation strategy 
(n=20) 
• No outcome data (n=18) 
• Infeasible strategy for 
2022 summer (n=11) 
• Heat treatment or 
alteration to heat alert 
(n=4) 
• Incorrect population (n=3) 
Records identified through 
other sources 
(n=69) 
Articles included in review (N=47) 
•
Strategy proposed/described 
(n=47) 
•
Effectiveness evidence (n=11) 
•
Implementation and utilization 
considerations (n=15) 
Screening 
Included 
Eligibility 
Identification 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
5 
Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies 
In total, 51 strategies were identified (Table 2 and Appendix B), with 10 strategies having effectiveness 
data, and 12 strategies having information on the facilitators and barriers to 
implementation/utilization. The majority of interventions were implemented concurrently, mostly as 
part of an overall heat health action plan and/or heat health warning system, and were often 
proposed for or implemented in urban areas for the general population. The majority of strategies 
focused on reactive approaches: adapting individual behaviours during extreme heat, or encouraging, 
providing items or infrastructure, and assisting people with adapting their behaviours during heat 
waves. Strategies that focused on preparing for extreme heat centered around education and 
awareness, as well as identifying those who may be at increased risk for heat-related illnesses and 
ensuring there are supports in-place for increased social connection/monitoring during times of 
increased temperatures.  
 
Overall Effectiveness 
Effectiveness outcomes typically measured heat-related mortality or excess mortality (that is, more 
deaths during a period of time than would be expected for that period), through comparing time 
periods with and without interventions in place. Surveys or interviews were also often utilized to 
gather self-reported perceptions of heat stress, and compared participants who utilized adaptation 
strategies to those who did not. There were comparatively few studies reporting on health care 
utilization and cost. Due to the design of the studies and outcome measures, effectiveness studies 
exclusively reported the combined impact of concurrent strategies, or that of overall heat health 
action plans (that is, multiple interventions with special considerations given to the needs and 
contexts of vulnerable subpopulations), therefore the impact attributable of any individual extreme 
heat health adaptation strategy could not be determined (Table 3). Overall, the effectiveness evidence 
was favourable for the combined strategies/heat health actions plans, suggesting that intervening 
during extreme heat events reduced population-level morbidity and/or mortality risk.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
6 
Table 2: List of Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies 
Individual and Care 
Provider Behavioura 
Care Provider 
Preparednessa 
Community 
Communication 
Government Policy 
• Air conditioning 
• Applying water to 
extremities (e.g., using 
wet towels, submerging 
feet)  
• Block sunlight (e.g., 
closing blinds, shade 
shutters)  
• Cold showers or shower 
more frequently 
• Cooking/eating differently 
(e.g., not using oven; 
avoiding alcohol caffeine, 
hot drinks; attention to salt 
intake)  
• Creating natural 
ventilation (e.g., opening 
windows) 
• Drinking more fluids/ 
maintaining hydration 
• Expand and maintain 
vegetation cover on 
private property 
• Fans 
• Modified work 
arrangements (e.g., more 
frequent rest periods, 
scheduling heavy work 
during cooler part of the 
day)  
• Monitoring technology 
(e.g., weather forecasts 
and individualized warning 
app, personal multi-senor 
monitor)  
• Checklists 
• Facility heat health 
action/response plan or 
protocols  
• Information/Education 
campaign specific to care 
providers 
• Maintenance of equipment 
• Meeting of all agencies to 
discuss coordination 
issues 
• Participating in community 
committees (e.g., health 
councils, school boards, 
recreation programs)  
• Patient risk pre-
assessment and 
identification 
• Provide information during 
non-heat related visits and 
increased surveillance for 
signs/symptoms of heat 
related illness 
• Cooling bus programs 
• Cooling centres or 
shelters 
• Distribution of water (e.g., 
water bottles, install public 
fountains, portable water 
stations, public coolers)  
• Distribute shading/cooling 
items (e.g., tents, 
umbrellas, misting fans, 
super soakers, water jugs, 
water balloons)  
• Expand and maintain 
vegetation cover on public 
property/businesses 
• Expanded programs for 
vulnerable and isolated 
people 
• Extending operational 
hours of public pools, 
outdoor recreation spaces, 
spray parks 
• Outreach 
• Shade structures 
• Spray/sprinkler caps on 
fire hydrants 
• Transportation to heat-
health infrastructure 
• Welfare check-ins 
 
• Declaring a “Heat 
Advisory Day” 
• Disseminate city maps 
with heat-health 
infrastructure (e.g., water 
fountains, cooling centres)  
• Heat Hotline 
• Mass notification app or 
website, or automated 
phone warning 
• Public information or 
education campaign (e.g., 
press releases, 
pamphlets, 
advertisements, social 
media)  
• Promotion materials (e.g., 
fridge magnets, 
thermometers)  
• Weather safety talks 
• Expand and maintain 
vegetation cover 
• Financial assistance for 
home or common room air 
conditioning, or utility 
assistance (e.g., 
subsidized electricity bills)  
• Fan and air conditioner 
distribution programs 
• Grants for temporary 
community cooling 
infrastructure (e.g., 
portable misting stations)  
• Heat Health 
Action/Response Plan 
• Provide incentives to 
increase passive cooling 
and reduce “waste” heat 
(e.g., by subsidizing tree 
planting or home retrofits)  
• Review of emergency, 
ambulance and other 
clinical response 
capabilities in the health 
sector 
 
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
7 
Individual and Care 
Provider Behavioura 
Care Provider 
Preparednessa 
Community 
Communication 
Government Policy 
• Reducing or rescheduling 
recreational activity 
• Resting in the shade, 
create your own shade 
(e.g., umbrella, hat)  
• Turning off heat-producing 
equipment (e.g., 
computer, television)  
• Use thinner 
bedding/modify sleeping 
arrangements 
• Wearable personal cooling 
system (e.g., cooling vest, 
neck ties)  
• Wearing less or 
light/breathable clothing 
Category headings are linked to their respective evidence summary table in Appendix B.  
Strategies which had effectiveness evidence identified, are shaded grey.  
a Care providers include all those who contribute to the health and well-being of others including healthcare providers, community public health providers, 
allied heath and social services.   
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
8 
Table 3: Number and Type of Effectiveness Studies for Extreme Heat Health Adaptation 
Strategies  
Adaptation strategies 
Patient risk pre-assessment 
and identification 
Cooling Centre or shelter 
Distribution of water 
Expand programs for 
vulnerable/isolated people 
Outreach 
Welfare check-ins 
Mass notification app or 
automated phone warning 
Public information or 
education campaign 
Promotion materials 
Heat Health Action Plan 
Study Type 
Literature 
Review 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Randomized 
controlled trial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
1 
1 
 
Community 
Trial 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ecological 
Study or Case 
Series 
 
 
 
 
2 
1 
 
 
 
1 
Cost Analysis 
1 
1 
 
1 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Overall Implementation and Utilization Facilitators and Barriers 
Implementation and utilization considerations highlighted awareness and motivation behaviours, as 
well as capability and opportunities, both in individuals and decision makers/implementers, as the 
major factors influencing for heatwave adaptation. Mayhuber et al. (2018)29 identified four 
assumptions that modulate the effect of heat health adaption behaviours and influence how 
vulnerable population are reached:  
• 
Informing people about the danger of heat and particular risks in a way that will make them 
aware and adapt their behavior according to advice. 
• 
Ensuring at-risk individuals recognize their own vulnerability and therefore will feel 
concerned by heat alerts and heat messaging.  
• 
Having the benefits of visiting cooling infrastructure and other heat advice behavior 
commonly understood and taken seriously.  
• 
Having care providers of vulnerable groups possess the infrastructural and human resource 
capacity to intensify care provision during heatwaves, and are sufficiently trained in 
thermoregulation and possible heat reduction measures. 
However, the intervention components necessary to support these assumptions were not described 
in the literature. Many studies reported underutilization or delays in the implementation of extreme 
heat strategies because of a persisting disbelief from both individuals and decisions makers of the 
seriousness of heat waves on health, a lack of awareness of or the inability to access cooling 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
9 
resources, or limited means to implement adaptation strategies. Evidence from reviews highlighted 
that there was large variability in the implementation of heat health action plans,20 as well as for 
specific strategies (for example, cooling centres).17, 27  
 
Elderly Populations 
The literature discussing vulnerable populations focused on the elderly, particularly those in 
congregate living facilities, as well as those living alone in the community. There was a broad range 
of strategies used for seniors (Table 4). Kemen et al. (2021)16 surveyed urban community dwelling 
adults over the age of 65 years old in Cologne, Germany, who reported utilizing the many individual 
behaviour strategies, though water-related heat adaptation strategies, such as applying water to 
extremities, were not frequently used. People who reported heat as more challenging (that is, had a 
higher heat perception) applied more coping strategies, suggesting that perceived risk was a strong 
predictor of whether or not an individual changed their behavior. McInnes and Ilbrahim (2013)30 
interviewed public sector residential care nursing or managerial staff in Victoria, Australia, and 
described several behaviour adaptations for the elderly including: 
• 
Ensuring an adequate supply of fluids for residents, including thickened drinks or diabetic 
cordial; a drink fountain was provided in the facility foyer for residents (and visitors).  
• 
Provided cooling “neck-ties” for all residents (and staff). 
• 
Assisting in the relocation of residents to air-conditioned common rooms. 
• 
Protocols for “cool change” messaging, to ensure that staff acted early in the day to close 
windows, pull down blinds, open awnings, and turn on air conditioning, and again when 
windows could be reopened later in the evening.  
The need to respect residents’ responsibility and self-determination was mentioned,22 though health 
care providers have a particular responsibility to protect residents who are confused, disoriented, or 
disabled, against their own actions or lack thereof.  
Care provider preparedness strategies for community-based care was reported, and facility heat 
health action/response plans were the most common interventions described.22, 30 McInnes and 
Ilbrahim (2013)30 identified numerous response plan components, with the more frequent or novel 
strategies being 
• a heatwave checklist meant to act as prompt and to provide a framework for planning and 
preparedness activities; 
• staff education, including monthly meetings, topic-specific seminars and staff newsletters; 
and, 
• routine maintenance programs for air conditioning units. 
Staff awareness of the dangers of heat for older people was seen as a facilitator for heatwave 
preparedness. Challenges with air conditioning was a frequently discussed barrier, including capacity 
issues due to restricted power supply and delayed repairs due to lack of access to parts and repair 
personnel.30   
Welfare check-ins were also utilized as a community-based social connection strategy. Vulnerable 
seniors were identified through registration (by care providers or self-registration), and in-person or 
telephone follow ups were conducted to ensure registrants were prepared and/or not actively 
experiencing heat stress. In the case where heat related illness was suspected, or registrants could not 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
10 
be contacted, the case was escalated to other organizations (for example, community services or first 
responders) to conduct welfare check-ins or intervene. Examples of such programs include 
• 
The United States Postal Service’s Carrier Alert Program.45 If a postal carrier notices that the 
person doesn’t pick up mail in three or four days, the post office alerts a list of nearby 
community-based organizations and the organization or a first responder is sent to see if the 
person is well. 
• 
The Telecross Redi program.35, 48 A program conducted by the Australian Red Cross, that 
provides phone calls to registered vulnerable clients during heat alerts; in the event that an 
individual does not respond to a welfare call the case is escalated and first responders will 
conduct a home welfare check. 
• 
Montreal’s Heat Action Plan:2 The plan includes home care patients receiving daily contact 
by telephone or home visits, with calls registered and a compilation of questionnaires for 
home and risk evaluation completed. 
Generally, welfare check-in strategies were facilitated by having staff and volunteers available, both 
early in the year to identify and assess clients, as well as to connect with clients during heatwaves.39 
However, the prioritization of clients of most need and ability to identify early sign of heat related 
illness (especially over the phone) was challenging, even with appropriate levels of staffing. 
Implementing and sustaining programs successfully  requires strong relationships and good 
communication with both participants and between program partners, and building these 
relationships can take time.10  
Community strategies targeted specifically for the elderly were also described. For example, agencies 
also provided additional transportation to and from the cooling centers for their senior population,33 
or mailing water and educational materials to household of those over the age of 65 years old.41  
Information communicated about heat health risk and adaptation was similar to that for the general 
public, but modified for seniors by making it available in formats appropriate for those with poor 
eyesight, who are hard of hearing, or when English is not their first language.10 Distribution focused 
on more traditional forms of media which may be more likely to reach seniors (for example, 
television, radio, and newspapers) or through care providers (for example, home care visits, non-heat 
related doctor visits, senior centre talks).33 
Table 4: Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies for the Elderly 
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
Individual and care provider behaviour 
• Air conditioning 
• Applying water to extremities 
• Block sunlight 
• Cold showers or shower more 
frequently 
• Cooking/eating differently  
• Creating natural ventilation 
• Drink more fluids/maintaining hydration  
• Fans 
• Reducing or rescheduling recreational 
activities 
• Behaviour changes are associated with perceived risk and 
older adults don’t always recognize themselves as being 
particularly vulnerable to heat 
• Residents’ responsibility and self-determination, for those 
living in long-term or residential care 
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
11 
 
Those Experiencing Homelessness 
There were several community-led adaptation strategies which focused on supporting those 
experiencing homelessness during extreme heat events (Table 5). Cabantog (2017)5 provided 
recommendations to creating policies and programs adaptation for extreme heat events affecting 
homeless populations in British Columbia’s Lower Mainland, which included 
• 
Increasing the availability of and accessibility to cooling spaces, 
• 
Enhancing health service delivery, and  
• 
Increasing outreach services and communication.  
The Code Red program in Adelaide, Australia was designed to provide those sleeping rough a place 
to stay cool and hydrated.48 The program was part of regular services to the homeless, enabling 
greater respite options during heatwaves. The Code Red program in Baltimore, Maryland distributed 
bottled water to those experiencing homelessness through the Salvation Army outreach teams.27 
Widerynski et al. (2017)46 described cooling centres, including the specific location or functionality 
factors that may increase utilization of homeless population, including 
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
• Use thinner bedding/modify sleeping 
arrangements 
• Wear less or light/breathable clothing 
Care provider preparedness 
• Checklists 
• Facility heat health action/response 
plan or protocols  
• Information and education campaign 
specific to care providers 
• Maintenance of equipment 
• Patient risk pre-assessment and 
identification 
• Provide information during non-heat 
related visits and increased 
surveillance for signs or symptoms of 
heat related illness 
• Staff awareness of the dangers of heat for older people 
• Restricted power supply for air conditioners and delayed repairs 
(access to parts and repair personnel) 
• Challenges in accurately identifying and assessing those at risk 
Community 
• Cooling centres 
• Distribution of water 
• Outreach 
• Transportation to heat health 
infrastructure 
• Welfare check-ins 
• Leveraging existing services (e.g., health services, 
neighborhood and building associations, business communities, 
faith-based groups, and senior centres) 
• Distances to cooling centers/available transportation 
• Relies on strong relationships with good communication, which 
can take time to establish 
• Staff and volunteer availability 
Communication 
• Public information/education campaign 
• Format messaging for those with poor eyesight, hard of hearing, 
or adapt messaging where English is not their first language 
• Use of multiple media outlets that are most likely to reach 
seniors (e.g., television, radio, newspapers) 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
12 
• 
organizations learning the most ideal areas to open them to serve the largest vulnerable 
population; 
• 
providing safe and reliable transportation to the centre; 
• 
providing additional accommodations for homeless individuals such as food, clothing and 
referring services to shelters, mental health care and food bank; and 
• 
partnerships that link support from communities to government programs and financial 
resources. 
Cooling centres were established in homeless shelters, often with extended hours, as part of 
Southern California Edison’s Cool Center Program, because program managers noticed with past 
experiences, visitors often were at publicly available cooling centre facilities for another reason and 
then stayed due to the heat.46  Homeless survey respondents from Adelaide, Australia have stated 
that it is hard to find a public cool space without being asked to leave, or have difficulty getting to a 
cooling centre because of lack of transportation. Instead, homeless individuals congregated in shady 
and green parks due to not wanting to go into a building that is unfamiliar, or where they do not feel 
welcome.46 
Table 5: Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies for those Experiencing 
Homelessness 
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
Community 
• Cooling centres or shelters 
• Distribution of water 
• Expanded programs for vulnerable and 
isolated people 
• Extending operational hours of public 
pools, outdoor recreation, spaces, 
spray parks 
• Outreach 
• Transportation to heat health 
infrastructure 
• Identifying most ideal areas to open centres, to provide easy access 
for and to serve the most vulnerable populations 
• Those experiencing homeless reported having trouble accessing 
public centres or feel reluctant because of stigma (may not go into a 
building where they do not feel welcome or are not familiar with) 
• Centres should include partnerships that link support from 
communities to government programs and financial resources 
• Safe and reliable transportation to the centre supports utilization to 
those who do not have access to personal transportation 
 
Chronically Ill Populations 
There were strategies targeting people with a chronic illness, particularly those with mental illness, as 
it is believed that individuals, family members, and professionals may be less aware that mental 
illnesses can create vulnerability during a heat wave (Table 6).  Williams et al. (2022)48 described a 
patient risk pre-assessment and identification intervention for mental health clients in Adelaide, 
Australia. Clients were assessed at the beginning of summer using a heat vulnerability assessment 
tool to identify those who may require closer monitoring during heatwaves. On activation of South 
Australia’s heat health warning system, clients who were considered vulnerable received daily welfare 
checks by phone or home-visits if needed. Price et al. (2013)40 reported that the Montreal Heat 
Response plan had a specific communication campaign during heat waves that targeted individuals 
with mental illness. In addition, the plan included further preparation work with local health and 
social services centres, community organizations, and psychiatric hospitals to ensure that there was 
proper outreach to individuals with mental illness.   
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
13 
Boyson et al. (2014)3 conducted focus groups with frontline clinical staff and senior managers of a 
hospital, to discuss the implementation of England’s National Heatwave Plan, which includes 
identifying and increasing surveillances on vulnerable patients. Though most frontline staff were 
unaware of the National Heatwave Plan, many were able to identify at-risk patients and outline 
simple actions to undertake during periods of increased temperatures. Respondents rejected the idea 
that mass care should change when a heatwave occurs and emphasized instead the idea that 
healthcare professionals should continue to manage patients on an individual level. Clinical 
experience during heatwaves was seen as important for encouraging the use of heat adaptation 
strategies with patients.  
Discussion of heat risk and adaptation strategies at non-heat-related visits was also suggested. The 
adaptation of behaviour is associated with perceived risk, and those who are chronically ill don’t 
always recognize themselves as being particularly vulnerable to heat or realize that there is an 
increased risk of heat-related mortality among patients who take certain medication such as 
psychotropic medications, diuretics, and long-term antihypertensives.38  
Table 6: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for the Chronically Ill 
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
Care provider preparedness  
• Information/education campaign 
specific to care providers 
• Patient risk pre-assessment 
• Provide information during non-heat 
related visits and increased 
surveillance for signs or symptoms of 
heat related illness 
• Awareness of certain illnesses creating vulnerability to heat (e.g., 
mental illness) and tailoring messages to their care providers 
• Clinical experience during heatwaves  
• Care providers belief in altering clinical practices for heatwaves 
 
Communication 
• Public information/education campaign 
• Awareness of certain illnesses creating vulnerability to heat (e.g., 
mental illness) and tailoring messages to those individuals  
 
Those with Low Socioeconomic Status 
Two government policies were suggested, to target those who have low socioeconomic status (Table 
7). Providing financial assistance for utility bills, or placing a moratorium on service 
cancellations/charges during extreme heat events, may prevent citizens from being cautious in using 
their air conditioning because of the financial cost.24 Jin et al. (2022)14 reported that moratoriums 
were used over the summer months in 25 cities across the United States, which often ended before 
the summer heat ended. Particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic, many families were still 
expected to avoid the use of air conditioning and/or allow indoor temperatures to reach unsafe 
levels due to concerns over future financial burdens and the unrelated accumulation of financial 
stress from COVID-19 economic impacts. To provide cooling infrastructure to those who qualify 
based on level of income or medical need, White-Newsome et al. (2014)45 suggested fan and air 
conditioning distribution programs; however, concerns were raised about the lack of utilization of 
the air conditioners once distributed, due to perceived financial stress and the inability to pay 
associated utility costs.  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
14 
Table 7: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for those with Low 
Socioeconomic Status 
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
Government policy 
• Financial assistance for home or 
common room air conditioning, or 
utility assistance 
• Fan and air conditioner distribution 
programs 
• Concerns over ongoing and future utility specific and overall 
financial stress 
 
Infants and Children  
The strategies targeting children focused on education/awareness for care providers and increased 
access to child-friendly cooling infrastructure (Table 8). Extending operational hours of public pools, 
parks and playgrounds, and spray parks was seen as a family-friendly heat adaptation strategy, and 
suggested building shade structures in heat vulnerable areas where trees are not feasible (e.g., 
playgrounds).24 Jin et al. (2022)14 described the addition of distributing shading and cooling items as 
part of Philadelphia’s Playstreets Program. This program was in response to COVID-19 pandemic-
related budget cuts, which led to the closure of public pools and recreation centers for the summer 
of 2020. The Playstreet Program was an extension of federal free lunch program, and provided 100 
streets throughout Philadelphia with free tents, patio umbrellas, misting fans, super soakers, water 
jugs, water balloons, and neck cooling rags.  
Paterson et al. (2020)38 suggested that risk communication materials be developed specifically for 
children and their caregivers. Local weather service employees have conducted public information 
talks to schools,45 and it was suggested that community pediatricians actively participate in school 
wellness committees, health councils, school boards, local, regional, or national sports medicine 
advisory committees, or in local parks and recreation programs to help to educate youth, parents, 
caregivers, coaches, and administrators on how to minimize heat-related health effects for children.21 
Table 8: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for Infants and Children  
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
Community 
• Distribute shading and/or cooling items 
• Extending operational hours of public 
pools, outdoor recreation spaces, 
spray parks 
• Shade structures 
None reported 
Care-provider preparedness 
• Information and/or education campaign 
specific to care providers 
• Participating in community committees 
None reported 
Communication 
• Weather safety talks 
None reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
15 
Pregnant Persons  
Only one scoping literature review mentioned a potential adaptation strategy for pregnant persons. 
Paterson et al. (2020)38 suggested that risk communication materials be developed specifically for 
pregnant persons and their unborn child. They noted that further evidence is needed regarding 
exposure of pregnant persons to heat stress and the implications on the parent and unborn child’s 
health in a temperate climate. 
 
Indigenous Populations 
No studies were identified examining strategies targeting Indigenous populations specifically, but a 
First Nations Band was consulted in developing a rural community heat action and response plan.9  
 
Rural Populations 
There was limited information regarding interventions designed to address the distinct challenges 
rural communities may face in heat health adaptation, and few studies examining the strategies most 
amendable to rural locations. Most reports implied that similar strategies may be employed across 
urban and rural locations (Table 9). Rural locations may benefit from numerous natural cooling 
resources like trees and lakes, and extreme heat adaptation may be expected to be more community-
driven as rural residents are more likely to know and trust their neighbours, provide unpaid volunteer 
work, and have a strong sense of belonging to their community.9, 33 However, rural individuals may 
be less able or willing to travel to a cooling infrastructure and may not participate in community 
activities aimed at heat health information dissemination.46 
Deegan et al. (2022)9 reported on the community-driven, collaborative, approach to extreme heat 
alert and response system planning for the small rural community of Ashcroft, British Columbia. The 
development of the Ashcroft heat alert and response system identified several considerations unique 
to rural populations: 
• Communicating heat messages where there might be a lack of traditional media, such as a 
dedicated radio station or newspaper. Paper flyers were seen as preferable for disseminating 
messaging, in part to ensure that vulnerable populations such as seniors were reached. 
During heat events, brochures and posters were distributed through the local post office and 
through household mail boxes, were placed on bulletin boards at high-traffic sites. Lawn 
signs were place through out the community, and notices were posed on the village website 
and social media.  
• Taking into account resource availability and allocation. Ashcroft had limited municipal 
resources to oversee the implementation of the heat action and response plan, so the plan 
was based on or embedded in existing physical, procedural, and communications 
infrastructure. The Ashcroft heat action and response committee (composed of municipal 
government and regional district, Emergency Management, the local school district, public 
health, community organizations including non-profits, first responders, a volunteer 
coordinator, First Nation Band members, and members of the public) was leveraged, and 
each committee member had a responsibility for their respective actions during an extreme 
heat event. 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
16 
 The Ashcroft heat action and response plan was simple, concise, and considerate of the 
community’s unique context, and endeavoured to create a supportive environment and strengthen 
community action. 
Nayak et al. (2017)33 reported that only 3% of cooling centres in the New York state were located in 
rural areas. The study authors suggested that it would be prudent to set up cooling centers in publicly 
accessible facilities in rural areas (for example, in conjunction with American Red Cross chapters), so 
that people without access to air conditioning at home can access them in their local community. 
Lubik and Kosatsky (2017)24 recommended that rural jurisdictions have a strategy in place to assure 
that residents who are not on municipal systems have access to water. 
Table 9: Extreme Heat and Health Adaptation Strategies for Rural Populations 
Strategies 
Implementation Considerations 
Community 
• Cooling centre 
• Distribution of 
water 
• Sparse population 
• Natural cooling resources (e.g., lakes, trees) 
• Transportation options (less able or willing to travel to a cooling centre) 
Government policy 
• Heat action and 
response plan 
• Community-led and informed by the intersectoral stakeholders 
• Utilizing existing physical, procedural and communications infrastructure 
 
Discussion  
There are many individual-focused heat adaptation strategies that may be feasible for implementation 
for summer 2022 in Alberta. These strategies include 
• 
Individual and care provider behaviour strategies; 
• 
Care provider preparedness strategies to identify those who may be at increased risk for heat-
related illnesses and ensuring supports are in place; 
• 
Community strategies that encourage providing items or infrastructure, and assisting people 
with adapting their behaviours; 
• 
Communication strategies for education and awareness, and 
• 
Government policy strategies to develop heat response plans and provide financial resources 
or infrastructure. 
Most strategies were implemented as part of a heat health action plan or heat health warning system. 
Settings and populations varied, as well as data sources and reporting, reflecting the different needs 
and available resources for different groups. Many strategies were modified for or targeted vulnerable 
populations, with the majority focused on protecting the elderly or those experiencing homelessness 
during extreme heat events. 
Effectiveness outcomes were primarily focused on the effects of concurrent strategies on mortality, 
with limited outcomes data for healthcare utilization and costs. Heat health action plans, which 
included concurrent interventions and special considerations given to the needs and contexts of 
vulnerable subpopulations were effective in reducing heat-related adverse health outcomes, but the 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
17 
attributable impact from single strategies on these outcomes was unclear. Interventions for heat wave 
events are difficult to evaluate because no two heat wave events, and the populations that are 
affected, are exactly alike. Evaluations of adaption strategies are also hindered by a lack of a guiding 
framework, on the assessment of interventions in reducing heat-related mortality and morbidity.20 
Facilitators of and barriers to implementation and utilization were themed around awareness, 
motivation, capability, and opportunity for both individuals and decisions makers. For individuals, 
the most frequently cited barrier was having people understand and accept the dangers of heat and 
their own personal risk of adverse health effects, as well as being aware of and having access to 
cooling infrastructure. Decision makers were also often hindered by the lack of perceived risk of 
heat, limited access to financial and personnel resources to enact response plans, and difficulties in 
reaching vulnerable populations. The influence of population characteristics, setting or institutional 
factors, and the involvement of government and participating organizations on the development and 
implementation of successful extreme heat strategies remains poorly understood.  
The information collected for this review was limited in several ways. The literature search was 
confined to a single database, limited to publications within the last 10 years, and was devised to 
capture a broad selection of potential strategies. For these reasons, it is possible that some relevant 
articles and studies may have been missed. We also expect that relevant information is likely 
contained in grey literature and unpublished sources, which were not exhaustively searched. The 
ability to collect effectiveness evidence may also have been limited by strict selection criterion 
focusing on direct outcomes such as morbidity, mortality, and healthcare resource utilization. Data 
on indirect outcomes, such as physiological or atmospheric temperature changes, may have helped to 
provide a more complete picture of the potential effectiveness of the strategies. As a result, there 
may be more strategies that are effective than we have been able to identify, and this limitation 
should be considered when prioritizing implementation of the strategies, based on the effectiveness 
data (or lack thereof) presented in this rapid review.   
Conclusion 
Extreme heat events are expected to increase in frequency, length, and severity, and cause excess 
mortality, morbidity and healthcare utilization, specifically in vulnerable populations. A variety of 
adaptation strategies for reducing the health impacts of extreme heat events have been proposed or 
implemented. The majority of strategies focused on reactive approaches, such as adapting individual 
behaviours during extreme heat, or providing cooling items or infrastructure. Strategies that focused 
on preparing for extreme heat centered around education and awareness, as well as identifying those 
who may be at increased risk for heat-related illnesses and ensuring there was supports in-place. 
Strategies were often implemented concurrently in heat health actions plans or as part of heat health 
warning systems for the general population. Effectiveness studies reported that utilizing concurrent 
strategies or heat health action plans were effective in reducing population-level heat-related adverse 
outcomes, but the impact attributable to single strategies remains unclear. Factors affecting 
implementation or utilization highlighted the need for awareness and motivation in both individuals 
and decisions makers, as well as the capability, and opportunity to adapt, but the influence of 
population characteristics, setting or institutional factors, and the involvement of government and 
participating organizations on the development and implementation of successful extreme heat 
strategies remains poorly understood. Overall, extreme heat adaptation options are available, but the 
evidence supporting their effectiveness and implementation is limited. Those wishing to adopt 
adaptation strategies will need to determine which ones are likely most feasible and fit-for-purpose 
within their context.  
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
18 
 
References 
1. 
Bartko K. Edmonton set to reach 40ᵒC mid-week as 11 heat records broken saturday across 
Alberta. Global News. 27 Jun 2021 [cited 30 May 2022]: Sect. Weather. Available from: 
https://globalnews.ca/news/7984915/edmonton-alberta-heat-warning-records-june-27/. 
2. 
Benmarhnia T, Bailey Z, Kaiser D, Auger N, King N, Kaufman JS. A difference-in-
differences approach to assess the effect of a heat action plan on heat-related mortality, and 
differences in effectiveness according to sex, age, and socioeconomic status (Montreal, 
Quebec). Environ Health Perspect 2016;124(11):1694-9. 
3. 
Boyson C, Taylor S, Page L. The national heatwave plan - a brief evaluation of issues for 
frontline health staff. PLoS Curr 2014;6:ecurrents.dis.aa63b5ff4cdaf47f1dc6bf44921afe93.  
4. 
Brennan M, O'Shea PM, Mulkerrin EC. Preventative strategies and interventions to improve 
outcomes during heatwaves. Age Ageing 2020;49(5):729-32. 
5. 
Cabantog ED. Strategies to mitigate the impacts of extreme heat events among homeless populations in 
BC’s lower mainland: A review of evidence-based approaches and recommendations. Vancouver (BC): 
Simon Fraser University; 2017 Available from: https://ncceh.ca/sites/default/files/SFU-Cabantog-
2017.pdf. 
6. 
Calabro R, Hoffman C. The Rhode Island climate change and health program: Building 
knowledge and community resilience. R I Med J 2021;104(9):45-8. 
7. 
Casanueva A, Burgstall A, Kotlarski S, Messeri A, Morabito M, Flouris AD, et al. Overview 
of existing heat-health warning systems in Europe. Int J Environ Res Public Health 
2019;16(15):2657. 
8. 
Christenson ML, Moran CE, Grant BS, Tomaro NC, Meiman JG. Community assessment of 
extreme heat preparedness in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. WMJ 2021;120(3):222-5. 
9. 
Deegan HE, Green J, El Kurdi S, Allen M, Pollock SL. Development and implementation of 
a heat alert and response system in rural British Columbia. Can J Public Health 
2022;113(3):446-54. 
10. 
Eyquem J, Feltmate B. Irreversible extreme heat: Protecting Canadians and communities from a lethal 
future. Waterloo (ON): Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 2022 [cited 2022 May 3]. 
Available from: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2022/04/UoW_ICCA_2022_04-Irreversible-Extreme-Heat.pdf. 
11. 
Hasan F, Marsia S, Patel K, Agrawal P, Razzak JA. Effective community-based interventions 
for the prevention and management of heat-related illnesses: A scoping review. Int J Environ 
Res Public Health 2021;18(16):8362. 
12. 
Huang C, Barnett AG, Xu Z, Chu C, Wang X, Turner LR, et al. Managing the health effects 
of temperature in response to climate change: Challenges ahead. Environ Health Perspect 
2013;121(4):415-9. 
13. 
Jay O, Capon A, Berry P, Broderick C, de Dear R, Havenith G, et al. Reducing the health 
effects of hot weather and heat extremes: From personal cooling strategies to green cities. 
Lancet 2021;398(10301):709-24. 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
19 
14. 
Jin AS, Sanders KT. Analyzing changes to U.S. Municipal heat response plans during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Environ Sci Policy 2022;128:347-58. 
15. 
Kafeety A, Henderson SB, Lubik A, Kancir J, Kosatsky T, Schwandt M. Social connection as 
a public health adaptation to extreme heat events. Can J Public Health 2020;111(6):876-9. 
16. 
Kemen J, Schaffer-Gemein S, Grunewald J, Kistemann T. Heat perception and coping 
strategies: A structured interview-based study of elderly people in Cologne, Germany. Int J 
Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(14):7495. 
17. 
Kim K, Jung J, Schollaert C, Spector JT. A comparative assessment of cooling center 
preparedness across twenty-five U.S. cities. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(9):4801. 
18. 
Kingma BRM, Steenhoff H, Toftum J, Daanen HAM, Folkerts MA, Gerrett N, et al. 
ClimApp—integrating personal factors with weather forecasts for individualised warning and 
guidance on thermal stress. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18:11317. 
19. 
Kondo K, Mabon L, Bi Y, Chen Y, Hayabuchi Y. Balancing conflicting mitigation and 
adaptation behaviours of urban residents under climate change and the urban heat island 
effect. Sustain Cities Soc 2021;65:102585. 
20. 
Kotharkar R, Ghosh A. Progress in extreme heat management and warning systems: A 
systematic review of heat-health action plans (1995-2020). Sustain Cities Soc 2022;76:103487. 
21. 
Kravchenko J, Abernethy AP, Fawzy M, Lyerly HK. Minimization of heatwave morbidity 
and mortality. Am J Prev Med 2013;44(3):274-82. 
22. 
Kunst AE, Britstra R. Implementation evaluation of the Dutch national heat plan among 
long-term care institutions in Amsterdam: A cross-sectional study. BMC Health Serv Res 
2013;13:135. 
23. 
Liotta G, Inzerilli MC, Palombi L, Madaro O, Orlando S, Scarcella P, et al. Social 
interventions to prevent heat-related mortality in the older adult in Rome, Italy: A quasi-
experimental study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2018;15(4):715. 
24. 
Lubik A, Kostatasky T. Developing a  municipal heat response plan: A guide for medium-sized 
municipalities. Vancouver (BC): British Columbia Center for Disease Control 2017 [cited 2022 
May 4]. Available from: http://www.bccdc.ca/resource-
gallery/Documents/Guidelines%20and%20Forms/Guidelines%20and%20Manuals/Health-
Environment/Developing%20a%20municipal%20heat%20response%20plan.pdf. 
25. 
Lundgren-Kownacki K, Gao C, Kuklane K, Wierzbicka A. Heat stress in indoor 
environments of Scandinavian urban areas: A literature review. Int J Environ Res Public Health 
2019;16(4):560. 
26. 
Lundgren-Kownacki K, Hornyanszky ED, Chu TA, Olsson JA, Becker P. Challenges of 
using air conditioning in an increasingly hot climate. Int J Biometeorol 2018;62(3):401-12. 
27. 
Martin JL. Responding to the effects of extreme heat: Baltimore City's Code Red Program. 
Health Secur 2016;14(2):71-7. 
28. 
Martinez GS, Linares C, Ayuso A, Kendrovski V, Boeckmann M, Diaz J. Heat-health action 
plans in Europe: Challenges ahead and how to tackle them. Environ Res 2019;176:108548. 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
20 
29. 
Mayrhuber EA-S, Duckers MLA, Wallner P, Arnberger A, Allex B, Wiesbock L, et al. 
Vulnerability to heatwaves and implications for public health interventions - a scoping 
review. Environ Res 2018;166:42-54. 
30. 
McInnes JA, Ibrahim JE. Preparation of residential aged care services for extreme hot 
weather in Victoria, Australia. Aust Health Rev 2013;37(4):442-8. 
31. 
Mehiriz K, Gosselin P, Tardif I, Lemieux M-A. The effect of an automated phone warning 
and health advisory system on adaptation to high heat episodes and health services use in 
vulnerable groups-evidence from a randomized controlled study. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2018;15(8):1581. 
32. 
Mücke H-G, Litvinovitch JM. Heat extremes, public health impacts, and adaptation policy in 
Germany. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020;17(21):7862. 
33. 
Nayak SG, Lin S, Sheridan SC, Lu Y, Graber N, Primeau M, et al. Surveying local health 
departments and county emergency management offices on cooling centers as a heat 
adaptation resource in New York State. J Community Health 2017;42(1):43-50. 
34. 
Nitschke M, Krackowizer A, Hansen AL, Bi P, Tucker GR. Heat health messages: A 
randomized controlled trial of a preventative messages tool in the older population of South 
Australia. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2017;14(9):992. 
35. 
Nitschke M, Tucker G, Hansen A, Williams S, Zhang Y, Bi P. Evaluation of a heat warning 
system in Adelaide, South Australia, using case-series analysis. BMJ open 2016;6(7):e012125. 
36. 
Okwuofu-Thomas B, Beggs PJ, MacKenzie RJ. A comparison of heat wave response plans 
from an aged care facility perspective. J Environ Health 2017;79(8):28-37. 
37. 
Orlando S, Mosconi C, De Santo C, Emberti Gialloreti L, Inzerilli MC, Madaro O, et al. The 
effectiveness of intervening on social isolation to reduce mortality during heat waves in aged 
population: A retrospective ecological study. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2021;18(21):11587. 
38. 
Paterson SK, Godsmark CN. Heat-health vulnerability in temperate climates: Lessons and 
response options from Ireland. Glob Health 2020;16(1):29. 
39. 
Price K, Benmarhnia T, Gaudet J, Kaiser D, Sadoine ML, Perron S, et al. The Montreal heat 
response plan: Evaluation of its implementation towards healthcare professionals and 
vulnerable populations. Can J Public Health 2018;109(1):108-16. 
40. 
Price K, Perron S, King N. Implementation of the Montreal heat response plan during the 
2010 heat wave. Can J Public Health 2013;104(2):e96-100. 
41. 
Takahashi N, Nakao R, Ueda K, Ono M, Kondo M, Honda Y, et al. Community trial on heat 
related-illness prevention behaviors and knowledge for the elderly. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2015;12(3):3188-214. 
42. 
United Kingdom Health Security Agency, National Health Services (NHS) England. Heatwave 
plan for England - protecting health and reducing harm from severe heat and heatwaves. London: 
Government UK; 2022 [cited 2022-05-04]. Report No.: GOV-12083. Available from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/10712
50/Heatwave_Plan_for_Engand_2022_-_260422.pdf. 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
21 
43. 
van Loenhout JAF, Rodriguez-Llanes JM, Guha-Sapir D. Stakeholders' perception on 
national heatwave plans and their local implementation in Belgium and The Netherlands. Int 
J Environ Res Public Health 2016;13(11):1120. 
44. 
White-Newsome JL, Ekwurzel B, Baer-Schultz M, Ebi KL, O'Neill MS, Anderson GB. 
Survey of county-level heat preparedness and response to the 2011 summer heat in 30 U.S. 
States. Environ Health Perspect 2014;122(6):573-9. 
45. 
White-Newsome JL, McCormick S, Sampson N, Buxton MA, O'Neill MS, Gronlund CJ, et 
al. Strategies to reduce the harmful effects of extreme heat events: A four-city study. Int J 
Environ Res Public Health 2014;11(2):1960-88. 
46. 
Widerynski S, Schramm PJ, Conlon KC, Noe RS, Grossman E, Hawkins M, et al. Use of 
cooling centers to prevent heat-related illness : Summary of evidence and strategies for implementation. Atlanta 
(GA): Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - National Center for Environmental 
Health 2017 [cited 2022 Apr 29 ]. Available from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/docs/UseOfCoolingCenters.pdf. 
47. 
Williams L, Erens B, Ettelt S, Hajat S, Manacorda T, Mays N. Evaluation of the heatwave plan for 
England. London, UK: Policy Innovation and Evaluation Research Unit; 2019 [cited 2022 
May 12]. Report No.: 2019-24. Available from: 
https://piru.ac.uk/assets/files/Evaluation%20of%20the%20Heatwave%20Plan%20for%20England%2
0-%20Final%20Report.pdf. 
48. 
Williams S, Nitschke M, Wondmagegn BY, Tong M, Xiang J, Hansen A, et al. Evaluating 
cost benefits from a heat health warning system in Adelaide, South Australia. Aust N Z J 
Public Health 2022;46(2):149-54. 
 
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
22 
Appendix A: Heat and Health Search Strategy 
Box A.1: Extreme Heat Adaptation Strategies Scoping Search - Search Strings 
Database 
Edition or 
Date 
Searched 
Search Terms 
Ovid 
MEDLINE(R) ALL 
1946 to April 13, 2022 
2022-04-14 
Results: 
1089 
1. ((rural or urban) adj (heat or temperature*)).ti,kf. 
2. ((rural or urban) adj (heat or temperature*)).ab. /freq=2 
3. (Heat adj (wave* or health or day*)).ti,kf. 
4. (Heat adj (wave* or health or day*)).ab. /freq=2 
5. (Hot adj (day* or night* or weather)).ti,kf. 
6. (Hot adj (day* or night* or weather)).ab. /freq=2 
7. Heatwave*.ti,kf. 
8. heatwave*.ab. /freq=2 
9. or/1-8 
10. exp Hot Temperature/ 
11. ((Extreme or high or rising) adj (heat or temperature*)).ti,kf. 
12. ((Extreme or high or rising) adj (heat or temperature*)).ab. /freq=2 
13. exp heat stress disorders/ or (dehydration or heat-health or heat 
exhaustion or heat stroke).ti,kf. 
14. or/10-13 
15. exp climate change/ 
16. (weather or climat* or meteorolog* or global warming).mp. 
17. (weather or climat* or meteorolog* or global warming or 
environment*).in,nw. 
18. or/15-17 
19. 9 or (14 and 18) [EXTREME HEAT TERMS] 
20. public policy/ or environmental policy/ or health policy/ 
21. (policy or policies).ti,kf. 
22. exp Health Planning/ or exp Adaptation, Physiological/ or public health 
practice/ or environmental monitoring/ 
23. ((adapt* or prepar* or (action adj2 plan*) or manage* or mitigat* or resilien* 
or "preventive measures" or prevent* or solution* or intervention* or 
evaluation* or strateg*) not (Occupation or work)).ti,kf. 
24. ((adapt* or (action adj2 plan*) or mitigat* or "preventive measures" or 
prevent* or solution* or intervention* or evaluation*) not (occupation or 
work)).ab. /freq=2 
25. hydrat*.mp. or exp Fluid Therapy/ 
26. exp Immersion/ and exp Extremities/ 
27. ((limb or limbs or hand or hands or foot or feet) adj2 immers*).ti,kf. 
28. ((limb or limbs or hand or hands or foot or feet) adj2 immers*).ab. /freq=2 
29. (cool* adj2 (centr* or center*)).ti,ab,kf. 
30. air conditioning/ or ventilation/ 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
23 
31. (air adj2 (condition* or cool*)).ti,kf. 
32. (fan or fans or fanning).ti,kf. 
33. (outreach or ((heat or system) adj2 warn*)).mp. 
34. exp city planning/ or urban plan*.ti,ab,kf. 
35. disaster planning/ or relief work/ or environmental policy/ 
36. or/20-35 [ADAPTATION STRATEGIES] 
37. 19 and 36 
38. exp Geriatrics/ or exp Aged/ or Health Services for the Aged/ or Senior 
Centers/ or (elders or elderly or geriatric* or "gerontolog* old age" or 
(seniors not "high school") or (older adj3 (adult*or person* or people or 
man or men or woman or women)) or centenarian* or nonagenarian* or 
octogenarian* or septuagenarian* or sexagenarian* or dottering or 
decrepit or tottering or overaged or "oldest old" or 
supercentenarian*).mp. 
39. Vulnerable Populations/ or abortion applicants/ or child, abandoned/ or 
disabled persons/ or disabled children/ or persons with mental 
disabilities/ or mentally ill persons/ or drug users/ or enslaved persons/ or 
homeless persons/ or homeless youth/ or prisoners/ or refugees/ or sex 
workers/ or "sexual and gender minorities"/ or intersex persons/ or 
transgender persons/ or terminally ill/ or "transients and migrants"/ or 
working poor/ or ((vulnerable or migrant or transient* or marginal* or "at 
risk" or impoverished) adj2 (population* or people or person* or 
individual* or child* or youth* or population* or worker* or men or women 
or man or woman)).ti,ab. or (street adj2 (people or person* or individual* 
or youth* or population* or child* or men or women or man or 
woman)).ti,ab. or (underhoused or "lack of housing" or ((substandard or 
insufficien* or unstabl* or under or instabil*) adj3 hous*) or squatter* or 
homeless* or vagrant* or indigent or "hard to house" or refugee* or 
asylee* or "mental* ill*" or "mental disorder*" or PTSD or "post traumatic 
stress" or "brain injur*" or "brain damag*" or disabled or pwud or "drug 
user*" or "drug dependen*" or addict* or alcoholi* or "sex worker*" or 
"released prisoner*" or "formerly incarcerated" or "pregnant teen*" or 
"pregnant youth*" or runaway* or "run away*" or (traffik* adj3 (youth* or 
women or woman or child* or person* or people*)) or "low income" or 
"low socioeconomic" or "low SES" or "poorest poor" or "battered women" 
or "intimate partner violen*" or "domestic violen*" or (abuse* adj3 
elder*)).ti,ab. 
40. rural population/ or suburban population/ or urban population/ 
41. rural health/ or suburban health/ or urban health/ 
42. rural health services/ or suburban health services/ or urban health 
services/ 
43. "Catchment Area (Health)"/ 
44. (rural* or urban or semi-rural or semi-urban or city or non-urban or farm* or 
agricultur* or town* or village* or metropolitan or non-metropolitan or 
suburb* or remote or region or residence or jurisdiction or geographic or 
geography or location or residence or catchment).ti,ab,kf. 
45. (community adj (dwelling or resid* or based)).ti,ab,kf. 
46. (care adj network).ti,ab,kf. 
47. exp Child/ or "Congenital, Hereditary, and Neonatal Diseases and 
Abnormalities"/ or exp infant/ or adolescent/ or exp pediatrics/ or child, 
abandoned/ or exp child, exceptional/ or child, orphaned/ or child, 
unwanted/ or minors/ or (pediatric* or paediatric* or child* or newborn* or 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
24 
congenital* or infan* or baby or babies or neonat* or pre-term or preterm* 
or premature birth* or NICU or preschool* or pre-school* or kindergarten* 
or kindergarden* or elementary school* or nursery school* or (day care* 
not adult*) or schoolchild* or toddler* or boy or boys or girl* or middle 
school* or pubescen* or juvenile* or teen* or youth* or high school* or 
adolesc* or pre-pubesc* or prepubesc*).mp. or (child* or adolesc* or 
pediat* or paediat*).jn. 
48. exp Pregnancy Complications, Infectious/ or exp Pregnancy/ or exp 
Pregnant Women/ or exp Labor, Obstetric/ or exp Delivery, Obstetric/ or 
exp Obstetric Labor, Premature/ or exp Obstetric Labor Complications/ 
or Prenatal Care/ or (obstetric* or prenatal* or pregnan* or gestat* or 
perinatal or antenatal or parturi* or childbirth or (labo?r adj3 
delivery)).mp. 
49. Transsexualism/ or exp Ethnic Groups/ or bisexuality/ or exp 
homosexuality/ or exp disabled persons/ or transgendered persons/ or 
exp refugees/ or exp Cultural Diversity/ or exp Socioeconomic Factors/ 
50. (Metis or Indigenous* or Aboriginal* or Amerindian* or Autochtone* or First 
Nations or First Nation* or Inuit or Innu or Inuk or Inuvialuit or tribal or 
diversity or underprivileged or underrepresented or disadvantaged or 
minority or minorities or transient* or migrant* or immigrant* or blind or 
visual* impair* or hearing impair* or deaf or amputat* or paraplegic* or 
quadraplegic* or wheelchair* or transsexual* or homosexual* or 
bisexual* or two spirit* or gender-questioning or HIV positive or elders or 
elderly or oldest old or senior citizen* or shut-in or house-bound or 
neglected).mp. 
51. (battered adj3 (spouse* or wife* or partner)).mp. 
52. (disable* or transgender* or ethnic* or poverty or impoverished or working 
poor or unemploy* or under-employed or transportation deficit* or low 
soci* status or low income* or low-SES or hard-to-house or homeless* or 
under-housed).mp. 
53. (street adj3 (worker* or people or child or children or youth)).mp. 
54. (prostitute* or inner city or downtown core or city core or skid row or rural 
or remote or alcoholic* or mental* ill*).mp. 
55. ((drug or substance*) adj3 (abuse* or use* or illegal or illicit or addict*)).mp. 
56. or/38-55 [POPULATION TERMS] 
57. exp Canada/ 
58. (canada or canadian$ or alberta or british columbia or columbie 
britannique or saskatchewan or manitoba or ontario or quebec or new 
brunswick or nouveau brunswick or nova scotia or nouvelle ecosse or 
prince edward island or ile du prince edward or PEI or newfoundland or 
terre neuve or labrador or nun?v?t or nun?v?t or nwt or territoires du 
nord ouest or northwest territories or yukon).ti,ab,jw,kw. 
59. (Toronto* or Vancouver* or Montreal* or Edmonton* or Calgary* or 
Winnipeg* or Ottawa* or Halifax* or Regina* or Saskatoon* or whitehorse 
or yellowknife or inuvik).ti,ab,jw,kw. 
60. (alberta* or (edmonton* not England) or calgary or calgarian* or medicine 
hat or lethbridge or athabasca or barrhead or beaverlodge or Drayton 
Valley or Drumheller or Buffalo Lake or Kikino or Kinuso or Okotoks or 
Onoway or Paddle Prairie or peerless Lake or Pincher Creek or Piyami 
or Ponoka or Wabasca or Wetaskiwin or Zama or Fort Chippewayan or 
(Banff not (scor* or grade or grades or criteria or grading or scheme or 
schema or type* or classification or type or Scotland)) or (Jasper not 
(jumper or Penfield)) or Waterton or Canmore or Cadotte Lake or 
Woodland Cree or Fort Macleod or Shaganappi or ((spruce grove or 
stettler or strathmore or sundre or sylvan lake or airdrie or beaumont or 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
25 
Calling Lake or Camrose or Coronation or (Devon not England) or 
Didsbury or East Prairie or Eckville or Edson or Elk Point or elnora or 
evansburg or fairview or Fishing Lake or Gibbons or Gift Lake or 
Glendon or Grande Cache or grande Prairie or Grimshaw or Hanna or 
Hinton or Hobbema or Innisfail or Kitscoty or Lac la Biche or Leduc or 
Manyberries or Mill Woods or Morinville or Myrnam or Nanton or (Olds 
not "year olds") or Rainbow Lake or Raymond or Red Earth Creek or 
Rimbey or Rocky Mountain House or Sedgewick or Strathmore or 
Sundre or Taber or Thorhild or Thorsby or Three Hills or Tofield or Trout 
Lake or Valleyview or Vauxhall or Vegreville or Vermillion or Viking or 
Vilna or Vulcan or Wainwright or Jasper Place or Westlock or Whitecourt 
or Winfield or Worsley) and canada*)).mp. or Alberta/ 
61. or/57-60 [CANADA ALBERTA] 
62. exp united states/ or chile/ or Costa Rica/ or Colombia/ or israel/ or turkey/ 
or exp japan/ or exp Republic of Korea/ or austria/ or belgium/ or exp 
baltic states/ or estonia/ or latvia/ or lithuania/ or czech republic/ or 
hungary/ or poland/ or slovakia/ or slovenia/ or exp france/ or exp 
germany/ or united kingdom/ or exp england/ or northern ireland/ or exp 
scotland/ or wales/ or greece/ or exp ireland/ or exp italy/ or luxembourg/ 
or netherlands/ or portugal/ or exp "scandinavian and nordic countries"/ 
or exp denmark/ or finland/ or iceland/ or norway/ or sweden/ or spain/ or 
switzerland/ or exp australia/ or exp new zealand/ or (Australia or Austria 
or Belgium or Canada or Chile or Colombia or "Costa Rica" or "Czech 
Republic" or Denmark or Estonia or Finland or France or Germany or 
Greece or Hungary or Iceland or Israel or Italy or Japan or "Republic of 
Korea" or "South Korea" or Latvia or Lithuania or Luxembourg or Mexico 
or Netherlands or New Zealand or Norway or Poland or Portugal or 
"Slovak Republic" or Slovenia or Spain or Sweden or Switzerland or 
Turkey or "United Kingdom" or England or Ireland or Scotland or Wales 
or "United States").mp. 
63. 37 and (56 or 61 or 62) 
64. Developing Countries.sh,kf. 
65. (Africa or Asia or West Indies or South America or Central 
America).hw,kf,ti,ab,cp. 
66. (Caribbean or Latin* America*).hw,kf,ti,cp. 
67. (Afghanistan or Albania or Algeria or Angola or Antigua or Barbuda or 
Argentina or Armenia or Armenian or Aruba or Azerbaijan or Bahrain or 
Bangladesh or Barbados or Benin or Byelarus or Byelorussian or Belarus 
or Belorussian or Belorussia or Belize or Bhutan or Bolivia or Bosnia or 
Herzegovina or Hercegovina or Botswana or Brasil or Brazil or Bulgaria 
or Burkina Faso or Burkina Fasso or Upper Volta or Burundi or Urundi or 
Cambodia or Cairo or Khmer Republic or Kampuchea or Cameroon or 
Cameroons or Cameron or Camerons or Cape Verde or Central African 
Republic or Chad or Chile or China or Colombia or Comoros or Comoro 
Islands or Comores or Mayotte or Congo or Zaire or Costa Rica or Cote 
d'Ivoire or Ivory Coast or Croatia or Cuba or Cyprus or Czechoslovakia 
or Czech Republic or Slovakia or Slovak Republic or Djibouti or French 
Somaliland or Dominica or Dominican Republic or East Timor or East 
Timur or Timor Leste or Ecuador or United Arab Republic or Egypt or El 
Salvador or Eritrea or Estonia or Ethiopia or Fiji or Gabon or Gabonese 
Republic or Gambia or Gaza or Georgia Republic or Georgian Republic 
or Ghana or Gold Coast or Greece or Grenada or Guatemala or Guinea 
or Guam or Guiana or Guyana or Haiti or Honduras or Hungary or India 
or Maldives or Indonesia or Iran or Iraq or Isle of Man or Jamaica or 
Jordan or Kazakhstan or Kazakh or Kenya or Kiribati or Korea or Kosovo 
or Kyrgyzstan or Kirghizia or Kyrgyz Republic or Kirghiz or Kirgizstan or 
Lao PDR or Laos or Latvia or Lebanon or Lesotho or Basutoland or 
Liberia or Libya or Lithuania or Macedonia or Madagascar or Malagasy 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
26 
Republic or Malaysia or Malaya or Malay or Sabah or Sarawak or Malawi 
or Nyasaland or Mali or Malta or Marshall Islands or Mauritania or 
Mauritius or Agalega Islands or Mexico or Micronesia or Middle East or 
Moldova or Moldovia or Moldovian or Mongolia or Montenegro or 
Morocco or Ifni or Mozambique or Myanmar or Myanma or Burma or 
Namibia or Nepal or Netherlands Antilles or New Caledonia or Nicaragua 
or Niger or Nigeria or Northern Mariana Islands or Oman or Muscat or 
Pakistan or Palau or Palestine or Panama or Paraguay or Peru or 
Philippines or Philipines or Phillipines or Phillippines or Poland or 
Portugal or Puerto Rico or Romania or Rumania or Roumania or Russia 
or Russian or Rwanda or Ruanda or Saint Kitts or St Kitts or Nevis or 
Saint Lucia or St Lucia or Saint Vincent or St Vincent or Grenadines or 
Samoa or Samoan Islands or Navigator Island or Navigator Islands or 
Sao Tome or Saudi Arabia or Senegal or Serbia or Montenegro or 
Seychelles or Sierra Leone or Slovenia or Sri Lanka or Ceylon or 
Solomon Islands or Somalia or South Africa or Sudan or Suriname or 
Surinam or Swaziland or Syria or Tajikistan or Tadzhikistan or 
Tadjikistan or Tadzhik or Tanzania or Thailand or Togo or Togolese 
Republic or Tonga or Trinidad or Tobago or Tunisia or Turkey or 
Turkmenistan or Turkmen or Uganda or Ukraine or Uruguay or USSR or 
Soviet Union or Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or Uzbekistan or 
Uzbek or Vanuatu or New Hebrides or Venezuela or Vietnam or Viet 
Nam or West Bank or Yemen or Yugoslavia or Zambia or Zimbabwe or 
Rhodesia).hw,kf,ti,ab,cp. 
68. ((developing or less* developed or under developed or underdeveloped or 
low* income or underserved or under served or deprived or poor*) adj 
(countr* or nation? or population? or world)).ti,ab. 
69. (middle income adj (countr* or nation? or population? or world)).ti. 
70. (low* adj (gdp or gnp or gross domestic or gross national)).ti,ab. 
71. (low adj3 middle adj3 countr*).ti. 
72. (lmic or lmics or third world or lami countr*).ti,ab. 
73. transitional countr*.ti,ab. 
74. or/64-73 [LMIC FILTER] 
75. microbiology.jw. 
76. animals/ not (animals/ and humans/) 
77. (in vitro or in vivo).ti. 
78. 63 not (74 or 75 or 76 or 77) 
79. limit 78 to (english language and yr="2012 -Current") 
80. limit 79 to (comment or editorial or letter) 
81. 79 not 80 
 
Google Scholar 
https://scholar.goo
gle.com/ 
2022-04-29 
 
Results: 12 
 
Retrieved: 9 
allintitle: +"extreme heat" OR heatwave OR heatwaves +implementation OR 
plan OR strategy OR strategies OR interventions OR program OR programs 
evaluation OR evaluate OR effectiveness OR outcomes 
Limited to 2012-2022 
 
+"extreme heat" OR heatwave OR heatwaves OR “extreme temperatures” 
+implementation OR implement OR plan OR strategy OR strategies OR 
intervention OR interventions OR program OR programs evaluation OR 
evaluate OR effectiveness OR outcomes OR study OR studies   
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
27 
Limited to 2012-2022 
Grey literature 
Global 
Adaptation 
Mapping 
Initiative 
 
https://globaladap
tation.github.io/in
dex.html 
 
2022-03-25 
 
Retrieved: 3 
Browsed publications 
National 
Collaborating 
Centre for 
Environmental 
health 
https://ncceh.ca/ 
 
2022-03-25 
 
Browsed Extreme Heat page – 0 results 
https://ncceh.ca/environmental-health-in-canada/health-agency-
projects/extreme-heat 
 
Qwant 
https://www.qwan
t.com/ 
 
 
2022-03-25 
 
Retrieved: 7 
 
extreme heat systematic review – retrieved 4 
extreme heat mitigation OR adaptation systematic review – retrieved 3 
 
Google Advanced 
Search 
 
https://www.goo
gle.ca/ 
2022-04-29 
 
Retrieved: 
20 
 
 
Google extreme heat mitigation OR adaptation OR management health 
systematic review – 96 results (retrieved – 9) 
 
allintitle: +"extreme heat" OR heatwave OR heatwaves OR “extreme 
temperatures” +implementation OR implement OR plan OR strategy OR 
strategies OR intervention OR interventions OR program OR programs 
evaluation OR evaluate OR effectiveness OR outcomes OR study OR studies 
– 15 Results (retrieved – 7) 
 
allintext: +"extreme heat" OR heatwave OR heatwaves OR “extreme 
temperatures” +implementation OR implement OR plan OR strategy OR 
strategies OR intervention OR interventions OR program OR programs 
evaluation OR evaluate OR effectiveness OR outcomes – browsed 1st 100 
results (retrieved – 4) 
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
28 
Intergovernment
al Panel on 
Climate Change 
(IPCC) 
https://www.ipcc.c
h/ 
 
2022-05-02 
 
 
Browsed publications – 0 results 
Climate Change 
and Human 
Health Literature 
Portal  
https://tools.nie
hs.nih.gov/cchhl
/index.cfm 
 
2022-05-04 
 
Retrieved: 
20 
 
 
Evaluation – 34 results 
Evaluate – 64 results 
Implement – 15 results 
Implementing – 19 results 
Implementation – 35 results 
Effective – 65 results 
Outcomes – 98 results 
 
Filters for all searches: Assessment/Book/Report|Research Article|United 
States|Europe|Non-U.S. North America|Heat|Drought|Health Impact|Review 
Article|Australasia|Year 
Published|2021|2020|2019|2018|2017|2016|2015|2014|2013|2012|Health 
Sector Influence|Vulnerable Population|Sociodemographic 
Vulnerability|Research Gap|Policy|Mitigation 
 
Global Heat 
Health 
Information 
Network 
https://ghhin.org/ 
2022-05-04 
 
Retrieved: 5 
Browsed Tools Products and Services page 
 
Searched: 
Evaluation, evaluate (retrieved – 3) 
Implementation (retrieved – 0) 
Health outcomes: (retrieved – 1) 
Uptake – 0 results 
Effectiveness (retrieved – 1) 
 
 
European 
Observatory 
https://climate-
adapt.eea.europa
.eu/observatory/e
vidence/health-
effects/heat-and-
health/heat-and-
health 
2022-05-04 
 
Retrieved: 4 
Browsed site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
29 
Appendix B: Evidence for Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies 
Table B.1: Summary of Evidence for Individual and Care Provider Extreme Heat Health Behaviour Strategies  
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Air conditioning2, 
10, 13, 15, 16, 19, 20, 22, 
24-26, 29, 33, 42 
• Mechanically controlling the 
humidity, ventilation, and 
temperature in a building, in 
order to maintain a cool indoor 
environment.  
• AC units may be installed or 
utilized within private dwellings, 
or patients/those living in a 
congregate living facility may 
utilize an air-conditioned 
common area. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
Christenson 
20218 
Survey study 
Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, 
United States 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• Cost (e.g., installation, 
energy bills, repairs) 
• Noise 
• Discomfort with use 
• Safety concern with 
window unit overnight 
Kondo 202119 
Survey study  
Fukuoka, Japan 
Not reported 
Facilitator 
• Educate the public about 
an efficient/appropriate use 
of AC and how to use AC 
while saving energy 
Applying water to 
extremities13, 16, 
25 
• Using wet towels, spraying, or 
submerging arms, feet, neck 
and/or head in cool water to 
reduce to the body’s heat load 
through evaporative heat loss. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
Not reported  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
30 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
 
Block sunlight10, 
15, 16, 19, 22, 25, 42 
• Preventing increased indoor 
temperatures through latent 
solar heat, by closing blinds, 
shades, or shutters during the 
day.  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
Cold showers or 
shower more 
frequently9, 12, 16, 
25 
• Wetting the body, to reduce the 
body’s heat load through 
evaporative heat loss. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
Cooking and 
eating 
differently16, 19, 25, 
33, 42 
• Avoiding increased indoor 
temperatures through the use 
of cooking appliance (e.g., not 
using oven). 
• Avoiding food and beverages 
that can dehydrate (e.g., 
alcohol, caffeine, high in salt). 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General Public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
Not reported  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
31 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Creating natural 
ventilation7, 10, 16, 
19, 20, 22, 25, 26, 33, 42 
• Opening windows, during 
coolers parts of the day (i.e., 
nighttime) to circulate and 
introduce cooler air indoors. 
• Natural-draft ventilation 
(allowing cooler air to enter at 
the base/north side, and letting 
hotter air exit through an 
opening at the top of the 
building) and cross-ventilation 
(opening doors or windows on 
opposite walls) configurations 
are suggested. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
Mayrhuber 
201829 
Scoping review 
United States, 
Canada, 
Europe, 
Australia, 
Japan, China, 
Hong Kong, 
and South 
Africa. 
 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• Safety/security concerns 
with leaving windows 
open at night 
 
Drinking more 
fluids and/or 
maintaining 
hydration4, 7, 9, 12, 
13, 15, 16, 19, 22, 25, 26, 
33, 42 
• Drinking fluids regularly, to 
prevent dehydration. 
• Water is the preferred fluid, 
with soft-drinks, alcohol and 
caffeinated beverages being 
avoided because of their 
diuretic properties.  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
32 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
 
Expand and 
maintain 
vegetation cover 
on private 
property10 
• Reducing artificial surfaces in 
size (which absorb re-emit 
heat) through the addition of 
vegetation in gardens/yards, 
alleyways, driveways and 
balconies. 
Setting 
• Urban 
Population 
• General public  
Implementers 
• Individuals 
None identified 
Fans10, 13, 15, 16, 19, 
25, 29, 33 
• Using electrical ceiling, floor or 
desk fans to improve ventilation 
in indoor spaces and support 
convection/evaporative heat 
loss from the skin 
• In non-humid conditions 
applying water to extremities or 
wetting clothes in conjunction 
with fan use, to support 
evaporative heat loss. 
• Guidelines recommend against 
using fans in heat that exceeds 
35ᵒC or when high humidity is 
present in conjunction with a 
heat wave.  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
Modified work 
arrangements7, 10 
• Arranging with employers to 
work at cooler times of the day. 
• Taking more frequent work 
breaks for workers in hot, non-
air-conditioned environments. 
• Scheduling heavy work during 
cooler part of the day. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
33 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Monitoring 
technology13, 18 
• Monitoring the health of 
individuals outside of 
healthcare facilities using apps 
or personal monitors.  
• Alerting the individual or a care 
provider when parameters 
indicate an elevated risk for 
heat-related illness.  
Example: ClimApp18   
• An app (available for Android, 
iOS) which combines the 
current and 24-hour weather 
forecasting with individual 
information to offer 
personalized guidance related 
to heat exposure 
• Advice can be for individuals or 
groups and the user can 
customize the model input 
according to their personal 
situation (e.g., activity level, 
clothing, body characteristics, 
heat acclimatization, indoor or 
outdoor situation, and 
geographical location) 
 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers  
None identified 
Reducing or 
rescheduling 
recreational 
activity9, 13, 15, 16, 
20, 22, 25, 33 
• Reducing, eliminating or 
rescheduling strenuous 
activities for early morning or 
late evening, when 
temperatures are cooler, to 
reduce the risk of heat stress 
through excursion.   
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
Kemen 202116 
Survey study 
Cologne, 
Germany 
• The sum of all coping-
strategies is positively 
correlated with 
perception of heat strain 
(Spearman’s ρ = 0.396), 
and more adaptation 
strategies are 
associated with more 
heat strain (individual 
strategies not analyzed) 
Not reported  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
34 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• Care providers 
Resting in the 
shade and/or 
creating one’s 
own shade9, 22, 26 
• Resting away from direct 
sunlight (e.g., under an awning, 
umbrella, or tree’s shadow), or 
wearing a hat to reduce the risk 
of one’s body temperature 
rising. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
None identified 
Turning off heat-
producing 
equipment3, 10, 22 
• Avoiding increasing the indoor 
temperatures by turning off 
heat-producing equipment 
(e.g., TVs, computers).  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
None identified 
Use thinner 
bedding and/or 
modify sleeping 
arrangements7, 
10, 16, 25 
• In homes with different rooms 
and floors, arranging sleeping 
areas differently, so that people 
can benefit from cooler areas 
of the house (e.g., basements, 
lower floors, and rooms that 
receive less sunlight). 
• Using thinner bedding may 
reduce the risk of over-heating. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
35 
AC: air conditioning; ρ: rank correlation coefficient; TV: television  
 
 
 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Wearable 
personal cooling 
system25, 30 
• Wearing neck ties, cooling 
vests or other clothing, which 
may use water, ice packs, 
personal ventilation (e.g., 
ventilated clothing with 
integrated electric fans), or and 
phase change materials.  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
None identified 
Wearing less, 
light, and/or 
breathable 
clothing7, 9, 12, 13, 
15, 16, 19, 22, 25, 33 
• Wearing fewer garments, that 
are light coloured and are 
breathable or do not retain heat 
(e.g., cotton, linen, silk) to 
improve air circulating over 
one’s skin, as well as allowing 
sweat/moisture to evaporate. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Individuals 
• Care providers 
Jay 202113 
Literature 
review 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• Can compromise skin 
protection from ultraviolet 
radiation 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
36 
Table B.2: Summary of Evidence for Care Provider Extreme Heat Health Preparedness Strategies  
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Checklists30 
• An extreme heat checklist is 
developed to highlight issues 
and provide a systematic 
approach to hot weather 
preparation. 
Example:  Heatwave checklist for 
residential aged care( Victoria, 
Australia)30 
• Checklist designed to assist 
residential aged care providers 
to prepare for summer and 
periods of extreme heat. 
• It is meant to act as prompt 
and to provide a framework for 
planning and preparedness 
activities 
• It is used by multiple personnel 
to review and prepare their 
respective work areas. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• Healthcare 
providers and 
patients (healthcare 
facilities) 
• Seniors (nursing 
homes) 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Care providers 
None identified 
 
 
Facility heat 
health action-
response plan or 
protocols20, 21, 30, 
36 
• Healthcare facilities or 
community services develop 
plans or protocols which help 
prepare for and guide their 
services through extreme heat 
events. 
• Healthcare facilities or 
community services may also 
adapt local or national heat 
health plans to their individual 
context. 
• Planned interventions and 
protocols may include: 
installation of thermometers in 
patient bays and recording of 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• Patients 
• Vulnerable 
populations 
• Seniors (nursing 
homes) 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Care providers 
Boyson 20143 
Survey study  
England  
Not reported 
Facilitators 
• Clinical experience and 
knowledge about heat and 
health  
• Capacity to identify 
vulnerability and increase 
surveillance 
• Family involvement  
Barriers 
• Lack of awareness; do not 
perceive as a priority 
• Limited or unsuitable 
resources and facilities 
(e.g., lack of ice machines, 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
37 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
temperatures frequently; 
identifying vulnerable 
individuals; creation of cool 
areas for high-risk patients; 
obtain and maintains supplies 
(e.g., ice machine, water 
fountains, fans); turning off 
unnecessary lights and 
electrical equipment; 
maximizing green areas on 
and around the facility site. 
fans; poor design of 
building) 
• Conflicting actions with 
other guidelines  
• Lack of, or poor channeling 
of communications to 
frontline staff 
McInnes 201330 
Survey study 
Victoria, 
Australia 
Not reported 
Facilitators 
• Awareness; education of 
staff on plan/protocols 
(e.g., audits of staff 
knowledge, compulsory 
information sessions, staff 
meetings and easy access 
to materials [hard copy and 
electronic] 
Barriers 
• Staff absences 
• Lack of time 
Kunst 201322 
Survey study  
Amsterdam, 
The 
Netherlands 
Not reported 
Barriers  
• Poor dissemination of heat 
plans within institutions 
• Shortage of expertise 
among personnel 
• Residents’ lack of 
awareness of risks vs. 
need to respect residents’ 
responsibility and self-
determination 
• High cost to install cooling 
measures (e.g., AC) in 
older buildings 
Information 
and/or education 
• Training sessions and 
reminders to personnel of 
Population 
None identified  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
38 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
campaign 
specific to care 
providers4, 7, 20, 30, 
38 
preventive measures to put in 
place and signs of heat-related 
illness. 
• Care providers and 
patients (healthcare 
facilities) 
• Children (schools) 
• Seniors (nursing 
homes) 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Care providers 
Maintenance of 
equipment30  
• An early preparation activity for 
healthcare facilities to ensure 
cooling resources are 
available, including repair and 
maintenance of AC units. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population  
• Patients 
• Care providers 
General public 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
None identified  
Meeting of all 
agencies to 
discuss 
coordination 
issues35 
• An early preparation activity for 
decision makers and care 
providers to review heat health 
action plans and discuss 
responsibilities, and 
coordination of resources. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population  
• Care providers 
General public 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Government 
• Healthcare 
providers 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
39 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• Not-for-profit 
groups 
• Combination of 
partners and 
agencies 
Participating in 
community 
committees21 
• Care providers can participate 
in community committees, 
(e.g., health councils; school 
boards; recreation programs) 
to provide expertise on how 
minimize heat-related health 
effects during program 
activities and spread 
awareness on extreme heat 
adaptation.  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General population 
• Children (schools) 
Implementers 
• Care providers 
None identified 
Patient risk pre-
assessment and 
identification3, 18, 
22, 24, 48 
• Patients/clients are pre-
assessed using a heat 
vulnerability assessment tool, 
to identify those who may 
require close monitoring during 
heatwaves. 
• Assessments may include the 
effects of current medications, 
condition or behavioral factors, 
and/or limited 
resources/support. 
• Those identified as high risk for 
heat-related illness may 
receive education, or be 
enrolled in a welfare-check in 
program. 
Example: Health Heatwave 
intervention for mental health 
clients (Adelaide, Australia)48  
• Mental health clients were 
assessed at the beginning of 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population  
• Chronically ill 
Implementers 
• Healthcare 
providers 
Williams 202248 
Cost Analysis 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
• For mental health 
clients, total costs were 
estimated as $222,365 
AUS, (pre-season risk 
assessment: $145,895 
AUS; client education 
and follow up $35,506 
AUS) 
• Potential costs averted 
through combined 
HHWS-attributable 
reductions in hospital 
admissions and 
ambulance callouts: 
benefit-to-cost ratio of 
2.0–3.3 (but contribution 
of the intervention was 
not evaluated) 
• There was no apparent 
decrease in mental 
health hospitalizations 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
40 
AC: air conditioning; HHWS: heat health warning system  
 
 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
summer, to identify those who 
may require closer monitoring 
during heatwaves; on 
activation of the HHWS, these 
clients receive daily welfare 
checks by phone or home-
visits if needed. 
following introduction of 
the HHWS 
Provide 
information 
during non-heat 
related visits and 
increased 
surveillance for 
signs or 
symptoms of 
heat related 
illness2, 38 
• Bringing awareness to extreme 
heat related risk and 
adaptation during routine 
health appointments. 
• During times of extreme heat, 
intensified surveillance of signs 
or symptoms of heat-related 
illness may be prudent in those 
who are unable to notice and 
respond accordingly. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• Chronically ill 
• Seniors 
Implementers 
• Care providers 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
41 
Table B.3: Summary of Evidence for Community Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies  
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Cooling bus 
program14 
• Leveraging public 
transportation system’s air-
conditioned buses as cooling 
centers that can strategically 
be placed in locations that 
needed cooling access. 
Setting 
• Urban 
Population 
• General Public  
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
• Community 
organization 
None identified 
Cooling centres 
or shelters8, 9, 11-
14, 17, 20, 21, 24, 27, 33, 
38, 45, 46 
• An air-conditioned building 
designated to provide respite 
and safety during extreme 
heat.  
• Often a government-owned 
building (e.g., library, museum, 
school, recreation center), an 
existing community or religious 
centre, or a private business 
(e.g., shopping mall, or movie 
theatre), with trained staff 
which can recognize signs of 
heat-illness. 
• Extreme-heat education 
materials, water, food/snacks 
and entertainment is 
sometimes provided. 
• Disseminating information 
regarding the centres was most 
often through public radio, 
social media, and newspapers, 
with targeted reach-out to 
vulnerable populations. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Seniors 
• Homeless 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Municipal 
government 
• Non-profit groups 
• Combination of 
agencies and/or 
partners 
Widerynski 
201746 
Report 
 
 
• Spending time (even a few 
hours) in a cool 
environment reduces the 
risk of mortality 
(approximately 66% 
reduction) 
Facilitator 
• Transportation (e.g., free 
bus service)  
Barriers 
• Lack of awareness 
• Stigma/perception of need 
(e.g., do not feel they are 
vulnerable to heat) 
• Don’t want house 
unoccupied (e.g., crime in 
area, pets) 
White-
Newsome 
201445 
Qualitative 
study  
Detroit, 
Michigan, New 
York City, New 
York, 
Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 
and Phoenix, 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• Stigma (e.g., 
misconception that 
centres are only for 
seniors or homeless) 
• Hygiene, health and 
safety 
• Access, lack of 
transportation 
• Difficulty evacuating one’s 
home  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
42 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• There may be designated 
centres for persons 
experiencing homelessness, 
which may provide other 
services such as food, clothing, 
referring services, and mental 
health care. 
Example: Code Red program 
(Adelaide, Australia)48  
• Provide those sleeping rough a 
place to stay cool and 
hydrated. This was provided in 
addition to regular services to 
those experiencing 
homelessness. 
Example: Code Red program 
(Baltimore Maryland, United 
States) 
• The program is in effect from 
May 15 to September 15 each 
summer, with cooling centers 
opened to the public (including 
in Community Action Centers 
and city-run senior centers) on 
days when a heat declaration 
was issued by the health 
commissioner; This runs in 
conjunction with bottled water 
distribution to the homeless, 
and energy assistance to those 
who apply and qualify (i.e., help 
with the cost of heating and 
cooling bills).  
Arizona, 
United States 
Nayak 201733  
Survey study 
New York 
State, United 
States 
Not reported  
Facilitators 
• Food and activities 
provided 
• Use of multiple media 
outlets to notify the 
community (e.g., 
television, radio, 
newspapers to reach 
seniors) 
• Large distribution of 
cooling centres (i.e., 
across metropolitan areas, 
suburban, and rural) 
Barriers  
• Limited resources (e.g., 
facilities, funds, staff) 
• Making aware vulnerable 
populations 
Williams 
202248 
Cost analysis 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
• For Code Red program, 
total cooling center costs 
were $48,000 AUS  
• Potential costs averted 
through combined HHWS-
attributable reductions in 
hospital admissions and 
ambulance callouts: 
benefit-to-cost ratio of 
2.0–3.3 (but contribution 
of the individual 
intervention was not 
evaluated) 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
43 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Christenson 
20218 
Survey study 
Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, 
United States  
Not reported 
Facilitators 
• Messaging about 
intended audience  
Barriers 
• Lack of awareness 
• Negative perception  
• Long distance from home 
• Limited hours of 
operation 
• Worried about personal 
safety  
• Cannot bring pets 
• Building not accessible 
for disabilities 
Martin 201627 
Program 
description 
Baltimore, 
Maryland, 
United States  
Not reported 
Facilitators 
• Leverages existing assets 
and programs in the city 
Barriers 
• Variation in cooling centre 
implementation and 
operation 
• Lack of channels of 
communication with 
vulnerable population 
• Message fatigue during 
long periods of extreme 
heat 
• Deterred by getting 
comfortable at the centre, 
only to become 
uncomfortable again at 
home 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
44 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Distribution of 
water4, 11, 14, 20, 24, 
27, 38, 41 
• Distribution of water bottles, 
installation of public fountains, 
providing portable water 
stations, or public coolers, to 
provide hydration options for 
individuals. 
• Along with water distribution to 
the general population, 
educational materials regarding 
heat health risk and individual 
behaviour adaptations may be 
included. 
• Water distribution to vulnerable 
populations, may coincide with 
outreach efforts or as part of 
home visits.  
• For patients/those living in a 
congregate living facility, 
access to fluids may be 
enhanced (e.g., water stations, 
distributing cups of water), in 
conjunction with reminders to 
stay hydrated. 
Example: Heat health warning 
plus bottled water delivery 
(Nagasaki, Japan)41 
• In addition to heat health 
warnings, two 500 mL bottles 
of water with short messages 
about heat-related illness 
prevention behaviors were 
delivered by couriers to each 
household once a week for 5 
weeks. 
 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public 
• Homeless 
• Homecare clients 
(seniors, 
chronically ill) 
Implementers 
• Government 
• Non-profit groups 
• Care providers 
• Volunteers 
• First responders 
 
Takahashi 
201541 
Community 
trial 
Nagasaki, 
Japan 
• In conjunction with a heat 
health warnings and public 
information materials, 
water bottle distribution 
improved nighttime AC 
use, water intake, cooling 
body behaviours, and 
reduced activity in the 
heat. 
• There was no 
improvement of the 
knowledge scores with 
water bottle distribution. 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
45 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Distribute 
shading and/or 
cooling items14 
• Distribution of shading or 
cooling items (e.g., free tents, 
patio umbrellas, misting fans, 
super soakers, water jugs, 
water balloons and/or neck 
cooling rags) to encourage 
individual heat adaptation 
behaviours.  
Example: Playstreets program 
(Philadelphia, Pennsylvania) 14 
• As an extension of a pop-up 
play program with free lunches, 
the program provided 
participants with shading and 
cooling items during program 
participation. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Children 
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
• Non-profit groups 
None identified 
Expand and 
maintain 
vegetation cover 
on public 
property or 
businesses4, 10, 
13, 19-21, 24, 42 
 
• Reducing artificial surfaces, 
(which absorb re-emit heat) 
through increasing vegetation 
in parking areas, alleyways, 
streets, and other public (e.g., 
school yards), or commercial 
infrastructure. 
Setting 
• Urban 
Population 
• General public  
Implementers 
• Community groups 
• Businesses 
 
Eyquem 
202210 
Report 
Canada 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• High land costs 
• Competition for space 
 
Expanded 
programs for 
vulnerable and 
isolated people26, 
48 
 
• Existing programs (e.g., senior 
centres, homeless shelters and 
outreach) may expand services 
(e.g., hours, personnel, 
services) to increase support 
for those vulnerable 
populations during extreme 
heat events. 
Example: Code Red program 
(Adelaide, Australia)48  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Seniors 
• Homeless 
Implementers 
Williams 
202248 
Cost analysis 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
• For Code Red program, 
total cooling center costs 
were $48,000 AUS  
• Potential costs averted 
through combined HHWS-
attributable reductions in 
hospital admissions and 
ambulance callouts: 
benefit-to-cost ratio of 
2.0–3.3 (but contribution 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
46 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• Provide those sleeping rough a 
place to stay cool and hydrated 
in addition to regular services 
to those experiencing 
homelessness. 
• Public health 
authority 
• Municipal 
government 
• Non-profit groups 
• Combination of 
agencies and/or 
partners 
of the individual 
intervention was not 
evaluated) 
Extending 
operational hours 
of public pools, 
outdoor 
recreation, 
spaces, spray 
parks2, 9, 24, 33, 38 
 
• Extending operational hours of 
public pools, outdoor 
recreational spaces, and spray 
parks, to increase access to 
cooling infrastructure. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public  
• Children 
• Homeless 
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
• Businesses 
None identified  
Outreach4, 5, 10, 21, 
23, 24, 27, 29, 37, 45 
• Engaging with the public about 
the risks of extreme heat, and 
preventive measures that can 
reduce these risks. 
• Programs may also look at the 
sites (e.g., low-income 
communities, seniors’ 
residences) for indicators of 
elevated risk and provided 
education and assistance as 
needed. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public 
• Seniors 
(community 
dwelling, isolated) 
• Homeless 
Implementers 
Orlando 
202137 
Ecological 
Study 
Rome, Italy 
• The Long Live Elderly 
program reduced 
excessive mortalitya: 2% 
intervention vs. 3.81% 
controls; rate ratio 0.70, 
95% CI (0.54 to 0.92); 
adjusted IRR: 0.44, 95% 
CI (0.3 to 0.60).  
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
47 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• For homeless populations, 
outreach teams may patrol the 
streets, looking for vulnerable 
people and providing 
information, water/sports 
drinks, and basic necessities 
(e.g., hygiene kits, socks) 
Example: Gatekeeping program 
(Detroit, Michigan)45 
• Utility service providers go out 
into the field to look at sites and 
provide assistance to 
vulnerable customers (e.g., 
senior citizens); if someone is 
in danger, it was reported back 
to the appropriate group (e.g., 
Aging agency)45 
Example: Long Live the Elderly 
Program (Rome, Italy)23, 37 
• All those over 75 receive a 
letter and then a phone call to 
obtain their consent to be part 
of the program; refusal for 
participation is low (2%). 
• Periodically assessing social 
and health needs, health 
promotion campaigns, and 
assistance in handling 
bureaucratic matters, or 
seeking formal or informal care; 
this is often provided by 
volunteers living or working 
near participants. 
• Government 
• Non-profit groups 
• Volunteers 
• Utility providers 
• First responders 
 
Liotta 2018 23   
Case control 
study 
Rome, Italy 
 
• Cumulative mortalityb 
rates for Long Live Elderly 
program participants 25% 
(SD 1.4) vs. non-
participants 29% (SD 6.7) 
Not reported 
Shade 
structures13, 25, 30 
• Artificial canopies are 
strategically located over 
outdoor areas (e.g., transit 
stops, play areas, and picnic 
Setting 
• Urban 
Population 
Jay 202113 
Literature 
review 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• High cost of canopy 
materials.  
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
48 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
areas) and buildings, minimize 
radiative heat load. 
• Building shade can be 
strategically used to provide 
shading for pedestrians and 
high-use urban areas (e.g., 
plazas and transit stops). 
• General public  
• Children 
• Homeless 
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
• Coverage dependent on 
size, height, and 
orientation of shading.  
• Shading implementation 
should assess use (e.g., 
time of day and 
demographics) to ensure 
shade is optimally cast at 
the hottest times of day. 
Spray or 
sprinkler caps on 
fire hydrants45 
 
• Misting or sprinkler heads are 
attached to fire hydrants, which 
control how much water is used 
for cooling sprays (rather than 
having people opening fire 
hydrants). 
Setting 
• Urban 
Population 
• General public  
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
None identified 
Transportation to 
heat health 
infrastructure21, 
24, 33, 38 
• Shuttles or public 
transportation are utilized to 
better provide access to heat 
health infrastructure (e.g., 
cooling centres, public pools). 
• Allocation and routes are 
designed to target those who 
are at high-risk for heat related 
illness, or are unlikely to have 
personal transportation options 
(e.g., lower income areas). 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public 
• Vulnerable 
populations  
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
None identified 
Welfare check-
ins4, 7, 9, 10, 20, 24, 
27, 32, 35, 38, 39, 48 
• Leveraging emergency 
services to assist vulnerable 
populations during heat 
events or community-led 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• Seniors 
(community 
Eyquem 
202210 
Report 
Canada 
 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• Community relationships 
take time to build 
• Co-operation required 
between many parties 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
49 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
initiatives that strengthen 
social networks. 
• Including door-to-door visits or 
automated calls; for 
individuals that do not 
respond to a welfare 
call/check, the case is 
escalated and first 
responders, EMS or other 
organizations will conduct a 
home welfare check. 
• Individuals may self-register 
or are registered by family 
members, doctors, or support 
workers. 
• For those who receive routine 
home visits, the intensity of 
follow up may increase.  
Example: Telecross Redi 
program (Adelaide, Australia)35, 48 
• A telephone support program 
conducted by the Red Cross 
that provides phone calls to 
registered vulnerable clients 
during heat alerts, principally 
the community dwelling 
elderly population. In the 
event that an individual does 
not respond to a welfare call 
the case is escalated and first 
responders will conduct a 
home welfare check.  
Example: United States Postal 
Service’s Carrier Alert Program 
(New York City, New York)45 
• If the postal carrier notices 
that the person doesn’t pick 
dwelling, isolated, 
homecare clients) 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Municipal 
government 
• Non-profit groups 
• Community or 
volunteer groups 
• First responders 
• Utility providers  
• Postal service 
• Certain occupation 
groups (e.g., 
doormen, 
maintenance 
workers) 
• Availability of staff or 
volunteers 
Williams 
202248 
Cost analysis 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
• For the Telecross Redi 
program, total costs were 
$89,621 AUS (calls to 
registered clients: $67,621 
AUS)  
• Potential costs averted 
through combined HHWS-
attributable reductions in 
hospital admissions and 
ambulance callouts: 
benefit-to-cost ratio of 
2.0–3.3 (but contribution 
of the individual 
intervention was not 
evaluated). 
Not reported 
Price 201339 
Mixed 
methods Study  
Montreal, 
Quebec, 
Canada 
Not reported 
Facilitators 
• Volunteers available to 
identify/assess clients 
early in the year 
Barriers 
• Prioritization of clients 
• Identifying early signs of 
heat-related illness 
Nitschke 
201635 
Ecological 
study 
• In conjunction with a 
HHWS, IRR for total 
ambulance calls and 
emergency presentations 
were lower during the 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
50 
a Excess(ive) mortality: more deaths during a period of time than would be expected for that period 
b Cumulative mortality: proportion of individuals alive at the start of a period that die over that period 
AC: air conditioning; CI: confidence interval; HHWS: heat health warning system; IRR: incidence risk ratio; SD: standard deviation; 
 
 
 
 
 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
up mail in three or four days, 
the post office alerts a list of 
nearby community-based 
organizations, which sends a 
volunteer (or first responders) 
go to check to see if the 
person is well. 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
2014 heatwaves 
compared with the 2009 
heatwaves (2014:2009, 
0.9 95% CI [0.83 to 0.99], 
and 0.95, 95% CI [0.88 to 
1.01], respectively) 
• Excess mortalitya was not 
reduced. 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
51 
Table B.4: Summary of Evidence for Communication Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies  
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Declaring a 
“Heat Advisory 
Day”45 
 
• Press packets and public 
information statements, to 
promote heat awareness and 
provide heat safety tips. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General population 
Implementers 
• Municipal, 
provincial, federal 
government 
• Local weather 
service 
None identified 
Disseminate 
maps with heat-
health 
infrastructure9, 38 
• Pamphlets or searchable web-
based maps, which identify 
available heat-health 
infrastructure and information 
(e.g., water fountains, outdoor 
pools, recreational areas, spray 
parks, cooling centres) 
• Distributing maps as part of a 
public information campaign or 
with outreach to vulnerable 
populations 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General Public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
• Indigenous 
populations 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Municipal 
government 
• Community 
agencies 
• Schools 
• Volunteers 
Deegan 20229 
Project 
description 
Ashcroft, British 
Columbia, 
Canada 
Not reported 
Facilitators 
• Integration with heat alert 
and response system 
• Use of multiple forms of 
media, including traditional 
media (e.g., radio station, 
newspaper) 
Barriers 
• Lack of resources (e.g., 
employees) to develop and 
distribute  
Heat Hotline4, 11, 
38 
• A hotline available during 
extreme heat events, which 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
52 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
can provide general heat risk 
and safety information 
• Sometimes municipal or 
business hotlines (e.g., 311) 
are repurposed as heat 
helplines in heat emergencies, 
with extended hours. 
• A public health nurse may be 
on staff to talk to individuals, to 
determine whether or not to 
seek medical attention  
Population  
• General public 
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
• Public health 
authority 
Healthcare providers 
Mass Notification 
app/website, or 
automated 
phone warning31, 
45 
 
• Alerts are issued, to notify 
anyone of extreme heat events 
and provide recommendations 
individual behaviours to adopt 
during high temperatures. 
• People interested in receiving 
notifications can register, and 
subscribers can opt-in to the 
types of notifications they’d like 
to receive (emergency alerts 
may be automatic to all). 
• Messages can be received in a 
variety of ways including phone 
message, email, text or social 
media.  
• May be used for the entire 
population, or within a subset 
of a population (i.e., 
vulnerable). 
Example Notify NYC (New York 
City, New York)45 
• Citizens can register to be 
notified of any type of 
emergency or disaster in the 
city 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General Public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Municipal 
government 
Mehiriz 201831 
RCT  
Montreal, 
Quebec, 
Canada 
• Téléphone Santé call 
receivers were more 
likely to adopt 
preventative behaviours 
(drinking water, taking 
cool shower, staying 
indoors) 
• Reduced heat related 
symptoms (OR 1.18, 
[SE 0.38]) 
• Women Téléphone 
Santé call receivers had 
reduced use of 
healthcare resources 
(5.7% vs 11.3% control)  
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
53 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Example: Téléphone Santé 
(Montreal, Quebec)31 
• A programmed warning 
message was sent to 
registered heat-vulnerable 
people to warn them of heat 
episodes and provide 
recommendations; the 
threshold for contacting 
participants was lower than 
general heat warnings (given 
the risk of heat-related illness 
and need ability to test the 
system).  
Public 
information 
and/or education 
campaign4, 6, 7, 9, 
11, 21, 27, 29, 35, 38, 45 
• Providing information about the 
risks of extreme heat, and 
preventive measures that can 
reduce these risks 
• Messaging often focuses on 
individual behaviours people 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General Public  
Eyquem 202210 
Report 
Canada 
• Increased awareness 
• Information does not 
necessarily lead to 
action 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
54 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
can do to protect themselves 
during a heat wave, and less 
often about reducing risk 
ahead of time. 
• May includes press releases, 
radio, TV, brochures/flyers, 
websites, billboards/posters, 
social media, email, or door-to-
door campaigns 
• Educational materials are often 
provided in several languages, 
and distribution is coordinated 
with community groups (e.g., 
faith-based organizations), with 
particular efforts to ensuring it 
reaches vulnerable 
populations. 
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Government 
White-
Newsome 
201445 
Qualitative 
study  
Detroit, 
Michigan, New 
York City, New 
York, 
Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 
and Phoenix, 
Arizona, United 
States 
Not reported 
Facilitator 
• Adapting communication to 
meet the needs of the 
public (i.e., illiterate, 
hearing impaired, blind, 
non-English speaker) 
Barriers 
• Ability to share information 
with those who lack 
internet access 
• Extreme heat messages 
often perceived as not as 
serious as other 
emergencies (e.g., natural 
disaster).  
• Public desensitization with 
multiple risk warnings or 
messages 
Nitschke 201734 
RCT 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
• A “Beat the heat” 
magnet, along with 
educational material, 
increased the use of 
cooling systems (AC) 
and the use of a wet 
cloth to cool the skin.  
• Self-reported heat stress 
experienced was 
reduced 63% (RR 0.37; 
95% CI [0.22 to 0.63]) 
Not reported 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
55 
AC: air conditioning; CERT: community emergency response team; CI: confidence interval; OR: odds ratio; RCT: randomized controlled trial; RR: relative risk; SE: 
standard error: TV: television.  
 
 
 
 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Promotion 
materials11, 34 
• Items, such as magnets or 
critical temperature-marked 
thermometers are distributed to 
households to promote 
awareness to extreme heat 
• Information is provided in 
conjunction, outlining the risks 
of extreme heat, and 
preventive measures that can 
reduce these risks 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General Public  
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Government 
Nitschke 201734 
RCT 
Adelaide, 
Australia 
• A “Beat the heat” 
magnet, along with 
educational material, 
increased the use of 
cooling systems and the 
use of a wet cloth to cool 
the skin.  
• Self-reported heat stress 
experienced was 
reduced 63% (RR 0.37; 
95% CI [0.22 to 0.63]) 
Not reported 
Weather safety 
talks45 
• Community discussions (e.g., 
local weather service talks with 
community organizations or in 
schools) or more formal 
trainings (e.g., CERT 
programs) to help 
organizations/citizens prepare 
and respond to extreme heat 
events. 
• These talks often happen 
before an extreme heat event 
takes place, thus promoting 
heat awareness. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General public 
• Civic organizations 
• Children (schools) 
• Care providers 
Implementers 
• Local weather 
service 
• Trained volunteers 
 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
56 
Table B.5: Summary of Evidence for Government Policy Extreme Heat Health Adaptation Strategies  
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Expand and 
maintain 
vegetation 
cover10 
 
• Planting trees, or expanding 
public green spaces to reduce 
the urban-heat-island effect.  
• Municipalities may also make 
inventories of the natural 
assets and actively managing 
their them alongside their built 
infrastructure, as part of 
regular municipal asset 
management. 
Setting 
• Urban 
Population 
• General public  
Implementers 
• Municipal 
government 
None identified 
Financial 
assistance for 
home or 
common room 
air conditioning 
or utility 
assistance14, 27, 38 
 
• Utility assistance (e.g., 
subsidized electricity bills) and 
moratorium on utility 
disconnections throughout the 
summer, to ensure AC will be 
used within private households 
and make cooling resources 
more affordable and 
accessible. 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• Low SES 
populations 
• Vulnerable 
populations 
Implementers 
• Municipal, 
provincial, and/or 
federal government 
• Utility companies 
None identified 
Fan and air 
conditioner 
distribution 
programs45 
 
• Installing AC or fans, for 
vulnerable people who qualify 
(e.g., based on income status 
and/or a prescribed medical 
need).  
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• Low SES 
populations 
• Seniors 
• Chronically ill 
Implementers 
White-
Newsome 
201445 
Qualitative 
study  
Detroit, 
Michigan, New 
York City, New 
York, 
Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 
Not reported 
Barriers 
• Being able to afford the 
associated energy bills 
• Homes must be in suitable 
condition 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
57 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
• Municipal, 
provincial, and/or 
federal government 
and Phoenix, 
Arizona, United 
States 
Grants for 
temporary 
community 
cooling 
infrastructure6 
• Funding is available for 
communities to set up cooling 
infrastructure (e.g., portable 
misting stations).   
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population 
• General population 
Implementers 
• Municipal, 
provincial, and/or 
federal government 
None identified 
Heat Health 
Action or 
Response Plan9-
11, 28, 32, 35, 40, 43, 44, 
47 
• Plans which help prepare for 
and guide communities 
through extreme heat events. 
• Frameworks for developing the 
heat health action plans are 
available (e.g., WHO heat 
health action plans guidance, 
Government of Canada Heat 
Alert and Response Systems 
to Protect Health: Best 
Practices Guidebook) 
• Plans include: information on 
heat-related health effects, risk 
groups and aggravating 
factors, weather surveillance 
and thresholds for action 
(HHWS), communication 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population  
• General population 
• Vulnerable 
populations  
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
• Municipal, 
provincial, and/or 
federal government 
• Social services 
Hasan 202111 
Scoping review 
United States, 
Australia, 
Western 
Europe, 
Canada, Japan, 
India, and 
China  
• Reduction of mortality 
(relative risk, daily 
deaths) and morbidity  
Facilitators 
• Locally led plans 
• Collaboration  
• Local workforce and 
infrastructure  
• Multilateral transparent 
communications 
• Use of digital technology, 
mobile-cellular 
subscriptions 
Barriers 
• Variable vulnerability  
• Financial constraints 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
58 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
plans, individual and 
community interventions, and 
outlines responsibilities and 
coordination between 
stakeholders. 
• Real-time surveillance of 
health-care demand may also 
be included to guide action 
(e.g., Health-link calls, EMS 
transports and community 
deaths) 
• Responses most often 
included were: providing 
outreach/education, 
collaborating with other 
organization to support 
vulnerable populations, and 
opening cooling centres 
• Plans often consider and 
provide specific guidance for 
vulnerable populations. 
• These plans often have a 
unified command centre, which 
brings together representatives 
of all major involved 
organizations, to help 
coordinate an effective 
response while also carrying 
out individual jurisdictional 
responsibilities 
Williams 201947 
Report  
England 
• There was very little 
change in the 
temperature-health 
relationship since the 
UK plan has been in 
operation 
• Provision of hot weather-
related publicity/advice 
was not associated with 
the likelihood of people 
experiencing hot 
weather-related health 
problem; participants 
who said they had 
changed their behaviour 
as a result of hearing the 
advice were significantly 
more likely to report hot 
weather-related health 
symptoms. 
Facilitator 
•  Good communication 
between stakeholders, 
managers and frontline 
staff 
• Annual updates 
• Plan made available to 
stakeholders earlier in the 
year 
Barriers 
• Low priority, given 
competing severe weather 
and other local emergency 
events 
• Responsibility “passed 
around” 
• Lack of awareness; 
positive views about hot 
weather; “wait and see” 
approach before enacting 
plan  
• Historical focus on “warning 
and informing” rather than 
public health planning or 
intervention 
• Difficulties identifying and 
reaching vulnerable 
populations 
• Message oversaturation 
and/or fatigue 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
59 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Benmarhnia 
20162 
Before and 
after study  
Montreal, 
Quebec, 
Canada 
• Mortality was reduced 
during hot days by 2.52 
deaths/day, 95% CI (–
0.34 to 5.38) 
• Elderly vs. non-elderly: 
reduced differences in 
mortality during hot days 
by 2.44 deaths/ day, 
95% CI (0.27 to 4.59) 
• Low SES vs. high SES 
neighborhoods: reduced 
differences in mortality 
by 2.48 deaths/day, 95% 
CI (0.69 to 4.27) 
Not reported 
White-
Newsome 
201445 
Qualitative 
study  
Detroit, 
Michigan, New 
York City, New 
York, 
Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 
and Phoenix, 
Arizona, United 
States 
• Not reported  
Facilitator 
• Political will 
• Resources and funding 
(access and coordination) 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts 
 
60 
AC: air conditioning; CI: confidence interval, EMS: emergency medical services; HHWS: heat health warning system; SES: socioeconomic status; WHO: world 
heath organization. 
 
 
Strategy 
Intervention Characteristics 
Intervention Outcomes 
Description 
Setting 
Population 
Implementers 
Studies 
Effectiveness 
Implementation and 
Utilization Considerations 
Van Loenhout, 
201643 
Qualitative 
Study 
Brussels, 
Belgium and 
Amsterdam, 
The 
Netherlands 
Not reported 
Facilitator 
• Emphasis on a variety of 
vulnerable groups 
• Clarity in roles and 
responsibilities 
• Best practices and lessons 
learned are shared 
Provide 
incentives to 
increase passive 
cooling and 
reduce “waste” 
heat10 
 
• Subsidies and/or rebates for 
improving energy efficiency in 
homes or buildings  
• Improvements may include: 
subsidizing tree planting, home 
retrofits (EnerGuide), green or 
cool roofs 
• Programs often do not mention 
that eligible retrofits help 
control indoor-temperatures 
during extreme heat events 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population  
• General population 
Implementers 
• Municipal, 
provincial, and/or 
federal government 
• Utility companies 
Eyquem 202210 
Report 
Canada  
• Effectiveness depends 
on how many people 
choose to participate 
Not reported 
Review of 
emergency, 
ambulance and 
other clinical 
response 
capabilities in the 
health sector35 
• Continuous review of 
emergency, ambulance and 
other clinical response 
capabilities in the health sector 
to ensure adequate healthcare 
resources are available in the 
event of high needs during 
extreme heat events.  
 
Setting 
• Urban or rural 
Population  
• General population 
Implementers 
• Public health 
authority 
None identified 
 
 
 Adaptation strategies for reducing extreme heat health impacts
 
 
61 
Author Contributions 
Lindsey Warkentin contributed to study conception and design, and conducted the study selection, 
data extraction, and interpretation. Lindsey wrote the draft and revised the report. 
Carmen Moga assisted with the data extraction. 
Lisa Tjosvold conducted the literature and data searches.
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Institute of Health Economics 
1200 – 10405 Jasper Avenue 
Edmonton AB Canada T5J 3N4 
Tel. 780.448.4881 Fax. 780.448.0018 
info@ihe.ca 
 
www.ihe.ca 
 
ISBN 978-1-989429-11-2 (online) 
 
