An Introduction for
 Canadian Municipalities
Recommended citation:
Richardson, G. R. A. (2010). Adapting to Climate Change: An Introduction for Canadian Municipalities. Ottawa, Ont.. 
Natural Resources Canada, 40 p.
Front cover photographs courtesy of:  
Insets left to right: The Corporation of Delta, Michaël Rheault, Armand Robichaud and Rob Leavoy Photography 
Main: Derek Halstead-Silver
Aussi disponible en français sous le titre : S’adapter aux changements climatiques : 
Une introduction à l’intention des municipalités canadiennes 
Information contained in this publication or product may be reproduced, in part or in whole, and by any means, for personal or public  
non-commercial purposes, without charge or further permission, unless otherwise specified.
You are asked to:
•	
exercise due diligence in ensuring the accuracy of the materials reproduced;
•	
indicate the complete title of the materials reproduced, and the name of the author organization; and
•	
indicate that the reproduction is a copy of an official work that is published by the Government of Canada and that the reproduction  
has not been produced in affiliation with, or with the endorsement of, the Government of Canada.
Commercial reproduction and distribution is prohibited except with written permission from the Government of Canada’s copyright  
administrator, Public Works and Government Services Canada (PWGSC). For more information, contact PWGSC at 613-996-6886 or  
at copyright.droitdauteur@pwgsc-tpsgc.gc.ca.
Cat. No. M174-6/2010E (Print) 
ISBN 978-1-100-17238-5 
Cat. No. M174-6/2010E-PDF (On-line) 
ISBN 978-1-100-17239-2
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2010
Her Majesty is not responsible for the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in the reproduced material. Her Majesty shall 
at all times be indemnified and held harmless against any and all claims whatsoever arising out of negligence or other fault in the use of the 
information contained in this publication or product.
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  i
The impacts of changing climate are already evident in 
Canada and globally. Scientific understanding of climate 
change indicates that Canada will experience significant 
shifts in weather patterns over the period of a single 
generation, a trend that will likely continue for several 
centuries. Communities of all sizes will face many new  
risks and opportunities. Managing the impacts of a 
changing climate will require developing local strategies.
The anticipated impacts of climate change include drought; 
reduced quality of surface waters; a higher incidence of 
vector-borne diseases; more frequent heat waves resulting 
in reduced air quality and high human discomfort in 
urban centres; and an increase in storm surge flooding in 
coastal regions. For many municipalities, the change in the 
frequency and severity of extremes in weather – such as 
intense precipitation, heavy winds or ice storms, as well 
as seasonal variations in the water supply – are a major 
concern. The greatest warming is expected to occur in 
the North. Resource-based and Aboriginal communities, 
which generally have economies closely tied to the natural 
environment and local climate variability, are particularly 
vulnerable. 
Anticipating the effects of climate change and taking 
actions before major impacts occur is an effective strategy 
to manage climate risk and reduce a community’s overall 
vulnerability. Adaptation involves making changes in 
decisions, activities and thinking in response to observed 
or expected changes in climate. Governments, individuals, 
industry and community groups can all take adaptive 
actions to reduce potential harm and to take advantage 
of new opportunities. Possible adaptation actions are 
tremendously wide ranging and may involve using new 
technologies, adjusting planning and investment practices, 
and revising regulations. Adaptation measures can also  
help achieve other municipal sustainability goals and should 
not be considered only as stand-alone actions to address 
climate change. 
This book is an update and expansion of the document 
published in 2006 by the Canadian Climate Impacts and 
Adaptation Research Network (Mehdi, 2006) under the 
same title. It provides municipal decision-makers and staff 
with information to help them understand the need for 
climate change adaptation and how to put adaptation 
measures in place. The book also refers to other guides 
that can help municipalities identify and address risks 
and opportunities, and to case studies that illustrate how 
municipalities of varying sizes from across the country  
are taking action now. 
Each case study outlines the impact of changing climate on 
the community, the catalyst for developing a plan, the plan-
making process, measures adopted, next steps and lessons 
learned. The case studies illustrate the value in collaborating 
with non-traditional partners and demonstrate practical 
measures that other municipalities facing similar issues 
might take to enhance community resilience in the face  
of a changing climate.
Preface
ii —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Principal author
Gregory R.A. Richardson, Climate Change Impacts and 
Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada
 
The author thanks the many contributors who generously 
shared their knowledge and time to review the manuscript.
•	 Devin Causley, Federation of Canadian Municipalities
•	 Neil Comer, Environment Canada
•	 Paul Egginton, Natural Resources Canada
•	 Jenny Fraser, British Columbia Ministry of Environment
•	 Linda Harvey, City of Calgary
•	 Birgit Isernhagen, City of Ottawa
•	 Ewa Ciuk-Jackson, ICLEI Canada
•	 Stan Kavalinas, Ministry of Sustainable Resource 
Development, Alberta
•	 Pamela Kertland, Natural Resources Canada
•	 Don Lemmen, Natural Resources Canada
•	 Kyle McKenzie, Nova Scotia Environment
•	 Veronica Mossop, Natural Resources Canada
•	 José Otero, McGill School of Urban Planning
•	 Michelle Poirier, Natural Resources Canada
Annapolis Royal
•	 Amery Boyer, Town of Annapolis Royal
•	 Stephen Hawboldt, Clean Annapolis River Project
•	 Tim Webster, Centre of Geographic Sciences
Clyde River
•	 Beate Bowron, Canadian Institute of Planners
•	 Shari Gearheard, University of Colorado at Boulder
•	 David Mate, Natural Resources Canada
•	 Froeydis Reinhart, Department of Environment (Nunavut)
Edmonton
•	 Jeannette Wheeler, City of Edmonton
Halifax
•	 John Charles, Halifax Regional Municipality
•	 Donald L. Forbes, Natural Resources Canada
•	 Richard MacLellan, Halifax Regional Municipality
•	 Roger Wells, Halifax Regional Municipality
Kamloops
•	 Kelly Johnston, City of Kamloops
Le Goulet
•	 Omer Chouinard, Université de Moncton
•	 Benjamin Kocyla, Commission d’aménagement  
de la Péninsule acadienne
•	 Madeleine Roussel, Village de Le Goulet
London
•	 Berta Krichker, City of London
•	 Slobodan P. Simonovic, University of Western Ontario
Metro Vancouver
•	 Brent Burton, Metro Vancouver
•	 Robert Hicks, Metro Vancouver
•	 Sarah Howie, Corporation of Delta
•	 Harald Fograscher, Corporation of Delta
•	 Mark Wellman, Metro Vancouver 
•	 Albert van Roodselaar, Metro Vancouver
•	 Ed von Euw, Metro Vancouver
Quebéc CITY 
•	 Matthieu Alibert, Québec City
•	 Caroline Larrivée, Ouranos
Regina
•	 Fred Clipsham, Regina City Council
•	 Dorian Wandzura, City of Regina
•	 Ken Wiens, City of Regina
Toronto
•	 Stephanie Gower, Toronto Public Health
•	 Lisa King, City of Toronto
•	 David MacLeod, City of Toronto
•	 Elaine Pacheco, Toronto Public Health
•	 Jennifer Penney, Clean Air Partnership
Some of the content of this book was published in the  
2006 edition. The Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation  
Division of Natural Resources Canada gratefully acknowledges 
the many contributors to the first edition, including  
the editor, Bano Mehdi; the lead authors, Bano Mehdi, 
Charles Mrena and Al Douglas; and the contributing authors, 
Liette Connolly-Boutin, Robin Sydneysmith, Kathryn Parlee, 
François Morneau, Geneviève Leroux, Jamal Shirley, John 
Streicker and Kyle McKenzie.
Acknowledgements
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  1
Contents
Preface........................................................................................................................................................... i
Acknowledgements........................................................................................................................................ii
Chapter 1: An introduction to climate change adaptation.................2
Chapter 2: Climate change adaptation  
and municipal decision making.......................................................................5
Chapter 3: Case studies: Integrating climate change  
considerations into municipal decision making.......................................9
Clyde River’s Community Climate Change Adaptation Plan..............................................................................10
City of Kamloops’ Wildfire Protection Plan......................................................................................................12
Metro Vancouver’s Stormwater Management Program.....................................................................................14
Edmonton’s Urban Forest Management Plan...................................................................................................16
Regina’s Water Conservation Program............................................................................................................18
London, Ontario’s, Climate Change Adaptation Strategy................................................................................. 20
Toronto’s Heat Health Alert System............................................................................................................... 22
Québec City’s Environmental Services Adaptation Plan....................................................................................24
Le Goulet’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan................................................................................................. 26
Planning for Sea-level Rise in Halifax Harbour................................................................................................ 28
Preparing for Storm Surges in Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia............................................................................ 30
Chapter 4: Moving forward with planned adaptation.......................... 32
Appendix A: Climate models......................................................................................................................... 33
Appendix B: Information and resources......................................................................................................... 35
Appendix C: Climate change terminology...................................................................................................... 37
References.................................................................................................................................................. 39
2 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
The Earth’s climate is changing. Some of this change is due 
to natural variations that have been taking place for millions 
of years, but increasingly, human activities that release 
heat-trapping gases into the atmosphere are warming the 
planet by contributing to the “greenhouse effect.”
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concludes 
that the best estimate for global average surface air 
warming over the current century ranges from 1.8°C 
to 4.0°C (IPCC 2007). This rate of temperature change 
is without precedent in at least the last 10 000 years. 
Consequently, historical climate no longer provides an 
accurate gauge for future climate conditions.
What is climate change 
adaptation?
Even after introducing significant measures to reduce 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, some additional degree 
of climate change is unavoidable and will have significant 
economic, social and environmental impacts on Canadian 
communities. To reduce the negative impacts of this 
change and to take advantage of new opportunities 
presented, Canadians will need to adapt.
Climate change adaptation refers to actions that reduce  
the negative impact of climate change, while taking 
advantage of potential new opportunities. It involves 
adjusting policies and actions because of observed or 
expected changes in climate. Adaptation can be reactive, 
occurring in response to climate impacts, or anticipatory, 
occurring before impacts of climate change are observed.  
In most circumstances, anticipatory adaptations will result 
in lower long-term costs and be more effective than 
reactive adaptations.
Adaptation is not a new concept: Canadians have developed 
many approaches to effectively deal with the extremely 
variable climate. For example, communities in the Prairie 
provinces have been designed to withstand extreme 
differences in seasonal temperatures. Nevertheless, the 
amount and rate of future climate change will pose some new 
challenges. The fact that science now allows communities 
to anticipate a range of potential climate conditions, and 
therefore take action before the worst impacts are incurred, 
makes adaptation to future climate change different from 
how Canadians have adapted historically. 
Adaptation (responding to climate impacts) and mitigation 
(reducing GHG emissions) are necessary complements in 
addressing climate change. The fourth assessment report of 
Chapter 1  
An introduction to  
climate change adaptation
Photo courtes y o f Jerry Moul a n d
Photo courtes y o f Agriculture 
a n d Agri - Foo d C a n a da
C H A P T E R  1  —  A n  i n t r o d u c t i o n  t o  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a d a p t a t i o n
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change states that 
while neither adaptation nor mitigation actions alone can 
prevent significant climate change impacts, taken together 
they can significantly reduce risks. Mitigation is necessary 
to reduce the rate and magnitude of climate change, while 
adaptation is essential to reduce the damages from climate 
change that cannot be avoided.
Single policies and measures can be designed to help tackle 
both mitigation and adaptation. For example, as the climate 
changes, a projected higher frequency and intensity of rain 
storms may increase stormwater runoff and the potential 
for localised flooding in urban areas. Planting street trees 
is an initiative that municipalities can implement to both 
reduce stormwater runoff (adaptation) and increase carbon 
storage (mitigation).
In other cases, there may be conflicts between adaptation 
and mitigation goals that can only be addressed in a 
broader context of community priorities and risk tolerance. 
For example, increased use of air conditioning can be 
considered an adaptive measure because it reduces human 
health problems during heat waves, which are projected to 
become more frequent in future. However, air conditioning 
is energy intensive and, depending on the source of the 
electricity, is likely to increase carbon dioxide emissions. 
Therefore, in deciding which adaptation action is most 
appropriate for a particular situation, attention must be 
paid to its implications for adaptation and mitigation, as 
well as its cost, efficacy and acceptance by the public.
Why Canadian municipalities 
need to adapt 
Gradual shifts in average conditions (temperature, 
precipitation and sea level) will be accompanied by  
changes in climate variability and the frequency of  
extreme weather and climate events. The impacts of 
changing climate are already evident in every region  
of the country, especially in Canada’s North where impacts  
are associated with warming that is taking place at faster  
rates than those throughout the country as a whole. 
Anticipated impacts across Canada include increased 
frequency and severity of extreme weather events (e.g. 
heat waves, floods, coastal storm surges and droughts), 
more smog episodes and disease outbreaks, thawing of 
permafrost, loss of northern sea ice, and rising sea levels. 
These impacts will affect municipalities large and small, 
urban and rural, and have both positive and negative 
implications on infrastructure (e.g. transportation, water 
supply, sewage), social and economic systems (e.g. human  
health, competitiveness, recreation) and natural environ-
ments (e.g. biodiversity loss, habitat degradation, invasive 
species).
Learn more about 
climate change impacts 
and adaptation in 
Canada
From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007 
presents the current understanding 
of the ongoing and future impacts of 
climate change on Canada and the 
country’s ability to adapt. Regional chapters in the book 
identify key issues and provide examples of adaptation 
initiatives in British Columbia, the Prairies, Ontario, Quebec, 
Atlantic Canada and the North. The “Synthesis” chapter 
presents 10 key conclusions at the national level.
adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php 
Climate change  
impacts in Canada
Projected rapid changes in the climate system will 
increasingly pose significant challenges in Canada.  
Some primary biophysical impacts of concern include
•	 permafrost thawing, with the associated effects on 
northern infrastructure
•	 warming and prolonged drought, making forests more 
susceptible to fires and insect infestations
•	 increased drying of the continental interior, reduced snow 
packs and shrinking glaciers, leading to water shortages 
for agriculture, hydroelectric facilities, shipping, municipal 
water supplies and other uses
•	 increasing frequency of heat waves and smog episodes, 
causing morbidity and mortality, notably in large cities 
where heat island effects amplify these events
•	 increasing severity and frequency of some extreme 
weather events and associated natural hazards such  
as floods, impacting economic activities, infrastructure 
and health
•	 increasing coastal exposures to storm surges due 
to increases in the number and intensity of storms, 
combined with higher sea levels, leading to erosion  
and infrastructure damage
•	 damage to habitat for vulnerable species, impacting 
the local economy and traditional ways of life in some 
communities 
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  3
4 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
C H A P T E R  1  —  A n  i n t r o d u c t i o n  t o  c l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a d a p t a t i o n
Impacts of recent extreme weather events highlight 
the vulnerability of Canadian communities and critical 
infrastructure to climate change. The costs resulting from 
extreme weather events in Canada over the past 15 years 
have been greater than for all previous years combined. 
Hundreds of millions and even billions of dollars in property 
damage and disruptions in the production and flow of 
goods and services have been associated with flooding, 
wind, hail and ice storms, hurricanes, tornados and wild  
fires in all regions of southern Canada. Increases in the  
frequency and intensity of extreme weather, as is projected 
to occur with continued climate change, will also affect the 
cost and availability of insurance and impact governments 
where they serve as insurers of last resort. 
Local governments have a unique and critical role to play  
in managing the risks of a changing climate. While all levels 
of government have important adaptation responsibilities, 
the local nature of many climate impacts means that 
municipalities are often on the front line to ensure effective 
management of risks, protect community safety and 
promote economic sustainability. Municipalities are well 
positioned to implement adaptive measures, particularly 
through processes such as land use planning, community 
energy planning and mechanisms like zoning or permit 
regulations. For many communities, changes in climate 
variability, as reflected in less predictable weather events, 
may represent a greater challenge for planning than will 
changes in average climatic conditions. 
Recent costly weather events in Canada,  
excluding drought
Weather event
Region
($) Cost
1998 Ice storm
Ontario, Quebec, 
Atlantic Canada
~5.4 billion
1996 Saguenay flood 
Quebec
1.7 billion
1991 Calgary 
hailstorm 
Alberta
884 million
1997 Red River flood 
Prairies
817 million
2003 British 
Columbia / Alberta 
wildfires 
British Columbia, 
Alberta
~700 million
2005 Toronto  
extreme rain 
Ontario
>500 million
2005 Southern  
Alberta floods 
Alberta
400 million
1996 Calgary 
hailstorm 
Alberta
305 million
2003 Hurricane Juan 
Atlantic Canada
200 million
The actions taken today by towns and cities to enhance 
community resilience to climate change will greatly 
influence their ability to meet future sustainability goals, 
as well as to pay for the human and economic costs of 
climate-related impacts. The case studies in this report 
provide several examples of relatively low-cost actions, 
particularly through planning processes, being taken by 
communities today that are designed to reduce costs of 
future impacts.
Photo courtes y o f Debbie Holick
Photo courtesy of Ole Mikkelsen
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  5
Planning for climate  
change impacts
No single approach to climate change adaptation is 
appropriate for all communities. Each municipality has 
to contend with unique geography and specific climate-
change issues. Legal systems, laws, institutions and cultural 
traditions differ by region. The resources that a community 
can dedicate to adaptation planning also vary substantially. 
Large metropolitan areas may have many planners and 
policy-makers dedicating at least some of their time directly 
to adaptation-related issues, whereas a remote hamlet likely 
will not have any planners. Approaches should build on the 
communities’ land use and capital infrastructure plans and 
be adjusted to the realities of the local situation.
The adaptation actions presently taken by communities 
across Canada are diverse. Most climate change adaptation 
actions are embedded in a municipality’s existing plans 
and strategies. In some communities, municipal staff 
and community partners have developed plans, policies, 
regulations or programs specifically for climate-change 
adaptation. These plans may target one adaptation issue/
measure or be wide-ranging by tackling numerous climate 
issues, cross-cutting various departments and even external 
organizations. Such planning can target private citizens, 
including home and business owners, or be focused on  
a municipality’s internal operations and infrastructure.
Key ingredients for successful 
adaptation planning
Understanding vulnerability
Assessing vulnerability is an integral part of most  
adaptation planning processes. Vulnerability to climate 
change is the degree to which a system is susceptible  
to, and unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate 
change, including climate variability and extremes. 
Understanding a municipality’s climate vulnerability 
provides a basis for establishing priorities. 
Analysis starts with an assessment of a municipality’s 
vulnerability to the current climate, informed by knowledge 
of how climate events have impacted the community in  
the past, the actions that were taken in response to those 
impacts and how successful those actions were (NRCan 
2004). The next phase of analysis examines how climate 
risks are likely to change in future; these risks are informed 
by projections of future climate as well as social and 
economic conditions. Stakeholder input is critical at all 
stages of a vulnerability assessment. 
Chapter 2 
Climate change adaptation  
and municipal decision making
Mainstreaming adaptation into 
existing processes, policies and 
mechanisms
Adaptation can often be effectively integrated into existing 
processes, policies and mechanisms. Rather than developing 
new plans and strategies, it may be logistically easier 
and more financially prudent for municipalities to build 
long-term climate factors into a wide array of municipal 
operations and services, including infrastructure decisions, 
capital plans, land use plans and disaster emergency 
management frameworks.
Photo courtes y o f Nicole Colle t t
6 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Managing risk
Adaptation can be seen simply as a way to manage the 
risks presented by a changing climate. Climate-related 
risks can be treated similarly to other risks (i.e. financial, 
political, demographic and engineering) municipalities 
face. Many municipal decision-makers are familiar with risk 
management, which is a practical and credible approach to 
selecting the best course of action in uncertain situations. 
Risk management helps decision-makers determine, 
understand, analyze and communicate about risks. 
Vulnerability assessments are a common element of 
risk management approaches. They help identify and 
classify potential risks to municipal policies, programs, 
infrastructure and other assets. The process for selecting 
a community’s adaptation plans and measures may be 
formal or ad hoc. The advantages of a formal approach 
are its ability to provide clear and structured rationales 
and to accommodate the uncertainties that are inherent 
in projections of future climate, social and economic 
conditions.
For every climate impact, there is a range of possible 
responses that vary in time, complexity and cost. Many  
of these options fit into the following broad categories 
(from Pew Center 2009):
•	 “no-regrets”: actions that provide benefits regardless 
of impacts incurred from climate change 
•	 profit/opportunity: actions that take advantage of 
a changing climate to yield net benefits 
•	 “win-win”: actions that reduce vulnerability to climate 
change while also contributing to other economic,  
social or environmental goals (including reduction  
of greenhouse gas emissions) 
•	 low-regret: measures that have relatively low costs 
and yield high benefits 
•	 avoiding unsustainable investments: measures 
that limit or prevent new investment in areas already  
at high climate risk and where climate change is likely  
to exacerbate the impacts
•	 averting catastrophic risk: policies or actions taken 
to avoid unacceptably high losses as a result of climate 
events
Climate change scenarios
Climate change scenarios are one tool that can help 
raise awareness of climate change risks and, in some 
cases, help plan to address specific impacts. They present 
the differences between historic climate conditions 
and plausible future climate conditions. The scenarios 
complement projections of socioeconomic changes that 
many communities routinely use as part of long-term 
planning processes (see Appendix A). The following are  
key sources of scenario information in Canada: 
•	 Canadian Climate Change Scenario Network –  
www.cccsn.ca 
•	 Ouranos – www.ouranos.ca 
•	 Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium –  
www.pacificclimate.org
Identifying synergies and overcoming conflict
Adaptation is closely linked with sustainable development. 
Policies, plans and investments that span more than two 
decades may not be sustainable if the changing climate is 
not factored into their development. Understanding the 
links between climate change actions and sustainability 
goals helps municipalities make their adaptation actions 
more effective by strategically allocating resources to 
achieve multiple outcomes. 
Municipal decision-makers also need to be aware of the  
possible conflicts that can arise when choosing adaptation 
measures. For example, a sea wall may protect coastal 
properties from extreme storm damage, but it can also  
have an adverse affect on the health of the costal ecosystem  
(e.g. disturbing sensitive fish- and bird-breeding grounds) and 
have negative impacts on erosion or sedimentation elsewhere 
on the coast. Discussion is an important means of resolving 
conflict and arriving at community consensus. Many Canadian 
communities that have successfully implemented adaptation 
plans and measures have held public consultations to openly 
discuss costs, benefits, strengths and weaknesses of various 
options, and to give the public an important say in deciding 
the best way to proceed. 
Awareness, leadership and partnerships 
Awareness of the potential impacts of climate change  
on communities and of the value of taking early action 
to reduce negative impacts is critical. Because adaptation 
often involves proactive investment to prevent future 
damage, awareness is needed among the public and 
decision-makers. 
C H A P T E R  2  —  C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a d a p t a t i o n  a n d  m u n i c i p a l  d e c i s i o n  m a k i n g
Photo courtes y o f nat ur a l ressources c a na da
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  7
Moving from awareness to action frequently requires 
strong leadership. Foresight, determination and patience 
are needed to instigate municipal adaptation work and  
see it through to implementation stages. In many cases,  
it takes one or more champions (inside or outside the local 
government) to keep adaptation initiatives alive in the face 
of the many competing priorities that municipalities face. 
Communities that have shown initiative and success in 
climate change mitigation programs and measures may 
be able to efficiently leverage this leadership to accelerate 
adaptation efforts. 
Also, interdisciplinary partnerships and collaboration can be 
useful when addressing the complex challenges of climate 
change. When planning for climate change, particularly in the 
vulnerability assessment stage, policy-makers and planners 
will need to draw on external specialists. These partnerships 
with climate change specialists are particularly important 
because municipalities will have to clearly explain complex 
issues to a public faced with many competing priorities. 
The case studies in Chapter 3 illustrate the approaches  
that Canadian communities have taken to build awareness 
and partnerships, and the actions that resulted. 
Adaptation tools and guide books
Various tools exist that can help municipalities integrate 
climate change adaptation into new and existing plans. 
These include:
•	 guide books (electronic or hard copies) that include key 
decision-making steps common to many adaptation plans 
and strategies
•	 risk management processes for selecting the best 
course of action in situations where uncertainties are 
significant
•	 case studies that provide examples of how communities 
are confronting specific climate challenges
Some important Canadian sources of information are listed 
below. Additional information and tools can be accessed at 
the Web sites listed in Appendix B.
Adapting to Climate Change: A Risk-based 
Guide for Local Governments (Black et al., 
2010)
This guide, based on risk-management 
guidelines from the Canadian Standards 
Association, uses a simple, practical approach 
for identifying risks, ranking them and selecting 
the best way to reduce those risks. Versions of the guide exist for 
British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario and northern Canada, while a 
generic guide with region-specific annexes will be available in 2011. 
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/tools/abosuj_e.php
Changing Climate, Changing Communities: 
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and 
Workbook (ICLEI Canada)
This guide provides a Canadian-based frame-
work that helps local governments develop 
an adaptation plan that addresses the most significant climate 
risks and opportunities for their community. The five-milestone 
approach to adaptation planning is 1) initiate, 2) research, 3) plan, 
4) implement and 5) monitor. The accompanying workbook 
includes practical tools and exercises to support practitioners 
during the planning process. 
www.iclei.org/index.php?id=11710 
A Guide for Quebec Municipalities for 
Developing a Climate Change Adaptation 
Plan (Ouranos)
Élaborer un plan d’adaptation aux 
changements climatiques : Guide destiné  
au milieu municipal québécois 
This French-language guide uses five steps to 
help municipalities identify climate risks, set adaptation priorities  
and implement effective adaptation strategies.
http://ouranos.ca/media/publication/111_PlanadaptationCC-
Guidemunicipalites-Ouranos.pdf 
Municipal Resources for Adapting to 
Climate Change (Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities)
This publication features seven municipalities 
that are considering adaptation in their 
communities. Scientific resources and  
planning tools that have been used by  
other municipalities are also included.
www.sustainablecommunities.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/
PCP_Resources/Mun-Re-_Adapting-Climate-Change-e.pdf 
Infrastructure Climate Risk Protocol 
(Engineers Canada)
This protocol is intended for users who own, 
operate or design physical infrastructure. 
It provides a five-step procedure to assess 
the vulnerability of infrastructure to climate 
change from an engineering perspective. The 
protocol helps users systematically evaluate risks from climatic 
changes on all components of infrastructure. 
www.pievc.ca
C H A P T E R  2  —  C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a d a p t a t i o n  a n d  m u n i c i p a l  d e c i s i o n  m a k i n g
8 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Climate Change Adaptation Framework 
Manual (Ministry of Sustainable Resource 
Development, Alberta)
This manual helps organizations anticipate 
and prepare for the economic and ecological 
impacts of climate change in a comprehensive 
and consistent manner.
www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsFormsPublications/Publications/
ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx
C H A P T E R  2  —  C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  a d a p t a t i o n  a n d  m u n i c i p a l  d e c i s i o n  m a k i n g
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  9
Quick Index
Region
Title
Page
Northern Canada
•	 Clyde River’s Community Climate Change Adaptation Plan
10
British Columbia
•	 City of Kamloops’ Wildfire Protection Plan
•	 Metro Vancouver’s Stormwater Management Program
12
14
Prairies
•	 Edmonton’s Urban Forest Management Plan
•	 Regina’s Water Conservation Program
16
18
Ontario
•	 London, Ontario’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy
•	 Toronto’s Heat Health Alert System
20
22
Quebec
•	 Québec City’s Environmental Services Adaptation Plan
24
Atlantic
•	 Le Goulet’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan
•	 Planning for Sea-level Rise in Halifax Harbour
•	 Preparing for Storm Surges in Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia
26
28
30
Photo courtes y o f Nicole Colle t t
Chapter 3 
Case studies: Integrating climate 
change considerations into 
municipal decision making
The case studies presented here demonstrate how 
Canadian communities are starting to address climate 
change adaptation. While they do not claim to represent 
best practices, they serve to raise awareness of climate 
change impacts and provide insights as to how these 
challenges might be addressed by other communities  
facing similar issues.
Certain case studies reflect actions taken by communities  
as a specific response to recognized climate change impacts 
(e.g. Clyde River, Le Goulet and Québec City). Other studies 
represent actions that reduce vulnerability to climate change 
even though this was not the main reason for implementing 
the initiatives (e.g. Kamloops, Metro Vancouver and Regina). 
All the case studies exemplify how communities followed a 
decision-making process that directly or indirectly considered 
climate change adaptation and improved community capacity 
for long-term adaptation planning and implementation.
The case studies listed in the following table illustrate a 
range of climate change impacts and possible adaptations, 
using municipalities of varying sizes from across Canada. 
For further information, see the “References” chapter.
10 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Clyde River’s Community Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan
Planning in remote northern communities presents unique challenges
Canada’s North is experiencing rapid changes in climate. Northern residents have noticed 
thinner sea ice, melting of ground ice, rising sea levels, increases in the frequency and 
intensity of storm events, and a change in coastal erosion rates due to reduced ice cover. 
The impact of these changes on communities spurred intergovernmental cooperation 
and engagement of a professional organization to undertake climate change adaptation 
planning in Nunavut. 
In 2006, a three-day workshop was held in Iqaluit, the 
territorial capital, to launch a new intergovernmental /
interagency climate change adaptation planning initiative 
for Nunavut. One key recommendation of the workshop 
was to pilot small-scale, integrated adaptation planning 
processes in two Nunavut communities. Representatives 
from the hamlets of Clyde River and Hall Beach offered to 
be part of the initiative. These pilot projects were designed 
to be iterative, collaborative processes involving community 
members (including school students and local decision-
makers), scientists and professional planners. Local and 
traditional knowledge and expertise were recognized  
to be of paramount importance. 
One outcome of the Clyde River pilot project was an 
action-oriented climate change community adaptation 
plan. Its development involved the Canadian Institute of 
Planners, which provided two volunteer professionals to 
help coordinate the planning process, a science team led 
by Natural Resources Canada (NRCan) researchers, Ittaq 
Heritage and Research Centre (an Inuit-run research centre 
in Clyde River) and the Government of Nunavut. As with  
all new collaborations, there were a number of challenges 
to be overcome in achieving an effective working process.
Climate change impacts 
Clyde River is a hamlet of 900 people on the north coast 
of Clyde Inlet on northeast Baffin Island, Nunavut. The 
community is surrounded by mountains, dramatic cliffs, 
deep fjords and rolling tundra. The rapidly warming arctic 
climate has residents concerned about their safety. Two 
impacts of particular concern are melting permafrost, which 
is threatening the integrity of the town’s roads, buildings 
and other critical infrastructure, and unpredictable sea ice, 
which is making traditional hunting and travelling routes 
more dangerous.
The planning involved community workshops and in-
person interviews, with the Ittaq Heritage and Research 
Centre playing a key coordination role. The final product 
was a concise plan listing 38 distinct actions for adapting 
to specific risks identified by the community. The actions 
were organized on the basis of which partner (e.g. Hamlet 
Council, Ittaq Heritage and Research Centre, the Hunters 
and Trappers Association or other organizations) would be 
best positioned to implement the action.
Photo courtes y o f Dav id Mate
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  11
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
Scientific fieldwork
NRCan is undertaking scientific research in Nunavut that 
is relevant at the regional and local levels. It includes work 
on permafrost degradation, landscape hazards, sea-level 
rise, coastal erosion and freshwater supply. The findings 
are being integrated with traditional knowledge to improve 
community planning capacity in Nunavut. This research  
is being conducted in collaboration with several Canadian 
universities, the Ittaq Heritage and Research Centre and  
the Nunavut Research Institute.
The work in Clyde River represents the first attempt at 
adaptation planning in this small northern community. 
Many valuable lessons were learned and are being 
applied to planning processes in other remote northern 
communities. A summary of these lessons learned can 
be found on the Canadian Institute of Planners Web site 
(www.planningforclimatechange.ca). Examples include
•	 acquiring formal recognition of the project from the 
Hamlet Council, as well as assigning a senior staff person 
to the planning work to ensure project continuity and 
accountability at the local level
•	 improving the coordination between the science and 
planning work to allow for better integration
•	 lengthening the planning cycle to enable the planning 
teams to spend more time in the community to build 
relationships and trust
•	 establishing priorities for recommended actions to help  
in the implementation phase
•	 translating all public notification and planning documents 
into local languages (in this case Inuktitut) before they 
are released
•	 enhancing community participation through local culturally 
appropriate methods, including regular public phone-ins 
on community radio for contacting local residents and 
receiving feedback
Adaptation Action Plan
A succinct community adaptation plan identified 38 actions, 
the climate change issue that each addresses, the intended 
result of the action, and the resources the community could  
utilize to complete each action. The following is one example.
Action
Provide broader coverage of communication 
equipment outside of town for FRS, CB and  
HF radio.
Issue
Uncertain ice and travel conditions. Increased risk 
to personal safety. Need for quicker and better 
sharing of information.
Results
Residents able to obtain and pass on information 
on travel and ice conditions as well as emergency 
situations. Extend the range of current 
communication equipment.
Resources 
Hamlet with HTA and Search and Rescue 
Committee
Source: www.planningforclimatechange.ca
The lessons learned from the Clyde River pilot project, 
combined with similar work in Hall Beach, helped lead 
to the establishment of the Nunavut Climate Change 
Partnership. This multi-year collaborative effort, funded 
by Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, will develop 
community-based adaptation action plans in five additional 
communities (Iqaluit, Arviat, Whale Cove, Kugluktuk and 
Cambridge Bay); prepare a planning workbook/tool for 
use by other Nunavut communities; produce new scientific 
information on sea-level change, permafrost landscape 
hazards and freshwater supply; and create tools to collect, 
publish, share and communicate knowledge about climate 
change adaptation.
The Clyde River Adaptation Action Plan, the first of its kind 
in the Canadian Arctic, provides a useful starting point. The 
Clyde River Council supports continued efforts for working 
together to address climate change issues. 
Contact:
Nick Illauq
Deputy Mayor, Hamlet of Clyde River
Tel.: 867-924-6220
E-mail: nick_illauq@hotmail.com
Photo courtes y o f Be ate Bow ron 
12 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
City of Kamloops’ Wildfire Protection Plan
Reducing urban wildfire risk through preventative action
Kamloops, a city of 93 000 people situated in the Thompson River Valley of south-central 
British Columbia, is particularly vulnerable to wildfires because of its dry climate. Wildfires 
are one of several risks that are projected to increase in future as a result of a changing 
climate.
Several factors produce an elevated risk from wildfires to 
lives and property in Kamloops’ wildland-urban interface. 
These include social factors, such as growing development 
on the city’s perimeter, as well as natural factors such as 
forest fuel build-up, the impacts of the pine beetle and  
an increase in the number of hot and dry summers.
During the devastating 2003 wildfire season, Kamloops served 
as the command and control centre for emergency workers 
and as a temporary refuge for thousands of evacuees from 
surrounding municipalities. Three large wildfires reached 
the city’s perimeter that summer, threatening homes and 
businesses. Fortunately, Kamloops suffered only one minor 
structural loss when a community waterworks shed burned 
down. However, the city’s close call that summer, as well 
as the harrowing experiences of other British Columbia 
municipalities such as Kelowna, spurred Kamloops to take 
preventative action.
In 1998, the City established a multi-stakeholder committee 
to coordinate its wildfire response. While it is recognized 
that it is not possible to eliminate all wildfires (approximately 
150 to 170 small wildfires occur within city boundaries each 
year), actions can be taken to minimize potential home and 
infrastructure damage. 
In 2007, the committee published its comprehensive 
Community Wildfire Protection Plan, whose overarching 
goal is “to identify and reduce the risk of life, property and 
environmental losses due directly or indirectly to wildfire 
within, or threatening city boundaries through effective 
pre-planning and preparation.” The Plan outlined the City’s 
actions to date and contains further recommendations.
Hazard assessment
In 2004, the City contracted a private firm to conduct  
a city-wide wildfire hazard assessment to determine the 
amount and configuration of forest fuel and the ensuing 
threat to adjacent structures. The resulting map demarcated 
all public and private lands within the city into the following 
wildfire risk classes: extreme, high, moderate or low.
Forest fuel management plan
A contractor was hired to develop a plan proposing specific 
actions to reduce the wildfire hazard on the 4036 hectares 
(ha) of city and crown land that had been assessed as 
extreme and high hazard. The plan’s proposed hazard 
reduction measures were based on FireSmart hazard 
reduction guidelines.
Photo courtes y o f Bria n Av ery
2003 British Columbia wildfire season
In the hot and dry summer of 2003, more than 2500 wildfires 
across British Columbia caused unprecedented damage to 
homes, businesses and public infrastructure. Three pilots 
lost their lives, 334 homes and businesses were destroyed, 
and 45 000 people were evacuated from their homes.  
The total cost of the fires is estimated at $700 million 
(Filmon 2003).
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  13
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
Fuel management operations
Based on the management plan described previously, the 
City undertook extensive forest treatment work on 905 ha 
of city and crown land. The forest canopy bulk and density 
were reduced mechanically to decrease the amount of fuel 
available for combustion to FireSmart guideline levels.The 
spacing and pruning work was accelerated to be completed 
by the spring of 2010 because of the seriousness of the pine 
beetle epidemic, which has killed more than 90 percent of 
the ponderosa pine trees within city limits.
Wildland-Urban Interface Covenant 
Kamloops’ existing Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) covenant 
specifies that before a building or subdivision is approved 
for development, the landowner must agree to wildfire 
mitigation measures, including fire-resistant roofing materials, 
fuel buffer dimensions and spark arresters for wood stoves. 
A more stringent covenant is being developed in 2010. It  
states that a proposed development situated in the assessed  
moderate, high or extreme wildfire hazard classes cannot 
be built upon unless the landowner
•	 meets a minimum of FireSmart guidelines
•	 submits a site-specific wildfire hazard assessment to  
the City
Following negotiations with the City, two new subdivisions 
have already adhered to the new covenant’s more stringent 
FireSmart guidelines.
Public and landowner education and compliance
The City created a wildfire Web site with up-to-date 
information for area residents. In addition, information and 
advice is distributed through television commercials, public 
campaigns, FireSmart seminars and information pamphlets.
The City of Kamloops is balancing public safety with the 
ecological integrity of surrounding green space. Wildfires 
are a regular ecological element in this “mountain rain-
shadow” region covered by grasslands and forests; the 
natural burn cycle is between 7 and 30 years. However, 
most large wildfires have been suppressed in recent 
decades, and consequently, the land around Kamloops  
has accumulated dangerous levels of forest fuel material. 
Although mechanically thinning thousands of hectares  
of city forests affects the region’s soil, fauna and flora, it 
can be argued that such operations are bringing the forest 
closer to its “natural” state by reducing the level of forest 
fuel by mechanical rather than natural (wildfire) means. 
The Filmon report (2003), a review of the British Columbia 
government’s response to the fires across the province in 
Best practice wildfire planning guides
FireSmart: Protecting Your Community From Wildfire 
(2003), published by Partners in Protection, an Alberta-
based non-profit organization, provides individuals and 
communities with planning tools for mitigating the risk  
of fire in interface areas.
The City of Langford, British Columbia, received provincial 
government funding to develop and implement model 
guidelines for reducing fire risk in the wildland-urban 
interface. The City published a detailed report in 2002 
outlining its experiences, plans, wildland-urban interface 
covenant and other actions.
2003, argued that controlled forest burns are a good way 
to replicate the natural ecological integrity of the landscape 
while also helping to substantially reduce the wildfire threat 
to the public. The City of Kamloops plans to pilot controlled 
surface burns in 2011.
Managing wildfires is complex. Although the City of 
Kamloops has taken action to reduce the risks to human 
life and property from wildfires, several challenges remain. 
First, for the current plans and actions to continue to be 
effective, ongoing active forest management is required 
(involving either mechanical thinning or controlled burning). 
Otherwise, the forests will accumulate dangerous levels of 
forest fuel. Second, the public’s perception of fire hazards 
and what a forest should look like in the Kamloops region 
has been identified as a major challenge for the City to 
overcome. Since the wildfires of 2003 and the pine beetle 
epidemic, public perception is beginning to change; but 
continued work is needed to fully engage the public and 
effectively reduce the wildfire risk.
In the aftermath of the 2003 wildfire season, Kamloops 
quickly mobilized various stakeholders to develop a 
comprehensive wildfire reduction plan and implement 
ambitious measures such as forest treatment work and 
a wildfire hazard covenant. The City’s decisive response 
to the wildfires of 2003 demonstrates the importance of 
taking concerted action before devastation occurs.
Contact:
Kelly Johnston 
Wildfire Protection Project Coordinator
City of Kamloops
Tel.: 250-828-3461
E-mail: kjohnston@kamloops.ca 
14 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Metro Vancouver’s Stormwater  
Management Program
Adaptation to climate variability and change can be successfully  
integrated into existing plans and programs
Metro Vancouver, a regional district comprising 22 municipalities, one electoral area and 
one treaty First Nation, is home to more than 2 million people. It has experienced very 
rapid growth over the past decade that is expected to continue. The district’s mandate 
relates primarily to regional planning and delivery of essential utility services. Some Metro 
Vancouver member municipalities have been addressing climate change adaptation for 
more than five years. 
Stormwater Interagency Liaison Group
Under the federal Fisheries Act, Metro Vancouver and 
its member municipalities are not allowed to discharge 
stormwater and rain runoff that would negatively impact 
fish and their habitat. The concern is about how changes in 
stormwater runoff quantity and quality impact the region’s 
many urban and rural salmon and trout streams. Metro 
Vancouver, its member municipalities, and provincial and 
federal environmental agencies formed the Stormwater 
Interagency Liaison Group (SILG) in 2002 under its 
provincially approved Liquid Waste Management Plan  
to facilitate the co-ordination and sharing of common 
research related to stormwater management.
This co-ordinated approach created a template for developing 
watershed-specific, flexible and adaptive strategies, known as 
Integrated Stormwater Management Plans (ISMPs). These 
plans integrate a wide range of water management issues, 
including watershed health, land use planning, engineering, 
community values, and climate variability and change. 
Although the primary drivers in the development of these 
plans have been expanding urbanization and management 
of intensive agriculture, climate change has been integrated 
into the ISMP process and other approaches for managing 
the health of streams in the region.
A changing climate 
Metro Vancouver has a coastal climate characterized by mild, 
wet winters and warm, dry summers. Temperature records 
indicate a clear warming trend of between 0.5ºC and 0.8ºC 
over the past century. Also, annual precipitation in the  
region has increased over the past 50 years. Much of the 
short-term variability in climate (years to decades) relates 
to natural climate cycles such as the El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation.
Seven steps to design  
and implement an ISMP
1.	 Secure political interest and support.
2.	 Identify watershed problems and opportunities.
3.	 Develop objectives and alternative scenarios.
4.	 Collect meaningful data and refine scenarios.
5.	 Evaluate alternatives and develop component plans.
6.	 Develop an implementation program.
7.	 Refine the plan through adaptive management.
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  15
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
Integrated Stormwater Management Plans 
The goal of an ISMP is to develop effective stormwater 
plans that will result in no net loss to environmental 
quality and protect communities from localized flooding. 
The process actively seeks input from various stakeholder 
groups within each watershed and brings together the 
fields of planning, engineering, ecology and natural hazard 
protection within an adaptive management methodology. 
Member municipalities have committed to develop ISMPs 
for all Vancouver urban and suburban watersheds by 2014.
Within each ISMP process, an advisory group that includes 
representatives from the development, agricultural and 
environmental sectors contributes historical knowledge 
of the watershed and helps to assess the benefits of the 
ISMP over time. The general public is involved in evaluating 
alternative management scenarios and reviewing the plan’s 
success. This roundtable approach relies on a combination 
of knowledge of land use, water resources and engineering 
from governments, local residents and experts. A widely 
supported set of final adaptive management rules allows  
landowners and developers to make long-term investment 
decisions with confidence, provide government agencies  
with regulatory certainty and ensure that the investments  
of municipal governments lead to continuous improvements 
in stormwater management.
Approximately 25 ISMPs have been completed or are 
underway in Metro Vancouver – representing about  
half of the watersheds in the region. Municipalities have 
adopted such measures as on-site rainfall retention (through 
infiltration and detention infrastructure) the re-exposure 
and naturalisation of culverted or buried streams, reduction 
targets for total impervious area and improved public access 
to waterways. Some of these measures are driven, in part, 
by the projected impacts of climate change on the region’s 
watersheds. After the measures are implemented, many 
municipalities will monitor stream flows and stream health 
(e.g. benthic and fish studies).
Watershed improvement features 
Many Metro Vancouver municipalities have translated the 
ISMPs into actions. For example, the Corporation of Delta 
has a landscape architect on staff to assist the engineering 
design team to construct landscaped watershed improvement 
features that reduce stormwater runoff and protect stream 
health. The engineering team has constructed more than 
18 watershed improvement projects that include permeable 
paving and the planting of street trees over renovated 
portions of roadsides, infiltration tanks, grassy swales  
and rain gardens. 
Climate change vulnerability 
assessment 
In 2006, Metro Vancouver partnered with Engineers Canada 
to conduct an initial assessment of various components 
of the region’s wastewater system – combined sewers, 
pump stations and the Iona Island wastewater treatment 
plant. The final report noted that low-lying wastewater 
infrastructure (such as the Iona Island wastewater treatment 
plant, which provides primary treatment services for 
approximately 600 000 people) was vulnerable to both 
rising sea levels and possible increases in the frequency 
and magnitude of storm surges. In addition, the increasing 
intensity of extreme rain events potentially has significant 
implications for the capacity of existing sewers and the 
design of upgraded infrastructure.
Metro Vancouver has been proactive in integrating climate 
change adaptation into the region’s wastewater planning 
processes since 2002. In 2006, Metro Vancouver and 
Engineers Canada jointly funded an initial assessment of the 
vulnerability of the region’s wastewater infrastructure to 
climate change. Subsequently, Metro Vancouver undertook 
actions supporting improving infrastructure resilience, many 
of which were incorporated directly into the Integrated 
Liquid Waste and Resource Management Plan, adopted in 
May 2010. This plan specifically addresses the impacts of 
climate change and climatic cycles on local water resources.
Although it is not driven directly by concerns about the 
impacts of climate change, the ISMP process provides 
Metro Vancouver and its members with an inclusive 
and comprehensive tool for managing complex risk-
management issues that improve the region’s capacity  
to deal with environmental risks, including those related  
to climate variability and change.
Contact:
Robert Hicks
Senior Engineer, Policy and Planning Department
Metro Vancouver
Tel.: 604-451-6165
E-mail: Robert.Hicks@metrovancouver.org
Sarah Howie
Urban Environment Designer, Engineering Department
Corporation of Delta
Tel.: 604-952-3189
E-mail: showie@corp.delta.bc.ca 
16 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Edmonton’s Urban Forest Management Plan
Managing urban forests in a changing climate
Edmonton, Alberta, has 299 000 landscape trees on City property, including boulevards 
and parks. These trees provide a plethora of valuable ecological services to the City. They 
keep neighbourhoods cool, improve air quality, provide wildlife habitat, remove carbon 
dioxide from the atmosphere, retain stormwater run off and prevent erosion. In addition, 
trees add substantial aesthetic, recreational and economic value to communities. However, 
this valuable asset is at risk because recent drought, insect infestations, disease and storms 
are taking a heavy toll on Edmonton’s extensive urban tree canopy. 
In the last decade, more than 30 000 trees (an average of 
4300 annually) died because of drought conditions and 
secondary pests, compared with a previously more typical 
number of losses of between 600 and 900 annually. The 
scale and intensity of the drought-related tree deaths are a 
major challenge for the City. Even with a capital infusion of 
$2.75 million to augment replanting efforts in 2003–2004 
and the City’s desire to replace every felled tree, the City 
has been unable to keep pace with the recent losses. 
Climate change is expected to further increase the threats 
to the health and viability of Edmonton’s urban tree canopy. 
If summer drought conditions continue, the City will need to 
intensify replanting efforts and reconsider which tree species 
to plant to reduce losses. Edmonton is also preparing for a  
wave from the south of invasive pests and diseases, including 
the Emerald Ash Borer and Dutch Elm Disease. These are 
major threats to the urban tree canopy because green ash 
and American elms comprise approximately 46 percent  
and 32 percent, respectively, of the City’s street trees. 
These threats to the urban forest spurred the City to 
create a plan that would guide its future management 
over a 10-year period. In 2006, council approved the 
creation of a new staff position to lead the development 
of the City’s first Urban Forest Management Plan (UFMP). 
The plan, due in 2010, includes a vision statement, three 
main objectives, associated strategies and specific actions. 
The plan’s vision is “to have a diverse and sustainable 
urban forest that enhances the beauty of Edmonton  
and contributes to the well-being and quality of life  
for future generations.”
Each action has been assigned to a project partner and  
has a prioritized timeline: short (0 to 3 years), medium  
(4 to 7 years) and long (8 to 10 years). The following  
are examples of the key actions:
•	 Create an inventory of the urban forest (completed 2009).
•	 Develop a replacement strategy for dead or dying plant 
material.
•	 Review existing planting strategies.
Photo courtes y o f C athy Ta l a rico
Tree losses in Edmonton
Year
Lost
Planted
2002
4300
1000
2003
5200
1800
2004
6200
1600
2005
4300
800
2006
3000
2050
2007
3400
1400
2008
4100
2450
2009
2977
2600
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  17
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
•	 Create fire and disaster management plans.
•	 Develop a disease control plan.
•	 Assess staffing levels and staff training. 
•	 Develop potential tree planting partnerships.
•	 Create public education opportunities.
•	 Perform an Urban Forest Effects Model and a Street Tree 
Resource Analysis for Urban Forest managers (completed).
The plan was developed with regular input and direction 
from a multi-stakeholder advisory group that included 
members of the public and affected interest groups, such 
as the City’s transportation and drainage personnel. An 
outcomes-based systems approach was used to define 
measures to assess progress toward the vision and the 
objectives. Forestry staff began the planning process by 
conducting an extensive review of best practice urban 
forest management plans from across North America. At 
various points in the process, the public was consulted 
through surveys, online information sharing and focus 
groups.
An inventory of the urban forest, encompassing both 
private and public lands, is a key component of the  
UFMP. In 2009, extensive field observations combined  
with meteorological and pollution records were used to 
calculate the species composition of the urban forest as 
well as its economic and ecological value. This database 
provides an accurate baseline for the management of 
various threats to the urban canopy, including those  
related to a changing climate.
Edmonton’s Forestry Unit is actively testing different strategies 
and techniques to minimize the threats from climate change 
as well as take advantage of new opportunities. The City’s 
Old Man Creek Nursery, in partnership with a local private 
nursery, is conducting tree hardiness trials to test species such 
as red maples, crabapples, oaks and pears that are not usually 
planted in Edmonton but have increasing survival potential 
because of warming climate conditions. In addition, the 
Forestry Unit is testing alternative maintenance techniques 
to minimize losses from drought. These include watering 
methods such as the installation of water bags that slowly 
release water to the base of trees. 
City officials note that a key strength of the UFMP plan-
making process has been the Forestry Unit’s collaborative 
approach with other municipal departments and the public. 
Collaborative computer software has been an important 
tool for coordinating meetings, sharing data and distributing 
draft plans. However, the successful implementation of  
the plan’s actions rests on the continued engagement  
of stakeholders. 
Half of Edmonton’s trees are on private property. To 
encourage a healthy tree canopy while also minimizing 
costs to the City, municipal officials will need to provide 
ongoing education and other services to the public. In 
addition, coordination between municipal departments  
is critical in responding to evolving climate and pest 
conditions. One example is a joint project between the 
Forestry Division and Public Works that is studying the 
feasibility of storing stormwater for use by trees during 
drought periods.
Edmonton’s tree canopy is seriously threatened by climate 
change, natural disasters, pests and disease. While the UFMP 
is still in its final draft stage, it has already enabled the City  
to develop a comprehensive and integrated approach to 
managing the urban forest. City officials look forward 
to continuing the work with various public and private 
stakeholders to implement best practice solutions to 
minimize, and hopefully reverse, the trend of high tree 
losses observed over the last decade. 
Contact:
Jenny Wheeler 
Principal of Forestry, City of Edmonton
Tel.: 780-442-0224 
E-mail: Jeannette.Wheeler@Edmonton.ca 
Three main objectives of the Urban 
Forest Management Plan
1.	 To provide Edmonton with a comprehensive plan  
for effectively managing, sustaining and ensuring  
the growth of the City’s urban forest
2.	 To educate the general public, other city agencies, 
neighbouring communities and community partners 
about the importance of the urban forest, forestry  
issues and management best practices
3.	 To protect native forest and tree stands in conjunction 
with the city’s Office of Natural Areas, which is 
responsible for the natural areas and the Natural 
Connections Strategic Plan
Photo courtes y o f Jennie Da ile y- O’C a in
18 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Regina’s Water Conservation Program
Demand management of scarce resources can be critical in enhancing 
climate resilience
Regina, Saskatchewan, is a city of 200 000 situated in the middle of the vast southern 
prairies, the driest major region of Canada. The city has very little local access to water. 
The only body of water running through the city is Wascana Creek, a formerly ephemeral 
stream that was dammed in 1883 to create an artificial lake that today acts as a downtown 
landmark. 
To meet local demand, Regina draws its potable water 
from Buffalo Pound Lake (57 kilometres [km] northwest 
of the city), which itself is fed from Lake Diefenbaker, a 
large reservoir formed in 1967 by damming the South 
Saskatchewan and Qu’Appelle rivers.
In the early 1980s, Regina was struggling to meet demand 
with its existing water supply system. Per capita water 
usage was increasing annually, and if unchecked, the City 
would have had to undertake costly infrastructure upgrades 
to increase potable water and wastewater supply capacity. 
Although water conservation was a fairly new concept in 
the 1980s, the City thoroughly explored its options and in 
1985 implemented a Water Conservation Program. While 
not designed as a climate change adaptation measure,  
the program has had a profound impact on enhancing  
the city’s climate resilience.
The program involves several components that have been 
developed incrementally over the last 25 years. These include
•	 a pricing structure to encourage water conservation
	 Prior to implementing its conservation program, Regina 
operated a full-cost recovery, user pay system that 
charged a fixed price for the first 28 cubic metres of water 
consumed per household, plus a metered charge for any 
use above that amount. In 1985, the City replaced the fixed 
price with a fee for each cubic metre of water consumed. 
The underlying concept was that by paying for all water 
Photo courtes y o f Ron Ga rne t t 
Enhanced Water Conservation  
Program goals
In 1991, Regina City Council implemented strict new targets 
and expanded the water consumption program to delay 
infrastructure expansion costs. Since 1991, the program’s 
goals have been to
•	 reduce the average day and peak day water consumption 
per capita by 15 percent by 2011
•	 continue to encourage the wise use of water by customers
•	 inform the public of the City’s plan for water conservation
Water scarcity and climate change 
For the Canadian prairies, increases in water scarcity 
and drought are the most serious risks presented by 
future climate changes. These impacts will be particularly 
significant for Regina because much of its water supply 
comes from the South Saskatchewan River. For this river, 
rising demand for water by industrial, agricultural and 
community users in southern Alberta and southwest 
Saskatchewan will need to be reconciled with projected 
decreases in mean annual flows due to climate variability 
and change. Demand management will be a critical tool  
in addressing water scarcity challenges.
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  19
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
consumed, customers would limit water consumption. 
This, in turn, would delay the need for system-wide 
infrastructure upgrades and allow costs to be spread  
over a greater time period. 
•	 communication
	 Communication has been a central component of 
Regina’s water conservation efforts. The City has 
disseminated information and advice – that emphasize 
the message “save water, save money” – through 
brochures, Web sites, school visits, local trade shows, 
xeriscape landscaping workshops, as well as through 
advertising campaigns using local radio, television, 
newspapers and billboards. 
•	 water meter replacement
	 In 2002, the City began replacing the approximately 
50 000 meters installed before 1992 with the goal of 
improving metering accuracy – the old meters typically 
undermeasured water consumption. The new meters 
have radio transmitters that relay consumption data to  
a city-operated vehicle each month. Accurate registration 
of water flows on a monthly basis promotes conservation 
because customers can quickly and accurately make the 
connection between changing water conservation habits 
and their bill.
Upper Qu’Appelle River and Wascana 
Creek watershed planning 
The City of Regina has provided strong support to 
community-based planning in the Upper Qu’Appelle  
River and Wascana Creek watersheds. In 2002, the newly 
created Saskatchewan Watershed Authority invited local 
people to participate in watershed and aquifer planning 
with the goal of protecting water quality and quantity. A 
diverse group of stakeholders that included farmers, rural 
and urban municipalities, environmental organizations  
and industry oversaw the creation of comprehensive plan.  
The final plan included 82 initiatives within 10 broad  
categories. Many proposed actions dealt with climate  
change adaptation. For example, Action 61 states that  
“all stakeholders . . . consider climate change an integral  
part of source water protection decisions.” 
Regina’s Water Conservation Program has been extremely 
successful. The city’s annual water consumption decreased 
from a high of 39 billion litres (L) in 1988 to 28.5 billion L 
in 2007. This enabled the City to delay the upgrade to the 
water supply system. 
In 2005, Regina completed construction of a second  
57-km pipe from the Buffalo Pound Water Treatment  
Plant, with the primary goal of improving supply security.  
The redundancy offered by the second pipe, wherein 
disruption of one does not impact the entire water supply 
to the city, is a good example of a measure that enhances 
resilience in the face of climate change.
Regina has significantly reduced per capita water consumption 
through a series of incremental changes. In recent years, 
water consumption for the city as a whole has remained 
stable despite modest population growth. The modification 
to the pricing structure, which charges users for every 
cubic metre of water used, is the flagship feature of this 
successful program. It demonstrates that financial incentives, 
in conjunction with effective communication, can help 
manage demand for scarce resources. While not initially 
designed as a climate change adaptation measure, improved 
water management has helped increase the city’s resilience 
to climate impacts. Recognizing its role as a key water user, 
the City is lending its experience and support to broader 
watershed planning initiatives that are addressing water 
supplies and climate change impacts.
Contact:
Ken Wiens
Manager, Water Operations
City of Regina
Tel.: 306-777-7431
E-mail: kwiens@regina.ca 
Xeriscape
Xeriscape is an alternate form of landscaping that relies 
on drought-tolerant plants to reduce outdoor watering 
requirements during the summer. In 1993, the City produced 
a xeriscape workbook that it distributes annually at free 
workshops in the spring and fall and on the City’s Web 
site. In the late 1990s, the City partnered with a local 
school (collaboration between city staff, teachers, parents 
and school children) to create a xeriscape educational and 
demonstration site. The garden features 45 plant types, a 
false creek and an amphitheatre with a teacher’s rock for 
outdoor classes and lessons.
Photo courtes y o f Che t Neufeld
20 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
In 2007, a University of Western Ontario (UWO) research 
team published a report that assessed the vulnerability of 
the Thames River watershed to changing climate. The study 
concluded that “climate change is expected to intensify 
flooding in the [river] basin, thus bringing flows in higher 
magnitude with more frequent occurrence.” 
To act upon the study’s findings, the City engaged UWO  
researchers from the Department of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering to conduct a preliminary analysis of the city’s 
rainfall intensity, duration and frequency curves (IDF curves) 
in the context of a changing climate. These rainfall trends 
help define key design criteria for municipal water resource 
management infrastructure, such as storm sewers, overland 
drainage, street curbs, gutters, culverts, dikes and bridges. 
Analysis of the IDF curves demonstrated that “rainfall 
intensity and frequency in the Thames River watershed 
had increased on the basis of historical observations (1965 
to 2001) and is anticipated to continue to increase.” The 
research predicted that peak flow estimates for a small 
storm lasting fewer than 90 minutes would be increased 
by 10 to 15 percent, while peak flow estimates for a storm 
exceeding 90 minutes would be up to 30 percent greater 
than in the past. 
For existing stormwater management systems, this would 
likely lead to more flooding and overflows. The report 
Photo courtes y o f Lot te Hux le y
London, Ontario’s, Climate Change  
Adaptation Strategy
Reducing flood risk through proactive design
Two tributaries of the Thames River meet in London, a city in southwestern Ontario with  
a population of 350 000. The Thames River has experienced several extreme floods since 
records began in 1791. Dikes and dams completed in the 1950s have since saved London 
from major flooding. 
London’s flooding history 
The floods of 1883 caused extensive damage to homes  
and businesses and killed 17 people, prompting the City  
to construct protective dikes. The floods of 1937 were  
the most severe in the city’s history (see above image).  
River water rose 7 m, overflowing dikes and destroying 
1100 homes and killing five people. After the 1937 and 
1947 floods, the City constructed three dams along the 
Thames River to protect the community. Together, the 
dikes and dams have been effective defensive measures. 
Although the Thames River flooded its banks in 1977, 
1986, 1997 and 2000, no water breached the dikes  
during these events.
Photo cou rt es y o f T he U n i v er si t y 
o f W es t ern O n tari o Arch i v es
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  21
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
concluded that the City should consider developing 
significantly larger stormwater management facilities 
and drawing new flood lines within the Thames River 
watershed. The latter measure would potentially lead to 
changes in the City’s Official Plan and other environmental 
and water resource policies.
In response to the preliminary IDF curves analysis, the 
City’s Environmental and Engineering Services Department 
recommended the development of a comprehensive climate 
change adaptation strategy for London, with a focus on 
the impacts from flooding. This two-phase strategy, which 
was passed by City Council in December 2007, includes 
comprehensive engineering and scientific assessments to 
more clearly determine the risks to the level of municipal 
services that can be provided.
While still in its early stages, the adaptation strategy is 
progressing well. The City plans to move to Phase 2 following 
completion of the General Risk and Consequences Analysis  
in February 2011. In addition, based on a recommendation 
from a Blue Ribbon Panel tasked with reviewing London’s 
property development charges, the City has transferred 
responsibility for the construction of all stormwater 
management infrastructure from property developers  
to the City. This transfer of responsibility, which is unique 
among Ontario municipalities, allows the City to take an 
integrated systems approach to stormwater management. 
For example, when a new subdivision is constructed, the 
City, not the developer, will be responsible for designing 
and implementing stormwater infrastructure.
High-quality local climate data were a crucial component 
of this project. However, municipal officials note that 
relevant local-scale data (such as historical rainfall records) 
were incomplete and substantially lengthened the data 
gathering and analysis process undertaken in Phase I. Much 
of the City’s climate change strategy work would not have 
been possible without the City dedicating significant funds 
($1.3 million was approved in 2008) to conduct research 
to examine the impacts of climate change on London’s 
infrastructure and to update the IDF curves.
London’s Adaptation Strategy demonstrates the importance 
of collaborative partnerships between climate change 
specialists and municipal staff. UWO’s rainfall projections 
will form the basis for revised engineering standards for the 
City’s stormwater management system. These changes will 
allow the City to make proactive incremental changes to its 
flood management program that should help avoid costly, 
disruptive and dangerous flooding in the future. 
Contact:
Berta Krichker
Manager of Stormwater, City of London
Tel.: 519-661-2500, Ext. 4724
E-mail: bkrichker@london.ca
Stoney Creek restoration 
This project demonstrates the City moving toward an 
ecological/systems approach to stormwater management, 
as stated in the long-term strategy (Phase II). In the spring 
of 2009, the City undertook channel restoration and 
remediation on a 1.8-km stretch of Stoney Creek. It also 
created an adjacent wetland, with a total drainage area 
of 3600 ha. One goal of the remediation was to ensure 
that the creek could support the stormwater runoff from 
a nearby 360-ha residential/commercial development. 
The remediation work is minimizing bank erosion and 
stormwater runoff volumes by restoring the creek’s 
geomorphological and ecological functions.
Phase 2 – Climate Change Adaption  
Long-term Strategy
Action
Completion date
Amend the City’s Stormwater Management 
Strategy and Subwatershed Study upon 
completion of the general risk assessment  
and updated IDF curves. 
~2013
Consider developing a green infrastructure plan 
that incorporates an environmental/ecological 
approach to water resource management.
Formalize a long-term Climate Change 
Adaptation Strategy for protection of municipal 
infrastructure and public and private property.
Phase 1 – Climate Change Adaption  
Transition Strategy
Action
Completion date
Undertake detailed analysis and update of the 
city’s current IDF curves. 
May 2010
Investigate increasing the short-term capacity 
of the stormwater management system by 15 to 
20 percent to account for climate change. 
July 2010
Engage experts to undertake a general risk and 
consequences analysis associated with impacts 
of storm events on the following city-owned and 
maintained infrastructure: buildings, floodways, 
streets, culverts, dikes, bridges and sewer 
design. 
February 2011
22 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Toronto’s Heat Health Alert System
Proactive adaptation can help save lives now and prepare for future 
climate change
The City of Toronto has developed and implemented two extreme weather alert systems: 
Extreme-Cold Weather Alerts (in 1996), and Heat Health Alerts (in 2001). These systems are 
designed to protect the city’s most vulnerable populations – the elderly, children, medically 
at-risk persons, and the homeless – from extremes of heat and cold. The Heat Health Alert 
System was developed proactively, in part as a response to the disastrous heat waves in 
Chicago (1995) and Philadelphia (1993), both of which killed hundreds of urban residents. 
Environment Canada projects that by the latter part of 
this century, Toronto will average 65 days per year where 
the temperature exceeds 30°C, more than four times the 
historic average between 1961 and 1990. This represents 
a critical concern that will disproportionately impact 
the health and wellbeing of the city’s more vulnerable 
populations.
Toronto has had a heat warning system since 1999. The 
first heat warning system used a threshold of a one-day 
forecast of humidex over 40°C. Since 2001, Toronto Public 
Health has adopted the Heat Health Alert System as the 
basis for declaring alerts. This system is based on a synoptic 
approach that assesses the historical relationship between 
mortality levels and weather conditions. 
Toronto’s Heat Health Alert System includes a three-day  
forecast outlook. This synoptic-based approach starts with  
an air mass categorization for each forecast day based on  
weather conditions (temperature, humidex, dew point, wind 
speed and direction, air pressure and cloud cover). Then an 
algorithm is run to predict the likelihood of excess mortality 
under these air mass conditions; it is this likelihood that 
determines whether the Heat Health Alert System forecasts 
an Extreme Heat Alert, a Heat Alert or neither. 
The Toronto Medical Officer of Health issues a “Heat Alert” 
when the likelihood of excess weather-related mortality 
exceeds 65 percent and an “Extreme Heat Alert” when  
the likelihood of excess weather-related mortality exceeds 
90 percent. 
At the beginning of the summer, the City of Toronto and 
its partners provide the public with targeted information 
on the risks of extreme heat and on precautions to 
prevent heat-related illness and death. Various brochures 
are distributed and are available on the City’s Web site. 
Declaration of an alert by Toronto’s Medical Officer of 
Health activates specific responses under the City of 
Toronto Hot Weather Response Plan, which includes
•	 contacting local media to inform the public that a  
heat alert has been issued
•	 notifying community agencies and other response 
partners of the alert status, in order for them to 
implement agency specific protocols
Photo courtes y o f Se a n Ro bert son
Populations at risk from extreme heat 
The health risks increase substantially when people 
experience prolonged exposure to heat without significant 
cooling intervals. Socially isolated seniors are at highest 
risk of heat-related illness and death. Other at-risk groups 
include children, people with chronic and pre-existing 
illnesses including mental illness, low-income households, 
and adults who are marginally housed or homeless.
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  23
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
•	 operating, through the Canadian Red Cross, a heat 
information line from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. for those in need  
of assistance or with heat-related inquiries
•	 distributing bottled water through the Canadian Red 
Cross, targeting vulnerable people and providing water 
to agencies that work with vulnerable groups
•	 distributing Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) tokens 
through selected drop-in centres to the homeless so  
they can reach cooling centres
•	 opening seven designated cooling centres (one open for  
24 hours) at public locations, such as community centres 
and civic centres, during an Extreme Heat Alert
Toronto Public Health (TPH) conducts an annual review of 
the City’s hot weather response. Recent changes to the 
plan include an increase in the number of cooling centres 
and an increase in the number of transit tokens distributed 
to people in need of transportation to a cool place. TPH 
also received funding from NRCan in 2010 to develop a 
map-based decision support tool for public health staff 
and community partners to improve the delivery of health-
protective services to the most vulnerable populations 
during extreme heat events.
In addition to the Heat Health Alert System, the City has  
implemented various programs that include measures 
aimed at reducing the effects of heat waves by implementing 
tools aimed at cooling the city over the long term. These 
programs include a Green Roof Bylaw, the Toronto Green 
Standard, an Eco-Roof Incentive Program, Doubling the 
Tree Canopy Initiative, and ”Greening” Surface Parking  
Lot guidelines. Many of these actions will help reduce  
the urban heat island effect, which occurs in urban areas 
where dark surfaces such as asphalt and roofing absorb  
the sun’s energy and radiate it out, thereby further 
warming the local ambient air. 
Toronto’s Hot Weather Response Plan has increased awareness 
of problems related to extreme heat, contributed to the 
development of new programs and measures to combat 
the urban heat island effect, and helped facilitate the 
partnering of various City departments, non-governmental 
organizations and other local groups. The City is now 
developing a Climate Change Risk Assessment process  
and electronic tool to be used in a variety of City Divisions. 
The process will include consideration of many extreme 
weather indicators, including extreme heat. The results  
of the risk assessment will enable staff to prioritize climate 
change risks and prepare appropriate adaptive actions.
Contact:
Elaine Pacheco 
Manager, Healthy Environments 
Toronto Public Health
Tel.: 416-338-8047 
E-mail: epacheco@toronto.ca
Stephanie Gower
Research Consultant
Environmental Protection Office
Toronto Public Health
Tel.: 416-338-8101
E-mail: sgower@toronto.ca
Heat vulnerability mapping tool 
Toronto Public Health (TPH) is developing a mapping tool to 
visualize human vulnerability to extreme heat. The maps will 
incorporate numerous indicators of vulnerability, including 
surface temperatures, green space coverage, housing and 
social characteristics of at-risk populations, access to air 
conditioning, and the location of cool places. Due to be 
completed in 2011, the tool will help TPH and community 
partners identify and prioritize geographic hot spots for 
delivering resources during a heat alert. The City of Toronto 
also plans to use the tool for long-term climate adaptation 
planning.
Photo courtes y o f S tefa n P ow ell
24 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Québec City’s Environmental Services  
Adaptation Plan
Leadership and teamwork are key when developing adaptation plans
Québec City (population 491 000) is located on the north shore of the St. Lawrence River 
in eastern Quebec. It is expected that climate change will result in the city being impacted 
by more severe weather events, including more intense snow storms, wind storms, heat 
waves and torrential rain. 
In 2006, a presentation to City staff by Ouranos, a Quebec-
based consortium on regional climatology and adaptation to 
climate change, spurred work to develop an adaptation plan. 
The City decided that, despite uncertainties in the magnitude 
of future climate changes, it was judicious to create an 
adaptation plan by examining past trends, climate projections, 
vulnerable operations and possible adaptive actions. 
By being proactive, the City hoped to reduce the costs 
and negative effects of a changing climate on the City’s 
operations and infrastructure. The goal was to develop 
an adaptation plan for the City’s Environmental Services 
Department and then, based on the results of this small-
scale trial, to produce an adaptation plan for the entire 
metropolitan area.
Environmental Services was chosen to develop the first 
adaptation plan because the department is responsible for 
managing the city’s natural resources in a sustainable manner 
and already had a good knowledge of climate change. 
Environmental Services has three main responsibilities: 
•	 managing air, water and soil quality at facilities operated 
by public works – wastewater treatment plants, landfill 
sites, snow depots and stormwater management facilities
•	 managing the City’s trees and horticulture
•	 evaluating water quality (drinking and wastewater) in 
city-run laboratory facilities
An Environmental Services staff member led the process and 
wrote the plan. During the process, it was recognized that 
many actions already provided for in existing management 
plans could be considered adaptation measures because they 
serve to reduce vulnerability to climate hazards. Therefore, 
throughout the consultation process, staff were encouraged 
to identify both existing and new adaptation measures.
The process proceeded in four main steps over six months.
1. Climate change projections
	
To prepare for the consultations, a request was made  
to Ouranos to obtain regional climate modelling data  
for the 2020s, 2050s and 2080s.
2. Literature review
	
A literature review, encompassing scientific journal  
articles and government reports, was conducted to 
determine the likely impacts of climate change on the 
city’s physical infrastructure and natural environment, 
and to help create a methodology for developing  
the plan.
3. Internal consultations
	
Internal consultations were conducted with  
10 Environmental Services staff members to identify 
existing and proposed adaptation measures. The  
outcome was a summary table capturing key actions  
for each of the department’s 20 subactivities.
Photo courtes y o f Ro bert Saucier
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  25
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
4. Prioritizing adaptation strategies
	
Following revisions by the project lead, the summary 
tables were examined in individual meetings between 
the project lead and the consulted staff to arrive at a 
consensus on the final text and the priority level of  
each proposed measure.
The resulting adaptation plan, which was approved by 
council in April 2009, commits Environmental Services 
to consider the impacts of a changing climate in all of its 
operations, projects, plans and bylaws. In addition, the 
results from the consultations – including priority level, 
deadlines – and funding requirements – were presented in 
tables that clearly and concisely disseminate the key findings.
Eighty-eight adaptation measures have been targeted  
for all of Québec City’s Environmental Services operations. 
The majority of these (54) target the aquatic environment 
and drinking water, areas of high vulnerability to climate 
change. Twenty-six measures have been defined as 
priorities, including 12 that had been planned but not  
yet implemented and 14 that are new strategies. 
Adaptation consultation
A table was distributed to 10 staff members working on 
different subactivities within Environmental Services. The 
project lead filled in the climate change projections section 
based on research findings from Ouranos. The 10 staff 
members then completed the impacts and adaptation 
strategies sections. Below is an example of a completed 
table.
Example: Drinking water
Climate 
change 
projections
•	 increasing temperatures and evapotranspiration 
rates 
•	 absence of precipitation over long periods
Impacts
•	 Fresh water supplies may be compromised 
during the summer because of reduced flow 
levels.
•	 Possible water shortages could require water 
restriction measures.
Proposed/  
existing 
adaptation 
strategies
1.	 Reserve funds for purchasing municipal water 
conservation equipment.
2.	 Install rainwater collection cisterns on selected 
municipal buildings.
3.	 Develop a communication program to educate 
the public on how to increase efficiency of 
water usage.
The adaptation plan places highest priority on measures 
affecting the quality and availability of water, a vital resource 
that is particularly sensitive to changes in temperature and 
precipitation. The City is concerned about the projected 
increases in summer drought, which could make drinking 
water scarcer. Another concern is that rising sea levels, 
along with flow reductions in the St. Lawrence River,  
would result in salt-water intrusion impacting drinking 
water supplies in some parts of the city. While some of 
these issues may be already included in other City plans, 
the adaptation plan gives priority status to these issues.
The process that led to the development of the 
Environmental Services Adaptation Plan helped build 
support for the production of a city-wide adaptation plan. 
Following a clear presentation of some key climate change 
impacts and adaptation actions, the City’s Executive 
Committee approved (in April 2009) an expansion of 
the adaptation initiative to all of the City’s operations. 
Development of the expanded plan is possible through 
funding from the programme Climat municipalités of 
Quebec’s Ministère du Développement durable, de 
l’Environnement et des Parcs.
The consultation process and adaptation plan developed 
by Environmental Services is based on the understanding 
that proactive adaptation measures are generally more 
cost effective than reactive measures implemented after 
a significant climate impact has occurred. This example 
demonstrates the effectiveness of using a consultation 
mechanism to identify and prioritize adaptation measures 
and to develop broad-based support and ownership of 
adaptation initiatives.
Contact:
Matthieu Alibert
Division de la qualité du milieu, Québec City
Tel.: 418-641-6411, x2961
E-mail: matthieu.alibert@ville.quebec.qc.ca 
Photo courtes y o f Michaël Rhe ault
26 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Le Goulet’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan
Planned relocation as an option to address sea-level rise
Le Goulet is a small fishing community with a population of 950 located on the Acadian 
Peninsula in northeast New Brunswick. The village is low-lying and relatively flat, two 
features that make it particularly vulnerable to the impacts of a changing climate and rising 
sea levels. 
Local residents have noticed an increase in the frequency 
and intensity of extreme weather, including storm surges 
and flooding, and are worried about future impacts on their 
homes and livelihoods. For example, in the last 15 years, four 
major floods resulting from coastal storm surges have affected 
up to 30 homes in the village. These floods contaminated 
drinking water supplies (salt-water intrusion), caused septic 
tanks to overflow and flooded access roads, hampering 
emergency procedures. Contaminated drinking water and 
mould issues continue to be problems for many homes.
Le Goulet is separated from the Gulf of Saint Lawrence by  
sand dunes and salt marshes, both of which act as important 
natural buffers from storm events. Human extraction of  
dune sand in the 1980s (now illegal), combined with greater-
than-normal coastal erosion rates (associated with reduced  
winter ice cover) and the four major storm surge events have  
resulted in erosion of the dune sand from a maximum height 
of 2 m above sea level to a height of just half a metre 
today. The lower dune levels leave residents increasingly 
concerned about the impact of future storm surges.
In 2002, engineering consultants hired by the village  
recommended that a 3.8-km sea wall be constructed  
just seaward of the sand dunes to protect against the  
worst impacts of storm surges, at an estimated cost of  
$3.3 million. In 2004, community leaders asked University  
of Moncton climate change specialists to assist the village  
in producing a comprehensive local plan to adapt to  
the impacts of climate change and rising sea levels.  
The development of the plan included three phases.
Three principal coastal  
adaptation methods
Retreat – Relocate human settlement (homes, roads, etc.) 
away from areas of potential flooding, allowing the rising 
sea to advance inland.
Accommodate – Engage in actions that compensate for 
climate-related changes (e.g. constructing raised homes on 
pilings to accommodate rising sea levels).
Protect – Safeguard existing coastal land uses by 
implementing measures such as sea walls, dikes, beach 
nourishment and wetland restoration.
Phase I – Raising awareness
In 2007, climate change specialists made three presentations 
in Le Goulet on different aspects of climate change, storm 
surges and coastal erosion. The presentations provided 
local residents with a sound scientific base from which to 
make informed adaptation and planning decisions. Three 
principal coastal adaptation methods were presented: 
retreat, accommodate and protect.
Phase II – Focus groups
Researchers organized discussion groups with 10 to  
12 interested residents, living both inside and outside  
the at-risk zone, and local leaders (including the mayor 
and councillors). The goal of these group discussions was 
to arrive at adaptation options to be included in the draft 
Photo courtes y o f the Municipa lit y o f Le Goule t
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  27
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
plan. This collaborative exercise led to, among other things, 
public consensus on the geographic definition of the area 
at risk.
Phase III – Adaptation options
The discussion groups decided on two principal adaptation 
options:
Option A: The voluntary retreat of homes most at risk 
It was decided that relocating homes at risk from flooding 
(retreat) to a higher elevation is the most desirable and 
cost-effective means to reduce the multiple health and 
safety issues stemming from storm surge flooding. While 
the retreat option received consensus support within the 
discussion groups, it remains controversial for many villagers. 
For example, the logistics of relocation would be 
complicated, as funds would have to be made available 
to compensate for relocation costs and help persuade 
residents to make the move. Option A also includes 
sand dune restoration efforts, and modification of the 
municipal zoning bylaw to ensure only approved adaptive 
development occurs in flood-prone areas.
Option B: The construction of a 3.8-km sea wall
For some residents, the construction of a sea wall is the 
most viable option for protecting the community from 
storm surges and flooding. However, during the group 
discussions, residents raised doubts as to the efficacy of 
the sea wall in preventing flooding and contamination 
of drinking water wells for low-lying homes. If a sea wall 
cannot prevent these risks, an expensive municipal water 
and sewage system (estimated at $14 million) would have 
to be constructed to provide safe drinking water and 
sewage disposal. 
The group discussions identified several important studies 
to conduct before moving forward with either option:  
(1) the development of a digital risk map that superimposes 
various climate change scenarios (flooding and erosion) 
with existing topographical features and infrastructure;  
(2) a modelling study of the impacts of a sea wall on  
coastal erosion and salt-water intrusion; and (3) a detailed 
cost analysis for the various adaptation measures. 
The university-community partnership successfully initiated 
an important debate about the future of the community 
and spurred the following actions. First, in 2009 the 
Commission d’aménagement de la Péninsule acadienne 
(local planning commission) modified the village’s zoning 
bylaw to prevent unsuitable development in flood-prone 
areas. Second, New Brunswick’s Department of Natural 
Resources agreed to produce a high-resolution digital 
elevation map of the coastline, information needed to 
inform all possible adaptation options. Data collection  
for the map took place in the summer of 2010.
Innovative zoning bylaw
Rather than prohibiting all development projects in flood-
prone areas of Le Goulet, the local planning commission took 
a more targeted approach. Using results from the discussion 
groups, the commission identified a zone where climate 
change impacts are considered a major risk that developers 
must consider in their plans. The zoning bylaw provides an 
opportunity to educate developers about the climate change 
related risks to people and infrastructure, and ensures that 
appropriate, but not prescriptive, measures are taken to 
accommodate those risks. The commission is working with 
the New Brunswick Department of Environment to develop 
criteria for adaptation that developers should consider when 
presenting a development proposal.
Many small communities lack the resources to develop and 
implement a comprehensive climate change adaptation plan.  
In Le Goulet, policy-makers were able to rely on nearby 
researchers from the University of Moncton to provide 
impartial impacts and adaptation information, to facilitate 
a discussion process and to draft a plan based on the 
outcomes from the discussions. This example demonstrates 
the importance of collaboration between local residents 
and climate change specialists when producing a climate 
change adaptation plan for a small community.
Contact:
Benjamin Kocyla
Directeur – Conseiller en urbanisme
Commission d’aménagement de la Péninsule acadienne
Tel.: 506-727-7979
E-mail: benjaminkocyla@nb.aibn.com 
M a p cou rt esy o f CA PA
28 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Planning for Sea-level Rise in Halifax Harbour
Adaptation measures can be incrementally adjusted as new 
information becomes available
Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM), the capital of Nova Scotia, is Atlantic Canada’s largest 
city. The municipality covers more than 5500 km2 and has a population of more than 
390 000. Halifax Harbour, at the heart of HRM, is a major seaport with significant 
industrial, military and municipal infrastructure.
Rising sea level, along with increased storm intensity and 
associated waves and storm surges, presents risks to 
residents, property and infrastructure in coastal areas of 
HRM. Following extreme weather events in September 
2003 and February 2004, HRM launched ClimateSMART 
(Sustainable Mitigation & Adaptation Risk Toolkit) to help 
mainstream climate change mitigation and adaptation into 
municipal planning and decision making. ClimateSMART 
initiated discussion of climate change and spurred further 
adaptation action.
In August 2006, the HRM Council adopted the Regional 
Municipal Planning Strategy, an integrated land use 
planning guide for future development. The Strategy 
explicitly included policies to address climate change 
impacts. It recognized the need to gather scientific data 
on sea-level rise, storm surges and vulnerability to inform 
development of an area-specific land use plan for Halifax 
Harbour. 
To deliver the information needed for effective adaptation 
planning, a partnership was formed between HRM planners 
and scientists from Natural Resources Canada, provincial 
agencies, Dalhousie University and Nova Scotia Community 
College. The process also involved consultation with major 
harbour stakeholders. The scientists developed scenarios for 
sea-level rise and extreme water levels to guide adaptation 
planning. There were several steps in the process to arrive 
at these scenarios:
Damaging storms
In recent years, Halifax has experienced frequent extreme 
weather, including several major storms that caused 
extensive erosion and flood damage. Most notable was 
Hurricane Juan in September 2003, a “once-in-a-century” 
event. This Category 2 hurricane made landfall just west 
of Halifax and tracked across central Nova Scotia and 
Prince Edward Island, leaving a trail of damage to property, 
infrastructure and the environment (cost estimated at 
$200 million). A few months later, in February 2004, the 
severe winter blizzard that became known as “White Juan” 
dumped nearly 90 cm of snow on Halifax in one day ($5 million 
in snow removal and damage costs). These events increased 
public concern about the potential impacts of climate change.
Analysis of historical sea-level rise, showing that water 
levels relative to the land have risen by 32 centimetres (cm) 
over the last century, a combination of land subsidence 
(-16 cm) and local sea-level rise (16 cm). The figures were 
derived from the Halifax tide gauge (since 1920) and crustal 
vertical motion GPS data (since 2002).
Documentation of stormwater levels and impacts  
on coastal areas. Scientists analysed 90 years of 
Halifax tide gauge data to determine the frequency and 
maximum water levels reached during extreme storms.  
Photo courtes y o f Ha lifa x 
Regiona l Municipa lit y
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  29
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
Hurricane Juan, an exceptional storm with record water 
levels, was recognized as a benchmark for flooding.
Projections of future sea levels and stormwater levels 
in Halifax Harbour under three scenarios for 2000–2100: 
(1) 16 cm – a continuation of the historical rate of change;  
(2) 57 cm – the upper-limit projection for mean sea-level rise 
from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
Fourth Assessment (2007); and (3) 1.3 m – a projection 
based on more recent scientific literature. All of the above 
were combined with the measured rate of subsidence to 
give local rates of relative sea-level rise.
High-resolution mapping of possible future flood 
levels for each scenario. In 2007, HRM and partners 
commissioned a LiDAR survey to provide baseline elevation 
data to a precision of about 15 cm. GIS software was  
then used to simulate the extent and depth of flooding  
on harbour-front properties in the year 2100 for various 
storm events coupled with projected rise in sea level for 
each of the three scenarios. 
In early 2010, following a presentation by scientists and  
city staff, HRM Council agreed to the use of Scenario 2c  
as an interim basis for action. This set a policy reference 
point from which planners can move forward in developing 
an adaptation plan. 
Maps of projected sea-level rise are a powerful visual 
tool for communicating potential flood impacts to policy-
makers, land owners and the general public.
Scenario 2C
Relative sea-level rise 
2000–2100
=
0.73 m above 2000 level  
(still water)
Add 1 in 50-year  
stormwater level
=
1.74 m  
(tide plus storm surge)
Stormwater level in 2100 
relative to geodetic datum
=
2.67 ±0.17 m
Add wave run-up
=
+1 to +2 m
Source:  http://geopub.nrcan.gc.ca/moreinfo_e.php?id=248196
Next steps include 
•	 further consultation with property owners and other 
stakeholders to obtain feedback on options and 
strategies
•	 a modelling exercise to accurately predict the impact of 
heavy wave action on harbour-front properties
•	 development of a risk assessment database containing 
information on the vulnerability of harbour-front 
properties
•	 the creation of measures that could include minimum 
ground elevation for new development, engineered 
solutions such as raising sea wall heights, and land use 
and development regulations for flood-prone areas 
Together, these will lead to the development of a 
comprehensive adaptation strategy to be presented  
to Council.
As an interim measure, a recently approved Municipal 
Planning Strategy and Land Use By-law for the downtown 
Halifax waterfront area prescribes that any development 
(ground floor elevation) must be a minimum of 2.5 m above 
the ordinary high-water mark. This figure may be adjusted 
based on ongoing sea-level rise monitoring and analysis. 
Halifax has taken a pragmatic approach in adapting to the 
impacts of rising sea level. It partnered with scientific and 
technical experts to obtain data to develop scenarios that 
speak to the concerns of stakeholders. Recognizing that 
time is needed to complete the planning process, HRM staff 
have used development agreements – bilateral contracts 
between the municipality and the landowner – for a number 
of waterfront parcels to encourage appropriate development 
while the formal adaptation plan is being formulated. 
Staff have also noted that the 100-year period allows for 
inclusion of adaptation measures when infrastructure is due 
for renewal. In this way, there is recognition that adaptation 
is an incremental process and that initial useful measures 
can be taken despite uncertainties in the magnitude of 
long-term changes.
Contact:
John Charles
Planner, Infrastructure & Asset Management
Halifax Regional Municipality
Tel.: 902-490-5771
E-mail: charlej@halifax.ca
Roger Wells
Supervisor, Regional and Community Planning 
Halifax Regional Municipality
Tel.: 902-490-4373
E-mail: wellsr@halifax.ca 
30 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Preparing for Storm Surges in Annapolis Royal, 
Nova Scotia
Small communities can take practical steps to reduce their climate 
vulnerability
Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia, is a coastal community with a population of approximately  
500 located on the southern shore of the Bay of Fundy. A significant area of the town is  
low-lying, an attribute that, along with rising sea levels and the fact that land has been  
sinking for thousands of years, makes it increasingly vulnerable to flooding.
Finding critical data with  
limited resources
The Clean Annapolis River Project (CARP) searched records 
from museums, newspapers and historical societies to 
discover the types of events that occurred in the past and 
to estimate changes in climatic and tidal factors. The most 
severe event, the Saxby Gale of October 4–5, 1869, was 
used as a model for flood predictions.
Finding precise terrain elevation data was also crucial to 
the Tidal Surge Project. The standard contour interval in 
the 1:10 000 digital maps is 5 m. This is insufficient when a 
few centimetres can be the difference between a disastrous 
flood and a non-event. Instead, CARP obtained paper maps 
from 1980 at a 1:2000 scale with 2 m contours and spot 
elevations of 10 cm. With this more detailed information, 
it was able to determine the locations most at risk from 
tidal surge flows and the areas most in danger of flooding. 
Further studies have added yet a higher level of detail (see 
next inset box).
Climate change will cause coastal communities to experience 
a rise in sea level and likely increases in the frequency and  
intensity of storm surges and coastal erosion. Annapolis 
Royal residents wanted to know whether the risk of flooding 
would increase in the future and what infrastructure, such 
as roads, bridges and buildings, would be vulnerable. Of  
particular concern was the large number of heritage buildings 
of national significance in the Fundy region.
A citizens-based group, CARP, undertook the Tidal Surge 
Project in 1998 to assess the town’s vulnerability to storm 
surges. The goal was to identify and gather information  
on potential threats, including floods during times of 
extreme tides and storm surges, so the community could 
put appropriate emergency-response plans and procedures 
in place. 
CARP discovered that a tidal surge during a severe storm 
was a rare but real threat to coastal zones in their region, 
particularly if it occurred concurrently with an unusually 
high tide (the latter happens several times each year). Using 
future climate change scenarios and resulting sea-level 
rise predictions, storm surge floods were mapped. With 
the information gathered, CARP was able to identify wide 
potential risk zones for tidal surge flooding and possible 
implications for people in the region. 
Photo courtes y o f Paul Ill sle y
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  31
C h a p t e r  3  —  C a s e  s t u d i e S
The results of the project were presented to citizens in a 
series of public forums. These were followed in the spring 
of 1999 by a mock disaster scenario that engaged local 
fire, medical and emergency response teams. The public 
was also involved, allowing citizens to observe the potential 
effects that a flood might have on their lives and enabling 
them to explore how to minimize property damage and 
harm during a real disaster.
Continued improvement:  
2008 flooding scenario maps
The Groundhog Day storm with 50 years of projected sea-level rise.
To develop improved flooding maps, the Applied Geomatics 
Research Group conducted a LiDAR survey that used an 
airborne laser to scan the ground to obtain elevation data 
to an accuracy of ±15 cm. The team then created flood 
risk maps with these data, GIS and software developed in-
house, called “the Water Modeller.” The 1976 Groundhog 
Day storm, during which a high tide coincided with a storm 
surge, was used as benchmark for flooding. An accurate 
record of water levels achieved during the Groundhog Day 
storm was obtained from the tide gauge in Saint John, 
New Brunswick, which lies across the Bay of Fundy from 
Annapolis Royal. Future sea-level rise from climate change 
was then incorporated into the risk statistics and the final 
maps. To calculate sea levels, the following factors were 
considered:
•	 projected global sea-level rise – 50 cm in the next 
century, from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (2007).
•	 crustal motion (uplift or subsistence) – The Fundy 
region of Nova Scotia is sinking at a rate of 20 cm per 
century.
•	 tidal range – The Bay of Fundy tidal range is expected 
to increase by 10 cm over the next century with increasing 
sea levels.
The resulting flooding maps can be readily updated to 
reflect improved estimates of global sea-level rise.
In response, various adaptive planning measures were 
taken. These include a renewed focus on the need to both 
raise and properly maintain dikes, issues which have been 
acknowledged by the provincial government. The maps 
revealed that during a major flooding event, the fire hall, 
which is situated on a small rise, would become an island 
separated from the rest of the community. Subsequently, 
the Fire Department acquired a boat and modified its 
emergency response plans, including the relocation of 
much of the rescue equipment (previously stored solely  
at the station). One homeowner particularly at risk  
decided to raise his home by more than half a metre. 
CARP’s original Tidal Surge Project led to an important spinoff. 
In 2005 a team of scientists from the Applied Geomatics 
Research Group (AGRG) at the Centre of Geographic Sciences 
(COGS) in nearby Lawrencetown set out to develop high-
resolution maps that more accurately visualize future 
flooding scenarios for the Fundy region of Nova Scotia.  
The resulting maps, published in 2008, allow Annapolis 
Royal and other coastal communities in the region to  
better plan for the future.
Municipal staff in Annapolis Royal use the AGRG maps  
to inform potential developers of risks from storm surges. 
In addition, staff have been actively engaging various 
stakeholders in the Fundy region to develop a coordinated 
regional approach to tackling future flooding problems. 
CARP’s work demonstrates that even with limited resources, 
communities can reduce the uncertainty of climate change 
effects and find ways to adapt. Actions taken by the town 
serve to reduce current vulnerability to storm surge flooding 
and will continue to be built upon, as estimates of future 
sea-level rise improve. 
Annapolis Royal municipal staff look forward to continuing 
to work with partners and various stakeholders to place 
the impacts of climate change, and associated storm surge 
flooding, higher on the regional agenda.
Contact:
Amery Boyer
CAO, Town of Annapolis Royal
Tel.: 902-532-3146
E-mail: cao@annapolisroyal.com 
Steve Hawboldt
Executive Director
Clean Annapolis River Project 
Tel.: 902-532-7533
E-mail: carp@annapolisriver.ca
32 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
Adaptation involves a wide range of actors: individuals, 
community groups, civil society, the private sector and all 
orders of government. A proactive adaptation approach 
– which involves consideration of climate change impacts 
in planning processes – reduces short- and long-term risks 
and avoids the significantly higher costs associated with 
reactive measures. Collective approaches can help achieve 
multiple policy goals for various orders of government.  
The implementation of adaptation measures is essential  
for municipal governments to protect the well-being of 
citizens and to manage public resources effectively. 
Successful adaptation actions require planning and 
appropriately resourced strategies. Mainstreaming 
adaptation into existing and new municipal plans,  
policies and regulations – including capital, infrastructure, 
land use and emergency response plans – may be the  
most efficient means of reducing vulnerability to climate 
change while also contributing to other sustainable 
development goals. Nevertheless, some communities  
facing acute impacts may choose to develop detailed 
climate change adaptation plans to address local priorities. 
Information resources are available to help municipalities, 
whether they are just starting to think about adaptation, 
conducting a vulnerability assessment or preparing to plan 
and implement discreet adaptation measures. As a start, 
Appendix B includes Web sites and resources on climate 
change impacts and adaptation, ranging from material 
created for a general audience to resources intended for 
the scientific community. General information is readily 
accessible, and regionally specific resources are constantly 
evolving.
Chapter 4  
Moving forward with planned 
adaptation
Photo courtes y o f diav ik diamon d mines inc .
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  33
Appendix A: Climate models
Climate models and scenarios: Tools to glimpse the future
The scientific understanding and projection of anticipated changes in our future climate (and its associated 
variability) is a rapidly evolving research field. Nonetheless, a clear picture of the expected changes in global 
climate is emerging, and there is increasing confidence in the prediction of climate trends at the regional level. 
Climate models are the primary tools used to assess future climate.
Climate models are computer programs that simulate  
the climate system’s behaviour based on the fundamental 
laws of physics. Although they are the best available 
representation of the planet’s climate, they are only a 
simplified version of natural processes. There are two types 
of models: global climate models (GCMs), which simulate 
coarse planet climate dynamics with a horizontal spatial 
resolution of 250 kilometres (km) × 250 km, and regional 
climate models (RCMs), which cover a limited area with  
a finer resolution of approximately 50 km × 50 km.
Figures 1 and 2 provide examples of the type of 
information on future climate that can be accessed  
through the Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network 
(CCCSN). These figures show mean differences in annual 
temperature and precipitation patterns of the future  
period (2041–2070 – a.k.a. 2050s) compared with  
the historical period (1961–1990). The figures are an 
ensemble of two versions (4.2.0 and 4.2.3) of the Canadian 
Regional Climate Model (CRCM), with boundary conditions 
established by output of the third generation of the 
Canadian Global Coupled Circulation Model. The output 
from the two versions are averaged during the historical 
period and again for the future period. The differences 
between the two periods are presented in the figures. 
The future projections are based on a high-level of global 
socio-economic growth and no change in the relative 
consumption of renewable versus non-renewable energy 
resources (SRES-A2 scenario, IPCC 2000). 
Figures 1 and 2 represent only one possible future Canadian 
climate as analysed by the CRCM. Simulations from other 
RCMs, which may use different nesting data (GCMs),  
different time periods or different greenhouse gas emission  
scenarios, will produce different results from those shown  
here. Also, each climate model contains inherent uncertainties 
Figure 1: Change in mean temperature (˚C) over Canada in the 2050s from the 1961–1990 historical baseline
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Winter
Ensemble of two versions of CRCM (see text), courtesy of the Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (www.cccsn.ca).  
Please note that the legends differ for each map.
Figure 2: Change in mean precipitation (%) over Canada in the 2050s from the 1961–1990 historical baseline
Spring
Summer
Autumn
Winter
Ensemble of two versions of CRCM (see text), courtesy of the Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (www.cccsn.ca).  
Please note that the legends differ for each map.   
34 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
A p p e n d i x  A :  C l i m a t e  m o d e l s
related to the hypotheses and the simplifications of the 
real world on which it is based. Consequently, municipal 
governments are strongly encouraged to use several 
climate models and scenarios to evaluate and compare 
climate change outcomes for their region. An “ensemble 
approach,” in which the projections from many models 
are averaged, is useful because individual model biases 
are removed. The CCCSN recently produced an ensemble 
projection of seasonal temperature and precipitation 
change across Canada by using all available GCMs from 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fourth 
Assessment Report (IPCC 2007). 
Climate models are not yet at the spatial and temporal scales  
of resolution that correspond to many extreme weather 
events such as thunderstorms and extreme rainfall. Note  
also that changes in average seasonal rainfall are insufficient 
to assess changes in drought or flood conditions for a 
specific area. 
Climate models provide the virtual meteorological data  
that feed into the construction of climate scenarios. Climate 
models and climate scenarios are part of a suite of tools 
that can be used to determine likely impacts of climate 
changes for a region.
Learn more
Canada is a world leader in the development of climate 
models and climate scenarios. The following resources 
provide information on the understanding of future climate 
change, the work started and future research directions.
The Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and 
Analysis develops numerous versions of the Canadian 
global climate model, provides climate data for these 
models and distributes data for the Canadian Regional 
Climate Model (CRCM). 
www.cccma.bc.ec.gc.ca 
The Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network 
(CCCSN) is Environment Canada’s interface for distributing 
information about climate change scenarios and adaptation 
research. 
www.cccsn.ca 
The Ouranos consortium climate simulations team 
developed the CRCM and uses multiple versions of the  
same model to provide regional climate projections. 
www.ouranos.ca 
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  35
National
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, 
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan), facilitates the 
generation and sharing of knowledge, tools and 
mechanisms to integrate adaptation into policy,  
plans and projects. 
www.adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca
Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (CCCSN) 
is Environment Canada’s vehicle for distributing climate 
change scenarios and adaptation research from national 
and regional perspectives.
http://www.cccsn.ca 
Climate Change and Health is Health Canada’s resource 
for researchers and decision-makers to better understand 
how a changing climate will affect human health and to 
determine the best ways to prepare for these changes.
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/climat/index_e.html 
Climate Change Geoscience Program, Natural 
Resources Canada, provides planners, decision-makers 
and the general public with access to a source of credible 
scientific information on the risks and opportunities faced 
by Canadian communities and industries as a result of a 
changing climate.
http://ess.nrcan.gc.ca/ercc-rrcc/index_e.php 
Canada’s Action on Climate Change is the Government 
of Canada’s Web site on action on climate change across 
domestic, continental and international fronts.
http://www.climatechange.gc.ca 
The Partners for Climate Protection program of the 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities is a network of 
Canadian municipal governments that have committed to 
reducing greenhouse gases and acting on climate change. 
www.sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca/partners-for-climate-
protection. 
ICLEI Canada – Local Governments for Sustainability 
is part of an international association of local governments 
that have made a commitment to sustainable development.
http://www.iclei.org/index.php?id=611
Planning for Climate Change is a Web site maintained 
by the Canadian Institute of Planners for disseminating 
urban planning-related climate change information to its 
members and the public.
www.planningforclimatechange.ca 
Regional
ArcticNet is part of the Networks of Centres of Excellence 
of Canada, which bring together scientists and managers 
in the natural, human health and social sciences with their 
partners in Inuit organizations, northern communities, 
federal and provincial agencies and the private sector 
to study the impacts of climate change in the coastal 
Canadian Arctic.
www.arcticnet.ulaval.ca 
Managing the Risks of Climate Change – A Guide  
for Arctic and Northern Communities was developed 
by the Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources (a 
national, First Nations-directed environmental non-profit 
organization) to provide northern communities with a 
simple and practical risk management process. 
www.ccrm.cier.ca 
Ouranos is a Quebec-based consortium on regional 
climatology and adaptation to climate change. Ouranos 
develops and adapts the necessary tools to provide 
decision makers with detailed climate change scenarios  
on a regional scale. It also performs evaluations of expected 
sectoral impacts to optimize adaptation strategies. The 
Climate Simulations team at Ouranos develops and uses 
Canadian Regional Climate Model (CRCM) to provide 
regional climate data.
http://www.ouranos.ca 
Plan2Adapt (a site developed by the Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium) features a tool designed to help 
communities assess the impacts of climate change in  
their region through the generation of high-resolution 
maps, graphs and data tables.
http://www.plan2adapt.ca 
Appendix B: Information and resources
Useful climate change Web sites
The following Web sites provide general information on climate change science, greenhouse gases and 
emissions, and taking action on climate change.
36 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
A p p e n d i x  B :  I n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  r e s o u r c e s
The Northern Climate ExChange (NCE) is a source of 
climate change information for Northern Canada. NCE’s 
mandate is to provide independent information, develop 
shared understanding and promote action on climate 
change.
http://www.taiga.net/nce 
The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium is dedicated 
to stimulating collaboration to produce practical climate 
information for education, policy and decision making  
in the Pacific Northwest.
www.pacificclimate.org 
The Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative is a 
multijurisdictional partnership that pursues climate change 
impacts and adaptation research in the Prairie provinces.
www.parc.ca 
International
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is 
the leading body for the assessment of climate change, 
established by the United Nations Environment Programme 
and the World Meteorological Organization to provide the 
world with a clear, scientific view on the state of climate 
change and its potential environmental and socio-economic 
consequences.
www.ipcc.ch
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change is the international treaty whose ultimate objective 
is the stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in 
the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic interference with the climate system.
www.unfccc.int/adaptation/items/4159.php
weADAPT is a collaborative platform for climate 
adaptation that draws together a wide range of partners  
to share experience, tools and case studies to create a 
dynamic community and knowledge base for adaptation.
www.weadapt.org
Natural Resource Canada’s Climate Change Impacts and 
Adaptation Division provides a comprehensive and up-to-
date list of Canadian and international adaptation-related  
Web sites: 
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/li_e.php 
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  37
Adaptation: Adjustment in natural or human systems in 
response to actual or expected climate stimuli and their 
effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial 
opportunities. There are various types of adaptation, 
including anticipatory, autonomous and planned 
adaptation.
Adaptive capacity: The whole of capabilities, resources 
and institutions of a country, region, community or group 
to implement effective adaptation measures.
Climate: Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as 
the average weather or, more rigorously, as the statistical 
description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant 
variables over a period of time ranging from months to 
thousands or millions of years. Variables taken into account 
most often include surface temperature, precipitation  
and wind. Climate in a wider sense is the state, including  
a statistical description, of the climate system.
Climate change: Climate change refers to a change in 
the state of the climate that can be identified (e.g. by using 
statistical tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability 
of its properties, and that persists for an extended period, 
typically decades or longer. Climate change may be due 
to natural internal processes or external forcing factors, or 
to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition 
of the atmosphere or in land use. Note that the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) defines climate change as “a change of climate 
which is attributed directly or indirectly to human activity 
that alters the composition of the global atmosphere and 
which is in addition to natural climate variability observed 
over comparable time periods.” The UNFCCC thus makes a 
distinction between climate change attributable to human 
activities altering the atmospheric composition, and climate 
variability attributable to natural causes.
Climate projection: The calculated response of the 
climate system to emissions or concentration scenarios 
of greenhouse gases and aerosols, or radiative forcing 
scenarios, often based on simulations by climate models. 
Because climate projections are based on assumptions 
concerning, for example, future socioeconomic and 
technological developments that may or may not 
be realized, they are therefore subject to substantial 
uncertainty.
Climate scenario: A plausible and often simplified 
representation of the future climate, based on an  
internally consistent set of climatological relationships  
and assumptions of radiative forcing, typically constructed  
for explicit use as input to climate change impact models. 
A “climate change scenario” is the difference between a 
climate scenario and the current climate.
Climate variability: Variations in the mean and other 
statistics (e.g. standard deviations, the occurrence of 
extremes, etc.) of the climate on all temporal and spatial 
scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability 
may be due to natural internal processes within the climate 
system or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external 
forcing.
Extreme weather event: An event that is rare within 
its statistical reference distribution at a particular place. 
Definitions of “rare” vary, but an extreme weather event 
would normally be as rare as, or rarer than, the 10th or 
90th percentile. By definition, the characteristics of what  
is called “extreme weather” may vary from place to place.
Greenhouse gas: Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, 
both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit 
radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of 
infrared radiation emitted by the Earth ’s surface, by the 
atmosphere itself and by clouds. Water vapour (H2O), 
carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) 
and ozone (O2) are the primary greenhouse gases in the 
Earth’s atmosphere. In addition, there are a number of 
entirely human-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, 
such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-
containing substances.
(climate change) Impacts: The adverse and beneficial 
effects of climate change on natural and human systems. 
Depending on the consideration of adaptation, one can 
distinguish between potential impacts and residual impacts.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC): A panel established by the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO) and the United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP) in 1988 to assess scientific, technical and 
socioeconomic information relevant for the understanding  
of climate change, its potential impacts, and options for 
adaptation and mitigation.
Mainstreaming: In the context of adaptation, mainstreaming 
refers to the integration of adaptation considerations 
(or climate risks) such that they become part of policies, 
programs and operations at all levels of decision making. 
The goal is to make the adaptation process a component  
of existing decision-making and planning frameworks.
Appendix C: Climate change terminology
Adapted from Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007)
38 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
A p p e n d i x  C :  C l i m a t e  c h a n g e  t e r m i n o l o g y
Mitigation: In the context of climate change, mitigation is 
an anthropogenic intervention to reduce the anthropogenic 
forcing of the climate system; it includes strategies to 
reduce greenhouse gas sources and emissions and enhance 
greenhouse gas sinks.
“No regrets” policy/measure: A policy or measure 
that would generate net social and/or economic benefits 
irrespective of whether or not climate change occurs.
Permafrost: Ground (soil or rock and included ice and 
organic material) that remains at or below 0°C for at least 
two consecutive years.
Precautionary principle: It absorbs notions of risk 
prevention, cost effectiveness, ethical responsibilities 
toward maintaining the integrity of human and natural 
systems, and the fallibility of human understanding. The 
application of the precautionary principle or approach 
recognizes that the absence of full scientific certainty  
shall not be used to postpone decisions where there  
is a risk of serious or irreversible harm.
Resilience: The ability of a social or ecological system 
to absorb disturbances while retaining the same basic 
structure and ways of functioning, the same capacity  
for self-organization and the same capacity to adapt  
to stress and change.
Risk: A combination of the likelihood (probability of 
occurrence) and the consequences of an adverse event  
(e.g. climate-related hazard).
Risk management: A systematic approach to setting 
the best course of action under uncertainty, by applying 
management policies, procedures and practices to the tasks 
of analysing, evaluating, controlling and communicating 
about risk issues.
Salt-water intrusion: Displacement of fresh surface water 
or groundwater by the advance of salt water due to its 
greater density. This usually occurs in coastal and estuarine 
areas due to reducing land-based influence (e.g. either 
from reduced runoff and associated groundwater recharge, 
or from excessive water withdrawals from aquifers) or 
increasing marine influence (e.g. relative sea-level rise).
Sea ice: Any form of ice found at sea that has originated 
from the freezing of sea water. Sea ice may be discontinuous 
pieces (ice floes) moved on the ocean surface by wind and 
currents (pack ice) or a motionless sheet attached to the 
coast (land-fast ice). Sea ice less than one year old is called 
first-year ice. Multiyear ice is sea ice that has survived at 
least one summer melt season.
Sea-level rise: An increase in the mean level of the ocean. 
Eustatic sea-level rise is a change in global average sea level 
brought about by an increase in the volume of the world 
ocean. Relative sea-level rise occurs where there is a local 
increase in the level of the ocean relative to the land, which 
might be due to ocean rise and/or land-level subsidence.  
In areas subject to rapid land-level uplift, relative sea level 
can fall.
Sensitivity: Sensitivity is the degree to which a system 
is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate 
variability or climate change. The effect may be direct  
(e.g. a change in crop yield in response to a change in  
the mean, range or variability of temperature) or indirect 
(e.g. damage caused by an increase in the frequency of 
coastal flooding due to sea-level rise).
Stakeholder: A person or an organization that has a 
legitimate interest in a project or entity, or would be 
affected by a particular action or policy.
Storm surge: Generally used to refer to a temporary 
increase, at a particular locality, in the height of the sea 
due to extreme meteorological conditions (low atmospheric 
pressure and/or strong winds). The storm surge is defined 
as being the excess above the level expected from the tidal  
variation alone at that time and place. Negative storm surges  
also occur and can present significant problems for navigation.
Tools (for adaptation): Methodologies, guidelines and 
processes that enable stakeholders to assess the implications 
of climate change impacts and relevant adaptation options 
in the context of their operating environment. Tools may 
occur in a variety of formats and have diverse applications: 
crosscutting or multidisciplinary (e.g. climate models, 
scenario-building methods, stakeholder analysis, decision-
support tools, decision-analytical tools) to specific sectoral 
applications (e.g. crop or vegetation models, methods for 
coastal-zone vulnerability assessment).
Traditional knowledge: A cumulative body of knowledge, 
practice and belief, evolving by adaptive processes and 
handed down through generations by cultural transmission, 
about the relationship of living beings (including humans) 
with one another and with their environment.
Vulnerability: Vulnerability is the susceptibility to be 
harmed. Vulnerability to climate change is the degree 
to which a system is susceptible to, and unable to cope 
with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate 
variability and extremes. Vulnerability to climate change is 
a function of the character, magnitude and rate of climate 
variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity and its 
adaptive capacity.
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  39
Bizikova, L., Neale, T. and Burton, I. (2008). Canadian Communities’ 
Guidebook for Adaptation to Climate Change. Including an approach 
to generate mitigation co-benefits in the context of sustainable 
development. First Edition. Vancouver, B.C.: Environment Canada and 
University of British Columbia.
Black, R. A., Bruce, J. P. and Egener, M. (2010). Adapting to Climate 
Change: A Risk-based Guide for Local Governments in British 
Columbia. Ottawa, Ont.: Summit Enterprises International Inc.
Deloitte. (2010). Climate Change Adaptation Framework Manual. 
Edmonton, Alta.: Government of Alberta. Retrieved June 8, 2010, 
from www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsFormsPublications/Publications/
ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx.
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM). (2009). Partners for 
Climate Protection – Municipal Resources for Adapting to Climate 
Change. Ottawa, Ont.: FCM. Retrieved July 16, 2010, from www.
sustainablecommunities.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/PCP_
Resources/Mun-Re-_Adapting-Climate-Change-e.pdf.
Hallegatte, S. (2009). Strategies to adapt to an uncertain climate 
change. Traditional Peoples and Climate Change, 19(2), 240–247. 
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6VFV-4VNCBYR-1/2/0ada4d
eadb3cb5d2278e60012b35e24e
ICLEI Canada. (2010). Changing Climate, Changing Communities: 
Guide and Workbook for Municipal Climate Adaptation. Toronto, 
Ont.: ICLEI Canada. Retrieved September 20, 2010, from  
http://www.iclei.org/index.php?id=11710.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2007). Climate Change 
2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. (Summary for Policymakers). Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved January 15, 2010, from 
www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/ar4-wg2.htm.
Lemmen, D. S., Warren, F. J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.). (2008). 
From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007. 
Ottawa, Ont.: Government of Canada. Retrieved November 17, 2010, 
from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php.
Lemmen, D. S. and Warren, F. J. (Eds.). (2004). Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptation: A Canadian Perspective. Ottawa, Ont.: 
Government of Canada. Retrieved November 12, 2010, from  
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/perspective/pdf/report_e.pdf.
Mehdi, B. (Ed.). (2006). Adapting to Climate Change: An Introduction 
for Canadian Municipalities. Ottawa, Ont.: Canadian Climate Impacts 
and Adaptation Research Network. Retrieved November 10, 2009, 
from http://www.c-ciarn.ca/primer/index_e.html.
National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy (NRTEE). 
(2009). True North: Adapting Infrastructure to Climate Change in 
Northern Canada. Ottawa, Ont.: NRTEE. Retrieved from www.nrtee-
trnee.com/eng/publications/true-north/true-north-eng.pdf.
Ouranos. (2010). Élaborer un plan d’adaptation aux changements 
climatiques. Guide destiné au milieu municipal québécois. Montréal, 
Que.. Retrieved March 17, 2010, from www.ouranos.ca/media/
publication/124_PlanadaptationCC-Guidemunicipalites-Ouranos.pdf.
Séguin, J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Ottawa, Ont.: Health Canada. 
Snover, A. K., Binder, L. W., Lopez, J., Willmott, E., Kay, J. and 
Howell, D. (2007). Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for 
Local, Regional, and State Governments. Oakland, CA: ICLEI – Local 
Governments for Sustainability. Retrieved March 29, 2010, from 
www.cses.washington.edu/db/pdf/snoveretalgb574.pdf.
Annapolis Royal
Webster, T. L., Mosher, R. and Pearson, M. (2008). Water Modeler:  
A Component of a Coastal Zone Decision Support System to Generate 
Flood-risk Maps from Storm Surge Events and Sea-level Rise. Geomatica,
62(4), 393–406. 
Clyde River
Bowron, B. and Davidson, G. (2008). CIP Forays into Climate Change. 
Plan Canada, 48(1), 24–26. www.planningforclimatechange.ca/
wwwroot/Docs/Library/PlanCanada/PC4801_07.pdf
Canadian Institute of Planners (CIP). (2008). Building Community 
Capacity for Climate Change Adaptation Action Planning: Clyde River 
and Hall Beach, Nunavut – Evaluation Report. Ottawa, Ont.: CIP. 
Retrieved March 17, 2010, from www.planningforclimatechange.
ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/Evaluation%20Report%20
Building%20Community%20Capacity%20for%20Climate%20
Change%20Adaptation%20Action%20Planning.%20Clyde%20
River%20and%20Hall%20Bea.pdf.
Hamlet of Clyde River Ittaq, Heritage Research Centre, Canadian 
Institute of Planners and Natural Resources Canada. (2008). 
Climate Change Adaptation Action Plan, Clyde River, Nunavut. 
Retrieved March 16, 2010, from www.planningforclimatechange.ca/
wwwroot/Docs/Library/CommAdptPlans/Climate%20Change%20
Adaptation%20Action%20Plan%20Clyde%20River,%20Nunavut.pdf. 
Edmonton
City of Edmonton. (2009). Urban Forestry. Retrieved December 
20, 2009, from www.edmonton.ca/environmental/conservation_
landscaping/urban-forestry.aspx.
City of Edmonton. (2010). Draft Urban Forest Management Plan. 
Edmonton, Alta.
Halifax
Forbes, D. L., Manson, G. K., Charles, J., Thompson, K. R. and Taylor, 
R. B. (2009). Halifax Harbour Extreme Water Levels in the Context of 
Climate Change: Scenarios for a 100-year Planning Horizon. Ottawa, 
Ont.: Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 6346, iv+22 p.  
http://geopub.nrcan.gc.ca/moreinfo_e.php?id=248196
Halifax Regional Municipality, Geological Survey of Canada and 
Natural Resources Canada. (2010, February 9). Sea Level Rise 
Adaptation Planning for Halifax Harbour. Halifax, N.S.: Presentation 
to the Committee-of-the-Whole - Halifax Regional Council. Retrieved 
February 26, 2010, from www.halifax.ca/council/agendasc/
documents/100209cow4.pdf.
Natural Resources Canada. (2009). Coastal Vulnerability in the Halifax 
Regional Municipality. Ottawa, Ont.: Climate Change Geoscience 
Program. Retrieved January 27, 2010, from http://ess.nrcan.gc.ca/ercc-
rrcc/proj2/theme1/act2_e.php.
References
40 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
R e f e r e n c e s
Kamloops
Buchan, R. (2002). An Interface Fire Hazard Planning Model: A Case 
Study of the District of Langford. Victoria, B.C.: District of Langford. 
Retrieved November 5, 2010, from www.cityoflangford.ca/documents/
brochures/FireInterface_Doc.pdf.
City of Kamloops. (2006). Kamloops Fire Rescue. Retrieved December 
15, 2010, from www.city.kamloops.bc.ca/firerescue/wildfire/
wildfireoverview.shtml.
City of Kamloops FireSmart Committee. (2008). City of Kamloops 
Community Wildfire Protection Plan. Kamloops, B.C.: City of 
Kamloops. Retrieved November 25, 2009, from www.city.kamloops.
bc.ca/trees/media/cwpp.pdf.
Filmon, G. (2004). Firestorm 2003 – Provincial Review. Vancouver, 
B.C.: British Columbia Government. Retrieved December 10, 
2010, from http://www.2003firestorm.gov.bc.ca/firestormreport/
FirestormReport.pdf.
Partners in Protection. (2003). Fire Smart: Protecting Your Community 
From Wildfire. 2nd ed. Edmonton, Alta.: Partners in Protection. 
Retrieved January 7, 2010, from www.partnersinprotection.ab.ca.
Le Goulet
Chouinard, O. and Martin, G. (2007). Un plan communautaire pour 
l’adaptation au changement climatique pour Le Goulet, Nouveau-
Brunswick. Moncton, N.B.: Université de Moncton. Retrieved 
December 12, 2009, from http://www.zipnord.qc.ca/forumerosion/
PDF/PlanLeGoulet_VersionPreliminaire2007.pdf.
Chouinard, O., Plante, S. and Martin, G. (2008). The Community 
Engagement Process: A Governance Approach in Adaptation to 
Coastal Erosion and Flooding in Atlantic Canada. Canadian Journal 
of Regional Science, 31(3), 507–520. 
London
King, L., Solaiman, T. and Simonovic, S. P. (2009). Assessment of 
Climatic Vulnerability in the Upper Thames River Basin. London, Ont.: 
Facility for Intelligent Decision Support, Department of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering.
Mortsch, L. and Hebb, A. J. (2008). Assessing Vulnerability to  
Climate Change and Flooding in the City of London, Upper  
Thames River Basin, Ontario. Plan Canada, 48(1), 41–44. 
www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/
PlanCanada/PC4801_12.pdf
Steblin, P. W. (2007, December 10). Review of Rainfall Intensity 
Duration frequency curves for City of London under climate change. 
London, Ont.: Environment and Transportation Committee – City 
of London. Retrieved from http://council.london.ca/meetings/
Archives/Agendas/Environment%20and%20Transportation%20
Committee%20Agendas/ETC%20Agendas%202008/2007-12-10%20
Agenda/item%206.pdf.
Québec City
Alibert, M. (2008). Plan d’adaptation aux changements climatiques : 
Activités du Service de l’environnement de la Ville de Québec. 
Québec, Que.
Regina
City of Regina. Xeriscape Workbook – A practical guide to low-water, 
low-maintenance landscaping. 4th Edition. Retrieved June 14, 2010, 
from www.regina.ca/AssetFactory.aspx?did=3708.
City of Regina. (2010). Save water & save money. Retrieved June 16, 
2010, from www.regina.ca/Page421.aspx.
Engineering & Works Department – City of Regina. (2009, February 
17). Expanded Water Conservation Program. Works and Utilities 
Committee – City of Regina. Retrieved June 19, 2010, from www.
regina.ca/AssetFactory.aspx?did=2466.
Upper Qu’Appelle River and Wascana Creek Watersheds Advisory 
Committees. (2008). Getting To The Source: Upper Qu’Appelle 
River and Wascana Creek Watersheds Source Water Protection Plan. 
Saskatchewan Watershed Authority. Retrieved June 27, 2010, from 
http://wuqwatr.ca/assets/pdf/UQW%20SSWP.pdf.
Toronto
City of Toronto. (2008). Ahead of the Storm: Preparing Toronto for 
Climate Change. Toronto, Ont.: City of Toronto. Retrieved April 3, 
2010, from www.toronto.ca/teo/pdf/ahead_of_the_storm.pdf.
City of Toronto. (2010). Heat Alerts and Extreme Heat Alerts. 
Retrieved April 3, 2010, from www.toronto.ca/health/heatalerts/
index.htm.
Medical Officer of Health. (2010, March 4). Hot Weather Response 
Plan Update. Toronto, Ont.: City of Toronto. Retrieved June 17, 
2010, from http://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/hl/bgrd/
backgroundfile-28173.pdf.
Toronto Public Health. (2010). Healthy People Healthy Environment: 
Reports and Publications — Air Quality / Climate change. Toronto, 
Ont.: City of Toronto. Retrieved May 20, 2010, from www.toronto.ca/
health/hphe/air_quality/climate.htm.
Vancouver
Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd., & Associated Engineering. (2008, 
March). Vulnerability of Vancouver Sewerage Area Infrastructure to 
Climate Change. Vancouver, B.C.: Metro Vancouver. Retrieved May 
7, 2010, from www.metrovancouver.org/planning/ClimateChange/
ClimateChangeDocs/Vulnerability_climate_change.pdf.
Metro Vancouver. (2009). Draft Liquid Waste Management Plan. 
Vancouver, B.C. Retrieved July 2, 2010, from http://www.public.
metrovancouver.org/about/publications/Publications/March_2009_
Draft_LWMP.pdf.
Metro Vancouver. (2010). Wastewater Collection and Treatment – 
Planning. Vancouver, B.C.: Metro Vancouver. Retrieved June 16, 2010, 
from www.metrovancouver.org/services/wastewater/planning/Pages/
default.aspx.
A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e  —  41
42 —  A d a p t i n g  t o  C l i m a t e  C h a n g e
