66
67
OXFORD COUNTY
Adapting to extreme heat – 
perspectives from rural Southwestern 
Ontario
By Jay Storfer
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
During an extreme heat event, effective communication between local agencies as 
well as with the public is essential. Rural and smaller urban communities are home 
to many heat-vulnerable individuals, including a rapidly growing older population 
and certain occupational groups (e.g. farmers, foresters, fishers, and other labourers 
doing outdoor work). Rural regions can also face unique challenges in developing and 
implementing heat-health preventative actions due to limited resources and expertise, 
proximity and access to health services, a smaller number of community support 
organizations and facilities, limited media for communicating in real time with local 
populations during an event and, finally, a greater likelihood of people being isolated 
or without public transportation compared with those living in urban settings.
At the same time, rural communities have particular characteristics that can support 
the adoption of community-based strategies to minimize heat-health risks and 
enhance response efforts. Identifying and understanding the vulnerabilities that may 
threaten a specific community and the resources that can be leveraged during an 
emergency are key steps in building resiliency. 
Oxford County (population 106,000) is a primarily rural area located in 
Southwestern Ontario that consists of one city, two towns and five townships. 
Historically, Southwestern Ontario has experienced some of the highest recorded 
temperatures and humidex values in the country. Due to climate change, this region is 
expected to experience a doubling of days over 30°C by mid-century. 
THE TRIGGER
An emergency heat event requires the participation of many parts of society 
during the alert, response and recovery phases. A comprehensive risk management 
approach to extreme heat necessitates effective partnerships among different levels 
of government, first responders, the private sector, volunteers, and community-based 
NGOs. In Ontario, a large number of communities have developed different 
thresholds for calling alerts, communication protocols and response mechanisms over 
time. 
By 2012, Oxford County Public Health and Emergency Services had committed to 
understanding and effectively managing the health risks and impacts from extreme 
heat. The County actively engaged neighbouring public health units and participated 
in multi-stakeholder workshops to collect information on key issues such as effective 
heat-health risk communication, interactions between medications and heat and 
methods for assessing community-level vulnerabilities. This information supported the 
development of a county-wide Heat Alert and Response System. 
THE APPROACH
The County used an extreme heat tabletop exercise to identify the best way to 
coordinate a community response to an extreme heat event among the County’s 
departments, area municipalities, local organizations, and healthcare facilities. 
68
69
Recognizing the opportunity to engage a broad range of community partners about 
heat and health, Oxford County held the tabletop exercise in conjunction with the 
County’s annual emergency preparedness, response education, and training event. 
The all-day event began with a series of background presentations on the impacts 
of heat on vulnerable populations, regional climatology, interactions between heat 
and medications, and local services for a response. Participants then worked through 
a series of worsening heat scenarios within a controlled situational environment 
to test a planned heat alert activation and response before shifting to community 
recovery. Participants were asked to consider roles and responsibilities within their 
organization, existing procedures, as well as possible actions and decision-making. The 
scenarios developed emphasized exploration of community response capacity related 
to different possible situations, such as well-water contamination, power outages, 
community isolation and disposal of dead live stock.    
THE OUTCOME
The exercise was a useful tool to raise awareness of this growing public health issue, 
identify gaps in existing risk management processes, and provide an opportunity to 
improve local response capabilities. Using the exercise as an education and training 
session was a highly successful approach to engaging partners and stakeholders. Close 
to 100 participants attended the tabletop exercise and it was one of the largest 
exercises of that nature facilitated by the County. 
Figure 17: The exercise conducted in Oxford County revealed that communication between 
affected agencies, the general public and the emergency operations centre is essential.  (Source: 
Adobe Stock Photo)
The County was able to gain valuable insights about vulnerabilities in their community 
and the measures needed to address them. Four key themes emerged from the 
exercise:
•	
Communication between affected agencies, the general public and the 
emergency operations centre is essential. The exercise provided the first 
opportunity for these units to come together to discuss response communication 
(e.g. who is responsible for issuing a heat alert, who declares an emergency and 
informs the public in a timely manner?).
•	
Many agencies that participated in the exercise identified the importance of 
reviewing their current policies (if they exist) on extreme heat.
•	
Informing the public is a delicate balance between being proactive and 
desensitizing the population, especially those most vulnerable to heat.
•	
There are resource challenges for rural emergency management operations. 
Resource demands were frequently mentioned by participants throughout the 
exercise.
Examining the coordination of efforts to respond to extreme heat in a participatory 
fashion permitted Oxford County to work towards developing a robust Heat Alert 
and Response System for the region. 
A WORD FROM OXFORD COUNTY
When asked what advice he would provide to a rural community looking to develop 
a Heat Alert and Response System, Peter Heywood, Manager, Health Protection 
for Oxford County Public Health and Emergency Services suggested that “during 
a heat emergency, the response to vulnerable populations in rural communities, 
including older adults, requires special consideration and care.” In Oxford County, 
the 55+ population is proportionally larger and increasing at a slightly faster rate 
than the Ontario average. Looking forward, this has implications for Oxford County 
with respect to the accessibility of this population to services, including public 
transportation and cooling centres. It also impacts how heat-related information is 
disseminated to people residing in rural areas. Mr. Heywood recommended that 
“local public health units partner with area municipalities and community agencies 
to conduct a vulnerability assessment.” The assessment can support and guide 
heat-related response activities in rural settings. Oxford County is in the initial stages 
of an assessment and is hopeful that it will allow municipalities and community 
agencies to improve their preparedness, response and recovery activities related to 
extreme heat events, with a particular emphasis on older adults.
