Aligning Local Government
Climate Action with UNDRIP
CONTENTS
Introduction
Context: Legal Duties and Obligations of Local Governments to
 Indigenous Peoples
Context: BC First Province to Adopt UNDRIP
Key Resources
Learning From Early Adopters & Action Takers: UNDRIP & Local
 Government Case Studies
Approach & Methods for Case Studies
Summary of Key Findings
Case Study Findings 
Key Approach: Tackling Racism in Cities & Towns
Key Approach: What’s in a Name?
Key Approach: Dismantling Colonial Infrastructure, Re-Indigenizing
 Cities & Towns
Key Approach: Growing from Catalyzing Events
Key Approach: Building Relationships
Key Approach: Being Bold, Breaking New Trail
Key Approach: Strategic Level Plans
Key Approach: Land Back
Key Approach: Support for Indigenous Guardians’ Monitoring
 Initiatives
Key Approach: Human Capacity, Training, Decolonizing Practices
Key Approach: Procurement, Business & Economic Reconciliation
Key Approach: Supporting More Indigenous People as Elected
 Officials & Local Government Staff
Key Approach: Working with Multiple First Nations &
 Organizations, Overlapping Territories, Urban Indigenou
s Populations
Key Approach: Accountability & Tracking UNDRIP Progress
Key Approach: Paradigm Shifts & Indigenizing Local Government
 Perspectives
Learning & Takeaways from Local Government in Advancing UNDRIP
Gaps & Supports Needed
Interviewees & About the Author
1
2
3
4
5
5
6
7
7
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
15
16
17
18
19
20
20
22
23
24
-1-
INTRODUCTION
The United Nations
 Declaration on the Rights o
f Indigenous Peopl
es (“UNDRIP”) is a fundamen
tal framework for the protec
tion of inherent Indigenous r
ights in the face of colonizat
ion at multiple levels of gove
rnment. Indigenous peoples 
globally have rallied behi
nd UNDRIP and called for its a
doption by state governments
, in Canada this primarily incl
udes federal and provincial
 governments. UNDRIP contai
ns 46 Articles affirming inhe
rent Indigenous rights an
d calls on state government
s to legislate or domesticate 
the Declaration to ensure compliance. 
Local or municipal
 governments are a child o
f provincial governments 
in Canada, and derive th
eir authority and jurisdic
tion accordingly. Local govern
ments are uniquely positio
ned to advance UNDRIP:
Closer in relationship and
 proximity to First Nation
s territorial owners, as well 
as urban Indigen
ous populations, 
Can move more nimbly or
 quickly to advanc
e UNDRIP-related efforts th
an their provincial and fede
ral counterparts. 
Contrastingly, local
 governments are als
o uniquely challenged 
in advancing UNDRIP due to:
lack of overarching
 jurisdictional powers, 
lack of resources targeting
 UNDRIP compliance, 
and varying degrees of
 political (voter) support fo
r Indigenous rights generally. 
Indigenous rights and climate
 action are intimatel
y intertwined. Local governmen
ts seeking to enact clim
ate change mitigatio
n or prevention measures
, can benefit from millennia of
 local Indigenous knowled
ge, and work in allys
hip with Indigenous gover
nments to strengthen effor
ts for the betterment of their
 respective communiti
es. Pursuing climate a
ction without Indigenous i
nvolvement not only
 deprives local governmen
ts of Indigenous knowledge, 
but threatens the possibility o
f partnerships and relationship-b
uilding. Similarly, where lo
cal governments lack know
ledge of First Nation climat
e actions within their own terr
itories or communities, they run 
the risk of operating in isolation
, duplicating efforts, or 
at worst undermining First Nation climate actions. 
-2-
CONTEXT: LEGAL DUTIES AND
OBLIGATIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
TO INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Municipal governments make a
 myriad of decisions each da
y that have the potential 
to impact Indigenous rights, la
nds and waters. Yet, the l
egal landscape on the duti
es of local governments in te
rms of consultation, accommo
dation, and now consent, is 
far from clear. 
Key cases on development in
 communities such as Salmo
n Arm, found that whi
le development in n
on-Indigenous communities 
may impact Indigenous rights, l
ands and waters, that muni
cipal governments “lack the a
bility to provide sufficient r
emedies to achieve me
aningful consult
ation and accommodation.”
In BC, the position of the courts
 has been echoed by the provincial government, that local government’s ‘do not have the provincial government’s constitutional obligation to consult with First Nations.’ Yet, many of the interviewees for this project engage routinely in ‘referrals’ that take up a large amount of time and human capacity for both First Nation and local governments.In BC, the position of the courts has been echoed by the provincial government, that local government’s ‘do not have the provincial government’s constitutional obligation to consult with First Nations.’ Yet, many of the interviewees for this project engage routinely in ‘referrals’ that take up a large amount of time and human capacity for both First Nation and local governments.
In BC, the position of the 
courts has been echoed by 
the provincial gove
rnment, that local governme
nt’s ‘do not have the prov
incial government’s constitution
al obligation to consult with
 First Nations.’ Yet, many of t
he interviewees for this proje
ct engage routinely in ‘ref
errals’ that take up a larg
e amount of time and human capacity for both First Nation and local governments.
In other provinces like Ontario,
 similar provincial court case
s have allowed municip
al governments to escape 
the duty to consult, by simply
 not addressing that question i
n one of its rulings, mak
ing an assumption that such
 a duty existed, without ever d
eclaring it. 
While the legal context and
 constitutional duties owed o
r not owed to Indigeno
us peoples by local governments
 is important context, it is not
 the driving force behind the
 case studies outlined i
n this handbook. Rather, the f
ocus of these case studies a
re those local government
s who are taking action on 
UNDRIP, in the absence of 
any form of legal duty to do so
. This is in contrast to the p
rovincial and federal govern
ments who have too ofte
n only advanced Indigenous right
s in the face of decades of lit
igation requiring them to do so. 
-3-
The government of BC was the first colonial government (federal or
provincial) in Canada to adopt and implement UNDRIP. In 2019,
following a period of engagement with the First Nations
Leadership Council, the provincial government passed the
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Act (“DRIPA”).
This act committed the provincial government to a process to
ensure that all provincial laws are consistent with UNDRIP, and an
accompanying action plan process that is guided by input from
First Nations in BC. 
While municipal governments are a child of the provincial
government, DRIPA in BC is silent on the role of municipal
governments in upholding UNDRIP. The provincial Local
Government Act, and others similar in other provinces, grant
powers, duties and functions to local governments including
municipalities and regional districts. 
Presumably, however, the Local Government Act is subject to
DRIPA and at some point, must be reviewed to ensure consistency
with UNDRIP. The current 2022-2027 DRIPA Action Plan makes no
mention of reforms to the Local Government Act nor any other
actions to ensure local governments are acting to uphold UNDRIP,
and provincial communications to the Union of BC Municipalities
states that there are “no immediate effects on local government
legislation, and provincial laws will be brought into alignment over
time.”
Interestingly, several of the local government case studies outlined
here preceded the provincial and federal governments in their
adoption of UNDRIP. It is these early adopters and action takers
that are of significance for broad learning, not only for their
leadership but for the longer-term learnings having been active
UNDRIP implementers for multiple years. 
CONTEXT: BC FIRST PROVINCE TO
ADOPT UNDRIP
Image Source: CBC News
The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 2007.
The United Nations Declarati
on on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. 2007.
The Declaration on 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples Act. 2019. Local Governm
ent Act. 2015, 2024.
City of Co
urtney Resolution, adopting UNDRIP fo
r Indigenous reconciliation.
C
ity of Toronto Report for Action 2016, adop
ting UNDRIP as part of the Cit
y’s year-long proclamatio
n on Truth and Reconciliation 2013-2014.City of Surre
y Council Report on endorsing UNDRIP as r
econciliation framework. 2017.
C
ity of Edmonton Indigenous Framework
, Commitment #1 supporting UNDRIP as a fo
undation for the Indigenous Framework. 
Manual on the Declaration by the Office 
of the High Commissioner on Human Rights. A
 manual for Human Rights Institutions. 2013.UNDRIP & You Webinar
. Hosted by the Real Estate Founda
tion of BC and Hlimoo Sustai
nable Solutions. 2023.
Optimism for Renaming Dewdney Avenue af
ter Saskatoon drops ‘John 
A. McDonald Road’. News article, 2021.ʔy̓ əy̓alməxy̓ ʷ/Iy̓álmexw /Jericho Lands to become future complete community. City of Vancouver. 2024.
ʔəy̓alməxʷ/Iy̓álmexw /Jericho Lands to be
come future comp
lete community. City of Vanco
uver. 2024.
-4-
KEY RESOURCES
-5-
Climate Caucus in partnership with Hlimoo Sustainable Solutions
 (Tara Marsden/Naxginkw) took the following steps to conduct an
d share learnings from local government case studies that are doi
ng work to advance UNDRIP:
Retained Hlimoo Sustainable Solutions, who brings extensive
 experience in applying and advancing UNDRIP at multipl
e levels.
1.
Collaborative research on potential case studies, conducting
 internet-based searches and inquiring amongst networks o
f First Nations and local governments. 
2.
Outreach to invite elected officials and senior staff from local
 governments to participate in 30-60 minute virtual recorde
d interviews.
3.
Transcription of interviews and coding for themes.
4.
Synthesis and summary of key approaches to advancing
 UNDRIP outlined in the section below.
5.
Listening to numerous Indigenous leaders and community
 members who have called for non-Indigenous people to do thei
r fair share of the work of decolonization, the focus for t
he interviews was non-Indigenous elected officials and senior st
aff (with the exception of one Indigenous elected official). 
This approach also is grounded in the theory of change that other 
local governments not well advanced in their UNDRIP work will
 learn better from people who are similar to them, and have taken 
strides where they have yet to. 
The author has taken a storytelling approach, with use of
 excerpted quotes, in as close to the original version as possibl
e from the interviews. Edits are solely for readability, and connecti
ng related concepts, or inserting hyperlinks for readers to learn mo
re. Quotes are mixed and woven throughout from all of the intervi
ews. Interviewees are listed in the Appendix, but are not individ
ually attributed for each quote. 
LEARNING FROM EARLY ADOPTERS &
ACTION TAKERS: UNDRIP & LOCAL
GOVERNMENT CASE STUDIES
Approach & Methods For Case Studies
Tackling Racism in
 Cities & Towns
What’s in a name?
Dismantling Colonial
 Infrastructure, Re
-Indigenizing Cities 
& Towns
Growing from
 Catalyzing Events
Building
 Relationships
Being Bold,
BBreaking New Trail
Strategic Level Plans
Land Back
Support for
 Indigenou
s Guardian
s’ Monitor
ing Initiatives
Human Capacity,
 Training
, Decolonizi
ng Practices
Procurement,
BBusiness 
& Econom
ic Reconciliation
Supporting More
 Indigenous Peopl
e as Elected Officials
 & Local Governm
ent Staff
Working with
 Multiple First Nation
s & Organization
s, Overlapp
ing Territories, U
rban Indig
enous Populations
Accountability &
 Tracking UNDRI
P Progress
Paradigm Shifts &
 Indigenizing Loca
l Governme
nt Perspectives
-6-
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
Key Approaches: UNDRIP in Local Government
-7-
“During COVID a  high-profile incident occurred that really unleashed an undercurrent of racism. I met with the Chief [from First Nation], and we decided to create a joint press release and media campaign (posting on socials, interviews) - calling on the community to stand together, reminding us that we are better than this. The response from community was overwhelming- they organized a convoy, in the best sense of the word! People made t-shirts, flags, signs and bumper stickers (all city vehicles took part too) that said, “I Stand with Cowichan”. Hundreds of people drove through the community, going up and down streets past houses and apartments, waving, honking, sharing uplifting messages of love and respect with Indigenous neighbors, friends and relatives, letting them know they were standing by them and standing up to racism and discrimination. Indigenous and Non Indigenous community members were standing on their porches and lawns, many in tears, and hundreds of messages posted about what that meant to people".“During COVID a  high-profile incident occurred that
 really unleashed an undercurrent of racism. I met with the Chief [from 
First Nation], and we decided to create a joint press release and medi
a campaign (posting on socials, interviews) - calling on the communit
y to stand together, reminding us that we are better than th
is. The response from community was overwhelming- they organized
 a convoy, in the best sense of the word! People made t-shirts, flags, si
gns and bumper stickers (all city vehicles took part too) that said, 
“I Stand with Cowichan”. Hundreds of people drove through the com
munity, going up and down streets past houses and apartments, waving, 
honking, sharing uplifting messages of love and respect with Indige
nous neighbors, friends and relatives, letting them know they were s
tanding by them and standing up to racism and discrimination. 
Indigenous and Non Indigenous community members were standing on
 their porches and lawns, many in tears, and hundreds of messages 
posted about what that meant to people".
CASE STUDY
FINDINGS
Key Approach: Tackling Racism in Cities &
Towns
“Another incident that received international attention, of two boys
 who were best friends, one was Cowichan and one wasn't. They got int
o a fight and soon, bystanders started to jump in and beat on the you
ng Cowichan man. It turned in to a international story about racism [vi
deo recording went viral online]. The Chief of Cowichan Tribes reached
 out and discussed what we could do to bring peace… Elders were call
ed in and set up a ceremony at the school all the boys involved at
tended together. The Elders stood them up with their mothers, ta
lked to them about taking responsibility for their actions and then
, one by one, called on the boys to do better, reminding them that ‘w
e need to help change the world. How what they did, could define th
em for the rest of your life if you let it, if we all let it. The Elders said, we
 don't want this act to define you, we want what you do next to defi
ne you’. The feedback from follow up interviews with the boys and t
heir families spoke to the transformation they underwent, the de
ep impact that experience had on each one.
“That resistance underneath [to advancing UNDRIP] will always be there
 until we deal with it. It just gets suppressed, people are polite, until w
e reach a point of tension until something happens that tips the scal
es once again, it becomes exposed. We must continue to stand toget
her as a community, this is not the time to give into the fear of somet
hing being taken away on this journey [by recognizing Indigenous rights].”
-8-
“
We invested our time in truth,
 before reconciliation. We took 
a deep dive into our history, 
of displacement and ongoing syste
mic racism against the peoples w
hose land we are on. Truth telli
ng is essential, it shows that 
we are committed to work throu
gh what some feel can be embarra
ssing to the city, or as it is often ca
lled ‘too depressing” to hear abo
ut because it doesn’t feel good for us
 to talk or learn the truth…We al
ways want to jump to the actions of r
econciliation and call it done, but it
 will be done, not in our lifetimes.
The circumstances in the city of Williams Lake in regards to Indigenous
 relations had gotten to such a disastrous and disrespectful and racist point from our local government to our local First Nations that it really lit a fire under me to start paying attention to local government.”
The circumstances in the city of Williams Lake in regards to Indigenous relat
ions had gotten to such a disastrous and disrespectful and racist point from our local government to our local First Nations that it really lit a fire under me to start paying attention to local government.”
“Local governments need a keener understanding of environmental
 racism, in relation to their climate action. Environmental hazards ar
e disproportionately impacting Indigenous communities and peoples a
ll across Canada. At the same time, there is no one like Indigenous peop
les who have traditional knowledge systems that can assist with cli
mate action and have seen the step-by-step incremental changes in cl
imate from pre-colonial times up until now.”
-9-
“If you go back to the history of Mission, literally our name comes from
the fact that we were identified as a place for a Catholic mission. The
idea of colonialism is very much present in our past. So, we have a real
responsibility from our municipality’s perspective in being leaders in a
new mission of reconciliation. It isn't just philosophical. It really
represents opportunity for all of the various communities here. But
from a philosophical perspective, we want to have a second chapter of
the story, and one that talks about being leaders in reconciliation.”
“Around the same time that the City of Vancouver approved the motion I
brought forward on implementing UNDRIP and started to work to set up
the task force, we also had a motion and vote at council to change the
name of a “Trutch Street” on the West side of Vancouver and Musqueam
territory, which was a moving and impactful decision on a very specific
issue. The renaming of Trutch Street was a tangible example of
reconciliation, but we want to be at the table together and change how
we're making all of our decisions. That's the real strength of the UNDRIP
work, and that's what I'm interested in, systems change, and so I have
found it meaningful to be part of. We are now having a whole review of
our commemoration policy and how we do namings across the city, who
is involved, alongside our public art policy.”
“[New Westminster is known as the Royal City, “birthplace of
colonization”] and so the Community Stories of Truth and Reconciliation
was a risky thing. There are a lot of monarchists here, a lot of feelings of
pride about our colonial history. But it felt like it was necessary because it
was the thing that we were not having a conversation about so we
wanted to try and daylight it.” 
Key Approach: What’s in a Name?
“We have a new aquatic centre opening up next year. We had a process
with the nations to give a name to it. We brought in a knowledge keeper
who was able to lead us through the process. We ended up on a
hən̓ q̓ əmin̓ əm̓  name, təməsew̓ tx which means Otter House which I
think is an incredible name.”
Image Source: CBC News
-10-
“The city hall used to be the office of Indian Affairs and has a room where
 they used to prepare children to go to residential school. We have bee
n working with a group of Elders for 17 years, and no one mentioned t
he history of the building (and she was there for 2 terms already).
 We invited Elders to the inauguration and they told her what had happ
ened there - she asked what they wanted her to do and they put tog
ether what needed to be done.”
 
“We did a street sign project with Elders and asked what they would
 like to see, which resulted in instead putting up a reconciliation mural.”
“There are concerns that people are not prepared for change. There are
 plans for a city park to be returned to the nation, and I am worrie
d that people will be reacting instead of planning on how to do this well.”, 
“The Judge Matthew Begbie statue, we didn’t have a public event, we
 just removed it quietly. But it still made national news because it wa
s around the same time as the Sir John A McDonald statue in Victoria w
as taken down. We had a long-standing relationship with the Tsilhqot
’in because of the connection to the hanging of their Chiefs and J
udge Begbie. So [taking down the statue] was about an apology for 
them. Begbie had their Chiefs hanged because they pushed for their lan
d, and the leaders today have asked for the statue in New West to b
e taken down. 
Key Approach: Dismantling Colonial
Infrastructure, Re-Indigenizing Cities &
Towns
“People said we didn’t consult, and were upset. But we didn’t consult
 because the nation had already told us what they wanted and so w
e removed it. It then got put in the museum in an exhibit call
ed Reconciling, to create conversation with the community. People 
say taking down a historical statue is erasing history, but we wan
t to contextualize the statue. It just shouldn’t be in a place of powe
r, it should be in a learning environment where we can talk abo
ut the impasse.”
“Sometimes small things make a big difference. We replaced some
 street signs in town with bilingual signs, and realized that half the stree
t names in town are nouns [e.g. Orca Crescent] and could be easi
ly translated. The process was really gratifying. We were able to use s
ome of the resort municipality initiative funding to pay for the new signs
. It helps tourists learn, but we started with the signs near the schoo
ls to support their language learning. So the kids walking to school eve
ry day are going past those bilingual signs. That’s what it's all about.”
-11-
“We had a statue in one of our
parks of John A. McDonald. It’s
down now. The idea was to put
it somewhere there could
actually be information
explaining the entire history. It
became quite controversial.
There was also a discussion
around potentially renaming
one of our streets, it’s a major
street going through Regina
called Dewdney.
Reconciliation Regina is
expected to review renaming
options and then give us
advice on that.”
“We had an affordable housing
project with a 40% Indigenous
tenancy target. We worked
with an Indigenous artist to
carve two welcome poles for the entrance. The funding for the housing
project took too long, and the poles were ready first. So we pivoted and
let the artist decide where to erect them, they chose Peace Park. We had
a beautiful ceremony that was a huge cultural experience for everyone.
Any opportunity to Indigenize anything I think is really important,
because it brings people that awareness – ‘hey this isn’t our land’.”
An Assiniboine camp in the Cypress Hill in 1878. Indigenous people
 in the Cypress Hills area would receive treaty-dictated rations a
t Fort Walsh, until Edgar Dewdney restricted who could get them a
nd later closed the fort. (Glenbow Archives NA-790-4)
Key Approach: Growing from Catalyzing Events
“There was growing awareness and
need for action around when the
Maa-Nuulth treaty was being
finalized. How to connect the treaty
with the district’s official community
plan. We had no budget to update
an outdated plan. The Mayor had
personal relationships with some of
the Elders and elected officials of the
nation, which helped with inviting
their input.”
The foundation for the UNDRIP
Strategy was both the Olympics and
the Canada 150 efforts. The City and 
Maa-nulth First Nations
the nations did a lot of important reconciliation work like education and
partnership building that laid the groundwork to talk about Indigenous rights
before doing the UNDRIP work.” 
-12-
“
“We have an Elders committee looking at what they want to do in
 Duncan, in terms of building within the city to work on reconciliatio
n (does not want to use words like reconciliation because Elders don't li
ke to use that term). It's not about building acknowledgement, it's ab
out making it part of who we all are.”
“A relationship doesn't occur by sitting down and having an agenda and
 going through the agenda and getting to the answers you want. It i
s about opening up and sharing your stories, finding out wh
at commonalities there are for the communities, relationship buildi
ng; and that takes time. It's not easy. You have to keep working on it. I
t is really about shifting the culture within the organization, both at the 
staff and the political level. That is one of the biggest challenges that
 we've tackled head on.”
Key Approach: Building Relationships
“Relationships that they have been building for years, that is where the
 value is - if you don't have this and the understanding, the rest of it wil
l be very hard to do; there isn't a simple answer, because we are talki
ng about system change.”
“Before UNDRIP at the provincial level there was mass confusion. Even
 within a district about what meaningful consultation is, especially wher
e the nation doesn’t have the capacity they need to engage meaningfull
y. We have shifted to a table that both parties see a benefit of coming 
to, instead of somebody just waiting for the city to phone them and
 ask their opinion.”
“Right now we're very blessed to have some people who are really eager
 to work together. And if somebody sets it down and, the balanc
e changes that way. It's not invincible. It needs to have continui
ng energy put into it. And we've seen examples of communities that h
ave tables, but not very much is happening at the tables. So for us, the 
work we're doing. Is both a reminder of why we should work together, but
 also the work itself matters and so we have to keep doing that.”
“The deeper work of building relationships is not expensive. Our
 Indigenous Relations Coordinator brought in Soup and Bannock o
n Wednesdays. We invite an Elder to join, he brings Bannock his nie
ce makes, and then someone from the city brings the soup. People on th
eir lunch just come in and chat, with no meeting task list or agenda. 
This has been deeply transformative for the city. The most transform
ative work is actually the cheapest.”
-13-
“The nation really helped us reframe our position in a good way. We
 had to stop going to them when we needed something, especiall
y consultation on our projects. We had to focus more on t
he relationship, which is slow and personal work that requi
res commitment.”
“We often hear from people within the municipality who are saying
 ‘you should do this or you should do that’ – one of the mos
t important learnings that we’ve tried to share is true reconciliati
on is about listening and hearing direction from First Nati
ons leadership and communities, not going to them and saying
 ‘we propose this or that.’ That really is, in its own way, just another
 form of paternalism.”
Key Approach: Being Bold, Breaking New
Trail
“I think our community has actually always been sort of proud to be a
 little bit ahead of the curve. We are a small community and no
t everybody knows about us, but we're willing to sort of be bold a
nd punch above our weight. Same thing with local First Nations - not at 
all hesitant about thinking about being bold, their economic develop
ment strategies, their environmental services, they're leading too. And so
 that was a really easy place where we saw that we had alignment. Yo
u know they do punch above their weight for the size of their service.”
“Our community had its 125th anniversary of our incorporation last year.
 We really didn’t want to celebrate it in the regular way - it felt ver
y colonial.. We contracted the event to a community organization who 
we knew was aligned with our reconciliation goals and we decolonized the whole thing. We didn’t talk about incorporation. We didn’t talk about Robert Dunsmuir, who basically built the town and screwed everybody that was here before and after for all eternity. That strategic kind of goal came from the community as well. We felt really strongly that the council was aligned with the community.”
“Our community had its 125th anniversary of our incorporation last ye
ar. We really didn’t want to celebrate it in the regular way - it f
elt very colonial.. We contracted the event to a community organization who 
we knew was aligned with our reconciliation goals and we decoloni
zed the whole thing. We didn’t talk about incorporation. We didn’t talk about Robert Dunsmuir, who basically built the town and screwed everybody that was here before and after for all eternity. That strategic kind of goal came from the community as well. We felt really strongly that the council was aligned with the community.”
-14-
“The Hatzic Watershed
Stewardship Team is playing a
huge role. We are being told that
the model, the governance model
and the work is ahead of other
regions in terms of dealing with
flood management. I think the
next story you hear is how this
partnership has resulted in actual
physical changes in infrastructure
and operations within the
floodplain in a way that is better
for people, and for the
environment entirely.”
Key Approach: Strategic Level Plans
Mission, BC Hatzik Watershed
“The provincial legislation and the calls to action of the TRC are largely
focused on about the provincial and federal governments. There are only
a few places that touch on municipal governments. We are not the
Crown, we are not the state, but we have a role to play here. So we
endorsed UNDRIP as the framework for reconciliation in the official
community plan [Policy 1.1]…there is something powerful about having it
be policy number one in the plan. It was a conscious decision to
acknowledge at the outset recognition of the traditional territory. What
does this mean? It is the work of now and the future, rethinking what we
have done, and what we can do better.”
“Planning can be about seeing basically the ecology that underlies a
place, then what is culturally known about how people relate to that
place. That’s where we have had a couple of different lenses and world
views that we are trying to reconcile, and one is currently the dominant
pattern. The dominant world view doesn’t work well for people on
personal levels, health, mental health, even economically how
sustainable is it?”
“In the old (pre-2000) official community plan, we had 2 pages of history
of the community focussed on settlers, and then one sentence on
Indigenous history. There were even mistakes about reserves being
outside of the municipality, but some were actually within municipal
areas. So we engaged a group of Elders from the nation’s heritage
society, and they wrote with us the two pages dedicated to their
history in the area. It still doesn’t do justice to their history, but at least it
is acknowledged.”
-15-
“Getting [UNDRIP] into the strategic plan was a priority, because that is
how work flows. If it’s not in the strategic plan, it doesn’t go into the work
plan and it doesn’t get done. It is needed in the plan to allocate
resources accordingly, and signal to the organization as a whole that it’s
a priority for us.” 
Key Approach: Land Back
“It took eleven years to complete
the land back deal, and we
believe we have set a tone for
others to follow. The first time you
do something, it will take time, be
patient. We will learn something
new each time we work together.”
“We looked at the land back as an
investment in the future [not a
loss to the City]. We yield a bigger
return in the future, and that is
not always financial. It can be in
terms of quality of life, or climate
resilience for example.”
Minister of Indigenous Relations and Reconciliation Murray Rankin
 signing Land Back agreement,  Mission, BC  
Key Approach: Support for Indigenous
Guardians Monitoring Initiatives
“[Support for the Forest Guardians
involvement in the Stave West
project has evolved to] a
partnership with the nations and
the school board. Our board of
education is working with
Kwantlen and Katzie First Nations
to actually deliver training in a
tripartite arrangement.”
We worked with our campground
operator to generate a fee to give
to our Guardians on an annual
basis to support their work. This
was much appreciated by the
nation.
Six-week Indigenous Guardians Training Program delivered as a partnership
 between the City of Mission, B.C., Kwantlen First Nation, Leq’a:mel First Nation
, Matsqui First Nation, and the Mission Public School District.
“I think for people who care about reconciliation and decolonization, it is
 a complicated thing to be an elected member in a colonial governmen
t on unceded territory. And so, I feel like it is deeply tied to my values a
nd necessary for me to be in this position to push for this to go ah
ead because you know all of us have a relationship to colonialism globally.” 
“We brought in Brad Marsden to do a workshop on the legacy of
 residential schools as a part of our commitment to learning. More o
f this is needed for city councillors, from observing local governme
nt officials at the annual Union of BC Municipalities.”
“I also run a campaign school, and when I talk to potential candidates
 about reconciliation I advise to bring it down to the every-day level, th
e public spaces people go to, how they get there. Talking abo
ut reconciliation is like talking about climate change. People are too bu
sy, they don’t want to think in broad concepts. But if you talk a
bout tangible things, about more trees on certain streets for shad
e, or benches for people who are walking in the heat, those are eve
ry-day things. If we talk about climate and reconciliation in a big sense, 
we lose people.” 
“The City of Vancouver is able to fund positions in each of the nations to
 liaise and coordinate with the city and the Nations on UNDRIP work. Thi
s is likely to be hard for some other municipalities. The City has also hired
 a staff person to support urban Indigenous engagement [not the th
ree nations whose territory the City is in]. The Task Force is driven by t
he 3 nations, but Vancouver has a high Indigenous population who also
 want to be involved, but do not have an elected or representative bod
y that speak for them.”
“One of our biggest victories was establishing a staff position to work on Indigenous relations and climate action. For smaller municipalities, having a dedicated staff position is rare with limited budget available. So when we have a Strategic Plan that includes UNDRIP as a key pillar, we have at least one staff person who is responsible and has dedicated time to work on this.”“One of our biggest victories was est
ablishing a staff position to work on Indigenous relations and climate 
action. For smaller municipalities, having a dedicated staff position is ra
re with limited budget available. So when we have a Strategic Plan tha
t includes UNDRIP as a key pillar, we have at least one staff person who
 is responsible a
nd has dedicated time to work on this.”
“As a newly elected Mayor, I have learned to make friends with the 
engineering department. Because they are the ones on the ground. In 
order for the [UNDRIP] work to be meaningful, it has to impact every level of local government.”
-16-
Key Approach: Human Capacity, Training,
Decolonizing Practices
-17-
“If a city creates an action plan on UNDRIP or Indigenous relations, then
 the band or nation also needs the capacity to implement them. If you
, the city, is lacking capacity to implement, you have created a situati
on where your lack of capacity is also now magnifying anot
her government’s lack of capacity, and you are again putting the work 
back onto the First Nations. This cycle of relationship building is very diff
icult for everyone.”
“The cultural competency and anti-racism training for district staff has
 largely been embraced, and generally positive. But as an organization, I’
d say we have a lot to learn still. Our challenge is we are a small town, a
nd small organization, but it’s booming here right now so we are alw
ays playing catch up.”
“We found challenges throughout our organization. There is such a
 range of people, some who are super committed to this work and thos
e who have no idea and get very defensive. We had to recognize this w
as our own organizational journey, and then making time for that. To f
ind the right training for everyone, to do the training in a good way,
 not judging people as you go along, or making people feel forced.”
Key Approach: Procurement, Business &
Economic Reconciliation
“In 2020 we made a major policy change, the Indigenous Procurement
 Policy. Which focuses on economic reconciliation, and targets at leas
t 20% of contracts and services from the city going to Indigeno
us businesses. Indigenous leaders came to council and explained that
 by supporting Indigenous businesses, you are also supporting l
ocal businesses and putting profits back into the community.”
“In our procurement work, there are all these complexities even around
 international trade deals in terms of what we can prioritize fo
r procurement. Often local government procurement tends to favor b
ig bidders because the contracts are so big. In our social procurem
ent work, we are working to break up those bids so that they are 
more accessible for local and Indigenous companies. It is really val
uable having staff from the nations involved in the process, so our staff h
ave an understanding of how we are supporting Indigenous entrepr
eneurs, architects, or figuring out community benefit agreements on 
specific projects.”
-18-
“Right now there are no Indigenous staff in
the 300 staff members for the City of
Williams Lake, and we currently have about
23% Indigenous population within the City.
So if we were to be proportionate to that
population, we should have around 60
Indigenous staff. There are no other
Indigenous councillors, besides me.”
“As a part of the Federation of Canadian
Municipalities, which is an advocacy
organization for all municipalities in Canada,
I have been going through the process of
creating an Indigenous caucus. The goal is
to provide elected Indigenous delegates in
local government with a voice, and to strive
towards Indigenous representation in every
local government in Canada.”
Key Approach: Supporting More Indigenous People
as Elected Officials & Local Government Staff
Mayor of Chetwynd, Allen Courtoreille
“I have some Indigenous mentors in local government. The Mayor of
Chetwynd is one of them, a big inspiration for me and one of my personal
heroes. Being the only Indigenous person in City Hall is challenging, but it
has also shown me the power of just having someone in the room. I started
attending council meetings a year before I started my campaign [for office],
and the way council would speak about local First Nations was very “us vs.
them”, not very collaborative and a lot of disrespect. Now with me in the
room as a councillor, conversations change, the culture changes. It provides
me a lot of hope that if we can have more representation across the country,
it will change so much.”
“As the only Indigenous councillor, I did a lot of my own research into
strategic planning for municipalities and Indigenous relations. I produced a
report and recommendations for council, that normally isn’t done, usually
staff are responsible for reports. But this is another example of Indigenous
people being forced to do the work for reconciliation. I was ready to go to
war for this and debate for hours to defend it. I handed it out, and everyone
read it and just said “this is great, let’s do it. You did all homework and its
looks wonderful.”
“Representation of Indigenous people in local government is important, but
we also need to elect people who want to do the work, and who aren’t afraid.
Who prioritize UNDRIP and reconciliation and TRC. People who are true
allies, we need to amplify them and put them on pedestals if we have to.
Those who aren’t afraid of the hard work or afraid of repercussions.”
“I am mostly held accountable by other Indigenous people, and based on
their feedback I will know if I am on the right path or not. As soon as I am
straying, I get told I need to right my ship.”
-19-
Key Approach: Working with Multiple First Nations &
Organizations, Overlapping Territories, Urban
Indigenous Populations
“Overlap can cause friction, and hinder healthy conversation. There is
 the nation whose territory we are on, then the surrounding area nation
s who come to the city for services, it’s a hub for a much larger Indigeno
us population, then those Indigenous people who live within the city. Th
ere isn’t an answer for how to make this easier for municipalities.”
“A lot of our [Indigenous] peoples are moving outside of their own
 territories. But these people don’t have an elected voice, so how do yo
u on a governance level engage on UNDRIP with that population? It’s
 a really difficult scenario, where a lot of people feel left out.”
“We have worked both with the Hereditary and band leadership. But we
 have to do it in a way that doesn’t cause more friction or strife in thei
r community. Understanding the culture is a primary place to begin f
or me. After talking to trusted people from the nation, we decided
 to approach the band and Hereditary leaders at the same time [not
 one before another].”
“We have projects that we want to partner on. But we don’t have clear
 partners. But that doesn’t mean you just rush it and put anyone’s nam
e on the partnership, that’s not right too. Provincial and feder
al governments have a list of First Nations with interests in the area, 
and one list has 33 nations listed. Recognizing that colonial understandings 
of land use impact the way
 that we understand thes
e things [overlapping territories
]. I think it’s really hard to not
 be that colonizer again who 
goes in and makes the relation
ships for the nations worse
…These things are deeply compl
icated, and are rooted in colo
nialism. It’s hard as a munici
pality to not sort of dig i
n and make that worse.”
-20-
“Our council just voted to track progress on TRC and UNDRIP. It’s an
 important instance to show accountability by showing the public wha
t we are doing and what we have done. If that sheet stays stagnant, it
’s very clear that we’re not doing anything, or we aren’t doing enough,
 or we’re not doing it quickly enough. We learned from the Cit
y of Vancouver, but it’s not just a cut and paste, because we are so diff
erent and so are the nations involved. We hope to be a blueprint for s
maller communities.”
“I have had to question assumptions, who is the community we are
 serving and accountable to in planning efforts? There is more than on
e public out there. There’s this assumed default that it is the ratepaye
r, the taxpayer is the public we serve. That is very narrow, and in rec
ent years we are seeing more of a focus that includes equity
 and marginalized voices. What used to be considered fringe is
 very common.”
Key Approach: Accountability & Tracking
UNDRIP Progress
Key Approach: Paradigm Shifts & Indigenizing
Local Government Perspectives
with our community. Our community cares about intergenerational
 learning. Our community cares about living well with the environment
. Our community cares about restorative justice and so many oth
er things that we have learned from First Nations partners. It's the cult
ure and the attitude of the city and recognition of our past and how we
 can move forward in a better way.”
“I think if we're doing climate actions
 and initiatives properly, it should b
e improving people's lives. We need 
to bridge this disconnect betw
een people thinking that the climat
e is some separate entity. It's hard
 when we spend all of our time i
n this artificial world. So we have to 
try and figure out how we can und
erstand, get people to understan
d no this this isn't something sep
arate from me.”
We've been successful with
 developing services that serv
e everybody but bring a First Natio
ns or Indigenous lens and Indigen
ous values. That has really resonated 
“Unfortunately, there are still too many in local government who ask
 ‘what’s in it for us? Why don’t bands work together so that we don’t hav
e to do this for them all?’ These are the same views that started residenti
al schools, the 60s scoop. These are the same views that created the Ind
ian Act. These views exist today, but now they aren’t allowed to get t
hose same outcomes [e.g residential schools]. Now the outcomes a
re to ensure that TRC and UNDRIP are the absolute maximum we c
an do. But in reality, these are the floors, not the ceilings.”
“I guess it's part of a long process of unlearning and questioning my
 role and what it is that we do, you know in government… I think that it'
s probably one of the areas that's been most challenging, challengi
ng assumptions and challenging roles and past understandings or belie
fs. But also it's an area that is I think probably some of the most rewar
ding work I've done that I sort of look and go, ‘OK I'm proud of that thi
ng we did’, you know, being able to have a hand in some change.”
“I’ve learned the importance of listening. As a white guy, that’s
 particularly important. Personally, realizing that I come from a point o
f privilege. I am in a senior government position, I am an educated whi
te male. All of those things start to stack up, so my voice carries very loud
ly. Listening is ensuring others have the space to speak. One incred
ible learning from listening to Indigenous leaders was learning 
about planning on the life cycle of a cedar tree. Not on the standard 5-1
0 year municipal planning cycles. And that it is not about land use, b
ut land relationship.”
“There's a lot to be learned from Indigenous communities who had
 balance for thousands of years before what we've imposed over the las
t couple hundred years. So we're at a point in time when our climate 
is telling us we don't have it right. We need to rethink things.”
-21-
“Engaging in reconciliation and decolonization work, I think the
 reflection is that we are going to make many missteps and things ar
e going to feel bad, you know in the middle and then hopefully though it 
is just part of a journey that is like part of processing. But I think it is b
oth slow and also confusing in that I think people want there to be a c
lear path of these things. And there isn't a clear path because nobody's
 ever really done this before because this is our first time, anybody's firs
t time trying to create these partnerships at a local government level. 
I think some people are wanting to get out of this discomfort quicker.
 I think some people just want a land acknowledgement -
 the land acknowledgement is not the outcome. The land acknowle
dgement is just a side effect of knowing whose territory we're on 
and to know whose territory we're on…is about rebuilding relat
ionships and understanding the historical connection to this territory.”
“I really want to emphasize the truth before reconciliation piece. I think
 that is essential for governments. We didn't pop up like mushrooms i
n 2022 when we were elected. We come off a basis of displacement a
nd land theft. City councillors come with very disparate understandings
 of the world, sometimes based on our generation, based on what we
 are taught in schools. Someone asked how city councillors can learn 
about the truth of colonization while doing all their other work. It’s a
 great question. They don’t, unless they seek it out.”
“Creating an UNDRIP Task Force isn’t always sexy, and doesn’t make
 headlines like renaming Trutch Street did. There are built-in incentive
s for elected leaders to do easier and more visible work that oft
en overshadows the harder, more systemic work.”
“A lot of smaller communities are scared that if they don’t have the
 resources (e.g. staff, capacity funds) that it won’t be good enough. I
t becomes the CAO or planner’s responsibility for maybe one day a wee
k. The repercussion is that feedback from the First Nation will be poor, f
rom intentionally poor relationship building. This can lead to 5 out of 7 of 
your council being replaced. People are now seeing that there are real
 life major repercussions of doing this poorly.”
“A big learning is having patience to let the work unfold, and not on our
 timeline. When you have grants from the province or the federa
l government where we need consultation, we have boldly said ‘we’re n
ot going to push to meet your grant deadline because we’re working
 in partnership and they don’t have time to review this right now. They 
need more time’. Stepping back from whatever white supremacist perspe
ctive of like, the province gave us this money and we have this deadline.”
-22-
LEARNING & TAKEAWAYS FROM
LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN ADVANCING
UNDRIP
“There is a limited amount of information and involvement that
 local governments have had with this process - this process ha
s mostly been dealt with at the provincial level. Municipalities have n
ot had guidance on what that will look like at an operational 
and functional level on the ground.” 
“There is a concern about political turnover. I might not have this
 role [after election] when everything is being implemented, an
d worried someone might hold the position and this might not 
be their priority.”
“The City and the nation do not have the capacity to do all of these
 other things, for example the referrals alone take up so muc
h capacity. Would love to be able to resource the nation to do th
is work, but is that their current priority?”
“Being conscious of the long-term nature of this work, and how it
 gets bridged between elections and turn-overs in electe
d officials. Important to have different voices, parties and ideologi
es involved at each step [regardless of who is in power] to ens
ure accountability and continuity to the UNDRIP strategy.”
“Adding more work on a small municipality is always difficult, so a lot
 of resistance is based on budget constraints. Last year, the averag
e budget for municipalities was raised by only around 5-10%. A l
ot more can be done if the budget is there to support it.”
“There needs to be some sort of assistance for municipalities and
 regional districts and First Nations to work together. The community-to-community grants are very short term, small amount of resources available and don’t actually get you to a stage where you can create and implement a plan with equal resources for both governments.”
“There needs to be some sort of assistance for municipal
ities and regional districts and First Nations to work together. Th
e community-to-community grants are very short term, small amount 
of resources avail
able and don’t actually get you to a stage where you can create 
and implement a plan with equal resources for both governments.”
“We are not the provin
ce, and not the federal government. But we are a creature of the
 provincial government. There definitely are some calls from loca
l governments to have provincial support for engagement, general referral funding. There are local government projects that also intersect with provincial authorizations, like archaeological assessments and the archaeology branch.”
-23-
GAPS & SUPPORT NEEDED
C L I M A T E C A U C U S . C A
-24-
Tara Marsden/Naxginkw owns and operates
 Hlimoo Sustainable Solutions, an Indigenou
s Gitksan consulting business working on
 a variety of matters related to land, governan
ce, Indigenous rights, research, and po
licy development and analysis. Tara has a Ma
sters of Arts in Political Science from the Univ
ersity of Northern BC, and been taught by t
he many Gitksan Hereditary Chiefs and Matriar
chs. For the past two decades +, Tara has w
orked for First Nations, the provincial g
overnment, NGOs, philanthropic organiz
ations, and universities. In an effort to 
advance more sustainable development, 
Tara seeks to operationalize Free, Prio
r and Informed Consent for Indigenous peo
ples, alongside other key principles outlin
ed in the United Nations Declaration
 on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Tara li
ves in the Gitksan homelands of her people, in New Hazelton, BC.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
INTERVIEWEES
City of Vancouver, Councillor Christine Boyle
City of Duncan, Mayor Michelle Staples
City of Mission, Mayor Paul Horn and Barclay Pitkethly
City of New Westminster, Councillor Nadine Nakagawa
City of Regina, C
ouncillor Shanon Zachidniak
City of Williams Lake, Councillor Michael Moses
District of Ucluelet, Director of Community Planning
Village of Cumberland, Mayor Vickey Brown
