Natalia Moudrak
Kathryn Bakos
Joanna Eyquem
Hugh O’Reilly
Ashby Monk
Soh Young In
SUPPORTED BY:
December 2020
INSTITUTIONAL 
INVESTORS 
FIND ALPHA IN 
CLIMATE RISK 
MATRICES: 
GLOBAL SURVEY 
FINDS
Global Projects Center
ABOUT THE INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) 
is an applied research centre at the University 
of Waterloo. The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 
with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s 
largest property and casualty insurer. The Intact Centre 
helps homeowners, communities and businesses to 
reduce risks associated with climate change and extreme 
weather events. For additional information, visit: 
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca
ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation 
university. With more than 41,000 full and part-time 
students (Fall 2019), the university is home to the world’s 
largest co-operative education system of its kind. 
The university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, 
combined with an intensive focus on research, powers 
one of the top innovation hubs in the world. For 
additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
ABOUT THE GLOBAL RISK INSTITUTE
The Global Risk Institute is the premier organization 
that defines thought leadership in risk management for 
the financial industry globally. It brings together leaders 
from industry, academia, and government to draw 
actionable insights on emerging risks globally. For more 
information, visit: https://globalriskinstitute.org/
ABOUT STANFORD GLOBAL PROJECTS CENTER
The Global Projects Center is an interdisciplinary 
research center at Stanford University. The center seeks 
to facilitate understanding of the financing, development, 
and governance of critical infrastructure worldwide.  The 
center conducts interdisciplinary research, facilitates 
engagement among academic and industry leaders, and 
educates future leaders within the infrastructure finance 
and development space.
ABOUT INTACT FINANCIAL CORPORATION
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest 
provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada and a leading provider of specialty insurance in 
North America, with over CAD$11 billion in total annual 
premiums. The Company has approximately 16,000 
employees who serve more than five million personal, 
business and public sector clients through offices in Canada 
and the U.S. In Canada, Intact distributes insurance under 
the Intact Insurance brand through a wide network of 
brokers, including its wholly-owned subsidiary BrokerLink, 
and directly to consumers through belairdirect. Frank 
Cowan Company, a leading MGA, distributes public entity 
insurance programs including risk and claims management 
services in Canada. In the U.S., Intact Insurance Specialty 
Solutions provides a range of specialty insurance products 
and services through independent agencies, regional and 
national brokers, and wholesalers and managing general 
agencies. Products are underwritten by the insurance 
company subsidiaries of Intact Insurance Group USA, LLC.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Intact Centre thanks GRI, Stanford Global Projects 
Center and IFC for their support of the report. We are 
grateful to all institutional portfolio managers who offered 
substantial feedback throughout the “Intergrating Climate 
Risk into Institutional Portfolio Management” survey.
CITATION
Moudrak, N., Bakos, K., Eyquem, J., O’Reilly, H., 
Monk, A., and In, S. Y. 2020. Institutional Investors 
Find Alpha in Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey 
Finds. Prepared by the Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, Global Risk Institute and Stanford Global 
Project Center.
	
For information about this report, contact 
Natalia Moudrak: nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
	
DISCLAIMER
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our 
knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The 
Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the 
completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the data provided 
in the report. This report has been prepared for general guidance on 
matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. 
You should not act upon the information contained in this publication 
without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation 
or warranty (express or implied) is given as to the accuracy or 
completeness of the information contained in this publication, and 
Intact Centre employees and affiliates do not accept or assume any 
liability, responsibility or duty of care for any consequences to you or 
anyone else acting, or refraining to act, in reliance on the information 
contained in this report or for any decision based upon it.
1
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
Abstract 	
p. 5
Introduction 	
p. 7
Climate Risk Matrices: 	
p. 11
A Practical Approach to Integrate Physical Climate Risk 
into Portfolio Management
International Survey:	
p. 13
Integrating Climate Risk into Institutional 
Portfolio Management
Analysis of International Survey Outcomes 	
p. 15
Conclusion 	
p. 20
References	
p. 21
TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
2
3
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
“Climate change is a risk, not 
only to our environment but 
to the long-term stability of our 
economy and global financial 
system. Investors need to 
understand the physical and 
transition risks climate poses to 
their portfolio companies.”
Sonia Baxendale
President and CEO, Global Risk Institute
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
4
5
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
The need to factor climate risk into portfolio 
management is clear – the outstanding challenge is 
“how?” Unfortunately, there is no standardized guidance 
regarding means to include physical climate risk into 
institutional portfolio management.
In response, this paper presents Climate Risk Matrices 
as a practical tool for institutional investors to integrate 
physical climate risk into portfolio management. In brief, 
a Climate Risk Matrix identifies the top 1-2 means by 
which extreme weather events (e.g., flood, fire, extreme 
heat, etc.) may negatively impact a specific industry 
sector, while identifying actions that a company within that 
sector could be expected to take to mitigate these risks.
The paper further describes results of an international 
survey focused on understanding the methods 
undertaken by portfolio managers to assess physical 
climate risk, the extent of formal training on physical 
climate risk received by the Boards of Directors, C-Suite 
officers and portfolio managers, and the utility of 
Climate Risk Matrices to aid portfolio managers in 
investment decisions.
The survey results confirm the need to improve 
translation of physical climate risk into financial 
valuations, while highlighting the utility of Climate 
Risk Matrices as a practical tool, consistent with 
TCFD, for application of climate risk assessment 
into portfolio management. The survey results also 
illustrate the need for scaling formal training on climate 
risk among Boards of Directors, C-Suite officers and 
portfolio managers.
The Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures 
advises that climate change and extreme weather risk should 
factor into institutional portfolio management, founded on 
studies confirming that (1) climate change and extreme weather 
risk are effectively irreversible, and (2) the consequent impacts 
(largely negative) of climate change could potentially extend 
across all business sectors and geographic domains.
ABSTRACT
>
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
6
7
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
INTRODUCTION
Due in part to climate change, the cost of “physical 
climate risk” (i.e., natural disasters and extreme weather 
events) will continue to rise. Already, 2010-2019 was 
the costliest decade in the modern history of 
natural disasters, with total direct economic 
damages and insured losses tallying $2.98 trillion 
USD globally, $1.1 trillion USD higher than in the 
previous decadeiii.   Notably, the insurance protection 
gap, which is the portion of economic losses not covered 
by insurance, was 69% in 2019, leaving governments, 
businesses and individuals “on the hook” to pay for 
the majority of damages and disaster recovery efforts iv. 
Box 1 illustrates selected climate impacts across direct 
industry sectors.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 
the United Nations body for assessing climate science, projects 
that global warming is effectively irreversible and that 
there will be an increase in the frequency, intensity and 
duration of extreme weather events, such as floods, 
droughts and heat waves, through the 21st century.i, ii
 
INTERGOVERNMENTAL PANEL ON climate change
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
8
•	 Buildings are increasingly more exposed to damages 
and/or destruction by floods, forest fires, and other 
extreme weather events (e.g., between 2005 and 2017, 
increased tidal flooding caused by sea level rise eroded 
$15.9 billion in relative property values for 28.6 
million coastal properties in 18 states located in the 
East and Gulf Coasts of the US).v 
•	 Infrastructure services are increasingly impacted 
by climate-related disruptions (e.g., by 2040, much of 
the continental US is projected to experience warmer 
summers and tripling of extreme-heat days, leading 
to a 6 to 18% increase in spending on residential and 
commercial electricity).vi
•	 Crop production is impacted by changes to 
harvests and production costs, affecting price, quantity 
and quality of farmed products (e.g., the European 
Environment Agency projects that climate change 
will lead to a decrease crop productivity in southern 
Europe, where yields of non-irrigated crops like wheat, 
corn and sugar beet are expected to decrease 
50% by 2050.). vii
•	 Fisheries will be impacted due to changing marine 
and freshwater conditions, ocean acidification, 
invasive species, and pests (e.g., cold-water fish habitat 
in Southern Ontario, Canada is projected to decline 
67% by 2025; and arctic char populations could 
decline by 40% by 2100).viii
•	 Fixed income investments can also be impacted 
by natural disasters and extreme weather events, 
leading to municipal, state and sovereign credit rating 
downgrades and plummeting value of debt 
(e.g., following Hurricane Harvey in 2017, Moody’s 
downgraded Port Arthur in Texas, from A1 to A2 
due to its “weak liquidity position that is exposed 
to additional financial obligations from the recent 
hurricane damage, that are above and beyond the 
city’s regular scope of operations”). ix
BOX 1. EXAMPLES OF PHYSICAL CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS THAT CAN AFFECT ASSET VALUATION 
AND PORTFOLIO PERFORMANCE
9
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
Recognizing that physical climate risks often translate 
to material losses, the global financial community 
emphasizes the need for climate risk disclosures and 
integration into portfolio management. For example:
•	 The Task Force on Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD), the Sustainability Accounting 
Standards Board (SASB), and Canada’s Expert 
Panel on Sustainable Finance (EPSF) have 
instructed investors of their fiduciary duty to assess, 
disclose and incorporate climate risk into portfolio 
management. x, xi, xii  
•	 The Network of Central Banks and Supervisors 
for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) 
noted that climate risks are a source of financial risk 
that will affect all agents in the economy (households, 
businesses, governments) across all industry sectors 
and all geographies, and called on central banks 
to integrate climate risk factors into own portfolio 
management decisions. xiii
•	 The International Monetary Fund found that 
investors are currently falling short on pricing physical 
climate risk and advocated for better climate risks 
disclosures and stress testing. xiv
•	 Security commissions began to issue guidance 
relative to material climate change risk disclosures 
by issuers, pointing to the possibility of mandated 
disclosures in the near future. xv, xvi 
•	 Judicial systems have accepted climate change and 
the risks it presents as self-evident, uncontroversial 
and beyond reasonable dispute, so it would be nearly 
impossible for Boards of Directors to dismiss climate 
change risk - courts require directors to inform 
themselves about the material facts, while evaluating 
and seeking advice about the information presented to 
them. xvii
However, characterization of physical climate risk is 
a process that requires in-depth technical knowledge 
of potential impacts that vary widely across different 
geographies and sectors. While there are technical 
frameworks for assessing climate risks, such as 
Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens approach xviii and 
the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability 
Committee (PIEVC) Protocol, xix climate risk assessments 
are being undertaken in a piece-meal manner. 
Furthermore, there is no standardized guidance 
regarding the practical inclusion of physical climate risk 
into institutional portfolio management, on an industry-
by-industry basis.
There is no standardized guidance 
regarding the practical inclusion of 
physical climate risk into institutional 
portfolio management, on an 
industry-by-industry basis.”
“
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
10
11
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
A concept that has been developed to fill the identified 
gap in guidance relating to physical climate risk is that 
of sector-specific Climate Risk Matrices (CRMs). xx
These matrices identify top 1 to 2 physical climate 
risks that portfolio managers should prioritize as most 
material to affect performance of  companies within a 
given industry sector. These impacts reflect the expert 
advice of  operations officers or similarly experienced 
subject matter experts within industry sectors – 
based on their collective experience, these practitioners 
are best positioned to identify a short list of  material 
means by which flood, drought, wildfire, wind or 
other hazards may convey risk to companies within a 
specific industry sector. For each physical climate risk 
impact, a risk mitigation action is suggested within 
a CRM. Prioritized physical climate risk impacts and 
risk mitigation actions presented in CRMs, provide a 
practical format for portfolio managers, as responsible 
fiduciaries, to recognize physical climate risk.
CRMs have been developed for two industry sectors – 
Electricity Transmission & Distribution (T&D) and Commercial 
Real Estate (CRE). xxi The matrices were designed with the 
following features in mind:
•	 user-friendly (i.e., information in the matrix can be 
easily understood by any portfolio manager);
•	 scientifically well-informed (based on expert 
advice from subject matter experts);
•	 predisposed to frequent updating (e.g., every five 
years) to ensure relevancy of guidance, and
•	 available for use almost immediately (i.e., tools 
that require years to develop will be “too little too 
late”).
The T&D CRM (referenced in the survey 
described subsequently) is presented in Table 1.
A PRACTICAL APPROACH TO INTEGRATE PHYSICAL CLIMATE 
RISK INTO PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
CLIMATE RISK 
MATRICES:
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
12
FLOOD
FIRE
WIND STORMS
ICE AND SNOW 
LOADING
THAWING 
PERMAFROST
Key Climate 
Risk 
Impacts
Flood-induced 
high-water 
levels result 
in inadequate 
electrical 
clearances below 
lines that are 
hazardous to the 
public
Fire along 
transmission 
corridors can 
cause outages 
if corridors are 
not adequately 
cleared of brush
Vegetation/tree 
contacts with 
transmission lines 
can cause arcing, 
fires and outages
Vegetation/tree 
branches can fall 
onto T&D lines 
causing outages
T&D lines can be 
brought down by 
wind forces  
T&D lines and 
structures can 
collapse under 
heavy ice loading
Thawing of 
permafrost 
can displace 
transmission 
tower foundations, 
causing structural 
collapse and 
outages
Mitigation 
Measures
Ensure structures 
are tall enough 
to ensure safe 
clearances under 
foreseeable flood 
levels, or that 
lines are installed 
underground
Conduct patrols 
(visual inspection 
of utility 
equipment and 
structures) in fire 
prone areas
Clear vegetation 
along transmission 
corridors
Clear vegetation 
along trans-
mission corridors
Install anti-
galloping devices 
on conductors and 
ensure structures 
are designed to 
withstand winds
Install visual 
monitors to detect 
ice loading before 
ice loads build, 
boost current 
to melt ice (i.e., 
shorting the line)
Modify 
structures/designs 
to readily permit 
adjustment of 
towers when line 
patrols identify 
permafrost thaw 
displacement
TABLE 1: CLIMATE RISK MATRIX FOR CANADA’S ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION AND 
DISTRIBUTION SECTOR
13
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
In 2019, the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, the 
Stanford Global Projects Center and the Global Risk 
Institute administered an international survey, titled 
“Integrating Climate Risk into Institutional Portfolio 
Management” to 50 institutional investors. The purpose 
of the survey was two-fold: first, to assess the degree to 
which physical climate risk is currently integrated into 
portfolio management and investment analyses, and 
second, to test the practical utility of Climate Risk 
Matrices in assisting portfolio managers with integrating 
physical climate risk into portfolio management.
The survey was undertaken between October 1 and 
October 31, 2019. Of the 50 invited institutions, 13 
participated (Table 2), representing just over $2 trillion 
USD of assets under management. These institutions 
collectively met the following criteria:
•	 Assets under management: range in size from 
“small”/$7 billion to “large”/$500 billion;
•	 Diversity of fund management organizations/
mandates: pension funds, property & casualty and 
life & health insurance companies, and university 
endowment funds; and 
•	 Geographic representation: North America, 
Australia and Europe
Integrating Climate Risk into Institutional 
Portfolio Management
INTERNATIONAL 
SURVEY: 
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
14
Survey questions were designed to invite feedback 
relative to three aspects of analysis:
1.	Existing frameworks for climate risk 
assessment used by portfolio managers;
2.	The extent of formal climate risk training 
received by Board members, C-Suite officers and 
portfolio managers; and
3.	The utility of Climate Risk Matrices (CRMs) 
in helping portfolio managers to integrate physical 
climate risks into their investment conversations and 
decisions.
Relative to assessing the utility of CRMs for enhanced 
portfolio management, survey participants were asked 
to share feedback on the CRM developed for Canada’s 
Electricity Transmission and Distribution presented 
earlier (Table 1). The survey questions and summary of 
responses are presented in Table 3.
PARTICIPANT
COUNTRY
Assets Under Management 
($ Billion USD)*
AIMCo
Canada
$90.26 as of December 2019  
AllianceBernstein Holding L.P.
USA
$631 as of September 2020 
AustralianSuper
Australia
$132.86 as of June 2020
BlackRock Asset Management Canada Limited
Canada
$144.8 as of November 2019
Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec
Canada
$253.08 as of June 2020
The Canada Pension Plan Investment Board
Canada
$330.14 as of June 2020
Intact Investment Management Inc.
Canada
$16 as of October 2020
Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan
Canada
$155.57 as of June 2020
RPMI Railpen
UK
$39.04 (date unspecified)  
SLC Management  
Canada
$193 as of June 2020 
UK – Environment Agency Pension Fund
UK
$4.47 as of October 2020
University of California (Regents)
USA
$130 as of June 2020
University of Toronto Asset Management Corporation
Canada
$8.63 as of October 2020
Total
$2.13 Trillion USD
Exchange Rates Used (as of November 4, 2020)  $1.00 CAD to $0.76 USD, £1.00 Pound to $1.30 USD, 
$1.00 AUD to $0.73 USD.
TABLE 2: “INTEGRATING CLIMATE RISK INTO INSTITUTIONAL PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT” 
SURVEY, LIST OF PARTICIPATING INSTITUTIONS
15
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
4.1 Existing Frameworks for Climate Risk 
Assessment 
The survey revealed that while the majority of 
respondents (62%) have not yet translated physical 
climate change impacts into financial valuation of assets, 
the majority (54%) indicated that they viewed physical 
climate risks as a “very high” or “somewhat high” 
material issue.   Qualitative survey responses pointed to 
two key factors impeding financial valuation of assets 
from the standpoint of physical climate risk: 
1.	Lack of decision-friendly climate data disclosure by 
the issuers; and
2.	Lack of standardized best practices for integrating 
climate risk into portfolio management.
In relation to these two factors, CRMs offer an eloquent 
solution, as they succinctly outline the most material 
physical climate risks and risk mitigation measures that 
should be disclosed by companies within specific 
industry sectors. 
4.2 Formal Training on Climate Risk
The survey indicated that there is a general lack of 
formal training of Board Members, C-suite officers and 
portfolio managers relating to climate risk, which may 
compound the difficulty in integrating physical climate 
risk into institutional portfolio management:
•	 46% of survey respondents indicated that either 
“none” of their Board Members received formal 
training on climate risk, or they were not sure about 
the extent of climate risk training received by the 
Board Members;
•	 23% of survey respondents indicated that their Chief 
Strategy Officers received no formal training on 
climate risk, and 31% indicated that they were not sure 
about the extent of climate risk training received by the 
Chief Strategy Officers;
•	 31% of survey respondents indicated that their Chief 
Investment Officers received no formal training on 
climate risk, and 15% indicated that they were not sure 
about the extent of climate risk training received by the 
Chief Investment Officers; and
•	 46% of survey respondents indicated that either “none” 
of their portfolio managers received formal training on 
climate risk, or they were not sure about the extent of 
climate risk training received by portfolio managers.
Key takeaways relating to the three areas of analysis 
are described below.
ANALYSIS OF 
INTERNATIONAL 
SURVEY 
OUTCOMES
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
16
There is an evident need to scale training on climate 
risk among institutional investors to help them meet the 
directives outlined in the Task Force on Climate-Related 
Financial Disclosures, the Sustainability Accounting 
Standards Board, and Canada’s Expert Panel on 
Sustainable Finance.
4.3 Utility of Climate Risk Matrices
A notable 85% of survey respondents indicated that 
CRMs would be useful in providing portfolio managers 
with actionable insights into industry-specific physical 
climate risks. The same percentage indicated that the 
level of detail provided relating to the key climate risks 
was appropriate. However, most respondents (62%) 
would welcome greater detail regarding mitigation 
measures.
The survey results indicate that development of a suite 
of CRMs for a broader range of industry sectors 
and geographies would assist institutional investors in 
appropriately integrating physical climate risk into their 
portfolio management. 
TABLE 3: “INTEGRATING CLIMATE RISK INTO INSTITUTIONAL PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT” 
SURVEY RESULTS, 13 RESPONDENTS
SURVEY QUESTIONS
RESPONSES
Part 1: Existing Frameworks for Climate Risk Assessment
1. Has your organization translated climate 
risk impacts into financial valuation of  assets 
(e.g., through Ratio Analysis, Discounted Cash 
Flow Analysis, “Rules of  Thumb” valuations, 
Economic Value Added Analysis, Options 
Pricing models, etc.)?
2. How much weight does your institution attach 
to the materiality analysis of  climate risks applied 
to portfolio management?
3. Has your organization performed a materiality 
analysis to determine if  any of  the following 
climate risk factors may influence the performance 
of  assets in portfolios?
FLOOD
SEA LEVEL
RISE
DROUGHT WILDFIRE WINDSTORM
SNOW
AND ICE
LOAD
EXTREME
HEAT
HAIL
PERMAFROST
THAW
OTHER
NONE OF
THE ABOVE
62%
62%
54%
46%
46%
31%
23%
23%
23%
23%
8%
• Yes   • No
• Very High   • Somewhat High
• Somewhat Low  • Very Low
0
20
40
60
80
100
38%
62%
0
20
40
60
80
100
31%
31%
23%
15%
17
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
SURVEY QUESTIONS
RESPONSES
4. For climate risk factors deemed to be material, 
please indicate the broad categories of  industry 
sectors to which portfolio managers in your 
organization apply climate risk assessment.
ENERGY
REAL ESTATE
UTILITIES
CONSUMER
STAPLES
INDUSTRIALS
INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
CONSUMER
DISCRETIONARY
FINANCIALS
MATERIALS
COMMUNICATION
SERVICES
HEALTH CARE
OTHER
NONE OF
THE ABOVE
77%
77%
54%
46%
46%
46%
38%
38%
38%
31%
31%
23%
8%
5. If  your organization integrates climate risk 
into portfolio management, what is the source of  
expertise?
6. If  your organization utilizes internal 
expertise for integrating climate risk into portfolio 
management, what inputs do you use (indicate all 
that apply)? 
SELF-REPORTED
INFORMATION BY
THE ISSUER
MANAGEMENT
CONSULTANT
REPORTS
ANALYST
REPORTS
MEDIA
REPORTS
OTHER
69%
62%
54%
46%
38%
• Internal expertise only   • External expertise only
• Both internal and external expertise  • None of the above
0
20
40
60
80
100
8%
8%
69%
15%
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
18
SURVEY QUESTIONS
RESPONSES
Part 2: Formal Training on Climate Risk
7. Please indicate how many Board Members within your 
organization have received formal training on climate risk.
8. Please indicate whether Chief  Strategy Officer within your 
organization has received formal training on climate risk.
9. Please indicate whether Chief  Investment Officer within your 
organization has received formal training on climate risk.
10. Please indicate how many Portfolio Managers within your 
organization have received formal training on climate risk.
11. Does your organization employ an in-house Climate Scientist, 
who assists portfolio managers?
• All   • Less than Half  • Unsure  • None
• Yes   • No
• Yes   • Not applicable / Not Sure   • No
• Yes   • Not applicable / Not Sure   • No
• All   • More than half   • Less than half
• None / Not Sure
0
20
40
60
80
100
38%
8%
38%
15%
0
20
40
60
80
100
8%
92%
0
20
40
60
80
100
46%
23%
31%
0
20
40
60
80
100
54%
31%
15%
0
20
40
60
80
100
23%
31%
15%
31%
19
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
SURVEY QUESTIONS
RESPONSES
Part 3: Utility of Climate Risk Matrices
12. From the perspective of  portfolio management, would 
industry-specific Climate Risk Matrices, such as the one 
illustrated in Table 1, be useful to portfolio management?
13. Relative to “Key Climate Risk Impacts” outlined in Climate 
Risk Matrix (first row), please indicate whether the level of  detail 
should be expanded, kept the same, or reduced?
14. Relative to “Mitigation Measures” outlined in in Climate 
Risk Matrix (second row), please indicate whether the level of  
detail should be expanded, kept the same, or reduced?
• Yes   • Not Sure
• Expanded   • Kept the same
• Expanded   • Kept the same
0
20
40
60
80
100
85%
15%
0
20
40
60
80
100
85%
15%
0
20
40
60
80
100
62%
38%
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
20
The growing magnitude of extreme weather events 
guarantees to challenge businesses across all industry 
sectors and geographies, obligating them to mitigate the 
unrelenting impacts of floods, fires, heat waves, storm 
surges and other natural disasters.
As the survey highlights, as responsible fiduciaries the 
need to account for physical climate risk is appreciated 
by institutional investors. However, incorporating 
physical climate change impacts into financial valuation 
of assets is a challenge exacerbated by a lack of decision-
friendly climate data disclosure by issuers and lack of 
standardized practices to integrate climate risk into 
portfolio management.
Climate Risk Matrices offer a practical, 
accessible and user-friendly method to address 
these outstanding challenges. By combining the skill 
sets of investors and subject matter experts (for example, 
industry associations and standards-setting intuitions), the 
scaled production of Climate Risk Matrices, across 
all sectors and geographies, could begin today.
The expansion of formal climate risk training for 
Board members, C-suite officers and portfolio 
managers is required if physical climate risk is to be 
incorporated into well-informed investment decisions 
and conversations with issuers.
These two actions combined will provide a practical 
way for institutional investors to transform their 
general appreciation of the importance of climate risk, 
into climate risk-informed financial valuations and 
investment decisions, as advised by the Task Force on 
Climate-Related Financial Disclosures, the Sustainability 
Accounting Standards Board, and Canada’s Expert 
Panel on Sustainable Finance.
CONCLUSION
As TCFD admonishes, time is not a luxury for 
institutional investors to integrate physical climate 
risks into portfolio management. Climate Risk Matrices 
(CRMs) offer a practical, accessible and user-friendly 
method to address outstanding challenges.
21
Institutional Investors Find Alpha In Climate Risk Matrices: Global Survey Finds
i Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S., editors (2019): Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report; Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
444 pp. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
energy/Climate-change/pdf/CCCR_FULLREPORT-EN-
FINAL.pdf
ii  IPCC (2018): Summary for Policymakers. In: Global 
Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and 
related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the 
context of strengthening the global response to the threat 
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts 
to eradicate poverty. World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 32 pp. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
chapter/spm/ 
iii  Aon (2019): Weather, Climate & Catastrophe Insight Annual 
Report, 83 pp. https://www.aon.com/unitedkingdom/
insights/Weather-Climate-Catastrophe-Insight-2019-Report.
jsp 
iv  Aon (2019): Weather, Climate & Catastrophe Insight Annual 
Report, 83 pp. https://www.aon.com/unitedkingdom/
insights/Weather-Climate-Catastrophe-Insight-2019-Report.
jsp 
v  First Street Foundation (2019): State by State Analysis: 
Property Value Loss from Sea Level Rise. https://firststreet.
org/press/property-value-loss-from-sea-level-rise-state-by-
state-analysis/
vi  The Rhodium Group (2017): Assessing the Effect of 
Rising Temperatures: The Cost of Climate Change to the 
U.S. Power Sector. Prepared by Kate Larsen, John Larsen, 
Michael Delgado, Whitney Herndon and Shashank Mohan. 
https://rhg.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/RHG_
PowerSectorImpactsOfClimateChange_Jan2017-1.pdf 
vii  European Environment Agency (2019): Climate change 
adaptation in the agriculture sector in Europe, 112 pp. https://
www.eea.europa.eu/publications/cc-adaptation-agriculture 
viii  Council of Canadian Academies. 2019. Canada’s Top 
Climate Change Risks, Ottawa (ON): The Expert Panel on 
Climate Change Risks and Adaptation Potential, Council of 
Canadian Academies. https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-climate-change-risks.
pdf 
ix  Four Twenty Seven (2018): Assessing Exposure to Climate 
Change in U.S. Munis, 15 pp. http://427mt.com/wp-content/
uploads/2018/05/427-Muni-Risk-Paper-May-2018-1.pdf 
x  Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures. 2019. 
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures: Status 
Report. https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P050619.
pdf 
xi  Sustainability Accounting Standards Board. 2020. The 
Value of Climate-Related Financial Disclosures for a Fixed 
Income Investor. https://www.sasb.org/blog/the-value-
of-climate-related-financial-disclosures-for-a-fixed-income-
investor/ 
xii  Canada’s Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance. 2019. 
Final Report of the Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance: 
Mobilizing Finance for Sustainable Growth. http://
publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2019/eccc/En4-350-
2-2019-eng.pdf 
xiii  NGFS (2019): A call for action: Climate change as a source 
of financial risk, 42 pp. https://www.ngfs.net/sites/default/
files/medias/documents/synthese_ngfs-2019_-_17042019_0.
pdf 
xiv  https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/
Issues/2020/04/14/global-financial-stability-report-april-
2020#Chapter5 
xv  Canadian Securities Administrators (2018): CSA Staff 
Notice 51-354: Report on Climate Change-Related Disclosure 
Project. https://www.osc.gov.on.ca/en/SecuritiesLaw_
csa_20180405_51-354_disclosure-project.htm 
xvi  Securities and Exchange Commission (2010): Commission 
Guidance Regarding Disclosure Related to Climate Change.
xvii  Hansell LLP. 2020. Putting Climate Change Risk on 
the Boardroom Table.  https://law-ccli-2019.sites.olt.ubc.
ca/files/2020/06/Hansell-Climate-Change-Opinion-1.
pdf?file=2020/06/PUTTING-CLIMATE-CHANGE-RISK-
ON-THE-BOARDROOM-TABLE.pdf
xviii  Infrastructure Canada. Climate Lens – General Guidance. 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/other-autre/cl-occ-eng.
html 
xix  Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee. 
About PIEVC. http://pievc.ca/about-pievc
xx  Feltmate, B., Moudrak, N., Bakos, K. and B. Schofield 
(2020): Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation. 
https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2020/03/Factoring-Climate-Risk-into-Financial-
Valuation.pdf
xi  Ibid.
REFERENCES 
For further information about the report, please contact:
Natalia Moudrak
Director, Climate Resilience
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, 
University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 – 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, Canada  N2L 3G1
E.	 nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca
T.	 226 220 4982
“Every company, investor, & bank that screens new & existing 
investments for climate risk is simply being pragmatic.”
Jim Yong Kim
President of the World Bank
