Black Creek SNAP
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
The Black Creek Sustainable Neighbourhood Retrofit 
Action Plan (SNAP) is a plan for environmental and 
community transformation. It is the product of an 
innovative, integrated approach to urban retrofit 
challenges in this northwest Toronto neighbourhood 
(Figure 1, Box 1). One of five pilot SNAPs in the Toronto 
Region, the Black Creek SNAP was developed by 
Toronto and Region Conservation in partnership with the 
Jane Finch Community and Family Centre, Black Creek 
Conservation Project, City of Toronto and many other 
community stakeholders (Box 2). 
The Black Creek SNAP seeks to coordinate and 
find synergies between numerous on-the-ground 
improvement efforts. It addresses a number of previously 
recommended environmental objectives with unique 
solutions that fit the compelling socio-economic 
needs of this neighbourhood. Black Creek, a Humber 
River tributary that flows through the area, is an urban 
river with limited aquatic habitat and degraded water 
quality. It was identified as a priority for restoration 
in the Humber River Watershed Plan, Pathways to 
a Healthy Humber (TRCA, 2008), along with other 
recommendations for improved urban forest. The area 
is also a site of basement flooding concern under the 
City of Toronto’s Wet Weather Flow Management 
Master Plan. A recent environmental assessment 
process identified infrastructure upgrades within road 
rights of way to alleviate flooding. Alongside this work, 
Toronto Water is interested in promoting basement 
flooding prevention measures and lot level stormwater 
management practices such as rain harvesting and 
permeable pavement in driveways to reduce the strain 
on the storm sewer system. Private landowners need  
to be engaged to achieve maximum success on  
these issues.
Despite the local environmental concerns, the top of 
mind community interests that dominated the many 
workshops, survey findings and feedback sessions 
held throughout development of the SNAP were 
food security and job skills/employment opportunities 
(Box 3). Notably, this area also lies within a Priority 
Neighbourhood, designated by the City of Toronto 
as a focus for improved social health and wellbeing. 
The resulting SNAP action plan, therefore, centres 
on actions to fulfil these community needs, while 
incorporating designs and delivery approaches  
to address broader objectives. 
The Black Creek SNAP
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Box 1: Neighbourhood 
Profile
Study Area
395 ha
Land Use
22% single family residential (SFR)
20% multi-unit residential (MUR)
23% industrial, commercial, institutional (ICI)
16% roads
19% open space and other
Demographics  
(Based on 2006 Census) 
Population: approx. 25,000
Median age: 28-30 (44 in SFR area)
Median household income: $31,000-40,000  
	 ($57,000 in SFR area)
Low Income: 37-54% (12% in SFR area)
Recent immigrants (2001-2006):	11-19%  
	 (4% in SFR area)
Unemployment rate: 10-15% (7% in SFR area)
Top five home languages: Vietnamese, Spanish, 	
	 Chinese, Italian, Arabic
Private dwellings: 66% rented; 34% owned
Building age: 90% built between 1960  
	 and 1980
Total estimated single family homes: 2700
Total estimated MUR buildings: 45
1
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Box 2: Who’s involved?
Lead Partners
TRCA
City of Toronto
Jane Finch Community and Family Centre
Black Creek Conservation Project
Major Landowners 
Toronto Community Housing Corporation
Jane Finch Mall
Yorkgate Mall
Tennis Canada
Single detached homeowners
Multi-unit residential owners
Churches/Schools
City of Toronto (parks, roads)
Ontario Infrastructure and Lands 
Corporation
	 (Hydro Corridor)
Local Groups
Jane Finch Community and Family Centre 		
	 – Green Change Agents
Toronto Hydro
Enbridge
Black Creek Clean Energy Coalition
Afri-Can FoodBasket
Live Green Animators
ACORN
San Romano Way Revitalization 	 	
	
	 Association
Yorkwoods Library
Driftwood Community Centre
LINC Centre
Reaching Up Homework Club
Signs of Science
2
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
A Closer Look at the Black 
Creek SNAP
The Black Creek SNAP focuses on Growing Food and 
Green Opportunities through four primary action areas: 
vegetable gardening (supported by rain harvesting) 
in homes and open spaces, stormwater management 
and basement flooding prevention, urban forest 
enhancement and energy conservation and renewables 
(Figure 2, Box 4). Other considerations, such as 
sustainable transportation, waste management, long 
term land use planning and air quality were found to 
be adequately addressed by other existing plans and 
programs or not a top priority in the neighbourhood, and 
links to them will be made.
Implementation programs will be explored through 
local trusted agents and realize added social 
benefits by incorporating local job skills training and 
employment opportunities as part of delivery. The 
programs will also explore opportunities for revenue 
generation to contribute to long term program 
sustainability. This integrated Action Plan addresses 
local needs for improved environmental health, climate 
change adaptation, increased local food production 
opportunities and greater job skills training and 
employment in this diverse community of over 25,000 
people, over 60% of whom are tenants. 
A description of the primary components of the Action 
Plan is presented here, followed by an overview of the 
next steps involved in developing the implementation 
program. Additional background about the SNAP 
planning process can be found at the end of the 
document. 
A vision of the future Black Creek neighbourhood. 
3
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Box 3: How we’re listening
Research Tools
• Single detached homeowner survey by local  
	 green change agents (130)
• Key informant interviews (15)
Fun Informative Events
• Homeowner learning centre 
• Participation in local events 
Feedback Sessions
• City department meetings - One on ones;  
	 joint meetings
• Community leaders workshops (35+ people)
• Meetings with local stakeholders
Figure 2: Black Creek Sustainable Neighbourhood Action Plan.
4
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Vegetable Gardens & 
Rainharvesting for Homes  
and Open Spaces 
Community Gardening
The availability of fresh produce is a high priority in 
this community. It is underserved by outlets for fresh 
produce. There has been a strong community expression 
of the need for food security and access to a healthy 
diet, especially for over 60% of the population who 
live in apartment buildings and who are among the 
lower income earners. We conducted an analysis of 
the growing requirements for fresh vegetables and the 
potential plantable space on house and townhouse 
yards, multifamily and institutional sites, public and 
private open space, the Toronto urban farm and hydro 
corridor. Our analysis indicates that 20% of the area’s 
open ground (excluding industrial, commercial and ravine 
lands) can provide 20% of the community’s vegetable 
needs. Additional local food production may be possible, 
if balcony and rooftop gardens are promoted.
The strong community interest in vegetable gardening 
represents a potential mechanism for engagement 
of greater participation in the SNAP and can serve 
as a catalyst for greater use of rainwater as a source 
Community gardens help address local food needs and strengthen social connections, while also presenting 
opportunities for on site rainwater use.
5
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
of garden water supply. This will help achieve local 
water management objectives. Our resident interviews 
found that local social connections tend to follow 
cultural lines, except in the case of gardening, where 
neighbour to neighbour sharing of seeds and skills 
occurs. A coordinated urban agriculture program for 
this neighbourhood may, therefore, also represent 
an opportunity to strengthen a sense of community. 
Furthermore, opportunities for harvest sharing or sales 
represent additional mechanisms for revenue generation, 
increased food availability and community building.
Reaching Up Homework Club’s Community Garden 
Residential Eco-edible Gardening
Among residents of single-family homes, there is also 
a strong vegetable and fruit gardening culture. This 
particular population, mostly from Italian, Vietnamese 
and Spanish background, has been growing food for 
decades on its backyards, and has extensive knowledge 
about gardening. It is an older population, with 30% 
over 60 years old. In the last few years families have 
become smaller and their physical capacity to garden has 
been reduced due to age. SNAP sees an opportunity to 
facilitate sharing of skills, backyards and produce with 
other members of the community (i.e. apartment buildings 
tenants) that don´t have access to these resources, while 
also promoting improved water management.
The strong community interest in vegetable and fruit 
gardening represents an opportunity not only for the 
engagement of residents, but for the promotion of 
rainwater as a low cost water supply alternative to tap 
water. In our door to door survey, approximately 71% of 
single family homeowners report growing food already 
and only about 20% of them currently use rainbarrels. Our 
social research further revealed that the environmental 
ethic among homeowners is most closely tied to 
practical considerations and saving money, rather than 
more abstract concepts of climate change or ecological 
integrity. Many respondents noted conservation and re-
use as a way of life in their countries of origin. For these 
reasons, the collection of rainwater for beneficial re-use 
in gardens and to save money on the water bill, appear to 
be well aligned with resident values. TRCA has estimated 
that a 500 liter rain barrel can save around 18.5 cubic 
meters of water per year. Rainwater collection and re-
use will also help in supporting the basement flooding 
prevention strategy.
Once residents open the door to the measures that are 
of most interest to them, SNAP will use the opportunity 
to encourage other measures such as tree planting, 
sustainable stormwater management at the lot level and 
basement flooding prevention procedures (see other 
SNAP components). 
Roof leader disconnection combined with large rain barrels will be promoted to supply water for private vegetable 
gardens. They can also help prevent basement flooding and save residents money on their water bill.
6
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
target for runoff reduction and quality improvement, with 
the specific targets to be set at a local level in retrofit 
situations. SNAP has estimated that a typical single 
family residential lot in this neighbourhood already retains 
the first 5 mm of rain, but could have the potential to 
retain up to 10 mm of water and achieve 80% removal 
of suspended solids, if the above-noted measures 
are implemented. This assumes roof leaders are 
disconnected and directed to non-paved areas. 
Recognizing technical constraints and homeowner 
preferences at individual lots may limit the full adoption 
of these measures, SNAP recommends a target of an 
additional 30% reduction in runoff and an associated 
30% reduction in pollutants be adopted for the single 
family residential lots. This target could be achieved 
if 90% of lots disconnected their downspouts, 50% 
installed 500 liter rain barrels, 30% installed a 1 m2 rain 
garden and 5% adopted permeable pavement.
SNAP will encourage other actions to further reduce 
basement flooding risk, such as disconnection of 
foundation drains and reversed-slope driveway drains 
from the sanitary sewer, installation of sump pumps and 
installation of backwater valves.
Under the City of Toronto’s Mandatory City-wide 
Downspout Disconnection By-law (2009), the Black 
Creek neighbourhood will be required to disconnect all 
downspouts by December, 2013. This represents a great 
opportunity for coordination in SNAP implementation. 
 
Stormwater Management and 
Basement Flooding Prevention 
Primary issues identified at the outset of this study are 
the quality and quantity of water entering the storm 
sewers (and ultimately Black Creek) and the frequency 
of basement flooding during storms in the single family 
housing tracts. The latter is caused in large part by 
capacity constraints in the piped sewer system, as 
well as the prevalence of reverse-sloped driveways. 
The relative lack of tree cover and extent of hard 
surfaces aggravate these problems. Black Creek suffers 
from flashy flows and poor water quality which pose 
challenges for the restoration of healthy aquatic habitat. 
A sustainable solution is to reduce the amount of storm 
water entering the sewers by dealing with rainfall where 
it lands, through increased ground infiltration and 
evapotranspiration, increased re-use and attenuation. 
Single-Family Residential Properties
In the private residential lots, SNAP proposes runoff 
reduction measures, combined with other actions for 
enhanced prevention of basement flooding. In order to 
engage the community, SNAP will approach residents 
on the basis of their known interest in vegetable gardens 
and rainharvesting, and then other key measures, as 
explained below, will be encouraged.
The primary water management measure proposed 
is roof leader disconnection combined with large rain 
barrels and re-use schemes; with permeable paving 
at driveways and rain gardens/infiltration trenches in 
landscaped areas considered secondary measures 
as opportunities arise. Tree and shrub plantings, as 
part of urban forest enhancement initiatives, will also 
contribute to objectives for water management and 
energy conservation through building shading among 
other benefits. While the primary objective of these 
measures is to improve the health of the Black Creek 
subwatershed, they will also help in supporting the 
basement flooding prevention strategy. 
The flow and quality targets set out in Toronto’s Wet 
Weather Flow Management Master Plan are to absorb 
the first 5mm of a rainfall event before entering the 
sewers and reduce 80% of the total suspended solids. 
The Humber River Watershed Plan sets a directional 
7
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
In the single family residential road right of way (ROW), 
the measures proposed are a reduced pavement width, 
permeable pavement on the driveway aprons, and 
infiltration galleries or bioswales within the boulevard. 
In addition, ROW modification provides an opportunity 
to raise the lip of reverse sloped driveways, thereby 
reducing the vulnerability of these homes to basement 
flooding from the street. Further input from the community 
is needed to determine the likely acceptability of the 
proposed measures, and any implementation should be 
coordinated with the City’s long term road maintenance 
and rehabilitation plans. It is recommended that pilot 
projects involving these design concepts be earmarked 
for incorporation into the City’s long term road projects 
for this neighbourhood. No such projects are anticipated 
in this neighbourhood within the next five years.
 
Conceptual drawing of a modified single family residential road right of way
8
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Commercial and Institutional Properties
The extensive area of paved parking lots and hard 
rooftop surfaces, prevalent in this neighbourhood as 
part of commercial/retail centres, schools and churches, 
contribute to high volumes of stormwater runoff that 
flow largely untreated to Black Creek. Built in the 1960s 
car-focused planning era, many of the parking lots are 
now considered oversized and underutilized. These hard 
surfaces also contribute to urban heat island effects, 
(warmer air temperatures relative to the cooler, more 
vegetated areas). Strategies to reduce the impacts of 
these hard surfaces involve attenuation of rainwater 
and re-use as well as plantings to help provide shade. 
Additional greening targets involve the adjacent buildings, 
such as energy and water conservation, renewable energy 
production, etc. (see other SNAP components).
The low impact stormwater management measures 
proposed for these properties are permeable paving, 
bioswales, bio-retention cells, rainwater harvesting and 
planted medians. The extent and variety of measures 
required to achieve the targets are entirely dependent 
on site specific conditions including the overall site 
area, the proportion of building to parking areas, and the 
amenability of property managers to the different types of 
approaches. However, as an example, in order to capture 
15 mm of every rainfall event, a 5 hectare commercial 
property would need to include mechanisms that together 
provide about 750 m3 of storage, either within cisterns 
for reuse, or within the subsurface media underlying 
permeable pavement zones, bioswales, bioretention 
cells, or the planted medians. This benchmark has been 
shown to be achievable in other projects and is estimated 
to result in a 60% reduction in peak release rates and 
runoff volume from the 2-year storm and 20% reduction 
for the 100 year storm. These effects will contribute to 
the alleviation of erosion and flood risk, as well as reduce 
the pollutant load to Black Creek. Further detailed site 
analysis will explore opportunities to optimize designs and 
achieve or exceed these objectives. 
Multifamily Residential Properties
In these properties, a similar suite of low impact 
development measures as for commercial properties 
has been explored in detail as part of the Toronto Tower 
Renewal Program. The study identified the effectiveness 
of these measures and demonstrates that the SNAP 
targets can be achieved through implementing them. 
Further detailed analysis will take place at the site scale to 
optimize designs. 
A number of rainwater re-use, permeable pavement and rain 
garden demonstrations have been completed or are being 
investigated in the Black Creek SNAP area. These initiatives 
will generate a set of local champions for this sector. 
Urban Forest Enhancement
The focus of this component of the Action Plan is on 
expansion of the natural heritage system and the overall 
urban forest. Although the existing urban forest tree 
canopy covers 26% of the SNAP area, it is concentrated 
in the Black Creek valley corridor with relatively sparse 
cover in the built up areas. Urban forest health is poor. 
There is a low proportion of mature trees, due in part to 
the area’s inclusion within the federally-regulated Asian-
Long Horned Beetle control area. In this area, potential 
host trees (e.g. maple, poplar) were removed to control 
spread of the beetle. The relatively well-vegetated 
valley supports greater habitat diversity and provides a 
significant cooling effect on surface air temperatures of 
up to 10ºC, as compared to the warmer, predominantly 
paved tableland areas. 
Given that the Black Creek corridor is the centrepiece 
of the natural heritage system, this Action Plan aims 
to increase the extent of natural cover along the Black 
Creek corridor as well as the corridor associated with 
Driftwood Creek. Potential opportunities to expand natural 
cover have been identified including naturalizing portions 
of the Hydro corridor and public and private lands that 
are situated along these Creek corridors. These ‘Priority 
Naturalization Areas’ represent an area of 12.3 hectares. 
The successful implementation of this work will elevate 
the total area of natural cover from 72.5 ha (18.3% of the 
study area) to 84.8 ha (21.5%). 
The enhancement to overall urban forest cover should 
also aim for improved distribution throughout the area and 
be coordinated with efforts to achieve objectives related 
to the urban agriculture theme. We have estimated that by 
planting the equivalent of one new large stature tree (e.g. 
silver maple) or three small stature trees (e.g. fruit trees) 
9
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
at each single family residential property 
(about 1700 lot parcels), combined with 
the above-noted expansion of the natural 
heritage system, the total urban forest 
cover in the study area will reach 34%. 
Although these residential plantings 
could be done within only 25% of the 
plantable space in residential yards, we 
would expect that a portion of these 
plantings would take place in school 
yards, church properties parks or other 
private properties. 
This sample planting effort illustrates 
a possible way to achieve the City’s 
overall target of 30-40% urban 
forest cover within the study area. In 
addition to providing shade and water 
management functions, the urban forest 
removes greenhouse gases and other 
pollutants from the air. 
Without exception, community members 
indicated they are interested in more 
naturalization in parks. The parks, 
greenspace, trees and trails were 
identified by many as the best things 
about the neighbourhood. There is a 
sense of pride in the neighbourhood and 
support for further enhancing it with tree 
planting and profile projects.
The well-vegetated valley provides a cooling effect of up to 10ºC as 
compared to the built up areas. 
A Black Creek Conservation Project community tree planting event
10
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Energy Conservation  
and Renewables
According to Toronto’s Sustainable Energy Strategy, 
electricity and natural gas end-use in Toronto accounts for 
approximately 60 percent of the entire City’s greenhouse 
gas emissions. Natural gas and electricity also emit into 
the air thousands of tonnes of pollutants each year, giving 
rise to smog that contributes to health problems resulting 
in thousands of deaths.
Even with current relatively low energy prices, there are 
“energy equity” issues that affect low-income residents 
in Toronto. Low-income households tend to live in less 
energy efficient homes. These households tend to spend 
a much higher percentage (more than twice) of their 
pre-tax income on utilities. Many of these people are 
unable to afford maximizing the energy efficiency potential 
of their homes. It is expected that the cost of fossil fuel 
sourced energy will significantly rise in the next few years, 
as availability of limited resources is unable to keep pace 
with the increasing demand. 
Increasing energy conservation is crucial, in order to:
	 • address environmental and public health issues
	 • help residents, businesses and institutions to cope 
with fluctuating prices of energy from fossil fuels
	 • improve energy security
	 • keep dollars within local economies.
In this neighbourhood the residential sector is the largest 
gas consumer, consuming 67% of total gas used (30% 
is consumed by single-family residences and 37% by 
apartment buildings). The commercial and institutional 
sectors are the largest electricity consumers, consuming 
58% of electricity used (32% is consumed by the 
commercial sector and 26% by the institutional sector, 
including municipal facilities).
The Black Creek SNAP will focus its main efforts on 
promoting gas-saving measures in the residential, 
commercial and institutional sectors, with a particular 
emphasis on the residential sector (low, mid and high 
rise). In terms of electricity-saving measures, SNAP will 
focus its main efforts on the commercial and institutional 
sectors. Some attention should also be given to the high 
and mid-rise residential sector. Electricity use in the low-
rise residential sector is very low; resources allocated to 
this area ought to be proportional to the small savings 
potential. The same applies for gas and electricity use 
in the industrial sector in the neighbourhood, where 
consumption is relatively low. 
While implementation of renewable energy measures is 
desirable in the long term, in this particular neighbourhood 
(with 90% of the building stock developed before 1980), 
the most cost-effective means of achieving gas and 
electricity savings in the mid and short term is through 
energy conservation measures. SNAP will concentrate  
on the following actions (in this order of priority):
	 1. Promoting existing energy efficiency retrofit 
programs offered by utilities (i.e. including 
weatherization programs, HVAC retrofits, appliance 
and equipment replacement, etc). A neighborhood-
based social marketing approach can be 
customized by SNAP to effectively reach and  
assist each specific sector. 
	 2. As opportunities arise, promoting ``light`` energy 
efficiency measures and behavioral changes in all 
sectors. Light energy efficiency measures include 
programmable thermostats, power bars with timer, 
efficient bulbs, etc. These measures are highly  
cost-effective, achieving high energy savings at a 
small cost. 
	 3. Supporting opportunities for renewable energy 
production in the neighborhood, not as an ultimate 
cost-effective strategy to save energy but as 
a means of creating momentum, changing the 
face of the neighborhood, attracting investment 
and generating revenue. More than 14 suitable 
roofs have been identified in the neighbourhood, 
with areas of 12,000 square ft or greater and 
potential for photovoltaic installations. The Ontario 
Sustainable Energy Association (OSEA), through 
the Black Creek Community Energy Coalition is 
currently exploring the implementation of a Feed-in 
Tariff-contracted, solar PV project, to be located  
on one of these roofs. The project would operate  
as a cooperative. It is hoped to bring revenue to  
the community.
	 4. Exploring opportunities with businesses for “bulk 
purchasing deals” on products and services, to 
achieve key energy efficiency measures in key 
sectors, in exchange for marketing and promotion.
11
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Box 4: Key Outcomes
Local food production
Produce 20% of the community’s vegetable needs by creating vegetable gardens on 20% of the area’s 
potential plantable ground (excluding industrial, commercial and ravine lands). An estimated 3% of plantable 
ground is currently used for food production.
Basement flooding reduction
Reduce the risk of basement flooding in single family residential properties by implementing targeted 
measures such as disconnection of foundation drains and reversed-slope driveway drains from the sanitary 
sewer, installation of sump pumps and/or installation of backwater valves in homes that experienced flooding 
during the 100 year storm in August of 2005.
Stormwater management / Improved health of Black Creek
Achieve Humber River Watershed Plan and City of Toronto objectives for stormwater runoff reduction and 
improved water quality by retaining an additional 30% of stormwater runoff (and diverting it from the sewer 
system) and removing an additional 30% of total suspended solids every year, in the single family residential, 
commercial and institutional properties, by dealing with rainfall where it lands, through increased ground 
infiltration and evapotranspiration, increased re-use and attenuation. 
Urban forest enhancement
Achieve the City of Toronto’s urban forest targets by expanding the overall tree canopy cover from 26% to 
34% of the area. This can be done by planting the equivalent of one large tree (e.g. silver maple) or three 
small trees (e.g. fruit) per single family residential lot and by adding 12.3 ha of natural cover to the Black 
Creek corridor, Driftwood Creek and immediately adjacent properties. These efforts will also meet watershed 
targets by expanding the natural heritage system from 18.3% to 21.5% of the area.
Ecoservices
After 30 years of growth, the new urban forest will have removed 5700 kg of air pollution (service valued at 
$2800 annually) and provided 128,000 kg of carbon storage (valued at $3000 annually).
Energy conservation
Achieve targets established by the City of Toronto by reducing electricity use in the neighbourhood by 10% 
and reducing natural gas use by 17% below 2007 levels by 2020.
12
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
Next Steps
The partners will now focus on the development of 
implementation programs and building capacity for 
the implementing non-profit groups for key action 
areas of the Black Creek SNAP. In keeping with the 
highly collaborative and innovative process that was 
followed in the development of the plan, the project 
partners will continue to engage additional local groups, 
community leaders and other stakeholders in this work. 
Demonstration projects are underway to bring the 
concepts to life.
Primary implementation program areas include:
1. Neighbourhood-wide Agriculture Supported 
by Rain Harvesting. This program will expand food 
production and facilitate improved access to local 
food through private and public residential property 
gardens, balcony gardens, and community gardens on 
open space such as parks, hydro corridors, schools and 
churches and the Toronto Urban Farm. Rainharvesting will 
be incorporated into garden designs wherever possible, 
as a source of water supply. Program development will 
involve determination of a suitable business model and 
partnerships for coordination and delivery. 
2. Single-family Residential Eco-edible 
Landscaping and Other Strategic Retrofits. 
This program will promote rain harvest supported 
vegetable gardens, while also promoting other 
strategic retrofits for single-family residential 
properties. Other retrofits include measures to 
address basement flooding, stormwater management 
at the lot level, rainwater re-use, tree planting and 
water and energy conservation. Implementation 
program design will involve the development of a 
customized marketing and delivery approach that is 
informed by insights gained from the SNAP study 
on key motivations and barriers of local residents. 
Delivery approaches will build on existing programs.
3. Greening of Paved Areas and Buildings on 
Institutional, Commercial and Multi-Unit 
Residential Properties. This implementation 
program will encourage low impact development 
measures for stormwater management, tree planting, 
rainwater harvesting and re-use and energy and 
water conservation. It will also support renewable 
energy, such as mid-scale solar PV projects that can 
potentially bring revenue to the community and raise 
the neighbourhood profile. The approach will facilitate 
partnerships and opportunities for collaboration that 
can take advantage of existing programs and technical 
support offered by utilities, the City of Toronto and the 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. 
4. Urban Forest Enhancement This implementation 
component will focus on tree and shrub plantings on 
public open spaces, including the Hydro Corridor and 
parks, but it will also support the above mentioned 
greening programs for the residential, commercial and 
institutional sectors. SNAP recognizes the Black Creek 
Conservation Project as the lead organization with 
a long history of tree planting in this neighbourhood 
and will continue to collaborate with them to achieve 
SNAP’s urban forest objectives.
Delivery Parameters
   • Build on the strengths of local partners  
SNAP will identify potential delivery partners for each 
program. The partners will be identified based on 
their history and presence in the neighbourhood, their 
existing relationship with community leaders, residents 
and local stakeholders, and their level of expertise on 
key action areas. 
   • Local green job creation and skills development 
SNAP is committed to create jobs in the 
neighbourhood, as this has been identified as one 
of the primary top of mind issues in this community. 
SNAP will collaborate with local organizations to 
train and hire local residents in SNAP implementation 
programs. 
   • Partnership with private businesses  
SNAP will work with private businesses to explore 
opportunities for sponsorship or “deals”, in exchange 
for the creation of a market for the products and 
services that support SNAP objectives.
13
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
The partners acknowledge the consulting team of DuToit Allsopp Hillier, Schollen and Company, The Municipal Infrastructure 
Group and Nicole Swerhun for their contribution to background studies in support of the Black Creek SNAP.
Rain harvest kick off at 35 Shoreham Drive - May 2012
Toronto Urban Farm
14
Black Creek SNAP 
Growing Food and Green Opportunities
www.sustainableneighbourhoods.ca
Sustainable Neighbourhood Retrofit Action Plan (SNAP) projects develop an environmental improvement plan for existing urban 
neighbourhoods. The projects aim to accelerate implementation of sustainable practices through: (1) An integrated approach to 
urban retrofits that addresses a broad range of objectives (e.g., natural water cycle, water and energy conservation, urban forest, 
green building, community interests); and (2) Innovative stakeholder engagement and social marketing to increase the rate of private 
landowner uptake and secure local partnerships for implementation. 
© 2012, Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. All Rights Reserved.
