
1
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
Opportunities and challenges for 
financing women’s, children’s and 
adolescents’ health in the context of 
climate change
Blanca Anton  ‍
‍ ,1 Soledad Cuevas  ‍
‍ ,2 Mark Hanson  ‍
‍ ,3 
Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta  ‍
‍ ,4,5 Etienne V Langlois  ‍
‍ ,6 Domenico Gerardo Iaia  ‍
‍ ,6 
Giulia Gasparri  ‍
‍ ,6 Josephine Borghi7
Analysis
To cite: Anton B, Cuevas S, 
Hanson M, et al. Opportunities 
and challenges for financing 
women’s, children’s and 
adolescents’ health in 
the context of climate 
change. BMJ Glob Health 
2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/
bmjgh-2023-014596
Handling editor Seye Abimbola
Received 19 November 2023
Accepted 14 March 2024
1Department of Population 
Health, London School of 
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 
London, UK
2Instituto de Economía, 
Geografía y Demografía, Consejo 
Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas, Madrid, Spain
3Institute of Developmental 
Sciences, University of 
Southampton, Southampton, UK
4Center of Excellence in Women 
and Child Health, Aga Khan 
University, Karachi, Pakistan
5Centre for Global Child Health, 
The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
6Partnership for Maternal, 
Newborn and Child Health, 
World Health Organization, 
Geneve, Switzerland
7Department of Global Health 
and Development, London 
School of Hygiene & Tropical 
Medicine, London, UK
Correspondence to
Ms Blanca Anton;  
​Blanca.​anton@​lshtm.​ac.​uk
© World Health Organization 
2024. Licensee BMJ.
ABSTRACT
Women, children and adolescents (WCA), especially in 
low-­income and middle-­income countries (LMICs), will 
bear the worst consequences of climate change during 
their lifetimes, despite contributing the least to global 
greenhouse gas emissions. Investing in WCA can address 
these inequities in climate risk, as well as generating 
large health, economic, social and environmental gains. 
However, women’s, children’s and adolescents’ health 
(WCAH) is currently not mainstreamed in climate policies 
and financing. There is also a need to consider new and 
innovative financing arrangements that support WCAH 
alongside climate goals.
We provide an overview of the threats climate change 
represents for WCA, including the most vulnerable 
communities, and where health and climate investments 
should focus. We draw on evidence to explore the 
opportunities and challenges for health financing, climate 
finance and co-­financing schemes to enhance equity and 
protect WCAH while supporting climate goals.
WCA face threats from the rising burden of ill-­health and 
healthcare demand, coupled with constraints to healthcare 
provision, impacting access to essential WCAH services 
and rising out-­of-­pocket payments for healthcare. Climate 
change also impacts on the economic context and 
livelihoods of WCA, increasing the risk of displacement 
and migration. These impacts require additional resources 
to support WCAH service delivery, to ensure continuity 
of care and protect households from the costs of care 
and enhance resilience. We identify a range of financing 
solutions, including leveraging climate finance for WCAH, 
adaptive social protection for health and adaptations to 
purchasing to promote climate action and support WCAH 
care needs.
INTRODUCTION
Climate change impacts everyone, but not 
equally. Due to systemic gender inequalities 
and their unique stages in the life course, 
women, children and adolescents (WCA), 
especially in low-­income and middle-­income 
countries (LMICs), will be forced to bear the 
worst consequences during their lifetimes, 
despite contributing the least to global green-
house gas emissions.1 Figure  1 depicts the 
impacts of climate change across the different 
life stages. Climate change is an intergener-
ational injustice. Under current emission 
reduction pledges, children born in 2020 will 
experience a twofold to sevenfold increase in 
extreme weather events during their lifetime 
compared with a person born in the 1960s.2
Investing in WCA can address these inequi-
ties in climate risk, as well as generating large 
health, economic, social and environmental 
gains.3 However, women’s, children’s and 
adolescents’ health (WCAH) and well-­being 
are still not mainstreamed in climate policies 
and financing. For instance, only 2.4% of 
SUMMARY BOX
	
⇒Women, children and adolescents (WCA), especial-
ly in low-­income and middle-­income countries, are 
disproportionately affected by the impacts of climate 
change due to systemic gender inequalities and 
their unique stages in the life course.
	
⇒Investing in WCA can address these inequities in cli-
mate risk, and generate large health, economic, so-
cial and environmental gains in both the short-­term 
and long-­term.
	
⇒Climate adaptation is currently rarely integrated 
within women’s, children’s and adolescents’ health 
(WCAH) programmes, and WCAH and well-­being is 
not mainstreamed in climate policies and financing.
	
⇒Initiatives to promote co-­financing of WCAH and 
climate resilience would therefore yield large and 
sustained returns.
	
⇒For climate finance to be effective, it is crucial to 
increase equity and gender and age responsiveness 
of climate mitigation and adaptation plans.
	
⇒There is also a need for investments in new or 
adapted health financing mechanisms to support 
WCA climate-­related needs.
2
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
BMJ Global Health
multilateral climate financing incorporate child-­related 
activities.4 Moreover, climate adaptation is rarely inte-
grated within WCAH programmes, and WCAH financing 
does not adequately promote climate consciousness or 
resilience-­building, with very limited health-­related aid 
supporting climate mitigation or adaptation.5 There 
is, therefore, a need to also consider new financing 
arrangements that support WCAH alongside climate 
goals, including by exploiting synergies between WCAH 
financing and climate finance, and considering the poten-
tial for co-­financing (the use of funding from one sector 
to support the goals of the other), generating a win-­win 
scenario. Adaptations to financing arrangements can be 
considered across the three health financing functions, 
including revenue generation, pooling and purchasing.
We provide an overview of the threats climate change 
represents for WCA, including the most vulnerable 
communities, and where health and climate investments 
should focus. We draw on evidence to explore the oppor-
tunities and challenges for health financing and climate 
finance to enhance equity and protect WCAH while 
supporting climate goals. Table 1 provides an overview of 
the threats of climate change to WCA and the challenges 
and opportunities for health financing, climate finance 
and intersectoral financing.
Increasing burden of ill-health and healthcare demand
Climate change increases the burden of ill-­health among 
WCA. Research suggests that natural disasters dispropor-
tionately kill more females at a younger age than males.6 
Due to cultural barriers, women are often not able to 
make independent decisions on whether to evacuate or 
not, depending on the male household head. This divide 
will only be exacerbated by increasing and more severe 
weather events caused by climate change. This disparity 
is, however, reduced when the social status of women 
improves.6
WCA are further vulnerable to the rise in climate-­
sensitive conditions and chronic effects, such as infec-
tious diseases and respiratory conditions linked to 
pollution.7 Half a million children under the age of 5 die 
from air pollution-­related causes every year. Newborns 
and younger children are particularly vulnerable to 
the impacts of air pollution as they breathe faster, have 
higher metabolic rates and their immune systems are 
still developing.8 Climate-­related emergencies also cause 
major disruptions in sexual and reproductive health 
service delivery, including commodity supply chains for 
family planning, which can affect the healthcare burden 
in the population.9 Furthermore, there is an increased 
risk of adverse birth outcomes, such as miscarriage, 
preterm birth, stillbirth and low birth weight among 
pregnant women exposed to extreme heat.9 Climate 
events also aggravate violence against women and girls 
and increase the risk of human trafficking10 and child, 
early and forced marriage.9 Adolescents are further 
particularly susceptible to mental health impacts and 
eco-­anxiety.11 Thus, climate-­related effects on health 
occur across the lifecourse and can cast a shadow across 
generations.
Figure 1  Impacts of climate change across the life stages.50
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
3
BMJ Global Health
Challenges: rising demand and increased out-of-pocket payments
The additional ill-­health and disease burden, together 
with supply-­side constraints and access barriers to health-
care, impact private health spending.12 In low-­income 
settings, households bear the majority of healthcare 
costs of climate conditions. Thus, research across African 
countries showed that a 1% increase in the level of CO2 
emissions can increase out-­of-­pocket health expenditures 
by 0.42%.12 The rise in health expenditures can compro-
mise the financial protection goal of universal health 
coverage, as well as limit access to needed care.
Opportunity: adaptive social protection schemes, and inclusion of 
climate-related WCAH service needs
There is potential to link adaptive social protection 
schemes for climate hazards to health insurance, 
providing access to healthcare for those most likely to 
be impacted by a hazard.13 In addition, unconditional 
cash transfers can improve access to health services and 
improve health outcomes among mothers and chil-
dren.14 During drought in Kenya, for example, cash 
transfers were distributed to children and orphans to 
ensure access to health check-­ups.15 A study from food 
insecure and drought-­prone areas in Ethiopia showed 
that the participation of female-­headed households in 
a social safety-­net programme increased the enrolment 
in a community-­based health insurance scheme by 16.3 
percentage points.14 Although maternal and child health 
services are often free in public facilities in LMICs, 
waivers of fees or copayments may also be considered for 
any fee-­paying WCAH services.16 Benefit packages can 
also be revisited to ensure climate-­related WCAH service 
needs are covered.
Healthcare provision and cost
With an increase in the frequency and impact of extreme 
weather events, climate change can cause an unprece-
dented disruption to health services,9 17 which can persist 
beyond normal recovery cycles of 3–5 years. Bangladeshi 
women, for example, showed lower usage of maternal 
healthcare beyond the normal recovery period after 
the floods between 2011 and 2014.18 Furthermore, in 
the USA after hurricane Harvey, healthcare access was 
particularly hindered for people who lost their job after 
the disaster.19 Impacts are particularly experienced by 
women in poverty, as they are often more negatively 
affected.20
Challenges: health budget constraints, and pro-rich allocation of 
funds
The increased demand for healthcare services among 
WCA associated with climate change, and changing 
disease and risk profile among this population has impli-
cations for health financing in terms of the level of finan-
cial resources and its allocation, including which services 
are purchased.
Despite the need for more financial and health 
support after climate hazards, evidence suggests that 
Table 1  Overview of WCA threats from climate change, and the challenges and opportunities for financing
Threat to WCA
Challenge for financing
Financing solutions
Rising burden of ill-­health and 
healthcare demand
	
►Rising demand21
	
►Budget constraints due to slowed 
growth and reduced tax revenue21
	
►Pro-­rich allocation of funds 
postdisaster23
	
►Adaptive social protection schemes linked to 
health financing13
	
►Fee waiver/co-­payments for WCA posthazard16
	
►Expand benefit packages to include climate-­
related WCAH service needs14 15
Healthcare provision and cost
	
►Increased out-­of-­pocket payments for 
WCAH12
	
►Carbon pricing and climate adaptation finance 
can be leveraged for WCAH24 25
	
►Promote agile public financial management26
	
►Provider payment mechanisms to encourage 
climate adaptation/sustainability
Economics and livelihoods
	
►Loss of income20 27
	
►Lack of access to credit20 27
	
►Loss and damage fund29 30
	
►Crop/Weather insurance31
	
►Asset management and access to credit 
initiatives34 35
	
►Co-­financing approaches and intersectoral 
financing25 47
Displacement and migration
	
►Increase in host health system resource 
needs37
	
►Lack of/reduced access to health 
financing arrangements for migrants40 42
	
►Cash transfers, health insurance, supporting 
migrant populations42 43
	
►Additional funding to support host health 
systems45
	
►Funding to support impacted communities to 
reduce migration44 46
WCA, women, children and adolescents; WCAH, women’s, children’s and adolescents’ health.
4
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
BMJ Global Health
extreme weather events reduce growth and tax reve-
nues,21 through damage to infrastructure, production 
and productivity, leading to a reduction in government 
resources for health.22 Extreme weather events have 
macro-­economic impacts and impact subnational alloca-
tion of funding, including for health.23 Funding alloca-
tions often favour wealthier localities and better educated 
and informed individuals who are better able to access 
funding and thus respond to a disaster, further exacer-
bating inequalities.23
Opportunity: carbon pricing and climate adaptation funds to 
support WCAH, and agile public finance management
Climate hazards, however, can also drive additional 
funding for climate adaptation and mitigation, yielding 
health co-­benefits for WCA. For example, following the 
devastating wildfires in California, the 2022 state budget 
proposed funding to increase surveillance of climate-­
sensitive conditions and for local health departments to 
develop health resilience plans.24 There is also an oppor-
tunity for climate adaptation funds and carbon tax and 
credits and micro-­levies to provide additional revenues to 
support WCAH goals.25 Experience from COVID-­19 high-
lights the benefits of agile public financial management 
systems which provide greater flexibility in budget allo-
cation and deployment in the aftermath of a disaster.26 
Adaptations to routine provider payment mechanisms 
(transfer of funds from healthcare purchasers to health-
care facilities and health workers) can also be considered 
to encourage climate-­conscious behaviour within health 
facilities, supporting sustainability goals and adaptation 
strategies linked to the delivery of WCAH services.
Livelihoods, economics and farming
Following an extreme weather event, women experience 
the direct impacts on health more severely than men, 
and suffer economic hardship. Women are often much 
more vulnerable because they lack power and access 
to assets, hindering their ability to adapt. Women tend 
to work more and take on more caring responsibilities 
during disasters in order to secure livelihoods, which 
leaves less time for education and developing new skills.7 
In India, for example, women reported taking out loans 
to cope with the effects of increased care responsibilities 
and lost income due to extreme weather events.27 These 
livelihood effects coupled with increased out-­of-­pocket 
payments for health, risk increasing catastrophic health 
expenditure and impoverishment.
Loss of income and lack of access to credit among WCA
There is also evidence from high-­income countries of 
gendered livelihood impacts of extreme weather events. 
After hurricane Katrina in the USA, for example, women 
were more likely to drop out of their current employ-
ment than men due to caregiving roles. In New Orleans, 
women experienced on average a 7% loss in earnings 
(a 14% loss among African-­American women), whereas 
males experienced on average a 23% gain due to the 
increased importance of the construction and sales indus-
tries which are dominated by males.20
For women to adapt better to extreme weather events, 
it is vital to incorporate sustainable farming practices, 
however, access to tools, knowledge and technology is 
often gendered and women may not possess the financial 
means or knowledge that is required to adopt sustain-
able farming practices. Women tend to have less access 
to seeds, fertilisers or tools, spend more time collecting 
water and often manually till fields, rather than using agri-
cultural machinery.28 One of the main reasons for this is 
that women tend to have less access to credit and cash 
and are limited in their decision-­making in male-­headed 
households.20 27 As a result, climate change often reduces 
household income and forces a shift to lower income 
activities. In order to search for alternative work, males 
often migrate to rural areas, increasing the economic 
vulnerability of women.20
Enhancing access to economic and social resources for women
Enhancing access to economic and social resources for 
women is a crucial step to promote WCAH in the wake 
of climate change. Health is considered a key ‘non-­
economic loss and damage’,29 which would enable the 
loss and damage fund to address WCAH impacts of 
climate hazards, including for displaced populations. 
Insurance mechanisms, as part of loss and damage 
finance specifically targeting farmers, can be leveraged 
to improve resilience and food security. This can include 
government-­backed insurance, potentially combining 
micro-­insurance and macro-­level contingency funds as 
part of a broader social protection programme.30 Index-­
based weather insurance, for example, can improve food 
security among farmers, however insurance on its own, 
and in particular market-­based insurance, has limited 
potential to address non-­economic loss and damage 
such as health.31 Moreover, barriers to accessing finance 
persist due to high illiteracy rates among women and 
complicated application processes, as well as prejudices 
towards marginalised groups.32 Financing also favours 
male-­dominated sectors, including energy and trans-
port, whereas female-­dominated sectors such as agricul-
ture or textile manufacturing are rarely acknowledged.33 
For this reason, social protection support for alternative 
income sources, including skill development, training 
and household asset management, should be promoted 
for women,34 as well as expanding access to formal credit 
with reduced interest rates.35
Moreover, UN agencies and multilateral development 
banks are relevant actors in providing dedicated funds 
for deforestation (Reducing Emissions from Deforesta-
tion and Forest Degradation, REDD+), or smallholder 
agriculture (Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture 
Programme, ASAP) which have important linkages with 
women’s rights, livelihoods and health. These funds 
can be leveraged to provide support for sustainable 
farming practices with an equity lens.36 An evolving 
number of multilateral dedicated funds exist that provide 
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
5
BMJ Global Health
financial support for climate mitigation and adaptation. 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) funds and its associated funds, 
further play a significant role in leveraging national 
sector and private finance.
Displacement and migration
Climate change has significantly disrupted displace-
ment and migration patterns and drivers. It is also a 
threat multiplier, and may exacerbate conflict over 
depleted resources, leading to further movement.37 It 
is estimated that, by 2050, >216 million people will be 
internally displaced because of changing climatic condi-
tions.38 Studies also show that women and children are 
particularly vulnerable as they have a higher likelihood 
to become trapped due to sociocultural gender norms,6 
and are at greater risk of exploitation and human traf-
ficking.10 Displacement can further have detrimental 
impacts on children as they can become separated from 
their families following a disaster, their access to educa-
tion and healthcare can be disrupted, increasing the risk 
of malnutrition, inadequate immunisation and disease.8 
Studies further found post-­traumatic stress disorder, 
separation anxiety and depression among children who 
were exposed to disasters.11
Increase in host health system resource needs, and health 
financing gaps for migrants
Migration can, in exceptional cases, improve health and 
provide better access to healthcare. In reality, however, 
host regions or communities often lack adequate hygiene 
standards and public health resources, and the health of 
climate-­migrants is becoming a key issue.37 Mental health 
issues arising from climate-­driven migration can further 
trigger a feeling of solastalgia, which is understood as 
emotional and existential distress caused by climate 
change.39 Equally, migrants may not be covered by health 
financing arrangements when they move within their 
countries or to neighbouring countries.
There is a pressing need to fund climate migration-­
related projects, both to develop adaptive measures that 
prevent displacement and to support people migrating. 
Funding for migrants comes primarily from high-­income 
countries, and the current modalities to support fragile 
settings are not sustainable.40 A lack of in-­depth under-
standing regarding which approaches are most successful, 
and the politicised nature of migration, currently pose 
barriers to intersectoral collaboration. There is an urgent 
need for more context-­specific data and collaboration 
between migration experts and climate donors.41
Innovative health financing for migrants, funding for host health 
systems and impacted communities to prevent migration
Common financial challenges among refugees in human-
itarian settings include high out-­of-­pocket payments, frag-
mented financial support and limited funding.42 Sources 
of innovative humanitarian health financing for refu-
gees and migrants, such as health insurance schemes,42 
multipurpose cash transfers43 or remittances, are needed 
to strengthen adaptive capacity and resilience among 
households.44
The Global Cities Fund for Migrants and Refugees 
supports host communities to be better prepared for 
climate migration.45 The fund supports cities with tech-
nical and financial resources to address the needs of 
migrant communities affected by climate change. An 
additional fund was initiated specifically for migrant and 
displaced children and their care-­givers, which supports 
their health and well-­being.45 Evidence from India’s 
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guar-
antee Act (MGNREGA) further suggests the relevance of 
social protection to climate resilience among the rural 
poor. MGNREGA guarantees labour and cash payments 
to the rural poor in India, which has contributed to 
female empowerment and protected children during 
droughts and decreased child labour. However, barriers 
to accessing the programme exist for individuals under 
working age, the disabled and women with childcare 
responsibilities.46
DISCUSSION
WCA are disproportionately affected by the impacts of 
climate change. Gender-­responsive climate finance and 
funding allocation are therefore needed to avoid an 
exacerbation of existing inequalities.47 Investing in WCA 
can also generate health, economic, social and envi-
ronmental gains.3 Enhancing access to economic and 
social resources for women is a crucial step to promoting 
WCAH in the wake of climate change.
There is potential for greater use of existing climate 
finance and to leverage additional funding to enhance 
the resilience of WCA and address the health conse-
quences of climate change. There are an evolving 
number of multilateral climate funds that support 
WCAH activities and goals. The Green Climate Fund, 
for example, suggests various financing instruments that 
can support health goals, including climate grants, insur-
ance or bonds for climate-­sensitive health co-­benefits.25 
Other funds, such as the Adaptation Fund, have already 
developed plans to integrate gender in their processes 
and projects.47 To further facilitate access to multilat-
eral climate finance, it will be important to promote the 
accreditation of more health organisations, which can 
apply for climate finance, especially those supporting 
WCA. A major addition to multilateral climate finance will 
be the Loss and Damage Fund, where the needs of those 
who are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate 
change are supported. Further research and documen-
tation of real-­world practices are needed to support the 
valuation of WCAH-­related loss and damages, especially 
non-­economic loss and damages from climate change, to 
ensure that the Loss and Damage Fund fully accounts for 
these and can adequately support WCAH needs.
In order for climate finance to benefit WCA, it is further 
crucial to increase the gender and age responsiveness 
6
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
BMJ Global Health
of climate mitigation and adaptation plans.47 WCA are 
often relevant actors in the implementation of mitigation 
and adaptation strategies but their needs are usually not 
explicitly recognised and the health benefits of mitiga-
tion and adaptation projects for WCA often depend on 
community and household dynamics. For carbon credit-­
funded conservation projects, for example, community 
governance and impact on ecosystems determined the 
degree of investments in WCAH priorities.48 Literature 
further suggests that gender equity is better embedded 
in adaptation plans compared with mitigation plans. 
46% of bilateral official development assistance to adap-
tation actions targeted gender equality, compared with 
only 28% for mitigation actions, highlighting the need 
to recognise the gendered effects of climate change and 
actively promote WCAH in climate action.49
Another possible opportunity for donors to increase 
gender equity is through improving support of predict-
able finance for civil society organisations in the Global 
South. Supporting locally led action on climate change 
and gender is necessary to address the needs of WCA in 
the wake of climate change and to ensure funds reach 
the local level. In 2014, only 2% of gender-­responsive 
climate aid supported civil society organisations in the 
Global South.49
There is also a need for investments in new or adapted 
provider payment mechanisms or resource allocation 
formulae to incentivise ‘climate conscious’ behaviour 
(eg, initiatives to reduce emissions of the healthcare 
sector and/or to reduce vulnerability to climate hazards) 
among health workers and healthcare managers linked 
to health service delivery for WCA. These will be perti-
nent to addressing the specific vulnerabilities and needs 
of WCA in emergency and humanitarian response plans. 
The Global Financing Facility for Women, Children and 
Adolescents can, for example, be leveraged to support 
WCAH in the context of climate change by strength-
ening health systems and improving access to healthcare 
for WCA. More research is required to better understand 
the impacts and distributional effects of novel financing 
arrangements that support WCAH in the context of 
climate change. A co-­financing agenda which addresses 
the needs of WCA arising from climate change, and 
builds resilience, while acknowledging their contribu-
tions to economic progress and social stability across the 
life-­course, merits urgent consideration.
X Etienne V Langlois @EtienneVincentL
Contributors  BA, SC and JB contributed to the conception and design of the paper 
and wrote the first draft of the paper and undertook the review underpinning the 
paper. MH, ZAB, EVL, DGI and GG contributed to the conception and design of the 
study and reviewed and contributed to the paper.
Funding  The research underpinning this article was supported through a grant 
from the Partnership for Maternal, Newborn and Child Health (PMNCH), hosted by 
WHO.
Disclaimer  The author is a staff member of the World Health Organization. The 
author alone is responsible for the views expressed in this publication and they 
do not necessarily represent the views, decisions or policies of the World Health 
Organization. 
Competing interests  None declared.
Patient consent for publication  Not applicable.
Ethics approval  Not applicable.
Provenance and peer review  Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Data availability statement  There are no data in this work.  
Open access  This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the 
Creative Commons Attribution IGO License (CC BY NC 3.0 IGO), which permits use, 
distribution,and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly 
cited. In any reproduction of this article there should not be any suggestion that 
WHO or this article endorse any specific organization or products. The use of the 
WHO logo is not permitted. This notice should be preserved along with the article’s 
original URL.
ORCID iDs
Blanca Anton http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3991-9690
Soledad Cuevas http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4897-5240
Mark Hanson http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6907-613X
Zulfiqar Ahmed Bhutta http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0637-599X
Etienne V Langlois http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4853-2511
Domenico Gerardo Iaia http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8277-9342
Giulia Gasparri http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3408-114X
REFERENCES
	 1	 McGushin A, Gasparri G, Graef V, et al. Adolescent wellbeing and 
climate crisis: adolescents are responding, what about health 
professionals?. BMJ 2022;379:e071690. 
	 2	 Thiery W, Lange S, Rogelj J, et al. Intergenerational inequities in 
exposure to climate extremes. Science 2021;374:158–60. 
	 3	 Remme M, Vassall A, Fernando G, et al. Investing in the health of 
girls and women: a best buy for sustainable development. BMJ 
2020;369. 
	 4	 CERI. Falling short: addressing the climate Finance gap for children. 
2023. Available: https://www.unicef.org/wca/press-releases/funds-​
worlds-climate-hotspots-woefully-neglect-needs-children-new-​
report-finds
	 5	 Beyeler N, Guinto RR. Closing the gap on health-­related climate 
financing. 2021.
	 6	 Neumayer E, Plümper T. The gendered nature of natural disasters: 
the impact of catastrophic events on the gender gap in life 
expectancy, 1981–2002. Ann Am Assoc Geogr 2007;97:551–66. 
	 7	 Romanello M, Napoli C di, Green C, et al. The 2023 report of the 
lancet countdown on health and climate change: the imperative for a 
health-­centred response in a world facing irreversible harms. Lancet 
2023;402:2346–94. 
	 8	 UNICEF. The climate crisis is a child rights crisis - introducing the 
children’s climate risk index. New York United Nations Children’s 
Fund (UNICEF); 2021.
	 9	 McMullen H, et al. Sexual and reproductive health and rights in 
national climate policy - A review of 50 nationally determined 
contribution documents. UNFPA ESARO; 2021. 88.
	10	 Abbas Khan K, Zaman K, Shoukry AM, et al. Natural disasters 
and economic losses: controlling external migration, energy and 
environmental resources, water demand, and financial development 
for global prosperity. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int 2019;26:14287–99. 
	11	 Clemens V, von Hirschhausen E, Fegert JM. Report of the 
intergovernmental panel on climate change: implications for the 
mental health policy of children and adolescents in Europe-­a 
scoping review. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2022;31:701–13. 
	12	 Ezeruigbo CF, Ezeoha A. Climate change and the burden of 
Healthcare financing in African households. Afr J Prim Health Care 
Fam Med 2023;15:3743:e1–3:. 
	13	 Silchenko D, Murray U. Migration and climate change – the role of 
social protection. Clim Risk Manag 2023;39:100472. 
	14	 Mussa EC, Agegnehu D, Nshakira-­Rukundo E. Impact of conditional 
cash transfers on enrolment in community-­based health insurance 
among female-­headed households in South Gondar zone, Amhara 
region, Ethiopia. SSM Popul Health 2022;17:101030. 
	15	 Pega F, Shaw C, Rasanathan K, et al. Climate change, cash transfers 
and health. Bull World Health Organ 2015;93:559–65. 
	16	 Matsuyama Y, Tsuboya T, Bessho S-­I, et al. Copayment exemption 
policy and Healthcare utilization after the great East Japan 
earthquake. Tohoku J Exp Med 2018;244:163–73. 
Anton B, et al. BMJ Glob Health 2024;9:e014596. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2023-014596
7
BMJ Global Health
	17	 Ebi KL, Vanos J, Baldwin JW, et al. Extreme weather and climate 
change: population health and health system implications. Annu Rev 
Public Health 2021;42:293–315. 
	18	 Baten A, Wallemacq P, van Loenhout JAF, et al. Impact of recurrent 
floods on the utilization of maternal and newborn healthcare in 
Bangladesh. Matern Child Health J 2020;24:748–58. 
	19	 Flores AB, Collins TW, Grineski SE, et al. Disparities in health effects 
and access to health care among Houston area residents after 
Hurricane Harvey. Public Health Rep 2020;135:511–23. 
	20	 GGCA. Gender and climate change: A closer look at existing 
evidence. Global Gender and Climate Alliance; 2016.
	21	 Noy I, Nualsri A. Fiscal storms: public spending and revenues in the 
aftermath of natural disasters. Envir Dev Econ 2011;16:113–28. 
	22	 Panwar V, Sen S. Fiscal repercussions of natural disasters: stylized 
facts and panel data evidences from India. Nat Hazards Rev 
2020;21. 
	23	 Miao Q, Chen C, Lu Y, et al. Natural disasters and financial 
implications for Subnational governments: evidence from China. 
Public Finance Review 2020;48:72–101. 
	24	 Vo MV, Ebi KL, Busch Isaksen TM, et al. Addressing capacity 
constraints of rural local health departments to support climate 
change adaptation: action is needed now. Int J Environ Res Public 
Health 2022;19:13651. 
	25	 GCF. Sectoral guide: health and wellbeing. 2022. Available: https://
www.greenclimate.fund/document/sectoral-guide-health-wellbeing
	26	 Novignon J, Tabiri KG. Leveraging COVID-­19 pandemic response for 
improved health system financing: lessons from Ghana. Int J Health 
Plann Manage 2022;37:2211–23. 
	27	 Sogani R. Gender approaches in climate compatible development: 
lessons from India. Climate and Development Knowledge Network; 
2016.
	28	 Koppen B, Hope L, Colenbrander W. Gender aspects of small-­scale 
private irrigation in Africa. 2013: IWMI,
	29	 UNFCCC. Non-­economic losses in the context of the work 
programme on loss and damage. Technical paper; 2013.
	30	 WFP. Linking disaster risk financing with social protection: an 
overview of concepts and considerations. World Food Programme; 
2023.
	31	 Linnerooth-­Bayer J, et al. Insurance as a response to loss 
and damage? In: Loss and Damage from Climate Change. 
2019: 483–512. 
	32	 UNDP. Gender and climate Finance. United Nations Development 
Programme New York; 2013.
	33	 Patel S, Plutshack V, Kajumba TC, et al. Género, financiación 
climática y transiciones inclusivas con bajas emisiones de carbono 
(gender, climate finance and inclusive low-­carbon transitions). SSRN 
Journal 2023. 
	34	 Jalal MJE, Khan MA, Hossain ME, et al. Does climate change 
stimulate household vulnerability and income diversity? 
evidence from Southern Coastal region of Bangladesh. Heliyon 
2021;7:e07990. 
	35	 Quast T, Mortensen K. Emergency Department utilization in the 
Texas Medicaid emergency waiver following hurricane Katrina. 
Medicare Medicaid Res Rev 2012;2. 
	36	 Guizar-­Coutiño A, Jones JPG, Balmford A, et al. A global evaluation 
of the effectiveness of voluntary REDD+ projects at reducing 
deforestation and degradation in the moist tropics. Conserv Biol 
2022;36:e13970. 
	37	 UNHCR. Climate change and disaster displacement: an overview of 
UNHCR’s role; 2017.
	38	 Clement V, Rigaud KK, de Sherbinin A, et al. Groundswell pt 2. World 
Bank, 2021. 
	39	 Albrecht G, Sartore G-­M, Connor L, et al. Solastalgia: the 
distress caused by environmental change. Australas Psychiatry 
2007;15 Suppl 1:S95–8. 
	40	 Spiegel P, Chanis R, Trujillo A. Innovative health financing for 
refugees. BMC Med 2018;16:90. 
	41	 Huang L, Sohst R, Le Coz C. Financing responses to climate 
migration: the unique role of multilateral development banks. 2022.
	42	 Etemadi M, Shahabi S, Lankarani KB, et al. Financing of health 
services for undocumented immigrants in Iran: common challenges 
and potential solutions. Global Health 2023;19:26. 
	43	 Lyles E, Chua S, Barham Y, et al. Multi-­purpose cash transfers and 
health among vulnerable Syrian refugees in Jordan: a prospective 
cohort study. PLOS Glob Public Health 2022;2:e0001227. 
	44	 Musah-­Surugu IJ, et al. Migrants’ remittances: a complementary 
source of financing adaptation to climate change at the local level in 
Ghana. Int J Clim Change Strateg Manag 2018;10:178–96. 
	45	 Council, M.M. The global cities fund for migrants and refugees; 
2022.
	46	 Godfrey‐Wood R, Flower BCR. Does guaranteed employment 
promote resilience to climate change? the case of India's Mahatma 
Gandhi national rural employment guarantee act (MGNREGA). 
Development Policy Review 2018;36. 
	47	 Schalatek L, Nakhooda S. Gender and climate Finance. Overseas 
Development Institute, Heinrich Böll Stiftung North America; 2015.
	48	 Jameel Y, et al. Climate-­poverty connections: opportunities for 
synergistic solutions at the intersection of planetary and human well-­
being. 2022.
	49	 OECD. Making climate Finance work for women: overview of 
bilateral ODA to gender and climate change. OECD DAC Network on 
Gender Equality (GENDERNET); 2016.
	50	 Etzel RA, Weimann E, Homer C, et al. Climate change impacts on 
health across the life course. J Glob Health 2024;14:03018.
