Buying Out the Floodplain
Recommendations for Strategic Relocation Programs in Canada
PARTNERS FOR ACTION 
APRIL 2023Graphic illustration featuring abstract interpretations of flowing water and three colourful dots sparsely positioned to represent multiple locations. 
This study has been reviewed and received ethics clearance 
through a University of Waterloo Research Ethics Board (REB# 42199). 
Please reference as:
Thistlethwaite, J., Le Geyt, M., Martin, G., Cottar, S., & Whittaker, L. (2023).
Buying Out the Floodplain: Recommendations for Strategic Relocation Programs in Canada.
Partners for Action, University of Waterloo.
April 2023 © Partners for ActionPartners for Action logo
Made possible through the generous support of the Max Bell Foundation.University of Waterloo – Faculty of Environment logo
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
﻿
3
Table of Contents
4	
Acknowledgements and Credits
6	
Executive Summary
7	
Introduction
11	
Background
12 
Cost Efficiency
13 
Social Acceptability
14 
Political Feasibility
15 
Evaluating Effective Buyout Program Design
19	
Buyout Programs in Canada
20	 Gatineau, Quebec
21	
High River, Alberta 
23 Grand Forks, British Columbia
25	 Buyout Program Design
28	 Buyout Program Evaluation
29 Cost Efficiency
30 Social Acceptability
32 Political Feasibility
34 Summary Table 
35	 Main Findings
35 Cost Efficiency
35 Social Acceptability
35 Political Feasibility
36 Strategic Relocation Policy in Canada
37	
Eight Recommendations
41 
Engagement Summary and Conclusion—What We Heard
44	 Endnotes
48	 References
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Acknowledgements and Credits
4
Acknowledgements and Credits
Acknowledgements
We would first like to acknowledge the generous support of the Max Bell Foundation 
for this innovative research. The writing was conducted as a team including research by 
Jason Thistlethwaite, Melissa Jordan Le Geyt, Leah Catherine Whittaker and Shaieree Cottar. 
Geoff Martin organized the research and wrote substantial sections of the report. Partners 
for Action Director, Julie Wright, and staff Sharmalene Mendis-Millard and Elena Christy facilitated 
the project and the engagement. We also acknowledge the contribution of Anna Ziolecki, the 
previous Director of Partners for Action, who developed this project and secured the funding. 
An Advisory Committee was established to help guide the project and ensure research efforts 
had maximum value for our stakeholder audiences. Thank you to Helen Collins from the Ontario 
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing, Sandy Davis from the City of Calgary, Simon Glauser 
from the Waterloo Climate Institute, Chris Rol from the Insurance Bureau of Canada, Sarah 
Sargent from the Canadian Red Cross, and Gordon Smith from the Province of Nova Scotia for 
your help identifying stakeholders, your participation in the online engagement and your support 
disseminating the results.
The online workshop was made possible with the help of current graduate students, recent 
graduates and faculty from the University of Waterloo and McGill University, as well as external 
consultants. Thank you to Katherine Allaby, Augustin Bilaine, Patrick Bosworth, Shaieree Cottar, 
Dominique Dennery, Brent Doberstein, Annie Gauthier, Erin Griffiths, Devon Jones, Rachel 
Krueger, Beth Palmer, Kalindi Shah, Samantha Terry, Felicia Watterodt, and ICI International 
Conference Interpreters for your facilitation, interpretation, notetaking, and technical support.
Lastly, we would like to take this opportunity to thank all of the stakeholders who took the 
time to participate in the online workshop and survey. Your enthusiastic participation and rich 
input allowed us to validate and further contextualize the recommendations. In addition, the 
input received through these engagement efforts has provided valuable insight for future 
research directions as the discussion on strategic relocation and property buyout programs 
in Canada continues.
Credits
Editor(s)
Geoff Martin
Wheelhouse 
Writing Services
Lead Writers 
Jason Thistlethwaite
University of Waterloo
Melissa Jordan Le Geyt
University of Waterloo
Geoff Martin
Wheelhouse 
Writing Services
Researchers
Jason Thistlethwaite 
University of Waterloo
Leah Catherine Whittaker 
University of Waterloo
Shaieree Cottar
University of Waterloo
Melissa Jordan Le Geyt 
University of Waterloo
Translation
Johanne Roberge
Report Design
James Bisch
S.O.B. Communication 
Design
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Acknowledgements and Credits
5
About Partners for Action
P4A is a research initiative at the University of Waterloo that seeks to empower Canadians 
to become flood resilient by promoting awareness and preparedness actions that are inclusive 
and evidence-based. Partnership is central to our approach: strategic collaborations allow us 
to focus on changing the flood response landscape at the ground level and with policy makers. 
As a thought leader and steward of Flood Smart Canada, P4A moves conversation and multi-
level action forward by localizing community-engaged flood risk awareness and preparedness, 
partnering for adaptation, and developing flood resilience planning and foresight. These priorities 
will enable communities to access effective resources and innovative research, and ultimately, 
embrace inclusive resilience. 
Learn more about us at www.uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-action.


About Max Bell Foundation
Max Bell Foundation reflects the spirit and intent of its founder to improve Canadian society. 
We encourage the development of innovative ideas that impact public policies and practices 
with an emphasis on health and wellness, education, and the environment. We seek to support 
work that helps Canadians adapt to social, economic, and technological change while positively 
impacting the quality of life in our communities. Our current strategic priority is to support 
projects which educate Canadians about public policy and practice alternatives.
Learn more about Max Bell Foundation at www.maxbell.org.Partners for Action logoMax Bell Foundation logo
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Executive Summary
6
Executive Summary
Property buyout programs—which involve the relocation of high-risk neighbourhoods via the 
government acquisition of property—are considered among the most effective forms of risk 
management since they directly reduce exposure to flooding. But for local governments, buying 
out property is expensive and takes away a source of tax revenue while for citizens, home 
buyouts can be traumatic. And yet, the pervasive problem of flooding—in coastal communities, 
riverside towns, and urban neighbourhoods—means that the public is increasingly interested 
in strategic relocation as a necessary tool. There is, however, a lack of understanding about the 
planning, implementation, and long-term effects of these property buyout programs. This report 
seeks to address that lack of knowledge. 
We have identified three main challenges to the implementation of a buyout program and have 
noted various best-practices and proposals to mitigate those difficulties: 1) cost efficiency (cost-
benefit); 2) social acceptability (transparency, public engagement and equity); and 3) political 
feasibility (support among elected officials and influential stakeholders).
We also studied and evaluated the design of three buyout programs in Canada after major flood 
disasters: Gatineau, Quebec in 2017 and 2019, High River, Alberta in 2013, and Grand Forks, 
British Columbia in 2018. We found that these strategic relocation case studies were, ultimately, 
cost effective based on strong evidence that the benefits of flood risk reduction exceed the costs 
associated with the property buyouts and program administration. While these three programs 
struggled in terms of social acceptability given the disruption and difficulty involved in convincing 
property owners to abandon their homes, they were all largely considered politically feasible. 
This local support is explained by the trauma caused by the disaster and the recognition in the 
community that rebuilding completely was not an appropriate strategy. 
Based on our literature review, case study analysis, and feedback from both our national 
stakeholder workshop and survey, we make the following eight recommendations for designing 
and administering a buyout program in Canada that is cost-efficient, socially acceptable and 
politically feasible:
1.	 Develop a buyout program that is ready for implementation before a disaster;
2.	 Engage early and often;
3.	 Provide on-the-ground support and dedicated resources;
4.	 Increase compensation caps to reflect regional pre-flood market values of homes;
5.	 Create pathways for consensus and support among community partners;
6.	 Establish a federal buyout program with funding to support provincial or municipal 
relocation programs;
7.	 Improve intergovernmental coordination and dialogue;
8.	 Align buyout program design with existing disaster assistance, adaptation, and risk 
reduction policy.
Ultimately, our goal is to generate and disseminate practical knowledge that will enable 
communities across Canada to reduce the risks and costs associated with flooding and 
strengthen their own community’s resilience in the face of climate change.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
7
Introduction
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Introduction
8
On September 24, 2022 the post-tropical storm Fiona slammed into the east coast of Canada 
with a destructive storm surge and violent rain and winds in excess of 100 kilometres an hour. 
It washed away homes, caused significant flooding, and knocked out power across two Canadian 
provinces. According to an initial estimate, Fiona caused $660 million in insured damages alone, 
making it by far the most expensive extreme weather event in Atlantic Canada.1 Only ten months 
earlier and on the opposite side of the country, an atmospheric river brought “an unprecedented 
amount of rain” to British Columbia and cut off numerous highway and railway routes throughout 
the province.2 While temporary repairs have re-opened many areas, the damage, according 
to the provincial government, “is extensive and will take years to fully recover.” Indisputably, 
managing flood risk across Canada is an increasingly important social, political, and economic 
task for every tier of government and the communities they represent.
Indeed, flooding is Canada’s most frequent and most costly natural disaster. In 2018 alone, 
damage from extreme weather cost $1.9 billion in insured damages, and Canadians now pay 
$3 out-of-pocket for every $1 in damage covered by insurance.3 Worse yet, due to climate 
change, flood risk is growing in coastal communities, riverside towns, and urban neighbourhoods. 
Residential and commercial districts face increasingly frequent and intense floods,4 whether from 
sea-level rise along the coasts,5 heavy precipitation and rapid snowmelt that overflow riverways,6 
and more frequent and severe storms that overwhelm urban drainage infrastructure.7 And these 
risks are all perpetuated by decades of development in floodplains.
To reduce flood risk, Canada’s various tiers of government can improve development regulations, 
building codes, and warning systems. Yet Canada continues to rely heavily on structural defences 
like levees and berms to contain water.8 While these defences can be effective in protecting some 
people and property, levees and berms are expensive to install and costly to maintain. They are 
also environmentally unsound and prone to periodic failure. 
Canada’s approach to flood risk management is facing increasing demands for change. 
An alternative policy option that is still underdeveloped in Canada is strategic relocation, which 
intentionally withdraws people away from hazardous, flood-prone areas and either relocates 
or demolishes buildings and infrastructure.9 This purposeful relocation is achieved primarily 
through the public acquisition of exposed lots and homes.10 Governments around the world, 
including Australia and the United States, have begun implementing strategic relocation programs 
as an effective policy instrument for strengthening local climate resilience.11, 12
The design and implementation of these programs, however, is crucial. Well-planned buyout 
programs can effectively eliminate flood risk to people and property, restore natural flood 
protection along shorelines, and open up land for public recreation.13 Poorly formulated buyout 
programs often lack transparency, exacerbate social inequities, and engender resistance from 
property-owners, all of which erodes trust in the process.14
Thus far in Canada, property buyout programs have been rare and limited in scope. Rather 
than being planned in advance via prudent policy design, these programs have only been 
implemented in the aftermath of disastrous flood events. As a result, governmental attempts 
to relocate people from flood-prone areas have largely been improvised and haphazard.
And yet, support for government-initiated buyout programs appears to be gaining political 
momentum. While granting the challenging, time-consuming, and expensive nature of such 
programs, the August 2022 report by Canada’s Task Force on Flood Insurance and Relocation 
→
Occasionally also 
called “managed retreat” 
or “strategic retreat”:
This report follows the 
naming convention of 
Canada’s Task Force 
on Flood Insurance 
and Relocation.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Introduction
9
states emphatically that strategic relocation “effectively eliminates the element of exposure, 
and can be an extremely impactful tool for managing flood risk.”15 Buyouts have also received 
widespread coverage in national and international media, including in-depth analyses in 
The Globe and Mail and the New York Times.16 The idea has also gained traction among the 
broader policy community, including the Insurance Bureau of Canada.17
Against this backdrop, there is an urgent need for evidence-based policy advice about how 
to optimally design and implement effective property buyout programs. This report aims to do 
exactly that within the Canadian context. In keeping with current scholarship on flood risk 
management, we focused principally on ensuring that Canadian buyout programs are:
1. Cost efficient 
(i.e., prudent use of scarce 
resources; minimal overlap 
and duplication), 
2.	 Socially acceptable 
(i.e., accountable; transpar­
ent; participatory), and 
3.	 Politically feasible 
(i.e., supported by elected 
officials and influential 
stakeholders).18
We began this research with a systematic review of academic literature, organizational reports, 
and government documents. We endeavoured to summarize current debates around strategic 
relocation, broadly, and property buyouts, specifically. We also sought to identify recent major 
advances in the field and uncover significant gaps in the research. In the process, we built a 
database of buyout programs in Canada and other countries, which details relevant information 
on policy design, allowing for easier comparison (e.g., were the buyouts voluntary or mandatory? 
were the offers aligned with pre-flood or post-flood property values?). We wanted to illuminate 
variations in program design, assess the geographic scope of previous buyout efforts, and gauge 
whether such programs are, in fact, becoming more prevalent.
We also wanted to look more closely at several buyout programs in Canada, so we analyzed three 
recent programs in High River, Alberta, Grand Forks, British Columbia, and Gatineau, Quebec and 
produced case studies that evaluate their effectiveness based on the three criteria noted above: 
cost efficiency, social acceptability, and political viability. 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Introduction
10
Throughout our review of the literature, our database construction, and our Canadian case study 
comparisons, we asked the following questions regarding key program design considerations:
Timing: should buyouts be pursued only after significant floods, or before flood damage occurs 
(potential trade-off between efficiency and effectiveness)?
Coerciveness: should buyouts be voluntary or mandatory (potential trade-off between social 
acceptability and effectiveness)?
Compensation: should property-owners be offered pre-flood market value, or should 
compensation be capped (potential trade-off between efficiency and social acceptability)?
Governance: what should be the respective roles of the federal, provincial and local 
governments in buyout programs?
Since strategic relocation is complex, expensive, and politically fraught, an important 
consideration for the design of this project was to embed meaningful engagement with 
neighbourhood groups and elected officials who represent those who are likely to be affected 
by property buyout programs, those who have relevant knowledge and experience in designing 
these programs, and those who have been involved in past implementations. To help guide these 
efforts, we assembled a project Advisory Committee composed of representatives from provincial 
ministries, municipalities, non-governmental organizations, and think tanks. We also drew on P4A’s 
active stakeholder network of professionals from across Canada through an online survey, and 
we held a national workshop with policymakers and practitioners on December 13, 2022. 
Ultimately, our goal is to generate and disseminate practical knowledge that will enable 
communities across Canada to reduce the risks and costs associated with flooding and 
strengthen their own community’s resilience in the face of climate change.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
11
Background
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
12
Despite the growing public interest in strategic relocation, 
there is a lack of understanding about the planning, 
implementation, and long-term effects of these property 
buyout programs. This report seeks to address that lack 
of knowledge. We synthesized and compared existing 
research and reports on buyout programs in Canada 
and other high-income countries with similar policy 
contexts, including the US, New Zealand, Australia, and 
select jurisdictions in Europe. In the process, we identified 
program considerations for policy makers and noted 
future directions for research that would contribute to 
successful property buyouts programs in Canada.
Our review of key messages and themes confirms the fact that policymakers face 
considerable uncertainty in planning and carrying out either proactive or reactive buyout 
programs. Based on the key themes that emerged, we have identified three main challenges to 
the implementation of a buyout program and have noted various best-practices and proposals 
to mitigate those difficulties: 1) cost efficiency (cost-benefit), 2) social acceptability (transparency, 
public engagement and equity), and 3) political feasibility (support among elected officials 
and influential stakeholders).
Cost Efficiency
It is essential that public policy planners clearly demonstrate that the economic benefits of a 
large buyout project exceed its significant costs. In the case of strategic relocation, the benefits 
of relocation must exceed the costs of remaining in place.19 These benefits include the savings 
generated by no longer needing to maintain costly structural defences20 or fund rebuilding 
in the aftermath of a disaster. 21 The bulk cost of a buyout usually involves the financial cost of 
purchasing property and is often shouldered by a national government; however, many studies 
noted that the programs can result in significant on-going costs for lower levels of government22 
due to the loss of established or potential tax-revenue23 as well as increased maintenance costs, 
especially where limited acceptance of a buyout offer causes a “checkerboard” of vacant lots.24
Nevertheless, there are ways to mitigate some of these municipal costs. Certain programs, for 
example, have included a financial incentive for relocating within the community, county, or city.25 
Where vacant lots cannot be joined up as continuous space, municipalities have reduced costs 
by planting native species26 or repurposed the space for small-scale recreation.27 They can also 
increase surrounding land values through community enhancements, such as by building parks, 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
13
community gardens and recreational spaces.28 Finally, municipalities might consider arranging 
external land management partnerships with conservation groups, park organizations, or land 
trusts to defray costs and share responsibility.29
Another barrier to efficiency involves fragmentation and redundancy in the administration of the 
program.30 Often a program’s administration can be spread across multiple levels of government, 
leading to confusion among participants when guidance is unclear or if there are multiple, 
concurrently running buyout programs. For example, participants might apply for eligibility for a 
buyout program funded by an upper tier government but also need zoning approval from the 
municipal government.
Poor policy alignment is also distinctly inefficient as it increases the costs of administration. 
Residents are less likely to participate in a buyout if other disaster assistance is funding 
rebuilding programs at the same time. Similarly, buyout programs need to be aligned with local 
land-use policies. If the land reclaimed through a buyout program remains zoned for residential 
or commercial use, residents are unlikely to participate or offer their support since future 
construction could still occur.
Inconsistent eligibility requirements make these programs challenging to administer and 
communicate to the public. Moreover, high turnover rates of staff can lead to inefficient delays 
associated with new hires and training. Finally, the programs’ voluntary buyout structures can 
create a patchwork of compliance in some neighbourhoods, producing a redundancy whereby 
local governments have to both protect those property owners who remain while also beginning 
to maintain newly vacated lots.
Social Acceptability
Social acceptability refers to the level of support among residents and other influential 
stakeholders involved in the buyout program. Without widespread approval among local 
constituencies, buyout programs struggle to achieve the levels of participation needed to reduce 
risk. Existing research highlights three particular challenges in cultivating program acceptance: 
1.	 Most people have a strong attachment to their place and community, including physical and 
emotional connections to their birthplace or long-time home or job. However, one of the most 
influential factors in taking a buyout offer was if a homeowner’s family or neighbours were also 
considering moving.31 
2.	 Low levels of risk perception and awareness can act as a barrier to accepting a buyout 
program.32 Individuals often discount the likelihood of recurrent flooding, especially after the 
risk has subsided and life has returned to “normal.”33 
3.	 Relocation can have a disproportionate impact on those who are socially vulnerable. Analysis 
in the US and Canada has found that levels of socio-economic vulnerability are often higher in 
flood zones.34 Buyout programs can therefore increase levels of inequity by unfairly targeting 
the relocation of marginalized populations. Broadly speaking, those who are wealthier are also 
likely to enjoy better outcomes from participation in a buyout program since they are able to 
navigate administrative processes and afford desirable property in other locations.35 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
14
Existing research on buyout programs has identified how program design can reduce 
these challenges, namely through robust engagement and public consultation, which foster 
trust and much-needed transparency over decision making on program eligibility, compensation, 
and timelines.36
First, engagement provides an opportunity to inform residents about risk and begin managing 
expectations about their attachment to a specific, high-risk location. For example, through a 
door-to-door campaign in Waitakere City, New Zealand, a buyout program was able to increase 
participation by offering to move neighbours together and involve them in the re-naturalization 
of their former properties.37
Secondly, consultation provides an opportunity for decision makers to acknowledge that 
different households and communities will have varying barriers to relocation. More specifically, 
residents can help inform policy planners about what incentives or program details might 
encourage their acceptance of a buyout.38 In the case of socio-economic vulnerability, for 
example, program administrators can address deficits in resources by enhancing compensation 
or offering additional services. Notably, this consultation should also include communities 
adjacent to high-risk buyout zones since they often see many of the same negative effects of 
a flood without the support of buyout compensation.39 Partnering with local organizations and 
community leaders, who likely have previous relationships and shared priorities with residents, 
can help facilitate trustworthy consultation.40
Political Feasibility
The effectiveness of property buyout programs depends, in part, on the support they receive from 
elected decision makers and influential interests.41 For instance, property buyout programs might 
be opposed by elected officials who eye them as contrary to their strategic political interests or 
the wishes of their constituents. Since elected officials are accountable for the well-being of those 
constituents, buyout programs can generate a significant backlash that may limit elected officials’ 
chances of re-election. 
Support must also be broad among influential stakeholders, whether internal (e.g., finance, city 
staff, planners and engineers) or external (e.g., community associations). Support among financial 
staff, for example, is critical if the city requires additional room in the budget to fund a portion of, 
or all of, the buyouts. Community associations often serve to collect neighbourhood feedback on 
local policy and are instrumental in communicating a buyout program’s objectives and design. 
Lastly, buyout programs must also align with existing policies for land-use, flood risk reduction 
and climate change adaptation. If property is relocated and the site is subsequently used for 
commercial development rather than flood mitigation, like new floodway parkland, a credibility gap 
is likely to emerge as residents question the original intent of the decision makers implementing 
the buyout program. Similarly, in communities facing housing shortages, other options besides 
buyouts (e.g., structural defences) might be necessary if the trade-off between higher levels of 
flood exposure is deemed worth it in exchange for housing stock retention. 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
15
Evaluating Effective Buyout Program Design
In the process of reviewing the literature on various buyout program designs, we identified the 
following key features that could be used to address the three main challenges of cost efficiency, 
social acceptability and political feasibility: 
Compensation
•	
Determining adequate compensation for property owners is a complex and context-
specific task. Compensation is a powerful tool for addressing buyout program weaknesses, 
but it can involve trade-offs between social acceptability, political feasibility and costs.
•	
Most buyout programs use pre-disaster property values as a baseline to calculate 
compensation, sometimes using third-party appraisals. While such offers are more appealing 
for residents and encourage program acceptance, they also result in high program costs.42 
However, the consensus in the research is that financial offers need to be high enough that 
they make homeowners feel like they are getting appropriate value for their property and allow 
them to recreate their same quality of life elsewhere—including maintaining their social ties.43 
•	
Buyout programs vary considerably, offering baseline valuations for land and property that 
range from as little as 80% (Eferding Basin, Austria) to 110% (Ames, Iowa). Offers may also 
include allocations for moving expenses and/or demolition costs. Even in cases where 
100% of the pre-flood property value was paid, homeowners reported challenges in finding 
comparable housing for the same price outside of the flood-zone.44 They also faced additional 
expenses such as moving costs, interim housing, legal fees, service connections, and in 
some cases, building demolition45—all of which can represent a considerable burden to 
homeowners who accept a buyout.46
Coerciveness
•	
Programs can be designed to coerce participation (e.g., mandatory buyouts) by using the 
threat that, if residents choose to remain, government will expropriate land exposed to flood 
risk. These programs, however, are rare since they face considerable social and political 
opposition. As such, most buyout programs are explicitly voluntary by design even though 
legal mechanisms exist in some jurisdictions for authorities to acquire property for the sake 
of public safety. While voluntary programs are likely to be more acceptable to residents and 
elected officials since they offer flexibility for individuals to determine whether or not they want 
to participate, voluntary programs can also be less efficient as property that is left behind 
remains exposed to flooding in the community. Furthermore, when buyouts are voluntary, 
there is a risk of sporadic acceptance, resulting in a mixture of isolated houses and vacant lots 
that create costs for municipalities that must protect and maintain both.47 
•	
Given the challenges involved in coercing residents to leave their property, most funding 
structures require that buyout programs be voluntary.48 Even so, the literature reveals that 
many homeowners still felt compelled to relocate despite the “voluntary” structure.49 They 
cite pressure from officials, limited income to rebuild after a flood, the removal of infrastructure, 
and barriers from the municipality in obtaining rebuilding permits.50 Such actions not only 
→
Higher levels of 
compensation have 
been shown to improve 
social acceptability 
since property owners 
are more likely to 
participate; however, 
increased compensation 
can be expensive for 
local governments to 
fund and can decrease 
the program’s political 
viability if tax increases 
are required.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
16
undermine trust in government, they can also influence acceptance of a buyout offer. One 
study found that people were more likely to accept a buyout offer if they did not feel pressured 
and had trust in officials.51
	
To encourage uptake of a buyout program while also respecting residents, 
governments should strengthen guidelines to ensure that their programs 
do not pressure property owners inadvertently or explicitly and that the 
compensation is generous.52 Furthermore, governments need to guarantee 
that affected communities are consulted from the early stage of program 
conception all the way through to completion.

Timing
•	
Most property buyouts occur in the immediate aftermath of a flood event rather than through 
advance engagement and study, involving the identification of high flood-risk neighbourhoods, 
broad community consultations to educate and assess buyout interest and, pre-emptive 
financial offers to buy out properties most at risk of flooding. Such advanced efforts have 
been identified as critical pre-cursors to effective buyout programs since they improve social 
acceptability, cultivate political support and reduce the administrative costs of programs 
hastily implemented in the aftermath of severe flooding. 
•	
Prior to a flood disaster, there is often a lack of will to pursue retreat options pre-emptively. 
Politicians understandably worry about public opinion, the local tax base, economic 
investment, and long-term development goals.53 For the most part, elected officials often 
postpone large-scale responses—such as retreat—until it is absolutely necessary.54 But a 
major flood crisis brings stark attention to an inundated community’s water risks, opening a 
post-disaster window of opportunity to initiate new policies and norms that involve significant 
life changes and financial cost.55 The more a city or municipality is prepared for a flood 
disaster, the better it is positioned to respond efficiently.
While very few buyout programs have been designed in advance of 
a major flood event, a number of studies have noted actions and details 
that can, at the very least, be pre-planned:
•	Mapping buyout zones; 
•	Determining appropriate financial compensation; 
•	Undertaking early public consultation in order to aid community
	 members in understanding the need for retreat; and 
•	Noting which property owners may be willing to participate.56
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
17
•	 These pre-emptive actions should be components within a broader, integrated flood 
management strategy that encompasses new infrastructure in urbanized areas and allocates 
funding for pre-crisis adaptation and mitigation actions.57 Planning buyout zones in advance 
is an important strategy for holistic and orderly flood management that efficiently meets 
a community’s needs and goals and retains public support.
	
One case study offers relevant lessons: following the 2008 Midwest 
floods, the City of Cedar Rapids, Iowa began a successful property buyout 
program comprising three zones, each of which had different goals: a 
greenway (high flood risk, intended for recreational use and green space), 
a construction/study area (medium flood risk, intended for some hard flood 
protection, relocation of some roads and utilities, and recreational use), 
and a community development area (lower flood risk, intended for 
affordable housing and flood-resilient buildings). The whole program and 
individual zone details were decided through deliberate and collaborative 
consultation with the public, resulting in very positive public perception 
of the program.58 

Governance
•	
Most programs are implemented at local levels by governments that lack sufficient 
resources for implementation. But well-run, efficient buyout programs require significant 
human and financial resources and capacity—from consulting with the public and 
administering the program to processing funding applications and managing land use 
planning.59 As a result, national and sub-national governments are often involved in buyout 
programs as sources of financial and administrative capacity.
•	 This multi-level approach involves some trade-offs in terms of program effectiveness. Local 
governments often have the most knowledge about the needs of residents and locations 
where buyouts are justified, but they often sacrifice control over the implementation if upper-
tier governments expect to influence program design in exchange for more resources. For 
example, an upper-tier government might identify different neighbourhoods for relocation than 
those expected by local governments and residents, leading to confusion and limiting the 
program’s social and political acceptability. At the same time, local governments often require 
financial and administrative support from upper-tier governments in order to defray costs that 
residents would likely oppose if passed down in the form of property tax increases. 
•	
Local governments should leverage the reach and capacity of community and neighbourhood 
associations, which can influence the effectiveness of buyout programs. These organizations 
act as knowledge brokers and communicators between governments and residents, helping 
to gather feedback on program design while also explaining critical administrative information 
to those seeking to relocate. In Staten Island following Hurricane Sandy, for example, 
community groups were essential in both getting a buyout program as well as liaising with 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Background
18
residents about program details.60 Some government agencies have also contracted work out 
to private firms, as in the Australian buyout program in Grantham, Queensland, where a land 
swap lottery was run by a private firm to ensure impartiality.61
	
The case of Christchurch, New Zealand following the 2010 and 2011 
earthquakes highlights one attempt at increasing capacity; the federal 
government created the Canterbury Earthquake Recovery Authority—a 
new central government agency dedicated to running the recovery efforts, 
including the property buyouts.62 The skill sets, resources, and relationships 
necessary to undertake an effective buyout program can often be found in 
community organizations and actors, and governments can take advantage 
of this by involving a broader range of community organizations and 
encouraging local leadership.63
	
The literature review determined that while property buyout programs have been planned and 
carried out in varying ways, they share key challenges of funding, equity, timing, and capacity. 
The existing research also highlights common approaches for program success, namely 
public participation, homeowner supports and financial compensation, a planned approach, 
and organizational capacity.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
19
Buyout Programs in Canada
Based on the findings from the literature review, we explored and evaluated 
the design of the following three existing buyout programs in Canada.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Programs in Canada
20
Gatineau, Quebec
In the spring of 2017, the City of Gatineau experienced torrential rainfall, rapid snowmelt, and 
soil saturation. This record-breaking flood forced more than 4,000 people to evacuate from the 
Ottawa River shoreline and damaged over 1,800 properties.64 Disaster assistance was quickly 
made available for eligible owners who had sustained damages to their primary residences, but 
provincial legislation prohibited the rebuilding of the 1,428 flood-damaged properties located in 
the 1:20 flood zone. Through the province’s General Indemnity and Financial Assistance Program 
for Actual or Imminent Disasters, these houses were targeted for a buyout with capped value of 
$200,000 and an additional $50,000 for the value of the land.65 The City of Gatineau also aided 
recovery efforts by deferring property tax deadlines, waiving application fees, and expediting 
construction/ demolition permits.66
Two years later, the Gatineau region was again struck by widespread flooding. One hundred 
and eleven homes had to be evacuated, and 923 houses were ultimately damaged.67 Faced 
with more damaged properties and rising recovery costs, the Government of Quebec amended 
the disaster financial compensation program, lowering the limit on eligible damages for repair 
or rebuilding from $159,000 after the 2017 floods to a $100,000 lifetime limit.68 If the damage 
to a home exceeded 50% of its value or exceeded $100,000 in damages, property owners 
situated on floodplains were eligible for a buyout up to a maximum payment of $200,000 based 
on municipal tax valuations, with an additional $50,000 for the land.69 Those who accepted the 
buyout offer transferred ownership to the municipality for the symbolic sum of $1, after which 
the City assumed responsibility for the property’s care and maintenance.70
Because of the successive rounds of 
flooding, uptake for the buyout program was 
higher in 2019 than in 2017. As of 2019, more 
than 250 single detached houses had been 
demolished and 148 of the lots had been 
officially transferred to the City of Gatineau 
(Figure 2).71 The Government of Quebec has 
paid out approximately $50 million to buy 
back properties in Gatineau, and this figure 
is expected to increase as more claims are 
paid out. As of 2022, the government of 
Quebec has increased compensation caps 
to $325,000.72
Following the demolition of condemned properties, the City of Gatineau allotted $1.4 million of its 
budget for beautification projects on vacant lots.73 Local organizers and non-profits collaborated 
to create economical urban civic gardens, pedestrian walkways, and commemorative spaces to 
document the disaster and community experiences.74 ■
CASE STUDY
Figure 4: A family bungalow in Gatineau is put up 
for sale in 2019 following the spring floods.
Photo credits: Cottar, 2019
Figure 1: A property in 
Gatineau, QC opposite the 
Ottawa River undergoes 
structural renovations after 
the 2019 floods.
Figure 2: A demolition flyer 
is advertised on a vacant lot 
in Gatineau marking where a 
property buyout has occurred.
Figure 3: A 16-unit 
condominium in Gatineau is 
condemned and slated for 
demolition after the spring 
2019 floods.Figure 1: A property in Gatineau, QC opposite the Ottawa River undergoes structural renovations after the 2019 floods.Figure 2: A demolition flyer is advertised on a vacant lot in Gatineau marking where a property buyout has occurred.Figure 3: A 16-unit condominium in Gatineau is condemned and slated for demolition after the spring 2019 floods.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Programs in Canada
21
High River, Alberta 
In June 2013, torrential rainfall, combined with above-average mountain snowpack, a very 
wet spring, and early snowmelt, triggered unprecedented flooding across southern Alberta.75 
More than 100,000 residents were displaced from their homes, and 30 municipalities had to 
declare a state of local emergency.76 It proved to be the costliest natural disaster in Canada up 
to that point: flood-related damages across the province cost about $6 billion, of which only 
$1.74 billion was insured.77
The Town of High River, located 70 kilometres south of Calgary, was hit particularly hard. 
The floods impacted nearly 60% of the residents and 70% of the buildings, and the town issued 
a mandatory evacuation order for all 13,000 residents.78 
Two months after the flood, the Government of Alberta announced a Floodway Relocation 
Program (FRP) with an allocated budget of $137 million. The program aimed to encourage certain 
homeowners in Calgary, High River, Medicine Hat, Bragg Creek, Black Diamond, and Turner Valley 
to voluntarily relocate out of floodways.79 Residential owners within designated floodway zones 
were eligible to receive compensation equal to their most recent municipal tax assessment value 
in exchange for vacating their homes. Only primary residences were eligible for the program, and 
the government did not intend to allow any rebuilding on vacated lots. Those who declined the 
buyout and opted instead to receive financial disaster assistance forfeited eligibility to receive 
additional assistance in the event of a future flood.80
Criticisms were directed at the provincial government’s FRP for relying on outdated flood hazard 
maps that did not consistently reflect areas where actual damage had occurred.81 Notably, heavily 
damaged areas within the Town of High River, including the neighbourhoods of Wallaceville and 
Hampton Hills, had not been mapped as designated floodways and were therefore ineligible 
CASE STUDY
Figure 5: Overlay of the flood 
hazard mapping in High River; 
neighbourhood locations 
added by author.
Credit: Government of Alberta, n.d. 
Wallaceville
Beachwood Estates
Hampton Hills
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Programs in Canada
22
for the province’s relocation program.82 By contrast, areas such as the neighbourhood of 
Beachwood Estates and other nearby streets were designated within the floodway and included 
in the FRP although residents reported little or no damage during the flood.83
In November 2013, High River’s town council approved a motion to petition the province to 
include the entire neighbourhood of Wallaceville in the FRP, with the objective of returning the 
area to its natural state.84 The Alberta government agreed to extend the buyout offer to the entire 
Wallaceville neighbourhood. Meanwhile, low uptake across Alberta’s FRP (about 40% of the 
254 eligible homeowners) prompted the province to extend the program, giving residents until 
August 30, 2014 to enter a buyout program.
By September 2015, all the property owners in Wallaceville had accepted buyout offers, 
and the demolition of homes was completed that December.85 For Beachwood Estates, which 
experienced limited flood damage but was positioned entirely in the floodway and between dike 
projects, the town ultimately committed to restoring the neighbourhood to its natural state, urged 
full buyout acceptance, and, rather uniquely, auctioned off 26 of the houses under the condition 
that they would be dismantled and removed.86 By 2018 all remaining buildings and infrastructure 
were removed and vegetation and seeding in the area was completed the following summer.87 
In Hampton Hills, where temporary berms in the town’s core reportedly diverted floodwaters 
into the neighbourhood, mitigation projects have since been built. As such, Hampton Hills 
has remained developed and many of the houses have since been rebuilt.
Several additional buyouts were required where land was needed to construct dikes 
or bank amendments as part of the town’s flood protection program. Beginning immediately 
after the flood, the municipality embarked on an extensive upgrade of its infrastructure 
network, including installing the Centre Street Flood Gate, constructing 15 dikes, and realigning 
various roadways.88 ■
Figure 6: Properties included 
in the Beachwood Estates 
acquisition program.
Photo credit: Town of High River, 2019
Figure 7: Properties included 
in the Wallaceville acquisition 
program.
Photo credit: Gateway Gazette, 2015
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Programs in Canada
23
Grand Forks, British Columbia
The City of Grand Forks is located in interior British Columbia, at the confluence of the Granby 
and Kettle Rivers. In the spring when the mountain snowpack melts into the watershed, the area 
experiences frequent seasonal flooding. In May 2018, however, a perfect storm of high snowpack 
(238% of normal in the Boundary Basin), warm weather and heavy spring rain resulted in a 1-in-
200-year flood in the city and surrounding area.89 Over two days, the rivers surpassed previous 
water level records and resulted in widespread overland flooding.90 Just four days prior, the City 
had met with consultants to begin updating local floodplain maps.
In total, 1,471 households were ordered to evacuate, about 400 homes experienced moderate 
to major damage and more than 50 homes were damaged beyond repair.91 The flood cost Grand 
Forks nearly $50 million, which included significant damage to dikes, community infrastructure, 
residential homes, and commercial property.92 Most of the flooding was concentrated downtown 
and in the neighbourhoods of Johnson Flats, South Ruckle, and North Ruckle, the latter of which 
was the lowest-income community in the city.
The provincial government approved Disaster Financial Assistance for the flood event, 
enabling eligible uninsured residents to access compensation for disaster-related losses.93 In 
June 2018, the Regional District of Kootenay Boundary (RDKB) began developing a community-
based recovery process and formed a Boundary Flood Recovery (BFR) Team.94 Over the next 
few months, the Team worked closely with residents, community organizations, and governments 
as well as the Canadian Red Cross, Mennonite Disaster Service, Samaritan’s Purse, Emergency 
Management British Columbia (EMBC) and the Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource 
Operations and Rural Development.95
CASE STUDY
Granby River East
Downtown
South Ruckle
Johnson Flats
LEGEND
Constructed Water Bodies
Pipes and Swales
Drainage Swale
Interceptor Storm Main
Pipe
Potential Riparian 
Restoration Sites
DMAF Dikes
DMAF Property Aquisitions
Full
6-Meter Setback
3-Meter Setback
Renaturalized Floodplain
Figure 8: Grand Forks 
2018 flood impact areas and 
proposed disaster mitigation 
and adaptation projects. 
Credit: City of Grand Forks, 2021
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Programs in Canada
24
Given that annual freshet flooding had become more frequent and damaging, there was strong 
public support for increasing flood resiliency and preventing a repeat of the 2018 flood.96 As 
such, the city hired an engineering firm to provide an overview of flood impacts, identify areas of 
permanent flood risk, and suggest long-term risk reduction options for the area.97 That fall, Grand 
Forks City Council voted in favour of the recommended flood protection. These included: 
•	
Property buyouts in four areas of the city: the entirety of North Ruckle, floodplain areas 
in South Ruckle and Johnson Flats, and some downtown properties;
•	
Improving grey infrastructure with three new dikes and raising high-priority arterial roads;
•	 Augmenting natural infrastructure by strategically restoring certain riparian areas and 
floodplains.
To design and administer the first property buyout program in British Columbia, Grand Forks 
hired a consulting company and approved its Land Acquisition Program in early 2020. Over the 
ensuing year, personnel met with homeowners individually, conducted property inspections, and 
extended offers to those owners who had accepted the buyout.98 Controversially, City Council 
converted some of the newly acquired homes into temporary rental properties as a means of both 
adding housing stock and using revenues to offset costs of the buyout program.99 At the same 
time, property owners were offered the option to retain title and stay in their homes temporarily, 
even after their offer was settled and funds dispersed; this design feature proved an important 
factor in encouraging property owners to accept a buyout. By June 2021, the owners of 63 out of 
73 targeted properties had accepted an offer, and as of 2022, City Council had expropriated three 
properties as part of the neighbourhood-wide buyouts. Properties being purchased as part of the 
next phase flood mitigation works are currently in the offer stage. ■
Land 
Aquisition 
Program
Owner
intake
meeting
Appraisal 
process
Additional 
consideration 
calculation
Establish 
file type
Receive offer
Contract
Appeal 
process
Offer revisions 
and acceptance
Reject offer
Leave program
Conveyance
Hardship file
EXPEDITE
Technical file
At-risk file
Standard file
9–10 weeks
6–8 weeks
Apply 
additional 
resources
Refer to 
public trustee
Figure 9: 
Land Acquisition Program 
Implementation Schedule. 
Credit: Keystone Consulting and 
Appraisals, 2021
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
25
Buyout Program Design
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Design
26
Our analysis of these three existing buyout programs 
in Canada revealed several areas of consistency in terms 
of design but some notable differences in execution.
Compensation
•	
Compensation approaches varied between the three cases:
	
Compensation in the Grand Forks buyout program was based on post-flood fair market 
value with an additional compensation sum based on property sale costs and disturbance 
factors exceeding Expropriation Act compensation factors. In High River, however, property 
values were assessed based on the pre-flood property tax assessment. In contrast to both, 
the city of Gatineau capped property values based on a damage threshold of $200,000 for 
structures plus $50,000 for land.
Coerciveness
•	
Coerciveness was largely voluntary “on paper” but each program included conditions 
that limited the benefits for those who chose not to participate in the buyout program:
	
In High River’s Wallaceville and Beachwood neighbourhoods, participation was ostensibly 
voluntary, but homeowners still faced the threat of expropriation by the municipality if they 
refused to take the buy-out. The provincial government also encouraged buyout acceptance 
by limiting access to future disaster assistance for those that chose to remain in the flood 
zone. Similarly, the Grand Forks program was voluntary even as the municipality reserved the 
right to expropriate homes if property owners chose to stay. In addition, the funding provided 
by the Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF) required that any acquired property 
be returned to its natural state. In Gatineau, coerciveness was presented on a gradient 
based on a given property’s damage and location within the floodplain: mandatory buyout 
for damaged properties within the 1:20 zone and voluntary buyouts for damaged properties 
outside the 1:20 zone while those who didn’t accept the buyout faced a limited lifetime disaster 
recovery allowance of $100,000.
Timing
•	 All three case study programs were established reactively to a major flood event, 
but the buyout program timeline varied from one to several years:
	
In High River, the government of Alberta announced the Floodway Relocation Program 
(FRP) two months following the flood and initially gave residents three months to decide 
although this was extended to one year. With the Wallaceville neighbourhood added to the 
program four months later (six months post-flood), homeowners were given eight months to 
make a decision. The Grand Forks program was also reactive but considerably more drawn-
out. The provincial government applied to the federal DMAF program two months after the 
spring 2018 flood, and Grand Forks City Council approved the buyout program with funding 
approved by DMAF just over one year later. In the fall of 2019, Grand Forks hired a consultant 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Design
27
to administer the buyout, and land acquisitions occurred over 2020 and 2021. In Gatineau, 
the buyout program was approved by the province approximately one month after the 
flooding in May 2017 and was expanded in response to more flooding in spring 2019. At the 
time of each disaster, none of the three programs were in a good position to make decisions 
about long-term flood risk reduction due to a lack of up-to-date flood maps and hazard risk 
assessments as well as a lack of coordinated land use planning and management.
Governance
•	
Governance and oversight of the three buyout programs varied between local and 
provincial control and with or without assistance from consulting firms and outside experts:
	
Widespread flooding in other locations in Southern Alberta, beyond just the town of High 
River, justified a provincial rather than municipal approach. As a result, buyout programs were 
developed by the province of Alberta and implemented by a number of municipalities. The 
program in Grand Forks was developed and implemented by a consulting firm hired by the 
city and financed by the federal DMAF program. Even so, the municipality maintained control 
over the program, including the scope of land acquisition and land-use decision. The buyouts 
in Gatineau were coordinated and administered entirely by the Quebec government. The 
program was institutionalized through Quebec’s General Indemnity and Financial Assistance 
Program, which created a permanent mechanism for buyouts yet still allows the provincial 
government to expand and refine the criteria over time. At the local level, the City of Gatineau 
attempted to support homeowners in other ways via deferred deadlines, waived fees, and 
expedited permits, etc. Unlike the Alberta or Quebec floods, the flood disaster in Grand Forks 
was more concentrated, which allowed the city, rather than the province, to manage the 
implementation of the buyout program. Grand Forks was also unique in their efforts to conduct 
one-on-one intake meetings with eligible homeowners, but this outreach was only done after 
the buyout option had been decided.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
28
Buyout Program Evaluation
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Evaluation
29
We evaluated the three Canadian buyout programs 
using a set of criteria grounded in existing literature on 
flood risk management and program design. These are 
broken down into the three categories introduced earlier: 
program efficiency, social acceptability, and political 
feasibility. See also the Summary Table.
Cost Efficiency
Property buyouts to reduce flood risk are funded with public money, and they involve a 
significant immediate cost for longer-term benefits. We evaluated the efficiency of each program 
based on the extent to which it:
•	
Encouraged prudent use of scarce resources (i.e., achieved results at a reasonable cost);
•	
Coordinated efforts and minimized overlap and duplication;
•	
Promoted medium- and long-term financial planning for flood risk reduction.
High River, AB  (medium) 
Limited uptake of the provincial buyout program was identified as evidence of inefficiency. 
From the beginning, poor policy alignment at the provincial and municipal levels resulted 
in multiple, concurrently running buyout programs. Inconsistent eligibility requirements made 
these various programs challenging to administer and communicate to the public. Exacerbating 
these problems, high turnover rates of staff led to inefficient delays due to new hiring and training. 
Finally, the program’s voluntary buyout structure created a patchwork of compliance in some 
neighbourhoods; this created a redundancy whereby local governments had to both maintain 
newly vacated lots and still protect those property owners who remained.
Grand Forks, BC  (medium-high)
We noted several efficiency strengths in the Grand Forks property buyout program due to 
the use of financial resources, human resources, timeliness, and risk reduction. An initial cost-
benefit analysis (CBA) determined that the benefits of the program were higher than the costs 
based on a return on investment (ROI) of 3.4:1, which exceeded the threshold required by the 
Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF) to qualify for funding.100 But this assessment 
likely underestimates the economic benefits since it does not account for non-monetary gains 
such as limiting loss of life, lessening ecological damage, preventing additional disruptions 
to local business activity and reducing damage to infrastructure. There remains, however, 
some uncertainty in final cost estimates, especially if the city is required to pay for legal costs 
associated with expropriating additional properties. 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Evaluation
30
As with the other case studies, the buyout planning was reactive to the flood event, so it 
involved significant time and resources from city staff. There was also uncertainty over the 
financial costs of the buyouts and the funding available from upper levels of government as well 
as negative public opinion that made the program politically challenging. As a result of delays in 
the finalized program details, many people lived with a great deal of uncertainty, unsure if they 
should repair their homes, move out, or even protect their property.101 That said, once buyouts 
were underway, negotiations and compensation with property owners proceeded in a timely 
manner. Further evidence of the degree of efficiency the city gained through policy alignment was 
their implementation of a Flood Mitigation Program,102 which embedded the buyouts as one risk 
reduction strategy among others, like limiting any further development in the floodplain.
Gatineau, QC  (medium)
In Gatineau, the Quebec government approached the cost efficiency challenge by capping 
its homeowner compensation at $200,000 per buyout although there was no ceiling on 
total program spending. Caps on compensation can lead to more limited uptake in voluntary 
buyouts, but our analysis suggests that the program did in fact reduce flood risk exposure in the 
municipality. Moreover, many residents decided to relocate within the municipality, which limited 
some lost revenue from property taxes. 
According to some homeowners, however, the coordination and implementation of the program 
was somewhat inefficient. Gatineau’s buyout program was led by the Government of Quebec 
with the Ministry of Public Security and Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing responsible 
for program delivery. This multi-office approach led to some confusion and redundancy. 
Homeowners often had to consult these ministries in addition to the municipality in order to 
participate in the program. For example, once a buyout was approved by the province, property 
owners then had to seek a demolition permit from the municipality. 
Despite some of the coordination challenges, the buyouts were aligned with a broader set of 
long-term risk reduction strategies and policies: investments in structural defences, such as 
raising roads, improvements to the stormwater and runoff management systems in the Wabassee 
Creek watershed, and the rehabilitation of natural assets. This policy alignment ensured that the 
benefits of risk reduction exceeded the costs.
Social Acceptability
People often react strongly and emotionally to property buyout programs in their neighbourhood 
because people underestimate risk, exhibit strong place attachment, and vary in their capacity to 
relocate.103 Based on the evidence from other complex policy initiatives, we evaluated the social 
acceptability of each property buyout programs based on the extent to which it:
•	 Allowed stakeholders to hold decision makers to account and obligated planners to report, 
explain, and be answerable for their decisions;
•	
Promoted transparency in decision making transparency;
•	
Encouraged meaningful engagement with a range of stakeholders;
•	
Fairly and equitably distributed benefits and burdens.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Evaluation
31
High River, AB  (low-medium)
Low levels of accountability, transparency and engagement limited the social acceptability 
of the High River buyout program. A study of public engagement efforts in High River following 
the 2013 flood found that opportunities to participate and shape the flood recovery plan were 
limited.104 Early town hall meetings were emotionally charged, with many residents using 
the opportunity to express their anger and frustration. Later sessions were then structured 
as open houses used to disseminate information. Neither of which provided opportunities 
for meaningful collaboration. 
Limited transparency over the program design also led to confusion. Initially, property owners 
in the Wallaceville neighbourhood were excluded from eligibility for the buyout program. 
Many started to rebuild their properties after seeking support from provincial disaster assistance 
programs. Several months later, however, the province announced that property owners 
in Wallaceville would in fact be eligible for buyouts but would not be compensated for any 
investments they had made in restoring or cleaning their property. Additionally, municipal officials 
announced that property owners who refused a buyout could still face expropriation with a 
lower compensation level.105 This messaging deviated significantly from the provincial FRP, which 
stipulated that the buyout program was entirely voluntary and included no threat of expropriation. 
Grand Forks, BC  (medium)
The buyout program in Grand Forks employed public engagement and communication strategies, 
like one-on-one meetings with property owners, several public meetings, and surveys of property 
owners to improve the social acceptability of the program. Still, residents expressed concerns 
about inconsistent messaging and a lack of early outreach. However, assigning Boundary Family 
Services case workers to residents in the early stages was identified as helpful for enabling 
meaningful engagement; the case workers provided a neutral sounding board and supportive 
resource for residents. In turn, they communicated residents’ needs back to the BFR Team.106 
Interviewees noted, however, that public engagement could have started earlier and been more 
consistent, which would have resulted in more meaningful and comprehensive feedback from the 
public.107 Early engagement would also have potentially neutralized vocal opposition from some 
residents towards certain program elements, especially the long period of initial uncertainty and 
the compensation offers at post-flood value.108
To support transparency, Grand Forks regularly updated residents via public and closed meetings, 
mailings, social media, and a program website. But this messaging was sometimes inconsistent 
with other public communications by city officials, which led to confusion among residents—
particularly whether compensation would reflect pre- or post-flood property values.109 Residents 
also objected to public communication that characterized the buyouts as “voluntary” since 
many assumed they would have to accept a buyout or face municipal expropriation. Despite 
the ambiguity, Grand Forks worked to improve transparency through a centralized website 
and strategy managed by a communications firm and hired a consulting firm to negotiate with 
property owners over property appraisals and acquisitions. 
Notably, the neighbourhoods that suffered the most flood damage were also the city’s lowest-
income communities, an impact that reflects an inequity observed in other instances of 
flooding.110 The neighbourhoods most affected included many retirees, renters, and precariously-
housed populations, who reported less financial and housing security than those in other 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Evaluation
32
areas of the city.111 For some of these residents, accepting the buyout would have increased 
their financial hardship. Grand Forks attempted to identify and engage with these residents 
and facilitated access to additional support, like independent legal representation and social 
services—an effort that demonstrates a credible concern for fairness and equity in their 
buyout program. 
Gatineau, QC  (low-medium)
As with High River and Grand Forks, Gatineau’s buyout program required a quick 
implementation that limited opportunities for strong engagement and transparency. The City 
of Gatineau appointed a dedicated team to process permits and help homeowners navigate 
bylaw regulations to speed up recovery efforts. Many residents expressed support for the 
buyout program but remained confused on the details and eligibility. In response, the province 
and municipality offered information sessions and administrative assistance to residents 
during the application process. 
In terms of fairness, Quebec’s program capped funding to appease concerns that taxpayer 
resources were being used to subsidize the purchase of properties from higher income earners. 
By capping compensation, residents living in more expensive homes could decide to maintain 
the property without further disaster assistance or another buyout option. This design builds off 
evidence that residents with financial resources and economic flexibility can recover more quickly 
than those who are less-well off. Implementing a cap on coverage, however, can discourage 
uptake of the program even among those who are socially and economically vulnerable if their 
properties are worth more than the compensation offer.
Political Feasibility
The effectiveness of a property buyout program depends partly on the support it receives from 
elected decision makers and influential interests.112 For instance, property buyout programs might 
be opposed by certain elected officials if they perceive them to be contrary to their strategic 
political interests or the wishes of their constituents. 
We evaluated the political viability of each case study program by examining the extent to which it:
•	 Attracted support among local and provincial decision makers;
•	
Was endorsed by influential stakeholders in the targeted community and province;
•	 Aligned with other policies for flood risk reduction and climate change adaptation.
High River, AB  (medium)
In the aftermath of the 2013 floods, provincial decision makers in Alberta were quick to design and 
implement a buyout program, which suggests a high level of political support. The implementation, 
however, became a source of criticism among participants, media, and local governments. Due 
to the low uptake by eligible homeowners, much of the criticism concerned the ineffectiveness of 
the program, which appeared to not improve the region’s overall flood resilience.113 Media framing 
of the FRP, including anecdotes of buyouts being offered to homeowners who did not experience 
much flood damage, influenced public perceptions that the program was a waste of money.114
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Evaluation
33
Local governments were also frustrated with the implementation of the provincial program. 
In High River, the mayor had to lobby the province to include neighbourhoods that had endured 
significant damage but that were initially excluded even as other neighbourhoods with less 
damage were eligible for buyouts. In a noteworthy response, provincial officials expanded 
eligibility and extended deadlines for residents seeking a buyout.115 But the initial policy 
misalignments were largely the result of the quick, reactive deployment of flood mitigation 
strategies without sufficient consultations, flood risk assessments at the local level, or up-to-date 
floodplain maps. Although the provincial program faced considerable criticism, support among 
the local leadership in High River demonstrates political feasibility for the buyouts.
Grand Forks, BC  (high)
The Grand Forks program enjoyed support among many key stakeholders including the 
provincial and local governments, public and private sector community leaders, a fifty-person 
stakeholder group, and property owners through outreach efforts.116 This support was contingent, 
however, on adequate compensation. In particular, the North Ruckle neighbourhood voiced 
strong support for the buyouts, with 75-80% of respondents expressing interest in receiving a 
fair offer for their property.117 That said, the buyout was still contentious among some citizens who 
were frustrated with compensation figures and the administrative process. Nevertheless, political 
support for the buyouts was durable after the 2018 election, allowing Grand Forks to implement 
the program.
The federal government also supported the program by approving funding through DMAF. 
Along with City Council’s approval of a long-term strategy combining buyouts, a planned dyke in 
the surrounding area and strategic use of green space, there was a strong political commitment 
among multiple levels of government for risk reduction in Grand Forks.118
Gatineau, QC  (high)
Successive flood events in Gatineau attracted significant political attention and the support 
of provincial and local leadership. Although 2017 was the first time that buyouts were offered by 
the Quebec government, elected officials at both levels expressed their support in favour of the 
program due to the obvious long-term cost-benefits. Provincial funding for the buyout program 
helped generate political support at the local level, where the costs of implementation are most 
pronounced. After a buyout was complete, the province transferred ownership to the municipality 
for a nominal fee of a $1, whereupon the municipalities were responsible for lot maintenance.
Provincial funding, combined with long-term investment in flood protection, helped ensure the 
political feasibility of the buyouts. For example, in addition to several structural mitigation projects 
in the Wabassee Creek watershed, the provincial government also prohibited rebuilding or future 
redevelopment in the 1:20 floodplain. By coupling land use planning tools with relocation policies, 
the Government of Quebec generated credibility by signalling a longer-term commitment to 
flood risk management in the community. For local governments and citizens, this long-term 
commitment is important for political feasibility since it communicates that the sacrifice made 
by those relocating is part of a broader effort to reduce risk that benefits the community. 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Buyout Program Evaluation
34
Summary Table 

High River, AB
2013 Flood 
Gatineau, QC
2017/2019 Floods 
Grand Forks, BC
 2018 Flood 
 Evaluation Criteria
Cost Efficiency
Encouraged prudent use of scarce resources
●
▲
▲
Coordinated efforts to minimize overlap 
and duplication
▼
●
▲
Promoted media and long-term financial 
planning for flood risk reduction
●
▲
▲
Social Acceptability
Allowed stakeholders to hold decision 
makers to account
●
▼
▼
Promoted transparency in decision making
▼
●
●
Encouraged meaningful engagement with 
a range of stakeholders
▼
▼
●
Fairly distributed benefits and burdens
●
●
●
Political Feasibility
Attracted support among local and provincial 
decision makers 
●
▲
▲
Endorsed by influential stakeholders in the 
targeted community and province 
▼
●
●
Aligned with other policies for flood risk reduction 
and climate change adaptation  
●
▲
▲

Legend:       ▲ High       ● Medium       ▼ Low
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Main Findings
35
Main Findings
Cost Efficiency
Most strategic relocation programs are, ultimately, cost effective based on strong evidence 
that the benefits of flood risk reduction exceed the costs associated with the property buyouts 
and program administration. This is an important finding given that buyouts are perceived 
as expensive in the short-term. In each of the three case studies, however, the communities 
recognized that reducing exposure to future risk was worth the investment. Each community also 
tried to align the buyouts within a longer-term strategy for risk reduction, which further enhanced 
the program’s benefits. Inefficiencies were most noticeable in the actual program administration 
and implementation. In both the High River and Gatineau cases, provinces and municipalities took 
on responsibilities that required time to coordinate in ways that delayed access to information 
and funding for residents and led to some confusion. Nonetheless, it is important to note that 
this coordination inefficiency is in part related to the speed and urgency required to design and 
develop a program in the immediate aftermath of a significant natural disaster. Such bottlenecks 
could be mitigated, at least in part, by advance planning and preparation.
Social Acceptability
The buyout programs performed the poorest in terms of social acceptability. This outcome 
is not surprising given the disruption and difficulty involved in convincing property owners to 
abandon their homes. Moreover, following the flood event, many property owners experienced 
significant delays in confirming whether they should begin rebuilding or were eligible for a buyout. 
A critical factor in improving social acceptability is early and frequent community engagement 
that is transparent about decision making via public and one-on-one meetings and information 
websites. Sufficient compensation at pre-flood market rates was also identified as an important 
factor influencing social acceptability. 
Political Feasibility
According to our evaluations, the buyout programs were all largely considered politically 
feasible. This outcome is especially important since existing research often identifies local 
political opposition as a major barrier to this policy option. A part of this political support is 
explained by the trauma caused by the disaster and the recognition in the community that 
rebuilding completely is not an appropriate strategy. Commitments by governments to embed 
the buyouts within a longer-term risk reduction strategy was also identified as an important factor 
that influenced a program’s feasibility. Buyout participants and taxpayers funding the program 
need to know that their sacrifices will lead to permanent benefits for the community.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Main Findings
36
Fig. 1
Strategic Relocation Policy in Canada
Maximizing the success of buyouts for those facing unsustainable flood risk
Policy Targets:
Household Level
Empower residents to make 
risk-informed housing choices
Community Level
Systematically reduces flood risk 
across a broader area
What contributes to success?
Compensation
•	
Sufficient to encourage property owners to realize 
the total benefits of relocation
•	
Strongly tied to valuations in the local housing market
Equity
•	 The process is fair and equitable for all participants—
acknowledging participant’s differing needs and supporting 
them accordingly
•	
No participant is made worse off
Program 
Administration
•	
Resources and staff are conveniently accessible 
to program participants
•	
Provides appropriate training to ensure all staff are 
culturally and disaster sensitive
•	 The degree of choice is appropriate to the level of risk
Efficiency
•	
Ensure the risk-reduction benefits of the buyout program 
exceed the financial and social costs
•	
Clarify the roles and responsibilities between 
administrations to avoid duplication of services
Public 
Engagement
•	
Engagement happens early (before flooding occurs), 
and often in high-risk areas
•	
Foster relationships with high-risk communities to build 
trust over time
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Eight Recommendations
37
Eight Recommendations
The following eight recommendations are based on 
findings from the literature review, the analysis of three 
existing buyout programs in Canada, and input received 
from stakeholders across Canada and the United States.
1.	 Develop a buyout program that is ready for implementation before a disaster: 
	
Property buyout programs should be developed in advance of a disaster and be made 
available for proactive or reactive implementation. Proactive buyout programs can be more 
cost-efficient, engage a wider set of stakeholders, and facilitate a more systematized rollout. 
Critically, residents living in high-risk areas should be engaged well in advance of a flood 
or other hazardous event and made aware that a buyout option is available to protect their 
well-being and property investment. Some residents are likely to take up the offer in advance, 
while others could afford time to engage with their neighbours, community associations and 
the municipality to inform their own decision. Even so, it is important that the buyout program 
continue to be offered after a disaster event when impacted residents are experiencing 
significant stress and anxiety. 
2.	 Engage early and often: 
	
Delays in outreach limit the social acceptability of the program by leading to higher levels of 
mistrust among residents. In some cases, information is released through the media or public 
officials that is contradictory or unclear, leading to confusion about eligibility or compensation 
levels. A communications strategy that maintains a single source of constantly available 
information can improve program uptake along with the social acceptability and political 
feasibility of the program. For external communications between stakeholders and the public, 
the use of a standard messaging template can help to streamline key information and maintain 
consistency and clarity between jurisdictions. 
	
“A solid communications strategy is valuable, but must be tailored to meet 
the needs of the least easy‑to‑reach, least accessible, and often most 
vulnerable members of a community… Communication isn’t unidirectional. 
It needs to happen in relationship.” —Survey Participant 12, 2022
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Eight Recommendations
38
3.	 Provide on-the ground support and dedicated resources: 
	
Adequate engagement requires human and administrative resources at the local level. 
Disaster victims require significant support and assistance to understand the program’s 
requirements and to navigate the buyout application process. Practically speaking, local/
provincial staff or consultants could be deployed into the community by setting up an office 
in a community centre during the recovery phase. The provision of on-the-ground support 
and resources can help to humanize the application process, improve processing times, 
and ensure residents have access to the necessary resources required for successful 
program implementation at the local level. As such, administrative operations should be 
itemized into the buyout program budget.
4.	 Increase compensation caps to reflect regional pre-flood market value of homes: 
	
By increasing the ceiling of compensation, homeowners are incentivized to participate 
and are granted greater financial flexibility to relocate, hopefully by purchasing a home 
nearby or in a comparable market. Because market values differ based on location, regional 
compensation caps should be set so that homeowners are provided enough funds to cover 
existing mortgages. By providing reasonable compensation, the benefits and burdens are 
fairly distributed, which in turn increases the social acceptability of the buyout program and 
limits the social disruption involved in relocation. Additional financial incentives to compensate 
residents for relocation expenses (i.e., moving costs, temporary housing, counselling, legal 
costs) can also be used to increase program uptake.
	
“The benefit (to relocation) of living with reduced risk elsewhere, higher 
security and avoided future trauma and damages must also be recognized 
in the negotiation, on the other side of the cost/benefit equation.”  
 —Survey Participant 2, 2022
5.	 Create pathways for consensus and support among community partners:
	
Municipal governments should engage local community organizations in the development of 
local climate and land use plans that incorporate a relocation/buyout component. Community-
driven participation helps to foster social cohesion, but adaptation plans rarely engage in local 
discussion on buyout program design. This is a missed opportunity for identifying potential 
exposed neighbourhoods and generating feedback on the design of a potential buyout 
program. The use of interjurisdiction roundtables or engagement forums can be used as 
mediums to strengthen relationships among communities and facilitate role assignment during 
program implementation and/or crisis response. Encouraging meaningful engagement with a 
range of stakeholders can strengthen the social acceptability of a buyout program, especially 
if communities are driving the development of a proactive plan before a flood event. Similarly, 
stakeholder engagement can strengthen relationships between the community and higher 
levels of government, which can encourage improved cooperation amongst key actors during 
program implementation and/or crisis response.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Eight Recommendations
39
6.	 Establish a federal buyout program with funding to support provincial or municipal 
relocation programs: 
	
The local jurisdictions in each case study experienced limited access to financial and human 
resources, which was a barrier to more effective planning and implementation. The availability 
of federal funding on a rolling basis should enable provinces or municipalities sufficient time to 
engage residents in communities where buyouts might be necessary. Federal funding should 
include support for local capacity-building and expertise. Early local engagement, along with 
access to federal and provincial resources, can attract the support of communities, leaders, 
and elected representatives in the development of a proactively efficient, socially acceptable, 
and politically feasible flood risk reduction plan.
	
“Without adequate financial backstop these programs will not 
be adequately received nor effective. It will be important to have local 
leadership, but it will be impossible to deliver such buyouts with an 
acceptable effect. I believe this approach requires national leadership 
and communication for credibility and consistency.”
 —Survey Participant 4, 2022
7.	 Improve intergovernmental coordination and dialogue: 
	
Generating greater clarity on roles, responsibilities and expectations from both local 
and provincial levels of government is an important avenue for fostering accountability and 
transparency. Having a clear division of responsibilities allows governments to coordinate 
efforts while minimizing overlap and duplication. To better streamline program implementation, 
increase political feasibility and guide home and business owners, dedicated teams at both 
levels of government are recommended. Further, by proactively engaging in scenario-based 
planning and training, governments can anticipate problems before they occur, which can 
also increase the efficiency of the buyout program.
8.	 Align buyout program design with existing disaster assistance, adaptation, and risk 
reduction policy: 
	
Coordinating a buyout program within existing flood risk reduction policy improves the 
effectiveness of the plan by ensuring that the burdens and benefits are fairly distributed 
throughout the community. Local buyout programs should link to existing provincial or 
federal Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) to avoid cross-purposes and 
duplication. Those who are making the sacrifice of relocation should know that their effort 
contributes to meaningful reduction of risk. Those who refuse to accept a buyout should 
not be eligible for future disaster assistance—a policy point that can encourage relocation 
while also ensuring that no more taxpayer funds are spent rebuilding in a flood-prone area 
from which the community has decided to retreat. Eligibility for property insurance could 
also be limited for those who refuse to participate in the program. Similarly, as a means of 
long-term risk reduction and fairness to those who have relocated, no further development 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Eight Recommendations
40
should be re-permitted in areas where buyouts have occurred. Finally, buyout programs 
should identify other communities or neighbourhoods nearby (i.e., preferably within the same 
municipality) that have the infrastructure, housing, and economic stability necessary to fully 
welcome the relocation of other community members, ideally in ways that involve minimal 
disruption to their jobs or social networks.
	
“As the buyout program is created, developed, and as it evolves, 
review existing frameworks to ask whether anything could be improved.” 
 —Survey Participant 8, 2022
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Engagement Summary and Conclusion—What We Heard
41
Engagement Summary and Conclusion—
What We Heard
When the eight recommendations were initially drafted, we organized a national online workshop 
and survey. Our objective was to engage stakeholders in a discussion on these recommendations 
for the design and implementation of property buyout programs in Canada, as well as to provide 
an opportunity for policymakers, subject matter experts, community groups, and NGOs to hear 
each other’s perspectives and collaborate on solutions.
Profession:
Location:  
Perspective:
52
Online workshop participants
21
Online survey participants
73
Stakeholders engaged
	23%	 Provincial government
	37%	 Western Canada
	25%	 Provincial
	23%	 Municipal
	
1%	 Indigenous communities
	 4%	 Federal government
	 3%	 Other
	 8%	 International
	 4%	 Other
	 6%	 Northern Canada
	 19%	 NGOs
	30%	 Central Canada
	 17%	 Municipal government
	 14%	 Academia
	 18%	 Atlantic Canada
	 13%	 Regional
	 13%	 Local
	 10%	 Outside of Canada
	 19%	 Private sector
	 14%	 Federal
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Engagement Summary and Conclusion—What We Heard
42
The overwhelming consensus heard amongst workshop and survey participants indicates 
a need—and growing demand for—the use of buyout programs in areas at highest risk of 
recurrent flooding. Creating pathways for consensus and support between government 
actors and community partners will encourage community participation in adaptation planning. 
Participants noted that communities should be meaningfully engaged in discussion on the 
suite of mitigation and adaptation options available to them, which can build understanding and 
informed participation at the local level. In addition to consultation, participants advised that cost-
benefit analysis be used as a crucial tool to help guide decision making with federal guidance. 
Intergovernmental coordination and dialogue between different levels of government is critical 
to foster accountability, transparency, and efficiency in buyout programs. 
Input received through our engagement process is consistent with the findings from Gatineau, 
High River and Grand Forks: the development and implementation of property buyout programs 
is highly dependent on the governments’ ability to secure funding to support these programs. 
Lower tier governments often lack capacity and resources. As such, the establishment of a 
federal buyout program with sufficient funding to support provincial- or municipal-led relocation 
would allow local governments to begin engaging with the highest risk neighbourhoods and 
to proceed with their own program design.
In addition to secure funding, better alignment between existing flood risk reduction policies, 
disaster assistance, and buyout programming is needed in order to eliminate redundancies 
and improve the overall effectiveness of these buyout programs. Participants expressed caution 
about increasing the ceiling of compensation given the politics associated with spending public 
resources to remove housing stock when there is a clear shortage that is driving up existing 
prices. Further discussions on program design are required to clarify how this buyout tool 
can be used in practice across different jurisdictions in Canada and especially in Indigenous 
and Northern communities.
Future research should be carried out on expanding the eligibility of the buyout program to 
include renters and business owners who are currently excluded from receiving disaster financial 
assistance (DFA) as well as those with secondary homes (e.g., seasonal cottages). Participants 
from government stressed the necessity of designing a buyout program that can be linked to 
existing provincial DFA or federal Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) to avoid 
cross-purposes and duplication. Moreover, participants noted the role and responsibility that 
insurers have in developing insurance products that are suitably designed for climate adaptation 
and that better align with existing flood risk policies while still supporting their business model. 
Finally, many participants noted the use of buyouts as a potential tool that can be applied to other 
natural hazards like landslides, shoreline erosion, and earthquakes further justifying expanding 
its use in hazard management.
“Not only does proactive planning help foster relationships in the community 
and among levels of government, but it builds trust, ensures local people have 
full access to necessary information, and are ready to make well-informed 
decisions when the time comes.” —Survey Participant 12, 2022
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Engagement Summary and Conclusion—What We Heard
43
In short, strategic relocation is a flexible—and increasingly essential tool—for every tier of 
Canadian government to consider using in the face of augmented flood risks. While the cost 
of property buyouts seems high, those costs are often far outweighed by the benefits of reducing 
physical, financial, and social exposure to flood risk. This report offered a full synthesis of existing 
literature on strategic relocation and an in-depth analysis of three case studies in Canada. We 
proposed evidence-based policy advice about how to optimally design and implement effective 
property buyout programs in the Canadian context. 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Endnotes
44
Endnotes
1 
The Canadian Press, “Post-Tropical Storm Fiona Most Costly Weather Event to Ever Hit 
Atlantic Canada, New Estimate Says,” cbc.ca Oct. 19, 2022. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/
nova-scotia/fiona-atlantic-canada-insured-damages-660-million-1.6621583 (“The second 
most expensive weather event in Atlantic Canada was Hurricane Juan in 2003 at $192 
million”).
2 
“2021 B.C. Highway Flood Recovery Projects,” https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/
transportation-projects/bc-highway-flood-recovery
3 
Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019
4 
El-Jabi, Caissie, and Turkkan 2016; Gaur, Gaur, and Simonovic 2018
5 
Lyle and Mills 2016; Thistlethwaite et al. 2018
6 
Alfieri et al. 2016; Simonovic and Li 2004
7 
Gaur et al. 2019; Simonovic, Schardong, and Sandink 2017
8 
Shrubsole 2013
9 
Hino et al., 2017; Vandenbeld and MacDonald, 2013; Harker, 2016; Healy and Soomere, 2008; 
Craig, 2019; Salvesen et al., 2018
10 
Agyeman, Devine-Wright, and Prange 2009; Hino, Field, and Mach 2017
11	
Loughran and Elliott 2019
12 
Dannenberg et al. 2019; Greiving, Du, and Puntub 2018
13	
Calil and Newkirk 2017
14 
Rey-Valette, Robert, and Rulleau 2019; Robinson et al. 2018; Siders 2019
15 
Task Force on Flood Insurance and Relocation, “Adapting to Rising Flood Risk: An Analysis of 
Insurance Solutions for Canada,” August 2022. (link: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/
pblctns/dptng-rsng-fld-rsk-2022/index-en.aspx)
16 
Hunter, Justine, “How will ‘Managed Retreat’ fit into Canada’s climate-change adaptation 
plans? Communities face hard choices in any scenario,” The Globe & Mail, July 11, 2022 
(link: https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/british-columbia/article-how-will-managed-
retreat-fit-into-canadas-climate-change-adaptation/); Flavelle, Christopher, Denise Lu, 
Veronica Penney, Nadja Popovich, John Schwartz, “New Data Reveals Hidden Flood 
Risk Across America,” New York Times, June 29, 2020 (link: https://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2020/06/29/climate/hidden-flood-risk-maps.html)
17 
IBC 2019
18 
Alexander, Priest, and Mees 2016; Hegger, Driessen, and Bakker 2016
19 
Zheng et al., 2014; Koslov, 2016; Salvesen et al., 2018; Marino, 2018; Olsen et al., 2000; Savard 
et al., 2016; Tate et al., 2016
20 
Olsen et al. (2000)
21 
Remo et al. (2012); Salvensen et al. (2018)
22 
de Koning et al., 2019; Cigler, 2009; Koslov, 2016; Lovett, 2017; Robinson et al., 2018; Siders, 
2019a; Siders 2019b; Siders, 2013b; Savard et al., 2016; Zavar, 2016
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Endnotes
45
23 
Siders, 2019a; Bukvic and Owen, 2017
24 
Freudenberg, 2016; Salvesen et al., 2018; Zavar and Hagelman, 2016; Salvesen et al., 2018; 
Binder et al., 2020
25 
Bryner et al., 2017; Maly and Ishikawa, 2013; Siders, 2013a
26 
Nordstrom and Jackson, 2018
27 
Zavar and Hagelman, 2016; Environmental Law Institute, 2017
28 
Freudenberg et al., 2016; Salvesen et al., 2018; Zavar and Hagelman, 2016; Salvesen et al., 
2018, p. 35; Koslov, 2016
29 
Salvesen et al., 2018; Environmental Law Institute, 2017
30	 Cottar et al., 2021. 
31 
Henry, 2013; Loughran et al., 2019; Kick et al., 2011; Perry and Lindell, 1997; Bronen and 
Chapin, 2013; Song and Peng, 2017; Seebauer and Winkler, 2020; Henry, 2013
32 
de Vries, 2007; de Vries and Fraser, 2017, de Vries, 2017
33 Gibbs, 2016, Bukvic and Owen, 2017; Cheong, 2011
34 
Calil and Newkirk, 2017; Siders and Keenan, 2020; de Vries, 2007; Klima et al., 2020; McGhee 
et al., 2020; Munoz and Tate, 2016; Rufat et al., 2015; Rumbach et al., 2020
35 
Mach et al., 2019; Kick et al., 2011; Weber and Moore, 2018; Robinson et al., 2018; Siders and 
Keenen, 2020
36 
Siders, 2019a; Binder and Greer 2016; Bukvic and Owen, 2017; Binder et al., 2018; 
Vandenbeld and MacDonald, 2013, Tanner and Avrai, 2018; Mach et al., 2019; Greer and 
Binder, 2017
37 
Vandenbeld and MacDonald, 2013
38	 Lovett, 2017
39 
Binder et al., 2020
40 Kousky, 2014
41 
May 2005; Meltsner 1972
42 
Salvesen et al., 2018
43 
Lovett, 2017; Perry and Lindell, 1997; Braamskamp and Penning-Rowsell 2018; deVries 
and Fraser 2012; Seebauer and Winkler, 2020; Cheong, 2011; Loughran and Elliott, 2019
44 
Baker et al., 2018; de Vries, 2017; Freudenberg, 2016; Robinson et al., 2018
45 
Bryner et al., 2017; Sipe and Vella, 2014; Vandenbeld and MacDonald, 2013
46 
Salvesen et al., 2018; Seebauer and Winkler, 2020; de Vries, 2007
47 
Salveson et al., 2018
48	
Siders, 2013
49 
de Vries, 2007
50 de Vries, 2007; de Vries and Fraser, 2017, de Vries, 2017
51 
de Vries and Fraser, 2017
52 
Binder et al., 2018
53 
Gibbs, 2016, Bukvic and Owen, 2017; Cheong, 2011
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Endnotes
46
54 
Zheng et al., 2014; Harker, 2016; Wilby and Keenan, 2012
55 
de Vries, 2017; Braamskamp and Penning-Rowsell, 2018; Kousky, 2014; Song and Peng, 
2017; Noy, 2020; Cheong, 2011; de Koning et al., 2019; Tanner and Avrai, 2018; Seebauer and 
Winkler, 2020
56 
Baker et al., 2018; Salvesen et al., 2018; Siders, 2013b; Scott et al., 2020
57 
Salvesen et al., 2018 Tate et al., 2016; Treuer et al., 2018
58 
Lovett, 2017; Siders, 2019a; Munoz and Tate, 2016; Tate et al., 2016
59 
Mach et al., 2019; Sipe and Vella, 2014; Dannenburg et al., 2019
60	 Siders, 2019a
61 
Sipe and Vella, 2014
62 
Mitchell, 2015; Noy, 2020
63 
Kick et al., 2011; Bronen & Chapin, 2013; Hayward, 2008; Kousky, 2014
64 
CBC News, 2017a; CBC News 2019b
65 
CBC News 2017b; Government of Quebec, 2019b
66	
Cottar, 2020
67 
CBC News, 2019a
68 
CBC News, 2019d
69	
Laucius, 2019
70 
Chandler, 2019; Government of Quebec, 2021a
71 
Chandler, 2019; Cottar, 2020; Interview, Informant 201119_004
72 
“Homeowners and Tenants (Simplified Guide): General Indemnity and Financial Assistance 
Program Regarding Actual or Imminent Disasters—Flooding,” The Ministère de la Sécurité, 
Gouvernement du Québec, 2022, p.8. 
73	
Chandler, 2019
74	
Cottar, 2020
75 
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2017
76	
MNP LLP, 2015
77 
Gambrill, 2020; Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2017; Insurance Bureau of 
Canada, 2014
78 
Town of High River, 2014; MNP LLP, 2015
79 
Auditor General of Alberta, 2015; CBC News, 2013b
80	 Henton, 2014
81 
CBC News, 2013
82 
CBC News, 2013; Franklin, 2013
83 Franklin, 2013; McGarvey, 2018
84	
Franklin, 2013
85 
CBC News, 2015; Gateway Gazette, 2015
86	
White, 2017
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
Endnotes
47
87 
Town of High River, 2019
88 McKerracher, 2020
89 
Wadhwani, 2018
90 Dobson Engineering Ltd., 2018
91 
NOR-EX Engineering Ltd., 2019
92 
City of Grand Forks, 2018
93 
British Columbia Ministry of Public Safety and Solicitor General, 2018
94 
City of Grand Forks, 2018
95 
Dinsdale, 2020
96 
Lavoie, 2018; Regional District of Kootenay Boundary, 2018
97 
Dobson Engineering Ltd., 2018
98 
Keystone Consulting & Appraisals, 2021
99 
Knox, 2020
100 NOR-EX Engineering Ltd., 2019
101	 Potenteau, 2019
102 Dinsdale, 2020
103 Bukvic and Owen 2017; Rey-Valette, Robert, and Rulleau 2019
104 Bogdan et al., 2018
105 Wright & Southwick, 2013
106 Interview, Informant 201209_0025
107 Interview, Informant 201112_0020; Informant 201209_0025
108 Thom, 2019
109	 Lirette, 2019
110 Siders and Keenan, 2020
111 
Hoogeveen & Klein, 2021
112 May 2005; Meltsner 1972
113 Markusoff, 2018
114 Calgary Herald, 2014
115 Interview, Informant 201026_004
116 Interview, Informant 201209_0025
117 
Interview, Informant 201026_0012
118 Ballard, 2018
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
48
References
Agyeman, Julian, Patrick Devine-Wright, and Julia Prange. 2009. “Close to the Edge, down by 
the River? Joining up Managed Retreat and Place Attachment in a Climate Changed World.” 
Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space 41 (3): 509–13. https://doi.org/10.1068/
a41301.
Alexander, Meghan, Sally Priest, and Hannelore Mees. 2016. “A Framework for Evaluating Flood Risk 
Governance.” Environmental Science & Policy 64 (October): 38–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.06.004.
Alfieri, Lorenzo, Luc Feyen, and Giuliano Di Baldassarre. 2016. “Increasing Flood Risk under 
Climate Change: A Pan-European Assessment of the Benefits of Four Adaptation Strategies.” 
Climatic Change 136 (3–4): 507–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1641-1.
Auditor General of Alberta. 2015. “Report of the Auditor General of Alberta - March 2015.” 
https://www.oag.ab.ca/reports/report-auditor-general-march-2015/.
Baker, Charlene K., Sherri B. Binder, Alex Greer, Paige Weir, and Kalani Gates. 2018. “Integrating 
Community Concerns and Recommendations into Home Buyout and Relocation Policy.” 
Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy 9 (4): 455–79. https://doi.org/10.1002/rhc3.12144.
Ballard, Joel. 2018. “Grand Forks Votes to Buy out Entire Neighbourhood after Major Flood.” CBC, 
September 5, 2018. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/grand-forks-votes-to-
buy-out-entire-neighbourhood-after-major-flood-1.4811582. 
Binder, Sherri B., and Alex Greer. 2016. “The Devil Is in the Details: Linking Home Buyout Policy, 
Practice, and Experience After Hurricane Sandy.” Politics and Governance 4 (4): 97–106. https://
doi.org/10.17645/pag.v4i4.738.
Binder, Sherri B., Alex Greer, and C. Baker. 2018. “Home Buyout Programs: Recommendations 
for Policy & Practice.” Rutgers University. https://www.preventionweb.net/publications/
view/58500.
Binder, Sherri B., Liesel A. Ritchie, Rose Bender, Alexis Thiel, Charlene K. Baker, Emily Badillo, Sophia 
Goodfellow, Bethann Kulp, and Paige Weir. 2020. “Limbo : The Unintended Consequences 
of Home Buyout Programmes on Peripheral Communities.” Environmental Hazards 19 (5): 
488–507. https://doi.org/10.1080/17477891.2020.1714537.
Bogdan, E., A. Bennett, and L. Yumagulova. 2018. “Public Engagements in Forward-Looking 
Recovery Efforts Following the 2013 Floods in High River and Calgary, Canada.” In Community 
Engagement in Post-Disaster Recovery, edited by Graham Marsh, 1st Edition, 37–55. New York, 
NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group.
British Columbia Ministry of Public Safety and Solicitor General. 2018. “Disaster financial assistance 
available for flood-affected communities.” May 14, 2018. https://archive.news.gov.bc.ca/
releases/news_releases_2017-2021/2018PSSG0035-000911.htm
Bronen, Robin, and F. Stuart Chapin. 2013. “Adaptive Governance and Institutional Strategies for 
Climate-Induced Community Relocations in Alaska.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences 110 (23): 9320–25. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1210508110.
Braamskamp, Arjan, and Edmund C. Penning-Rowsell. 2018. “Managed Retreat: A Rare and 
Paradoxical Success, but Yielding a Dismal Prognosis.” Environmental Management and 
Sustainable Development 7 (2): 108. https://doi.org/10.5296/emsd.v7i2.12851.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
49
Bryner, Nicholas S., Marisa Garcia-Lozano, and Carl Bruch. 2017. “Washed Out: Policy and Practical 
Considerations Affecting Return after Hurricane Katrina and Superstorm Sandy.” Journal of 
Asian Development 3 (1): 73. https://doi.org/10.5296/jad.v3i1.10590.
Bukvic, Anamaria, and Graham Owen. 2017. “Attitudes towards Relocation Following Hurricane 
Sandy: Should We Stay or Should We Go?” Disasters 41 (1): 101–23. https://doi.org/10.1111/
disa.12186.
Calgary Herald. 2014. “Flood Payouts Include $33 Million for 11 Homes in Roxboro.” October 8, 2014. 
https://calgaryherald.com/news/flood-payouts-include-33-million-for-11-homes-in-roxboro.
Calil, Juliano, and Sarah Newkirk. 2017. “Aligning Natural Resource Conservation, Flood Hazard 
Mitigation, and Social Vulnerability Remediation in Florida.” Journal of Ocean and Coastal 
Economics 4 (1). https://doi.org/10.15351/2373-8456.1074.
CBC News. 2013b. “254 Alberta Flood Victims to Get Government Home Buyouts,” August 22, 2013. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/254-alberta-flood-victims-to-get-government-
home-buyouts-1.1414403.
CBC News. 2015. “High River Holdouts Stall Demolition of Wallaceville for Flood Mitigation,” July 15, 
2015. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/high-river-s-wallaceville-demolition-stalled-
by-2-holdout-owners-1.3153124.
CBC News. 2017a. “The Ottawa and Gatineau Flood: A Timeline of Events.” CBC. May 14, 2017. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/ottawa-gatineau-floods-photos-week-1.4110510.
CBC News. 2017b. “Some Gatineau Homeowners in Flood Zone Will Not Be Allowed to Rebuild.” 
CBC, May 24, 2017. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/gatineau-homeowners-flooding-
rebuild-1.4128613.
CBC News. 2019a. “Quebec premier says province will cap flood compensation.” CBC. April 
22, 2019. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/gatineau-floods-ottawa-francois-
legault-1.5106522
CBC News. 2019b. “Gatineau Flooding Could Be Worse than in 2017, Mayor Warns” CBC. April 
26, 2019. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/gatineau-flood-worse-2017-1800-homes-
affected-1.5112211.
CBC News. 2019c. “Under water, again.” CBC. May 4, 2019. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/
ottawa/ottawa-river-flooding-2019-recap-1.5119980
Chandler, Olivia. 2019. “Gatineau aims to ‘take back’ lots left vacant by floods.” CBC News. November 
17, 2019. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/flood-gatineau-vacant-land-1.5362532
Cheong, So-Min. 2011. “Policy Solutions in the U.S.” Climatic Change 106 (1): 57–70. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-010-9996-1.
Cigler, Beverly A. 2009. “Post-Katrina Hazard Mitigation on the Gulf Coast.” Public Organization 
Review 9 (4): 325–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11115-009-0095-6.
City of Grand Forks. 2018a.“Flood Recovery 2018.” City of Grand Forks. June 22, 2018. https://www.
grandforks.ca/flood-recovery-2018/.
Cottar, Shaieree. 2020. “A Comparison of Post-Disaster Experiences in Two Canadian Riverine 
Communities: Evaluating Managed Retreat as a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy.” Master 
Thesis, University of Waterloo. https://uwspace.uwaterloo.ca/handle/10012/16437.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
50
Cottar, Shaieree, Brent Doberstein, Daniel Henstra, and Johanna Wandel. 2021. “Evaluating Property 
Buyouts and Disaster Recovery Assistance (Rebuild) Options in Canada: A Comparative 
Analysis of Constance Bay, Ontario and Pointe Gatineau, Quebec.” Natural Hazards 109 (1): 
201–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-021-04832-4.
Craig, Robin Kundis. 2019. “Coastal Adaptation, Government-Subsidized Insurance, and Perverse 
Incentives to Stay.” Climatic Change 152 (2): 215–26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-
2203‑5.
Dannenberg, Andrew L., Howard Frumkin, Jeremy J. Hess, and Kristie L. Ebi. 2019. “Managed 
Retreat as a Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation in Small Communities: Public Health 
Implications.” Climatic Change 153 (1–2): 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02382-0.
de Koning, Koen, Tatiana Filatova, Ariana Need, and Okmyung Bin. 2019. “Avoiding or Mitigating 
Flooding: Bottom-up Drivers of Urban Resilience to Climate Change in the USA.” Global 
Environmental Change 59 (November): 101981. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2019.101981.
de Vries, Daniel H. 2007. “Internal Migration through Buyouts after Natural Disasters: Hurricane 
Floyd in Eastern North Carolina (1999).” Association of America 2007 Annual Meeting. 1–30. 
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.2805.6565.
de Vries, Daniel H. 2017. “Temporal Vulnerability and the Post-Disaster ‘Window of Opportunity to 
Woo:’ A Case Study of an African American Floodplain Neighborhood after Hurricane Floyd in 
North Carolina.” Human Ecology 45 (4): 437–48. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-017-9915-4.
de Vries, Daniel H., and James C. Fraser. 2012. “Citizenship rights and voluntary decision making 
in post-disaster US floodplain buyout mitigation programs.” International Journal of Mass 
Emergencies & Disasters 30 (1), 1-33. https://dare.uva.nl/search?identifier=aafa3ebb-287f-41a1-
a75e-8fe0554254d3.
de Vries, Daniel H., and James C. Fraser. 2017. “Historical Waterscape Trajectories That Need Care: 
The Unwanted Refurbished Flood Homes of Kinston’s Devolved Disaster Mitigation Program.” 
Journal of Political Ecology 24 (1): 931. https://doi.org/10.2458/v24i1.20976.
Dinsdale, J. 2020. “City of Grand Forks: DMAF Program Charter” (p. 25). City of Grand Forks. May 4, 
2020. https://pub-grand-forks.escribemeetings.com/filestream.ashx?DocumentId=10475 
Dobson Engineering LTD. 2018. “Community Recovery Options for Areas Damaged by May 
2018 Flooding in the Kettle River Watershed” n.d. https://rdkb.civicweb.net/filepro/
documents/?preview=76108.
El-Jabi, Nassir, Daniel Caissie, and Noyan Turkkan. 2016. “Flood Analysis and Flood Projections 
under Climate Change in New Brunswick.” Canadian Water Resources Journal 41 (1–2): 
319–30. https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1071205.
Environment and Climate Change Canada. 2017. “Canada’s Top Ten Weather Stories of 2013.” 
October 8, 2017. https://ec.gc.ca/meteo-weather/default.asp?lang=En&n=5BA5EAFC-
1&offset=2&toc=show.
Environmental Law Institute. 2017. “Floodplain Buyouts: An Action Guide for Local Governments on 
How to Maximize Community Benefits, Habitat Connectivity, and Resilience.” Environmental 
Law Institute. http://search.proquest.com/docview/1970495736/AAB697CABE264FF4PQ/20.
Franklin, Michael. 2013. “High River Residents Want Province to Take Another Look.” CTV News, 
November 13, 2013. https://calgary.ctvnews.ca/high-river-residents-want-province-to-take-
another-look-1.1541007.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
51
Freudenberg, Robert, Ellis Calvin, Laura Tolkoff, and Dare Brawley. 2016. Buy-in for Buyouts the Case 
for Managed Retreat from Flood Zones. Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. http://
public.eblib.com/choice/PublicFullRecord.aspx?p=5742340.
Gambrill, David. 2020. “Where Calgary’s $1.2-Billion Hailstorm Ranks among Canada’s Largest 
Insured Disasters.” Canadian Underwriter, August 7, 2020. https://www.canadianunderwriter.
ca/insurance/where-calgarys-1-2-billion-hailstorm-ranks-among-canadas-largest-insured-
disasters-1004194178/.
Gateway Gazette. 2015. “High River’s Wallaceville Demolition: Frequently Asked Questions.” 
September 23, 2015. https://gatewaygazette.ca/high-rivers-wallaceville-demolition-frequently-
asked-questions/.
Gaur, Ayushi, Abhishek Gaur, and Slobodan Simonovic. 2018. “Future Changes in Flood Hazards 
across Canada under a Changing Climate.” Water 10 (10): 1441. https://doi.org/10.3390/
w10101441.
Gibbs, Mark T. 2016. “Why Is Coastal Retreat so Hard to Implement? Understanding the Political Risk 
of Coastal Adaptation Pathways.” Ocean & Coastal Management 130 (October): 107–14. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2016.06.002.
Government of Quebec. 2019b. “Special Intervention Zone -Delimitation of the territory flooded 
during the spring floods of 2017 and 2019 included in the special intervention zone” n.d. https://
www.cehq.gouv.qc.ca/zones-inond/zone-intervention-speciale.htm.
Government of Quebec. 2021a. Simplified Guide: Homeowners and Tenants – General Indemnity 
and Financial Assistance Program Regarding Actual or Imminent Disasters – Flooding. 
March 24, 2021. https://cdn-contenu.quebec.ca/cdn-contenu/adm/min/securite-publique/
publications-adm/publications-secteurs/securite-civile/aide-financiere/guide_simplifie_
particuliers_anglais_22-05.pdf?1653408943
Government of Quebec. 2022. Simplified Guide: Homeowners and Tenants - General Indemnity and 
Financial Assistance Program Regarding Actual or Imminent Disasters - Flooding. July 6, 2022. 
https://cdn-contenu.quebec.ca/cdn-contenu/adm/min/securite-publique/publications-adm/
publications-secteurs/securite-civile/aide-financiere/programme-2022/guide_simplifie_pgiaf_
locataires_proprietaires_ANG_2022-07-05.pdf 
Greer, Alex, and Sherri B. Binder. 2017. “A Historical Assessment of Home Buyout Policy: Are We 
Learning or Just Failing?” Housing Policy Debate 27 (3): 372–92. https://doi.org/10.1080/105114
82.2016.1245209.
Greiving, Stefan, Juan Du, and Wiriya Puntub. 2018. “Managed Retreat — A Strategy for the 
Mitigation of Disaster Risks with International and Comparative Perspectives.” Journal of 
Extreme Events 05 (02n03): 1850011. https://doi.org/10.1142/S2345737618500112.
Harker, J. 2016. “Housing Built Upon Sand: Advancing Managed Retreat in New Zealand.” 
Australian Journal of Environmental Law 3: 66–85.
Hayward, Bronwyn. 2008. “‘Nowhere Far From the Sea’: Political Challenges of Coastal 
Adaptation To Climate Change in New Zealand.” Political Science 60 (1): 47–59. https://doi.
org/10.1177/003231870806000105.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
52
Healy, Terry, and Tarmo Soomere. 2008. “Managed Retreat — Is It Really an Option for Mitigation 
of Chronic Erosion and Storm Surge Flooding?” In Solutions to Coastal Disasters 2008, 
456–62. Turtle Bay, Oahu, Hawaii, United States: American Society of Civil Engineers. https://
doi.org/10.1061/40968(312)41.
Hegger, Dries, Peter Driessen, Mark Wiering, Helena van Rijswick, Zbigniew Kundzewicz, Piotr 
Matczak, Ann Crabbé, et al. 2016. “Toward More Flood Resilience: Is a Diversification of Flood 
Risk Management Strategies the Way Forward?” Ecology and Society 21 (4). https://doi.
org/10.5751/ES-08854-210452.
Henry, Jacques. 2013. “Return or Relocate? An Inductive Analysis of Decision-Making in a Disaster.” 
Disasters 37 (2): 293–316. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2012.01303.x.
Henton, D. 2014. “Homeowners Cool to Flood Buyouts; For Many, Price Offered Is Less than Market 
Value.” Calgary Herald, July 6, 2014.
Hino, Miyuki, Christopher B. Field, and Katharine J. Mach. 2017. “Managed Retreat as a Response 
to Natural Hazard Risk.” Nature Climate Change 7 (5): 364–70. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate3252.
Hoogeveen, Dawn, and Klein, Kerri. 2021. “Social Impacts of the 2018 Grand Forks Flood. A Gender 
Based Plus Analysis of Climate Risk.” March, 2021. https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/
environment/climate-change/adaptation/resources/social_impacts_grand_forks_flood.pdf
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2014. “Canada Inundated by Severe Weather in 2013: Insurance 
Companies Pay out Record-Breaking $3.2 Billion to Policyholders [Media Release].” January 
20, 2014. http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/canada-inundated-
by-severe-weather-in-2013-insurance-companies-pay-out-record-breaking-$3-2-billion-to-
policyholders.
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2019. “Options for Managing Flood Costs of Canada’s Highest Risk 
Residential Properties.” Report of the National Working Group on Financial Risk of Flooding. 
Toronto, ON: Insurance Bureau of Canada. http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Studies/IBC-
Flood-Options-Paper-EN.pdf.
Insurance Bureau of Canada. 2019. “Severe Weather Causes $1.9 Billion in Insured Damage in 
2018,” January 16, 2019. http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/
severe-weather-causes-190-million-in-insured-damage-in-2018#:~:text=In%202018%2C%20
insured%20damage%20for,commercial%20properties%20across%20the%20country.
Keystone Consulting & Appraisals.2021. Grand Forks Voluntary Land Acquisition Program. https://
keystone-consulting.ca/grand-forks-voluntary-land-acquisition-program/
Kick, Edward L., James C. Fraser, Gregory M. Fulkerson, Laura A. McKinney, and Daniel H. De Vries. 
2011. “Repetitive Flood Victims and Acceptance of FEMA Mitigation Offers: An Analysis with 
Community-System Policy Implications.” Disasters 35 (3): 510–39. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
7717.2011.01226.x.
Klima, K., L. El Gammal, W. Kong, and D. Prosdocimi. 2020. “Creating a Water Risk Index to Improve 
Community Resilience.” IBM Journal of Research and Development 64 (1/2): 16:1-16:11. https://
doi.org/10.1147/JRD.2019.2945301.
Knox, Jules. 2020. “Grand Forks to Rent out Previously Flooded Homes Acquired under the Buyout 
Program.” Global News. September 24, 2020. https://globalnews.ca/news/7357468/grand-
forks-homes-buyout-program/. 
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
53
Koslov, Liz. 2016. “The Case for Retreat.” Public Culture 28 (2 79): 359–87. https://doi.
org/10.1215/08992363-3427487.
Kousky, Carolyn. 2014. “Managing Shoreline Retreat: A US Perspective.” Climatic Change 124 (1–2): 
9–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-1106-3.
Laucius, Joanne. 2019. “Letting nature its course: insurance, relocation may be part of the solution.” 
Ottawa Citizen. May 2, 2019. https://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-news/letting-nature-take-
its-course-insurance-relocation-may-be-part-of-the-solution.
Lavoie, Judith. 2018. “Grand Forks residents prep for winter in sheds, RVs after catastrophic flooding.” 
The Narwhal. November 29, 2018. https://thenarwhal.ca/grand-forks-residents-prep-for-
winter-in-sheds-rvs-after-catastrophic-flooding/
Lirette, Dominika. 2019. “Grand Forks offers land to residents whose homes bought out after flood.” 
CBC News. November 1, 2019. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/grand-
forks-offering-land-residents-homes-bought-out-flood-1.5343379
Loughran, Kevin, and James R. Elliott. 2019. “Residential Buyouts as Environmental Mobility.” 
Population and Environment 41 (1): 52–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-019-00324-7.
Lovett, John A. 2017. “Moving to Higher Ground: Protecting and Relocating Communities in 
Response to Climate Change (SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3106930).” Social Science Research 
Network. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=3106930.
Lyle, T. S., and T. Mills. 2016. “Assessing Coastal Flood Risk in a Changing Climate for the City of 
Vancouver.” Canadian Water Resources Journal 41 (1–2): 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1080/0701178
4.2015.1126695.
Mach, Katharine J., Caroline M. Kraan, Miyuki Hino, A. R. Siders, Erica M. Johnston, and Christopher 
B. Field. 2019. “Managed Retreat through Voluntary Buyouts of Flood-Prone Properties.” 
Science Advances 5 (10): eaax8995. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax8995.
Maly, E., and E. Ishikawa. 2013. “Land Acquisition and Buyouts as Disaster Mitigation after Hurricane 
Sandy in the United States.” Proceedings of International Symposium on City Planning 2013. 
http://www1.cpij.or.jp/com/iac/sympo/13/ISCP2013-8.pdf.
Marino, Elizabeth. 2018. “Adaptation Privilege and Voluntary Buyouts: Perspectives on Ethnocentrism 
in Sea Level Rise Relocation and Retreat Policies in the US.” Global Environmental Change 
49 (March): 10–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.01.002.
Markusoff, Jason. 2018. “In Calgary’s Flood Zone, Most Residents Hang on and Hope the Water 
Never Rises Again.” Maclean’s, October 30, 2018. https://www.macleans.ca/politics/in-
calgarys-flood-zone-residents-hang-on-hope-water-never-rises-again/.
May, Peter J. 2005. “Policy Maps and Political Feasibility.” In Thinking Like a Policy Analyst, 
edited by Iris Geva-May, 127–51. New York: Palgrave Macmillan US. https://doi.
org/10.1057/9781403980939_7. 
McGarvey, Dan. 2018. “High River Has Moved on 5 Years after Devastating Flood, but Some Still 
Face Uncertain Future.” CBC News, June 19, 2018. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/
high-river-flood-alberta-uncertain-future-1.4710837.
McGhee, Devon J., Sherri Brokopp Binder, and Elizabeth A. Albright. 2020. “First, Do No Harm: 
Evaluating the Vulnerability Reduction of Post-Disaster Home Buyout Programs.” Natural 
Hazards Review 21 (1): 05019002. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)NH.1527-6996.0000337.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
54
McKerracher, R. 2020. “Re: Flood Protection/Mitigation Program Status for the Town of High River,” 
August 12, 2020. https://highriver.ca/app/uploads/2020/12/2020-12-08-Flood-Insurance_
Letter.pdf.
Meltsner, Arnold J. 1972. “Political Feasibility and Policy Analysis.” Public Administration Review 
32 (6): 859. https://doi.org/10.2307/974646.
Mitchell, Michelle. 2015. “Relocating After Disaster: Engaging with Insured Residential Property 
Owners in Greater Christchurch’s Land-Damaged ‘Residential Red Zone.’” Brookings 
Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Brookings-Planned-
Relocations-Study-New-Zealand-June-12-2015.pdf.
MNP LLP. 2015. “Review and Analysis of the Government of Alberta’s Response to and Recovery 
from 2013 Floods.” https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/48bd39ee-2a5a-4846-944d-
6004e0a8a498/resource/8404f003-1bde-49d9-a953-d37e0d671dac/download/2013-
flood-response-report.pdf. 
Muñoz, Cristina E., and Eric Tate. 2016. “Unequal Recovery? Federal Resource Distribution after a 
Midwest Flood Disaster.” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 
13 (5): 507. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13050507.
NOR-EX Engineering Ltd. 2019. “City of Grand Forks DMAF Step II Hazard Risk Assessment.” 
n.d. https://resilience.grandforks.ca/wp-content/uploads/5_rpt_grand_forks_HRA_DMAF-
Redacted.pdf
Nordstrom, Karl F., and Nancy L. Jackson. 2018. “Constraints on Restoring Landforms and Habitats 
on Storm-Damaged Shorefront Lots in New Jersey, USA.” Ocean & Coastal Management 
155 (April): 15–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2018.01.025.
Noy, Ilan. 2020. “Paying a Price of Climate Change: Who Pays for Managed Retreats?” Current 
Climate Change Reports 6 (1): 17–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-020-00155-x.
Olsen, J. Rolf, Peter A. Beling, and James H. Lambert. 2000. “Dynamic Models for Floodplain 
Management.” Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 126 (3): 167–75. https://
doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9496(2000)126:3(167).
Perry, Ronald W., and Michael K. Lindell. 1997. “Principles for Managing Community Relocation as a 
Hazard Mitigation Measure.” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management 5 (1): 49–59. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-5973.00036.
Potenteau, Doyle. 2019. “Grand Forks resident still recovering from historic 2018 flood.” Global News. 
April 19, 2020. https://globalnews.ca/news/5187303/grand-forks-resident-recovering-2018-
flood/
Regional District of Kootenay Boundary.2018. “Staff Report: Community Recovery Options for 
Areas Damaged by May 2018 Flooding in the Kettle River Watershed.” Regular Meeting of the 
Board of Directors September 20, 2018. September 27, 2018. https://rdkb.civicweb.net/filepro/
documents/?preview=76108
Remo, Jonathan W. F., Megan Carlson, and Nicholas Pinter. 2012. “Hydraulic and Flood-Loss 
Modeling of Levee, Floodplain, and River Management Strategies, Middle Mississippi River, 
USA.” Natural Hazards 61 (2): 551–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9938-x.
Rey-Valette, Hélène, Samuel Robert, and Bénédicte Rulleau. 2019. “Resistance to Relocation in 
Flood-Vulnerable Coastal Areas: A Proposed Composite Index.” Climate Policy 19 (2): 206–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2018.1482823.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
55
Robinson, Scott, and Warren Eller. 2018. “Public Administrators in Natural Hazards Governance.” 
In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Natural Hazard Science, 20. Oxford University Press. 
http://naturalhazardscience.oxfordre.com/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199389407.001.0001/
acrefore-9780199389407-e-150?print=pdf.
Robinson, Celine S., Rachel A. Davidson, Joseph E. Trainor, Jamie L. Kruse, and Linda K. Nozick. 
2018. “Homeowner Acceptance of Voluntary Property Acquisition Offers.” International Journal 
of Disaster Risk Reduction 31 (October): 234–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2018.05.002.
Rufat, Samuel, Eric Tate, Christopher G. Burton, and Abu Sayeed Maroof. 2015. “Social Vulnerability 
to Floods: Review of Case Studies and Implications for Measurement.” International Journal of 
Disaster Risk Reduction 14 (December): 470–86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2015.09.013.
Rumbach, Andrew, Esther Sullivan, and Carrie Makarewicz. 2020. “Mobile Home Parks and 
Disasters: Understanding Risk to the Third Housing Type in the United States.” Natural Hazards 
Review 21 (2): 05020001. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)NH.1527-6996.0000357.
Salvesen, D., Todd BenDor, Christian Kamrath, and Brooke Ganser. 2018. “Are Floodplain Buyouts a 
Smart Investment for Local Governments?” UNC Policy Collaboratory.
Savard, Jean-Pierre, Danika van Proosdij, and Stephane O’Carroll. 2016. “Perspectives on Canada’s 
East Coast Region.” In Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate, edited by D.S. Lemmen, 
F.J. Warren, T.S. James, and C. S. L. Mercer Clarke, 99–152. Ottawa, ON: Government of 
Canada.
Scott, Mark, Mick Lennon, Daniel Tubridy, Patrick Marchman, A.R. Siders, Kelly Leilani Main, Victoria 
Herrmann, et al. 2020. “Climate Disruption and Planning: Resistance or Retreat?” Planning 
Theory & Practice 21 (1): 125–54. https://doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2020.1704130.
Seebauer, Sebastian, and Claudia Winkler. 2020. “Should I Stay or Should I Go? Factors in 
Household Decisions for or against Relocation from a Flood Risk Area.” Global Environmental 
Change 60 (January): 102018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2019.102018.
Shrubsole, Dan. 2013. “A History of Flood Management Strategies in Canada Revisited.” In Climate 
Change and Flood Risk Management, by E. Keskitalo, 95–120. Edward Elgar Publishing. https://
doi.org/10.4337/9781781006672.00009.
Siders, A.R. 2013a. “Managed Coastal Retreat: A Handbook of Tools, Case Studies, and Lessons 
Learned.” New York, NY: Columbia Center for Climate Change Law. https://biotech.law.lsu.edu/
blog/ManagedCoastalRetreat_FINAL_Oct-30.pdf.
Siders, A.R. 2013b. “Anatomy of a Buyout Program—New York Post-Superstorm Sandy.” 
Presented at the 16th Annual Conference on Litigating Takings Challenges to Land Use and 
Environmental Regulations, New York University School of Law. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/308518538_Anatomy_of_a_Buyout_Program_--_New_York_Post-Superstorm_
Sandy.
Siders, A.R.  2019a. “Social Justice Implications of US Managed Retreat Buyout Programs.” 
Climatic Change 152 (2): 239–57. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2272-5.
Siders, A.R.. 2019b. “Managed Retreat in the United States.” One Earth 1 (2): 216–25. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.oneear.2019.09.008.
Siders, A.R., and Jesse M. Keenan. 2020. “Variables Shaping Coastal Adaptation Decisions to Armor, 
Nourish, and Retreat in North Carolina.” Ocean & Coastal Management 183 (January): 105023. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2019.105023.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
56
Sipe, Neil, and Karen Vella. 2014. “Relocating a Flood-Affected Community: Good Planning or Good 
Politics?” Journal of the American Planning Association 80 (4): 400–412. https://doi.org/10.108
0/01944363.2014.976586.
Simonovic, Slobodan P., Andre Schardong, and Dan Sandink. 2017. “Mapping Extreme Rainfall 
Statistics for Canada under Climate Change Using Updated Intensity-Duration-Frequency 
Curves.” Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management 143 (3): 04016078. https://doi.
org/10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-5452.0000725.
Song, Jie, and Binbin Peng. 2017. “Should We Leave? Attitudes towards Relocation in Response to 
Sea Level Rise.” Water 9 (12): 941. https://doi.org/10.3390/w9120941.
Tanner, Alexa, and Joseph Árvai. 2018. “Perceptions of Risk and Vulnerability Following Exposure 
to a Major Natural Disaster: The Calgary Flood of 2013: Perceptions of Risk and Vulnerability 
Following Exposure to a Major Natural Disaster.” Risk Analysis 38 (3): 548–61. https://doi.
org/10.1111/risa.12851.
Tate, Eric, Aaron Strong, Travis Kraus, and Haoyi Xiong. 2016. “Flood Recovery and Property 
Acquisition in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.” Natural Hazards 80 (3): 2055–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11069-015-2060-8.
Town of High River. 2014. “Town of High River After Action Report, June 2013 Flood.” https://
swana.org/docs/default-source/resources-documents/disaster-resource-documents/
hrf_afteractionreport.pdf?sfvrsn=33d35da4_2#:~:text=The%20purpose%20of%20an%20
After,challenges%2C%20lessons%20learned%20and%20recommendations.
Town of High River. 2019. “Return Beachwood to Undeveloped State.” July 2019. https://highriver.ca/
beachwood.
Thistlethwaite, Jason, Daniel Henstra, Craig Brown, and Scott, Daniel. 2018. “How Flood Experience 
and Risk Perception Influences Protective Actions and Behaviours among Canadian 
Homeowners.” Environmental Management 61 (2): 197–208. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-
017-0969-2.
Thom, Shelby. 2019. “Grand Forks flood buyout woes highlight gaps in B.C. emergency management 
policies.” Global News. December 17, 2019.  https://globalnews.ca/news/6299535/grand-forks-
flood-gaps-bc-emergency-policies/
Treuer, Galen, Kenneth Broad, and Robert Meyer. 2018. “Using Simulations to Forecast Homeowner 
Response to Sea Level Rise in South Florida: Will They Stay or Will They Go?” Global 
Environmental Change 48 (January): 108–18. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.10.008.
Vandenbeld, Anna, and Janet MacDonald. 2013. “Fostering Community Acceptance of Managed 
Retreat in New Zealand.” In Climate Adaptation Futures, edited by Jean Palutikof, Sarah L. 
Boulter, Andrew J. Ash, Mark Stafford Smith, Martin Parry, Marie Waschka, and Daniela Guitart, 
161–66. Oxford: John Wiley & Sons. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118529577.ch15.
Wadhwani, Ashley. 2018. “5 Things to Know about B.C. Floods 2018” Grand Forks Gazette, May 12, 
2018. https://www.grandforksgazette.ca/news/5-things-to-know-about-b-c-floods-2018/.
Weber, Anna, and Rob Moore. 2019. “Going Under: Long Wait Times for Post-Flood Buyouts Leave 
Homeowners Underwater.” New York: Natural Resources Defense Council. https://www.nrdc.
org/sites/default/files/going-under-post-flood-buyouts-report.pdf.
Buying Out the Floodplain
PARTNERS FOR ACTION
References
57
White, Ryan. 2017. “Province Auctions off Salvageable Homes for Relocation Following High River 
Buyouts.” CTV News, February 17, 2017. https://calgary.ctvnews.ca/province-auctions-off-
salvageable-homes-for-relocation-following-high-river-buyouts-1.3290950.
Wilby, Robert, and Rod Keenan. 2012. “Adapting to Flood Risk under Climate Change.” Progress in 
Physical Geography 36 (3): 348–78. https://doi.org/10.1177/0309133312438908.
Wright, M., and R. Southwick. 2013. “Properties May Be Seized; Some High River Homeowners 
Refuse Buyout.” Calgary Herald, December 26, 2013.
Zavar, Elyse. 2016. “The Role of Magnetic Agents in Shaping Post-Disaster Land Use.” Land Use 
Policy 56 (November): 38–46. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2016.04.037.
Zheng, Haochi, David Barta, and Xiaodong Zhang. 2014. “Lesson Learned from Adaptation 
Response to Devils Lake Flooding in North Dakota, USA.” Regional Environmental Change 
14 (1): 185–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-013-0474-y.
uwaterloo.ca/partners-for-action
