Synthesis Report
Canada in a 
Changing
Climate
REPORT
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 2 
Recommended Citation: 
Lulham, N., Warren, F.J., Walsh, K.A. and Szwarc, J. (2023). Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Synthesis Report; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario.
The digital interactive version of the report is available at: 
www.ChangingClimate.ca/Synthesis. The report is also available at: 
adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca
Aussi disponible en français sous le titre : 
Le Canada dans un climat en changement : Rapport de synthèse
For more information regarding reproduction rights, contact Natural 
Resources Canada at:
nrcan.copyrightdroitdauteur.rncan@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca
For more information about the National Knowledge Assessment, 
contact the Assessment Secretariat at: 
nrcan.adaptation.rncan@nrcan-rncan.gc.ca
Cat. No.: M34-84/2023E-PDF
ISBN: 978-0-660-68099-6
Photos: © Shutterstock and Unsplash
© His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, represented by Natural 
Resources Canada, 2023
This report is part of Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action, the National Knowledge Assessment of how and 
why Canada’s climate is changing; the impacts of these changes on our 
communities, environment, and economy; and how we are adapting.
To find out more, please visit: <https://natural-resources.canada.ca/
climate-change/canada-in-a-changing-climate/19918>  
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 3 
Table of Contents 
Acknowledgements 
4
Key conclusions 
5
Preface 
7
1.0 Introduction 
8
1.1 Assessment scope and process
9
1.2 The climate science foundation
11
2.0 Key conclusions
17
2.1 Canada’s ageing infrastructure is at high risk from climate change
17
2.2 Climate change is harming our health
20
2.3 Our food and natural resources are highly climate-sensitive
25
2.4 The business case for adaptation is strong
28
2.5 Nature-based approaches save money and provide many benefits
30
2.6 Improved incentives and coordination can help close Canada’s adaptation gap
36
2.7 Local-level adaptation plays a leading role in our climate change response
40
2.8 Self-determined and Indigenous-led climate action supports reconciliation
45
2.9 Adaptation can promote equity
50
2.10 Now is the time for the private sector to step up on adaptation
53
3.0 Conclusion 
57
4.0 References 
58
Annex 1: Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action National Knowledge 
Assessment reports 
62
Annex 2: Headline Statements, Key Findings and Key Messages from reports produced in the 
2016-2023 National Knowledge Assessment process 
63
Annex 3: Examples of knowledge gaps identified in the most recent Canada in a Changing Climate 
National Knowledge Assessment reports 
68
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 4 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to acknowledge the National Assessment Advisory Committee for their valuable guidance and 
input throughout the process:
Gord Beal, Chartered Professional Accountants 
Canada
Robert Capozi, New Brunswick Climate Change 
Secretariat
Stewart Cohen, Independent Climate Scientist, 
Environment and Climate Change Canada (retired)
Ellen Curtis, Physical and Health Education Canada
Susan Evans, Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Affairs
Elaine Fox, Government of Manitoba
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé publique 
du Québec
Sara Holzman, Government of Nunavut
Ewa Jackson, ICLEI Canada
David Lapp, Engineers Canada (retired)
Caroline Larrivée, Ouranos
Fred Lipschultz, U.S. Global Change Research 
Program
Patricia Manuel, Dalhousie University
Linda Mortsch, University of Waterloo
Graeme Reed, Assembly of First Nations
Marjorie Shepherd, Environment and Climate 
Change Canada
Jim Vanderwal, Fraser Basin Council
Thomas White, Natural Resources Canada
Many people also contributed directly to this report, providing supporting text, reviewing content and assisting 
with editing. We would like to thank the following for their help:
Peter Berry
Richard Boyd
Craig Brown
Elizabeth Bush 
Meredith Caspell
Chris Derksen
Al Douglas
Dariel Helmesi
Anne Kendrick
Paul Kovacs
David Pearson
Marie-Hélène Tremblay
Rebekka Schnitter
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 5 
Key conclusions 
Canada’s ageing infrastructure is at high risk from climate change 
(see Section 2.1)
Adaptation is increasingly urgent for reducing climate risks to infrastructure, which provides safe spaces for 
living and working and supports our energy, transportation and water treatment systems. Many approaches 
are being developed and used to reduce climate risks and improve the resilience of Canada’s infrastructure.
Climate change is harming our health (see Section 2.2)
With climate change already negatively affecting the health of Canadians and their health systems, urgent 
adaptation action is needed to reduce the risks. Continued and coordinated efforts are critical for protecting 
the health of Canadians from current and future climate change impacts.
Our food and natural resources are highly climate-sensitive (see 
Section 2.3)
Failing to adjust how we manage natural resource and food production sectors in a changing climate would 
threaten local economies and jobs, and have consequences for transboundary resource management, 
Canada’s supply chains and our involvement in global trade. Various adaptation options are being 
implemented in these sectors to reduce climate risk and impacts.
The business case for adaptation is strong (see Section 2.4)
Climate change impacts already cost Canadians billions of dollars each year, and costs will continue to rise. 
There is a strong business case for adaptation, with the benefits (including avoided costs) gained through 
adaptation measures generally exceeding the costs of implementation.
Nature-based approaches save money and provide many benefits 
(see Section 2.5)
Nature-based approaches to adaptation are often more cost-effective and deliver a suite of co-benefits. 
Protecting vulnerable ecosystems is also essential for preserving the services that they provide and for 
maintaining biodiversity.
Improved incentives and coordination can help close Canada’s 
adaptation gap (see Section 2.6)
In Canada, progress on adaptation remains slow, with relatively few examples of implemented actions despite 
growing losses. Greater incentives, fewer barriers and improved coordination across sectors and scales will 
help close the adaptation gap.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 6 
Local-level adaptation plays a leading role in our climate change 
response (see Section 2.7)
Local governments and Indigenous communities in Canada are already experiencing climate change impacts 
on their infrastructure, economies and well-being. Together with local partners, they are well positioned to 
take action on adaptation given their local knowledge and Indigenous Knowledge, strong social networks and 
connections to the land.
Self-determined and Indigenous-led climate action supports 
reconciliation (see Section 2.8)
Indigenous Knowledge Systems, and Indigenous rights and governance are critical to establishing just, 
equitable, decolonized and sustainable approaches to overcoming the climate crisis. Recognizing that 
humans, culture and the natural world are inseparable, and that we share responsibility for future generations, 
is essential to these approaches.
Adaptation can promote equity (see Section 2.9)
Existing social, economic and health inequities are often exacerbated by climate change impacts. Engaging 
with those most affected by climate change is essential for ensuring that adaptation measures address these 
inequities.
Now is the time for the private sector to step up on adaptation (see 
Section 2.10)
Businesses face a range of direct and indirect risks from climate change. It is vital to engage and empower 
the business community and other private sector stakeholders if we are to progress at the scale needed to 
reduce current and future climate change risks and take advantage of potential opportunities.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 7 
Preface 
The release of this Synthesis Report marks an important milestone for Canada’s National Knowledge 
Assessment process. Over the last six years, we have worked with more than 650 experts from across 
the country to produce a total of six reports. While building on the knowledge foundation provided by past 
Assessment processes, we have introduced many new approaches and covered new themes and issues. 
New voices have been added, and we are especially excited to have included an Indigenous-led report, For our 
Future: Indigenous Resilience Report (forthcoming). These reports provide a strong and credible knowledge 
base to inform decision making.
At the same time, we must acknowledge the immense changes seen in Canada over the six years since 
the current Assessment process started. Due to the timing of knowledge collection and analysis, and the 
publication process, many of the latest changes and impacts have not been captured within this suite 
of reports. For example, following a global pandemic that affected all aspects of our lives, Canada has 
experienced several major climate events. These include the destructive Category 4 Hurricane Fiona in the 
Atlantic region in 2022 and the widespread, devastating wildfires across much of Canada in 2023. Such 
events clearly demonstrate that there is still much work to be done on adaptation to increase our resilience 
in the face of a changing climate. The urgency for action has also amplified, with mounting evidence that 
climate impacts, even at lower levels of global warming, can cause severe and sometimes irreversible 
consequences.
On a positive note, there have also been significant developments on the climate change agenda. Canada 
now has its first ever National Adaptation Strategy, which was developed through consultation with 
governments, experts, stakeholders and rights-holders across the country and released in 2023 (Government 
of Canada, 2023). This whole-of-society strategy includes a framework to help reduce risks and build climate-
resilient communities. It also includes goals, objectives and targets to help ensure that investments now and 
in the future are targeted and effective.
It is our hope that this Synthesis Report, and the other reports produced through this Assessment process, 
will help inform the decisions and actions that are urgently needed today to help ensure that we and future 
generations can survive and thrive in Canada’s changing climate.
 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 8 
1.0 Introduction 
The global climate is changing at an alarming rate. Global surface temperature has increased by over 1.0°C 
since pre-industrial times and will continue to rise until at least mid-century under all emissions scenarios 
considered by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2023a). In Canada, both past and future 
warming are about double the magnitude of global warming, with even greater warming in northern regions 
(see CCCR-41).
“There is a rapidly closing window of opportunity to secure a liveable and sustainable future for all.” 
(IPCC, 2023a)
Along with rising temperatures, a warming climate involves changes in precipitation patterns; more frequent 
and intense extreme events; declines in snow, ice and permafrost; changes in water quality and quantity; 
ocean warming; and sea-level rise. Such changes are already affecting many aspects of life in Canada—our 
health and well-being, economies, environment, culture and even our identities. The need for climate action 
has never been so urgent. Adapting our processes, practices and structures (see Box 1) is critical to reduce 
the growing risks from climate change. Climate change mitigation is also essential: without deep global 
reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions this decade, on a path to net zero emissions by around mid-
century, global warming is projected to exceed 1.5°C. Surpassing this threshold would have widespread and 
devastating consequences in Canada and globally (IPCC, 2022). It is imperative that actions and decisions be 
informed by the best available information.
Box 1: The adaptation process
Adaptation refers to measures that reduce the negative impacts of climate change or that take advantage of 
potential new opportunities. Climate change adaptation builds resilience and reduces risk related to current 
and future climate change impacts. It involves adjusting plans, policies and actions, and can be reactive (i.e., 
occurring in response to climate change impacts) or anticipatory (i.e., occurring before impacts of climate 
change are observed). 
1 The following short forms for each of the National Knowledge Assessment reports, followed by the chapter number, 
are used to refer readers to specific chapters for more information. See Annex 1 for the report citations. Readers are 
encouraged to use chapter-specific citations, where appropriate.
CCCR: Canada’s Changing Climate Report <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/>
NIR: National Issues Report <https://changingclimate.ca/national-issues/>
RPR: Regional Perspectives Report <https://changingclimate.ca/regional-perspectives/>
HCCC: Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate <https://changingclimate.ca/health-in-a-changing-climate/>
IRR: For our Future: Indigenous Resilience Report
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 9 
Adaptation is often portrayed as a cycle (see Figure 1), which encompasses a number of steps, from 
becoming aware of climate change and the need to adapt, all the way through to learning and adjusting 
post adaptation implementation. It is, by nature, iterative, and although presented as a sequential process, 
organizations may take different pathways. Throughout the process there is an ongoing need to build 
capacity to adapt and mobilize knowledge.
Figure 1: The adaptation cycle. Source: Modified from Eyzaguirre and Warren, 2014.
1.1 Assessment scope and process
In 2017, the Government of Canada launched its fourth National Knowledge Assessment process, Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action, with the goal of assessing, synthesizing and sharing 
the latest knowledge on climate change impacts and adaptation in Canada to help inform and advance 
decision making. Led by Natural Resources Canada, this multi-year, collaborative initiative delivered a series 
of authoritative reports (see Figure 2) that assess how and why Canada’s climate is changing; the impacts 
of these changes on our communities, environment and economy; and how we are adapting. The Headline 
Statements, Key Findings and Key Messages from each of these five Assessment reports are included in 
Annex 2.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 10 
Figure 2: Overview of the reports produced through the National Knowledge Assessment process.
The Assessment process has drawn on a broad partnership of subject-matter experts and Assessment 
users, including from universities, professional and non-governmental groups, Indigenous organizations, 
the private sector and all orders of government. Enhanced engagement was a priority throughout, to ensure 
the credibility, rigour and usefulness of the reports. Starting with a scoping meeting in 2016, experts, target 
audiences and members of the public were invited to provide input, including through workshops, conference 
sessions, surveys and online engagement. External review was critical to ensuring that the Assessment 
reports are credible and relevant: over 300 invited and self-registered expert reviewers provided more than 
10,000 comments to the author teams. The many steps of the multi-year Assessment process are outlined in 
Figure 3.
The Assessment reports draw from existing knowledge on climate change science, impacts and adaptation. 
Sources include peer-reviewed literature, broader literature, practitioner perspectives, Indigenous Knowledge 
and local knowledge. Enhanced inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge was a particular priority for the current 
Assessment process. Production timelines necessitated cut-off dates for incorporating new knowledge 
sources and literature; as such, the reports may not reference the newest available literature or knowledge on 
a given topic.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 11 
Figure 3: Overview of the steps involved in Canada’s National Knowledge Assessment process.
1.2 The climate science foundation
The conclusions of Canada’s Changing Climate Report (CCCR), the foundational climate science report of 
the Assessment process, underscore the urgency for action to both mitigate and adapt to climate change. 
A strong body of evidence confirms that Canada’s climate is changing, with changes documented across its 
regions, in the atmosphere, on land and in the surrounding oceans.
Additional global warming is unavoidable, as some additional GHG emissions are inevitable (see CCCR-3). 
Many climate trends already underway in Canada will therefore continue. These include more extreme heat, 
less extreme cold, longer growing seasons, increases in annual precipitation, earlier spring peak streamflow, 
shorter snow and ice cover seasons, thinning glaciers, thawing permafrost and rising sea levels along many 
Canadian coastlines (see Table 1). However, regional variation exists, and understanding these variations is 
important for informing adaptation plans. For example, while global sea level is unequivocally rising, relative 
sea level along Canadian coastlines is also influenced by local factors. These factors lead to rates of sea-level 
rise in some coastal areas that are higher than the global average, while in some other areas relative sea level 
is falling due to post-glacial rebound (see CCCR-7). In the Arctic and Atlantic Canada, the loss of sea ice will 
further increase the risks of coastal damage from sea-level rise and storm surges.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 12 
Table 1: Assessment of observed changes, their attribution, and future changes for a select set 
of climate indicators from Canada’s Changing Climate Report (CCCR) (Bush and Lemmen [Eds]., 
2019) and from reports contributing to the IPCC Sixth Assessment.
Confidence/likelihood not 
assessed for this finding
Low Confidence
Medium 
Confidence
Likely / High 
Confidence
Very Likely / Very 
High Confidence
Virtually Certain
Fact
CANADA
GLOBAL
CLIMATE INDICATOR
HISTORICAL CHANGE 
ASSESSMENT (CCCR)
HUMAN CONTRIBUTION 
ASSESSMENT (CCCR)
PROJECTED CHANGES – 
(CCCR)
IPCC SIXTH ASSESSMENT 
REPORT CONCLUSIONS
Average air temperature
{CCCR-4}
{IPCC SYR SPM A.1; 
IPCC SYR 3.1.1}
Annual and seasonal 
mean temperatures 
across Canada have 
increased, with the 
greatest warming 
occurring in winter. 
More than half of the 
observed warming in 
Canada is due to the 
influence of human 
activities.
Projected increases 
in mean temperature 
in Canada are about 
twice the corresponding 
increases in global mean 
temperature, regardless of 
the emission scenario.
Human activities, 
principally through 
emissions of greenhouse 
gases, have unequivocally 
caused global warming.
The best estimate of 
mean annual temperature 
increase between 1948 
and 2016 is 1.7°C for 
Canada as a whole, about 
twice the
Continued greenhouse 
gas emissions will further 
affect all major climate 
system components and 
many changes will be 
irreversible on centennial 
to millennial timescales.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 13 
CANADA
GLOBAL
Extreme temperatures
{CCCR-4}
{IPCC WGI SPM A.3.1} 
Extreme warm 
temperatures have 
become hotter, 
while extreme cold 
temperatures have 
become less cold.
Most of the observed 
increase in the coldest 
and warmest daily 
temperatures of the year 
in Canada from 1948 to 
2012 can be attributed to 
anthropogenic influence.
Extreme warm 
temperatures are 
projected to become 
hotter in the future, 
while extreme cold 
temperatures are 
projected to become even 
less cold. 
Hot extremes (including 
heatwaves) have become 
more frequent and 
more intense across 
most land regions since 
the 1950s, while cold 
extremes (including cold 
waves) have become less 
frequent and less severe.
Human-induced climate 
change is the main driver 
of observed changes in 
hot extremes and cold 
extremes.
Annual average 
precipitation
{CCCR-4}
{IPCC WGI SPM A.1.4)
Annual mean precipitation 
has increased, on average, 
in Canada.
The observed increase 
in Canadian precipitation 
is at least partly due to 
human influence.
Annual precipitation is 
projected to increase 
everywhere in Canada 
over the 21st century. 
Globally averaged 
precipitation over land has 
increased since 1950. 
Human influence 
contributed to the pattern 
of observed precipitation 
changes since the mid-
20th century.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 14 
CANADA
GLOBAL
Extreme precipitation
{CCCR-4}
{IPCC WGI CH. 11, WGI 
SPM B.2.4}
For Canada as a whole, 
observational evidence of 
changes in daily extreme 
precipitation amounts is 
lacking.
Not applicable.
In the future, daily extreme 
precipitation is projected 
to increase.
Human influence has 
contributed to the 
intensification of heavy 
precipitation at the 
continental scale in 
Northern America.
Heavy precipitation events 
will intensify and become 
more frequent in most 
regions with additional 
global warming.
Cryosphere extent and 
mass
{CCCR-5}
{IPCC WGI SPM A.1.5, 
TS 2.5}
Over the past three 
decades, the proportion of 
Canadian land and marine 
areas covered by snow 
and ice have decreased, 
and permafrost 
temperatures have risen. 
Detection and attribution 
studies show that climate 
change induced by human 
activity has driven observed 
changes to the cryosphere.
Further reductions in the 
cryosphere extent over 
the coming decades 
are virtually certain, 
as temperatures are 
projected to increase 
under all future emission 
scenarios. 
Over recent decades, 
widespread loss of 
snow and ice has 
been observed, and 
several elements of the 
cryosphere are now 
in states unseen in 
centuries. 
Human influence was the 
main driver of observed 
reductions in Arctic sea 
ice since the late 1970s, 
the widespread retreat of 
glaciers, and the Northern 
Hemisphere spring snow 
cover decrease since 1950.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 15 
CANADA
GLOBAL
Seasonal stream flow
{CCCR-6}
{IPCC WGI, TS Box TS.6}
Over the last several 
decades, spring peak 
streamflow following 
snowmelt has occurred 
earlier, with higher winter 
and early spring flows.
Although no Canadian 
studies have directly 
attributed change in 
streamflow timing to 
anthropogenic climate 
change, there is 
strong reasoning that 
observed changes in 
streamflow seasonality 
are partly attributable to 
anthropogenic warming.
Seasonal changes in 
streamflow are projected 
to continue, with 
corresponding shifts 
from more snowmelt-
dominated regimes 
toward rainfall-dominated 
regimes.
In response to cryosphere 
changes, there have been 
changes in streamflow 
seasonality, including 
an earlier occurrence of 
peak streamflow in high-
latitude and mountain 
catchments.
In some areas, reduced 
summer flows have been 
observed.
Ocean properties
{CCCR-7}
{IPCC WGI SPM A.1.6, 
B.5.1.}
Oceans surrounding 
Canada have warmed, 
become more acidic, 
and less oxygenated, 
consistent with observed 
global ocean changes 
over the past century.
There is strong evidence of 
human-induced changes 
during the past century 
in key ocean-climate 
properties—such as 
temperature, sea ice, acidity, 
and dissolved oxygen—off 
Canada.
Ocean warming and loss 
of oxygen will intensify 
with further emissions 
of all greenhouse 
gases, whereas ocean 
acidification will increase 
in response to additional 
carbon dioxide emissions.
The global upper ocean 
has warmed since the 
1970s.
Past GHG emissions since 
1750 have committed the 
global ocean to future 
warming.
Ocean acidification will 
continue to increase in the 
21st century.
Ocean oxygen levels will 
continue to decrease in 
the 21st century.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 16 
CANADA
GLOBAL
Sea level rise
{CCCR-7}
{IPCC WGI SPM A.1.7, 
B.5.3}
Relative sea level has 
increased in the Atlantic, 
Pacific, and western Arctic 
regions of Canada over 
the last century and even 
exceeded the global rate 
of change in southern 
Atlantic Canada, where 
land is subsiding.
Changes in sea level relative 
to Canada’s coastline are 
affected by global sea level 
rise and also by vertical 
land motion (land uplift or 
subsidence).
Where relative sea level 
is projected to rise (most 
of the Atlantic and Pacific 
coasts and the Beaufort 
coast in the Arctic), the 
frequency and magnitude 
of extreme high water 
level events will increase.
Human influence was 
the main driver of the 
observed increases in 
global mean sea level 
since at least 1971.
Global mean sea level will 
continue to rise over the 
21st century.
Sources: IPCC SYR SPM: IPCC, 2023a; IPCC SYR: IPCC, 2023b; IPCC WGI SPM: IPCC, 2021a; IPCC WGI TS: Arias et al., 2021; IPCC WGI CH. 11: 
Seneviratne et al., 2021.

The most severe impacts of climate change are often related to changes in climate extremes. A careful assessment of changes in these extremes 
was undertaken in the CCCR, which found strong evidence for observed changes in extreme temperature. However, at the time of the assessment, 
the observational record had not yet shown evidence of consistent increases in short-duration precipitation extremes across the country. 
Importantly, both extreme hot temperatures and extreme precipitation events are projected to become more frequent and intense. The former will 
increase the severity of heatwaves and contribute to increased risks of drought and wildfire, while the latter will increase risks of urban and inland 
flooding. Of note, the combination of warmer temperatures and smaller snowpacks in the future leads to uncertainty about future changes in 
snowmelt-related flooding.
A supplement to the CCCR, published in 2022, provided Canadians with an expert perspective on the consistency of the CCCR findings with those 
from the IPCC’s then most recent science assessment report (IPCC, 2021b). While the IPCC report did not assess changes in climate for Canada as 
a whole, many of the global and regional findings were confirmed as being consistent with, and in some cases strengthening the evidence for, the 
CCCR’s conclusions (see also Table 1).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 17 
2.0 Key conclusions
This Synthesis Report draws from the findings of the other reports produced through the current National 
Knowledge Assessment process (see Figure 2) to identify the 10 key conclusions discussed in this section. 
These key conclusions illustrate the main challenges that climate change is posing to our country, and the 
steps we are taking to adapt.
Three takeaway messages encapsulate the 10 key conclusions:
•	
Climate change impacts—and adaptation actions—are particularly evident in certain critical 
sectors and ecosystems. Throughout the Assessment reports, it is evident that Canada’s 
climate is changing, with the impacts felt across the country. But these impacts are especially 
pronounced for infrastructure, human health, natural resources and the functioning of 
ecosystems. In response to these impacts, we are seeing examples of adaptation actions being 
implemented—providing evidence, inspiration and impetus for further action.
•	
Canada’s economy is affected by the large and rising costs of climate change impacts. Our 
economy is highly sensitive to climate change, with extreme events having particularly large 
and disruptive impacts, and both direct and indirect costs. Economic analyses have shown that 
adaptation can reduce the projected costs of climate change, with avoided damages generally 
exceeding the costs of adaptation measures.
•	
Rapid, informed and coordinated action is needed to close Canada's large adaptation gap. As 
our knowledge around climate change impacts and adaptation continues to advance, lessons 
are emerging on how to move forward. These include the importance of reducing barriers and 
increasing incentives, continuing to stimulate action at the local level, increasing Indigenous-
led climate action, addressing social and economic inequities, and increasing private sector 
engagement in adaptation.
2.1 Canada’s ageing infrastructure is at high risk from climate change
Adaptation is increasingly urgent for reducing climate risks to infrastructure, which provides safe spaces 
for living and working and supports our energy, transportation and water treatment systems. Many 
approaches are being developed and used to reduce climate risks and improve the resilience of Canada’s 
infrastructure.
Canada’s infrastructure provides critical services for Canadians, including wastewater and stormwater 
management, access to drinking water, energy production and distribution, and the movement of goods 
and people. It also includes public buildings (such as health facilities) and private buildings (such as homes 
and businesses). Much of Canada’s infrastructure is ageing, with approximately one third in need of retrofit 
or replacement due to its poor condition (Project Steering Committee, 2016). The Council of Canadian 
Academies (2019) identified infrastructure as the top sector at risk to climate change impacts in Canada, but 
also the sector with the greatest potential for adaptation.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 18 
Most of Canada’s existing infrastructure was designed based on historical climate conditions, and much 
has been in use well beyond its intended capacity and lifespan (see NIR-2). As a result, the integrity and 
performance of this infrastructure is being put to the test, even under current climate conditions. We are 
already seeing examples of service decline and failure across the country (see NIR-2; IRR). Compared 
with urban areas, rural and remote communities—including those located in northern Canada—experience 
higher risks to health, safety and well-being from critical infrastructure decline or failure. This is due to their 
geographic isolation, reliance on limited access points into and out of their communities, and limited access 
to services (see Sections 2.7 and 2.9; IRR; Table 3.8 in NIR-3).
The cost of damage to infrastructure from climate change and extreme weather events is growing, with 
wide-ranging impacts for Canadians. It is estimated that $5.3 billion per year will be needed over the next 50 
years to reduce climate risks to municipal infrastructure in Canada, including roads, facilities, sewer systems 
and buildings (Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2020). This figure is 
conservative and underestimates the full investment needed to protect Canada’s infrastructure, since it only 
considers municipally owned infrastructure, certain climate risks and not the full range of impacts (see 
NIR-6). Climate change is also increasing risks to health facilities, which has important implications for health 
service delivery, particularly in the wake of climate disasters (see Sections 2.2 and 2.9; HCCC-3; HCCC-10).
Given the interdependence between different infrastructure systems, damage from climate change and 
extreme weather events can produce cascading impacts, with wide-ranging social and economic implications 
(see Section 2.9; RPR-3). For instance, transportation disruptions affect supply chains and create risks to 
other sectors of the economy (see NIR-7). Damage to roads, bridges or public transit can prevent people 
from getting to work, bringing their kids to school or daycare, or accessing healthcare (see NIR-6). Damaged 
infrastructure also disrupts the delivery of critical services such as electricity or drinking water, which extends 
to people living in areas not directly affected by the climate hazard (see NIR-6). Identifying interdependencies 
is increasingly considered an important step in reducing climate risks (C40 Cities and AECOM, 2017).
Many approaches are being developed, tested and used to reduce climate risks and improve the climate 
resilience of Canada’s infrastructure. These include:
•	
guidelines, codes and standards that consider future climate conditions (such as standards 
developed through the Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative);
•	
infrastructure risk assessments (such as the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability 
Committee Protocol developed by Engineers Canada) to assist with decision making and 
prioritizing adaptation actions;
•	
incentive-based tools (such as local improvement charges and development cost charges); and
•	
the growing use of green infrastructure (such as rain gardens or retention ponds to reduce storm 
runoff) and low-impact development approaches (see NIR-2; RPR-3).
Many of these approaches can be applied together, and often deliver a range of co-benefits to communities.
Asset management is another approach that communities are increasingly using to assess, monitor and 
manage their infrastructure assets, including natural assets such as wetlands and urban forests (see NIR-2; 
RPR-3). Incorporating climate change considerations into asset management practices helps communities 
better understand how climate change affects service levels, so they can make decisions accordingly (see 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 19 
Case Story 2.1 in NIR-2; Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2018). There are also a growing number of 
training opportunities related to strengthening climate resilience for communities and professionals working 
on the design and management of infrastructure (see Box 2).
Box 2: Protecting Canada’s infrastructure in a changing climate
Insights from Serge Dupuis, Professor of Civil Engineering, Université de Moncton
Ageing infrastructure across Canada faces a daunting array of challenges in a changing climate. According 
to civil engineering professor Serge Dupuis (see Video 1), the greatest challenge is the increase in 
extreme weather events: “Existing and past design criteria were never intended to [address] these extreme 
[circumstances].” New Brunswick’s roads and bridges, for example, are threatened by both inland and coastal 
flooding related to sea-level rise, storm surges and rivers swollen by extreme rainfall events.
To prepare for these changes, engineering professionals need greater awareness and guidance to meet 
Canada’s changing infrastructure needs. Through Natural Resource Canada’s Building Regional Adaptation 
Capacity and Expertise (BRACE) Program (2017‒2022), Université de Moncton managed a team that helped 
members of the engineering profession better contribute to climate change adaptation. “We [hosted] in-
person workshops and technical webinars. We even partnered in developing and hosting a certified risk 
assessment training course to better prepare our infrastructure professionals to tackle this oncoming 
extreme weather.”
Managing coastal flood risk in New Brunswick is a collaborative process, involving different orders of 
government. For instance, the provincial government has funded the development of localized maps that 
show future flood risk. Using these maps, along with LIDAR data and federal government data on climate 
extremes, Université de Moncton has been able to pinpoint areas that will be more vulnerable to flooding in 
the future. This work, in turn, informs how local governments can prepare for the consequences of flooding.
Having the right information is crucial to climate-proofing infrastructure. “Engineering professionals,” 
says Professor Dupuis, “need data on how much rain is falling in a certain period […] to help us manage 
the sizing of infrastructure, [such as] culverts. [They need to know] the number of heat days, the number 
of freeze-thaw days. This type of information helps us better design, manage or replace some of the 
infrastructure we have now.”
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 20 
Video 1: Video interview with Serge Dupuis, Professor of Civil Engineering at the Université de Moncton, on 
improving the climate resilience of infrastructure. <https://vimeo.com/886517548/1b4df0fb62>
2.2 Climate change is harming our health
With climate change already negatively affecting the health of Canadians and their health systems, 
urgent adaptation action is needed to reduce the risks. Continued and coordinated efforts are critical for 
protecting the health of Canadians from current and future climate change impacts.
Climate change is increasing risks to human health and well-being, affecting Canadians across the country 
(see Figure 4; HCCC-all chapters; NIR-3; RPR-6; IRR) and causing severe and sometimes catastrophic 
impacts. Climate change increases health risks through complex and interconnected social, environmental, 
cultural and economic pathways that impact individuals and communities (see HCCC-1; IRR). Populations 
that are disproportionately affected include Indigenous Peoples, women, children, youth, older adults, low-
income individuals, people experiencing homelessness, people living with pre-existing physical and mental 
health conditions, and certain occupational groups, such as outdoor workers and first responders. Rapidly 
scaled adaptation and a significant reduction of GHG emissions are critical for protecting our health from 
future climate change impacts.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 21 
Figure 4: Examples of risks of climate change to health in Canada. See the Health of Canadians in a Changing 
Climate report for more information. Source: Charness et al., 2023.
Natural hazards
Heatwaves, floods, wildfires, coastal erosion and droughts are examples of natural hazards whose frequency 
and/or intensity are influenced by climate change and pose important health risks for Canadians (see 
HCCC-3). For example, heat events can lead to cardiovascular and respiratory problems, pregnancy 
complications (see HCCC-3; RPR-2; RPR-3) and hundreds of deaths in affected communities (see HCCC-3). 
Flood damage can make homes unsafe, such as by introducing mould, fungi and bacteria or by causing loss 
of power (see HCCC-3; HCCC-9; HCCC-10). Severe floods can result in drowning, injury, and hypothermia and 
lead to evacuation, with accompanying physical and mental health impacts for communities (see NIR-6). 
Long-term displacement, including from traditional territories, has had significant impacts on the health and 
well-being of affected Indigenous Peoples (see HCCC-4; RPR-6; NIR-3; NIR-6; IRR).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 22 
Air quality
Climate change is affecting air quality in Canada, and many air pollutants contribute to climate change. 
Exposure to key air pollutants, including fine particulate matter and ozone, increases the risk of a range of 
adverse health outcomes and premature death (see HCCC-5). For instance, wildfire smoke can exacerbate 
existing health problems such as asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and cardiovascular 
diseases, leading to premature death for many Canadians each year (see Box 3; HCCC-3; RPR-6). Smoke 
plumes can travel several thousand kilometres, threatening the health of large numbers of people in distant 
communities and contribute to premature deaths (see HCCC-5).
Infectious Diseases
Climate change also poses serious risks to the health of Canadians from many diseases that could emerge 
or spread within Canada due to continued warming. These include diseases transmitted by insects (e.g., 
West Nile virus) or animals (e.g., rabies) or spread from human to human (e.g., seasonal influenza), and those 
acquired by inhaling bacteria found in the environment (e.g., Legionnaires’ disease). Climate change is a key 
driver in the northward spread of Lyme disease (see RPR-3): human cases in Canada increased from 144 in 
2009 to 2025 cases in 2017 (see Figure 6.5 in HCCC-6).
Food and water safety and security 
Climate change increases food safety and security risks by disrupting critical components of food 
systems, including food processing, transportation and distribution, and food preparation activities (see 
IRR). For example, changes in sea ice coverage and thickness challenge traditional hunting activities 
in the North while increasing risk of injury. The increased frequency and severity of storms and heavy 
precipitation can lead to food contamination by transporting harmful pathogens from the ground and 
sewage to water sources used to wash or process foods or irrigate crops (see HCCC-7). Globally, the 
changing climate has been identified as a major driver of increasing food prices—such as through supply 
chain disruptions due to extreme weather events—which can increase household food insecurity and lead 
to poor nutrition (see Box 9.2 in NIR-9; HCCC-8).
The quality of drinking water, which is critical for health and well-being, is also at risk from climate change 
(see HCCC-7; NIR-4). Many Indigenous communities across Canada face significant challenges accessing 
safe drinking water, which can be exacerbated by climate change (see HCCC-2; IRR). Heavy rainfalls can 
contaminate private wells and even municipal systems (see NIR-4), while increased droughts and wildfires 
can affect water availability and quality (see RPR-3). Poor water quality can lead to dehydration, unhygienic 
conditions, and a range of water-borne diseases, among other health risks (see HCCC-7).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 23 
Mental health
An important concern for many health authorities is the growing risk to mental health from climate change. 
Examples include the worsening of existing mental illness (e.g., psychosis), new-onset mental illness (e.g., 
post-traumatic stress disorder) and mental health stressors such as grief, worry, anxiety and vicarious trauma 
(see Figure 4; HCCC-4; NIR-3; IRR). Evidence suggests that without further adaptation measures, the toll on 
mental health related to climate change impacts in Canada is likely to rise with continued warming.
Health systems
Health systems in Canada are not prepared for climate change. Climate change is increasing risks to health 
facilities, health services and supply chains, and making it increasingly difficult for public health personnel 
to carry out essential operations (see HCCC-10). Recent floods, wildfires, extreme heat events, and severe 
storms have had impacts on health facilities, including forcing health care centres and hospitals to close 
temporarily, evacuate patients, or cancel operations and other services (see HCCC-10). Significant gaps 
exist in actions taken by health authorities to protect Canadians from current climate change impacts. 
Few provinces and territories have comprehensive or substantive measures to protect health as part of 
their broader climate change strategies and even fewer have a separate action plan or strategy to prepare 
individuals and health systems (see HCCC-10).
Addressing growing risks to health
Many health risks associated with climate change can be reduced through adaptation (see HCCC-10), 
and health authorities are beginning to plan and take action on this front. For example, since Montreal 
implemented an extreme heat action plan, the number of daily deaths has decreased five-fold, with the 
greatest decreases among seniors (Benmarhnia et al. 2016).
Adaptation can help make communities healthier and build the climate resilience of health systems through 
preventative measures such as:
•	
vulnerability and risk assessments;
•	
enhanced surveillance of climate change impacts on health;
•	
integrated early warning and response systems (such as for extreme heat events, floods, pollen 
seasons, wildfires);
•	
health professional training; and
•	
public education and outreach.
Well-designed efforts to adapt to climate change impacts and reduce GHG emissions can result in very 
large and near-term co-benefits to health. For example, taking action on air pollution could help Canada 
avoid thousands of premature deaths annually by the middle of the century (see HCCC-5). Continued and 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 24 
coordinated efforts to address health-related climate risks are critical for reducing vulnerability to current and 
future impacts.
Box 3: Protecting our health in a changing climate
Insights from Dr. Courtney Howard, Emergency Physician in Yellowknife, NWT
Working in emergency medicine in communities across northern Canada, Dr. Courtney Howard has seen firsthand 
how climate change impacts such as prolonged wildfires, changing sea ice and thawing permafrost are affecting 
people’s health (see Video 2). “I serve a patient population that is already coping with temperatures two-and-a-half 
to three degrees Celsius warmer than when an 80-year-old elder was born,” she says.
According to Dr. Howard, health facilities, supply chains and medical practitioners across Canada should be 
taking steps now to better prepare for the kinds of emergencies that her patients are already experiencing. 
For example, hospitals need to ensure they have backup energy sources during heatwaves and ventilation 
systems equipped for extreme weather. In 2014, the operating room in Yellowknife had to close in the middle 
of a wildfire crisis because its air exchange system drew in smoke from the outdoors. After emergency room 
visits for asthma doubled and pneumonia cases rose by 50%, local physicians are now encouraged to refill 
inhalers for high-risk individuals before wildfire season begins. 
“[W]e need to be making sure that we […] build health systems and health infrastructure for the climate that 
we are going to have this century”, says Dr. Howard, “as opposed to the climate we [had] last century.”
Climate change should also be factored into physician training, she says: “A global survey […] done recently 
showed that less than 15% of medical students worldwide are learning about climate change and health in 
their curricula.” She is confident that knowing more about how climate change affects human health will help 
her colleagues better protect patients and communities now and in the decades to come.
Dr. Howard also points to the many things that individuals and communities can do to support each other 
through events that can have negative health outcomes, such as checking on elderly neighbours during 
heatwaves. Ultimately, she says, “our neighbors are the people who are going to help us prepare for the worst 
consequences of climate change.”
Video 2: Interview with Dr. Courtney Howard, emergency physician in Yellowknife, NWT and a Clinical Associate 
Professor in the Cumming School of Medicine at the University of Calgary, on climate change impacts and 
adaptation related to human health. <https://vimeo.com/886513808>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 25 
2.3 Our food and natural resources are highly climate-sensitive
Failing to adjust how we manage natural resource and food production sectors in a changing climate would 
threaten local economies and jobs, and have consequences for transboundary resource management, 
Canada’s supply chains and our involvement in global trade. Various adaptation options are being 
implemented in these sectors to reduce climate risk and impacts.
Certain economic sectors in Canada are particularly sensitive to changes in climate, as they rely on 
favourable weather conditions and are vulnerable to extreme weather. These include natural resource sectors 
such as forestry and mining, and food production sectors such as agriculture, aquaculture and fisheries (see 
NIR-7) that are crucial to our livelihoods. Many rural, remote and Indigenous communities in Canada derive as 
much as 50–100% of their base income from food and natural resource sectors (see Figure 3.4 in NIR-3).
Forestry
Canadian forests are increasingly at risk from wildfire and drought. While forest fires are a natural element 
of forest ecology, climate change is expected to increase their frequency, severity and size (see Figure 7.1 in 
NIR-7; NIR-5; RPR-6). This threatens timber supply, habitat and biodiversity, along with ecosystem services 
such as carbon storage (see Box 5.2 in NIR-5), water quality regulation, protection against landslides, 
and the cultural and social values that forests offer to neighbouring communities (see NIR-4; NIR-5). The 
economic costs of wildfire can also be extensive. For example, the 2016 Fort McMurray wildfire resulted in 
almost $4 billion in insured losses (Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019). It also inflicted a range of indirect 
costs, including healthcare expenses associated with pollution from the fire (see Section 2.9; NIR-7; RPR-3). 
The social, mental and physical health impacts of wildfire and smoke affect both neighbouring and distant 
communities (see HCCC-3; 4; NIR-3).
Climate change is driving disturbances such as pest infestations (e.g., spruce budworm) that affect the 
structure, composition, health and resilience of Canada’s forests. In the past, responses to climate-related 
impacts on forests were primarily reactive, as was the response to the mountain pine beetle outbreak in 
Western Canada. More recently, new knowledge resources, tools and protocols have been developed to help 
practitioners proactively manage these impacts. Examples include a practical guidebook for mainstreaming 
climate change into forest management planning (Edwards et al., 2015); guidance documents for private 
woodlot owners (Ontario Woodlot Association, 2015); and SeedWhere, a decision-guidance tool to assist in 
forest regeneration (see Box 3.4 in RPR-3).
Various adaptation options are being implemented to reduce the risk and impact of disturbances in Canada’s 
forests (see Box 4). These include active fuel management (e.g., thinning, debris removal and prescribed 
burning); adjusting harvest schedules; forest management planning; and assisted migration of tree species 
to more climate-suitable locations (see NIR-7; RPR-2; RPR-3; RPR-5; IRR). FireSmart activities (such as 
vegetation management) and emergency preparedness plans are also being used to increase community 
resilience to wildfire (see NIR-7; IRR).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 26 
Box 4: Adapting forestry practice to manage climate risks
Insights from Carine Annecou, Forest Engineer with the Conseil régional de l’environnement du 
Centre-du-Québec
Forestry plays a vital role in Quebec’s economy, generating jobs and exports in timber, furniture, pulp and 
paper, and maple syrup. But these forests are increasingly at risk of wildfire, drought and pests. 
Forest engineer Carine Annecou has been working to develop a guidebook on silviculture strategies for 
managing climate-related risks to forest stands in the Centre-du-Québec region (see Video 3). She has found, 
in exploring the vulnerability of Quebec’s forests, that it is equally important to talk about resilience.
“I talk about risk instead of vulnerability, because it allows me to talk about resilience too,” she says. “How can 
a forest adapt [to climate change], and how can we help it to adapt?”
Consulting with a wide range of stakeholders has been key to finding approaches that increase forest 
resilience. “A message to my colleagues,” says Ms. Annecou, “is to work in collaboration with all stakeholders. 
That is the strength of our approach. No matter what your trade, if it's possible to collaborate with other 
forestry trades, it brings a lot of options into discussion at the table.”
Along with bringing in diverse perspectives to find suitable adaptation options, Ms. Annecou encourages 
individuals and forestry specialists to strengthen diversity in the forests themselves—whether on a tiny piece 
of land or on a larger scale. Given the uncertainty about how forests will adapt to climate change and the 
population pressures they face, “you have to start thinking about the forest in a more complex way,” she says.
“[Y]ou have to vary the species, you have to vary the heights, and you have to vary the diameters to give 
these stands a chance to grow […] All of these options are broad strokes, but they're part of the recognized 
remedies now.”
Video 3: Interview with Carine Annecou, Forest Engineer with the Conseil régional de l’environnement du Centre-
du-Québec, on climate change impacts and adaptation in Quebec’s forestry sector. 
<https://vimeo.com/886512878/15706ab1ee>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 27 
Mining
Climate change presents risks to the Canadian mining industry at every stage of the mining cycle, from 
exploration to restoration. For example, shorter periods of frozen ground can make access to certain 
exploration sites more difficult. However, the end of the cycle is most affected by climate change, largely due 
to impacts on mine tailings management and the reclamation of waste storage sites (see NIR-7). It is critical 
to ensure that long-term tailings management considers changes in climate so that these toxic materials are 
not released into the environment (see NIR-7; RPR-2). New methods, tools and guidance are needed to ensure 
that tailings containment and reclamation methods can withstand both extreme weather and slow-onset 
climate changes such as permafrost degradation (see NIR-7).
Climate change could also result in some new opportunities. For example, a longer warm season would 
allow more time for mapping and the delivery of raw materials. Increased access to new mining sites made 
possible by longer ice-free seasons in Canada’s North could also provide economic opportunities, but needs 
to be considered within the context of potential impacts on northern people, societies and cultures, and 
ecosystems (see RPR-6).
Fisheries and aquaculture
The Canadian fisheries and aquaculture industries are impacted by changes in ocean temperature and 
chemistry, with implications for livelihoods and fisheries management. Climate-related factors (such as 
ocean warming) combined with non-climate-related factors (such as overfishing) are affecting changes in the 
distribution and abundance of various fish species (see NIR-7; IRR). For instance, ocean warming is shifting 
the distribution of snow crab—the second most valuable fishery in Atlantic Canada (see Case Story 7.3 in NIR-7). 
Ocean acidification is impacting the development and overall health of lobster—the most lucrative fishery in 
Atlantic Canada—in the Gulf of Maine, Bay of Fundy and Scotian shelf (see Case Story 7.5 in NIR-7). Impacts on 
fish species can also affect Indigenous Peoples’ ability to access traditional foods and exercise cultural practices, 
with implications for health and well-being (see Section 2.8 and Case Story 5.1 in RPR-5; IRR).
These impacts present a major socioeconomic concern in Canada, particularly in the Atlantic provinces, 
where many coastal communities depend on fisheries for livelihoods and their local economy (see 
RPR-1; RPR-2; IRR). Species monitoring and management practices that improve habitat protection are two 
adaptation options being implemented to address the impacts of climate change on Canadian fisheries (see 
RPR-2; IRR). For example, in Western Canada, new provisions added to the Canada-U.S. Pacific Salmon Treaty 
will help reduce the impacts of climate change on salmon stocks through enhanced conservation measures.
Agriculture
Some Canadian producers stand to benefit from changes in climate, including through longer growing 
seasons and the increased potential for speciality crops, such as the expansion of wine-growing regions in 
Quebec and Atlantic Canada (see RPR-1; RPR-2). However, these benefits may be largely offset by negative 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 28 
impacts, such as increases in extreme precipitation, increased drought and growing risks of pests and 
diseases (see RPR-1; RPR-2; RPR-3; RPR-4; RPR-5). Canadian farms are adapting to a changing climate 
by using a range of strategies such as zero-till agriculture, crop rotation and precision irrigation (see 
NIR-7; RPR-4), although gaps in planning, implementation and evaluation remain. Continued collaborative 
efforts at the farm, regional and provincial level will help to ensure that the agriculture sector adapts to 
Canada’s changing climate.
Global trade
Climate change impacts on Canada’s natural resource and food production sectors also pose trade-related 
risks, particularly for the export of primary products such as timber, minerals, fish and agrifood (see 
NIR-6; NIR-7; NIR-9). Canada depends on international trade and will increasingly experience economic 
repercussions from climate change impacts elsewhere in the world. International trade involves a complex 
network of global supply chains. Climate-induced disruptions to production—such as damage to ports from 
extreme weather, and road and rail closures due to flooding—can have economic ripple effects across sectors 
and borders (see NIR-9).
To minimize climate-induced disruptions, proactive adaptation will be required. This could include promoting 
growth in sectors and regions that could counteract projected scarcities in other countries from climate 
change impacts, reducing dependency on imported staples, diversifying trade partners and addressing 
weaknesses in trade institutions (see NIR-9).
2.4 The business case for adaptation is strong
Climate change impacts already cost Canadians billions of dollars each year, and costs will continue to 
rise. There is a strong business case for adaptation, with the benefits (including avoided costs) gained 
through adaptation measures generally exceeding the costs of implementation.
Over the last several decades, direct costs from extreme weather events, such as wildfires, floods, droughts 
and storms, have been rising (see NIR-6). The total economic impact of these events is even higher, since 
the costs do not include the indirect losses as business-to-business purchases along supply chains 
are adversely affected. Many types of extreme weather events are projected to continue increasing in 
frequency and severity as the climate warms (see CCCR-4; CCCR-6; CCCR-7). This increases the risk of 
more public safety emergencies, with rising economic consequences.
Climate change is affecting nearly every economic sector in Canada, from goods producing sectors (such 
as agriculture, forestry, mining [see Section 2.3] and manufacturing) to service sectors (such as real estate, 
health care and tourism), with important economic implications. For instance, during the record warm winter 
of 2011‒2012, Ontario’s ski market experienced a 10% decrease in overall skier visits and a 17% decrease in 
the length of the ski season, compared to a climatically-normal winter over the 1981–2010 period (see NIR-7; 
Rutty et al., 2017). Similar impacts on visits and season length were observed in the Quebec market in the 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 29 
record warm winter of 2015‒2016, with skier visits reduced by 12.5% (see NIR-7; Association des Stations de 
Ski du Québec, 2016).
In addition to these tangible losses, climate change impacts have a wide range of social, cultural and 
environmental costs, such as illness and premature deaths (see Section 2.2), reduced ecosystem services 
(see Section 2.5) and loss of sites of cultural importance (see Section 2.9). For instance, coastal erosion has 
already destroyed some Indigenous archaeological sites in Kouchibouguac National Park (see Figure 1.13 
in RPR-1). These intangible or “non-market” costs of climate change are harder to calculate in dollar terms 
and are frequently left out of economic analyses (see NIR-6). Likewise, indirect impacts on the economy 
and consequences for future economic growth are often omitted. As a result, many estimates of projected 
climate-related costs are likely very conservative.
Without new adaptation actions, one study estimated the projected annual costs for Canada by 2050 in the 
range of $30–62 billion (2019 dollars), depending on the GHG emissions scenario and underlying rate of 
economic growth, with a 5% chance that costs could exceed $131 billion. By 2075, the same study projected 
annual costs in Canada in the range of $74–319 billion, with a 5% chance they will exceed $1,185 billion 
(see NIR-6; NRTEE, 2011). Economic assessments of climate change impacts have also been performed 
for several cities across Canada, including Edmonton, Halifax and Mississauga (see NIR-2; NIR-6), and have 
been prepared for several climate-sensitive sectors (such as forestry, agriculture and coastal areas). These 
assessments suggest that climate change will present some opportunities, but the economic impacts overall 
will be large and overwhelmingly negative.
The agricultural sector, for example, may benefit from a longer growing season in a warmer climate, 
particularly in the Prairie provinces, although farmers will also be challenged by increased variability in 
precipitation, extreme weather events and invasive pests (see Section 2.3; NIR-6; NIR-7; RPR-4). Some tourism 
sectors (such as agri-tourism, golf and outdoor recreational activities) will benefit from extended warm 
seasons (see RPR-2). Climate change may also create new markets for innovative products and services (see 
NIR-6).
In addition to projecting the costs of inaction (i.e., the costs of continuing a business-as-usual approach in the 
face of climate change), economic analysis helps to inform adaptation planning. It can help business leaders 
and other decision makers to identify how much they need to invest in adaptation; what kinds of adaptation 
actions are needed and when they should be implemented; and how the costs and benefits of adaptation will 
be distributed (see NIR-6).
Transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy that interweaves climate change adaptation and 
mitigation efforts requires substantial investment (see NIR-8). As a certain amount of warming is inevitable 
(see CCCR-4), major investments in adaptation are needed as not all economic impacts through mid-century 
can be avoided through GHG mitigation. Fortunately, economic decision-support tools (such as cost-benefit 
analysis and cost-effectiveness analysis) show that adaptation can reduce the projected costs of climate 
change, with avoided damages often exceeding the costs of implementing adaptation measures (Global 
Commission on Adaptation, 2019; Lempert et al., 2018). The Global Commission on Adaptation (2019) found 
that $1 invested in climate change adaptation could generate economic benefits (avoided damages) in the 
range of $2–10. A review of 60 Canadian adaptation projects found that “soft-engineering” actions, such as 
beach nourishment, were more efficient investments than “hard-engineering” measures, such as concrete 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 30 
walls and rock armour. Soft-engineering solutions saved on average $10 for each $1 invested, compared with 
savings of $3 for each $1 invested in hard-engineering (see Case Story 6.5 and Appendix 6.4 in NIR-6).
In addition to avoided damages, actions to adapt to climate change can produce many co-benefits (see Case 
Story 6.6 in NIR-6; Figure 5.15 in NIR-5), though they are generally not accounted for in economic analyses. 
These include reduced GHG emissions, improved health and safety, preservation of cultural heritage and 
more equitable outcomes (see NIR-6). The inclusion of these co-benefits in economic analyses enhances 
the already strong business case for investment in adaptation. Economic analysis has shown, however, that 
proactive investments in adaptation are unlikely to completely offset projected economic damages, given 
the breadth and depth of climate change impacts, and the technical, ecological and economic barriers (see 
Section 2.6; NIR-6).
2.5 Nature-based approaches save money and provide many benefits
Nature-based approaches to adaptation are often more cost-effective and deliver a suite of co-benefits. 
Protecting vulnerable ecosystems is also essential for preserving the services that they provide and for 
maintaining biodiversity.
Ecosystems are an integral element of our lives and landscapes. In Canada, they include wetlands, forests, 
grasslands, tundra, lakes and rivers, and coastal and marine areas. In addition to their natural beauty and 
positive impact on our quality of life and health, they provide a range of provisioning and regulating services 
(see Table 2 for examples; Table 5.1 in NIR-5), many of which can support climate change adaptation (see 
NIR-2; NIR-5; RPR-2; RPR-3; IRR). For example, wetlands help regulate water, forests improve cooling and air 
quality, and natural coastal structures protect against sea-level rise and flooding (see NIR-2; NIR-5; RPR-1; 
RPR-5). Protecting ecosystems also helps mitigate climate change by maintaining carbon sinks (see Box 5.2 
in NIR-5; RPR-3).
Climate change is affecting the capacity of Canada’s ecosystems to provide services upon which many 
communities rely. Impacts on ecosystems often have cascading effects in areas such as employment 
and job security, food security, and water quality and availability (see Figure 5.9 in NIR-5; IRR), with 
disproportionate consequences for the country’s most vulnerable populations (see NIR-2; NIR-3; NIR-6). These 
impacts are expected to be widespread and cumulative and are critical to consider in developing climate 
change adaptation policies and actions (see NIR-3; IRR).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 31 
Table 2: Examples of ecosystem services
REGULATING SERVICES
PROVISIONING SERVICES 
(MATERIAL)
PROVISIONING SERVICES 
(NON-MATERIAL)
•	
Air and water 
purification
•	
Climate regulation
•	
Carbon sequestration
•	
Pollination
•	
Regulation of water 
quality and quantity
•	
Food and feed
•	
Energy
•	
Medicines
•	
Raw materials
•	
Recreation
•	
Spirituality and 
identity
•	
Improved mental 
health
•	
Culture

Nature-based approaches to adaptation encompass using natural infrastructure (such as wetlands for 
coastal protection), applying ecosystem-based approaches (such as conservation and restoration), using 
natural asset management, and enhancing protected areas (see NIR-5; IRR). These adaptation approaches 
work to enhance and benefit from the services that ecosystems provide (see Table 3 for examples). Interest 
in, and application of, these approaches is growing in Canada and internationally. Much of their appeal stems 
from the fact that these approaches are flexible and cost-effective relative to “hard” approaches (such as the 
use of seawalls or other built infrastructure) (see NIR-5; NIR-6; RPR-1; RPR-2). They also offer a range of co-
benefits—including carbon sequestration, temperature regulation and recreation opportunities—that further 
increase their cost-effectiveness (see NIR-6).
Table 3: Examples of nature-based approaches for adapting to 
climate change
NATURE-BASED 
APPROACH
LOCATION
GOALS/ECOSYSTEM 
SERVICES
FAST FACT
SOURCE
Maintaining 
Ontario’s 
Greenbelt
Hamilton, 
Ottawa and 
Toronto, ON
Provide flood protection, 
carbon sequestration, 
recreation and refuge 
from urban heat 
One study values the 
ecosystem services 
provided by the 
Greenbelt at over $3.2 
billion/year (Green 
Analytics, 2016).
Case Story 
5.8 in NIR-5
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 32 
NATURE-BASED 
APPROACH
LOCATION
GOALS/ECOSYSTEM 
SERVICES
FAST FACT
SOURCE
Using the 
urban forest 
to mitigate the 
heat island 
effect
Kingston, ON
Reduce extreme heat, 
improve air quality and 
reduce stormwater runoff
Ecosystem services 
from Kingston’s urban 
forest generate an 
estimated $1.87 
million/year (SENES 
Consultants Ltd., 2011). 
Case Story 
5.7 in NIR-5
Municipal 
natural asset 
management 
and service 
delivery
Gibsons and 
Nanaimo, BC 
Manage natural assets 
such as woodlands, 
wetlands and creeks in 
urban areas as part of 
a municipal sustainable 
infrastructure strategy
The Municipal 
Natural Assets 
Initiative provides 
a method to value 
ecosystem services 
and is improving 
understanding of the 
municipal services 
nature provides. 
Case Story 
5.9 in NIR-5
Restoring tidal 
wetlands and 
their ecosystem 
services 
Truro, NS
Sequester carbon, reduce 
flood risk and provide 
storm buffer for long-
term community safety, 
protection of coastal 
ecosystem and fish 
nursery habitat
Managed retreat in 
tandem with restoration 
of the tidal wetland 
ensured a cost-effective 
solution for long-term 
community safety. 
Case Story 
5.5 in NIR-5
Act respecting 
the conservation 
of wetlands and 
bodies of water 
Province of 
Quebec
Enhance ecosystem 
connectivity and 
resilience, protect water 
resources and shorelines, 
and provide quality 
habitat for biodiversity
Under this Act, regional 
county municipalities 
must prepare regional 
plans for water bodies 
and for the wetlands 
that cover some 10% of 
Quebec’s surface area.
RPR-2
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 33 
NATURE-BASED 
APPROACH
LOCATION
GOALS/ECOSYSTEM 
SERVICES
FAST FACT
SOURCE
Ungava 
Peninsula 
Caribou 
Aboriginal 
Round Table 
Ungava 
Peninsula, QC
Ensure recovery of the 
migratory caribou herd 
and sustainability of 
caribou in the Nunavik 
territory
Conservation decision 
making for the 
species is supported 
by a long-term 
caribou management 
strategy that draws 
on Indigenous and 
scientific knowledge and 
the tracking of caribou 
migration patterns using 
satellite tags.
Case Story 
2.1 in RPR-2
Promoting 
ecosystem-
friendly 
shoreline 
development 
through the 
Green Shores 
program
Province of 
British Columbia
Provide capacity building, 
tools and best practice 
standards to encourage 
shoreline development 
approaches that protect 
the land from flooding 
and erosion
An economic analysis of 
one project supported 
through the program 
found that for every $1 
spent, social welfare 
increased by $2.50 
(Eyzaguirre et al., 2020).
Case Story 
5.6 in NIR-5
Despite their clear benefits and growing uptake, nature-based approaches are often not the preferred 
option. This is seen particularly with respect to water-related infrastructure, where “hard” or built options 
tend to dominate the dialogue and decisions. In Atlantic Canada, hard infrastructure (such as rock riprap 
and seawalls) is almost always chosen by private property owners, municipalities and industries to protect 
against coastal erosion, despite evidence that natural infrastructure is cost-effective and more resilient 
(see NIR-5; RPR-1). In some cases, built and natural approaches are combined to provide additional and 
complementary services. For instance, in many cities, municipal stormwater runoff systems integrate green 
roofs, bioswales (sloped, vegetated surfaces), bioretention ponds, rain gardens and urban trees to control and 
reduce runoff (see Figure 5; NIR-2; NIR-4).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 34 
Figure 5: Images of different nature-based approaches for addressing stormwater runoff: a) Parking lot of the 
Kortright Centre in Vaughan, Ontario with integrated bioretention (photo courtesy of Daniel Philippi, 2022); b) 
Bioswale along Elm Drive in Mississauga, Ontario (photo courtesy of Daniel Philippi, 2022); and c) Green roof on 
the District School Board of Niagara's Walker Living Campus at the Woodend Conservation Area, Ontario (photo 
courtesy of Jocelyn Baker, 2023).
An important consideration when planning nature-based approaches is how ecosystems themselves are 
vulnerable to climate change and other stressors. Nature-based approaches rely on healthy ecosystems. 
Already, there is evidence in Canada that climate change is affecting the capacity of some ecosystems to 
provide services, and climate change impacts are projected to intensify over the coming decades (see NIR-5). 
These include impacts from extreme weather events (see NIR-5), invasive species, shifts in species' ranges 
(see RPR-2; RPR-3; RPR-4; IRR) and coastal squeeze (see RPR-1; RPR-2). These impacts combine with other 
stressors, such as land development, air pollution, invasive species and overexploitation, to put ecosystems 
at risk.
Efforts to conserve and protect ecosystems can therefore be seen as important elements of adaptation plans 
and strategies (see Box 5; NIR-5; RPR-2; RPR-3; IRR). These include actions such as increasing ecosystem 
connectivity (as with habitat corridors or protected spaces), protecting biodiversity, restoring habitat, 
strategically restricting water withdrawals, identifying and protecting specific areas or species and limiting 
other stressors, such as human development and industrial activities (see RPR-3; IRR). These efforts are 
especially important when sensitive ecosystems are relied upon to enhance adaptive capacity (see NIR-2) and 
provide regulating services (see NIR-5).
“Integrating ecosystem conservation into decision making in all economic sectors is important in 
order to maintain ecosystem services.” (see RPR-2)
Indigenous Knowledge and leadership are making important contributions to plans and strategies for 
conserving and protecting ecosystems (see RPR-3; IRR). This can be seen in Indigenous Protected and 
Conserved Areas (IPCA), where Indigenous Peoples support ecosystem health and biodiversity while 
safeguarding Indigenous rights, notably self-determination (see Section 2.8; Case Story 5.4 in NIR-5; IRR).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 35 
Box 5: Harnessing nature-based approaches for adapting to 
climate change
Insights from Michelle Molnar, Technical Director at the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative
According to Michelle Molnar, Coordinating Lead Author of the Ecosystem Services chapter of the National 
Issues Report, Canada is uniquely positioned to use nature-based approaches for adapting to climate change, 
as one of five countries that together host 70% of the world's untouched wilderness (see Video 4). It is also 
important to manage ecosystems to preserve the many services they provide. Protecting these, says Ms. 
Molnar, will take a change of mindset:
“When we're thinking about ecosystems, we need to start incorporating systems thinking […]. At a very basic 
level, we need to adapt very different spatial and temporal scales to our thinking. Physical impacts and 
consequences of climate change and extreme events do not stop or start at human-defined boundaries, [like] 
political boundaries. And social time frames are very different from the time frames adapted by nature. So, 
really, a different way of thinking is probably the greatest need for ecosystems.”
Across Canada, Ms. Molnar sees examples of how nature-based approaches are being used to address the 
impacts of climate change, including by restoring natural floodplains and coastlines to deal with increased 
flood risk. “At the end of the day,” she says, “we're finding that nature-based [approaches] are often cost 
effective, they're very flexible and they offer a broad range of co-benefits.”
Depending on their priorities, communities can harness these approaches in different ways: “In some areas, 
this might [involve] conserving important parts of an ecosystem, and in more urban areas, it might be bringing 
nature into the city, through anything from street trees to green walls.”
The exploration of nature-based approaches is still in its early days. Canada in a Changing Climate is Canada’s 
first national knowledge assessment to consider the impacts of climate change on ecosystems and the 
services they provide, as well as the role of nature-based approaches in adaptation. For Ms. Molnar, this is an 
important start: “Future assessments, we're hoping, will build on this chapter to capture and reflect learnings, 
because nature-based [approaches] and ecosystem services are areas of fast-evolving research.”
Video 4: Video interview with Michelle Molnar, Technical Director of the Municipal Natural Assets Initiative, on the 
need for preserving ecosystems and incorporating nature-based approaches to adaptation. 
<https://vimeo.com/886515665>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 36 
2.6 Improved incentives and coordination can help close Canada’s 
adaptation gap
In Canada, progress on adaptation remains slow, with relatively few examples of implemented actions 
despite growing losses. Greater incentives, fewer barriers and improved coordination across sectors and 
scales will help close the adaptation gap.
Canadians recognize climate change as one of the greatest threats facing our country, and are already feeling 
its impacts. This is reflected in the increasing adaptation planning occurring within all orders of government, 
in all regions of the country, and across many sectors and businesses. However, planning is not translating 
into action fast enough to address current and projected changes in climate.
While promising examples of adaptation are being implemented across the country (see Table 3, Table 5, 
and Table 6), the Canada in a Changing Climate Assessment reports have found that current efforts are 
insufficient to close a widening adaptation gap—current levels of adaptation are not yet able to offset 
negative climate change impacts and enable benefits from new opportunities (see NIR-6). This conclusion 
is also supported by a benchmarking survey conducted with the experts involved in the current Assessment 
process (see Box 6). Further evidence can be seen in the increasing damage and associated costs caused 
by extreme weather events (see Section 2.4; NIR-6). Gradual changes in climate, such as sea-level rise (see 
NIR-3; RPR-1; RPR-5; RPR-6) and thawing permafrost in Canada’s North (see RPR-6), are also causing the 
adaptation gap to grow.
“There is a tendency to overestimate the capacity of adaptation planning to deliver intended 
outcomes.” (see NIR-2)
Box 6: Benchmarking adaptation in Canada
At the end of the current Assessment process, Advisory Committee members and Coordinating Lead Authors 
were invited to help establish a benchmark for adaptation progress in Canada, drawing on their expertise and 
knowledge (more than 50% of respondents have over 15 years of experience working on adaptation). Future 
Assessments will aim to compare progress on adaptation against this benchmark.
All 23 respondents either strongly or very strongly agreed that action on adaptation in Canada is not keeping 
pace with the level needed to address observed and projected climate change impacts. The top three barriers 
and constraints limiting progress on adaptation were deemed to be:
•	
lack of coordination among key stakeholders;
•	
climate change not being prioritized as an issue; and 
•	
limited resources.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 37 
While there are examples of adaptation underway at different stages and at different scales (local, regional, 
provincial/territorial, national), most experts felt that Canada as a whole is still currently at the stage of 
adaptation planning, rather than implementing actions to address risks (see Figure 6).
Figure 6: Views of Assessment Coordinating Lead Authors and Advisory Committee Members on Canada's 
current stage of adaptation. Note: A fourth option—“reviewing and adjusting implemented actions”—was not 
selected by any respondents. 
There were mixed opinions among the group about whether there is evidence of adaptation limits—the point 
at which severe risks can no longer be avoided through adaptation—being reached in Canada, but these 
experts recognized that northern Canada and many coastal areas are particularly challenged by a changing 
climate. When asked what is most needed to advance adaptation in Canada, the group signaled the need for 
coordinated action, more inclusive and equitable approaches to adaptation, better understanding of synergies 
and trade-offs, increased private sector action and financing, and for adaptation to be prioritized within 
different orders of government.
Much research has examined the various barriers that are limiting the implementation of adaptation 
initiatives (see Table 4 for examples; Table 2.3 in NIR-2; Box 3.6 in RPR-3). Across the board, the most 
frequently identified barriers relate to financial resources, although capacity challenges are also commonly 
identified. This has been the trend over time, with similar patterns reported in 2008 (Lemmen et al.), 2014 
(Warren and Lemmen) and 2016 (Lemmen et al.).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 38 
Table 4: Examples of barriers to adaptation
BARRIER TO ADAPTATION
SPECIFIC EXAMPLE 
Insufficient financial resources
A lack of funds and resources was cited as a primary reason why 
health facilities were not undertaking climate change resilience 
assessments (see HCCC-10).
Lack of human resources capacity 
Capacity challenges are often more evident in communities and 
organizations that are most vulnerable to climate change risks, 
including in rural, northern and Indigenous communities (see IRR; 
NIR-3; NIR-4).
Constraining policies or regulations
Government transfers for flood protection measures and disaster 
aid provide incentives to continue growth in flood-prone coastal 
areas, even when retreat or relocation would maximize public 
welfare (see NIR-6).
Limited access to relevant data and 
information
Communities in Ontario that are undertaking risk assessments 
or adaptation planning identified a lack of actionable climate 
information as a barrier (see RPR-3).
Poor coordination and/or 
understanding of roles 
A study in Ontario found that adaptation was hindered by poorly 
defined roles and responsibilities for water infrastructure, and 
insufficient coordination among government departments (see 
RPR-3).
Market failures
Businesses and households may lack information on climate 
risks; in some situations, information is known to some actors 
(e.g., homeowners) but not others (e.g., potential buyers and 
insurers) (see NIR-6).
Behavioural barriers 
Self-directed adaptation by businesses and individuals is not 
always adequate or efficient for addressing climate risks (see 
NIR-6; RPR-2). 
Technological barriers 
Snow-making equipment may not be able to sustain snow cover 
at lower-altitude ski resorts as the climate warms (see NIR-6; 
NIR-7).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 39 
BARRIER TO ADAPTATION
SPECIFIC EXAMPLE 
History of colonization 
The lack of recognition of Indigenous rights to natural resources 
has constrained the ability of the Stó:lō people to adapt to the 
effects of climate change on salmon (see Case Story 5.1 in 
RPR-5).
Barriers to equitable participation 
Some groups and individuals may be excluded from participating 
in adaptation planning and processes by factors such as financial 
burdens, travel requirements, language and childcare needs (see 
HCCC-9).

As a wealthy developed country with a highly educated population and abundant resources, Canada is well-
positioned to be a leader on climate change adaptation. Reaching our potential will require overcoming 
barriers that have hindered progress to date—addressing them directly through funding programs and 
capacity building and by creating an enabling environment for adaptation. This may entail using both carrot 
and stick approaches such as grants, taxes and charges to encourage positive change; removing incentives 
that encourage development in at-risk areas; promoting engagement and collaboration through networks 
and other trust-building initiatives; and providing sources of guidance, such as decision-support tools and 
data interpretation services. Overall, there is a relatively clear and growing sense of what needs to be done to 
create a more enabling environment, with less clarity on the who and the how. There is general agreement, 
however, that there are roles for all to play in fostering a more enabling environment for adaptation, including 
all orders of government through policies, legislation and regulations (see NIR-6).
It is also becoming evident that even if enabling conditions were optimized, adaptation can be undermined by 
behavioural biases and motivations. These factors can affect whether people will use available information in 
an efficient and effective manner. At worst, they can lead to decision inertia, delays in action and misguided 
decisions (see NIR-6).
The Canada in a Changing Climate Assessment reports present a number of recurring suggestions for moving 
from adaptation planning to successful implementation, closing the adaptation gap. These include:
•	
Improving coordination among all stakeholder groups (including the private sector) and all 
governments involved in adaptation. This is in addition to the collaboration needed to ensure that 
decisions are well-informed (including by Indigenous Knowledge), aligned and inclusive (see 
NIR-2; NIR-3; RPR-2; RPR-3; IRR).
•	
Adopting an adaptive management approach, which features an iterative process of monitoring, 
predictive modelling, evaluation and learning (see NIR-3; NIR-4; NIR-6; RPR-3; RPR-4).
•	
Building the business case for adaptation to provide decision makers with the evidence and 
confidence needed to invest in adaptation measures and maximize co-benefits (see Section 2.5; 
NIR-6).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 40 
•	
Providing mechanisms to help fund the implementation of adaptation measures, where needed.
•	
Addressing data and knowledge gaps that may be causing delays in implementation (see 
Annex 3; all chapters of NIR and RPR).
“Adaptive management provides a structured, iterative process of robust decision making in the face 
of uncertainty.” (see NIR-4)
2.7 Local-level adaptation plays a leading role in our climate 
change response
Local governments and Indigenous communities across Canada are already experiencing climate change 
impacts on their infrastructure, economies and well-being. Together with local partners, they are well 
positioned to take action on adaptation given their local knowledge and Indigenous Knowledge, strong 
social networks and connections to the land.
Communities across Canada are already experiencing climate change impacts, including damage to 
infrastructure, disruptions to businesses and jobs, and consequences for health and well-being. How they 
are affected largely depends on their geographic location, population size and demographics, and other 
contextual factors. Impacts are being caused by extreme weather events (such as flooding, drought, extreme 
heat [see Case Story 3.5 in RPR-3] and wildfire) and slow-onset changes (such as rising sea level, diminishing 
snow and ice, thawing permafrost and shifts in precipitation).
Characteristics that increase the vulnerability of Canada’s cities and towns to climate change include 
ageing infrastructure, high-density populations, degraded ecosystems and being located near water bodies 
(see Figure 7). As such, climate change can cause costly damage for cities and towns, with devastating 
consequences for their residents. For instance, several urban areas—including Toronto, Fredericton, Calgary 
and parts of southern Quebec—have experienced significant and costly floods in recent years (see NIR-2; 
RPR-2; RPR-4). Calgary’s 2013 flooding event caused more than $6 billion in damage, including over $400 
million to municipal infrastructure (see RPR-4; City of Calgary, 2017). Similarly, the 2013 flooding event in 
Toronto cost more than $1 billion in insured losses, with uninsured losses that were much higher (see 
Table 3.1 in RPR-3).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 41 
Figure 7: Assets and challenges for cities, towns, and rural and remote communities related to climate change 
impacts and adaptation. Sources: Brown et al., 2021; Vodden and Cunsolo, 2021.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 42 
Compared with larger urban centres, rural and remote communities tend to have access to fewer financial, 
human and formal institutional resources (see Figure 7). Furthermore, damage to critical transportation 
infrastructure (such as roads or bridges) from extreme weather events can severely limit the movement of 
goods and people and limit access to essential services, especially where there are few roads into and out of 
a given community (see Case Story 3.3 in NIR-3).
As the order of government that is closest to people, municipalities have a key role to play in adaptation, 
including by driving collaboration with different groups and removing barriers to adaptation. Local 
governments (such as Surrey, British Columbia; Edmonton, Alberta; and Montreal, Quebec) are increasingly 
planning for climate change through dedicated adaptation plans or by integrating climate change 
considerations into other municipal policies and plans (see Box 7). There are also many promising examples 
of local adaptation actions being implemented across the country, including low-impact development (such 
as the use of permeable pavement and bioswales) and nature-based approaches (such as increasing the size 
of urban forests and restoring coastal wetlands) (see Section 2.5; NIR-2). Many Indigenous communities—
including the Tsleil-Waututh Nation (see Case Story 2.5 in NIR-2), the Georgina Island First Nation (see Case 
Story 3.6 in RPR-3) and the Lennox Island Mi’kmaq First Nation—are also advancing on adaptation planning 
(see Case Story 1.8 in RPR-1).
However, implementation of adaptation plans and actions continues to be a challenge for many local 
governments and Indigenous communities, and the level of implementation is not keeping pace with the 
growing risks posed by climate change. A 2018 survey of 180 local governments across Canada found that 
while more than half had initiated formal adaptation planning discussions in their community within the last 
four years, they are sometimes ad hoc and reactive, and often do not result in implementation (McMillan 
et al., 2019). Barriers to implementation (see Section 2.6) often relate to financing, lack of access to or 
understanding of decision-support tools, competing priorities, governance and professional silos (see NIR-2).
Urgent action is imperative for minimizing negative impacts on cities, towns and smaller communities, and 
for leveraging opportunities (see Table 5 for examples of local level adaptation). Strategic and proactive 
implementation of local adaptation plans and actions is beginning to emerge, and will help to increase 
adaptive capacity and climate resilience now and in the future.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 43 
Table 5: Examples of local-level climate change adaptation 
TITLE
DESCRIPTION
SOURCE
Adaptation planning 
in Edmonton and 
Calgary, AB
Calgary’s Climate Resilience Plan (2018) identifies climate risks 
and vulnerabilities to city services and operations, and outlines 
the business units responsible for addressing those risks. The 
City of Edmonton instead used a phased approach to develop its 
adaptation strategy, undertaking a risk assessment, economic 
analysis, and engaging diverse stakeholders through thematic 
workshops.
Case Story 
4.5 in RPR-4
Coastal Flood 
Adaptation Strategy 
in Surrey, BC
Approximately 20% of Surrey’s land lies within a coastal floodplain, 
with several sectors at risk of flooding. The development of their 
Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy involved engagement with 
diverse stakeholders and partners. Strategic directions were 
developed through an iterative adaptive design process, which 
identified 46 adaptation options, including 13 major infrastructure 
projects.
Case Story 
5.2 in RPR-5
Brampton, ON 
Lighthouse 
Project: Supporting 
vulnerable 
populations during 
extreme weather 
events
The Brampton Lighthouse Project is a collaboration between the 
local government and 20 faith-based organizations (FBOs). This 
collaboration allows FBOs to support vulnerable populations during 
extreme weather and non-climate-related emergencies.
Case Story 
2.4 in NIR-2
Enhancing 
infrastructure 
resilience in 
Fredericton, NB to 
reduce flood risk
Persistent flood risk has resulted in over two decades of efforts to 
ensure that the City’s infrastructure is more resilient. Adaptation 
actions included sizing culverts 20% above a 1:100 return period and 
using rail-corridor trails as alternative transportation routes when 
flooding disrupts vehicle traffic.
Case Story 
2.1 in NIR-2
Local adaptation in 
the Great Lakes Basin
Adapting to climate change in the Great Lakes Basin requires 
transboundary leadership and coordination among all orders of 
government, organizations and agencies. Local governments in 
Ontario, Quebec and several U.S. states are working together on 
pilot projects, which include a platform to share data and resources 
for local adaptation and provide opportunities for building technical 
capacity.
Case Story 
3.3 in RPR-3
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 44 
TITLE
DESCRIPTION
SOURCE
Policies and 
measures for 
reducing flood risk in 
the City of Calgary, AB
In 2013, Calgary experienced its largest flood since 1897, with 
damage totalling $6 billion. The City has taken a holistic approach to 
reducing flood risk, employing multiple strategies at the watershed, 
community and property levels.
Case Story 
4.1 in RPR-4
Adaptation 
measures and co-
benefits through the 
upgrading of Rue 
Saint-Maurice in 
Trois-Rivières, QC
Significant upgrades were made to a 1.3 km stretch of Rue Saint-
Maurice in Trois-Rivières, QC, using a combination of built and 
natural infrastructure, and delivering a range of co-benefits. The 
project aimed to reduce the urban heat island effect, beautify the 
landscape, improve neighbourhood safety for pedestrians and 
motorists, and improve stormwater management.
Case Story 
2.6 in NIR-2
Project for the 
protection and 
rehabilitation of the 
Anse du Sud shoreline 
in Percé, QC
Severe storms in 2016 and 2017 destroyed more than 200 metres 
of the Anse du Sud boardwalk, prompting the Town of Percé to 
undertake adaptation measures, including beach replenishment, to 
protect tourist infrastructure along the coast and in the city centre. 
Case Story 
2.3 in RPR-2

Box 7: Using a systems approach to strengthen local adaptation
Insights from Duane Nicol, Chief Administrative Officer, City of Selkirk, Manitoba
The small city of Selkirk in southeast Manitoba is no stranger to overland flooding from heavy rain events. 
Chief Administrative Officer Duane Nicol has seen two major events in the last decade that have overwhelmed 
storm sewer systems, flooding homes (see Video 5). “The primary issue,” he says, “is really intense storm 
events throughout the year, but primarily in springtime.”
For other municipalities looking at how to adapt to a changing climate, Mr. Nicol suggests taking the long-
term view: “[We] know [climate change] is going to be around for decades. We are going to be dealing with 
this, learning from it, and slowly adapting to the changing environment. […] [O]ur infrastructure systems, our 
cultural systems, our social systems have all taken decades and centuries to evolve to this point. […] And so 
evolution, not revolution, is going to be the order of the day.”
Climate action, he says, is not about investing in “signature projects” that make a name for individual city 
leaders. He points to the less exciting, but essential work of integrating climate change considerations into 
everyday frameworks that determine how infrastructure and other assets are managed. “If you change the 
decision-making criteria, if you change the framework, […] what you’re going to do is take every one of those 
dollars and turn them into climate action dollars.”
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 45 
He also stresses the importance of clear communication and bringing people on board. This involves “making 
sure that […] we talk about any of the co-benefits and […] why making this change in the infrastructure or the 
way we operate our municipality actually benefits you, the citizen.”
Mr. Nicol feels that assessments such as Canada in a Changing Climate are an important tool for 
communities like his, enabling local leaders to learn from what others are experiencing. “We do not have the 
capacity in smaller municipalities, [where] the same person that’s your Chief Administrative Officer is also 
probably your finance person. [B]eing able to look at what’s already been thought through and done, and to 
borrow some of those ideas, makes it really, really easy to implement in your own capacity.”
Video 5: Interview with Duane Nicol, Chief Administrative Officer with the City of Selkirk, Manitoba on climate 
change impacts and adaptation in his community. <https://vimeo.com/886514873>
2.8 Self-determined and Indigenous-led climate action 
supports reconciliation
Indigenous Knowledge Systems, and Indigenous rights and governance are critical to establishing 
just, equitable, decolonized and sustainable approaches to overcoming the climate crisis. Recognizing 
that humans, culture and the natural world are inseparable, and that we share responsibility for future 
generations, is essential to these approaches.
First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples and their homelands are disproportionately affected by climate 
change, and face growing climate risks (see Box 8; IRR; HCCC-2; NIR-2; NIR-3; RPR-2). These impacts can 
magnify existing environmental, health and socioeconomic challenges, including structural inequities that 
Indigenous Peoples have faced for generations as a result of colonialism (see IRR). Adaptation efforts will 
require addressing ongoing inequities, such as those related to housing, water security, access to health 
care and education (see HCCC-2; NIR-3; IRR; Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami [ITK], 2019; EPCCARR, 2018). Indigenous 
governments, moreover, emphasize that climate change constitutes a state of emergency not only for their 
Peoples, but for their homelands and the ways in which they live in relationship with the land, water, ice, 
animals and plants (see IRR; Reed et al., 2022).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 46 
Box 8: Examples of key climate change risks for Indigenous Peoples 
Climate change risks are growing in many Indigenous communities, including risks to food, water and energy 
security, infrastructure, mental health and wellness, livelihoods, culture and identity (see IRR; HCCC-2; NIR-3; 
EPCCARR, 2018).
Indigenous food systems, in particular, are experiencing significant and unique impacts (see RPR-2; RPR-6; 
IRR; ITK, 2021). Not only has climate change affected the distribution, quality and quantity of nutrient-dense 
traditional and wild food sources, it has also affected access to store-bought foods, which is increasingly 
compromised by the growing expense and precariousness of supply chains, especially in the Indigenous 
communities that make up the vast majority of Canada’s remote, fly-in communities (see IRR; NIR-5; RPR-6). 
Affordable grocery items are often of poor nutritional quality, compared with traditional foods, and cannot 
replace the role that the harvest, processing and sharing of traditional foods play in Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems, cultures, identities and economies (see HCCC-2; NIR-3; RPR-2; RPR-5; IRR; ITK, 2021). Resupply is 
also compromised by ageing air infrastructure, hazardous and mobile sea ice, and the growing loss of winter 
roads that depend on frozen river and lake ice or frozen permafrost.

First Nations, Inuit and Métis leaders on climate change issues in Canada have long emphasized that 
reconciliation requires new approaches to engaging with Indigenous Knowledge Systems and respect for 
Indigenous-led policy and research on climate change mitigation and adaptation—especially in decision 
making. There is a need to better understand Indigenous rights-based approaches in order to respect and 
apply Indigenous concepts of sustainability, including interconnectedness between social and ecological 
systems, without significantly undermining their meaning (see IRR). Indigenous Knowledge Systems play an 
important role in enhancing the adaptive capacity and resilience of Indigenous Peoples and their reciprocal 
relationship with the natural world (see IRR; HCCC-2; NIR-3; RPR-4; RPR-5; RPR-6).
Indigenous climate policies and actions prioritize Indigenous Knowledge Systems and the need to rebalance 
the relationship between human societies and the natural world (see Table 6 for examples). They also 
recognize that Indigenous Peoples have the inherent right to self-determination and to advance climate 
actions that are interdependent, multi-dimensional and simultaneously advance climate change adaptation, 
decarbonization and decolonization (see Box 9; IRR; Reed et al., 2021).
Canada’s strengthened climate plan explicitly recognizes the importance of supporting Indigenous Peoples’ 
self-determined climate actions and their critical role in advancing Canada’s reconciliation with Indigenous 
Peoples (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2020). Indigenous Peoples have made key contributions 
to Canada’s climate discussions in recent years and play critical roles advocating for climate action, including 
in the following areas: education, land-based learning and healing, clean energy, Indigenous Knowledge and 
science strategies, adaptation planning and implementation, and political action and diplomacy (see IRR; 
NIR-2; NIR-3; ITK, 2019).
Canada can continue to draw important insights for understanding how our colonial history has driven the 
climate crisis and the ways in which Indigenous Peoples have disproportionately shouldered the impacts, 
from a number of seminal reports (Pikialasorsuaq Commission, 2019; Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 47 
of Canada, 2015; Qikiqtani Truth Commission, 2013; United Nations, 2007; Government of Canada, 1996; 
Berger, 1977). It is only through a reconciliation process that recognizes Canada’s collective colonial past 
that Indigenous-led climate governance will be meaningfully supported by non-Indigenous governments, and 
a path toward the respectful interweaving of Indigenous Knowledge Systems with conventional scientific 
approaches can be created (see Case Story 6.5 in RPR-6; IRR; NIR-5).
Ultimately, Indigenous climate policies are key to restoring Indigenous Peoples’ relationships with land and 
water, and for providing pathways to wellness where the “reconciliation between Indigenous Peoples and the 
Crown requires our collective reconciliation with the Earth” (Borrows, 2018).
Table 6: Examples of First Nations, Inuit and Métis climate action
TITLE
DESCRIPTION
SOURCE
Intersections of climate 
change and Indigenous 
traditions: the Northern 
Tutchone People of the 
Selkirk First Nation
The Northern Tutchone People of the Selkirk First 
Nation in the Yukon have adapted their salmon fishing 
camps with youth in mind to maintain cultural practices 
as critical pathways to mental, physical and spiritual 
well-being in the face of declining salmon populations.
Case Story 5 in IRR
“The eyes and ears for 
the land and water”: The 
rising tide of Indigenous 
Guardians programs and 
expansion of Indigenous 
Protected and Conserved 
Areas in Canada
Across Canada, there are now close to 100 
Indigenous Guardians programs. These programs 
support monitoring of climate change, the 
environment and protected areas; ecological 
restoration; public and youth education; conservation; 
and sustainable economic development planning. 
Case Story 8 in IRR
Preserving Tłı̨chǫ culture in 
the face of declining Barren-
ground caribou populations
The Tłıchǫ Dǫtaàts’eedı ̨program (“to share food among 
the people”) paired more than 100 young adults in four 
Tłıchǫ communities with 60 experienced harvesters to 
harvest wild foods and distribute some 4,000 kg of fish 
and meat to community Elders. The program addresses 
the impacts of climate change while supporting Tłıchǫ ̨ 
food security, values and culture.
Case Story 5.3 in 
NIR-5
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 48 
TITLE
DESCRIPTION
SOURCE
Confronting rising seas on 
Lennox Island, PEI
The Mi’kmaq Confederacy of PEI combines oral 
histories with instrumental data to identify climate 
trends. It has identified areas of coastal vulnerability 
now prioritized for adaptation programs to protect 
cultural values.
Case Story 1.8 in 
RPR-1
Peavine Métis Settlement 
FireSmart Program
Community members are using Indigenous 
Knowledge and information from provincial fire 
authorities to combine traditional burning practices 
with fireguard and fuel break strategies to manage 
fires in ways that reflect and protect cultural norms 
and values.
Box 2.3 in HCCC-2
Supporting Inuit wellness, 
strength, resilience and 
cultural continuity in 
Nunatsiavut, Labrador
Inuit communities of Nunatsiavut at the forefront 
of climate change have designed programs to 
support Inuit wellness, strength, resilience and 
cultural continuity. This includes the Aullak, 
Sangilivallianginnatuk (Going Off, Growing Strong) 
program, which brings youth and experienced 
harvesters together to support social and cultural 
connections, and community food security.
Case Story 3.5 in 
NIR-3
Community climate change 
resilience planning in the 
Tsleil-Waututh Nation
The Tsleil-Waututh Nation is developing a culturally 
relevant community planning process aimed at 
institutionalizing climate resilience throughout its 
governance. Early work has included hazard mapping 
and exposure-sensitivity analysis and reflects the 
Nation’s sacred obligations to care for the lands, 
waters and air.
Case Story 2.5 in 
NIR-2
BC First Nations Climate 
Change Strategy
The Strategy aims to identify actions to reduce 
GHGs, strengthen Indigenous climate leadership 
in BC, reduce vulnerability to impacts, and build 
capacity, understanding and resilience in First Nation 
communities.
Box 5.2 in RPR-5
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 49 
Box 9: Self-determination is critical for Indigenous climate action
Insights from Dr. Deborah McGregor, Canada Research Chair on Indigenous Environmental Justice
First Nations, Métis and Inuit recognize the existential threat that climate change poses to their cultural 
survival. Given the long shadow of colonization in Canada, Indigenous Peoples seek their own pathways 
forward, finding approaches based on their deep knowledge and experience.
Dr. Deborah McGregor, a contributing author of the For Our Future: Indigenous Resilience Report, points to 
emerging examples of Indigenous-led adaptation, largely seen in resolutions and declarations by Indigenous 
authorities at different levels (see Video 6). The Assembly of First Nations (AFN), for example, is developing 
a national climate change strategy, following the declaration of a First Nations Climate Emergency in 2019 
(AFN, 2019). Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK) has also defined a climate strategy that addresses common Inuit 
climate priorities (ITK, 2019). Other Indigenous communities are working on plans and policies at a local level.
What defines Indigenous-led adaptation strategies? Dr. McGregor highlights a number of common threads: 
“They center the U.N. Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Indigenous Knowledge, Indigenous 
relationships to the land, future generations and relationships with the non-human world […] Spirituality is 
another theme that you don’t often see in other climate change policies.”
Indigenous-led adaptation, she says, has to be rooted in the specific lived experience of Inuit, Métis and First 
Nations Peoples. Indigenous Peoples need to “trust [our] own traditions, because that’s what enabled us 
to survive despite genocidal policies, displacement from land, residential schools and other threats to our 
survival. It was [thanks to] our own knowledge, our own way of life, our own language, our own governance, 
our own laws and people.”
In most cases, Indigenous Peoples are still only consulted on strategies and processes determined by 
outsiders. However, Dr. McGregor sees hope in the National Knowledge Assessment process, Canada in a 
Changing Climate. Where past assessments underrepresented Indigenous expertise, she is encouraged at 
the broad and holistic scope of knowledge and experience that the For Our Future: Indigenous Resilience 
Report captures. This report, in particular, she says, “really made an effort to include […] diverse perspectives 
in Indigenous communities, but it was impossible to do it in one report. So, to me, it’s […] an opening. It’s like 
giving people a tiny glimpse of what’s possible and what’s there.”
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 50 
Video 6: Video interview with Deborah McGregor, Canada Research Chair in Indigenous Environmental Justice, on 
perspectives related to self-determination and Indigenous-led adaptation. 
<https://vimeo.com/889966380>
2.9 Adaptation can promote equity
Existing social, economic and health inequities are often exacerbated by climate change impacts. 
Engaging with those most affected by climate change is essential to ensure that adaptation measures 
address these inequities.
Climate change affects different groups of people in different ways. It can be particularly disruptive for those 
disadvantaged by pre-existing inequities (see IRR; HCCC-9), increasing their vulnerability and decreasing 
their adaptative capacity (see HCCC-9; NIR-2; NIR-3). Vulnerability to climate change is influenced by many 
factors, including demographics (such as age, gender or housing status), socioeconomic status (such as 
income levels or working conditions), geography (such as where one lives and works, or accesses healthcare 
services) and culture (such as ethnicity and Indigeneity) (see NIR-2; NIR-3; IRR). 
Some populations and communities are also at higher risk of experiencing climate-related health impacts. 
Determinants of health, including many of the factors mentioned above, play a key role in increasing or 
decreasing an individual’s adaptive capacity, and their exposure or sensitivity to climate-related health risks 
(see Figure 8). For example, certain occupations (such as in agriculture, landscaping or construction) are 
highly exposed to climate hazards, such as extreme heat (see RPR-2). Systemic drivers of health inequities—
such as racism and historic and ongoing colonization—also increase vulnerability to climate change, which 
increases risks to communities already disproportionately burdened by illness, including First Nations, Inuit 
and Métis communities and racialized populations (see HCCC-2; HCCC-9; NIR-3; RPR-4; IRR).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 51 
Figure 8: Climate change and health equity framework. Source: Schnitter et al., 2022.
Location is also an important factor shaping vulnerability to climate change impacts. For instance, people 
living in rural and remote communities often experience more environmental, social, economic, cultural and 
health impacts from climate change than those living in urban areas. This is largely due to their relative 
isolation, limited access to services (such as health care), reliance on sparse critical infrastructure for basic 
needs, and frequent dependence on climate-sensitive natural resources for their livelihoods (see Section 2.7). 
Coastal communities are increasingly at risk of displacement or relocation from extreme storms, erosion 
and rising sea levels. While adaptation options such as managed retreat may be possible, there are many 
important considerations, recognizing that livelihoods and identity in many of these locations are inherently 
intertwined with cultural and historic connections to place.
Climate change is having tangible and intangible impacts as ecosystems and landscapes change, particularly 
in rural and remote areas where connection to the land is embedded in identity and cultural practice (see 
NIR-3; IRR). People living in northern Canada, for instance, often live in close proximity to their environment 
and rely on the land to support their livelihoods, well-being, culture and identity (see RPR-6). Even small 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 52 
changes in climate and the environment can disrupt peoples’ lives and connection to place. This is 
particularly pronounced for Indigenous communities, whose cultural practices (such as hunting, fishing, 
trapping and gathering) and connection to land are affected by changes such as decreased sea ice, disruptions 
to food and water sources, and changes to wildlife and plants (see IRR; RPR-6). Further, recent studies have 
explored how climate change is limiting access to places of cultural significance, altering the inter-generational 
transmission of Indigenous Knowledge, and damaging or destroying landscapes and sites of cultural and social 
significance (see NIR-3; RPR-1; RPR-2; RPR-5; RPR-6). These intangible losses can also fuel ecological anxiety and 
grief (see RPR-6; IRR) as well as other mental health challenges (see HCCC-4; NIR-3).
Despite climate risks and existing inequities, many communities continue to demonstrate resilience. 
Many rural and remote communities benefit from heightened social capital and access to Indigenous 
Knowledge and/or local knowledge, which strengthens their adaptive capacity (see NIR-3; RPR-6; IRR). For 
example, the Eenou community of Mistissini in northern Quebec outlined several measures to monitor and 
address changing ice conditions in its Climate Change Adaptation Action Plan, drawing from Indigenous 
Knowledge Systems (see RPR-2; Grand Council of the Crees, 2019; Cree Nation of Mistissini and Cree Nation 
Government, 2018).
It is important that adaptation planning processes be equitable and that adaptation actions strive to benefit 
those most in need (see IRR). If equity outcomes are not considered during planning and implementation, 
measures can have unintended consequences that fail to benefit—or even harm—disadvantaged groups or 
deepen existing inequities (see IRR). For example, a study in Toronto found that racialized and low-income 
populations had less access to green space compared to communities that were predominantly white (see 
HCCC-9). Green space has been shown to reduce health risks related to urban heat islands and extreme heat.
To ensure that adaptation measures benefit those at highest risk, without exacerbating inequities and 
vulnerability, decision makers have a range of options. These include inclusive and equitable processes of 
community engagement that foster wide participation in adaptation planning, and participatory monitoring 
and evaluation of adaptation measures to assess if and how they have enhanced equity and reduced 
vulnerability. Decision-making tools—such as asset mapping, heat stress mapping, social vulnerability 
mapping (see Case Story 1.6 in RPR-1) and enhanced data collection—can also help authorities to better 
understand existing conditions and inequities in their communities, and how these factors interact with 
climate change. With this information, they are better equipped to identify populations and regions that are 
at increased risk and to plan and act accordingly. For example, social vulnerability mapping in Nova Scotia 
has identified populations at higher risk of adverse outcomes from climate change impacts such as coastal 
flooding, and can guide interventions to lower these risks and prepare for emergencies (see Case Story 1.7 in 
RPR-1).
Greater equity can be a co-benefit of well-designed and targeted adaptation strategies and actions (see 
Table 6.3 in NIR-6). For example, the City of Greater Sudbury partnered with Greater Sudbury Transit to make 
all transit trips free of charge during extreme heat events, which ensured more equitable access to cooling 
centres (see HCCC-9). The importance of equitable climate change adaptation is increasingly recognized, 
as is the need to ensure diverse voices are included in planning, implementing and delivering adaptation 
initiatives (see Case Story 2.3 in NIR-2). 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 53 
2.10 Now is the time for the private sector to step up on adaptation
Businesses face a range of direct and indirect risks from climate change. It is vital to engage and empower 
the business community and other private sector stakeholders if we are to progress at the scale needed to 
reduce current and future climate change risks and take advantage of potential opportunities.
Much of the literature on climate change adaptation in Canada focuses on the role of governments, with 
less attention paid to the private sector. Yet climate change presents great risks and opportunities to 
businesses across the country (see Box 10 and Table 7). These include direct risks to their facilities, supply 
chains and employee health and well-being, as well as indirect risks related to global trade patterns, shipping 
and distribution, and access to raw materials (see Figure 9; NIR-8; NIR-9). Such risks can in turn increase 
financial losses by reducing revenues and productivity, while increasing insurance and other operating 
costs and capital expenditures (see NIR-8). Adaptation also offers businesses potential opportunities (see 
Section 2.4), including through access to new markets, more favourable conditions for certain activities, and 
shifting patterns of comparative advantage. Overall, adaptation is imperative for the private sector to remain 
competitive in a changing climate.
“Climate change risks and opportunities are business issues.” (see NIR-8)
Figure 9: Climate change risks to businesses.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 54 
However, evidence to date suggests that adaptation in Canada’s private sector has been limited, with most 
businesses neither taking action, nor planning to engage in adaptation (see NIR-7; NIR-8; NIR-9). This could 
be due in part to underreporting, issues of confidentiality, competition and limited understanding of what 
constitutes adaptation to climate change (see NIR-7; NIR-8). While the number of examples of private-
sector adaptation is growing, most tend to be small in scale, piecemeal and reactive (see NIR-7). Overall, 
accelerating adaptation within the private sector is clearly needed to help close Canada’s ever-widening 
adaptation gap (see Section 2.6; NIR-6; NIR-7; NIR-8).
In addition to barriers and drivers (see Section 2.6), other factors can encourage or limit adaptation action 
in the private sector. Requiring financial disclosure of climate risks and opportunities, for example, has been 
recognized as a way to drive climate action by encouraging companies to become more climate resilient 
(see NIR-8). It is also an important tool for revealing the climate change risks that companies are facing (see 
NIR-8; NIR-9). Publicly traded companies are legally required to disclose material risks, such as damage and 
disruption from extreme weather events, limited water availability due to drought, and volatile energy costs 
due to shifting demand. Additional voluntary disclosure often happens through company reporting processes 
(see NIR-8). Experts question, however, whether this provides sufficiently detailed and comprehensive 
disclosure of climate risks (see NIR-8). The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (2017; 2019) 
provides recommendations for improvements (see Box 8.2 in NIR-8), while initiatives such as the Carbon 
Disclosure Project and the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board framework are other mechanisms that 
encourage progress in this area (see NIR-8).
Private sector action can also be encouraged through initiatives that clearly demonstrate the business case 
for adaptation (see Section 2.4). It is clear that the economic benefits of adaptation typically exceed the 
costs (see Section 2.4; NIR-6). However, the evidence base is fragmented and insufficient to fully inform 
business decisions, which are often complex due to competing priorities and the need to consider trade-offs. 
Calculations are further complicated by uncertainties inherent in climate change and economic projections, 
future discount rates and accounting for co-benefits, which can be difficult to quantify (see NIR-6). Case 
studies of implemented adaptation actions that clearly lay out the process followed, assumptions made, 
costs incurred and the results observed would play an important role in stimulating action in the private 
sector. For example, The Co-operators, a Canadian-based insurance company with branches across the 
country, worked with Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada to develop a proactive adaptation 
strategy for managing climate change risks and opportunities. This included creating new insurance products 
and engaging with stakeholders to enhance community resilience in the face of extreme precipitation and 
flooding events (see Map of Adaptation Actions).
Incentives are another recognized way to increase private sector action on adaptation (see NIR-6; NIR-7; 
NIR-8; RPR-1). These can include grants to increase resilience to physical risks (such as flooding and storms) 
or to encourage sustainable practices (such as in agriculture; see RPR-5). Incentives to adaptation can either 
reward positive measures, such as through reduced insurance premiums and tax-breaks (see NIR-8), 
or discourage negative actions, such as through charges and taxes. Often provided by various orders of 
government, financial incentives need to be carefully designed to achieve their goal (see Section 2.6; NIR-6). 
Governments can further encourage adaptation by providing clear policies, legislation and regulations (see 
Section 2.6). This helps to guide private sector decisions, provide reassurance that investments in adaptation 
are supported by the government (see RPR-5) and create a more level playing field. Governments can also 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 55 
contribute by providing access to timely, reliable and easily-interpreted climate data and tailored climate 
services (such as the Canadian Centre for Climate Services).
Transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy requires substantial investment (see NIR-8). 
Public sector financing alone is insufficient for meeting this need (see NIR-6)—the private sector has an 
important role to play in helping to bridge the finance gap, with help from governments in addressing market 
and behavioural barriers to action (see NIR-7).
Table 7: Examples of private sector adaptation to reduce climate risks 
to operations and assets
TYPE OF 
ADAPTATION
EXAMPLES
INVESTMENT 
REQUIRED
MOTIVATIONS
“Soft” adaptation 
measures
Risk assessments, organizational 
policies, adjustments in operational 
practices, education and awareness, new 
partnerships
Low to moderate 
Often related 
to social 
responsibility
“Hard” adaptation 
measures 
Building or renovating structural defenses, 
relocating infrastructure or offices, 
divesting from climate-exposed property 
and sectors
Significant 
Often in response 
to extreme events
Financial 
disclosure of 
climate risks
Disclosing material climate-related risks 
such as potential for damaged assets, 
operational disruptions, or disruptions to 
supply or distribution chains) 
Low to moderate 
Legislative 
requirement to 
report material 
risks 
Investments in risk 
modelling
Investments by insurance companies in 
catastrophe risk models, flood risk maps 
Moderate 
Enhanced ability to 
assess and valuate 
risks 
Sources: NIR-7; NIR-8; Averchenkova et al., 2016.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 56 
Box 10: Mobilizing private sector adaptation
Insights from Paul Kovacs, Founder and Executive Director of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
at Western University
With more than 25 years of experience in assessing catastrophic loss, Paul Kovacs believes there is a sound 
body of knowledge available to help businesses better prepare for climate change (see v). “It is clear that 
there is a greater effort evident in the private sector to understand what these risks are and to understand 
options to put protection in place,” he says.
The challenge is getting them to move from awareness to action. “It's essential that [they] become much 
more active in preparing for climate extremes,” says Mr. Kovacs. “We need a whole-of-society solution to the 
threat of climate change and [its] adverse impacts […]. We’re seeing good signs of interest and willingness to 
act, but turning that into protective action has yet to happen.”
In dollar terms alone, much is at stake. According to Mr. Kovacs, Canadian businesses experienced billions 
of dollars worth of preventable damage due to climate change and weather extremes in 2022 alone. Over the 
last 40 years, damage caused by severe weather has doubled every five to ten years. These rising costs are a 
key reason why more and more companies are assessing risks and considering what protective measures to 
put in place.
“The potential for positive outcomes through climate preparedness is very, very large in Canada,” says Mr. 
Kovacs. “We can stop the trend of rising losses by applying the knowledge that we have, but it requires large 
investments in protective action by businesses all across the country.”
Video 7: Video interview with Paul Kovacs, Founder and Executive Director of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction at Western University, on private-sector adaptation.  <https://vimeo.com/886516568>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 57 
3.0 Conclusion 
Our knowledge and understanding of Canada’s changing climate—along with the expected impacts and our 
adaptation options—have grown significantly in recent years. This is evident in the thousands of references 
cited in the Canada in a Changing Climate Assessment reports. The knowledge base has broadened too, 
with much of the literature focusing on new and emerging issues, such as the importance of addressing 
equity in the context of adaptation, and the need to integrate multiple sources of knowledge in adaptation 
decisions, particularly Indigenous Knowledge Systems. Throughout this report, we have highlighted some of 
the promising advances on adaptation, while recognizing that much more work is needed to close Canada’s 
adaptation gap.
For the first time in the National Knowledge Assessment process, authors of most of the reports were 
explicitly asked to identify key knowledge gaps and emerging issues. This has helped set a baseline and will 
inform future research, with the goal of closing gaps and expanding the existing knowledge base. These 
knowledge gaps are summarized in Annex 3.
Overall, it is clear that climate change is already having profound impacts on Canada and that many 
of these impacts will amplify in the future. The examples presented within this report provide only a 
snapshot of the wide-ranging risks we are facing. The actions we do or do not take now and in the near 
term will have a long legacy.
Ongoing adaptation must be accompanied by climate change mitigation to limit the level of global warming. 
With global action, we still have the chance to shape our long-term future and prevent many of the most 
extreme risks from being realized, though that window is rapidly closing (IPCC, 2023a). There is no denying 
that these are daunting challenges. However, they can also be seen as an opportunity. Climate change 
gives us impetus and motivation to make systemic changes in our society, economy and environment that 
would make our country a better place to live, work and play. Planned adaptation, for example, not only 
reduces climate risks, but can also increase overall resilience, help address underlying inequities, advance 
reconciliation and better protect the natural environment. There are roles for all—from individuals to 
households, communities, businesses and governments of all types—to better incorporate climate change 
adaptation within day-to-day decisions, policies and processes, and long-term mandates.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 58 
Benmarhnia, T., Bailey, Z., Kaiser, D., Auger, N., King, N. and 
Kaufman, J. S. (2016). A Difference-in-Differences Approach 
to Assess the Effect of a Heat Action Plan on Heat-Related 
Mortality, and Differences in Effectiveness According to 
Sex, Age, and Socioeconomic Status (Montreal, Quebec). 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(11), 1694–1699. 
Retrieved September 2023, from <https://doi.org/10.1289/
EHP203>
Berger, Thomas. (1977). Northern Frontier Northern Homeland: 
The Report of the Mackenzie Valley Pipeline Inquiry: Volume 
One. Minister of Supply and Services Canada. Report No. CP32-
25/1977-1. Retrieved August 2023, from <https://publications.
gc.ca/site/eng/9.700299/publication.html> 
Borrows, J. (2018). Earth-Bound: Indigenous Resurgence and 
Environmental Reconciliation in Resurgence and Reconciliation: 
Indigenous-Settler Relations and Earth Teachings, (Eds.) 
M. Asch, J. Borrows and J. Tully. Toronto Press, Toronto, 
Ontario, 49‒82. Retrieved August 2023, from <https://doi.
org/10.3138/9781487519926>
Brown, C., Jackson, E., Harford, D. and Bristow, D. (2021). Cities 
and Towns, Chapter 2 in Canada in a Changing Climate: National 
Issues Report, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham. Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 26‒102. Retrieved August 2023, from 
<https://changingclimate.ca/national-issues/chapter/2-0/>
C40 Cities and AECOM (2017). C40 Infrastructure 
Interdependencies and Climate Risks Report. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/report_c40_
interdependencies_.pdf>
Charness, K., Collie, J., Fatima, S. and Berry, P. (2023). Risks of 
Climate Change to Health in Canada. Health Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario.
City of Calgary (2017). Flood Mitigation Measures Assessment 
Report and 2016 Flood Resiliency Update. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.calgary.ca/UEP/Water/Pages/Flood-Info/
Stay-informed/Flood-Mitigation-Measures-Assessment.aspx>
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate 
Change Risks. Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-
Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf>
Cree Nation of Mistissini and Cree Nation Government (2018). 
Community Proposal: Climate Change Adaptation Action Plan. 
Retrieved November 2021, from <https://www.cngov.ca/news-
issues/current-issues/community-proposal-climate-change-
adaptation-action-plan/>
4.0 References 
 Arias, P.A., Bellouin, N., Coppola, E., Jones, R.G., Krinner, G., 
Marotzke, J., Naik, V., Palmer, M.D., Plattner, G.-K., Rogelj, J., 
Rojas, M., Sillmann, J., Storelvmo, T., Thorne, P.W., Trewin, B., 
Achuta Rao, K., Adhikary, B., Allan, R.P., Armour, K., Bala, G., 
Barimalala, R., Berger, S., Canadell, J.G., Cassou, C., Cherchi, 
A., Collins, W., Collins, W.D., Connors, S.L., Corti, S., Cruz, F., 
Dentener, F.J., Dereczynski, C., Di Luca, A., Diongue Niang, A., 
Doblas-Reyes, F.J., Dosio, A., Douville, H., Engelbrecht, F., Eyring, 
V., Fischer, E., Forster, P., Fox-Kemper, B., Fuglestvedt, J.S., 
Fyfe, J.C., Gillett, N.P., Goldfarb, L., Gorodetskaya, I., Gutierrez, 
J.M., Hamdi, R., Hawkins, E., Hewitt, H.T., Hope, P., Islam, A.S., 
Jones,C., Kaufman, D.S., Kopp, R.E., Kosaka, Y., Kossin, J., 
Krakovska, S., Lee, J.-Y., Li, J., Mauritsen, T., Maycock, T.K., 
Meinshausen, M., Min, S.-K., Monteiro, P.M.S., Ngo-Duc, T., Otto, 
F., Pinto, I., Pirani, A., Raghavan, K., Ranasinghe, R., Ruane, A.C., 
Ruiz, L., Sallée, J.-B., Samset, H., Sathyendranath, S., Seneviratne, 
S.I., Sörensson, A.A., Szopa, S., Takayabu, I., Tréguier, A.-M., 
van den Hurk, B., Vautard, R., von Schuckmann, K., Zaehle, S., 
Zhang, X. and Zickfeld. (2021): Technical Summary in Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Masson-Delmotte, 
V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. 
Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, 
J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu, 
and B. Zhou (Eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 33–144. <https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781009157896.002>
AFN [Assembly of First Nations] (2019). Declaring a First 
Nations Climate Emergency. Annual General Assembly, 
July 23, 24, 25; Fredericton, New Brunswick. Resolution No. 
5/2019. Retrieved August 2023, from <https://afn.bynder.
com/m/5a3de3c7f6cf08b5/original/05-2019-Declaring-a-First-
Nations-Climate-Emergency.pdf>
Association des Stations de Ski du Québec (2016). Congrès 
2016: Le Québec a atteint le 5,125 millions de jours/ski pour 
la saison 2015-2016. Tourismexpress. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://tourismexpress.com/nouvelles/congres-assq-
2016-le-quebec-a-atteint-le-5-125-millions-de-jours-ski-pour-la-
saison-2015-16>
Averchenkova, A., Crick, F., Kocornik-Mina, A., Leck, H. 
and Surminski, S. (2016). Multinational and large national 
corporations and climate adaptation: Are we asking the right 
questions? A review of current knowledge and a new research 
perspective. WIREs Climate Change, 7(4), 517–536. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.402>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 59 
Government of Canada (2023). Canada’s National Adaptation 
Strategy: Building Resilient Communities and a Strong Economy. 
Retrieved September 2023, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
services/environment/weather/climatechange/climate-plan/
national-adaptation-strategy.html>
Grand Council of the Crees (2019). Envisioning Responses to 
Climate Change in Eeyou Istchee: Report on the Regional Forum 
on Climate Change. Environment and Remedial Works, Cree 
Nation Government. Retrieved September 2020, from <https://
www.cngov.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/eastmain-climate-
change-report_pdf3.pdf>
Green Analytics (2016). Ontario’s Good Fortune: Appreciating 
the Greenbelt’s Natural Capital. Report prepared for The Friends 
of the Greenbelt Foundation by Green Analytics, 92 p. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/
greenbelt/pages/2825/attachments/original/1485878510/
OP_20_Web_version_2017.pdf?1485878510>
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2019). Facts of the Property and 
Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada, 41st edition. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20
Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf>
Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (2020). Investing in Canada’s Future: The Cost of 
Climate Adaptation. Retrieved March 2023, from <https://fcm.
ca/en/resources/investing-in-canadas-future>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2021a). 
Summary for Policymakers in Climate Change 2021: The 
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, (Eds.) V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, 
S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, 
M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, 
T.K. Maycock, T. Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou. In 
Press.
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2021b). 
Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis (Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), (Eds.) V. 
Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. Péan, S. 
Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. Huang, 
K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. 
Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New 
York, USA. Retrieved September 2023, from <https://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/9781009157896>
Edwards, J. E., Pearce, C., Ogden, A. E. and Williamson, T. B. 
(2015). Climate Change and Sustainable Forest Management 
in Canada: A Guidebook for Assessing Vulnerability and 
Mainstreaming Adaptation into Decision Making. Canadian 
Council of Forest Ministers, Climate Change Task Force, 172 
p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ccfm.org/pdf/
Vulnerability%20Guidebook_June2_EN.pdf>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2020). A Healthy 
Environment and a Healthy Economy: Canada’s Strengthened 
Climate Plan to Create Jobs and Support People, Communities 
and the Planet. Retrieved March 2023, from <https://www.
canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/
climate-plan/climate-plan-overview/healthy-environment-
healthy-economy.html>
EPCCARR [Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and 
Resilience Results] (2018). Measuring Progress on Adaptation 
and Climate Resilience: Recommendations to the Government 
of Canada. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada. Retrieved 
May 2020, from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2018/eccc/En4-329-2018-eng.pdf>
Eyzaguirre, J., Boyd, R., Prescott, S., Morton, C., Nelitz, M. and 
Litt, A. (2020). Green Shores 2020: Impact, Value and Lessons 
Learned, Final Project Report. Prepared by ESSA Technologies 
Ltd. for the Stewardship Centre for British Columbia. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <http://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_docs/
greenshores/Resources/Green%20Shores%202020_%20
Impact,%20Value%20and%20Lessons%20Learned_%20Full%20
Report_July2020.pdf>
Eyzaguirre, J. and Warren, F. (2014). Adaptation: Linking 
Research and Practice, Chapter 9 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 253‒286. Retrieved September 2023, from <https://
www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/
pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf>
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2018). How to Develop 
an Asset Management Policy, Strategy and Governance 
Framework Guide. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://fcm.
ca/sites/default/files/documents/resources/guide/how-to-
develop-asset-management-policy-strategy-mamp.pdf>
Global Commission on Adaptation (2019). Adapt now: a global 
call for leadership on climate resilience. Global Commission 
on Adaptation, 81 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://gca.
org/reports/adapt-now-a-global-call-for-leadership-on-climate-
resilience/>
Government of Canada (1996). Report of the Royal Commission 
on Aboriginal Peoples. Report prepared for the Government 
of Canada by the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. 
Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved August 2023, from <https://www.bac-
lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/aboriginal-heritage/royal-commission-
aboriginal-peoples/Pages/final-report.aspx>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 60 
McMillan, T., Causley, D., Hanna, K., Lulham, N., Seasons, M. and 
Boddy, S. (2019). Local adaptation in Canada: Survey report. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://ok-cear.sites.olt.ubc.ca/
files/2019/06/Local-Adaptation-in-Canada-Full-web.-1.pdf>
NRTEE [National Round Table on the Environment and the 
Economy] (2011). Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts 
of Climate Change for Canada. Ottawa, Ontario, 162 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <http://nrt-trn.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2011/09/paying-the-price.pdf>
Ontario (2015). Managing Your Forest in a Changing 
Climate. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://docs.ontario.
ca/documents/4491/managing-your-woodlot-in-a-changing-
climate.pdf>
Pikialasorsuaq Commission (2019). Pikialasorsuaq Leaders 
Statement. Retrieved August 2023, from <https://pm.gc.ca/
en/news/backgrounders/2019/04/04/pikialasorsuaq-leaders-
statement>
Project Steering Committee [Canadian Construction Association, 
Canadian Public Works Association, Canadian Society for Civil 
Engineering and Federation of Canadian Municipalities] (2016). 
Informing the Future: Canadian Infrastructure Report Card. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://canadianinfrastructure.
ca/downloads/Canadian_Infrastructure_Report_2016.pdf>
Qikiqtani Truth Commission (2013). QTC Final Report: Achieving 
Saimaqatigiinnhiq. Qikiqtani Truth Commission. Inhabit Media 
Inc., Iqualuit, Nunavut and Toronto, Ontario. Retrieved August 
2023, from <https://www.qtcommission.ca/en/reports/qtc-final-
report-achieving-saimaqatigiingniq>
Reed, G., Brunet, N.D., Longboat, S. and Natcher, D.C. (2021). 
Indigenous guardians as an emerging approach to indigenous 
environmental governance. Conservation Biology, 35(1), 179–
189. Retrieved December 2022, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cobi.13532>
Reed, G., Brunet, N.D., McGregor, D., Scurr, C., Sadik, T., Lavigne, 
J. and Longboat, S. (2022). Toward Indigenous visions of nature-
based solutions: an exploration into Canadian federal climate 
policy. Climate Policy, 22(4), 514–533. Retrieved March 2023, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2022.2047585>
Rutty, M., Scott, D., Johnson, P., Steiger, R., Pons, M. and Vilella, 
M. (2017). Using ski industry response to climatic variability 
to assess climate change risk: an antalogue study in Eastern 
Canada. Tourism Management, 58. Retrieved March 2023, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2016.10.020>
Schnitter, R., Moores, E., Berry, P., Verret, M., Buse, C., 
Macdonald, C., Perri, M. and Jubas-Malz, D. (2022). Climate 
Change and Health Equity in Health of Canadians in a Changing 
Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action, (Eds.) P. Berry and 
R. Schnitter. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved 
August 2023, from <https://changingclimate.ca/health-in-a-
changing-climate/chapter/9-0/>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2022). 
Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability 
(Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 
(Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, 
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, 
V. Möller, A. Okem and B. Rama. Cambridge University Press. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, New York, USA, 3056 p. Retrieved January 2023, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009325844>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2023a). 
Summary for Policymakers in Climate Change 2023: Synthesis 
Report (Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) IPCC Core Writing Team, Lee, H. and Romero 
J. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 1‒34. Retrieved September 2023, 
from <https://doi.org/10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691647.001>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2023b). 
Climate Change 2023: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, 
Lee, H. and Romero, J. (Eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 35-
115. Retrieved July 2023, from <https://doi.org/10.59327/IPCC/
AR6-9789291691647>
ITK [Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami] (2019). National Climate Change 
Strategy. Retrieved March 2023, from <https://www.itk.ca/
national-inuit-climate-change-strategy/>
ITK [Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami] (2021). Inuit Nunangat Food Security 
Strategy. Retrieved August 2023, from <https://www.itk.ca/
projects/inuit-nunangat-food-security-strategy/>
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.) 
(2008). From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2008. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 448 p. 
Retrieved March 2023, from <https://natural-resources.canada.
ca/sites/nrcan/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2007/pdf/full-
complet_e.pdf> 
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S. and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. 
(Eds.) (2016). Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 274 p. Retrieved March 
2023, from <https://natural-resources.canada.ca/sites/nrcan/
files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Coastal_Assessment_
FullReport.pdf>
Lempert, R., Arnold, J., Pulwarty, R., Gordon, K., Greig, K., 
Hawkins Hoffman, C., Sands, D. and Werrell, C. (2018). 
Reducing Risks Through Adaptation Actions in Impacts, Risks, 
and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate 
Assessment, Volume II. (Eds.) D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. 
Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock and B.C. 
Stewart. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., USA, 1309–1345. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_Ch28_Adaptation_
Full.pdf>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 61 
SENES Consultants Ltd. (2011). Kingston’s Ur ban Forest 
Management Plan: a plan for city-owned trees. Prepared for 
the City of Kingston by SENES Consultants Ltd. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://www.cityofkingston.ca/residents/
environment-sustainability/nature-forests-gardens/urban-forest-
management-plan>
Seneviratne, S.I., Zhang, X., Adnan, M., Badi, W., Dereczynski, 
C., Di Luca, A., Ghosh, S., Iskandar, I., Kossin, J., Lewis, S., Otto, 
F., Pinto, I., Satoh, M., Vicente-Serrano, S.M., Wehner, M. and 
B. Zhou, (2021): Weather and Climate Extreme Events in a 
Changing Climate in Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science 
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
Eds. Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, A. Pirani, S.L. Connors, C. 
Péan, S. Berger, N. Caud, Y. Chen, L. Goldfarb, M.I. Gomis, M. 
Huang, K. Leitzell, E. Lonnoy, J.B.R. Matthews, T.K. Maycock, T. 
Waterfield, O. Yelekçi, R. Yu and B. Zhou. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 1513–1766. Retrieved March 2023, from <https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781009157896.013>
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (2017). Final 
Report: Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-Related 
Financial Disclosures. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.fsb-
tcfd.org/publications/final-recommendations-report/>
Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (2019). 
2019 Status Report. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.fsb-
tcfd.org/publications/tcfd-2019-status-report/>
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (2015). Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada: Calls to Action. Retrieved 
August 2023, from <https://ehprnh2mwo3.exactdn.com/wp-
content/uploads/2021/01/Calls_to_Action_English2.pdf>
United Nations (2007). United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Resolution No. 61/295. 
Retrieved August 2023, from <https://www.un.org/
development/desa/indigenouspeoples/wp-content/uploads/
sites/19/2018/11/UNDRIP_E_web.pdf>
Vodden, K. and Cunsolo, A. (2021). Rural and Remote 
Communities, Chapter 3 in Canada in a Changing Climate: 
National Issues Report, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved August 2023, 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/national-issues/chapter/3-0/>
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S., (Eds.) (2014). Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 286 p. 
Retrieved March 2023, from <https://natural-resources.canada.
ca/sites/nrcan/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Full-
Report_Eng.pdf>
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 62 
Annex 1: Canada in a Changing Climate: 
Advancing our Knowledge for Action National 
Knowledge Assessment reports 
Berry, P. and Schnitter, R., editors (2022). Health of Canadians in a 
Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action; Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. <https://changingclimate.ca/health-in-a-
changing-climate/>
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S., editors (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. <https://
changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/>
Warren, F. and Lulham, N., editors (2021). Canada in a Changing Climate: 
National Issues Report; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 
<https://changingclimate.ca/national-issues/>
Warren, F., Lulham, N. and Lemmen, D.S., editors (2021). Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Regional Perspectives Report; Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. <https://changingclimate.ca/regional-
perspectives/>
Reed, G., Fox, S., Littlechild, D., McGregor, D., Lewis, D., Popp, J., Wray, K., 
Kassi, N., Ruben, R., Morales, S. and Lonsdale, S. (forthcoming). For Our 
Future: Indigenous Resilience Report. Ottawa, Ontario.
 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 63 
Annex 2: Headline Statements, Key Findings and 
Key Messages from reports produced in the 2016-
2023 National Knowledge Assessment process 
Box A1: Headline Statements from Canada’s Changing Climate 
Report (2019)
1.	
Canada’s climate has warmed and will warm further in the future, driven by human influence. Global 
emissions of carbon dioxide from human activity will largely determine how much warming Canada and the 
world will experience in the future, and this warming is effectively irreversible (CCCR-2.3; CCCR-3.3; 
CCCR-3.4; CCCR-4.2).
2.	
Both past and future warming in Canada is, on average, about double the magnitude of global warming. 
Northern Canada has warmed and will continue to warm at more than double the global rate (CCCR-2.2; 
CCCR-3.3; CCCR-4.2).
3.	
Oceans surrounding Canada have warmed, become more acidic, and less oxygenated, consistent with 
observed global ocean changes over the past century. Ocean warming and loss of oxygen will intensify 
with further emissions of all greenhouse gases, whereas ocean acidification will increase in response to 
additional carbon dioxide emissions. These changes threaten the health of marine ecosystems (CCCR-2.2; 
CCCR-7.2; CCCR-7.6).
4.	
The effects of widespread warming are evident in many parts of Canada and are projected to intensify in 
the future. In Canada, these effects include more extreme heat, less extreme cold, longer growing seasons, 
shorter snow and ice cover seasons, earlier spring peak streamflow, thinning glaciers, thawing permafrost 
and rising sea level. Because some further warming is unavoidable, these trends will continue (CCCR-4.2; 
CCCR-5.2; CCCR-5.3; CCCR-5.4; CCCR-5.5; CCCR-5.6; CCCR-6.2; CCCR-7.5).
5.	
Precipitation is projected to increase for most of Canada, on average, although summer rainfall may 
decrease in some areas. Precipitation has increased in many parts of Canada, and there has been a shift 
toward less snowfall and more rainfall. Annual and winter precipitation is projected to increase everywhere 
in Canada over the 21st century. However, reductions in summer rainfall are projected for parts of southern 
Canada under a high emission scenario toward the late century (CCCR-4.3).
6.	
The seasonal availability of freshwater is changing, with an increased risk of water supply shortages in 
summer. Warmer winters and earlier snowmelt will combine to produce higher winter streamflows, while smaller 
snowpacks and loss of glacier ice during this century will combine to produce lower summer streamflows. 
Warmer summers will increase evaporation of surface water and contribute to reduced summer water availability 
in the future despite more precipitation in some places (CCCR-4.2; CCCR-4.3; CCCR-5.2; CCCR-5.4; CCCR-6.2; 
CCCR-6.3; CCCR-6.4).
7.	
A warmer climate will intensify some weather extremes in the future. Extreme hot temperatures will 
become more frequent and more intense. This will increase the severity of heatwaves, and contribute to 
increased drought and wildfire risks. While inland flooding results from multiple factors, more intense 
rainfalls will increase urban flood risks. It is uncertain how warmer temperatures and smaller snowpacks will 
combine to affect the frequency and magnitude of snowmelt-related flooding (CCCR-4.2; CCCR-4.3; 
CCCR-4.4; CCCR-5.2; CCCR-6.2).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 64 
8.	
Canadian areas of the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans have experienced longer and more widespread sea-ice-
free conditions. Canadian Arctic marine areas, including the Beaufort Sea and Baffin Bay, are projected to 
have extensive ice-free periods during summer by mid-century. The last area in the entire Arctic with summer 
sea ice is projected to be north of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. This area will be an important refuge for 
ice-dependent species and an ongoing source of potentially hazardous ice, which will drift into Canadian 
waters (CCCR-5.3).
9.	
Coastal flooding is expected to increase in many areas of Canada due to local sea-level rise. Changes in 
local sea level are a combination of global sea-level rise and local land subsidence or uplift. Local sea level 
is projected to rise, and increase flooding, along most of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of Canada and the 
Beaufort coast in the Arctic where the land is subsiding or slowly uplifting. The loss of sea ice in Arctic and 
Atlantic Canada further increases the risk of damage to coastal infrastructure and ecosystems as a result of 
larger storm surges and waves (CCCR-7.5).
10.	 The rate and magnitude of climate change under high versus low emission scenarios project two very 
different futures for Canada. Scenarios with large and rapid warming illustrate the profound effects on the 
Canadian climate of continued growth in greenhouse gas emissions. Scenarios with limited warming will 
only occur if Canada and the rest of the world reduce carbon emissions to near zero early in the second 
half of the century and reduce emissions of other greenhouse gases substantially. Projections based on a 
range of emission scenarios are needed to inform impact assessment, climate risk management, and policy 
development (CCCR-all chapters).
Note: Each statement is cross-referenced to specific sections in chapters of the main report, where supporting evidence 
can be found. There is high confidence or more associated with each of these statements, which are consistent with, and 
draw on, the key messages in each of the chapters.

Box A2: Key Findings from Canada in a Changing Climate: Regional 
Perspectives Report (2020–2022)
1.	
Canada’s regions are experiencing climate change in different ways, with varied impacts on communities, 
ecosystems, infrastructure and natural resources. Provincial, territorial and local governments are 
responding with adaptation plans, policies and actions to address priority risks, but further work and 
resources are needed to better plan for climate change impacts at the regional level, as well as enhance 
regional capacity on adaptation (RPR-all chapters).
2.	
Climate change is increasing human health risks in all of Canada’s regions and deepening existing 
inequities. Climate change is having impacts on human health, including through growing risks related to 
extreme heat, extreme weather, vector-borne diseases, and changes to sea ice and permafrost in the north. 
While there are promising examples of adaptation planning and implementation at the regional level to 
address health risks, more work is needed to better understand and respond to climate change impacts on 
mental health and existing inequities (RPR-all chapters).
3.	
Adaptation is vital for Canada’s agriculture and natural resource sectors to remain competitive in a 
changing climate. Across Canada’s regions, the agriculture, energy, mining and forestry sectors face risks 
related to changes in temperature and rainfall patterns and the emergence of new pests. Producers in all 
climate-sensitive sectors need to adapt their decision making, practices and operations to changing climate 
conditions (RPR-1; RPR-3; RPR-4; RPR-5). 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 65 
4.	
Collaboration is key to managing water resources threatened by climate change. Rising temperatures and 
changing precipitation patterns are affecting the quality and availability of water resources in several regions 
across Canada. Approaches such as adaptive management, enhanced collaboration and transboundary 
coordination between different orders of government and stakeholders is needed to reduce negative impacts 
on agriculture, human health and industry (RPR-2; RPR-3; RPR-4). 
5.	
Indigenous Peoples are deeply affected by climate change, and draw on their knowledge and inherent 
resilience to address impacts. Climate change is altering landscapes and ecosystems across Canada’s 
regions, which sustain hunting, fishing and other land-based activities that are essential to the culture 
and identify of Inuit, First Nations and Métis Peoples. There are growing examples of Indigenous-led 
adaptation plans and actions, which integrate Indigenous Knowledge and draw on Indigenous leadership in 
environmental stewardship and governance of natural resources (RPR-1; RPR-3; RPR-5; RPR-6). 
6.	
Preserving ecosystems and implementing nature-based approaches can play an important role in climate 
change adaptation across Canada’s regions. Forests, wetlands and coastal vegetation help address 
climate change through the delivery of services, including reducing erosion and flood risks. Nature-based 
approaches are increasingly being used across Canada’s regions to address climate change (RPR-1; RPR-2; 
RPR-3). 
Box A3: Key Findings from Canada in a Changing Climate: National 
Issues Report (2021)
1.	
Communities of all sizes across the country are experiencing the impacts of climate change on their 
infrastructure, health and well-being, cultures and economies. Local action to reduce climate-related risks 
is increasing, although limited capacity is challenging the ability of many communities to act (NIR-2; NIR-3).
2.	
Changes in climate are threatening the vital services that Canada’s ecosystems provide and are negatively 
impacting our water resources. Effective coordination, cooperation and adaptive management, as well as 
conservation efforts, can help to reduce impacts. Nature-based approaches to adaptation that maintain or 
restore ecosystems, such as wetlands, are a cost-effective and sustainable means of moderating climate 
change impacts and building resilience (NIR-2; NIR-4; NIR-5).
3.	
While climate change will bring some potential benefits, overall, it will impose increasing economic costs 
on Canada. A changing climate affects all sectors of Canada’s economy through impacts on production, 
operations and/or disruption to supply chains. Disclosure of climate-related risks is emerging as a key driver 
of adaptation in the private sector (NIR-6; NIR-7; NIR-8). 
4.	
We must look beyond our borders when assessing the impacts of a changing climate for Canada. Climate 
change impacts occurring elsewhere in the world, as well as the steps that other countries take—or do not 
take—to adapt, can strongly affect food availability, trade and immigration. These impacts place additional 
stress on Canada’s communities, businesses and government services (NIR-9).
5.	
Large gaps remain in our preparedness for climate change, as demonstrated by recent impacts of extreme 
weather events, such as floods and wildfires. Accelerating progress on adaptation through rapid and 
deliberate plans and actions is vital for Canada’s economic and social well-being (NIR-all chapters).
6.	
Lessons on good practices are continuing to emerge and are helping to guide successful adaptation. 
These include empowering strong leadership, collaborating broadly and adopting flexible management 
approaches. Incorporating diverse perspectives and sources of knowledge, such as Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems, is also imperative for effective adaptation (NIR-all chapters).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 66 
Box A4: Headline Statements from the Health of Canadians in a 
Changing Climate Report (2022)
1.	
Climate change is already negatively impacting the health of Canadians. Climate change has been 
a driver of recent health effects related to rising temperatures and extreme heat, wildfires and the 
expansion of zoonotic diseases into Canada, such as Lyme disease (HCCC-3; HCCC-5; HCCC-6). 
2.	
Health risks will increase as warming continues, and the greater the warming, the greater the threats to 
health. Projected increases in the frequency and severity of intense precipitation events, urban flood risk, 
droughts, extreme heat, wildfires and storms will directly affect health by causing more illness, injuries and 
deaths, without greater adaptation efforts. The current burden of mental ill health in Canada is likely to rise 
as a result of climate change. Disruptions to food systems and water resources; worsening of air pollution; 
the emergence and re-emergence of climate-sensitive infectious diseases; and increasing demands on 
health systems will continue to threaten Canadians' health (HCCC-2; HCCC-3; HCCC-4; HCCC-5; HCCC-6; 
HCCC-7; HCCC-8). 
3.	
Some Canadians are affected more severely by climate change, as exposure and sensitivity to hazards 
and the ability to take protective measures varies across and within populations and communities. 
Growing climate change impacts worsen socioeconomic conditions harmful to health, such as poverty, and 
amplify health inequities. Combined with increasing rates of chronic diseases, social isolation and an aging 
population, climate change exacerbates impacts on health. People disproportionately affected by climate 
change include children and pregnant people; First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples; people with chronic 
illnesses; outdoor workers; low-income individuals; and people with disabilities (HCCC-2; HCCC-3; HCCC-9).
4.	
The effects of climate change on health systems in Canada—for example, damage to health facilities and 
disruptions to health services and operations—are already evident and will increase in the absence of 
strong adaptation measures. Health infrastructure, operations, health financing, health care, public health 
programming, supply chains and the health workforce can be impacted by extreme weather events and by 
chronic stresses from longer-term warming, reducing access to and quality of care to Canadians. Health 
facilities and services in rural and remote areas, and health systems that have not assessed and managed 
risks, face the greatest threats. Compounding climate change hazards that can arise—for example, when 
extreme heat occurs with drought and a wildfire—pose severe risks to individuals and the health systems 
they rely on (HCCC-10). 
5.	
Efforts to prepare for climate change are known to reduce risks and protect health. We must take action 
now. Many health authorities are working with decision makers in other sectors, such as emergency 
management, to take actions to protect people, communities and health systems. This is called adaptation. 
Adaptation measures must be scaled up rapidly and substantially if current and future health impacts are to 
be reduced (HCCC-10). 
6.	
The health impacts of climate change on First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples are far-reaching, with 
disproportionate impacts on their communities, including food and water security and safety, air quality, 
infrastructure, personal safety, mental health and wellness, livelihoods, culture and identity. Indigenous 
Peoples have been adapting to changing environments since time immemorial. Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems and practices are equal to Western scientific knowledge and contribute to Indigenous Peoples’ 
survival, adaptation, and resilience. Preparing for climate change requires addressing determinants of health 
and ongoing health inequities. It also requires that Indigenous Peoples’ rights and responsibilities over their 
lands, natural resources and ways of life are respected, protected and advanced through Indigenous-led 
climate change mitigation, adaptation, policy and research (HCCC-2). 
7.	
To successfully protect all Canadians from the health impacts of climate change, decision makers 
must pursue adaptation actions that are inclusive and equitable and consider the needs of racialized, 
marginalized and low-income populations. Existing health inequities could be made worse unless future 
adaptation and greenhouse gas mitigation efforts are designed to address them. Redressing inequities and 
strengthening determinants of good health, such as improving access to health care and housing quality, 
can help reduce the impacts of climate change on individual health (HCCC-2; HCCC-9).
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 67 
8.	
Increased efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are required to help protect the health of 
Canadians. The continued emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere will impose limits on our 
ability to adapt, and lead to more severe impacts on health. The health sector can show leadership in 
reducing its carbon footprint and improving environmental sustainability while building resilience to future 
climate change impacts (HCCC-10). 
9.	
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions can provide very large and immediate health co-benefits to 
Canadians. The economic value of the health co-benefits can help to offset the implementation costs of 
measures. Health co-benefits of taking action on air pollution are estimated to include thousands of avoided 
premature deaths annually in Canada by the middle of the century (HCCC-5; HCCC-10).
Box A5: Key Messages from the For Our Future: Indigenous Resilience 
Report (forthcoming)
1.	
Indigenous Peoples have unique strengths for responding to environmental and climate changes. 
Indigenous Peoples have responded to impacts of environmental and climate change before, are actively 
responding today, and will continue to respond into the future. Our communities have unique strengths to 
deal with the climate crisis, despite facing disproportionate climate change impacts and challenges related 
to the ongoing legacy of colonialization. 
2.	
Climate change is one of many crises that Indigenous Peoples face. Climate change creates serious 
disruption not just to the environment and economy, but to culture, language, knowledge transfer, ceremony, 
identity, and health and well-being. These impacts are interrelated and intersect with multiple other crises 
that First Nations, Inuit and Métis face.
3.	
Indigenous Knowledge and lived experiences are important components of climate action. To best 
respond to the impacts of climate change, Indigenous observations, knowledge systems, and diverse lived 
experiences—with special attention to gender-diverse people, women and youth—must be included in all 
levels of climate change research, approaches, and decision making. First Nations, Inuit and Métis have 
always had unique and diverse indicators and methods for observing, monitoring and assessing change.
4.	
The food, water and energy nexus is central to First Nation, Inuit and Métis climate leadership. Food 
sovereignty is at the heart of Indigenous cultures. The nexus of food, water and energy sovereignty is a 
key priority for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis. In each context, reasserting authority and decision-making is 
enabling a redistribution of power towards First Nations, Inuit and Métis. The revitalization of meaningful 
Indigenous economies based on relationships with the Land, Water, and Ice are central to this redistribution 
and to Indigenous-led climate action.
5.	
Self-determination is critical to Indigenous-led climate action. Self-determination and governance are key 
rights and aspirations for First Nations, Inuit and Métis Peoples in the face of climate change. We must 
recognize and address how the impacts of climate change affect our ability to determine our own futures, 
govern ourselves and how we adapt our governance structures to the impacts of climate change.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 68 
Annex 3: Examples of knowledge gaps identified 
in the most recent Canada in a Changing 
Climate National Knowledge Assessment reports 
ADDRESSING KNOWLEDGE GAPS REQUIRES WORK AT THE INTERSECTION OF ADAPTATION AND:
Agriculture
•	
Better understanding of how agriculture could expand beyond the Prairie eco-zone and into 
treed zones.
•	
Research on the vulnerability of the Chignecto Isthmus and its role in food security for 
Atlantic provinces.
Climate change communication
•	
Better tools and approaches for communicating with the public about climate change, 
particularly on changes that are less visible and/or have slower onset.
•	
Better understanding of the motives and perspectives that inspire people to learn about climate 
change, how quickly and effectively such learning is advancing, and the potential uses of 
technology for learning and knowledge-sharing in rural and remote communities.
•	
Further research to overcome communication barriers and develop climate science 
communication pathways.
Community-level adaptation
•	
Comprehensive assessments to better understand how climate change affects travel safety for 
rural and remote communities, particularly in northern Canada. 
•	
Research on proactive adaptation options at the community level, including relocation. 
Emergency management
•	
Lessons from recent examples of emergency management in response to extreme weather events. 
•	
Better understanding of the convergences and disparities between emergency management, 
disaster risk reduction and adaptation. 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 69 
ADDRESSING KNOWLEDGE GAPS REQUIRES WORK AT THE INTERSECTION OF ADAPTATION AND:
Climate change mitigation 
•	
Better understanding of the links and synergies between climate change mitigation and 
adaptation efforts. 
Data, projections and flood mapping
•	
Further information on how communities and practitioners can best access and use climate data to 
implement adaptation options. 
•	
More comprehensive collection and analysis of local data that affect the ability to forecast climate 
change variability.
•	
Improved projections of wind and clouds, and of changes in forest fire behaviour. 
•	
More research on how the frequency and magnitude of storms will affect coastal regions. 
•	
Improved data to better project and plan for future cascading changes, feedbacks and new 
types of disturbance.
•	
Updated flood risk mapping in many parts of Canada, and improved strategies for reducing flood risk. 
•	
Best practices on incorporating model projections of future climate scenarios into adaptation planning.
Economics of adaptation
•	
Research and guidance to better quantify direct (e.g., damage from a flooding event) and 
indirect costs (e.g., disruption in service delivery) of climate change impacts.
•	
Research to better understand the economic consequences of extreme events and catastrophes. 
•	
Further research to resolve uncertainty around the aggregate results of national-level studies of 
net economic consequences.
•	
Research on economic costs in specific regions (e.g., the Prairie provinces, the territories, the 
interior of British Columbia, Ontario) and among First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. 
Social resilience and equity
•	
Further research on how climate change disproportionally affects vulnerable and marginalized 
groups and their adaptive capacity.
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 70 
ADDRESSING KNOWLEDGE GAPS REQUIRES WORK AT THE INTERSECTION OF ADAPTATION AND:
Ecosystems and nature-based approaches 
•	
Better valuation and use of nature-based approaches to meet needs normally provided by “hard 
or engineered” infrastructure. 
•	
Better understanding of the threats to ecosystems and their functioning from pests, pathogens, 
weeds and invasive species. 
Human health
•	
Broader understanding of compounding mental health concerns (including ecological grief) 
associated with climate change.
•	
Better understanding of current and projected climate-related impacts, and vulnerabilities 
facing individuals and health systems (e.g., health policies, programs, services, infrastructure, 
and supply chains critical for health), including to rural, remote, and Northern health systems.
•	
Better understanding of the long-term impacts of changing temperature and precipitation 
regimes on food and water safety and security, particularly in Indigenous communities.
•	
Identification of equitable and effective adaptation measures for reducing health risks from 
current climate variability and projected climate change.
Indigenous-led adaptation
•	
Better understanding of how to decolonize climate change research, assessments and actions 
to advance Indigenous-led climate governance and policy.
•	
Additional research on the intersections between climate change and Indigenous law and language.
•	
Stronger consideration of gender, especially the knowledge, perspectives and experiences of 
Indigenous women, non-binary and 2SLGBTQQIA+. 
•	
Support and invest in First Nations, Inuit and Métis to develop and realize Indigenous-led 
climate actions. This includes research, monitoring and development, new technologies and 
approaches, and entrepreneurship.
International considerations
•	
Research to explore the implications of the opening of the Northwest Passage, and the longer 
ice-free season in northern parts of Canada (e.g., impacts from increased shipping, etc.). 
•	
Research on how climate change affects production and international trade.
•	
Research to better understand the implications for Canada of climate change-related 
displacement and migration. 
SYNTHESIS REPORT
 71 
ADDRESSING KNOWLEDGE GAPS REQUIRES WORK AT THE INTERSECTION OF ADAPTATION AND:
Monitoring, evaluating and assessing adaptation progress
•	
Enhanced place-based monitoring of environmental, health and social impacts related to 
climate change and adaptation. 
•	
Better inventories of climate change impacts, risks and adaptation actions, including examples 
of sector- or region-appropriate adaptation actions. 
•	
Better monitoring of adaptation actions, and development of suitable indicators and 
methodologies for measuring progress. 
Natural resource extraction
•	
Better understanding of potential new opportunities for extraction and export of previously 
inaccessible mineral, oil, and gas resources. 
•	
Better understanding of the costs and benefits of increased natural resource extraction 
associated with climate change, particularly its implications for northern societies and cultures. 
•	
Further research on climate change impacts in rural resource sectors, such as mining, oil and 
gas, and tourism in Canada.
Water resources
•	
Better understanding of the impacts of climate change on salinity transition zones, which can 
affect the quality and availability of drinking water. 
•	
Better understanding of the impacts of extremes in water levels that can accommodate both 
high water and low water scenarios over time. 
•	
 Increased knowledge of how climate change is affecting groundwater drinking supplies. 
