REPORT
Canada in a 
Changing
Climate
National Issues
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 2 
Canada in a Changing Climate: 
National Issues Report 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
FOREWORD. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 6
REPORT OVERVIEW . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
CHAPTER 1. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 14
CHAPTER 2. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Cities and Towns. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 26
CHAPTER 3. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Rural and Remote Communities. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 103
CHAPTER 4. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Water Resources. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 185
CHAPTER 5. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Ecosystem Services . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 264
CHAPTER 6. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 345
CHAPTER 7. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Sector Impacts and Adaptation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 488
CHAPTER 8. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 571
CHAPTER 9. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . International Dimensions . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 623
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 3 
Edited by 
Fiona J. Warren
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division
Natural Resources Canada
Nicole Lulham
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division
Natural Resources Canada
Recommended Citation: 
Warren, F. and Lulham, N., editors (2021). Canada in a Changing Climate: 
National Issues Report; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON.
The digital interactive version of the report is available at 
www.ChangingClimate.ca/National-Issues. The report is also 
available at: adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca
Aussi disponible en français sous le title : Le Canada dans un climat en 
changement : Rapport sur les enjeux nationaux
For more information regarding reproduction rights, contact Natural 
Resources Canada at: 
nrcan.copyrightdroitdauteur.rncan@canada.ca
For more information about the national assessment, contact the 
Assessment Secretariat at: nrcan.adaptation.rncan@canada.ca
Cat. No.: M174-24/2021E-PDF
ISBN: 978-0-660-38842-7
Photos: © Shutterstock and Unsplash
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by Natural 
Resources Canada, 2021
This report is part of Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action, the National Knowledge Assessment of how and 
why Canada’s climate is changing; the impacts of these changes on our 
communities, environment, and economy; and how we are adapting. 
To find out more, please visit: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/
impacts-adaptation/19918
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 4 
Acknowledgements
The Assessment Secretariat gratefully acknowledges the following people for taking the time to provide critical, expert reviews of one 
of more chapters of the report:
Bhim Adhikari
Bruce Currie Alder
Vidya Anderson
Adeniyi Asiyanbi
Stephanie Austin
Carol Aziz
Dan Babaluk
Céline Bak
Talaat Bakri
Phil Beard
Kevin Behan
Maija Bertule
Dale Beugin
Barrie Bonsal
Mark Boysen
Sara Brown
Chris Buse
Elizabeth Bush
Ian Campbell
Nazzareno Capano
Devin Causley
Nicole Cerpnjak
Juan-Carlos Ciscar
Stewart Cohen
Dylan Clark
Tugce Conger
Teresa Cline
Ellen Curtis
Danielle Dagenais
Simon Daigle
Simon Dalby
Julie Desjardins
James Davies
Marlene Doyle
Michele Leone
Bohan Li
Rob de Loë
Paddy Enright
Guy Felio
Kerri Finlay
Jeffrey Frank
Randy Gillespie
Elisabeth Gilmore
Paul Griss
Rohan Hamden
Sharon Hanley-Smith
Deb Harford
Monica Harvey
Daniel Henstra
Micah Hewer
Jeffrey Hicke
Lisa Hiwasaki
Dayne-Michael Hornick
Sara Janis
Amy Kim
Dan Kraus
Marie-Eve Landry
Chris Lemieux
Matt MacDonald
Dennis Mahony
Patricia Manuel
Shawn Marshall
Steve McCollough
Shannon Miedema
Kathleen Miller
Tamsin Mills
Simon Mitchell
Brian Montgomery
Linda Mortsch
Natalia Moudrak
Chad Nelson
Adolf Ng
Nancy Olewiler
Sara Jane O'Neill
Glen Parker
Hope Parnham
Jo-Ellen Parry
David Peterson
Francis Pigeon
Susan Preston
Jessica Puddister
Mark Radley
Graeme Reed
Gerald Renaud
Raul Salas Reyes
Dany Robidoux
Chris Rol
Dimple Roy
Michelle Rutty
Jo-Anne Rzadki
Marjorie Shepherd
Aviva Shiller
Dana Simon
Andrew Stumpf
Tim Taylor
Johanna Wandel
Emma Watson
Erica Weterings
Bruce Wilson
Ram Yerubandi
Alice Yu
Christine Zimmer
Carly Ziter
Laura Zizzo
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 5 
Gord Beal, Chartered Professional 
Accountants Canada
Robert Capozi, New Brunswick Climate 
Change Secretariat
Stewart Cohen, Independent Climate 
Scientist, Environment and Climate 
Change Canada (retired)
Ellen Curtis, Physical and Health 
Education Canada
Susan Evans, Ontario Ministry of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs
Elaine Fox, Government of Manitoba
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé 
publique du Québec
Sara Holzman, Government of Nunavut
Ewa Jackson, ICLEI Canada
Caroline Larrivée, Ouranos
David Lapp, Engineers Canada (retired)
Fred Lipschultz, U.S. Global Change 
Research Program
Patricia Manuel, Dalhousie University
Linda Mortsch, University of Waterloo
Graeme Reed, Assembly of First Nations
Marjorie Shepherd, Environment and 
Climate Change Canada
Jim Vanderwal, Fraser Basin Council
Thomas White, Natural Resources 
Canada
Meredith Caspell
Kathleen Godfrey
Gwynneth Magnan
Sana Malik
Brenda Reid
Brittany Poisson
Julia Szwarc
Diane Dupuis 
Joanne Egan
Nicole Lulham
Fiona Warren
We would also like to acknowledge the valuable guidance and input of the National Assessment Advisory Committee:
We would also like to recognize the following students and support staff for their helpful contributions:
Thank you to all, from the Assessment Secretariat:
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Foreword
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 7 
Foreword 
Three years ago, when we started working on Canada’s current National Knowledge Assessment process, 
Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action, we could never have imagined how 
different the world would be at the time of release of this report. Since early 2020, we have lived through rapid 
and unprecedented change as the global population has struggled to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. All 
aspects of our lives have been affected—health and well-being, social connections, jobs, economic stability 
and more.
Although dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic has dominated the world’s attention, the issue of climate 
change remains firmly embedded in many global, national and sub-national dialogues. Indeed, while we 
are still trying to understand the pandemic shocks that are rippling through our social, economic and 
environmental systems, some encouraging insights are emerging that are relevant to responding to climate 
change. The response to COVID-19 thus far has shown that once individuals, businesses and governments 
understand the risks, they are willing to make major changes to protect lives and livelihoods, even in the face 
of uncertainty. The experience of the past year has also demonstrated the advantages that can be realized 
through cooperation, the progress that can be achieved through aligned efforts, and the critical role that the 
private sector and civil society play in responding to global challenges.
There is abundant research indicating that current efforts to adapt are insufficient in the face of rapidly 
accumulating social and economic losses from current and future climate change impacts. The research 
also demonstrates that the window for taking action to reduce increasingly severe impacts is rapidly closing. 
Urgent action, supported by strong investments, is needed to both reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to 
increase resilience to climate change through adaptation. Our decisions and actions today will determine our 
ability to survive and thrive under a changing climate. Informed decisions, drawing from the best science and 
knowledge available at the time, are imperative.
Within this context, we are pleased to release the National Issues Report. This report, led by Natural 
Resources Canada, is part of Canada’s National Knowledge Assessment process, Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. The report provides a national perspective on how climate 
change is impacting our communities, environment and economy, and how we are adapting to reduce risks. It 
includes chapters on topics that are of national importance or that benefit from a pan-Canadian perspective, 
along with case stories featuring examples of adaptation in practice.
Within the larger National Knowledge Assessment process, the National Issues Report follows the release 
of Canada’s Changing Climate Report in 2019 and the Prairie Provinces chapter of the Regional Perspectives 
Report in December 2020. Other regional chapters—including Northern Canada, British Columbia, Ontario, 
Quebec and Atlantic Provinces—will also be released over the coming year.
The overarching goal of the National Knowledge Assessment process is to assess, synthesize and share the 
latest knowledge on climate change impacts and adaptation in Canada. We hope that this report, as well as 
those that follow, will inspire you to take timely and meaningful actions for adapting to climate change and 
equip you with the information you need to do so.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 8 
The National Knowledge Assessment Advisory Committee  
Fiona Warren (Chair), Natural Resources Canada
Gord Beal, Chartered Professional Accountants Canada
Robert Capozi, New Brunswick Climate Change Secretariat
Stewart Cohen, Independent Climate Scientist Scientist, Environment and Climate Change Canada (retired)
Ellen Curtis, Physical and Health Education Canada
Susan Evans, Ontario Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs
Elaine Fox, Government of Manitoba
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé publique du Québec
Sara Holzman, Government of Nunavut
Ewa Jackson, ICLEI Canada
Caroline Larrivée, Ouranos
David Lapp, Engineers Canada (retired)
Fred Lipschultz, U.S. Global Change Research Program
Patricia Manuel, Dalhousie University
Linda Mortsch, University of Waterloo
Graeme Reed, Assembly of First Nations
Marjorie Shepherd, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Jim Vanderwal, Fraser Basin Council
Thomas White, Natural Resources Canada
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Report 
Overview
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 10 
Introduction 
Canada’s changing climate is causing deep and lasting impacts on our society, economy and environment. 
Higher temperatures, shifting rainfall patterns, extreme weather events and rising sea levels are just some of 
the changes already affecting many aspects of our lives. Changes in climate will persist and, in many cases, 
will intensify over the coming decades. Understanding these impacts is necessary to reduce risks, build 
resilience and support sound decision-making. 
In 2017, the Government of Canada launched the National Knowledge Assessment process, Canada in a 
Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. This multi-year, collaborative initiative is delivering a 
series of authoritative reports (see Figure O.1) that focus on how and why Canada’s climate is changing, the 
impacts of these changes and how we are adapting. 
Figure O.1: An overview of the products being produced under Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action. Natural Resources Canada is leading the process and depends on the collaboration of a 
broad partnership of subject-matter experts and assessment users, including from all orders of government, 
Indigenous organizations, universities, professional and non-governmental groups, and the private sector. To 
learn more about the assessment process, visit adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 11 
The first report in the series, Canada’s Changing Climate Report (CCCR), was released in 2019. It assessed 
Canada’s changing climate, covering observed and projected changes in temperature, precipitation, snow, ice, 
permafrost and freshwater availability, including changes in Canada’s three oceans (see Box O.1).
Box O.1: Headline Statements from Canada’s Changing Climate Report 
Canada’s Changing Climate Report included 10 headline statements that tell a concise story about the 
changing climate in Canada. The statements are summarized below: 
1.	 Canada’s climate has warmed and will warm further in the future, driven by human influence. 
2.	 Both past and future warming in Canada is, on average, about double the magnitude of global 
warming. 
3.	 Oceans surrounding Canada have warmed, and have become more acidic and less oxygenated, 
which is consistent with observed global ocean changes over the past century. 
4.	 The effects of widespread warming are evident in many parts of Canada and are projected to 
intensify in the future. 
5.	 Precipitation is projected to increase for most of Canada, on average, although summer rainfall 
may decrease in some areas. 
6.	 The seasonal availability of freshwater is changing, with an increased risk of water supply 
shortages in summer. 
7.	 A warmer climate will intensify some weather extremes in the future. 
8.	 Canadian areas of the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans have experienced longer and more widespread 
sea-ice-free conditions. 
9.	 Coastal flooding is expected to increase in many areas of Canada due to local sea level rise. 
10.	The rate and magnitude of climate change under high versus low emission scenarios project two 
very different futures for Canada. 
Note: The full Headline Statements can be found at changingclimate.ca, and each statement is cross-
referenced to specific sections in chapters of the main report, where supporting evidence can be found. There 
is high confidence or more associated with each of these statements, which are consistent with, and draw on, 
the Key Messages in the chapters.
The National Issues Report builds on the CCCR, providing answers to questions such as: 
•	
What do these changes in climate mean for those living in Canada?
•	
How can we adapt to increase resilience, reduce risks and costs, and take advantage of potential 
opportunities?
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 12 
•	
Where have we made progress on addressing climate change impacts and adaptation? 
•	
Where do gaps in knowledge and action remain?
 
The National Issues Report focuses on climate change impacts and adaptation issues that are of national 
importance or that are best understood through an integrated, pan-Canadian perspective. It is structured 
around the main elements of sustainability—society, the environment and the economy—and includes a 
chapter on international dimensions. 
Key findings of the National Issues Report 
1.	 Communities of all sizes across the country are experiencing the impacts of climate change 
on their infrastructure, health and well-being, cultures and economies. Local action to reduce 
climate-related risks is increasing, although limited capacity is challenging the ability of many 
communities to act (see Cities and Towns chapter; Rural and Remote Communities chapter).
2.	 Changes in climate are threatening the vital services that Canada’s ecosystems provide and 
are negatively impacting our water resources. Effective coordination, cooperation and adaptive 
management, as well as conservation efforts, can help to reduce impacts. Nature-based 
approaches to adaptation that maintain or restore ecosystems, such as wetlands, are a cost-
effective and sustainable means of moderating climate change impacts and building resilience 
(see Ecosystem Services chapter; Water Resources chapter; Cities and Towns chapter).
3.	 While climate change will bring some potential benefits, overall it will impose increasing 
economic costs on Canada. A changing climate affects all sectors of Canada’s economy through 
impacts on production, operations and/or disruption to supply chains. Disclosure of climate-
related risks is emerging as a key driver of adaptation in the private sector (see Sector Impacts 
and Adaptation chapter; Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter; 
Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter).
4.	 We must look beyond our borders when assessing the impacts of a changing climate for 
Canada. Climate change impacts occurring elsewhere in the world, as well as the steps that 
other countries take—or do not take—to adapt, can strongly affect food availability, trade and 
immigration. These impacts place additional stress on Canada’s communities, businesses and 
government services (see International Dimensions chapter). 
5.	 Large gaps remain in our preparedness for climate change, as demonstrated by recent impacts 
of extreme weather events, such as floods and wildfires. Accelerating progress on adaptation 
through rapid and deliberate plans and actions is vital for Canada’s economic and social well-
being (all chapters). 
6.	 Lessons on good practices are continuing to emerge and are helping to guide successful 
adaptation. These include empowering strong leadership, collaborating broadly and adopting 
flexible management approaches. Incorporating diverse perspectives and sources of knowledge, 
such as Indigenous Knowledge Systems, is also imperative for effective adaptation (all chapters).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 13 
Moving forward 
As the world responds to the COVID-19 pandemic, new insights are emerging that are relevant to climate 
change adaptation. Considerable optimism can be derived from the global response. It has shown that 
once individuals, businesses and governments understand the risks associated with COVID-19, they are 
willing to make major changes to protect lives and livelihoods, even when faced with uncertainty. It has 
also demonstrated the importance of action at every level, the advantages that can be achieved through 
cooperation across multiple levels of government, and the critical role of both the private sector and civil 
society. It is important to note that the content of the chapters in this report was finalized prior to the start 
of the pandemic. The chapters therefore do not address the impacts of the pandemic or any potential 
relationships between climate change and COVID-19.
There is abundant research indicating that current efforts to adapt are insufficient in the face of rapidly 
accumulating social and economic losses from current and future climate change impacts. The research 
also demonstrates that the window for taking action to reduce increasingly severe impacts is rapidly closing 
(Rogelj et al., 2019; IPCC, 2018). Urgent action, supported by strong investments, is needed to both reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and to increase resilience to climate change through adaptation. Decisions 
taken today will determine the degree of future changes and our resilience to climate risks. Evidence-based 
decisions are imperative for minimizing costs, protecting lives and livelihoods, and ensuring a sustainable 
future for Canadians.
CHAPTER 1
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Introduction
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 15 
Lead authors 
Fiona Warren, Natural Resources Canada
Nicole Lulham, Natural Resources Canada
Contributing authors
Box 1.1:
Stewart Cohen, Independent Climate Scientist, Environment and Climate 
Change Canada (retired)
Laura Sarmiento
Recommended citation 
Warren, F.J. and Lulham, N. (2021). Introduction; Chapter 1 in Canada in 
a Changing Climate: National Issues Report, (eds.) F.J. Warren and N. 
Lulham. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 16 
1.1 Introduction 
In 2014, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) stated that “warming of the climate system is 
unequivocal” (IPCC, 2014). Since then, evidence of change has continued to build, with observed increases in 
temperature (over land and oceans), rising sea levels, loss of snow and ice, and shifting precipitation patterns 
at the global scale (e.g., IPCC, 2018; 2019; USGCRP, 2018). Many of the changes brought about by increases 
in temperature are unprecedented, and most are projected to persist and intensify over the current century 
(Bush et al., 2019; IPCC, 2014). A clearer picture of the impacts is also emerging, with recognition that climate 
change has the potential to affect almost every aspect of our lives—our health and well-being, economies, 
environment, and even our identities and sense of self. It is also increasingly clear that the impacts are not 
evenly distributed, and that certain regions, populations and groups are being disproportionately affected. 
We are also seeing these trends in Canada. Observed warming in Canada is, on average, approximately 
double the magnitude of global warming (Bush and Lemmen, 2019), with northern parts of the country 
experiencing the greatest rates of change (see Figure 1.1). We are experiencing more extreme heat, less 
extreme cold, longer growing seasons, shorter snow and ice cover seasons, earlier spring peak streamflow, 
thinning glaciers, thawing permafrost and rising sea levels (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). Losses from extreme 
events, such as floods and wildfires, are also increasing. In recent Canadian surveys, 87% of respondents 
indicated that they are already seeing the effects of climate change in their community (Natural Resources 
Canada, 2019), and 93% indicated that they believe climate change is either having an impact on their health 
now or will in the future (Environics Research Group, 2017). 
Figure 1.1: Map showing observed changes in annual temperature (°C) across Canada between 1948 and 2016. 
Source: Zhang et al., 2019.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 17 
These observed trends and documented impacts have firmly established the scientific basis for climate 
change. Debates over whether climate change is real have largely been replaced by discussions on how to 
respond. The need to plan for and to address climate change impacts grows daily. Decisions taken now to 
address climate change impacts will have important ongoing implications for Canada’s society, economy and 
environment. However, while there is clearly an urgent need to take action on climate change (IPCC, 2018), 
the path forward can be complicated. Climate change is a global issue with widespread, pervasive, interacting 
and often complex impacts occurring at all scales. At a basic level, there are two critically important response 
pathways—mitigation (greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction) and adaptation—which are related and 
co-dependent (see Box 1.1). 
Box 1.1: Linkages between climate change adaptation and mitigation
There are important linkages between actions that reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (climate change 
mitigation) and actions that build resilience to deal with climate change impacts (adaptation). As Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report concluded, “the rate and magnitude of climate change under high versus low 
emission scenarios project two very different futures for Canada” (see Figure 1.2).The ultimate success of 
adaptation in Canada will be influenced by which GHG emissions pathway the world ultimately follows. 
Figure 1.2: The differences between projections for climate variables under high and low emissions scenarios 
reveal two different potential futures for Canada. The high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) is associated with an 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 18 
increase in global average temperature of about 3.7 °C by the late century, relative to the 1986–2005 reference 
period, whereas the low emissions scenario (RCP2.6) is associated with a global average temperature of about 
1.0 °C for that same time period. Source: Adapted from Government of Canada, 2019. 
As warming increases, climate-related risks and impacts also increase (IPCC, 2018). Higher rates and 
amounts of warming make it more difficult for adaptation actions to offer sufficient protection against these 
impacts. This means that significant impacts would remain even after adaptation measures are implemented, 
and that the chances of reaching limits to adaptation are more likely (Klein et al., 2014). Adaptation limits 
are reached when there are no longer any practical or feasible adaptation options available, meaning that 
intolerable risks must be accepted, adaptation objectives must be abandoned and/or transformation and last-
resort measures, such as relocation or retreat, must take place (Dow et al., 2013). 
Interactions between adaptation and mitigation decisions are illustrated in Figure 1.3. Co-benefits and 
synergies can be obtained for actions that have both adaptation and mitigation objectives (top right panel)—
these are referred to as sustainable “win-win” approaches. For example, the use of nature-based approaches 
to adaptation in cities creates urban environments that are more resilient to heat waves (reducing associated 
health impacts) and to intense rainfall (reducing associated flooding), while also sequestering carbon and 
reducing energy demand (see Cities and Towns chapter). The top-left and bottom-right panels identify risk 
trade-offs that can emerge from particular actions that are designed to meet only one objective (adaptation 
or mitigation), but that can adversely affect the other objective. For instance, certain adaptation decisions 
can result in an increase in GHG emissions (e.g., the increased use of air conditioners during heat events); 
similarly, certain mitigation choices increase local vulnerability or risk (e.g., the increased exposure of the 
electricity grid to water supply shortages, which could result from expanded use of hydro-electricity). Priority 
should be given to minimizing or avoiding these negative consequences when planning actions to respond to 
climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 19 
Figure 1.3: Examples of trade-offs and co-benefits of actions where there are linkages between climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. Source: Adapted from Jones et al., 2014.  
This report focuses on climate change adaptation—actions that reduce the negative impacts of climate 
change or that take advantage of potential new opportunities. Adaptation builds resilience and reduces risk 
related to current and future climate change impacts. It involves adjusting plans, policies and actions, and 
can be reactive (i.e., occurring in response to climate change impacts) or anticipatory (i.e., occurring before 
impacts of climate change are observed). As a concept, adaptation is straightforward; in practice, however, it 
can range from being simple to incredibly complex. Our understanding of the ways in which climate change 
affects vulnerable groups and segments of the population is continuing to develop, highlighting the important 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 20 
socioeconomic and equity dimensions of adaptation decisions. Adaptation also offers the opportunity to 
generate significant co-benefits, such that investments to address climate change impacts in one particular 
sector or area can result in benefits elsewhere. Similarly, unintended consequences can result if planning and 
decisions do not adequately consider the broad system and context in which the decisions are being made. 
To help address complexities and promote action on climate change adaptation, decision makers need 
access to reliable information. Knowledge assessments on climate change impacts and adaptation address 
this need by providing decision makers with the foundation necessary for making evidence-based decisions. 
Such assessments synthesize existing knowledge on the key issues by following a rigorous process that 
ensures the end products are credible, relevant and useful to decision makers. While being policy-relevant 
and structured to inform decisions, assessments are not policy-prescriptive, nor do they provide specific 
instructions or recommendations. Assessments can be carried out at different scales—from the international 
assessments of the IPCC to national, regional and local-scale initiatives. Knowledge assessments differ 
from risk assessments, which apply analytical methods to estimate the probability and consequence of risks 
associated with current and future climate change impacts. However, risk assessments can both inform and 
be informed by knowledge assessments. Recent examples of risk assessments in Canada include those at 
the national scale (e.g., CCA, 2019) and regional scale (e.g., Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
Strategy, 2019). 
1.2 Canada’s National Knowledge Assessment 
process
Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action is Canada’s national-scale knowledge 
assessment process. Launched in 2017, it builds upon past assessments of climate change impacts 
and adaptation led by the Government of Canada, which examined key issues for Canada from regional 
perspectives (Lemmen et al., 2016; Lemmen et al., 2008) and sectoral perspectives (Palko and Lemmen, 2017; 
Warren and Lemmen, 2014; Seguin, 2008). The current National Knowledge Assessment process is producing 
a series of reports that assess how and why Canada’s climate is changing; the impacts of these changes on 
our communities, environment and economy; and how we are adapting (see Box 1.2). The resulting reports 
are resources for Canadians, raising awareness of the issues facing our country and providing information 
to support evidence-based decisions and actions for addressing climate change and adapting to its impacts. 
The National Issues Report is the second full report to be released in the current assessment series, following 
the release of Canada’s Changing Climate Report in 2019.  
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 21 
Box 1.2: Overview of the products included in the 2016–2021 National 
Knowledge Assessment process
A total of five assessment reports will be released within the current National Knowledge Assessment 
process (2016‒2022), over the course of three phases (see Figure 1.4). The first report in the series, Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report (2019), provides the climate science foundation, assessing how and why Canada’s 
climate has changed and what changes are projected for the future. The focus of the subsequent reports is 
on how these changes are affecting the country now and in the future; our vulnerability to climate change 
impacts; and the role of adaptation in reducing risks and building resilience. To reach broader audiences, the 
process is supported by an interactive website (changingclimate.ca), and a series of targeted supplementary 
products are being developed. Enhanced engagement has been a priority throughout the process. Starting 
with the scoping meeting in 2016, opportunities were made available for the public and experts to provide 
input on the current assessment, including through workshops, conference sessions, surveys and online. 
See the FAQs for additional information about the current National Knowledge Assessment process.
Figure 1.4: Reports developed under the current National Knowledge Assessment process (2016‒2022), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 22 
1.3 Scope and structure of the National Issues Report
The National Issues Report provides a nation-wide perspective on how climate change is impacting our 
communities, environment and economy, and how we are adapting to reduce risks. The report focuses on 
themes of national importance that benefit from an integrated, pan-Canadian perspective. It is intended to 
support evidence-based decisions, and to help decision makers learn from examples of adaptation in practice 
and to take action on adaptation. In addition to the Introduction, the report includes the following eight 
chapters:
•	
Cities and Towns;
•	
Rural and Remote Communities;
•	
Water Resources;
•	
Ecosystem Services;
•	
Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation;
•	
Sector Impacts and Adaptation;
•	
Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance; and
•	
International Dimensions.
Together, these chapters present a clear picture of how climate change is currently affecting and will affect 
Canada’s society, environment and economy. The report reinforces the conclusions of past assessments, 
which found that impacts of climate change are being felt by all sectors across the country, and that impacts 
are often cumulative, cross-sectoral, and increasing in frequency and magnitude. Each chapter discusses 
key vulnerabilities, risks and challenges, new and innovative approaches to adaptation, and also identifies 
knowledge gaps and emerging issues to help establish a baseline and inform future work. Case stories are 
featured throughout the report to showcase examples of adaptation from across the country, and to allow 
diverse voices to be heard. 
The content of each chapter is structured around key messages—high-level statements that provide an 
overview of the key issues facing the region or sector, and that reflect the state of knowledge on climate 
change impacts and adaptation. This approach allowed the chapters to go into greater depth on issues of 
priority to stakeholders and partners, as identified through engagement and outreach activities, rather than 
assessing all relevant issues pertaining to a given topic or region. Each chapter contains five to eight key 
messages, each of which is supported by a plain language summary. 
The report draws from existing knowledge on climate change impacts and adaptation from a wide range of 
sources, including peer-reviewed literature, broader literature, practitioner perspectives, as well as Indigenous 
Knowledge and local knowledge. It does not include original research. Enhanced inclusion of Indigenous 
Knowledge was a priority for the report, and most chapters include a key message on Indigenous Knowledge 
and/or case stories that focus on Indigenous themes related to climate change impacts and adaptation. Due 
to production timelines, it was necessary to include cut-off dates for incorporating new knowledge sources; 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 23 
as such, the chapters may not reference the newest available literature or knowledge on a given topic. The 
assessment content was also finalized before the learnings from the COVID-19 pandemic emerged and 
therefore does not address the impacts of the pandemic, or any potential relationships between climate 
change and COVID-19.
 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 24 
1.4 References 
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 444 
p. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/>
Bush, E., Gillett, N., Watson, E., Fyfe, J., Vogel, F. and Swart, 
N. (2019). Understanding Observed Global Climate Change, 
Chapter 2 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush 
and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
25–72. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://changingclimate.
ca/CCCR2019/chapter/2-0/>
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate 
Change Risks: The Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks and 
Adaptation Potential. Council of Canadian Academies, Ottawa, 
Ontario. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://cca-reports.ca/
reports/prioritizing-climate-change-risks/>
Environics Research Group (2017). Public Perceptions of 
Climate Change and Health Final Report. Prepared for Health 
Canada, 71 p.
Government of Canada (2019). Infographic – Canada’s Changing 
Climate: Projected changes this century. Retrieved January 
2021, from <https://changingclimate.ca/site/assets/uploads/
sites/2/2019/04/6269_infographic_Canada_v05.pdf>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2014). 
Summary for Policymakers, in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral 
Aspects. (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea and L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 
1–32. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/
assets/uploads/2018/02/ar5_wgII_spm_en.pdf>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2019). IPCC 
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. 
Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama and N.M. Weyer. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2018). 
Summary for Policymakers, in Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC 
special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above 
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response 
to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and 
efforts to eradicate poverty, (Eds.) V. Masson-Delmotte, P. 
Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, 
W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. 
Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, 
M. Tignor and T. Waterfield. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/spm/>
Jones, R.N., Patwardhan, A., Cohen, S.J., Dessai, S., Lammel, 
A., Lempert, R., Mirza, M.M.Q. and von Storch, H. (2014). 
Foundations for decision making, Chapter 2 in Climate Change 
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects. (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Eabi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea and L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 
195–228. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/
site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap2_FINAL.pdf>
Klein, R.J.T., Midgley, G.F., Preston, B.L., Alam, M., Berkhout, 
F.G.H., Dow, K. and Shaw, M.R. (2014). Adaptation opportunities, 
constraints, and limits, Chapter 16 in Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects. (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea and L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 
899–943. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/
site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap16_FINAL.pdf>
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S. and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. 
(Eds.) (2016). Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 274 p. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-
adaptations/canadas-marine-coasts-changing-climate/18388>
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.) 
(2008). From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 448 p. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/impacts-
adaptation-canada-changing-climate/10253>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 25 
Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy (2019). 
Preliminary Strategic Climate Risk Assessment for British 
Columbia. Report prepared for the Government of British 
Columbia, Victoria, BC. Retrieved March 2021, from <https:=//
www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/climate-change/
adaptation/risk-assessment>
Natural Resources Canada (2019). Canada in a Changing 
Climate: 2019 user survey.
Palko, K. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.). (2017). Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 
2016. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-
adaptations/climate-risks-adaptation-practices-canadian-
transportation-sector-2016/19623>
Seguin. J. (Ed.) (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Health Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-sc/
H128-1-08-528E.pdf>
USGCRP (2018). Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II: 
Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States, (Eds.) D.R. 
Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, 
T.K. Maycock and B.C. Stewart. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, DC, USA, 1,515 p. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/>
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (2014): Synthesis in Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 1–18. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Synthesis_Eng.pdf>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. and Kharin, V.V. (2019). 
Changes in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada; 
Chapter 4 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush, 
and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
112–193. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/energy/Climate-change/
pdf/CCCR_Chapter4-Temperature%20and%20Precipitation%20
Across%20Canada.pdf>
CHAPTER 2
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T

Cities 
and Towns
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 27 
Coordinating lead author 
Craig Brown, PhD, Vancouver Coastal Health 
Lead authors 
Ewa Jackson, ICLEI Canada 
Deborah Harford, Adaptation to Climate Change Team,
Simon Fraser University 
David Bristow, PhD, Civil Engineering, University of Victoria
Contributing authors 
Dan Sandink, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Heather Dorries, PhD, School of Public Policy and Administration,
Carleton University 
Mark Groulx, PhD, School of Environmental Planning, University of
Northern British Columbia
Zainab Moghul, PhD, Environment and Climate Change Canada 
Sophie Guilbault, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Treaty, Lands and Resources Department - Tsleil-Waututh Nation
Anika Bell, University of Victoria
Recommended citation 
Brown, C., Jackson, E., Harford, D. and Bristow, D. (2021): Cities and 
Towns; Chapter 2 in Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues 
Report, (ed.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; Government of Canada,
Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 28 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
30
2.1 Introduction 
32
2.1.1 Cities and towns
32
2.1.2 Climate change impacts in cities and towns
34
2.2 Climate change is threatening Canada’s ageing infrastructure 
37
2.2.1 Introduction 
37
2.2.2 Approaches and mechanisms to reduce risks
38
2.2.3 Decision-support tools
39
2.2.4 Funding
40
2.2.5 Interdependencies
42
Case Story 2.1: Enhancing infrastructure resilience in Fredericton, NB
to reduce flood risk
43
2.3 Enhancing green spaces helps cities and towns adapt to climate change 
45
2.3.1 Introduction
45
2.3.2 Low impact development 
48
2.3.3 Urban biodiversity 
49
2.3.4 Urban forests
49
2.3.5 Water supply 
50
2.3.6 Multifunctional landscape planning
51
Case Story 2.2: Piloting natural asset valuation in Nanaimo, BC
51
2.4 Climate change will hit those already struggling in cities and towns the hardest 
53
2.4.1 Impacts on individuals and communities 
53
2.4.2 Social determinants
54
2.4.3 Strong social systems
57
2.4.4 Increasing equity
58
2.4.5 Place-based adaptation 
59
Case Story 2.3: Victoria Call to Action: Building resilience through thriving and inclusive communities  59
2.5 Working together yields the most successful outcomes 
60
2.5.1 Introduction
60
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 29 
2.5.2 Co-production
61
2.5.3 Municipal governments
61
2.5.4 Private and public sectors
62
2.5.5 Citizens
63
2.5.6 Boundary organizations 
63
Case Story 2.4: Brampton Lighthouse Project: Supporting vulnerable populations during extreme 
weather events 
65
2.6 Indigenous peoples in cities and towns are often affected in unique ways by climate change 
67
2.6.1 Introduction
67
2.6.2 Climate change impacts for First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples
68
2.6.3 Indigenous Knowledge and climate change
69
2.6.4 Adaptation and reconciliation
70
Case Story 2.5: Community climate change resilience planning in the Tsleil-Waututh Nation
70
2.7 Cities and towns are moving from adaptation planning to implementation 
71
2.7.1 Introduction 
72
2.7.2 Barriers to adaptation
72
2.7.3 Advancing adaptation implementation
74
Case Story 2.6: Adaptation measures and co-benefits through the upgrading of Rue Saint-Maurice 
in Trois-Rivières, QC 
78
2.8 Monitoring and evaluation of adaptation is an important and often overlooked step 
80
2.8.1 Introduction
80
2.8.2 Progress and approaches
80
Case Story 2.7: Tracking progress on adaptation through the City of Surrey’s Sustainability 
Dashboard
82
2.9 Moving forward 
83
2.9.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs
83
2.9.2 Emerging issues
83
2.10 Conclusion 
85
2.11 References 
86
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 30 
Key messages 
Climate change is threatening Canada’s ageing infrastructure
(see Section 2.2) 
Safe and reliable infrastructure and resilient buildings are essential to life in cities and towns. The projected 
changes in climate will increase risk for Canada’s ageing infrastructure, causing structural damage, 
compromising system reliability and threatening health and safety. Integrating climate change information 
into the design, operation and management of infrastructure projects will help minimize risk.
Enhancing green spaces helps cities and towns adapt to climate 
change (see Section 2.3)
Green infrastructure, such as parks, wetlands and green roofs, in Canada’s cities and towns increase the 
quality of life for residents and improve climate resilience. Recognizing the value of the benefits associated 
with green infrastructure and nature-based adaptation solutions will be useful in advancing their use to 
reduce impacts from climate change and other stressors. 
Climate change will hit those already struggling in cities and towns 
the hardest (see Section 2.4)
Climate change will impact individual and community health and well-being in cities and towns. However, 
the negative impacts from climate change will not affect all members of society equally. Considering social 
equity in adaptation decisions will help reduce the vulnerability of those at highest risk and will ensure that 
benefits are distributed fairly.
Working together yields the most successful outcomes (see Section 2.5)
Effective adaptation approaches to climate change consider diverse perspectives and priorities. Local 
governments are increasingly playing a strong role in driving meaningful collaboration with different groups 
when it comes to designing, planning and implementing adaptation in their communities.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 31 
Indigenous peoples in cities and towns are often affected in unique 
ways by climate change (see Section 2.6)
Canada’s cities and towns are home to large populations of Indigenous peoples, who are often affected 
in unique ways by a changing climate. Attention is being given to Indigenous issues, and the inclusion of 
Indigenous perspectives and expertise in municipal adaptation planning processes is occurring, but this is 
not widespread. Strengthening collaboration with Indigenous peoples will require increased capacity and 
additional research.
Cities and towns are moving from adaptation planning to 
implementation (see Section 2.7)
Implementation of adaptation initiatives by cities and towns is not keeping pace with the risks posed by 
current weather extremes and future climate changes. However, examples of implementation are becoming 
more common, and the barriers to action are being reduced. Promising practices like mainstreaming and 
innovative funding arrangements offer opportunities to scale up and accelerate implementation.
Monitoring and evaluation of adaptation is an important and often 
overlooked step (see Section 2.8)
Monitoring and evaluation methods are required to track adaptation progress, and measure whether 
adaptation efforts are resulting in their desired outcomes. While promising approaches exist, monitoring and 
evaluation of adaptation projects and outcomes are still rare, and there is value in helping cities and towns to 
develop approaches that are effective and comprehensive.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 32 
2.1 Introduction 
2.1.1 Cities and towns
Over 80% of Canadians live in urban areas (see Box 2.1; Statistics Canada, 2017a), and more than half (51.8%) 
of Canada’s Indigenous population lives in a metropolitan area of at least 30,000 people (Statistics Canada, 
2017b). Our cities and towns help drive the national economy, and provide resources and opportunities that 
contribute to individual and community health and well-being. Although cities and towns have many attributes 
that increase their adaptive capacity (Natural Resources Canada, 2016); concentrated populations, exposure 
of economically-valuable assets, ageing infrastructure, degraded ecosystems and social inequality can make 
urban areas and their residents highly vulnerable to climate change (see Figure 2.1; Maxwell et al., 2018).
Figure 2.1: Assets and challenges that influence adaptive capacity in cities and towns. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 33 
Changes in Canada’s climate are already evident and projected to continue. For example, parts of the country 
have experienced higher temperatures, more extreme heat, less extreme cold, shorter snow and ice cover 
seasons, earlier spring peak streamflow, and rising sea level (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). In addition, increased 
precipitation is projected for most of Canada, on average, although summer rainfall may decrease in some 
areas. More intense rainfalls will increase urban flood risks, while in coastal regions, sea-level rise and more 
extreme high-water events will increase the risk of coastal flooding in some communities (Bush and Lemmen, 
2019). These changes will result in greater impacts on cities in the future, unless appropriate adaptation and 
risk management are implemented (see Table 2.1).
Managing climate risks is essential, and can provide a range of direct and indirect economic, individual, 
social and environmental benefits. Cities and towns can also adapt to take advantage of opportunities that a 
changing climate will bring, such as decreased heating demand in buildings (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit 
Valley Conservation, 2017). Reducing net greenhouse gas emissions (mitigation) is essential to managing 
future risks (Bush and Lemmen, 2019), although a discussion of mitigation efforts is largely outside of the 
scope of this report, which focuses on climate change impacts and adaptation. 
Population growth, urbanization, densification and increased resource consumption in the coming decades 
will amplify the sensitivity of cities and towns to climate-sensitive hazards (Webb et al., 2018). For example, 
the population in Ontario’s Greater Golden Horseshoe is expected to grow by 50%, reaching 13.5 million 
people by 2041 (Government of Ontario, 2017), and that of Metro Vancouver is expected to increase by 
25% to 3.2 million people over the same time period (Metro Vancouver, 2014, 2018). This population growth 
will mean higher exposure to impacts (as more people would be affected), along with greater demand on 
critical systems like energy, water and health care. The composition of Canada’s population can also affect 
vulnerability; for instance, newcomers to Canada and the elderly can have higher vulnerability to extreme 
weather events (Chang et al., 2015). 
This chapter assesses climate change impacts and adaptation in cities and towns across Canada and 
acknowledges that each location experiences and adapts to climate change differently (Hunt and Watkiss, 
2011). This chapter references Canadian and international literature, and includes case stories that provide 
practical examples of adaptation in action. The content has been structured using key messages that reflect 
the current state of research and practice on issues of priority to cities and towns. The volume in which 
this chapter appears is part of a suite of complementary products that are contributions to the national 
assessment process Canada in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. 
Box 2.1: Urban areas
Although the term “urban area” is often used interchangeably with cities and towns, Statistics Canada has 
replaced the term “urban area” with “population centre” and uses the following discrete categories: small 
(populations between 1,000 and 29,999), medium (populations between 30,000 and 99,999), and large 
(populations of 100,000 or more) (Statistics Canada, 2017e). As in previous assessments (e.g., Palko 
and Lemmen, 2016), this chapter focuses primarily on medium and large population centres, with some 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 34 
consideration of small centres that have more than 10,000 people. It is estimated that 500 of Canada’s 3,650 
cities and towns have populations over 10,000. For discussion on climate change impacts and adaptation in 
communities smaller than 10,000 people, see the Rural and Remote Communities chapter. 
2.1.2 Climate change impacts in cities and towns
As the global mean temperature continues to increase, cities and towns across Canada will experience 
warmer temperatures, shifting precipitation patterns (e.g., less snow and more rain, sustained periods of 
drought), increased frequency and intensity of some extreme weather events, and—for most coastal cities—
sea-level rise (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). Under all emissions scenarios of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC), these changes will result in an increased incidence of acute and chronic biophysical 
impacts, including more frequent and intense heat events (see Figure 2.2), increased incidences of poor air 
quality (e.g., from ground-level ozone, particulate matter), short-duration, high-intensity rainfall events, wind 
storms, wildland-urban interface fires, increased coastal erosion, storm surge flooding and decreased water 
quality (Bush and Lemmen, 2019; Field, 2018; BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, 2017; 
Government of Canada, 2016; Gasper et al., 2011). These biophysical impacts will affect built infrastructure, 
natural environments, individuals and communities (see Table 2.1). Such impacts are accentuated in 
developed areas because many impact-reducing natural surfaces have been replaced by water-shedding, 
heat-absorbing and re-radiating surfaces, and the population density is higher (Seto and Shepherd, 2009; 
Venema and Temmer, 2017). Many of the high costs associated with these impacts (see Costs and Benefits 
of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter) will be borne by local governments.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 35 
Table 2.1: Common climate change impacts facing cities and towns 
CATEGORY
COMMON CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
Infrastructure
and buildings
•	
Damage to infrastructure and buildings from storms
•	
Increased cooling demand and decreased heating demand in 
buildings
•	
Potential increase in disruption to and failure of electrical systems 
from heat and storms
•	
Increased winter maintenance costs and higher public safety risks
•	
Damage to coastal infrastructure due to sea-level rise
Natural
systems
•	
Shifts in distributions of plant and animal species, including 
beneficial and invasive species
•	
Degradation of urban ecosystems and those in the outskirts
•	
Increase in environmental pollution (e.g., rainfall events transporting 
contaminants into waterways)
•	
Saltwater intrusion into water supply aquifers
Individuals and 
communities
•	
Increased social inequity
•	
Business disruptions
•	
Mental and physical health impacts
•	
Loss of cultural landmarks, heritage and traditional practices
•	
Changes to recreation and tourism opportunities
Sources: Abbott and Chapman, 2018; Cedeño Laurent et al., 2018; Field, 2018; Diamond Head Consulting 
Inc., 2017a; Public Health Agency of Canada, 2017; Government of Canada, 2016; Giordano et al., 2014; 
Revi et al., 2014; Solecki and Marcotullio, 2013; Gasper et al., 2011.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 36 
Figure 2.2: The annual number of extreme heat days projected for six Canadian cities under three warming 
scenarios: global mean surface temperature of 1.5°C, 2°C, and 4°C above pre-industrial levels. The values are 
based on statistically downscaled simulations by 24 climate models participating in CMIP5, with the error bars 
representing the 25th and 75th percentiles, and the grey section showing the number of historical extreme heat 
days (1986–2005). The threshold for extreme heat differs by city (e.g., Toronto = 31°C, Vancouver = 29°C). Data 
source: Environment and Climate Change Canada.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 37 
2.2 Climate change is threatening Canada’s 
ageing infrastructure 
Safe and reliable infrastructure and resilient buildings are essential to life in cities and towns. The 
projected changes in climate will increase risk for Canada’s ageing infrastructure, causing structural 
damage, compromising system reliability and threatening health and safety. Integrating climate change 
information into the design, operation and management of infrastructure projects will help minimize risk. 
Historical and recent exposures to weather extremes have shown that urban infrastructure is vulnerable to 
these types of events. Climate change will increase the risk of overheated buildings, damaged infrastructure 
(e.g., bridges during flooding) and power outages across Canada. Increasing the resiliency of Canada’s 
ageing infrastructure is challenging due to factors such as higher levels of use beyond initial design, the large 
investments required, and performance under uncertain future climate conditions. In addition, infrastructure 
design to date reflects an assumption of a steady-state climate, whereas we now must design for “non-
stationarity” in order to minimize disturbance and damage as the climate continues to change dynamically. 
Infrastructure was identified as the top sector at risk to climate impacts, but also has the greatest “adaptation 
potential” to avoid and reduce negative consequences, as long as careful planning is undertaken (Council of 
Canadian Academies, 2019). The state of research and practice in Canada is advancing, as are the resources 
available to cities to towns. 
2.2.1 Introduction 
The infrastructure in cities and towns includes water systems (e.g., stormwater, wastewater, drinking water), 
transportation systems, public and private buildings, sport and recreation facilities, utilities (e.g., electricity 
and gas), telecommunications and industrial sites (see Box 2.2 for more details). Nearly two thirds of core 
public infrastructure is owned and maintained by municipal governments, and over one third is in need of 
retrofit or replacement due to being in a relatively poor condition (Project Steering Committee, 2016). Rising 
temperatures, changing hydrological conditions and more frequent extreme weather events will increase 
the risk of failure and make it more difficult to deliver optimal levels of service across the entire lifespan of 
existing and new infrastructure assets (Asset Management BC, 2018; Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley 
Conservation, 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 38 
Box 2.2: Infrastructure
The term “infrastructure” can mean many different things. Public Safety Canada provides a list of ten sectors 
that are termed critical infrastructure: health, food, finance, water, information and communication technology 
(ICT), safety, energy and utilities, manufacturing, government, and transportation (of all types―ground, air and 
water) (Public Safety Canada, 2020). The emphasis of this chapter is on the physical assets that underpin the 
functioning of these and other sectors within cities and towns, including buildings. Much of the infrastructure 
in population centres is publicly owned, such as roads, water mains and public buildings. Other infrastructure, 
such as most buildings, and ICT, natural gas and power distribution can be privately owned (in some cases 
depending on the regulatory structure). Infrastructure assets are dependent on other assets and services 
from other infrastructure. The term “interdependent” is used to describe cases where assets or systems are 
dependent on each other.
2.2.2 Approaches and mechanisms to reduce risks
The Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group—a panel of scientists, registered engineers and architects 
in California—defines climate-safe infrastructure as “infrastructure that is sustainable, adaptive and that 
meets design criteria that aim for resilience in the face of shocks and stresses caused by the current and 
future climate” (Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group, 2018, p. 5). Although this goal is conceptually 
straightforward, there are many challenges in achieving it (e.g., Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group, 
2018; Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 2017). As the field of climate change adaptation 
matures, approaches are emerging to assist infrastructure designers and operators as they modify their 
planning and design approaches. The Infrastructure and Buildings Working Group—a multi-stakeholder 
working group under Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation Platform—outlines the key areas that must be 
addressed, several of which are presented below:
•	
Development of guidelines, codes, standards and specifications that take into consideration the 
expected climate change impacts; 
•	
Development of critical infrastructure inventories, including the evaluation of vulnerabilities and 
identification of priority at-risk areas, based on the projected impact of climate change; 
•	
Identification of high-risk areas based on recent events (e.g., new flood zone mapping); 
•	
Completion of risk assessments and cost benefit analyses of alternatives to support decision-
making on priority adaptation actions; and
•	
Integration of planning and decision-making between departments within an organization or 
between stakeholders (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 39 
Although it is difficult to precisely track progress in each of these areas, there is evidence of advances. For 
example, asset management is a relatively widespread practice that seeks to inventory and manage existing 
and new infrastructure across municipal corporations, in a way that maximizes benefits and reduces risks, 
while reflecting the context and priorities of the community (Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2018). 
Over the last few years, the asset management community has been encouraged to incorporate climate 
change into its practices (Asset Management BC, 2018). While the inclusion of climate change is not yet well 
established, it involves considering how a range of potential climate impacts may affect levels of service, and 
building these considerations into asset management activities (see Case Story 2.1; Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, 2018). This process can also be used to manage natural assets (e.g., wetlands), although this 
practice is still very new (Municipal Natural Assets Initiative, 2017). Incorporating climate change into asset 
management represents a significant opportunity to accelerate adaptation through mainstreaming, and to 
pursue low-carbon options during infrastructure renewal (Adaptation to Climate Change Team, 2019). 
Codes, standards and guidelines are essential drivers of climate-safe infrastructure that are largely 
determined by various levels of government (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 2017). 
For example, in Quebec, standard BNQ 3019-190 provides information, guidelines and recommendations 
to improve the thermal performance of parking areas (e.g., reduced surface area, increased greenspace, 
permeable pavement) with the goal of reducing the urban heat island effect (Bureau de normalisation du 
Québec, 2013). The Borough of Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie, Quebec, has used this standard to require that 
“paving material in all new parking, loading and storage areas must meet a minimum solar reflectivity index 
rating of 29” (Government of Canada, 2011, p. 2). The Standards Council of Canada (2019) is also advancing 
work in this area , including a new national guideline on basement flood protection (Canadian Standards 
Association, 2018) and support for a Canadian standard for flood-resilient communities (Moudrak and 
Feltmate, 2019). Additional information on buildings is provided in Box 2.3.
2.2.3 Decision-support tools
Despite promising examples, designing for an increasingly non-stationary climate remains a challenge with 
evolving solutions. Designers are encouraged to incorporate flexibility to allow for uncertainty (Field, 2018; 
Milly et al., 2008), and to use safe-to-fail approaches that minimize consequences instead of the probability 
of failure (Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group, 2018). Traditionally, infrastructure parameters and 
thresholds have relied on historical weather data (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 
2017). Given the long lifespans of most infrastructure, future climate projections will be needed to 
establish parameters and thresholds for infrastructure. Intensity Duration Frequency (IDF) curves relate 
rainfall intensity with its duration and frequency of occurrence, and are often used to inform infrastructure 
decisions. Tools such as the IDF CC Tool 4.0 (Simonovic et al., 2018) can be used to develop IDF curves 
based on historical data, as well as under future climate conditions, thereby helping to incorporate climate 
considerations into infrastructure decisions. For instance, IDF curves were used in a study of Saskatoon 
residential retention ponds under future climate scenarios (Elshorbagy et al., 2018). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 40 
The Climate Lens from Infrastructure Canada represents an effort to embed the consideration of climate 
risk in professional practice. It requires analysis of climate change resilience during the planning and design 
phases of a project, as a prerequisite to funding for projects over $10 million, and also requires consideration 
of how the emissions from all projects will be managed and minimized (Infrastructure Canada, 2019). The 
guide contains a collection of supporting resources, including regional climate resources, engineering data 
sets (e.g., IDF files), provincial and territorial flood maps, risk assessment methodologies, previous federal 
assessment reports, and adaptation resources (Infrastructure Canada, 2019). 
Professional associations across Canada are increasingly providing voluntary training to their members on 
the planning and management of climate-safe infrastructure. For example, Engineers and Geoscientists 
British Columbia has an extensive climate change information portal that aims to support its members as 
they incorporate climate risk management into their practices (Engineers and Geoscientists British Columbia, 
2020). Similarly, the Canadian Society of Landscape Architects has produced a set of adaptation primers to 
guide its members’ practice (Canadian Society of Landscape Architects, 2018), and the Canadian Institute 
of Planners has a climate change portal with resources to inform planning and design for climate change 
adaptation, and a new policy for climate change planning that guides professional practice (Canadian 
Institute of Planners, 2018). 
In addition to these decision-support tools, there is also an expanding body of examples and design 
strategies in the following areas: storm and sanitary sewer design (Moudrak and Feltmate, 2017; Crowe, 
2014), transportation infrastructure (Temmer and Venema, 2018; Simonovic et al., 2016; Dennis Consultants, 
2008), energy distribution (Gomez and Anjos, 2017; AECOM and Risk Sciences International, 2015; Boggess 
et al., 2014), water systems (United States Environmental Protection Agency, 2014; Loftus, 2011), and 
information and communications technology (Kwasinski, 2016).
2.2.4 Funding
Although there are many barriers relating to financing of climate-safe infrastructure in Canada’s cities and 
towns (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 2017), there are innovative paths forward that 
are currently available to infrastructure owners and operators. These include incentive-based tools such as 
local improvement charges (LICs), density for benefit agreements, development costs charges and natural 
area tax exemptions (Zerbe, 2019; Adaptation to Climate Change Team, 2015). Funding options have also 
been assessed for natural assets initiatives (Cairns et al., 2019), and municipalities have received funding for 
adaptation through federally funded programs, such as the Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program 
(delivered by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities) and the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(delivered by Public Safety Canada). However, most of these funding opportunities are time-bound, and the 
amount of funding available generally falls short in comparison to the scale of adaptation responses that are 
needed. Since public funding sources represent only one quarter of capital expenditures in Canada, it will also 
be essential to mobilize private investment from businesses, homeowners and public-private partnerships in 
order to implement adequate infrastructure adaptation (Adaptation to Climate Change Team, 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 41 
Box 2.3: Buildings
In the past five years, there has been an increased effort to design for climate resilience at the building level 
(e.g., BC Housing, 2019). For each building type, there are a number of structural and operational adaptation 
options available depending on the hazard faced (see Figure 2.3). These include general guidance for 
designers and operators (e.g., BOMA Canada, 2019; Kesik and O’Brien, 2017; City of Toronto, 2016) and also 
certification systems like BOMA BEST 3.0 (BOMA Canada, 2020) for existing buildings, and the pilot credits 
in the RELi project rating system for new buildings (Pierce, 2017). There are also a number of pilot projects. 
For example, the City of Windsor, Ontario, retrofitted a 100-year-old home in the city’s core to reduce the risk 
of flooding by using a variety of property-level flood protection measures, including a backwater valve, sump 
pump with overflow, and regrading (City of Windsor, 2019). 
Enhancing climate resilience through building codes is another approach being used in cities and towns. 
Many local jurisdictions in Canada have adopted measures to reduce disaster risk through building design, 
despite limited authority to regulate construction beyond provincial code requirements (City of Barrie, 2017; 
Town of Wasaga Beach, 2015; City of Cambridge, 2011). For example, most municipalities in Alberta and 
major cities in Ontario such as Toronto, Ottawa, Windsor, Mississauga and Hamilton have adopted building 
code interpretations that have resulted in the installation of sewer backflow protection in most new homes 
to reduce sewer backup risk (Sandink, 2013a). In the City of Victoriaville, QC, the voluntary, incentive-based 
Habitation Durable [sustainable housing] program includes disaster risk reduction measures, such as 
improved roof-to-wall connections to reduce wind risk and measures to decrease heat-health risks. Seven 
additional municipalities in the province of Quebec have adopted Habitation Durable (City of Victoriaville, 
2018). Halifax enforces a vertical setback for residential ground floors of all new buildings along its coastline 
to accommodate sea-level rise, based on predictions and modelling out to the year 2100 (Halifax Regional 
Municipality, 2014). 
For many building-level adaptation measures, there are associated co-benefits. For example, passive solar 
design in buildings can help maintain comfort, including during power outages, while reducing heating and 
cooling loads (e.g., via optimized shading). Similarly, foliage and green roofs reduce urban heat, while also 
retaining stormwater and decreasing cooling demand. These and other building-level resilience measures 
deliver co-benefits relating to livability and property values as well (Urban Land Institute, 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 42 
Figure 2.3: A series of screenshots from the website www.climateresilienthome.ca, developed by the City of 
Edmonton and Ask for a Better World. This interactive tool provides information about modifications for making 
new and existing homes more climate resilient.
2.2.5 Interdependencies
Creating climate-safe infrastructure requires an operationalized understanding of the interconnected and 
interdependent nature of urban infrastructure, where interdependency refers to a relationship between 
two or more infrastructure systems (e.g., electricity distribution and water treatment) (see Figure 2.4; 
Zimmerman and Faris, 2010). Interdependencies can be physical, cyber-based, geographic or operational 
in nature (C40 Cities and AECOM, 2017), and can lead to cascading impacts across infrastructure systems, 
involving multiple infrastructure owners (Asset Management BC, 2018). Identifying interdependencies is 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 43 
increasingly considered to be a first step in reducing climate risk (C40 Cities and AECOM, 2017). Pilot projects 
related to specific assets, including the General Hospital in Nanaimo, BC, are being initiated to explore how 
interdependencies translate into climate risks (Cross Dependency Initiative, 2019). 
Discussions about interdependencies and cascading impacts often highlight the centrality of electricity to 
urban life. As Figure 2.4 shows, when the electricity supply is disrupted, many negative impacts occur across 
other infrastructure systems—as well as in natural and social systems (C40 Cities and AECOM, 2017). For 
example, high-rise buildings may experience disruptions in essential services like water supply and elevator 
service, and may lose their ability to maintain safe thermal conditions during power outages (Kesik et al., 
2019). Buildings tend to be highly interdependent, in that they rely on most other infrastructure types and are 
designed with minimal ability to function without these infrastructure elements. Utilities across Canada are striving to 
manage the risks to their distribution networks (e.g., BC Hydro, 2019; Canadian Electricity Association, 2019).
Figure 2.4: A graphical representation of an example of interdependencies between infrastructure systems. 
Source: Adapted from C40 Cities and AECOM, 2017.
Case Story 2.1: Enhancing infrastructure resilience in Fredericton, NB
to reduce flood risk
Located on the Saint John River, the City of Fredericton is the capital of New Brunswick and is home to nearly 
60,000 people. The primary climate risk for Fredericton is spring flooding of the Saint John River—a hazard so 
prominent that a public art piece was commissioned to contextualize the height of floodwaters (see Figure 2.5).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 44 
Fredericton experienced back-to-back spring floods in 2018 and 2019, both lasting for over a week. For each 
flood, a significant portion of the arterial transportation network was disrupted, and commuters struggled to 
travel from one side of the river to the other for work, hospital visits and other activities that are often taken 
for granted. During this time, the City encouraged using active transportation, free transit, park-and-ride 
options and telecommuting to ensure business continuity, as well as altering the flow of traffic on the major 
bridge to permit improved access to and from downtown. Business continuity is one way that City staff have 
framed adaptation efforts, accepting that eliminating flood risk is not possible. 
Persistent flood risk has resulted in over two decades of efforts to ensure that the City’s infrastructure is 
more resilient. Fredericton has relied on a commitment to asset management planning and a long-term vision 
to guide this work. This has led to changes, such as culverts that are sized 20% above a 1:100 return period; 
the use of active transportation (e.g., cycling); and rail-corridor trails that have been used as sites for water 
mains to increase redundancy, and also to act as alternative transportation routes when flooding disrupts 
vehicle traffic. The City has relied on diverse funding mechanisms to complete this work and will receive 
support from the National Disaster Mitigation Program to make Fredericton more resilient.
Figure 2.5: Gerald Beaulieu’s public art installation “Watermark”, consisting of a series of 11 wooden posts 
of different heights along a riverside walking path in Fredericton, NB. The tallest post—the “memory pole”—is 
encased in copper sheets that mark the year and peak water level of the Saint John River during the annual 
freshet. This project is a great example of municipal Public Works collaborating with the Culture Office. Photos 
courtesy of the City of Fredericton.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 45 
2.3 Enhancing green spaces helps cities and 
towns adapt to climate change 
Green infrastructure, such as parks, wetlands and green roofs, in Canada’s cities and towns increase 
the quality of life for residents and improve climate resilience. Recognizing the value of the benefits 
associated with green infrastructure and nature-based adaptation solutions will be useful in advancing 
their use to reduce impacts from climate change and other stressors.   
The natural environment influences quality of life in Canada’s cities and towns, and supports food and water 
security, as well as providing significant benefits in terms of air quality, water filtration and biodiversity. The 
ability of green infrastructure to increase resilience to climate change is well understood. Green infrastructure 
is beginning to be used more widely in Canada’s cities and towns, as are innovative approaches to design 
and governance relating to the natural environment. As the climate changes, protecting and enhancing green 
infrastructure (see Figure 2.6) will contribute to its resilience and its ability to continue to provide ecosystem 
services and co-benefits. This requires integration with complementary planning processes (e.g., built 
infrastructure decisions), as well as consideration of other factors relating to land-use planning and development.
2.3.1 Introduction
Cities and towns incorporate natural systems that include waterways, coastlines, wetlands, urban forests, 
parks, and remnant ecosystems, as well as built assets such as green roofs, bioswales and rain gardens 
(see Figure 2.6). These natural and engineered assets provide valuable goods and services that can increase 
adaptive capacity (see Ecosystem Services chapter; Frantzeskaki et al., 2019; Adaptation to Climate Change 
Team, 2017; Kabisch et al., 2017; Terton, 2017) and are often flexible, cost-effective, and broadly applicable in 
reducing the impacts of climate change (Emilsson and Sang, 2017). Green infrastructure can reduce impacts 
associated with extreme heat, drought, flooding and sea-level rise, while delivering multiple co-benefits (see 
Table 2.2). For example, there is increasing understanding of the effects that green infrastructure can have 
on heat and air pollution at the site, neighbourhood and city levels (Zupancic et al., 2015). However, the ability 
to provide these benefits is threatened by rapid urban growth and development, destructive land and water 
use practices, and the temperature and precipitation changes  and extreme events associated with climate 
change (The Nature Conservancy, 2018; Emilsson and Sang, 2017; Terton, 2017).

NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 46 
Figure 2.6: Definition of green infrastructure. Source: Adapted from Brooke et. al, 2017. 
There is an increasing amount of guidance available for those seeking to use green infrastructure for 
adaptation (e.g., see Case Story 2.2; Terton, 2017). Vulnerability and risk assessment tools also exist. For 
example, the PIEVC (Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee) protocol was applied to three 
parks in Mississauga to assess their vulnerability to twelve climate parameters (e.g., flooding, freeze-thaw 
cycles, drought and air quality). A number of risks were identified that could be managed by construction, 
operations and management, and/or additional research (Risk Sciences International, 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 47 
Table 2.2: Co-benefits of green infrastructure 
CATEGORY
CO-BENEFITS
Environmental
•	
Improved air quality 
•	
Improved water availability and quality
•	
Increased habitat and connectivity for biodiversity
•	
Reduced urban temperatures 
•	
Erosion prevention 
•	
Carbon sequestration and reduced emissions 
Social 
•	
Opportunities for recreation and physical activity
•	
Improved mental health
•	
Increased social cohesion (e.g., parks, community gardens, beaches)
•	
Potential for urban agriculture and local food security
•	
Reduced mortality 
•	
Educational opportunities 
•	
Spiritual value and sense of place 
Economic 
•	
Cost effectiveness compared to grey infrastructure 
•	
Flood protection
•	
Reduced energy consumption in buildings 
•	
Reduced energy required for pumps, etc. 
•	
Pollution removal 
•	
Improved power transformer capacity and electrical transmission 
efficiency
•	
Increased property values and property tax revenue
Sources: Arsenijevich, 2018; EPCCARR, 2018; Kabisch et al., 2017; Terton, 2017; Berry, 2016; McDonald 
et al., 2016; Sörensen et al., 2016; AECOM and Risk Sciences International, 2015; Kardan et al., 2015; 
Alexander and McDonald, 2014; ARUP, 2014; Beatley and Newman, 2013; Summers et al., 2012; Foster et 
al., 2011.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 48 
2.3.2 Low impact development 
Low impact development (LID) aims to return the hydrology of a site as closely as possible to its pre-
development conditions (Ahiablame et al., 2013) and is widely recognized as an important strategy for 
stormwater management in urban areas (Berry, 2016; Dagenais et al., 2014). Examples of LID include green 
roofs, permeable pavement, rain gardens, bioswales, infiltration planters, vegetated swales, flow-through 
planters, drywells and retention ponds. These natural assets retain and filter a portion of stormwater, help 
to recharge water supplies, avoid costly upgrades to hard infrastructure, provide habitat and recreation 
opportunities, and are viewed as vital components of municipal infrastructure systems (see Figure 2.7; 
Kabisch et al., 2017,). For example, in Washington State’s Puget Sound, there is an initiative to install 
12,000 rain gardens, which would defer 160 million gallons of water from entering the stormwater system 
(Stewardship Partners and Washington State University Extension, 2019). Planning is underway for a similar 
project in North Vancouver (Pacific Water Research Centre, 2020). The City of Niagara Falls now offers a 
rebate program that will cover 50% of the cost of one rain barrel for its residents (City of Niagara Falls, 2019). 
Regulatory approaches have also been effective at increasing LID. For example, Toronto’s Green Roof bylaw 
requires developments with a roof space larger than 2,000 square meters to have green roofs. The City 
estimates that these green roofing initiatives have alleviated over 9 million litres of stormwater from their 
drainage systems and mitigated 120 tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions by reducing annual energy usage 
by 1,000 megawatt hours (Guilbault et al., 2016). LID has been embraced variably, but generally favourably 
across Canada (Ishaq et al., 2019). Current concerns about LID include lifecycle operational and maintenance 
requirements, including considerations of maintenance processes and costs, and the impact of freezing rain 
and winter rain events on the efficiency and survival of roof gardens.
Figure 2.7: Photos of existing conditions at the often-flooded mouth of the Don River in Toronto, ON, and a 
rendering of a design to better accommodate floodwaters while improving amenities. Source: Waterfront 
Toronto, 2020.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 49 
2.3.3 Urban biodiversity 
The protection of urban biodiversity (i.e., the variety of life in the urban context) is a priority for many 
Canadian cities. Tools exist to support cities and towns in urban biodiversity planning (e.g., ICLEI 
Canada, 2014) and in creating urban biodiversity strategies (e.g., City of Vancouver, 2016); these tools 
can help address issues such as the arrival of invasive species, which is increasingly likely to occur in a 
changing climate (Smith et al., 2012). Efforts to preserve green space and biodiversity outside of a city 
can complement initiatives occurring within municipal boundaries (e.g., Parks Canada, 2014). However, 
coordinating transboundary and trans-sectoral planning for ecosystem connectivity is becoming increasingly 
urgent in the face of habitat loss and climate change. Some degree of connectivity is important for the health 
and survival of almost all species, and local and regional approaches to green infrastructure are likely to 
provide larger-scale benefits for flood and heat reduction (Satzewich and Straker, 2019).
2.3.4 Urban forests
Urban forests are useful in retaining stormwater, improving air quality, and reducing urban heat (see 
Figure 2.8). To maintain these benefits, it is essential that municipalities manage urban forests in ways 
that ensure their adaptability to climate change (Diamond Head Consulting Inc., 2017b; Brandt et al., 2017; 
McDonald et al., 2016). For example, the City of Kitchener is preparing its urban forest for more winter 
ice storms (City of Kitchener, 2019). For many cities, increasing heat and drought mean that cities need 
to actively plan to introduce tree species that will not only reduce various climate risks, but will also be 
resilient themselves to changing climate conditions (Brandt et al., 2016). Cities and towns across Canada 
are acknowledging this dimension of climate risk, and are developing a deeper understanding of the climate 
vulnerability of trees (e.g., City of Montréal, 2017). Cities and towns are also prioritizing the health of their 
urban forests. For example, the urban forest in Kingston, Ontario, provides $1.87 million in environmental 
benefits annually, and is being actively managed via the city’s Urban Forest Management Plan and Drought 
Protection Strategy (Guilbault et al., 2016). In some neighbourhoods—particularly in dense cities like Montréal 
and Toronto—the cost of tree planting for particulate matter (PM) reduction is as low as US$840/ton, and 
rivals commonly used strategies to reduce PM (e.g., point source control) (McDonald et al., 2016). Similarly, 
the shade provided by trees reduces temperature in the area, with associated reductions in cooling costs 
(McDonald et al., 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 50 
Figure 2.8: A graphical representation of the correlation between urban trees and temperature. Source: NASA 
Earth Observatory, 2006.
2.3.5 Water supply 
Water is an essential resource for cities and towns, and degraded water quality is commonly identified as a 
potential impact of a changing climate (see Water Resources chapter). The provision of clean drinking water 
is contingent on supply, treatment and delivery, with supply being the primary climate-related challenge. 
Local governments have always managed variability in supply; however, this occurred within the context of 
relatively predictable climatic variability (de Loe and Plummer, 2010). The causes of water shortages vary 
depending on the hydrology within a given region, and vary widely across Canada (de Loe and Plummer, 
2010). For example, in rainfall-dominated regions, a water shortage is often caused by decreased summer 
precipitation, while in snowmelt-dominated regions, earlier or more rapid snowmelt, or a reduced snowpack 
could be the cause (BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, 2019). Additional factors, such 
as stormwater management decisions that impact groundwater recharge, also affect municipal drinking 
water supply and quality (Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation, 2017). 
There have been some assessments of the resilience of water supply treatment and distribution 
infrastructure. For example, an assessment of Calgary’s water supply system found that the system was 
generally resilient due to robust treatment processes, two raw water sources, and redundancy within the 
distribution system (Associated Engineering, 2011). Tools also exist to guide the planning process. These 
often point to the importance of collaborative governance when managing watersheds (e.g., POLIS Project on 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 51 
Ecological Governance and Centre for Indigneous Environmental Resources, 2019), including the inclusion of 
Indigenous Knowledge Systems (Porten et al., 2016). An example of this type of governance can be seen in 
the Cowichan Valley Regional District (CVRD) water use planning process that involved the CVRD, Cowichan 
Tribes, the Cowichan Watershed Board and Catalyst Paper (Cowichan Valley Regional District, 2018). This 
process was created in response to significant pressure being placed on the drinking water supply system by 
factors relating to water demand, land use and a shifting hydrological cycle from climate change (Compass 
Resource Management Ltd., 2018).
2.3.6 Multifunctional landscape planning
Multifunctional landscape planning offers an emerging alternative to urban development frameworks that 
utilize built infrastructure, such as buildings, streets or districts, as the central organizing element of the 
urban fabric (e.g., smart growth and new urbanism). Multifunctional landscapes are explicitly designed to 
provide synergistic functions (e.g., environmental, social, economic and cultural) that support ecological 
health and co-benefits at and across the site, neighbourhood, city and regional scales (Kabisch et al., 
2017; Sörensen et al., 2016). Ecosystem services are reintroduced or reinforced within the urban fabric by 
coordinating development around “spatially and functionally integrated systems and networks of protected 
landscapes” that may be supported with additional complementary built infrastructure (Ahern et al., 2014, 
p. 255). The approach suggests a greater need for involvement of landscape architects throughout the 
planning and design process (Canadian Society of Landscape Architects, n.d.; Lovell and Johnston, 2009). 
Although effective applications of multifunctional landscape approaches are still limited in an urban 
context (Meerow and Newell, 2017; Lovell and Taylor, 2013), Toronto’s Don Mouth Naturalization and Port 
Lands Flood Protection project, with its series of proposed terrestrial, wetland and aquatic ecosystems, 
illustrates a multifunctional space in which ecological function is restored to the benefit of human health, 
recreation, restoration and built asset protection (see Figure 2.7). Since green infrastructure measures often 
require significant space that developers and others may desire, it is important to take climate change into 
consideration when contemplating urban growth (Geneletti and Zardo, 2016).
Case Story 2.2: Piloting natural asset valuation in Nanaimo, BC
Cities and towns face the dual challenges of upgrading ageing infrastructure and increasing the resilience of 
their natural environment. The Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) aims to address these challenges 
by helping municipalities identify, value and account for natural assets in their financial planning and asset 
management programs (O’Neil and Cairns, 2017), and to consider future climate conditions (Municipal 
Natural Assets Initiative, 2017). By identifying natural assets―such as wetlands, forests and parks―cities 
and towns can work to protect them, and can rely on ecosystem services to reduce the load on conventional 
infrastructure, like underground drainage. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 52 
Guided by the MNAI, the City of Nanaimo, BC, sought to assign a financial value to its natural assets, using 
the Buttertubs Marsh Conservation Area (BMCA) as part of a pilot study. When the opportunity came to 
participate in the MNAI, the City had just completed a Management Plan update with the Nature Trust of 
British Columbia and Ducks Unlimited for the BMCA. There was interest in exploring how the City could work 
more effectively to help implement the conservation plan, while also recognizing its value in mitigating the 
flows of the Millstone River. The BMCA comprises 55 hectares of reclaimed wetland and floodplain within 
Nanaimo (see Figure 2.9; Molnar et al., 2018). The project found that the BMCA helps moderate the rivers 
downstream during extreme precipitation events, and therefore reduces flood risk in the floodplain. Building 
an engineered system that could do what the BMCA does naturally would cost the City between $6.6 and $8.5 
million, a figure that would rise with more extreme events. The results of this pilot study will guide the City in 
identifying other key natural assets to be recognized and integrated into the City’s infrastructure (Molnar et 
al., 2018). Water levels throughout the BMCA have been tracked for the last two years in an ongoing effort to 
monitor and evaluate the project.
Figure 2.9: The Buttertubs Marsh Conservation Area, which comprises 55 hectares of reclaimed wetland and 
floodplain, appears in the center (the "management area") of this aerial photo of Nanaimo, BC. Source: City of 
Nanaimo.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 53 
2.4 Climate change will hit those already 
struggling in cities and towns the hardest 
Climate change will impact individual and community health and well-being in cities and towns. However, 
the negative impacts from climate change will not affect all members of society equally. Considering 
social equity in adaptation decisions will help reduce the vulnerability of those at highest risk and will 
ensure that benefits are distributed fairly.   
Many of the impacts of climate change on health and well-being—especially those relating to individual physical 
health—are increasingly well understood (see Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate Report). Adapting to 
these impacts requires continued collaborations across sectors and consideration of the many non-climate 
factors that influence health. Understanding and addressing the vulnerability of various urban populations 
to climate change is essential for increasing both individual adaptive capacity and the overall resilience of 
urban communities. It continues to be an important area of practice to establish practical linkages between 
community development, social resilience interventions, initiatives that increase equity, reconciliation and 
climate change adaptation.
2.4.1 Impacts on individuals and communities 
There is strong understanding of the impacts that climate change has on the physical health of individuals 
(see Table 2.2; EPCCARR, 2018; Berry et al., 2014). This understanding is becoming more nuanced and is 
beginning to include mental health impacts, such as despair and anxiety, as well as post-traumatic stress 
disorders for those affected by, and responding to, extreme events (Decent and Feltmate, 2018; Gifford and 
Gifford, 2016). Negative impacts can also result from individuals and communities experiencing grief or loss 
regarding some aspect of their surroundings that has been altered by climate change (e.g., the loss of cedar 
trees on Vancouver Island) (Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018). Framing climate adaptation as a public health issue is 
likely to garner public support for adaptation (Araos et al., 2017; Cheng and Berry, 2013) and is increasingly 
commonplace in adaptation practice in Canada’s cities and towns. Climate change is also affecting the 
delivery of services by health agencies across Canada (e.g., disease surveillance, air quality monitoring and 
emergency preparedness) (Buse, 2018).  
Negative impacts of extreme weather events and climate change on cultural practices include the loss of 
landmarks and a reduced ability to engage in recreational and cultural activities, such as bird watching, using 
public playgrounds and harvesting traditional foods (see Figure 2.10; Government of Canada, 2016; Ford, 
2012). In Ottawa, for example, Canada Day festivities have been reduced due to extreme heat (Dunham, 
2018), and it is likely that skating on the Rideau Canal will decrease in the future (Spears, 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 54 
Figure 2.10: Thermal imaging of Windsor's Captain John Wilson park shows that the temperature of the dark 
rubber mat under the play structure (yellow area) is 69.0°C. Photos courtesy of the City of Windsor.
2.4.2 Social determinants
Climate change can exacerbate existing socioeconomic vulnerabilities (EPCCARR, 2018). Social vulnerability 
refers to a set of social characteristics (e.g., socioeconomic status, age, ethnicity, housing status) that affect 
adaptive capacity and that increase the sensitivity of certain populations to climate impacts (EPCCARR, 2018; 
Cutter et al., 2010). Considering socioeconomic vulnerabilities, including their history and dynamics, helps to 
ensure that adaptation initiatives do not exacerbate existing inequities and that they are better positioned to 
maximize benefits for marginalized groups (Shi et al., 2016). The relationship between social vulnerability and 
climate change is often evident during extreme weather events. For example, Superstorm Sandy “exposed the 
role that chronic societal stressors—such as poverty, lack of mobility and lack of social cohesion—can play in 
both increasing community vulnerability and hindering a region’s ability to recover from a disaster” (Grannis, 
2016, p. 1). Some adaptation plans acknowledge the effects that climate-sensitive hazards can have on 
homeless populations (e.g., City of Toronto, 2019), and climate change is increasingly being viewed as a risk 
multiplier for the affordable housing crisis many cities are facing (Ortiz et al., 2019). 
Adaptation planning across Canada often takes into consideration those who are vulnerable, including low-
income and equity-seeking groups (i.e., groups facing an unequal distribution of opportunities and resources) 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 55 
(City of Toronto, 2019). For example, the City of Montréal considered social susceptibility by assessing the 
vulnerability of the following groups to different climate hazards: children aged 0 to 15, seniors aged 65 and 
up, people living alone, underprivileged people, recent immigrants and people who speak neither French 
nor English (City of Montréal, 2017). Indeed, the majority of the 53 heat-related deaths in Montréal’s 2018 
heat wave were men older than 50 years of age who lived alone (Santé Montréal, 2018). Box 2.4 describes 
impacts and adaptation relating to extreme heat events in cities and towns in more detail. Ideally, climate 
adaptation and resilience efforts would complement existing social vulnerability reduction efforts, including 
by mainstreaming.
Wildland-urban interface fires are projected to increase in frequency and will continue to cost more than fires 
that threaten only forest resources (Mahmoud and Chulahwat, 2018; Canadian Council of Forest Ministers, 
2013). The impacts of these fires include mortality, negative mental health effects (e.g., generalized anxiety 
disorder), displacement and respiratory illness. Particulates from wildfire smoke can affect air quality 
and health across great distances. These impacts are often most pronounced for vulnerable populations, 
including children, the elderly, pregnant women, people of low socioeconomic status, as well as first 
responders (National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health, 2019b; Abbott and Chapman, 2018; 
Agyapong et al., 2018; Ford, 2012).
Box 2.4: Extreme heat
The urban heat island effect results from the prevalence of hard surfaces in cities that store heat, often 
leading to higher daytime and nighttime temperatures (McDonald et al., 2016). This rise in temperature 
amplifies the risks that cities face during extreme heat events, which are expected to increase in frequency 
and intensity as the climate changes (see Figure 2.11; Zhang et al., 2019), along with the number of heat-
related mortalities (Guo et al., 2018 ). The negative health impacts associated with extreme heat events are 
well understood (see Video 2.1; National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health, 2019a; Lebel et al., 
2017). Multiple organizations, including local and provincial governments, health authorities and the federal 
government, often lead heat response efforts in Canada. Montréal’s heatwave plan involves “monitoring signs 
of heat-related illness, frequent visits to home-care patients, opening air-conditioned shelters, extending pool 
hours and mass media communication campaigns” (Araos et al., 2017, para 9). These efforts are estimated 
to have reduced heat wave-related mortalities by 1.52 deaths per day during heat events in Montréal 
(Benmarhnia et al., 2016). 
In Toronto, only 128 of the 583 schools in the Toronto District School Board have air conditioning, which 
exposes students and workers to significant heat stress, and can prompt parents to keep children home from 
school (Flanagan, 2018). Retrofitting the schools with air conditioners would cost roughly $750 million, and 
so temporary cooling centres are set up in libraries and gyms (Flanagan, 2018). Many high-rise residential 
buildings also lack air conditioning, and some local governments have implemented adaptation initiatives 
to address this problem. For example, the City of Hamilton trained landlords to deal with extreme heat by 
providing common rooms with air conditioning, and having superintendents identify heat-related health 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 56 
symptoms, and check in on vulnerable residents (Guilbault et al., 2016). Health authorities in British Columbia 
are exploring the role that passive cooling strategies can play in maintaining safe operating conditions 
in buildings, in order to avoid increasing greenhouse gas emissions through mechanical cooling (Lower 
Mainland Facilities Management, 2018). 
Figure 2.11: This map is from climatedata.ca and displays the “hottest day” variable across multiple timescales. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 57 
Video 2.1: The National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health has produced a video about the impacts of 
and adaptations to urban heat. Source: National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health, 2018. 
<https://youtu.be/RBwgS_1D5FM>
2.4.3 Strong social systems
In addition to built infrastructure, cities and towns also have social infrastructure, complete with assets that 
include community centres, trust and social cohesion (Carter et al., 2015; Kenton, 2014). Social resilience is 
a necessary, but insufficient condition of climate resilience (Kwok et al., 2016). It encompasses a number 
of factors, including social capital, innovation, a strong economy and inclusivity (Gibberd, 2015). For 
example, social capital—which is a measure of social cohesion, agency, trust and social learning (Walker et 
al., 2014)—helped reduce the number of injuries and fatalities in the 2013 floods in Calgary (Haney, 2018). 
Similarly, during the agenda-setting workshop for Calgary’s 100 Resilient Cities initiative, “participants noted 
that successful responses to shocks are frequently driven by grassroots efforts and rely on cohesive and 
connected communities that can assemble quickly” (City of Calgary, 2017, p. 10). Interestingly, participants 
also pointed out that social media—primarily Twitter—enabled rapid community mobilization. 
There are many examples of social resilience building exercises in Canada, several of which are motivated 
by an emergency management imperative, or by health and well-being agendas. For example, the City of 
Vancouver’s Healthy City Strategy sets the following target: “all Vancouverites report that they have at least 
4 people in their network they can rely on for support in times of need” (City of Vancouver, 2015, p. 26). 
Vancouver’s “Hey Neighbour!” program is a resident-led initiative aimed at increasing social connectedness, 
neighbourliness and resilience in multi-unit buildings (City of Vancouver, 2019a). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 58 
2.4.4 Increasing equity
Equitable climate change adaptation involves understanding the inequitable nature of climate impacts, 
and ensuring broad representation in the planning, implementation and delivery of adaptation initiatives. 
Creating equity is understood to increase adaptive capacity and well-being in cities (Rosenzweig and Solecki, 
2018), and can also increase the likelihood of climate resilience measures being implemented (Gonzalez et 
al., 2017), though this has not been explored empirically in Canada. In order to achieve this, equity must be 
present in both the processes and outcomes of climate adaptation activities (Doorn, 2017). This issue is 
sometimes characterized as the “resilience for whom” question (Meerow et al., 2016). For example, Video 2.2 
demonstrates the importance of involving youth in climate action. 
Equitable climate adaptation is an emerging trend in Canada, and an increasing body of international best 
practices inspire and direct action here in Canada. For example, infrastructure designers in the United States 
are being urged to consider the extent to which their designs prioritize equity and inclusion (Climate-Safe 
Infrastructure Working Group, 2018, p. xi). Similarly, the City of Portland, Oregon has incorporated equity into 
its climate preparedness plan (City of Portland, 2014). These sentiments were echoed in the October 2019 
Victoria Call to Action (see Case Story 2.3).
Video 2.2: This video describes the importance of youth perspectives. Source: ResiliencebyDesign Research 
Innovation Lab, 2017. <https://youtu.be/bQg42VCZegk
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 59 
2.4.5 Place-based adaptation 
Place-based approaches to adaptation recognize the importance of social resilience by organizing adaptation 
efforts around community spaces that support social bonding and elicit a strong sense of place attachment 
(Adger et al., 2011). For example, the City of Toronto created ten resilience hubs across the city that 
engaged diverse local residents to design resilience projects in their communities (City of Toronto, 2019). 
When knowledge pertaining to community spaces and their value to communities is overlaid with scientific 
knowledge about impacts, new opportunities for participatory dialogue between stakeholders and local 
citizens can emerge (Amundsen, 2015). The spatial structure of place attachments can be examined through 
engagement techniques like participatory GIS mapping (Brown and Raymond, 2014), while more experiential 
approaches like collaborative citizen science projects can foster scientific learning about climate change 
while simultaneously enabling a deeper sense of place (Groulx et al., 2017; Newman et al., 2016). When 
adaptation planning focuses on the place-based values that are unique to different communities, citizens gain 
greater access to, and influence over, defining what is important to protect through adaptation (Amundsen, 
2015). At the same time, technical experts gain a local framework for discussing climate change that may 
reveal potentially overlooked impacts and sources of vulnerability (De Dominicis et al., 2015; Marshall et al., 
2012). Orienting resilience-building towards places that foster our traditions and livelihoods, house individual 
and shared histories, and impart a sense of our identity can also support implementation by garnering public 
support to protect places from climate-driven environmental change (Nicolosi and Corbett, 2018; Masterson 
et al., 2017; Adger et al., 2013; Devine-Wright, 2013). 
Case Story 2.3: Victoria Call to Action: Building resilience through 
thriving and inclusive communities 
In October 2019, more than 50 mayors and councillors from across Canada gathered in Victoria, BC as part 
of the Livable Cities Forum to discuss and share ideas on building social resilience, community belonging 
and inclusion as a key resilience strategy (ICLEI Canada, 2018b). The session culminated with elected 
officials finalizing a collective Call to Action for local leaders to advance work on the health, well-being and 
social cohesion aspects of resilience. The Victoria Call to Action was endorsed by those locally elected 
officials present as a call to themselves and other locally elected officials to take action and commit to the 
following six points of action: 
1.	 Ensure that all actions we take are done through a lens of decolonization, health and well-being, 
equity and inclusion, racial and social justice, and ecological integrity. 
2.	 Empower and resource our communities and use our role as leaders to create opportunities for 
education, connection, belonging and community building.
3.	 Enrich the fabric of our communities by building towns and cities that create a sense of place and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 60 
a strong connection to neighbourhoods. 
4.	 Leverage the interconnection of issues and look for opportunities to solve complex challenges 
that generate multiple benefits and solutions. 
5.	 Seize the pockets of brilliance in our communities coming from youth and residents as bottom-up 
solutions to our collective challenges. 
6.	 Invest our collective resources to deliver short- and long-term solutions that will have the greatest 
impact and help us go further, faster together. 
2.5 Working together yields the most successful 
outcomes 
Effective adaptation approaches to climate change consider diverse perspectives and priorities. Local 
governments are increasingly playing a strong role in driving meaningful collaboration with different 
groups when it comes to designing, planning and implementing adaptation in their communities.
Initiatives that help make Canada’s cities and towns more resilient to a changing climate are more effective 
when they are collaborative. Collaboration that is inclusive, transparent, and incorporates diverse perspectives, 
from the initial planning phases right through to adaptation implementation, enhances outcomes for all. Local 
governments are well-placed to bring groups together to share their unique perspectives and priorities, create 
solutions, and implement action. As such, strengthening local government capacity to plan and implement 
adaptation would help build adaptation momentum in cities and towns.
2.5.1 Introduction
Climate change adaptation in Canada’s cities and towns is motivated by local governments’ need to ensure 
levels of service for their communities, as well as by policies and resources at the federal (Henstra, 2017) 
and the provincial levels. For example, Nova Scotia required its municipalities to create climate action plans 
(Climate Change Nova Scotia, 2014), and other provinces have developed planning tools and resources to 
help cities incorporate adaptation into land-use planning (Government of Ontario, 2017; Legislative Assembly 
of Ontario, 2017). 
Cities and towns operate within a governance context that includes provincial and federal entities, alongside 
their own staff, councils, residents and businesses (see Box 2.5 and Case Story 2.4). Although complex, 
this context presents an opportunity for effective action on adaptation (Paterson et al., 2017; Graham and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 61 
Mitchell, 2016; Revi et al., 2014). 
2.5.2 Co-production
Participatory, collaborative planning approaches embracing and leveraging the viewpoints of multiple actors 
are viewed as essential for successful adaptation in cities (Archer et al., 2014; e.g., Auditor General of 
Canada, 2018; Wamsler, 2017; Revi et al., 2014; Burch et al., 2010). Such approaches are usually described 
as “inclusive, transparent, participatory, multi-sectoral, multi-jurisdictional and interdisciplinary” (Rosenzweig 
and Solecki, 2018, p. 757). Co-production allows multiple parties to find ways to combine their efforts and 
capacities towards achievement of a common goal (Wamsler, 2017). Co-production can occur at all points 
in the adaptation process, including risk assessment, setting objectives, implementation activities, and 
monitoring and evaluation. This is an equitable approach that also increases the likelihood of implementation, 
which is partially contingent on those impacted by a changing climate being aware, empowered to act and 
capable of creating change (Birkholz et al., 2014). 
2.5.3 Municipal governments
Municipal governments help drive climate adaptation in Canada, as they are motivated by impacts in their 
jurisdictions affecting levels of service and budgets (Dale et al., 2013). While Video 2.3 demonstrates the 
important role that municipal planners play in climate change adaptation, adaptation also includes staff 
from across municipal departments (e.g., parks, engineering). Municipal governments can use numerous 
regulatory tools to drive land-use planning decisions that consider climate change impacts. For example, 
development limitations can increase the resilience of natural systems (Terton, 2017) and help cities to 
mitigate risks relating to wildland-urban interface fires (Kovacs, 2018). 
Local governments are increasingly encouraged—in the literature and through policies—to create more 
meaningful engagement with multiple actors (Canadian Institute of Planners, 2018; Mees, 2017). For 
example, in the collaborative work in the Bras d’Or watershed on Cape Breton Island, municipalities are 
working with First Nations, provincial governments, federal agencies and citizens to ensure the health of the 
watershed into the future (Bras d’Or Lakes Collaborative Environmental Planning Initiative, 2018). Similarly, 
the Fraser Basin Council Lower Mainland Flood Management Strategy is a collective approach to coastal and 
river flooding resilience that involves 23 municipalities and numerous community organizations (Fraser Basin 
Council, 2018). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 62 
Video 2.3: This video highlights the role of planners in the adaptation process. Source: Climate Atlas of Canada, 2018. 
<https://climateatlas.ca/video/planning-climate-resilience
2.5.4 Private and public sectors
Cities and towns are sites of concentrated economic activity. Climate change can undermine community 
resilience by affecting physical assets, disrupting supply chains and business networks, and affecting 
workers (Decent and Feltmate, 2018; Hunt and Watkiss, 2011). The connection between economic resilience 
and climate resilience is increasingly being recognized. For example, as part of its involvement in the “100 
Resilient Cities” international network, the City of Calgary (along with Toronto, Montréal and Vancouver) 
connects the health of its economy to its ability to remain resilient in the face of extreme weather events 
(Nenshi, 2018). Effective adaptation enables cities and towns to maintain favourable credit ratings and 
property values in the face of a changing climate, thus positioning cities as favourable sites for investment 
and in-migration (McCullough, 2018). This has led to cities like Toronto and Vancouver participating in the 
Task Force for Climate-related Financial Disclosure (see Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter). 
Similarly, ensuring business continuity is essential to a city’s ability to function during and after an extreme event. 
Private sector businesses, and public sector organizations like universities, health authorities/organizations, 
and provincial/federal governments, are also important partners for municipal governments. These actors 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 63 
often own significant assets in cities and towns, and provide essential services. Health authorities and 
municipal governments, for example, are interdependent in that health authorities depend on municipal 
infrastructure to deliver health services that are essential to cities and towns. Creating meaningful 
partnerships early in the adaptation planning process will help create the relationships that are essential in 
the implementation phase, where multiple actors are responsible for implementation actions within their 
mandate (see ICLEI Canada, 2020 for examples of this approach). 
2.5.5 Citizens
Citizens are central to co-production of adaptation approaches in cities and towns (Cloutier et al., 2018; 
Wamsler, 2016). Individuals drive political will, participate in citizen-science monitoring programs (e.g., 
City of Vancouver, 2019b), and create and implement adaptation initiatives. For example, homeowners 
are increasingly responsible for protecting themselves from flooding and other extreme weather, and for 
financing their own recovery through private insurance (Henstra et al., 2018; Kovacs et al., 2018). Local 
governments can encourage residents to take property-level actions by offering direct incentives for the 
purchase, installation, or construction of certain adaptive measures. Incentives and rebates can be coupled 
with policy initiatives to encourage property owners to take adaptive measures beyond those mandated by 
a local bylaw or regulation (Zerbe, 2019). There are also a number of programs that target building owners 
(e.g., Victoria’s Stormwater Utility), encouraging them to effectively manage stormwater, but uptake has been 
sporadic (Canadian Standards Association, 2018; Thistlethwaite et al., 2018; Kovacs et al., 2014; Chambers, 
2013; Sandink, 2013b). 
Effectively encouraging individuals to take action on climate adaptation involves engagement in co-
production of risk perception, action planning, and implementation. This involvement can be achieved through 
community-based organizations (Gonzalez et al., 2017). For example: 
•	
West Vancouver’s urban shoreline rehabilitation was spurred by the West Vancouver Shoreline 
Preservation Society (Centre for Civic Governance, 2018);
•	
The use of sand dunes in Hamilton involved experiential learning for students that was spurred by 
Environment Hamilton and the Hamilton Naturalists’ Club, with the help of the City of Hamilton; and
•	
Green Communities Canada’s RAIN Community Solutions program works with homeowners to 
implement low impact development initiatives (RAIN Community Solutions, 2020).

2.5.6 Boundary organizations 
Boundary organizations help to translate science and Indigenous Knowledge Systems into practice, build 
capacity, contribute analysis, and convene co-production processes (Bauer and Steurer, 2014). Boundary 
organizations can include not-for-profit organizations, private consultants, researchers or even government 
agencies (Graham and Mitchell, 2016). Effective boundary organizations provide credible, legitimate and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 64 
salient information and action to cities, and help with implementation (Graham and Mitchell, 2016). As 
described in Section 2.4, health organizations are increasingly developing programming that explicitly builds 
adaptive capacity. 
Box 2.5: Urban flooding
Urban flooding associated with impervious surfaces, inadequate drainage infrastructure, and short-duration, 
high-intensity rainfall events is one of the most significant drivers of disaster loss in Canada (Insurance 
Bureau of Canada, 2018; Friedland et al., 2014) and is expected to become more common in a changing 
climate (Gaur et al., 2019; Canadian Standards Association, 2018; Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley 
Conservation, 2017). During these events, local governments face decreased capacity to act, increased 
operational and repair costs, and can also be exposed to the risk of legal liability (Zizzo et al., 2014; City 
of Stratford, 2010; Campbell et al., 2007). Additionally, the flooded basements that are a hallmark of these 
events cause property damage, displacement, loss of irreplaceable and sentimental items, and negative 
physical and mental health impacts (Decent and Feltmate, 2018; Feltmate et al., 2017), as well as reduced 
insurance coverage for future events (Sandink, 2016). 
Managing these risks requires structural and non-structural responses (e.g., improved land-use planning). 
An important non-structural approach is insurance coverage for overland flooding. This type of coverage is 
improving in Canada (Meckbach, 2018), but its success requires a high degree of capacity to act on the part 
of homeowners, insurers and all levels of government (Henstra et al., 2018). Cities and towns, for example, 
need to improve risk planning and mitigation in order to increase the commercial viability of residential flood 
insurance (Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2015). Additional barriers include lack of flood hazard awareness 
(Thistlethwaite, et al., 2018; Sandink, 2016), limited understanding of the specifics of home insurance 
coverage (Oulahen, 2015; Sandink et al., 2010), an inaccurate understanding of the level of post-disaster 
assistance available from provincial and federal governments (Henstra et al., 2018), and a host of socio-
psychological factors (McDonald et al., 2015; van der Linden et al., 2015). 
Awareness of flood hazards through updated flood mapping (see Figure 2.12 as an example) has been 
associated with increased uptake of voluntary insurance coverage for floods (Shao et al., 2017), and also as 
important enabling evidence for the development of flood control bylaws (e.g., Prince George’s floodplain 
bylaw). The need for such mapping is increasingly being met by a variety of government programs (e.g., 
Public Safety Canada’s National Disaster Mitigation Program) as well as by academics (Thistlethwaite et 
al., 2018). In 2018, Natural Resources Canada released additional guidance on floodplain mapping, as well 
as a series of case studies (Natural Resources Canada, 2018). However, flood mapping is most effective if 
it makes its way into regulation. The town of Paradise, Newfoundland, for example, has plans to update its 
bylaws to reflect the flood risk mapping shown in Figure 2.12 (Town of Paradise, 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 65 
 
Figure 2.12: An example of a flood hazard map for the municipalities of St. John’s Mount Pearl and Paradise in 
Newfoundland and Labrador. Source: Natural Resources Canada, 2018. 
Case Story 2.4: Brampton Lighthouse Project: Supporting vulnerable 
populations during extreme weather events 
The City of Brampton’s Lighthouse Project is a collaboration between the City and 20 of its faith-based 
organizations (FBOs) (Keam and Murray, 2018). This collaboration allows FBOs to provide support to 
vulnerable populations during extreme weather events and non-climate-related emergencies. FBOs provide 
pre-screened volunteers, places of refuge, wellness checks on members, emotional counselling and donation 
management (Cummings, 2017). The City provides resources, including training, identification cards and 
signage, promotional material, some equipment, support for community grants, and liability and Workplace 
Safety and Insurance Board insurance coverage during emergencies (Cummings, 2017). Extensive work was 
required to structure these partnerships. 
Faith and the Common Good, a national, non-sectarian charitable network, provided evidence in support of 
this concept with a preliminary study that explored how FBOs could be better utilized to provide local service 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 66 
centres during extreme weather emergencies (Cummings, 2016). The study found that, in addition to owning 
a large number of physical assets (e.g., buildings, parking lots), FBOs also have a history of serving vulnerable 
populations. A mapping exercise identified the locations of FBOs in relation to known vulnerable populations 
(see Figure 2.13). This mapping revealed favourable conditions in Brampton, and thus the project was 
pursued. A crucial element of the project was the inclusion of Brampton’s legal and risk division, which was 
able to create a capacity-building agreement that enabled and formalized the partnership. A “Champions Kit” 
was also produced to encourage new FBOs to join the program. Numerous metrics are used to gauge the 
effectiveness of the program, including the level of participation in FBO training workshops, follow-up 
interviews with FBOs after the workshops, and expressions of interest from other community groups and 
municipalities to participate (ICLEI Canada, 2018a). 
Figure 2.13: A map showing the location of Faith-Based Organizations, affordable housing and vulnerable 
occupants. Source: Courtesy of the City of Brampton, 2019.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 67 
2.6 Indigenous peoples in cities and towns are 
often affected in unique ways by climate change 
Canada’s cities and towns are home to large populations of Indigenous peoples, who are often affected 
in unique ways by a changing climate. Attention is being given to Indigenous issues, and the inclusion of 
Indigenous perspectives and expertise in municipal adaptation planning processes is occurring, but this is 
not widespread. Strengthening collaboration with Indigenous peoples will require increased capacity and 
additional research.
Indigenous people living in Canada’s cities and towns will face all of the climate change impacts described 
throughout this chapter, as well as unique impacts that Indigenous communities have long experienced and 
understood, (Whyte, 2017). These impacts are related to land and territory, community well-being and culture. 
Efforts to address the impacts of climate change on Indigenous people and communities in cities and towns 
should be informed by the broader context of colonialization and should involve Indigenous-led organizations. 
Creating meaningful collaborations with Indigenous organizations will enhance the inclusiveness of adaptation 
approaches in cities and towns. Best practices are starting to emerge in Canada, although more research and 
practice are needed. 
2.6.1 Introduction
All cities in Canada are built on the traditional territories of First Nations, Métis or Inuit peoples. As Canadian 
cities were founded and settled, First Nations peoples were often purposefully relocated from cities to 
reserves (Peters et al., 2018). Nevertheless, Canada’s cities and towns are home to large populations of First 
Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples. 
Many First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples living in urban areas are either living in their traditional territory, 
or continue to have strong ties to their home territories (Snyder and Wilson, 2012; Peters and Robillard, 
2009; Peters, 2004). Thus, while some First Nations, Métis and Inuit people are disconnected from their 
communities of origin, many continue to be connected and to engage in traditional land-based activities such 
as hunting and fishing (Wilt, 2016). When considering how climate change affects urban Indigenous peoples 
and resilience, it is important to think beyond the city limits, and to understand the broader relationships that 
mediate both climate change impacts and adaptation strategies (see Case Story 2.5).
The population of urban First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples is growing across Canada (Statistics Canada, 
2017b). According to the 2016 Census, Winnipeg, Edmonton, Vancouver, Toronto and Calgary are the 
cities with the largest population of First Nations people, followed by Calgary, Ottawa-Gatineau, Montréal, 
Saskatoon and Regina (see Figure 2.14; Statistics Canada, 2017c). Trends are similar for Métis and Inuit. One 
quarter of Métis people in Canada live in cities (Statistics Canada, 2018). Although three-quarters of Inuit 
live in Inuit Nunangat, four out of ten of the Inuit people living elsewhere reside in large cities. Edmonton, 
Montréal, Ottawa-Gatineau, Yellowknife and St. John’s have the largest populations of Inuit (Statistics 
Canada, 2018). First Nations, Métis and Inuit urban communities are diverse and often made up of people 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 68 
from many different nations. In many cities, First Nations, Métis and Inuit are dispersed throughout the city, 
and do not live in concentrated neighbourhoods (Howard and Proulx, 2011; Environics Institute, 2010). Cities 
are important sites of Indigenous governance. Many cities are home to vibrant organizations representing 
the interests of First Nations, Métis and Inuit. Friendship Centres, social service organizations, such as 
child and family service agencies or housing co-operatives, as well as health care agencies, are important 
sites for Indigenous governance in cities (Tomiak 2010; Peters, 2004). These organizations are important 
interlocutors for municipal governments. At the same time, the creation of urban reserves in some cities and 
urban expansion into First Nations communities invite collaboration between First Nations and municipal 
governments. Many Indigenous communities and governments are developing their own climate change 
strategies of relevance to neighbouring municipalities.
Figure 2.14: Map illustrating the Canadian cities with the largest Indigenous populations. Data source: Indigenous 
and Northern Affairs Canada, 2016. 
2.6.2 Climate change impacts for First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples
Literature that directly addresses specific impacts of climate change on First Nations Métis and Inuit in 
cities and towns is relatively scarce. However, there is a large body of literature that examines the effects of 
climate change on Indigenous peoples in Canada in general, and internationally. This literature demonstrates 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 69 
that, globally, Indigenous peoples have already been significantly affected by climate change, with effects 
including displacement from traditional territories, and impacts on food security and health, as well as 
sovereignty and self-government (Whyte, 2016; Ford, 2012, 2009; Turner and Clifton, 2009). 
Some climate change adaptation measures can negatively impact Indigenous peoples living within cities, 
as well as those living a considerable distance away. For example, the operation of aspects of Winnipeg’s 
floodwater infrastructure during the 2011 Manitoba floods caused the flooding of four First Nations 
communities, resulting in multi-year displacement (Blais et al., 2016) and a class action lawsuit (The Globe 
and Mail, 2017). The flooding destroyed roads and housing as well as wild rice beds, which are a source of 
sustenance and economic activity for First Nations. The psycho-social effects of the lengthy displacement 
were acute (Thompson et al, 2014; Ballard and Thompson, 2013). According to community leadership, at 
least five of the evacuees died by suicide during the period of extended displacement (CBC News, 2016), 
reflecting the degree of hardship such displacement causes.
Cities thinking about climate change adaptation must consider how related initiatives could impact 
Indigenous peoples within and beyond urban boundaries, as well as how Indigenous peoples bring 
indispensable knowledge, perspectives, and expertise to help identify and develop adaptation solutions. This 
kind of collaboration requires capacity building on the part of non-Indigenous governments, which must work 
to understand these important perspectives and to work with Indigenous peoples and governments in order 
to build upon this knowledge in a respectful and impactful way.
2.6.3 Indigenous Knowledge and climate change
First Nations, Métis and Inuit communities and scholars have stressed the importance of using Indigenous 
Knowledge Systems in addition to Western science when addressing climate change (EPCCARR, 2018). A 
growing body of research explores the sources and content of Indigenous Knowledge Systems, as well as the 
ethical and practical considerations related to the incorporation of Indigenous Knowledge into environmental 
governance regimes (McGregor, 2014, 2013; Patrick, 2013; Whyte, 2012). Many authors stress that the 
core of Indigenous environmental knowledge is fundamentally about creating the kinds of relationships 
that sustain life (Whyte, 2018; Kimmerer, 2011; McGregor, 2005). Thus, rather than taking knowledge about 
the environment as its object, Indigenous environmental knowledge systems emphasize environmental 
relations, and the actions that create these relations. As McGregor (2005, p. 104) writes, “It is not just 
about understanding the relationship with Mother Earth, it is the relationship itself.” Many authors have 
stressed the significance of Indigenous Knowledge Systems for sustaining Indigenous sovereignty (Whyte, 
2017). Indigenous Knowledge Systems invite a holistic approach to climate change that addresses not 
only environmental outcomes, but also political and social factors. For Indigenous peoples, this means that 
addressing the restoration of Indigenous political and territorial authority and advancing reconciliation are 
fundamental steps to mitigating and adapting to climate change. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 70 
2.6.4 Adaptation and reconciliation
Indigenous environmental knowledge has often been used to inform environmental planning and resource 
management in rural and remote areas. However, this knowledge has rarely been applied within urban 
contexts (Porter, 2013). Yet, it is clear that First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples must be involved in the 
design and implementation of climate change adaptation initiatives (Government of Canada, 2016). This 
position is becoming increasingly recognized in Canada. For example, in its policy on climate change 
planning, the Canadian Institute of Planners (2018, p. 5) supports that “local Indigenous Knowledge and 
planning traditions are integrated into planning processes, respecting the rights of Indigenous peoples.”
Although little research currently exists discussing how this might be accomplished in urban contexts, 
some Canadian cities are beginning to explore the possibilities, and are engaging Indigenous peoples in the 
development of climate change resilience strategies. For example, participants in the creation of a resilience 
strategy for the City of Toronto found that “building bridges between First Nations, Indigenous, Métis and Inuit 
peoples, and industry and resilience infrastructure projects is a foundational part of the resilience building 
process” (City of Toronto, 2018). This process was facilitated by the Indigenous Climate Action Network. 
Similar initiatives are occurring elsewhere. For example, Calgary’s Indigenous relations efforts are viewed as 
integral to the city’s social resilience (City of Calgary, 2017). Similarly, the City of Surrey, British Columbia, is 
engaging the Semiahmoo First Nation in the development of its Coastal Flood Adaptation Strategy (City of 
Surrey, 2018). 
Case Story 2.5: Community climate change resilience planning in the 
Tsleil-Waututh Nation
Tsleil-Waututh are the People of the Inlet and have used, occupied and governed the lands and waters of 
Burrard Inlet and surrounding watersheds since time immemorial. It is the birthright, obligation and sacred 
trust of the Tsleil-Waututh to care for and restore this environment to a state of health and balance. The 
Tsleil-Waututh people have noticed the complex impacts of climate change in their territory for decades. 
With an inherent understanding of how climate change is affecting the environmental and its cultural 
values, the Nation has passed down stories, traditions and knowledge-sharing that are the living record of 
this information. The Tsleil-Waututh Nation has continuously adapted and enhanced community resilience 
throughout time. 
The Tsleil-Waututh are particularly concerned about the acceleration of harm to the environmental, cultural, 
spiritual and economic values of the Nation. Waterflow regime changes to local creeks, rising sea levels, and 
increased bank and coastal erosion are affecting the reserve land area, associated economic opportunities 
and real estate developments, while hotter and drier summers are threatening forest-based habitat, 
biodiversity, and cultural and recreational use areas. The Tsleil-Waututh worry about the spread of invasive 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 71 
species, soil degradation and landslides in the Indian River Watershed―the heart of the Nation. The health 
and abundance of salmon, forage foods, wildlife and cultural use areas are at risk. 
Acknowledging the immediacy and intensity of climate change, Tsleil-Waututh members are developing a 
Community Climate Change Resiliency Planning Process (CCCRP). The CCCRP aims to build understanding 
of the impact of climate change hazards on the Tsleil-Waututh community, to institutionalize climate 
resiliency planning through Tsleil-Waututh’s government, and to develop adaptation strategies for future 
prioritization and implementation to ensure that current and future generations of Tsleil-Waututh people can 
continue to thrive in a changing climate. 
As a multi-year undertaking, the CCCRP assesses Tsleil-Waututh climate vulnerabilities, develops an action 
plan with prioritized adaptation strategies, and supports implementing these adaptation strategies while 
monitoring their effectiveness. At the beginning of this work, the Tsleil-Waututh undertook an extensive 
hazard mapping and exposure sensitivity analysis, assessing the associated vulnerabilities on the lands, 
people, and culture of the Tsleil-Waututh Nation on and near the lands of Tsleil-Waututh Reserve IR#3.
The Tsleil-Waututh’s unique eco-cultural and archeological approach to hazard mapping has revealed 
previously unknown climate information. Subsurface testing identified intact charcoal-rich sands and fire-
altered rock dating back more than 3,000 years that, while originally situated on land, are now located well 
into the marine intertidal area. Cross-referencing the archaeological findings with oral history accounts 
from Elders of the Tsleil-Waututh Nation, the archaeology team identified areas where foreshore lands have 
receded (up to 12 m in some places) as a result of shoreline erosion. With archaeological clam shell samples, 
the Nation is considering exploring the use of isotopic oxygen analysis in combination with carbon dating, 
in order to shed light on historical oceanic conditions and temperatures, and potential impacts to the Tsleil-
Waututh way of life. 
The CCCRP is a culturally and locally relevant strategy in building resilience to current and potential future 
impacts of climate change. The CCCRP is a manifestation of Tsleil-Waututh stewardship and sacred 
obligation to care for the lands, waters and air, in acknowledgement of our changing climate. 
2.7 Cities and towns are moving from adaptation 
planning to implementation 
Implementation of adaptation initiatives by cities and towns is not keeping pace with the risks posed by 
current weather extremes and future climate changes. However, examples of implementation are becoming 
more common, and the barriers to action are being reduced. Promising practices like mainstreaming and 
innovative funding arrangements offer opportunities to scale up and accelerate implementation.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 72 
Although adaptation planning has been progressing quickly in cities and towns, adaptation implementation 
has been slower to advance due to a variety of barriers. These barriers are generally well understood, and 
relate to financing, decision-support tools, competing priorities, governance and professional silos. A number 
of emerging strategies to address these barriers are likely to accelerate the transition from planning to 
implementation. These include the creation of adaptation plans that explicitly focus on implementation, 
mainstreaming of adaptation into existing operations, practices and planning within local governments (e.g., 
incorporating climate risks into asset management), and the inclusion of First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples 
in the design and implementation of climate change adaptation initiatives. 
2.7.1 Introduction 
Awareness of the need to adapt to climate change is no longer a significant barrier; tools for assessing 
vulnerability and risk are increasingly available, and adaptation plans and strategies are now common (see 
Box 2.6; Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2019; McMillan et al., 2019; Moghal et al., 2017). There is 
also evidence of implemented actions (see Case Story 2.6) and novel policies. For example, the Canadian 
Institute of Planners’ policy on climate change planning “envisions a future in which Canadian communities 
are planned, designed, developed, and managed to contribute to climate stability and to be more resilient in 
the face of unavoidable changes in the climate, and in the process, to become more liveable, prosperous, 
and equitable” (Canadian Institute of Planners, 2018, p. 3). However, adaptation implementation in cities 
and towns has not kept pace with increasing climate risks in Canada (ICLEI Canada, 2016), nor has it 
in other counties (e.g., Woodruff and Stults, 2016). There is a tendency to overestimate the capacity of 
adaptation planning to deliver the intended outcomes of adaptation (Mimura et al., 2014), and so, the 
increasing prevalence of adaptation planning in Canada’s cities and towns is not an appropriate indication 
of implementation. Implementation remains the primary challenge for cities and towns seeking to adapt to 
climate change. 
2.7.2 Barriers to adaptation
A number of barriers make it difficult to implement adaptation. The barriers presented in Table 2.3 are drawn 
from Canadian and international literature, and vary in their extent across Canada. If they are understood and 
considered early on, many of the barriers discussed below can be overcome (ICLEI Canada, 2016). Where 
appropriate, these efforts should consider multiple barriers simultaneously (Hamin et al., 2014). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 73 
Table 2.3: Common barriers to adaptation
CHALLENGE/BARRIER
DESCRIPTION
Financing
•	
Conflicting incentives when municipal revenue is contingent on 
development (e.g., property tax, development cost charges)
•	
Funding largely limited to large-scale infrastructure projects, 
which favour larger cities
•	
Limited innovative financial models (e.g. green/resilience bonds, 
cost-sharing schemes, public-private partnerships)
•	
Public opposition to innovative approaches to financing 
adaptation
Uncertainty
•	
Inherent uncertainty associated with using future conditions to 
make decisions
•	
Lack of perceived immediacy of climate change consequences
•	
Strategic and institutional uncertainty
Data and tools 
•	
Limited economic studies on costs of damages of climate 
change impacts
•	
Limited economic studies or cost-benefit analyses for adaptation
•	
Lack of higzhly context-specific data
•	
Too many tools and frameworks resulting in information 
overload
•	
Few tools to specifically support the implementation of 
adaptation initiatives 
•	
Limited guidance and tools that support community engagement 
on adaptation
Governance
•	
Federal departments are politically limited in direct transfer 
payments to local governments, requiring coordination and 
relationships with provincial governments and/or third parties 
(e.g., FCM)
•	
Disconnect between needs of local action and provincial policy/
legislation 
•	
Limited enabling conditions, such as mandates, policy, 
regulations, standards and guidelines
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 74 
CHALLENGE/BARRIER
DESCRIPTION
Governance (continued)
•	
Limited political will, motivation, willingness to act and belief that 
action will be effective Limited jurisdictional power over private 
property
•	
Limited coordination with private sector and property owners, as 
well as vulnerable groups
•	
Limited public support and insufficient level of services for the 
current demand 
•	
Lack of non-environmental considerations in adaptation
Human resources
•	
Limited internal capacity, combined with limited national 
mandates and definitions of adaptation 
•	
Limited collaboration across professional associations 
•	
Compartmentalization and institutional fragmentation
Sources: BC Auditor General, 2018; Dohertyet al., 2016; ICLEI Canada, 2016; Nordgren et al., 2016; 
Adaptation to Climate Change Team, 2015; Biesbroek et al., 2015; Eisenack et al., 2015; Environmental 
Commissioner of Ontario, 2015; Ford and King, 2015; Archer et al., 2014; Moser, 2014; Pahl et al., 2014; 
Toman, 2014; Hallegatte and Corfee-Morlot, 2011; Mees and Driessen, 2011; Burch, 2010. 
2.7.3 Advancing adaptation implementation
There are many tools and resources that support adaptation planning (e.g., planning guides—see Figure 
2.15, FCM’s staff support grants, Canadian Centre for Climate Services Support Desk). These include tools 
and resources that support implementation, including guidance on designing implementation schedules and 
mechanisms, and best practice case studies (ICLEI Canada, 2016). It is important that adaptation-planning 
processes consider implementation (e.g., City of Barrie, 2018; Zukiwsky et al., 2016). Implementation-ready 
plans address issues such as feasibility, resources, accountability, partnerships, authority and interaction with 
other initiatives (Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 2015) and emphasize “no-regrets” 
options that address one or more climate hazards, in addition to non-climate issues that are priorities for the 
local government (Chen et al., 2016). Focusing explicitly on implementation can help to ensure that plans 
reach their aspirational outcomes (e.g., reducing risk to people and property), especially if the initiative is an 
area of high public concern, and there are clear cost implications (Picketts, 2015). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 75 
Figure 2.15: The traditional adaptation planning process (steps 1–6), with enabling actions added. Source: Adapted 
from City of Vancouver, 2018. 
Rather than developing new or stand-alone plans and strategies, many cities and towns are incorporating 
climate change considerations into a wide array of municipal operations, policies, plans and services, 
including infrastructure decisions, asset management, official community plans and land-use plans, capital 
plans, master plans and emergency management frameworks (City of Vancouver, 2018). Mainstreaming 
of climate change adaptation into existing frameworks and operations is an efficient strategy to overcome 
implementation barriers, such as insufficient human and financial resources, lack of momentum and 
competing priorities (ICLEI Canada, 2016). This strategy is more effective when accompanied by efforts 
to build and maintain internal capacity (Picketts, 2015), and to create forums for collaboration across 
jurisdictional boundaries (Adaptation to Climate Change Team, 2017). 
Climate change adaptation requires coordination among broad partner networks (Rosenzweig and 
Solecki, 2018). Collaborative forums provide municipal representatives who have implemented climate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 76 
adaptation initiatives with the opportunity to share their experience (i.e., peer-to-peer learning). For example, 
municipalities in Quebec are looking for implementation examples from similar cities and towns (Bleau 
et al., 2018). An example of a program that seeks to facilitate this type of collaboration is the University 
of British Columbia’s Resilient-C project that enables communities to share knowledge and resources to 
support coastal hazard risk reduction (Resilient-C Research Team, 2020). Similarly, FCM’s Climate Adaptation 
Partnership Grants have resulted in projects that leverage non-profit expertise to enable groups of cities and 
towns to collaborate; such an approach also supports the scaling up of action. 
Box 2.6: Benchmarking adaptation activity in Canadian cities
Between 2004 and 2014, most of the adaptation activity in Canada was occurring at the municipal level, 
with the majority of this work involving planning and capacity building, but few examples of implemented 
initiatives (Eyzaguirre and Warren, 2014). A number of surveys provide insight into the state of play of 
adaptation in Canada’s cities and towns. The 2018 Local Adaptation in Canada survey, carried out by 
the Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM), the University of British Columbia and the University 
of Waterloo, found that more than half of the 180 local governments respondents had initiated formal 
adaptation planning discussions in their community within the last four years (McMillan et al., 2019). 
These discussions are being advanced by a range of municipal departments, but are still sometimes ad 
hoc and reactive (see Figure 2.16), and often do not result in implementation due to a lack of human and 
financial resources (McMillan et al., 2019). This survey builds on a similar survey delivered in 2012 as 
part of the National Municipal Adaptation Project (National Municipal Adaptation Project, 2014), though 
direct comparisons between the two surveys are not possible due to differences in survey questions and 
methodology (McMillan et al., 2019). 
A Climate Adaptation Maturity Scale was developed by FCM to facilitate the self-assessment of a 
municipality’s institutional readiness and progress in adapting to climate change. The scale helps 
municipalities and FCM to rapidly self-assess their current state, as well as to identify areas of potential 
improvement across three competency areas, as they relate to climate change adaptation: 1) policy; 
2) human resources and governance; and 3) technical and risk management capacity (Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, 2017). It uses the following population categories: small (< 10,000), medium (10,000–100,000) 
and large (> 100,000). Based on the results from 110 ongoing adaptation projects, it was found that 
larger cities have higher baseline capacity in the policy and human resources and governance dimensions 
(Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2019). Municipalities will be invited to do a second self-assessment 
following the completion of their project. The results from 16 completed projects (see Figure 2.16) show that, even 
though projects undertaken by large municipalities end with a higher competency level in all three areas, small and 
medium-sized municipalities also show a significant progression on aspects of adaptation during their project.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 77 
Figure 2.16: Graphical representation of baseline self-assessments made using FCM’s Climate Adaptation 
Maturity Scale provided by municipalities that received FCM-support towards local adaptation projects. The 
five-point scale ranges from 1.0 (concept level) to 5.0 (continuous improvement level), and includes three 
competency areas: 1) policy, 2) human resources and governance, and 3) technical and risk management. 
This graph shows the average self-assessment values provided by small municipalities (e.g. less than 10,000), 
medium-size municipalities (e.g. 10,000-100,000) and large municipalities (e.g. more than 100,000) at the start of 
their adaptation projects. Data source: Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2019.
A 2019 landscape assessment and needs analysis conducted by FCM and Environment and Climate 
Change Canada scanned highest-order planning documents (e.g., official community plan) for 732 local 
governments for evidence of a commitment to climate change adaptation. This scan revealed that 19% of 
the municipalities demonstrated a commitment to climate change adaptation, 58% showed no commitment, 
and 23% had no high-order planning document available online (Federation of Canadian Municipalities 
and Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2019). Of those that had made commitments, 28% were in 
Ontario, 25% in British Columbia, and 10% from each of Alberta and Quebec. A secondary scan of 120 local 
governments revealed that a commitment to climate change by larger municipalities (>50,000) tended to be 
in a stand-alone adaptation or in resilience plans, whereas for smaller municipalities, if references to climate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 78 
change were present, they were in broader sustainability or community development plans. This finding is 
supported by additional research in the Canadian context (Moghal et al., 2017). 
The above findings focus largely on capacity building and planning, and do not represent a significant 
departure from those reported in the 2014 assessment (Eyzaguirre and Warren, 2014). Although there is 
evidence of more widespread implementation, the above surveys do not provide sufficient insight into the 
extent and nature of implemented adaptation initiatives in Canada. Despite this shortcoming, the surveys 
discussed above represent a relatively rich, albeit fragmented, source of baseline data for future research and 
assessments, and provide a useful point of comparison. It should be noted that there are also international 
surveys (e.g., Aylett, 2015; Carmin et al., 2012) and surveys conducted by industry associations (e.g., 
Canadian Institute of Planners, 2019) that contain some element of the climate change adaptation state of 
play in Canadian cities and towns, although these are less relevant for this chapter. 
Case Story 2.6: Adaptation measures and co-benefits through the 
upgrading of Rue Saint-Maurice in Trois-Rivières, QC 
Trois-Rivières, Quebec, is a riverside city with a population of 134,410. The City has had a climate change 
adaptation plan since 2013 (SNC-Lavalin Environnement, 2013) and has participated in two PIEVC (Public 
Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee) assessments (Osseyrane and Kamal, 2013; Rivard et 
al., 2013). A significant adaptation intervention that resulted from the plan is “Le Grand Projet de la Rue 
Saint-Maurice,” which involved significant upgrades to a 1.3-km stretch of residential road (Ville de Trois-
Rivières, 2018). The project used a combination of built and natural infrastructure, and aimed to reduce the 
urban heat island effect, increase the presence of plants, beautify the landscape, improve neighbourhood 
safety for pedestrians and motorists, and to help replenish the water table with drinking water through sound 
stormwater management (see Figure 2.17; Ville de Trois-Rivières, 2018). Parking spaces along the street have 
been replaced by more than 135 trees, 1,000 shrubs and 18,000 plants. The project also had a significant 
built infrastructure component, including the installation of 5.05 km of pipes and 103 sumps to manage the 
stormwater not absorbed by the green infrastructure.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 79 
 
Figure 2.17: An overview of the adaptation and GHG emissions reduction measures implemented through the 
upgrading of Rue Saint-Maurice in Trois-Rivières, QC. Photo courtesy of Ville de Trois-Rivières.
Monitoring and evaluation data for this project is not yet available, but will be once the project has been 
completed. It is expected that a research team will collect pre- and post-intervention data relating to peak 
flow, water volume, infiltration and water quality parameters (Ouranos, 2017). The project was funded 
primarily by the Fund for Drinking Water and Wastewater Treatment, and there are plans to conduct similar 
projects elsewhere in Quebec once the pilot has been evaluated. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 80 
2.8 Monitoring and evaluation of adaptation is 
an important and often overlooked step 
Monitoring and evaluation methods are required to track adaptation progress, and measure whether 
adaptation efforts are resulting in their desired outcomes. While promising approaches exist, monitoring 
and evaluation of adaptation projects and outcomes are still rare, and there is value in helping cities and 
towns to develop approaches that are effective and comprehensive. 
Although there has been considerable conceptual work on monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of adaptation, 
it remains difficult for cities and towns to apply this step. This is partly due to the fact that the adaptation 
field in Canada is just beginning to enter the implementation phase in a significant way. It is likely that this 
transition will spur the advancement of M&E approaches that cities and towns can use to overcome inherent 
difficulties, including shifting baselines, and attribution and resource requirements. M&E approaches work 
best when they reflect who is benefitting from adaptation, and when they embed accountability into the 
outcomes of investments in adaptation, take multiple co-benefits into account, and enable course corrections. 
Operationalizing adaptation monitoring and evaluation for specific contexts will be an important area of 
practice in the near term. 
2.8.1 Introduction
As cities and towns across Canada begin to move from adaptation planning to implementation, there is an 
urgent need for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) approaches that can be used to identify baseline conditions, 
guide action, track progress and evaluate the extent to which adaptive capacity and/or resilience are being 
achieved. The adaptation M&E imperative operates across all scales. Calls for M&E can be seen in the Paris 
Agreement (Ford et al., 2015), Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, Pan-Canadian Framework 
on Clean Growth and Climate Change, provincial adaptation plans (BC Auditor General, 2018), and at the 
local level. There is a strong literature base offering guidance on adaptation M&E (e.g., Brown et al., 2018; 
Leagnavar et al., 2015; Bours et al., 2014; Dinshaw et al., 2014; Pringle, 2011; Jacob et al., 2010), in addition to 
strong proxy literatures (e.g., disaster resilience, program evaluation, risk management). However, translating usable 
indicators and approaches from this literature is likely to be difficult for cities, especially those with limited capacity. 
2.8.2 Progress and approaches
There are several practical examples of adaptation M&E in Canada. One of the most salient is ICLEI Canada’s 
Building Adaptive and Resilient Communities (BARC) program, which is a participatory planning framework 
for climate adaptation that requires consideration of M&E. This requirement has led to a number of Canadian 
adaptation plans that incorporate proposed indicators, but no formal monitoring and evaluation strategies to 
date (e.g., City of Vancouver, 2012, p. 54). A more regional example of adaptation indicators in the Canadian 
context can be seen in the Columbia Basin Trust’s “State of The Basin” indicators (Columbia Basin Trust, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 81 
2015). The City of Surrey, BC, uses a series of sustainability and adaptation indicators to display progress and 
to encourage action (see Case Story 2.7).
In 2018, Environment and Climate Change Canada convened an Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation 
and Resilience Results (EPCCARR) that developed a series of indicators—structured around the five key 
focus areas in the adaptation pillar of the Pan-Canadian Framework—that could be used to measure progress 
on adaptation (EPCCARR, 2018). These include process and outcome indicators, many of which refer to 
measurable developments at the local government or community level (e.g., number of days of disruption to 
basic services and critical infrastructure). Potential challenges for mobilization of EPCCARR indicators at the 
city-level M&E include the lack of relevant data, and the fact that data are not organized in ways that might 
be useful for M&E processes (EPCCARR, 2018). Training and technical assistance on data collection and 
organization would facilitate consistent M&E application.
There are several international resilience planning frameworks that include M&E guidance for cities. The 
largest of these is UNISDR’s Resilient Cities and the City Resilience Framework, with the accompanying 
City Resilience Index, associated with the Rockefeller Foundation’s 100 Resilient Cities program. The City 
Resilience Index measures relative performance over time, rather than creating comparisons between cities, 
and provides indicators and metrics that can be used as a common basis for monitoring and evaluation, 
to create benchmark comparisons with other cities, and that are meant to identify areas of weakness and 
to suggest actions that can improve resilience (ARUP and Partners, 2016). Similarly, the Climate Risk and 
Adaptation Framework and Taxonomy (CRAFT) is a decision-support tool that relies in part on process 
indicators to demonstrate progress internally and in relation to other cities (C40 Cities, 2016). However, 
neither of these approaches was developed with the active participation of Canadian cities, and they have 
limited applicability in the Canadian context, as their primary focus is on the largest cities. 
There are also M&E frameworks that do not include the use of indicators. For example, outcome harvesting 
uses program documents and interviews to quantify progress on projects (Eyzaguirre, 2015; Wilson-Grau, 
2015). This approach can help overcome some of the challenges related to data availability and organization 
described above. However, other challenges still remain. Many adaptation initiatives are not initially labelled 
as such (i.e., unintentional adaptation), and are therefore not included in M&E reporting, even though they 
contribute to reducing vulnerability (Hughes, 2015). For example, the installation of larger culverts may have 
been motivated by analysis of historical trends, rather than influenced by a changing climate. 
Adaptation also occurs over long timelines, whereas project outcomes need to be evaluated over the course 
of decades, and often only after an extreme event has occurred (Moser and Boykoff, 2013). There are also 
challenges associated with attribution. Cities and towns are complex systems, and it can be difficult to 
disentangle causal pathways such that an outcome (e.g., reduced flood damage) can be attributed to an 
adaptation intervention (e.g., investment in green infrastructure). Similarly, successful adaptation often 
means measuring avoided impacts (e.g., fewer hospital visits during a heat wave) (Bours et al., 2014). Finally, 
articulating the co-benefits associated with adaptation initiatives is another significant challenge faced by 
those developing climate adaptation M&E plans. 
The selection of an M&E approach should take into account its appropriateness for the context, and its 
capacity for precision and accuracy, explanatory power and utility (Constas, 2015). Monitoring and evaluation 
plans are most effective when they are created early in the planning process, and used to communicate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 82 
results and harmonize action and reporting across municipal departments and with external stakeholders 
(ICLEI Canada, 2016). It is also important that M&E be designed and accomplished in a participatory way 
(Sharifi, 2016; Villanueva, 2011). As Moser and Boykoff (2013, p. 3) write, “Success is not simply to be decided 
on scientific, rational, objective, or procedural grounds, but is in important ways normative, historically 
contingent, and context-specific.” For example, including various perspectives―Indigenous, gender, business, 
marginalized populations―in the design of M&E frameworks can ensure that resilience objectives are 
mutually agreed upon and equitable (Doorn, 2017; EPCCARR, 2018). This will require creative development of 
engagement approaches, as well as expanded educational tools and resources.
Case Story 2.7: Tracking progress on adaptation through the City of 
Surrey’s Sustainability Dashboard
The City of Surrey is a coastal city in British Columbia with a population of 517,885. For over eight 
years, the City has been using a Sustainability Dashboard to communicate progress on items relating 
to its Sustainability Charter, which addresses the following themes: inclusion, built environment and 
neighbourhoods, public safety, economic prosperity and livelihoods, ecosystems, education and culture, 
health and wellness, and infrastructure. The dashboard is updated annually—except where reliant on census 
data—and, although it is explicitly focused on sustainability, there are several indicators that report on 
data relevant to climate change adaptation (e.g., shade trees planted on public property, extent of green 
infrastructure network). Some of the indicators also display links that encourage individuals to take action. 
For example, the indicator page for the number of trees planted on public property contains a link explaining 
how residents can add to Surrey’s urban forest. 
Surrey is involved in the development of World Council for City Data’s ISO 37123 for Resilient Cities, and 
plans to explore how these indicators could be integrated into the dashboard in the future.  In 2016, the 
City of Surrey was certified as a World Council for City Data’s ISO 37120 Platinum Certified City. However, 
the decision about which adaptation and/or resilience indicators to report on has not been straightforward. 
Surrey’s 2013 Climate Adaptation Plan contains 36 proposed indicators relating to the action items from 
the plan (City of Surrey, 2013). An internal study has concluded that some of these indicators are no longer 
appropriate, while others are weakened by lack of data availability and accountability, as well as other factors. 
However, most importantly, the City is currently transitioning towards a data-driven decision-making (D3M) 
approach that seeks to harmonize data collection and reporting across all city departments and initiatives. 
The outcomes of this process will help the City to determine which adaptation-related data to collect, and 
will also drive the creation of a new public-facing dashboard that uses a contemporary interface and data 
management system (e.g., Power BI), instead of the bespoke dashboard created for the city in 2011.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 83 
2.9 Moving forward 
2.9.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs
As the climate change adaptation field matures in Canada, there is a need for conceptual and practical 
guidance in a number of areas. First, decision-makers across Canada would benefit from more explicit 
guidance on how to mainstream adaptation into existing workflows (e.g., master planning processes) and 
business practices (e.g., procurement, financing and project management). This would help cities and towns 
to embed adaptation across the organization, which would likely strengthen implementation. 
There is a strong demand for research findings and methodological guidance relating to the quantification 
of economic, as well as social and environmental costs of climate impacts. These analyses can support 
compelling projected returns on investment for adaptation projects. There is also a demand for cost 
benefit analyses that can be applied to adaptation initiatives (Bleau et al., 2018). The Costs and Benefits of 
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter in this assessment represents a significant step forward in 
addressing this need. 
The adaptation field itself could be the subject of future research. An assessment of the climate change 
adaptation field in the United States was guided by the following question: “What would a strong, mature 
adaptation field look like, and what would it take to build it?” (Moser et al., 2017, p. 8). Such a study in Canada 
could help to more clearly articulate the role that cities and towns play in adapting to climate change, and 
how they could be supported by others as the field matures and as adaptation initiatives become more 
common. Similarly, although frameworks that evaluate plan quality are common (Guyadeen et al., 2019; 
Dokoska et al., 2018), research that examines the quality of adaptation plans is only beginning to emerge 
(e.g., Woodruff and Stults, 2016). 
2.9.2 Emerging issues
It is expected that several issues of relevance to cities and towns will emerge in the adaptation field in the 
coming years. One such issue relates to determining the appropriate relationship between climate change 
adaptation and resilience. Although inconsistently defined (Meerow et al., 2016; Meerow and Stults, 2016), the 
concept of resilience applied in the urban context often connotes a broad scope that includes non-climatic 
stressors like lack of affordable housing, economic downturns, or decreasing populations, such as those 
observed in Quebec and eastern Canada (Statistics Canada, 2017d). Although the concept of resilience 
can encourage local governments to govern collaboratively across disciplines, thereby taking more of a 
systems approach, and to consider the desirable qualities of resilient systems (e.g., flexibility, redundancy), 
this concept can be challenging to apply in practice, as it adds complexity to the already complex endeavour 
of adapting to climate change. Navigating this discursive and practical terrain is an emerging issue in the 
field of climate change adaptation in Canada, where an increasing number of cities are issuing requests for 
proposals for climate resilience strategies. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 84 
This chapter has highlighted some of the emerging issues related to Indigenous peoples and climate change 
adaptation in cities and towns. The inclusion of Indigenous people in planning and implementation processes 
within and adjacent to cities and towns is an emerging area of practice. Similarly, First Nations, Métis and 
Inuit communities and scholars have stressed the importance of considering Indigenous Knowledge Systems 
in addition to Western science when addressing climate change (EPCCARR, 2018). The inclusion of the 
processes and products of Indigenous Knowledge Systems into adaptation planning and implementation is 
likely to be an emerging priority in the Canadian adaptation field. 
The appropriate and effective inclusion of social equity into climate change adaptation planning and 
implementation processes is another emerging issue facing decision-makers in cities and towns. Considering 
equity issues is thought to increase adaptive capacity and well-being in cities (Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2018), 
and can increase the likelihood of adaptation implementation (Gonzalez et al., 2017), although this has not 
been explored empirically in Canada. It is increasingly acknowledged that an equity lens should be applied 
during adaptation planning and implementation, but conceptual and practical guidance on applying this lens 
is generally lacking, especially in small and medium-sized cities and towns. 
The declaration of climate emergencies has also emerged as a practice by many cities and towns across 
Canada. (Climate Emergency Declaration, 2020). The objective of the climate emergency declaration is to 
highlight that unless governments acknowledge and publicly declare climate change as the utmost global 
emergency, sufficient and profound action will not take place. Since climate emergency declarations are 
intended to encourage action on mitigation and adaptation, they are likely to be an important component of 
the adaptation landscape in Canada in the coming years. 
Another emerging issue faced by adaptation practitioners in Canada is the need to connect adaptation 
with greenhouse gas mitigation efforts. This approach is increasingly referred to as low carbon resilience 
(LCR) (Nichol and Harford, 2016). LCR has strong relevance at the local government level, with particular 
emphasis in the areas of asset management and corporate strategic planning (Adaptation to Climate 
Change Team, 2019). Discussion of this approach is emerging in the literature (IPCC, 2018), and practical 
application is being researched in the local government context, where it is being shown to have multiple co-
benefits in terms of health, equity, biodiversity and other key areas (Shaw et al., 2019) and is also occurring 
in the building sector. For example, the US Green Building Council’s RELi standard provides guidance on 
LCR approaches, and there is a strong push to design or retrofit buildings for low carbon resilience (BOMA 
Canada, 2019; Bristow and Bristow, 2017). 
There are also emerging issues that relate to continued technological development in cities and towns. The 
National Research Council of Canada identifies capabilities in smart infrastructure and cities of the future 
as a key opportunity for Canada (National Research Council of Canada, 2019). It is essential that efforts to 
create smart cities take into account the need to adapt to climate change. For example, self-driving cars 
could unlock tremendous potential for green infrastructure, including through the conversion of existing 
road infrastructure to more permeable surfaces that support stormwater management. There are similar 
opportunities relating to the role of big data (Ford et al., 2016) and artificial intelligence. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 85 
2.10 Conclusion 
Canada’s cities and towns will continue to be affected by climate change. Although the extent of these 
impacts remains unclear, early action is required to minimize the extent of negative impacts and to leverage 
the opportunities associated with positive impacts. As shown in Box 2.6, Canada’s cities and towns continue 
to make progress on adaptation to climate change, and the field is entering the era of implementation. While 
much of this implementation is reactionary, strategic and proactive implementation is beginning to emerge. 
With a concerted, supported and well-informed effort, implementation is likely to increase the adaptive 
capacity and resilience of cities and towns in the future. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 86 
2.11 References 
Abbott, G. and Chapman, M. (2018). Addressing the new 
normal: 21st century disaster management in British Columbia. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/
assets/gov/public-safety-and-emergency-services/emergency-
preparedness-response-recovery/embc/bc-flood-and-wildfire-
review-addressing-the-new-normal-21st-century-disaster-
management-in-bc-web.pdf>  
Adaptation to Climate Change Team (2015). Paying for urban 
infrastructure adaptation in Canada: An analysis of existing 
and potential economic instruments for local governments. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://act-adapt.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/06/Urban-Infrastructure-Optimized3.pdf>
Adaptation to Climate Change Team (2017). Low carbon 
resilience and transboundary municipal ecosystem governance: 
A case study of Still Creek. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://act-adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/ACT_
stillcreek.pdf>
Adaptation to Climate Change Team (2019). Workshop 2 
summary report. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://act-
adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/ICABCCI-Workshop-2-
Summary.pdf>
Adger, W. N., Barnett, J., Brown, K., Marshall, N., and O’Brien, 
K. (2013). Cultural dimensions of climate change impacts and 
adaptation. Nature Climate Change, 3(2), 112-117.  Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/NCLIMATE1666> 
Adger, W. N., Barnett, J., Chapin, F. S., and Ellemor, H. (2011). 
This must be the place: Underrepresentation of identity 
and meaning in climate change decision-making. Global 
Environmental Politics, 11(2), 1-25. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1162/GLEP_a_00051>
AECOM and Risk Sciences International. (2015). Toronto 
Hydro-Electric System Limited climate change vulnerability 
assessment. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/
sites/default/files/th_pievc_cc_assessment_final_external_
june_1_2015_-_sep_14_revision_web.pdf> 
Agyapong, V. I. O., Hrabok, M., Juhas, M., Omeje, J., Denga, E., 
Nwaka, B., Akinjise, I., Corbett, S. E., Moosavi, S., Brown, M., 
Chue, P., Greenshow, A. J., and Li, X. M. (2018). Prevalence rates 
and predictors of generalized anxiety disorder symptoms in 
residents of Fort McMurray six months after a wildfire. Frontiers 
in Psychiatry, 9(July), 1-12. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00345>
Ahern, J., Cilliers, S., and Niemelä, J. (2014). The concept of 
ecosystem services in adaptive urban planning and design: 
A framework for supporting innovation. Landscape and Urban 
Planning, 125, 254-259. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2014.01.020>
Ahiablame, L. M., Engel, B. A., and Chaubey, I. (2013). 
Effectiveness of low impact development practices in two 
urbanized watersheds: Retrofitting with rain barrel/cistern 
and porous pavement. Journal of Environmental Management, 
119, 151-161. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2013.01.019>
Alexander, C. and McDonald, C. (2014). Urban forests: the value 
of trees in the city of Toronto. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.td.com/document/PDF/economics/special/
UrbanForests.pdf> 
Amec Foster Wheeler and Credit Valley Conservation. (2017). 
National infrastructure and buildings climate change adaptation 
state of play report. Retrieved February 2020, from <www.
ibwgsop.org/assets/IBWG_SoP_Final.pdf> 
Amundsen, H. (2015). Place attachment as a driver of 
adaptation in coastal communities in Northern Norway. Local 
Environment, 20(3), 257-276. Retreieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2013.838751> 
Araos, M., Ford, J. D., and Austin, S. (2017). Canada’s cities 
confront climate change. GreenBiz. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://www.greenbiz.com/article/canadas-cities-
confront-climate-change> 
Archer, D., Almansi, F., DiGregorio, M., Roberts, D., Sharma, 
D., and Syam, D. (2014). Moving towards inclusive urban 
adaptation: Approaches to integrating community-based 
adaptation to climate change at city and national scale. Climate 
and Development, 6(4), 345-356. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17565529.2014.918868> 
Arsenijevich, N. (2018): What if … cities become sites of food 
production. Aperture Newsletter, WSP Canada. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://ca-futureready.wsp.com/aperture-
2018-q2/aperture-2018-q2/> 
ARUP (2014). Cities alive: Rethinking green infrastructure. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.arup.com/-/media/
arup/files/publications/c/cities_alive_booklet.pdf> 
ARUP and Partners (2016). Inside the CRI: Reference guide. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.alnap.org/system/
files/content/resource/files/main/160516-inside-the-cri-
reference-guide.pdf> 
Asset Management BC (2018). Climate change and asset 
management: A sustainable service delivery primer. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.assetmanagementbc.ca/wp-
content/uploads/The-BC-Framework_Primer-on-Climate-Change-
and-Asset-Management.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 87 
Associated Engineering (2011). City of Calgary water supply 
infrastrcuture: Climate change vulnerability risk assessment. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/
files/city_of_calgary_water_supply_infrastructure_report_web.
pdf> 
Auditor General of Canada (2018). Perspectives on climate 
change action in Canada. Office of the Auditor General of 
Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_otp_201803_e_42883.html>
Aylett, A. (2015). Institutionalizing the urban governance of 
climate change adaptation: Results of an international survey. 
Urban Climate, 14(December), 4-16. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.uclim.2015.06.005>
Bahadur, A., Tanner, T., King, D., Kirbyshire, A., and Morsi, H. 
(2016). Resilience scan, October-December 2015: A review 
of literature, debates and social media activity on resilience. 
Overseas Development Institute, London. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-
documents/11261.pdf> 
Ballard, M. and Thompson, S. (2013). Flooding, hope and 
livelihoods: Lake St . Martin First Nation. Canadian Journal 
of Nonprofit and Social Economy Research, 4(1), 43-65. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.22230/
cjnser.2013v4n1a129>
Bauer, A. and Steurer, R. (2014). Multi-level governance of 
climate change adaptation through regional partnerships in 
Canada and England. Geoforum, 51, 121-129. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.10.006>
BC Auditor General (2018). Managing climate change risks: 
An independent audit. Office of the Auditor General of British 
Columbia, Victoria, British Columbia. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.bcauditor.com/sites/default/files/
publications/reports/Climate_Change_FINAL.pdf> 
BC Housing (2019). Mobilizing building adaptation and 
resilience. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
bchousing.org/research-centre/library/residential-design-
construction/MBAR&sortType=sortByDate> 
BC Hydro (2019). Weathering the storm: Many British 
Columbians not prepared for increasingly severe winter storms. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.bchydro.com/
content/dam/BCHydro/customer-portal/documents/news-and-
features/report-storm-preparedness-report-nov2019..pdf> 
BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy 
(2017). Addressing climate and health risks in BC: Public health. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/
gov/environment/climate-change/adaptation/health/final_
climate_and_health_backgrounder_public_health.pdf> 
BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy 
(2019). Preliminary strategic climate risk assessment for British 
Columbia. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www2.gov.
bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/climate-change/adaptation/
prelim-strat-climate-risk-assessment.pdf> 
Beatley, T. and Newman, P. (2013). Biophilic cities are 
sustainable, resilient cities. Sustainability, 5(8), 3328-3345. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/
su5083328>
Benmarhnia, T., Bailey, Z., Kaiser, D., Auger, N., King, N., and 
Kaufman, J. S. (2016). A difference-in-differences approach to 
assess the effect of a heat action plan on heat-related mortality, 
and differences in effectiveness according to sex, age, and 
socioeconomic status (Montréal, Quebec). Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 124(11), 1694-1699. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP203> 
Berry, J. (2016). Ecosystem-based adaptation to climate 
change in urban areas: An evaluation of rainwater management 
practices in Metro Vancouver. Masters Thesis, Simon Fraser 
University. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://summit.sfu.ca/
system/files/iritems1/16260/etd9436_JBerry.pdf>  
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M. D., and Parker, S. (2014). Human 
health, Chapter 7 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector 
Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and 
D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 191-232. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/
Chapter7-Human-Health_Eng.pdf> 
Biesbroek, R., Dupuis, J., Jordan, A., Wellstead, A., Howlett, M., 
Cairney, P., Rayner, J., and Davidson, D. (2015). Opening up 
the black box of adaptation decision-making. Nature Climate 
Change, 5(6), 493-494. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2615> 
Birkholz, S., Muro, M., Jeffrey, P., and Smith, H. M. (2014). 
Rethinking the relationship between flood risk perception and 
flood management. Science of the Total Environment, 478, 12-
20. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2014.01.061> 
Blais, E. L., Greshuk, J., and Stadnyk, T. (2016). The 2011 flood 
event in the Assiniboine River Basin: Causes, assessment and 
damages. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 41(1-2), 74-84. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/070117
84.2015.1046139> 
Bleau, N., Bisaillon, A., and Duval, V. (2018). Inventaire et 
suivi de l’utilisation des ressources en adaptation des milieux 
urbains aux changements climatiques. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/
RapportBisaillon2018.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 88 
Boggess, J. M., Becker, G. W., and Mitchell, M. K. (2014). Storm 
and flood hardening of electrical substations. 2014 IEEE PES 
TandD Conference and Exposition, 1-5. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1109/TDC.2014.6863387> 
BOMA Canada (2019). 2019 resilience brief. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://bomacanada.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/11/BOMA_Resilience_Brief_Eng_v5.pdf> 
BOMA Canada (2020). About BOMA BEST. Retrieved February 
2020, from <http://bomacanada.ca/bomabest/aboutbomabest/> 
Bours, D., McGinn, C., and Pringle, P. (2014). Guidance note 
1: Twelve reasons why climate change adaptation M and E is 
challenging. Retrieved February 2020, from <www.ukcip.org.uk/
wp-content/PDFs/MandE-Guidance-Note1.pdf> 
Brandt, L. A., Derby Lewis, A., Fahey, R., Scott, L., Darling, L., and 
Swanston, C. (2016). A framework for adapting urban forests 
to climate change. Environmental Science & Policy, 66, 393-
402. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.06.005>
Brandt, L. A., Derby Lewis, A., Scott, L., Darling, L., Fahey, R. T., 
Iverson, L., Nowak, D. J., Bodine, A. R., Bell, A., Still, S., Butler, P. 
R., Dierich, A., Handler, S. D., Janowiak, M. K., Matthews, S. N., 
Miesbauer, J. W., Peters, M., Prasad, A., Shannon, P. D., Stotz, D., 
and Swanston, C. W. (2017). Chicago wilderness region urban 
forest vulnerability assessment and synthesis: A report from the 
Urban Forestry Climate Change Response Framework Chicago 
Wilderness Project. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
fs.fed.us/nrs/pubs/gtr/gtr_nrs168.pdf>
Bras d’Or Lakes Collaborative Environmental Planning Initiative 
(2018). Bras d’Or Charter. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://brasdorcepi.ca/cepi-homepage/bras-dor-charter/> 
Bristow, D. N. and Bristow, M. (2017). Retrofitting for resiliency 
and sustainability of households. Canadian Journal of Civil 
Engineering, 44(7), 530-538. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1139/cjce-2016-0440>
Brown, C., Shaker, R. R., and Das, R. (2018). A review of 
approaches for monitoring and evaluation of urban climate 
resilience initiatives. Environment, Development and 
Sustainability, 20(1), 23-40. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-016-9891-7> 
Brown, G. and Raymond, C. M. (2014). Methods for identifying 
land use conflict potential using participatory mapping. 
Landscape and Urban Planning, 122, 196-208. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2013.11.007> 
Burch, S. (2010). Transforming barriers into enablers of action 
on climate change: Insights from three municipal case studies 
in British Columbia, Canada. Global Environmental Change, 
20(2), 287-297. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2009.11.009> 
Burch, S., Sheppard, S. R. J., Shaw, A., and Flanders, D. (2010). 
Planning for climate change in a flood-prone community: 
Municipal barriers to policy action and the use of visualizations 
as decision-support tools. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 
3(2), 126-139. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1753-318X.2010.01062.x>
Bureau de normalisation du Québec (2013). BNQ 3019-
190/2013: Reducing the urban heat island effect - Parking lot 
development - Design guide. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www-secur.criq.qc.ca/bnq/documents/enquetes_
publiques/3019-190_dpen.pdf> 
Buse, C. G. (2018). Why should public health agencies across 
Canada conduct climate change and health vulnerability 
assessments? Canadian Journal of Public Health, 109(5-6), 782-
785. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.17269/
s41997-018-0118-6> 
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D. S. (2019). Canada’s changing climate 
report. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/energy/Climate-change/pdf/CCCR_
FULLREPORT-EN-FINAL.pdf> 
C40 Cities (2016). Climate risk and adaptation framework and 
Taxonomy (CRAFT). Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
c40-production-images.s3.amazonaws.com/other_uploads/
images/445_C40_CRAFT_v11.original.pdf?1453129528>  
C40 Cities and AECOM. (2017). C40 infrastructure 
interdependencies and climate risks report. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/report_c40_
interdependencies_.pdf>
Cairns, S., O’Neill, S. J., and Wilson, S. (2019). Opportunities to 
fund municipal natural asset management projects: An overview 
of six federal infrastructure funding programs. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://institute.smartprosperity.ca/sites/
default/files/spmnaireportfullweb.pdf> 
Campbell, J., Saxe, D., and Zechner, F. (2007). Municipal liability 
for sewer and water pipe failures...despite statutory authority 
and immunity. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
siskinds.com/cmsfiles/PDF/oswca-paper-to-cwwa-27-feb-2007-
final.pdf> 
Canadian Council of Forest Ministers (2013). Evaluating past, 
current and future forest fire load trends in Canada. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.ccfm.org/pdf/2 Fire Load 
Trends.pdf>  
Canadian Electricity Association (2019). The Canadian 
Electricity Association announces climate change adaptation 
plans in collaboration with Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://electricity.ca/news-events/news/
the-canadian-electricity-association-announces-climate-change-
adaptation-plans-in-collaboration-with-natural-resources-
canada/> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 89 
Canadian Institute of Planners (2018). Policy on climate change 
planning. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://cip-icu.ca/Files/
Policy-2018/policy-climate-eng-FINAL.aspx> 
Canadian Institute of Planners (2019). Perspective on climate 
change: A report oin the 2019 benchmarking survey of Canadian 
professional planners. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.cip-icu.ca/getattachment/Resources/Resources/2019-CIP-
Climate-Change-Survey-Final-Report/CIP-FINAL-report.pdf.aspx> 
Canadian Society of Landscape Architects (n.d.). Landscape 
architects lead climate conscious design and planning. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.csla-aapc.ca/sites/
csla-aapc.ca/files/Advocacy/CSLA Position Paper Climate 
Change FINAL en.pdf> 
Canadian Society of Landscape Architects (2018). Adaptation 
primers. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.csla-aapc.
ca/primers> 
Canadian Standards Association (2018). Guideline on basement 
flood protection and risk reduction. Canadian Standards 
Association, Toronto, Ontario. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/Z800-18/>
Carmin, J., Nadkarni, N., and Rhie, C. (2012). Progress and 
challenges in urban climate adaptation planning: Results of 
a global survey. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
cakex.org/sites/default/files/documents/Urban_Adaptation_
Report_23May2012.pdf> 
Carter, J. G., Cavan, G., Connelly, A., Guy, S., and Handley, J. 
(2015). Climate change and the city: Building capacity for urban 
adaptation. Progress in Planning, 95, 1-66. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progress.2013.08.001> 
CBC News (2016). Lake St. Martin evacuee blames Winnipeg for 
suicides, addictions, depression. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/lake-st-martin-
first-nation-lillian-catcheway-winnipeg-1.3589066>
Cedeño Laurent, J. G., Williams, A., Oulhote, Y., Zanobetti, A., 
Allen, J. G., and Spengler, J. D. (2018). Reduced cognitive 
function during a heat wave among residents of non-air-
conditioned buildings: An observational study of young adults 
in the summer of 2016. PLoS Medicine, 15(7), 1-20. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1002605>
Centre for Civic Governance (2018). Build a Better Waterfront 
with Nature. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
civicgovernance.ca/build-better-waterfront-nature/> 
Chambers, K. (2013). Weeping tile disconnection to reduce the 
impact of basement flooding. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://docplayer.net/11204245-Weeping-tile-disconnection-to-
reduce-the-impact-of-basement-flooding-london-ontario.html> 
Chang, S. E., Yip, J. Z. K., van Zijll de Jong, S. L., Chaster, R., and 
Lowcock, A. (2015). Using vulnerability indicators to develop 
resilience networks: a similarity approach. Natural Hazards, 
78(3), 1827-1841. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-015-1803-x> 
Chen, C., Doherty, M., Coffee, J., Wong, T., and Hellmann, 
J. (2016). Measuring the adaptation gap: A framework 
for evaluating climate hazards and opportunities in urban 
areas. Environmental Science and Policy, 66, 403-419. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.05.007> 
Cheng, J. J., and Berry, P. (2013). Health co-benefits and risks of 
public health adaptation strategies to climate change: A review 
of current literature. International Journal of Public Health, 
58(2), 305-311. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00038-012-0422-5> 
City of Barrie (2017). Storm Drainage and Stormwater 
Management Policies and Guidelines. Barrie, Ontario. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.barrie.ca/City Hall/Planning-
and-Development/Engineering-Resources/Documents/City-
Standards/Storm-Drainage-and-Stormwater-Management-
Policies-and-Design-Guidelines.pdf> 
City of Barrie (2018). Implementation plan: Climate change 
adaptation strategy. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.barrie.ca/Living/Environment/Conservation/Documents/
Implementation Plan - Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 
2018.pdf> 
City of Calgary (2017). March 3, 2017 agenda-setting workshop 
findings. Calgary, Alberta. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
www.calgary.ca/CS/Documents/ResilientCalgary/RC-Mar3-
AgendaSettingWorkshopFindings.pdf>
City of Cambridge (2011). City of Cambridge stormwater 
management policies and guidelines. Cambridge, Ontario. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.cambridge.ca/en/
learn-about/resources/Stormwater-Management-Policy.pdf> 
City of Kitchener (2019). Kitchener’s sustainable urban 
forest strategy 2019-2023. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.kitchener.ca/en/resourcesGeneral/Documents/
UrbanForestStrategyFinal.pdf> 
City of Montréal (2017). Climate change adaptation plan for the 
Montréal Urban Agglomeration: 2015-2020. Montréal, Quebec. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/pls/
portal/docs/PAGE/ENVIRO_FR/MEDIA/DOCUMENTS/2017_
PACCAM_2015-020_SUMMARY.PDF> 
City of Niagara Falls (2019). Rain barrels. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://niagarafalls.ca/living/environment/
rainbarrels.aspx> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 90 
City of Portland (2014). Climate change preparation strategy: 
Preparing for local impacts in Portland and Multnomah County. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://beta.portland.gov/sites/
default/files/2019-07/climate-change-prep-strat-press.pdf>
City of Surrey (2013). Climate adaptation strategy. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.surrey.ca/files/
ClimateAdaptationStrategy.pdf> 
City of Surrey (2018). Coastal flood adaptation strategy. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.surrey.ca/city-
services/19888.aspx> 
City of Surrey (2020). Sustainability dashboard. Retrieved May 
2020, from <http://dashboard.surrey.ca/> 
City of Toronto (2016). Minimum backup power guidelines for 
MURBs. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.toronto.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/91ca-Minimum-Backup-Power-
Guideline-for-MURBs-October-2016.pdf> 
City of Toronto (2018). CUI placemakers: Resilient Toronto part 
2 outcomes report. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
resilienttoronto.ca/5742/documents/11348> 
City of Toronto (2019). Toronto’s first resilience strategy. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.toronto.ca/ext/
digital_comm/pdfs/resilience-office/toronto-resilience-strategy.
pdf> 
City of Vancouver (2012). Climate change adaptation strategy. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://vancouver.ca/files/cov/
Vancouver-Climate-Change-Adaptation-Strategy-2012-11-07.pdf> 
City of Vancouver (2015). Healthy city strategy: Four year 
plan 2015-2018. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
vancouver.ca/files/cov/Healthy-City-Strategy-Phase-2-Action-
Plan-2015-2018.pdf> 
City of Vancouver (2016). Biodiversity strategy. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://vancouver.ca/files/cov/
biodiversity-strategy.pdf> 
City of Vancouver (2018). Policy report: 2018 Climate change 
adaptation strategy update. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://council.vancouver.ca/ctyclerk/cclerk/20181205/
documents/cfsc1.pdf> 
City of Vancouver (2019a). Hey Neighbour! Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://vancouver.ca/people-programs/hey-
neighbour.aspx> 
City of Vancouver (2019b). Vancouver sea level rise story 
map. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://vancouverbc.
maps.arcgis.com/apps/StoryMapCrowdsource/index.
html?appid=eb0a7a32e6954f77a5cd33dbb582ab20> 
City of Victoriaville (2018). Habitation Durable Victoriaville. 
Victoriaville, Quebec. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
www.habitationdurable.com/victoriaville/images/pdf/
Grilledepointage2018.pdf> 
City of Windsor (2019). Climate resilient home. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.citywindsor.ca/residents/
environment/climate-change-adaptation/climate-resilient-home/
Pages/default.aspx> 
Clean Energy Canada (2019). Media brief: The link between 
extreme weather and climate change. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://cleanenergycanada.org/the-link-between-extreme-
weather-and-climate-change/> 
Climate Atlas of Canada (2018). Planning for climate resilience. 
Retrieved May 2020, from <https://climateatlas.ca/video/
planning-climate-resilience> 
Climate Change Nova Scotia (2014). Climate change Nova 
Scotia: What Nova Scotia is doing. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://climatechange.novascotia.ca/what-ns-is-doing> 
Climate-Safe Infrastructure Working Group (2018). Paying 
it forward: The path toward climate-safe infrastructure 
in California. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
resources.ca.gov/docs/climate/ab2800/AB2800_Climate-
SafeInfrastructure_FinalWithAppendices.pdf>
Climate Emergency Declaration (2020). Climate emergency 
declarations in 1,385 jurisdictions and local governments 
cover 815 million citizens. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://climateemergencydeclaration.org/climate-emergency-
declarations-cover-15-million-citizens/> 
Cloutier, G., Papin, M., and Bizier, C. (2018). Les expérimentations 
de gouvernance de l’adaptation aux changements climatiques: 
terrains d’apprentissage de l’adaptation. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/
RapportCloutier2018-FR.pdf> 
Columbia Basin Trust (2015). Indicators of climate adaptation 
in the Columbia Basin. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://datacat.cbrdi.ca/sites/default/files/attachments/
ClimateAdaptation_FinalReport_15-03-15%5B1%5D.pdf>
Compass Resource Management Ltd. (2018). Public advisory 
group summary report Cowichan water use plan. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://cowichanwupca.files.wordpress.
com/2018/10/cowichanwup_finalreport_oct30_2018.pdf> 
Constas, M. (2015). Measuring resilience: Analysis-based 
measurement. Retrieved February 2020, from <www.fao.org/
fileadmin/user_upload/fsin/docs/Mark Constas.compressed.
pdf> 
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s top climate 
change risks. Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-
Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf> 
Crowe, B. (2014). Eliminating combined sewer overflows from 
Vancouver’s waterways. Vancouver, British Columbia. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 91 
Cowichan Valley Regional District (2018). Cowichan water 
use planning update. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
cowichanwupca.files.wordpress.com/2018/06/cwup_
posterboards_jun11_publicmtg.pdf> 
Cross Dependency Initiative (2019). Case study: XDI Nanaimo 
regional pilot for climate risk and health infrastructure in British 
Columbia. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://xdi.systems/
wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Nanaimo-Case-Study-Final.pdf> 
Cummings, L. (2016). Building local resilience to 
extreme weather. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/faithcommongood/pages/27/
attachments/original/1508424395/Feb10_social-capital_
cummings.pdf?1508424395> 
Cummings, L. (2017). Faith that does climate justice. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://climateconnections.ca/app/
uploads/2017/06/Lucy-Cummings.pdf> 
Cunsolo, A. and Ellis, N. R. (2018). Ecological grief as a mental 
health response to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate 
Change, 8, 275-281. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-018-0092-2> 
Cutter, S. L., Burton, C. G., and Emrich, C. T. (2010). Disaster 
resilience indicators for benchmarking baseline conditions. 
Journal of Homeland Security and Emergency Management, 
7(1), 14. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.2202/1547-7355.1732> 
Dagenais, D., Paquette, S., Thomas, I., and Fuamba, M. (2014). 
Implantation en milieu urbain de systèmes végétalisés de 
contrôle à la source des eaux pluviales dans un contexte 
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques: balisage des 
pratiques québécoises, canadiennes et internationales et 
développment d’un cadre d’implantation pour les municipalités 
du Sud du Québec. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/RapportDagenais2013_
FR.pdf> 
Dale, A., Robinson, J., Herbert, Y., and Shaw, A. (2013). Climate 
change adaptation and mitigation: An action agenda for BC 
decision-makers. Neurosurgery, 71(1), 38-46. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1227/NEU.0b013e3182503bf9>
De Dominicis, S., Fornara, F., Ganucci Cancellieri, U., Twigger-
Ross, C., and Bonaiuto, M. (2015). We are at risk, and so what? 
Place attachment, environmental risk perceptions and preventive 
coping behaviours. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 43, 
66-78. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvp.2015.05.010> 
de Loe, R. and Plummer, R. (2010). Climate change, adaptive 
capacity, and governance for drinking water in Canada, in 
Adaptive Capacity and Environmental Governance, (Eds.) D. 
Armitage and R. Plummer. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 157-178.  
Decent, D. and Feltmate, B. (2018). After the flood: The 
impact of climate change on mental health and lost time 
from work. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
After-The-Flood.pdf>
Dennis Consultants (2008). Adapting to climate change: 
Canada’s first national engineering vulnerability assessment of 
public infrastructure. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
pievc.ca/sites/default/files/appendix_b.4_city_of_greater_
sudbury_ontario.pdf> 
Devine-Wright, P. (2013). Think global, act local? The relevance 
of place attachments and place identities in a climate 
changed world. Global Environmental Change, 23(1), 61-69. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2012.08.003> 
Diamond Head Consulting Inc. (2017a). Design guidebook: 
Maximizing climate adaptation benefits with trees. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://www.metrovancouver.org/services/
regional-planning/PlanningPublications/DesignGuidebook-Maxi
mizingClimateAdaptationBenefitswithTrees.pdf> 
Diamond Head Consulting Inc. (2017b). Urban forest 
climate adaptation framework for Metro Vancouver. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.metrovancouver.
org/services/regional-planning/PlanningPublications/
UrbanForestClimateAdaptationFrameworkTreeSpeciesSelection.
pdf> 
Dinshaw, A., Fisher, S., Mcgray, H., Rai, N., and Schaar, J. (2014). 
Monitoring and evaluation of climate change adaptation: 
Methodological approaches. OECD Working Papers, No. 74, 
OECD Publishing, Paris. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1787/5jxrclr0ntjd-en> 
Doherty, M., Klima, K., and Hellmann, J. J. (2016). Climate 
change in the urban environment: Advancing, measuring and 
achieving resiliency. Environmental Science and Policy, 66, 310-
313. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.09.001> 
Dokoska, K., McVey, I., and Milner, G. (2018). Integrating climate 
change considerations into plans and policies in Durham Region. 
Ontario Climate Consortium, Toronto. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://climateconnections.ca/app/uploads/2018/10/
Integrating-CC-in-Durham.pdf> 
Doorn, N. (2017). Resilience indicators: Opportunities for 
including distributive justice concerns in disaster management. 
Journal of Risk Research, 20(6), 711-731. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/13669877.2015.1100662> 
Dunham, J. (2018). Canada Day on the Hill: Record heat, 
turnout down. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
ctvnews.ca/canada/canada-day-on-the-hill-record-heat-turnout-
down-1.3996190> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 92 
Eisenack, K., Moser, S. C., Hoffmann, E., Klein, R. J. T., Oberlack, 
C., Pechan, A., Rotter, M., and Termeer, C. J. A. M. (2015). Reply 
to ‘Opening up the black box of adaptation decision-making.’ 
Nature Climate Change, 5(6), 494-495. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2619> 
Elshorbagy, A., Lindenas, K., and Azinfar, H. (2018). Risk-based 
quantification of the impact of climate change on storm water 
infrastructure. Water Science, 32(1), 102-114. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsj.2017.12.003> 
Emilsson, T., and Sang, Å. O. (2017). Impacts of climate change 
on urban areas and nature-based solutions for adaptation, in 
Nature-based solutions to climate change adaptation in urban 
areas: Linkages between science, policy and practice, (Eds.) N. 
Kabisch, H. Korn, J. Stadler, and A. Bonn. Springer Open, London, 
United Kingdom, 15-28. 
Engineers and Geoscientists British Columbia (2020). Climate 
change information portal. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.egbc.ca/Practice-Resources/Climate/Climate-
Change-Information-Portal> 
Environics Institute (2010). Urban Aboriginal peoples study: 
Toronto report. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.uaps.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/UAPS-Toronto-report.pdf> 
Environmental Commissioner of Ontario (2015). Connecting the 
dots on climate data in Ontario. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://docs.assets.eco.on.ca/reports/other-publications/2015/
2015CDRoundtableReport.pdf>
EPCCARR [Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and 
Resilience Results] (2018). Measuring progress on adaptation 
and climate resilience: Recommendations to the Government of 
Canada. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada. Retrieved 
May 2020, from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2018/eccc/En4-329-2018-eng.pdf>
Eyzaguirre, J. (2015). The impacts of Canada’s Regional 
Adaptation Collaboratives on climate adaptation.  Prepared by 
ESSA Technologies, Ottawa, Ontario, April 2015. <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/environment/pdf/
RAC_Project_Impact_Report-eng.pdf> 
Eyzaguirre, J. and Warren, F. J. (2014). Adaptation: Linking 
research and practice, Chapter 9 in Canada in a changing 
climate: Sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation, (Eds.) 
D. S. Lemmen and F. J. Warren. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 253-286.
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2017). Climate 
adaptation maturity scale. Municipalities for climate innovation 
program. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://fcm.ca/sites/
default/files/documents/tools/MCIP/mcip-climate-adaptation-
maturity-scale.pdf> 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2018). How to develop 
an asset management policy, strategy and governance 
framework guide. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://fcm.
ca/sites/default/files/documents/resources/guide/how-to-
develop-asset-management-policy-strategy-mamp.pdf> 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2019). Municipalities for 
Climate Innovation Program - Supporting local climate action in 
Canada: Year 3 in review (2018-2019). Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://data.fcm.ca/documents/resources/supporting-
local-climate-action-in-canada.pdf> 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities and Environment and 
Climate Change Canada (2019). Landscape assessment and 
needs analysis in support of integrating climate data into 
municipal planning, analysis and decision making. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://icleicanada.org/project/landscape-
assessment-needs-analysis-in-support-of-integrating-climate-
data-into-municipal-planning-analysis-decision-making/> 
Feltmate, B., Evans, C., and Moudrak, N. (2017). Disaster risk 
reduction applied to Canadian residential housing: Interim report 
on the Home Flood Protection Program. Retrieved February 
2020, from <http://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2017/12/HFPP-Interim-Report-Dec-2017-
FINAL.pdf> 
Field, C. B. (2018). Smart adaptation in an era of rising climate 
risks. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 74(2), 73-80. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2018.
1436806> 
Flanagan, R. (2018). Toronto beats temperature record as 
students swelter in schools without AC. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/toronto-beats-
temperature-record-as-students-swelter-in-schools-without-
ac-1.4081007> 
Ford, J. D. (2009). Vulnerability of Inuit food systems to food 
insecurity as a consequence of climate change: A case study 
from Igloolik, Nunavut. Regional Environmental Change, 9(2), 
83-100. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10113-008-0060-x> 
Ford, J. D. (2012). Indigenous health and climate change. 
American Journal of Public Health, 102(7), 1260-1266. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.2105/
AJPH.2012.300752> 
Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Biesbroek, R., Araos, M., Austin, S. 
E., and Lesnikowski, A. (2015). Adaptation tracking for a post-
2015 climate agreement. Nature Climate Change, 5(11), 967-
969. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2744> 
Ford, J. D., and King, D. (2015). A framework for examining 
adaptation readiness. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 20(4), 505-526. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-013-9505-8> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 93 
Ford, J. D., Tilleard, S. E., Berrang-Ford, L., Araos, M., Biesbroek, 
R., Lesnikowski, A. C., MacDonald, G. K., Hsu, A., Chen, C., 
and Bizikova, L. (2016). Opinion: Big data has big potential 
for applications to climate change adaptation. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(39), 10729-10732. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1614023113> 
Foster, J., Lowe, A., and Winkelman, S. (2011). The value of 
green infrastructure for urban climate adaptation. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://ccap.org/assets/The-Value-of-
Green-Infrastructure-for-Urban-Climate-Adaptation_CCAP-
Feb-2011.pdf> 
Frantzeskaki, N., McPhearson, T., Collier, M. J., Kendal, D., 
Bulkeley, H., Dumitru, A., Walsh, C., Noble, K., van Wyk, E., 
Ordóñez, C., Oke, C., and Pintér, L. (2019). Nature-based 
solutions for urban climate change adaptation: Linking science, 
policy, and practice communities for evidence-based decision-
making. BioScience, 69(6), 455-466. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biz042> 
Fraser Basin Council (2018). Phase 2 flood strategy overview. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.fraserbasin.bc.ca/
Phase_2_Flood_Strategy_Overview.html> 
Friedland, J., Cheng, H., and Peleshok, A. (2014). Water damage 
risk and Canadian property insurance pricing. Canadian Instittue 
of Actuaries. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.cia-
ica.ca/docs/default-source/2014/214020e.pdf> 
Gasper, R., Blohm, A., and Ruth, M. (2011). Social and economic 
impacts of climate change on the urban environment. 
Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 3(3), 150-157. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cosust.2010.12.009> 
Gaur, A., Gaur, A., Yamazaki, D., and Simonovic, S. P. (2019). 
Flooding related consequences of climate change on Canadian 
cities and flow regulation infrastructure. Water (Switzerland), 
11(1). Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/
w11010063> 
Geneletti, D. and Zardo, L. (2016). Ecosystem-based adaptation 
in cities: An analysis of European urban climate adaptation 
plans. Land Use Policy, 50, 38-47. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2015.09.003> 
Gibberd, J. (2015). Assessing and intervening: Urban 
resilience indicators. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
www.academia.edu/download/31828862/Urban_Resilience_
Version_E.pdf> 
Gifford, E. and Gifford, R. (2016). The largely unacknowledged 
impact of climate change on mental health. Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists, 72(5), 292-297. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00963402.2016.1216505>
Giordano, F., Capriolo, A., and Mascolo, R. A. (2014). Planning 
for adaptation to climate change: Guidelines for municipalities. 
Adapting to Climate Change in Time. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://base-adaptation.eu/sites/default/files/306-
guidelinesversionefinale20.pdf> 
Gomez, J. A. and Anjos, M. F. (2017). Power capacity profile 
estimation for building heating and cooling in demand-side 
management. Applied Energy, 191, 492-501. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.01.064> 
Gonzalez, R., James, T., and Ross, J. (2017). Community-
driven climate resilience: A framework. Retrieved from <http://
movementstrategy.org/b/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/WEB-
CD-CRP_Updated-5.11.17.pdf> 
Government of Canada (2011). Measures to reduce the urban 
heat island effect in Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/mun/pdf/13-0616-
Rosemont Case Study_e.pdf>
Government of Canada (2016). Working group on adaptation 
and climate resilience. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/migration/cc/
content/6/4/7/64778dd5-e2d9-4930-be59-d6db7db5cbc0/
wg_report_acr_e_v5.pdf> 
Government of Ontario (2017). Growth plan for the Greater 
Golden Horseshoe. Toronto, Ontario. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://files.ontario.ca/mmah-greater-golden-horseshoe-
place-to-grow-english-15may2019.pdf> 
Graham, A. and Mitchell, C. L. (2016). The role of boundary 
organizations in climate change adaptation from the perspective 
of municipal practitioners. Climatic Change, 129, 381-395. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
016-1799-6> 
Grannis, J. (2016). Rebuilding with resilience: Lessons from 
the Rebuild by Design competition after Hurricane Sandy. 
Rebuild by Design. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.
rebuildbydesign.org/data/files/504.pdf> 
Groulx, M., Brisbois, M. C., Lemieux, C. J., Winegardner, A., 
and Fishback, L. A. (2017). A role for nature-based citizen 
science in promoting individual and collective climate change 
action? A systematic review of learning outcomes. Science 
Communication, 39(1), 45-76. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1075547016688324> 
Guilbault, S., Kovacs, P., and Berry, P. (2016). Cities adapt to 
extreme heat: Celebrating local leadership. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.iclr.org/images/Cities_Adapt_to_
Extreme_Heat_online.compressed.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 94 
Guo, Y., Gasparrini, A., Li, S., Sera, F., Vicedo-Cabrera, A. M., de 
Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, M., Hilario Nascimento Saldiva, 
P., Lavigne, E., Tawatsupa, B., Punnasiri, K., Overcenco, A., 
Matus Correa, P., Valdes Ortega, N., Kan, H., Osorio, S., Jaakkola, 
J. J. K., Ryti, N. R. I., Goodman, P. G., Zeka, A., Michelozzi, P., 
Scortichini, M., Hashizume, M., Honda, Y., Seposo, X., Kim, H., 
Tobias, A., Íñiguez, C., Forsberg, B., Oudin Åström, D., Guo, Y. 
L., Chen, B-Y., Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J., Dang, T. N., Do Van, 
D., Bell, M. L., Armstrong, B., Ebi, K. L., and Tong, S. (2018). 
Quantifying excess deaths related to heatwaves under climate 
change scenarios: A multicountry time series modelling study. 
PLoS Medicine, 15(7), 1-17. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002629> 
Guyadeen, D., Thistlethwaite, J., and Henstra, D. (2019). 
Evaluating the quality of municipal climate change plans in 
Canada. Climatic Change, 152, 1-23. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2312-1> 
Halifax Regional Municipality (2014). Regional municipal 
planning strategy. Development. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.halifax.ca/sites/default/files/documents/about-
the-city/regional-community-planning/RegionalMunicipalPlannin
gStrategy-03Nov2018-Case21331.pdf> 
Hallegatte, S. and Corfee-Morlot, J. (2011). Understanding 
climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation at city 
scale: An introduction. Climatic Change, 104(1), 1-12. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-010-9981-
8> 
Hamin, E. M., Gurran, N., and Emlinger, A. M. (2014). Barriers 
to municipal climate adaptation: Examples from coastal 
Massachusetts smaller cities and towns. Journal of the 
American Planning Association, 80(2), 110-122. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/01944363.2014.
949590> 
Hammill, A. and Dekens, J. (2014). Monitoring and evaluating 
adaptation at aggregated levels: A comparative analysis 
of ten systems. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale 
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) and IISD. Retrieved from <https://www.
adaptationcommunity.net/?wpfb_dl=163> 
Haney, T. J. (2018). Paradise found? The emergence of social 
capital, place attachment, and civic engagement after disaster. 
International Journal of Mass Emergencies and Disasters, 
36(2), 97-119. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.
timhaneyphd.com/uploads/1/2/8/3/12836355/haney_2018_
paradise_found_.pdf> 
Henstra, D. (2017). Climate adaptation in Canada: Governing a 
complex policy regime. Review of Policy Research, 34(3), 378-
399. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
ropr.12236> 
Henstra, D., Thistlethwaite, J., Brown, C., and Scott, D. (2018). 
Flood risk management and shared responsibility: Exploring 
Canadian public attitudes and expectations. Journal of Flood 
Risk Management. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/jfr3.12346> 
Howard, H. A. and Proulx, C. (Eds.) (2011). Aboriginal peoples 
in Canadian cities: Transformations and continuities. Wilfred 
Laurier University Press, Waterloo, Ontario, 264 p.
Hughes, S. (2015). A meta-analysis of urban climate change 
adaptation planning in the U.S. Urban Climate, 14, 17-29. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
uclim.2015.06.003> 
Hunt, A. and Watkiss, P. (2011). Climate change impacts and 
adaptation in cities: A review of the literature. Climatic Change, 
104(1), 13-49. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-010-9975-6> 
ICLEI Canada (2014). biodiverCITIES: A handbook for municipal 
biodiversity planning and management. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/
BiodiverCITIES-Handbook_Final.pdf>  
ICLEI Canada (2016). Making strides on community adaptation 
in Canada. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://icleicanada.
org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Making-Strides-on-
Community-Adaptation.pdf> 
ICLEI Canada (2018a). City of Brampton: Public engagement 
through existing faith-based organization network. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/07/City-of-Brampton.pdf> 
ICLEI Canada (2018b). The Victoria call to action: Building 
resilience through thriving and inclusive communities. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/11/Call-to-Action_Final.pdf>
ICLEI Canada (2020). Adaptation changemakers. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://icleicanada.org/project/climate-
change-adaptation-changemakers>
Infrastructure Canada (2019). Climate lens: General guidance 
(Version 1.2). Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/guidelines-lignes-directrices/
climate-lens-general-guidance-2019-10-31.pdf> 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2015). The financial management 
of flood risk. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.
ca/Documents/Natural Disasters/The_Financial_Management_
of_Flood_Risk.pdf> 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2018). 2018 facts of the property 
and casualty insurance industry in Canada. Retrieved from 
<http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts Book/Facts_Book/2018/
IBC-Fact-Book-2018.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 95 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2018). 
Summary for policymakers, in IPCC Special Report: Global 
Warming of 1.5°C, (Eds.) V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-
O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, T., A. Pirani, W. 
Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. 
Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, 
M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield. World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 32 p. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/05/
SR15_SPM_version_report_LR.pdf> 
Ishaq, S., Hewage, K., Farooq, S., and Sadiq, R. (2019). State of 
provincial regulations and guidelines to promote low impact 
development (LID) alternatives across Canada: Content analysis 
and comparative assessment. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 235, 389-402. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.01.074> 
Jacob, K., Blake, R., Horton, R., Bader, D., and Grady, M. O. 
(2010). New York City panel on climate change 2010 report, 
Chapter 7: Indicators and monitoring. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1196, 127-141. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://nyaspubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
epdf/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05321.x> 
Kabisch, N., Korn, H., Stadler, J., and Bonn, A. (Eds.) (2017). 
Nature-based solutions to climate change adaptation in urban 
areas: Linkages between science, policy and practice. Theory 
and practice of urban sustainability transitions, Springer Open, 
342 p.
Kardan, O., Gozdyra, P., Misic, B., Moola, F., Palmer, L. J., Paus, T., 
and Berman, M. G. (2015). Neighborhood greenspace and health 
in a large urban center. Scientific Reports, 5, 1-14. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/srep11610> 
Keam, H. and Murray, S. (2018). Strengthening the role of 
faith-based organizations to support emergency preparedness. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://cdn2.hubspot.
net/hubfs/316071/Resources/Case Studies/Emergency 
Preparedness casestudy final November 2018.pdf> 
Kenton, W. (2014). How social resilience can save your city. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.100resilientcities.
org/how-social-resilience-can-save-your-city/> 
Kesik, T. and O’Brien, L. (2017). Enhancing the liveability and 
resilience of multi-unit residential buildings (MURBs). Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.daniels.utoronto.ca/faculty/
kesik_t/MURB-Design-Guide/MURB-Design-Guide-v1.0-Jan2017.
pdf>
Kesik, T., O’Brien, L., and Peters, T. (2019). Enhancing the 
liveability and resilience of multi-unit residential buildings 
(MURBs) (v2). Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
daniels.utoronto.ca/faculty/kesik_t/MURB-Design-Guide/MURB-
Design-Guide-v2-Feb2019.pdf> 
Kimmerer, R. (2011). Restoration and reciprocity: The 
contributions of traditional ecological knowledge, in Human 
Dimensions of Ecological Restoration, (Eds.) D. Egan, E. E. 
Hjerpe, and J. Abrams. Island Press, Washington, DC, 277-298.
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S., Darwish, L., and Comella, M. (2018). 
Cities adapt to extreme weather. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Cities-
Adapt-Website.pdf> 
Kovacs, P. (2018). Development permits: An emerging policy 
instrument for local governments to manage interface fire risk 
in a changing climate. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/Development-
Permits_2018.pdf> 
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S., and Sandink, D. (2014). Cities adapt 
to extreme rainfall: Celebrating local leadership. Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/CITIES_
ADAPT_DIGITAL_VERSION.compressed.pdf>
Kwasinski, A. (2016). Realistic assessment of building 
power supply resilience for information and communications 
technologies systems. 2016 IEEE International 
Telecommunications Energy Conference (INTELEC). 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
document/6374525?denied=> 
Kwok, A. H., Doyle, E. E. H., Becker, J., Johnston, D., and Paton, 
D. (2016). What is ‘social resilience’? Perspectives of disaster 
researchers, emergency management practitioners, and 
policymakers in New Zealand. International Journal of Disaster 
Risk Reduction, 19, 197-211. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2016.08.013> 
Leagnavar, P.,Bours, D., and McGinn, C. (2015). Good practice 
study on principles for indicator development, selection, and 
use in climate change adaptation monitoring and evaluation. 
Climate-Eval Community of Practice. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/297234569_
Good_Practice_Study_on_Principles_for_Indicator_Development_
Selection_and_Use_in_Climate_Change_Adaptation_Monitoring_
and_Evaluation> 
Lebel, G., Dubé, M., and Bustinza, R. (2017). Analyse des impacts 
des vagues régionales de chaleur extrême sur la santé au Québec 
de 2010 à 2015: changements climatiques. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/
publications/2221_impacts_vagues_chaleur_extreme_sante.pdf> 
Legislative Assembly of Ontario (2017). Bill 139, Building Better 
Communities and Conserving Watersheds Act, 2017. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.ontario.ca/laws/docs/
S17023_e.doc> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 96 
Li, C., Zwiers, F., Zhang, X., and Li, G. (2019). How much 
information is required to well constrain local estimates 
of future precipitation extremes? Earth’s Future, 7(1), 
11-24. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2018EF001001> 
Loftus, A-C. (2011). Adapting urban water systems to climate 
change: A handbook for decision makers at the local level. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://ccsl.iccip.net/SWITCH_
Adaption-Handbook_final_small.pdf> 
Lovell, S. T. and Johnston, D. M. (2009). Creating multifunctional 
landscapes: How can the field of ecology inform the design 
of the landscape? Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, 
7(4), 212-220. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1890/070178> 
Lovell, S. T. and Taylor, J. R. (2013). Supplying urban ecosystem 
services through multifunctional green infrastructure in the 
United States. Landscape Ecology, 28(8), 1447-1463. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-013-
9912-y> 
Lower Mainland Facilities Management (2018). Moving 
towards climate resilient health facilities for Vancouver Coastal 
Health. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.egbc.ca/
getmedia/10a2c62e-2815-40f5-830e-e844441c5add/VCH-
ClimateReport-Appendices-Final-181025.pdf.aspx> 
Mahmoud, H. and Chulahwat, A. (2018). Unraveling the 
complexity of wildland urban interface fires. Scientific 
Reports, 8(1), 1-12. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-018-27215-5> 
Marshall, N. A., Park, S. E., Adger, W. N., Brown, K., and Howden, 
S. M. (2012). Transformational capacity and the influence 
of place and identity. Environmental Research Letters, 7(3). 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/7/3/034022> 
Masterson, V. A., Stedman, R. C., Enqvist, J., Tengö, M., Giusti, 
M., Wahl, D., and Svedin, U. (2017). The contribution of sense 
of place to social-ecological systems research: A review and 
research agenda. Ecology and Society, 22(1). Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-08872-220149> 
Maxwell, K., Julius, S., Grambsch, A., Kosmal, A., Larson, L., and 
Sonti, N. (2018). Built environment, urban systems, and cities, 
in Impacts, risks, and adaptation in the United States: Fourth 
national climate assessment, Volume II, (Eds.) D. R. Reidmiller, 
C. W. Avery, D. R. Easterling, K. E. Kunkel, K. L. M. Lewis, T. K. 
Maycock, and B. C. Stewart.Global Change Research Program, 
Washington, DC, 438-478. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_Ch11_
Built-Environment_Full.pdf> 
McCullough, S. (2018). Building a climate-resilient city: 
Economics and finance. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
prairieclimatecentre.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/pcc-brief-
climate-resilient-city-economics-finance.pdf> 
McDonald, R. I., Chai, H. Y., and Newell, B. R. (2015). Personal 
experience and the “psychological distance” of climate change: 
An integrative review. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 
44, 109-118. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2015.10.003> 
McDonald, R., Kroeger, T., Boucher, T., Longzhu, W., and Salem, 
R. (2016). Planting healthy air: A global analysis of the role 
of urban trees in addressing particulate matter pollution and 
extreme heat. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
nature.org/content/dam/tnc/nature/en/documents/20160825_
PHA_Report_Final.pdf>
McGregor, D. (2005). Traditional ecological knowledge: An 
Anishnabe woman’s perspective. Atlantis: Critical Studies in 
Gender, Culture and Social Justice, 29(2), 103-109. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://journals.msvu.ca/index.php/
atlantis/article/view/1057> 
McGregor, D. (2013). Anishinaabe environmental knowledge, 
in Contemporary studies in environmental and Indigenous 
pedagogies, (Eds.) A. Kulnieks, D. Longboat, and K. Young. 
Sense Publishers, Rotterdam, 77-88.
McGregor, D. (2014). Traditional knowledge and water 
governance: The ethic of responsibility. AlterNative, 10(5), 
493-507. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/117718011401000505>
McMillan, T., Causley, D., Hanna, K., Lulham, N., Seasons, M., 
and Boddy, S. (2019). Local adaptation in Canada: Survey report. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://ok-cear.sites.olt.ubc.ca/
files/2019/06/Local-Adaptation-in-Canada-Full-web.-1.pdf> 
Meckbach, G. (2018). Where Canada sits with overland flood 
insurance. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/canada-sits-overland-flood-
insurance-1004132703/> 
Meerow, S. and Newell, J. P. (2017). Spatial planning for 
multifunctional green infrastructure: Growing resilience 
in Detroit. Landscape and Urban Planning, 159, 62-75. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2016.10.005> 
Meerow, S., Newell, J. P., and Stults, M. (2016). Defining urban 
resilience: A review. Landscape and Urban Planning, 147, 38-
49. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2015.11.011> 
Meerow, S. and Stults, M. (2016). Comparing conceptualizations 
of urban climate resilience in theory and practice. Sustainability 
(Switzerland), 8(7), 1-16. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.3390/su8070701> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 97 
Mees, H. (2017). Local governments in the driving seat? A 
comparative analysis of public and private responsibilities for 
adaptation to climate change in European and North-American 
cities. Journal of Environmental Policy and Planning, 19(4), 374-
390. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/15
23908X.2016.1223540> 
Mees, H. and Driessen, P. (2011). Adaptation to climate change 
in urban areas: Climate-greening London, Rotterdam, and 
Toronto. Climate Law, 2(2), 251-280. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3233/CL-2011-036> 
Metro Vancouver (2018). Metro Vancouver Growth Projections 
– A Backgrounder. Retrieved May 2020, from <http://
www.metrovancouver.org/services/regional-planning/
PlanningPublications/OverviewofMetroVancouversMethodsin
ProjectingRegionalGrowth.pdf>
Metro Vancouver (2014). 2011 population density and the 
Metro 2040 growth model. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://www.metrovancouver.org/services/regional-planning/
PlanningPublications/140509_RPA_Density_and_Urban_Growth.
pdf> 
Milly, P. C. D., Betancourt, J., Falkenmark, M., Hirsch, R. M., 
Kundzewicz, Z. W., Lettenmaier, D. P., and Stouffer, R. J. (2008). 
Stationarity is dead: Whither water management? Science, 
319(5863), 573-574. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1151915>  
Mimura, N., Pulwarty, R. S., Duc, D. M., Elshinnawy, I., Redsteer, 
M. H., Huang, H. Q., Nkem, J. N., and Rodriguez, R. A. S. (2014). 
Adaptation planning and implementation, in Climate Change 
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global 
and Sectoral Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change), (Eds.) C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. 
J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, 
Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, 
S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, and L. L. White. Cambridge 
University Press, New York, New York, 869-898. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/
uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap15_FINAL.pdf> 
Moghal, Z., Dunford, E., and Romanick, G. (2017). Review 
of municipal climate change adaptation within Canada: 
Implications for the City of Cambridge. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://www.cambridge.ca/en/resources/rpt_cambridge_
climate_adapt_plan_20190823_access.pdf> 
Molnar, M., Sahl, J., Thompson, M., Borggard, J., Lawrence, 
R., Fournier, D., Stewart, D., Shkurhan, G., and Reid, T. (2018). 
Municipal natural assets initiative: City of Nanaimo, BC. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://davidsuzuki.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/07/municipal-natural-assets-initiative-
nanaimo-b-c.pdf> 
Moser, S. and Boykoff, M. (Eds.). (2013). Successful adaptation 
to climate change: Linking science and policy in a changing 
world. Routledge, New York, New York, 323 p.
Moser, S. C. (2014). Communicating adaptation to climate 
change: The art and science of public engagement when climate 
change comes home. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 
Change, 5(3), 337-358. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1002/wcc.276> 
Moser, S. C. and Boykoff, M. (2013). Climate change and 
adaptation success, in Successful adaptation to climate change: 
Linking science and policy in a changing world, (Eds.) S. Moser 
and M. Boykoff. Routledge, New York, New York, 1-34.
Moser, S. C., Coffee, J., and Seville, A. (2017). Rising to the 
challenge, together: A review and critical assessment of the 
state of the US climate adaptation field. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://kresge.org/sites/default/files/library/rising_
to_the_challenge_together_linked_0.pdf> 
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2017). Preventing disaster 
before it strikes. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/
Preventing-Disaster-Before-it-Strikes.pdf> 
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2019). Weathering the storm: 
Developing a Canadian standard for flood-resilient existing 
communities. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
preventionweb.net/files/63170_weatheringthestorm.pdf> 
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (2017). Primer on natural 
asset management. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
mnai.ca/media/2018/11/FCMPrimer-updated.pdf> 
NASA Earth Observatory (2006). The Making (and Breaking) 
of an Urban Heat Island. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://
earthobservatory.nasa.gov/features/GreenRoof/greenroof2.
php>
National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health (2019a). 
Extreme heat. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.ncceh.
ca/environmental-health-in-canada/health-agency-projects/
extreme-heat> 
National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health (2019b). 
Wildfire smoke and health. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://www.ncceh.ca/environmental-health-in-canada/health-
agency-projects/wildfire-smoke-and-health> 
National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health (2018). 
Extreme heat can be a killer. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=RBwgS_1D5FM&feature=youtu.be> 
National Municipal Adaptation Project (2014). Canada: Results 
from the national municipal adaptation survey. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.preventionweb.net/
files/36374_nmapfscanadajan20141.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 98 
National Research Council of Canada (2019). NRC capabilities in 
smart infrastructure and cities of the future. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/eng/about/corporate_
overview/clusters/smart_infrastructure.html>
Natural Resources Canada (2016). Vulnerability. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/
resources/publications/impacts-adaptation/reports/
assessments/2008/synthesis/10421> 
Natural Resources Canada (2018). Case studies on climate 
change in floodplain mapping, volume 1. Retrieved February 
2020, from <http://ftp.geogratis.gc.ca/pub/nrcan_rncan/
publications/ess_sst/306/306436/gip_118_en.pdf> 
Nenshi, N. (2018). Together, we are continuously rebuilding and 
re-imagining Calgary. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.100resilientcities.org/together-we-are-continuously-
rebuilding-and-re-imagining-calgary/> 
Newman, G., Chandler, M., Clyde, M., McGreavy, B., Haklay, 
M., Ballard, H., Gray, S., Scarpino, R., Hauptfeld, R., Mellor, D., 
and Gallo, J. (2016). Leveraging the power of place in citizen 
science for effective conservation decision making. Biological 
Conservation, 208, 55-64. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2016.07.019> 
Nichol, E. and Harford, D. (2016). Low carbon resilience: 
Transformative climate change planning for Canada. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://act-adapt.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/06/low_carbon_resilience.pdf>    
Nicolosi, E. and Corbett, J. B. (2018). Engagement with 
climate change and the environment: a review of the role of 
relationships to place. Local Environment, 23(1), 77-99. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2017.
1385002> 
Nordgren, J., Stults, M., and Meerow, S. (2016). Supporting 
local climate change adaptation: Where we are and where we 
need to go. Environmental Science and Policy, 66, 344-352. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.05.006> 
O’Neil, S. J. and Cairns, S. (2017). Defining and scoping 
municipal natural assets. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://mnai.ca/media/2018/02/finaldesignedsept18mnai.pdf> 
Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources 
(2015). Get adapting! Linking climate change vulnerability 
assessment to adaptation strategies in the Great Lakes Basin. 
Presented at Latournell Conservation Symposium, Weathering 
Change: Navigating a New Climate, Alliston, Ontario, 17-19 
November 2015. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.
latornell.ca/wp-content/uploads/files/past_programs/latornell_
final_program_2015.pdf> 
Ortiz, G., Schultheis, H., Novack, V., and Holt, A. (2019). A 
perfect storm: Extreme weather as an affordable housing crisis 
multiplier. Centre for American Progress. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/green/
reports/2019/08/01/473067/a-perfect-storm-2/>
Osseyrane, M. and Kamal, A. (2013). Évaluation de la 
vulnérabilité aux changements climatiques des réseaux 
d’évacuation des eaux de surface dans le secteur de Trois-
Rivières-Centre. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/
sites/default/files/551009-module_2_rf_analyse_vulnerabilite_
v3r_-_eau_potable_2013-05.pdf> 
Oulahen, G. (2015). Flood insurance in Canada: Implications for 
flood management and residential vulnerability to flood hazards. 
Environmental Management, 55(3), 603-615. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-014-0416-6> 
Ouranos (2017). Project in progress: Performance of green 
stormwater infrastructures. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/
FicheDagenaisDorner2017_EN.pdf>
Pacific Water Research Centre (2020). Engaging the community 
to build flood resistant rain gardens. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://www.sfu.ca/pwrc/research-and-projects/rain-
gardens.html> 
Pahl, S., Sheppard, S., Boomsma, C., and Groves, C. (2014). 
Perceptions of time in relation to climate change. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 5(3), 375-388. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.272> 
Palko, K. and Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.) (2016). Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 
2016. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/ClimatRisk-E-
ACCESSIBLE.pdf> 
Parks Canada (2014). Rouge National Park. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.pc.gc.ca/en/pn-np/on/rouge/info/~/
media/028EC69FE3264676AD660595012FED36.ashx> 
Paterson, S. K., Pelling, M., Nunes, L. H., de Araújo Moreira, F., 
Guida, K., and Marengo, J. A. (2017). Size does matter: City 
scale and the asymmetries of climate change adaptation in 
three coastal towns. Geoforum, 81, 109-119. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2017.02.014> 
Patrick, R. J. (2013). Indigenous source water protection: 
Lessons for watershed planning in Canada, in Reclaiming 
Indigenous planning, (Eds.) W. R., T. Jojola and D. Natcher. 
McGill-Queen’s University Press, Montréal, Quebec, 376–395.
Peters, E. J. (2004). Three myths about Aboriginals in cities. 
Canadian Federation for the Humanities and Social Sciences. 
Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 99 
Peters, E. J. (2007). Urban reserves. Research paper for the 
National Centre for First Nations Governance. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://www.fngovernance.org/ncfng_
research/e_peters.pdf> 
Peters, E. J. (2011). Aboriginal public policy in urban areas: An 
introduction, in Urban Aboriginal policy making in Canadian 
municipalities, (Ed.) E. J. Peters. McGill-Queen’s University 
Press., Montréal, Quebec, 3-32. 
Peters, E. J. and Robillard, V. (2009). “Everything you want is 
there”: The place of the Reserve in First Nations’ homeless 
mobility. Urban Geography, 30(6), 652-680. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.2747/0272-3638.30.6.652>
Peters, E. J., Stock, M., and Werner, A. (2018). Rooster town: The 
history of an urban Métis community, 1901-1961. University of 
Manitoba Press, Winnipeg, 248 p.
Picketts, I. M. (2015). Practitioners, priorities, plans, and 
policies: Assessing climate change adaptation actions in a 
Canadian community. Sustainability Science, 10(3), 503-513. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-
014-0271-7> 
Pierce, D. (2017). RELi resilience action list and credit catalog 
(Pilot version 1.2.1). Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
online.anyflip.com/zyqc/ojoi/mobile/index.html#p=1>
Polanyi, M., Wilson, B., Mustachi, J., and Kerr, M. (2017). Unequal 
city: The hidden divide among Toronto’s children and youth. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.
cloudfront.net/socialplanningtoronto/pages/1779/
attachments/original/1522073852/CAST-2017-report-v13-web.
pdf?1522073852> 
POLIS Project on Ecological Governance and Centre for 
Indigenous Environmental Resources (2019). Strengthening 
decision-making and collaboration for healthy watersheds. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://poliswaterproject.org/
files/2019/04/A-Handbook-for-Water-Champions_web_final.pdf> 
Porten, S. von der, de Loë, R., and McGregor, D. (2016). 
Incorporating Indigenous Knowledge Systems into collaborative 
governance for water: Challenges and opportunities. Journal of 
Canadian Studies, 50(1), 214-243. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.3138/jcs.2016.50.1.214>
Pringle, P. (2011). AdaptME toolkit: Adaptation monitoring and 
evaluation. Retrieved February 2020, from <www.ukcip.org.uk/
wp-content/PDFs/UKCIP-AdaptME.pdf> 
Project Steering Committee (2016). Canadian infrastructure 
report card: Informing the future. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/downloads/Canadian_
Infrastructure_Report_2016.pdf> 
Public Health Agency of Canada (2017). Climate change impacts 
on the Health of Canadians. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2017/aspc-
phac/HP5-122-2017-eng.pdf> 
Public Safety Canada (2020). Critical infrastructure. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/ntnl-
scrt/crtcl-nfrstrctr/index-en.aspx> 
RAIN Community Solutions (2020). About RAIN. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://www.raincommunitysolutions.ca/
en/about-rain-commmunity-solutions/> 
ResiliencebyDesign Research Innovation Lab (2017). Step 
up. Retrieved May 2020, from <https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=bQg42VCZegk> 
Resilient-C Research Team (2020). Platform to promote coastal 
risk resilience: Helping build community resilience to coastal 
hazards. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://resilient-c.ubc.
ca/>
Revi, A., Satterthwaite, D. E., Aragón-Durand, F., Corfee-
Morlot, J., Kiunsi, R., Pelling, M., Roberts, D. C., and Solecki, 
W. (2014). Urban areas, Chapter 8 in Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, 535-
612. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/
assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap8_FINAL.pdf> 
Risk Sciences International (2018). PIEVC assessment of three 
city parks. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/
sites/default/files/final_mississauga_parks_pievc_report_
july_4_2018.pdf>
Rivard, G., Lorrain, K., Pellegrino, M., Bédard, L.-M., and 
Sormain, E. (2013). Analyse de la vulnérabilité aux changements 
climatiques du réseau d’approvisionnement en eau potable de 
la Ville de Trois-Rivières. Ouranos. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/551009-module_2_rf_
analyse_vulnerabilite_v3r_-_eau_potable_2013-05.pdf> 
Rosenzweig, C. and Solecki, W. (2018). Action pathways for 
transforming cities. Nature Climate Change, 8(9), 754-761. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-
018-0264-0> 
Sandink, D. (2013a). Retrofitting homes to reduce basement 
flood risk: Lessons learned. Municipal World magazine, 13-15. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/
uploads/PDFS/retrofitting-homes-to-reduce-basement-flood-
risk-lessons-learned-municipal-world.pdf> 
Sandink, D. (2013b). Urban flooding in Canada: Lot-side 
risk reduction through voluntary retrofit programs, code 
interpretation and by-laws. Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://0361572.
netsolhost.com/images/Urban_Flooding_in_Canada_-_ICLR_-
_2013.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 100 
Sandink, D. (2016). Urban flooding and ground-related homes 
in Canada: an overview. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 
9(3), 208-223. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/jfr3.12168> 
Sandink, D., Kovacs, P., Oulahen, G., and McGillivray, G. (2010). 
Making flood insurable for Canadian homeowners: A discussion 
paper. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction and Swiss 
Reinsurance Company Ltd. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.iclr.org/images/Making_Flood_Insurable_for_
Canada.pdf> 
Santé Montréal (2018). Canicule : Juillet 2018 ‒ --Montréal 
bilan préliminaire. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
santemontreal.qc.ca/fileadmin/fichiers/actualites/2018/07_
juillet/BilanCanicule2018VF.pdf>
Satzewich, J. and Straker, D. (2019). Background report: 
Biodiversity-led green infrastructure in a changing climate. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://act-adapt.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/08/BiodiversityLedGreenInfrastructure.pdf> 
Seto, K. C. and Shepherd, J. M. (2009). Global urban land-use 
trends and climate impacts. Current Opinion in Environmental 
Sustainability, 1(1), 89-95. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cosust.2009.07.012> 
Shao, W., Xian, S., Lin, N., Kunreuther, H., Jackson, N., and Goidel, 
K. (2017). Understanding the effects of past flood events and 
perceived and estimated flood risks on individuals’ voluntary 
flood insurance purchase behavior. Water Research, 108, 391-
400. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2016.11.021> 
Sharifi, A. (2016). A critical review of selected tools for 
assessing community resilience. Ecological Indicators, 69, 629-
647. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2016.05.023> 
Shaw, A., Tolsma, K., and Hardford, D. (2019). Partner 
community profiles. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://act-
adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/ICABCCI-Profiles.pdf> 
Shi, L., Chu, E., Anguelovski, I., Aylett, A., Debats, J., Goh, K., 
Schenk, T., Seto, K.C., Dodman, D., Roberts, D., Roberts, J.T., 
and VanDeveer, S.D. (2016). Roadmap towards justice in urban 
climate adaptation research. Nature Climate Change, 6(2), 131-
137. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2841> 
Simonovic, S. P., Schardong, A., Sandink, D., and Srivastav, 
R. (2016). A web-based tool for the development of 
Intensity Duration Frequency curves under changing 
climate. Environmental Modelling and Software, 81, 136-153. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsoft.2016.03.016>
Simonovic, S. P., Schardong, A., Gaur, A., and Sandink, D. (2018). 
IDF_CC Tool 4.0. Facility for Intelligent Decision Support (FIDS), 
Western University. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
idf-cc-uwo.ca/> 
Smith, A. L., Hewitt, N., Klenk, N., Bazely, D. R., Yan, N., Wood, 
S., Henriques, I., MacLellan, J. I., and Lipsig-Mummé, C. (2012). 
Effects of climate change on the distribution of invasive alien 
species in Canada: A knowledge synthesis of range change 
projections in a warming world. Environmental Reviews, 20(1), 
1-16. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/
a11-020> 
SNC-Lavalin Environnement (2013). Ville de Trois-Rivières : 
Plan d’adaptation aux changements climatiques. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://glslcities.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/07/3riv-Plan_d_adaptationCC.pdf>
Snyder, M. and Wilson, K. (2012). Urban Aboriginal mobility 
in Canada: Examining the association with health care 
utilization. Social Science and Medicine, 75(12), 2420-2424. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2012.09.020> 
Solecki, W. and Marcotullio, P. J. (2013). Climate change and 
urban biodiversity vulnerability, in Urbanization, biodiversity 
and ecosystem services: Challenges and opportunities, 
(Eds.) T. Elmqvist, M. Fragkias, J. Goodness, B. Güneralp, 
P. J. Marcotullio, R. I. McDonald, S. Parnell, M. Schewenius, 
M. Sendstad, K.C. Seto, and C. Wilkinson. Springer, New 
York, 485-504. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-94-007-7088-1> 
Sörensen, J., Persson, A., Sternudd, C., Aspegren, H., Nilsson, 
J., Nordström, J., Jönsson, K., Mottaghi, M., Becker, P., Pilesjö, 
P., Larsson, R., Berndtsson, R., and Mobini, S. (2016). Re-
thinking urban flood management-time for a regime shift. Water 
(Switzerland), 8(8), 1-15. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.3390/w8080332> 
Spears, T. (2017). An inconvenient Ottawa? What will climate 
change actually mean for the nation’s capital? Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://ottawacitizen.com/news/local-
news/an-inconvenient-ottawa-what-will-climate-change-actually-
mean-for-the-nations-capital> 
Standards Council of Canada (2019). Standards to support 
climate resilience in infrstructure: Taking stock and mapping 
the future, Infrastructure program interim report 2016-2019. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.scc.ca/en/system/
files/publications/SCC_Infrastructure_Report_EN_WEB_FINAL.
pdf> 
Statistics Canada (2017a). 2016 Census: 150 years 
of urbanization in Canada. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/sc/
video/2016census_150yearsurbanization> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 101 
Statistics Canada (2017b). Aboriginal peoples in Canada: Key 
results from the 2016 census. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/daily-quotidien/171025/
dq171025a-eng.pdf?st=qqZORhXM> 
Statistics Canada (2017c). Focus on Geography Series, 2016 
Census. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www12.statcan.
gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/as-sa/fogs-spg/Index-eng.
cfm.> 
Statistics Canada (2017d). Municipalities in Canada with 
population decreases between 2011 and 2016. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-
recensement/2016/as-sa/98-200-x/2016002/98-200-x2016002-
eng.cfm> 
Statistics Canada (2017e). Population centre (POPCTR). 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/
census-recensement/2016/ref/dict/geo049a-eng.cfm> 
Statistics Canada (2018). Aboriginal peoples in Canada: First 
Nations people, Métis and Inuit. Retrieved February 2002, from 
<https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-enm/2011/as-sa/99-011-
x/99-011-x2011001-eng.cfm> 
Stewardship Partners and Washington State University 
Extension (2019). 12,000 rain gardens in Puget Sound. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://www.12000raingardens.org/> 
Summers, J. K., Smith, L. M., Case, J. L., and Linthurst, R. A. 
(2012). A review of the elements of human well-being with an 
emphasis on the contribution of ecosystem services. AMBIO, 
41(4), 327-340. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13280-012-0256-7> 
Temmer, J. and Venema, H. (2018). Building a climate-
resilient city: Transportation infrastructure. Retrieved February 
2020, from <http://prairieclimatecentre.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2017/04/pcc-brief-climate-resilient-city-transportation-
infrastructure.pdf> 
Terton, A. (2017). Building a climate-resilient city: Urban 
ecosystems. IISD and the University of Winnipeg. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/
publications/pcc-brief-climate-resilient-city-urban-ecosystems.
pdf> 
The Globe and Mail (2017). Settlement reached for 4,000 
Manitoba First Nations flood evacuees. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/
settlement-reached-for-4000-manitoba-first-nations-flood-
evacuees/article35334088/> 
The Nature Conservancy (2018). Nature in the urban century. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.nature.org/content/
dam/tnc/nature/en/documents/TNC_NatureintheUrbanCentury_
FullReport.pdf> 
Thistlethwaite, J., Henstra, D., Brown, C., and Scott, D. (2018). 
How flood experience and risk perception influences protective 
actions and behaviours among Canadian homeowners. 
Environmental Management, 61, 197-208. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-017-0969-2>
Thistlethwaite, J., Minano, A., Blake, J. A., Henstra, D., and 
Scott, D. (2018). Application of re/insurance models to estimate 
increases in flood risk due to climate change. Geoenvironmental 
Disasters, 5, 8. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40677-018-0101-9>
Thompson, S., Ballard, M., and Martin, D. (2014). Lake St. Martin 
First Nation community members’ experiences of induced 
displacement: “We’re like refugees.” Refuge, 29(2), 75-86. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://refuge.journals.yorku.ca/
index.php/refuge/article/view/38168/34563> 
Toman, M. (2014). The need for multiple types of information 
to inform climate change assessment. Journal of Benefit-Cost 
Analysis, 5(3), 469-485. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1515/jbca-2014-9005>
Town of Paradise (2016). Town of Paradise municipal plan 2016. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.paradise.ca/en/
town-hall/resources/Municipal-Plan/Municipal-Plan-Final/Town-
of-Paradise-Municipal-Plan.pdf> 
Town of Wasaga Beach (2015). Town of Wasaga Beach 
engineering standards. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.wasagabeach.com/Document Library/2015 WB 
Engineering Standards.pdf> 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (2020). Don Mouth 
Naturialization and Port Lands Flood Protection Project. 
Retrieved May 2020, from <https://trca.ca/conservation/
green-infrastructure/don-mouth-naturalization-port-lands-flood-
protection-project/> 
Turner, N. J. and Clifton, H. (2009). “It’s so different today”: 
Climate change and indigenous lifeways in British Columbia, 
Canada. Global Environmental Change, 19(2), 180-190. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2009.01.005> 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (2014). Flood 
resilience: A basic guide for water and wastewater utilities. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2015-08/documents/flood_resilience_guide.
pdf> 
Urban Land Institute (2015). Returns on resilience: The business 
case. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://uli.org/wp-content/
uploads/ULI-Documents/Returns-on-Resilience-The-Business-
Case.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 102 
van der Linden, S., Maibach, E., and Leiserowitz, A. (2015). 
Improving public engagement with climate change: Five “best 
practice” insights from psychological science. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 10(6), 758-763. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691615598516> 
Venema, H. and Temmer, J. (2017). Building a climate-resilient 
city: The built environment. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/pcc-brief-
climate-resilient-built-environment.pdf> 
Villanueva, P. S. (2011). Learning to ADAPT: Monitoring and 
evaluation approaches in climate change adaptation and 
disaster risk reduction – challenges, gaps and ways forward. 
SCR Discussion Paper 9. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
www.ids.ac.uk/files/dmfile/SilvaVillanueva_2012_Learning-to-
ADAPTDP92.pdf> 
Ville de Trois-Rivières (2018). Le grand projet de la rue Saint-
Maurice. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.v3r.net/
services-au-citoyen/environnement/lutte-aux-changements-
climatiques/le-grand-projet-de-la-rue-saint-maurice#principales-
ameliorations-suite-aux-travaux> 
Walker, B., Abel, N., Andreoni, F., Cape, J., Murdoch, H., and 
Norman, C. (2014). General resilience: A discussion paper based 
on insights from a catchment management area workshop in 
south eastern Australia. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.resalliance.org/files/General_Resilience_paper.pdf> 
Wamsler, C. (2016). From risk governance to city–citizen 
collaboration: Capitalizing on individual adaptation to climate 
change. Environmental Policy and Governance, 26(3), 184-
204. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
eet.1707> 
Wamsler, C. (2017). Stakeholder involvement in strategic 
adaptation planning: Transdisciplinarity and co-production at 
stake? Environmental Science and Policy, 75(February), 148-
157. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2017.03.016> 
Webb, R., Bai, X., Smith, M. S., Costanza, R., Griggs, D., Moglia, 
M., Neuman, M., Newman, P., Norman, B., Ryan, C., Schandl, H., 
Steffen, W., Tapper, N., and Thomson, G. (2018). Sustainable 
urban systems: Co-design and framing for transformation. 
AMBIO, 47(1), 57-77. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13280-017-0934-6>
Whyte, K. (2018). What do Indigenous Knowledges do for 
Indigenous Peoples?, in Traditional Ecological Knowledge: 
Learning from Indigenous Practices for Environmental 
Sustainability, (Eds.) M. Nelson and D. Shilling. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 57-82. 
Whyte, K. (2017). Indigenous climate change studies: 
Indigenizing futures, decolonizing the anthropocene. English 
Language Notes, 55(1–2), 153-162. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1215/00138282-55.1-2.153> 
Whyte, K. (2016). Is it colonial déjà vu? Indigenous peoples and 
climate injustice, in Humanities for the Environment, (Eds.) J. 
Adamson and M. Davis. Routledge, London, United Kingdom, 
102-119.
Whyte, K. (2012). Now this! Indigenous sovereignty, political 
obliviousness and governance models for SRM research. Ethics, 
Policy and Environment, 15(2), 172-187. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1080/21550085.2012.685570> 
Wilson-Grau, R. (2015). Outcome harvesting. Better Evaluation. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.betterevaluation.
org/en/plan/approach/outcome_harvesting> 
Wilt, J. (2016). Indigenous Calgarians struggle to find their 
cultural identity. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/indigenous-first-nation-
culture-1.3651039> 
Woodruff, S. C. and Stults, M. (2016). Numerous strategies but 
limited implementation guidance in US local adaptation plans. 
Nature Climate Change, 6, 796-802. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3012> 
Zerbe, J. (2019). Update: Paying for urban infrastructure 
adaptation in Canada. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://act-
adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/ACT-Update-Paying-for-
Urban-Infrastructure.pdf> 
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., and Kharin, V. V. (2019). 
Changes in temperature and precipitation across Canada, 
Chapter 4 in Canada’s changing climate report (Eds.) E. Bush and 
D.S. Lemmen, Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 112-193.
Zimmerman, R. and Faris, C. (2010). New York City panel 
on climate change 2010 report, Chapter 4: Infrastructure 
impacts and adaptation. Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, 1196, 63-85. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://nyaspubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
epdf/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05318.x> 
Zizzo, L., Allan, T., and Kocherga, A. (2014). Stormwater 
management in Ontario: Legal issues in a changing climate. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://cvc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2014/05/Stormwater-Management-in-Ontario_Legal-
Issues-in-a-Changing-Climate_2014.04.29.pdf> 
Zukiwsky, J., Boyd, R., and Wynn, L. R. (2016). Town of Canmore: 
Climate change adaptation and resilience plan. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://canmore.ca/documents/livable-
canmore/1040-town-of-canmore-climate-change-adaptation-
background-report-and-resilience-plan-2016>
Zupancic, T., Westmacott, C., and Bulthuis, M. (2015). The 
impact of green space on heat and air pollution in urban 
communities: A meta-narrative systematic review. David Suzuki 
Foundation. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://davidsuzuki.
org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/impact-green-space-heat-air-
pollution-urban-communities.pdf>
CHAPTER 3
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Rural and 
Remote  
Communities
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 104 
Coordinating lead authors 
Kelly Vodden, PhD, Environmental Policy Institute, Grenfell Campus, 
Memorial University
Ashlee Cunsolo, PhD, School of Arctic and Subarctic Studies, Labrador 
Institute, Memorial University
Contributing authors 
Sherilee L. Harper, PhD, School of Public Health, University of Alberta
Amy Kipp, College of Social and Applied Human Sciences, University 
of Guelph
Nia King, School of Medicine, Queen's University 
Sean Manners, Environmental Policy Institute, Grenfell Campus, 
Memorial University 
Brian Eddy, PhD, Natural Resources Canada
Conor Curtis, Environmental Policy Institute, Grenfell Campus, 
Memorial University
Stephen Hextall, Environmental Policy Institute, Grenfell Campus, 
Memorial University 
Sarah-Patricia Breen, PhD, Regional Innovation Chair in Rural Economic 
Development, Selkirk College
Lauren Rethoret, Columbia Basin Rural Development Institute, 
Selkirk College
Recommended citation 
Vodden, K. and Cunsolo, A. (2021): Rural and Remote Communities; 
Chapter 3 in Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report, 
(ed.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 105 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
107
3.1 Introduction 
109
3.1.1 Rural and remote Canada
110
3.1.2 Approach to chapter development
111
3.2 Climate change is affecting rural and remote communities 
114
3.2.1 Introduction
114
3.2.2 Knowledge-sharing and collaboration 
115
3.3 Local and Indigenous Knowledge are key to adaptation and understanding climate impacts 
117
3.3.1 Introduction
118
3.3.2 Monitoring and recording climate change impacts
119
3.3.3 Enhancing adaptive capacity and building resilience
120
3.3.4 Supporting sustainable risk reduction strategies
120
3.3.5 Informing place-based decision-making and policy on adaptation
121
Case Story 3.1: The Saugeen Ojibway Nation and tracking of climate change impacts on whitefish 
121
3.4 Climate change is challenging livelihoods and economies 
122
3.4.1 Introduction
122
3.4.2 Vulnerability and adaptation in the natural resource sectors
126
3.4.3 Adaptation responses and opportunities
131
Case Story 3.2: Government programming and partnerships in support of farm-level adaptation 
in Saskatchewan
134
3.5 Critical infrastructure and services are at risk 
135
3.5.1 Introduction
136
3.5.2 Transportation and energy systems 
136
3.5.3 Regional variation in climate change impacts to infrastructure
137
3.5.4 Adaptation responses and opportunities
138
Case Story 3.3: Adapting to transportation and service disruption in Nova Scotia’s 
ageing communities 
141
3.6 Individual and community health and well-being are being negatively affected
143
3.6.1 Introduction
143
3.6.2 Availability of nourishing, accessible and preferred food and water sources
145
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 106 
3.6.3 Infectious disease and exacerbating existing chronic illnesses
146
3.6.4 Increased risk of injury and mortality
146
3.6.5 Impacts on mental health and well-being
146
3.6.6 Adaptation responses and opportunities 
147
Case Story 3.4: Coping with the health impacts of wildfire in the Northwest Territories
150
3.7 Climate change is resulting in intangible losses and damages 
150
3.7.1 Introduction
151
3.7.2 Shifting cultural practices and identity related to place 
152
3.7.3 Changes to the social fabric of rural and remote communities 
153
3.7.4 Loss and damage to landscapes and sites of cultural and social significance
154
3.7.5 Adaptation responses and opportunities
155
Case Story 3.5: Supporting Inuit wellness, strength, resilience and cultural continuity in 
Nunatsiavut, Labrador
158
3.8 Local participation in adaptation decision-making improves outcomes 
159
3.8.1 Introduction 
159
3.8.2 The need for a collaborative approach to governance
160
3.8.3 Responding to governance challenges
162
Case Story 3.6: Co-constructing and building rural adaptation capacity
164
3.9 Moving forward 
166
3.9.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs
166
3.9.2 Emerging issues 
167
3.10 Conclusion 
168
3.11 References
175
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 107 
Key messages 
Climate change is affecting rural and remote communities
(see Section 3.2)
Rural and remote communities often experience environmental, social, economic, cultural and health impacts 
from climate change disproportionately compared with urban centres. Despite these challenges, rural and 
remote communities display strong resilience and are often at the forefront of adaptation action in Canada.
Local and Indigenous Knowledge are key to adaptation and 
understanding climate impacts (see Section 3.3)
Residents of rural and remote communities have a strong connection to the environments that they depend 
on for their livelihood, sustenance, well-being and way of life. Place-based knowledge systems, including local 
and Indigenous Knowledge, and lived experience are key to understanding and adapting to climate change 
impacts in rural and remote communities and areas.
Climate change is challenging livelihoods and economies
(see Section 3.4)
Climate change is already impacting many of the economic sectors and subsistence activities that rural and 
remote communities rely on for their livelihoods and economic well-being. Local adaptation strategies are 
helping to protect traditional economies through planning and capacity building, changing land practices and 
use of technology.
Critical infrastructure and services are at risk (see Section 3.5)
Critical infrastructure and related services, particularly in rural and remote coastal communities, are at risk 
of failure and disruption from increases in the number and severity of extreme weather events. In response, 
a growing number of these communities are mainstreaming climate change considerations into community 
planning and design, and are beginning to reimagine, reinforce and rebuild their built environments.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 108 
Individual and community health and well-being are being negatively 
affected (see Section 3.6)
In rural and remote communities, health and well-being are strongly influenced by social, cultural and 
physical environments. Climate change is negatively impacting the health and well-being of individuals and 
communities, both directly and indirectly. Reducing risk, adapting to climate change impacts and realizing co-
benefits from GHG emissions reduction present important opportunities for the health sector.
Climate change is resulting in intangible losses and damages
(see Section 3.7)
Climate change impacts are leading to a wide range of intangible losses and damages in many rural and 
remote communities and areas, including the loss of identity, cultural continuity and sense of place. These 
intangible losses and damages are expected to be widespread and cumulative, and are critical to consider in 
climate change adaptation and policy.
Local participation in adaptation decision-making improves outcomes 
(see Section 3.8)
Enhancing governance capacity and decision-making related to climate change adaptation in rural and 
remote communities requires access to additional resources, information and support. Decision-making 
processes related to adaptation programs and policy can be made more effective through greater 
participation of local residents and organizations, inclusion of local and Indigenous Knowledge, and 
consideration for the specific circumstances of rural and remote communities and areas.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 109 
3.1 Introduction 
There are rural and remote areas in every province and territory across Canada, with many remote 
communities located in Arctic and Subarctic parts of the country. These areas, and the communities 
located within them, are home to residents, businesses and organizations that are often highly dependent 
on natural resources and ecosystems for cultural purposes, livelihoods, transportation and well-being. 
Compared to urban centres, rural and remote communities often experience greater impacts from climate 
change, particularly in the Arctic and Subarctic regions where changes in climate are occurring more rapidly 
than elsewhere in the country (Bush avnd Lemmen, 2019). These communities also tend to have fewer 
financial, human and formal institutional resources with which to respond to these changes. At the same 
time, however, rural and remote communities have access to important assets that support resilience and 
adaptation from which they can draw, such as strong informal economies, social networks and connections 
to place, community and culture.
The challenges and inequities in rural and remote regions (see Box 3.1) impact all people living in Canada. 
While Canada’s 15 largest municipalities are home to 53% of Canada’s population, the vast majority (79%) of 
Canadian municipalities and other settlements are located outside of major metropolitan areas (Minnes and 
Vodden, 2019; Statistics Canada, 2016). Furthermore, nearly 6 million Canadians (approximately 17% of the 
country’s population) live in rural and remote areas1 (Statistics Canada, 2016).
Box 3.1: Rural and remote communities 
For the purpose of this chapter, rural and remote communities (including small towns) are defined as having 
a population of fewer than 10,000 people. In rural communities, less than 50% of the population commutes to 
an urban location for work. Remote communities either have no residents that commute to an urban location 
for work or are located in the Yukon, Northwest Territories, Nunavut, Nunavik or Nunatsiavut1.
Rural and remote communities make critical contributions to Canadian society, culture and environmental 
stewardship. These regions provide natural resources such as food, energy and drinking water, as well 
as other ecological amenities (see Ecosystem Services chapter) that support all Canadians, while also 
generating approximately 30% of Canada’s gross domestic product (Vodden et al., 2019). Despite these 
1 A variety of definitions for rural and remote communities are used throughout the literature; the definition used in this 
chapter was selected to maintain consistency with the Cities and Towns chapter. Given the importance of rural-urban 
interactions and interdependencies for rural lives and livelihoods, this definition includes all settlements located 
outside of Statistics Canada Census Agglomeration and Census Metropolitan areas (e.g., outside of “urban” areas) 
(Statistics Canada, 2016). In contrast, Statistics Canada’s current classification of population centres identifies small 
population centres as those with populations of 1,000–29,999 (Statistics Canada, 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 110 
contributions, rural and remote communities in Canada remain comparatively under-researched and have not 
been prioritized in terms of policy development and funding (Canadian Rural Revitalization Foundation, 2015). 
This chapter discusses the gaps in research and policy from a climate change perspective by assessing 
the current knowledge of climate change impacts, adaptation strategies and potential future directions for 
climate change adaptation in rural and remote areas. 
3.1.1 Rural and remote Canada
Despite the wide geographic distribution of rural and remote communities in Canada, they share similar 
characteristics that influence and mediate their experiences with climate change. For example, rural 
and remote communities are often geographically isolated; reliant on natural resources for sustenance, 
livelihoods, and ways of life; and have limited social and physical infrastructure and capacity (e.g., limited 
access to technology and communication systems, health and education services, supplies, and human 
resources). At the same time, rural and remote communities often have strong social capital and networks, 
extensive local and/or Indigenous Knowledge, and high rates of community involvement, which create 
resiliency and pride (Lemmen et al., 2008). It is important to note that while there are shared priorities, 
concerns and strengths, rural and remote communities across Canada display a wide diversity of important 
factors and attributes, including physical geography, culture, economy and demographics. Such factors 
differentially affect the experiences, responses and capacities of these communities related to climate 
change impacts and adaptation. 
Climate-related changes are occurring alongside other social and economic changes in rural and remote 
communities, leading to social disruption. Compounding stressors include the adoption of labour-saving 
technologies to lower production costs in resource industries, and changes in market conditions and 
international competitiveness due to shifts in global economic policy, such as the expiration of the Softwood 
Lumber Agreement in 2015 or the 2010 European Union ban on seal skins (Schroth et al., 2015; Reed et al., 
2014). New technologies, the rising cost of living, and a growing wage economy in some communities also 
intersect with climate-related changes and impacts on land-based subsistence activities (Clark et al., 2016b; 
Pearce et al., 2015). 
Other changes compounding the ways in which climate change is experienced in rural and remote 
communities in Canada include demographic changes (e.g., ageing populations), population growth in 
many Indigenous communities, and the movement of young adults and retirees to amenity-rich locations. 
These changes can have negative implications on the rural labour force and available tax base, services 
and business opportunities, social dynamics, transmission of intergenerational knowledge, and virtually 
all aspects of community life. From an institutional perspective, rural and remote areas are often 
disproportionately affected by reductions in government funding for programs and services, and are subject 
to province- or territory-wide policies that are not well suited to their particular circumstances (Vodden et al., 
2019; Dampier et al., 2016). For example, residents of these areas often experience disproportionately more 
job losses and negative economic consequences resulting from changes to province- or territory-wide energy 
policy (Dampier et al., 2016). These challenges, combined with frequently changing circumstances, require 
support at all levels (national, regional, local) to develop and implement strategies for coping, adaptation 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 111 
and resilience in rural and remote areas. Figure 3.1 highlights assets and challenges for rural and remote 
communities related to climate change adaptation.
Figure 3.1: Summary of key assets and challenges for rural and remote communities and areas related to climate 
change adaptation.
3.1.2 Approach to chapter development
Building on past national assessments (Warren and Lemmen, 2014; Lemmen et al., 2008), this chapter 
synthesizes the state of knowledge on the impacts of climate change in rural and remote communities 
across Canada. Specifically, this chapter applies a social equity lens to climate and environmental changes, 
and emphasizes adaptation, strength and resilience in rural and remote communities. While responses 
at all levels are required, this chapter emphasizes the need for local strategies that are culturally and 
geographically relevant. Information and perspectives from all provinces and territories in Canada are 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 112 
presented in this chapter. The information included was gathered through a systematic review of published 
peer-reviewed and broader literature related to climate change in rural and remote communities and areas 
across Canada; consultation with individuals living, working and undertaking research in these communities; 
and collaboration with other authors involved in this national assessment. Furthermore, this chapter explicitly 
incorporates the voices, expertise and knowledge of Indigenous individuals, Elders, organizations and 
communities, recognizing that many remote areas in Canada include Indigenous communities and First 
Nations, Inuit and Métis homelands. The chapter concludes with a discussion on knowledge gaps, research 
needs and emerging issues, and a synthesis of the state of adaptation to climate change in rural and remote 
communities.
This chapter presents seven key messages on the state of climate change impacts and adaptation 
across rural and regional communities and areas, as well as a number of short case stories from specific 
communities. These key messages reflect a series of priority themes that emerged from the literature 
review and consultations, and by drawing on the expertise of the author team. These priority themes 
include: enhancing adaptive capacity through knowledge-sharing, collaboration and co-creation; place-based 
knowledge systems; livelihoods and economy; infrastructure and transportation; health and well-being; 
identity, culture and society; and governance and institutions. Within these priority areas, it is important to 
consider how particular characteristics of rural and remote communities may support or hinder effective 
adaptation to climate change (see Box 3.2). 
Box 3.2: Social factors influencing vulnerability to climate change in 
rural and remote communities
Vulnerability to climate change is influenced by a variety of determinants including social, cultural and 
political factors (e.g., access to resources, political representation and social networks), as well as individual 
characteristics and circumstances (Krawchenko et al., 2016). In the literature, indigeneity, gender, age 
and socioeconomic status are highlighted as key factors that influence individual- and community-level 
vulnerability to climate change impacts in Canada’s rural and remote communities. 
Indigeneity
First Nations, Inuit and Métis populations in Canada—especially those living in remote and/or coastal areas 
in the Arctic and Inuit Nunangat (Inuit Homelands)—are particularly affected by the negative social, economic 
and environmental impacts of climate change due to their often-close and enduring reliance on the land 
for sustenance, livelihoods, culture and well-being (Archer et al. 2017; Picketts et al., 2017; Government of 
Canada, 2016; Province of New Brunswick, 2016; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Durkalec et al., 2015; Cunsolo 
Willox et al., 2012). It is also important to consider the ways in which current inequities experienced in 
Indigenous communities were created, as a result of historic and current government policies (Loring and 
Gerlach, 2015). At the same time, enduring connections to land and culture held by many Indigenous Peoples 
and communities in Canada are a source of strength, which fosters adaptive capacity. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 113 
Gendered experiences
Researchers have begun to explore the gendered dimensions of climate change in rural and remote areas, 
with gender being identified as a key determinant impacting individual experiences, specifically in Indigenous 
(Young et al., 2016; Hanrahan et al., 2014), forest-based (Reed et al., 2014), agricultural (Fletcher and Knuttila, 
2016) and coastal communities (Williams et al., 2018; Women’s Environment and Development Organization, 
2018; Vasseur et al., 2015). In rural and remote communities, divisions of labour based on gender influence 
the ways in which individuals are impacted by climate change, as well as their ability to respond to these 
impacts. In agricultural communities in Saskatchewan, for example, environmental crises associated with 
climate change have been found to further entrench patriarchal gender roles that position men as “primary 
farmers” and women as supporters and caregivers. This positioning may lead men to be more negatively 
affected by the psychological impacts of climate extremes, due to their position as “primary farmers,” or could 
make women more vulnerable due to the constant pressure to support others that are affected by climate 
extremes (Williams et al., 2018; Fletcher and Knuttila, 2016). In the Inuit community of Black Tickle, Labrador, 
men are often responsible for water retrieval. Consequently, as climate change affects water availability, 
single women may experience increased vulnerability to water insecurity (Hanrahan et al., 2014). 
Ageing populations
Age influences the vulnerability of individuals and communities to climate change, particularly in rural 
and remote areas, where populations tend to be older. Specifically, many elderly people in rural, coastal 
communities are at higher risk due to challenges with accessing and responding to warnings related to 
environmental emergencies, greater reluctance to leave their homes and limited financial capabilities. These 
challenges are further compounded by often-limited services for older populations that are in need of both 
social and physical support (Krawchenko et al., 2016; Manuel et al., 2015; Rapaport et al., 2015). 
Socioeconomic status
In many instances, socioeconomic factors such as high poverty rates, unemployment, food insecurity and 
lower levels of formal education can exacerbate and magnify climate change impacts in rural and remote 
communities (Loring and Gerlach, 2015; Vasseur et al., 2015; Reed et al., 2014). Residents in communities 
with lower average incomes are disproportionately affected by climate change impacts, in part as a result 
of an increasing trend in homeowner insurance costs related to property and infrastructure damage from 
extreme weather events (Drolet and Sampson, 2017). In addition, responses such as relocation or building 
protection walls to prevent or delay such damages are not affordable to all (Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, 2018b; Vasseur et al., 2017). Further, options for wage earnings are limited in some rural 
and remote communities, and are often supplemented by activities such as hunting, fishing, trapping and 
gathering, which are also affected by climate change (Kornfeld, 2016; Statham et al., 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 114 
3.2 Climate change is affecting rural and remote 
communities 
Rural and remote communities often experience environmental, social, economic, cultural and health 
impacts from climate change disproportionately compared with urban centres. Despite these challenges, 
rural and remote communities display strong resilience and are often at the forefront of adaptation action 
in Canada.
Rural, remote and resource-dependent communities have a history of coping with socio-ecological change, 
which has created a culture of resilience. While uncertainty associated with climate change impacts and the 
speed of climate-related changes is challenging existing capacities, many communities have begun to develop 
and implement adaptation strategies to anticipate, prepare for and address impacts. Adaptation strategies 
employed by rural and remote communities across the country include gathering and sharing information 
related to climate change impacts and potential responses; building adaptive capacity; harnessing the use 
of innovative technologies; and working across jurisdictions to co-construct plans and policies that facilitate 
successful adaptation and ensure ongoing resilience. 
3.2.1 Introduction
Canada’s rural and remote communities are home to residents, businesses and organizations that typically 
depend on climate-sensitive natural resources and ecosystems for their culture, livelihood, transportation and 
well-being. At the same time, due in part to their geographic location, these communities are experiencing 
greater impacts from climate change than their urban, and often more southern, counterparts.
As such, rural and remote communities are often characterized as being more vulnerable to climate change 
than other communities in Canada (Reed et al., 2014). Many rural and remote communities, however, have 
in the past demonstrated high levels of adaptive capacity and resilience, including in the face of “boom and 
bust” cycles in market demand for natural resource products and resulting from a history of ongoing colonial 
legacies and other power relationships that adversely affected them. Inuit communities in Inuit Nunangat, for 
example, are accustomed to working within changing environments, adapting which species they hunt and 
when depending on availability, and relying on group memory, intergenerational knowledge-sharing, learned 
experiences, sharing and trade (see Section 3.4). Continued exposure to climate change over long periods can 
create “response with learning” capabilities that facilitate adaptation (Pearce et al., 2015). Adaptive capacity 
is challenged by uncertainty around how climate change will impact specific communities, but many have 
begun to develop and implement adaptation strategies, drawing on local and Indigenous Knowledge, social 
networks and practices of flexible resource use (Clark et al., 2016b; Young et al., 2016). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 115 
3.2.2 Knowledge-sharing and collaboration 
Gathering and sharing information related to climate change impacts and potential responses is critical 
to adaptation efforts. Recent research highlights the importance of knowledge co-production, drawing 
from multiple knowledge systems and from knowledge that is experiential and place-based. For example, 
community-based monitoring programs and collaborative research have been used to inform decision-
making on climate change adaptation. The use of local and Indigenous Knowledge has helped to support 
hazard avoidance, emergency preparedness, flexibility and innovation in hunting practices, as well as 
monitoring of pests, pathogens and weeds. Examples include the eNuk app from Nunatsiavut (eNuk, n.d.), the 
Northwest Territory’s Knowledge Agenda (Government of Northwest Territories, 2017), and 4-H Ontario’s Field 
Crops: Weeds, Insects, and Diseases project (4-H, n.d.). Similarly, climate change-related health monitoring 
has informed key adaptation strategies (see Table 3.4) for responding to impacts such as vectorborne and 
foodborne disease, reduced water quantity and quality, respiratory disease and mental health concerns. 
Residents and organizations in rural and remote communities have also worked with partnering agencies at 
all levels of government, academia and non-government organizations to not only gather climate change-
related data on risks and responses, but also communicate information related to this research (e.g., lists 
of safe spaces, pamphlets regarding disease outbreaks and best practices for public health related to 
adaptation) (Drolet and Sampson, 2017; Groulx, 2017; Pearce et al., 2012). This has included incorporating 
culturally relevant and locally appropriate materials into educational programming, and providing practical 
advice on adaptation to local homeowners, investors, businesses, governments and non-profit organizations 
(Groulx et al., 2014; Pearce et al., 2012). 
Together, these knowledge creation and mobilization strategies have supported and enhanced adaptive 
capacity in rural and remote communities. For example, adaptation efforts draw from and build upon existing 
capacity within communities by enhancing social networks, connections to cultural practices and land-based 
learning, and intergenerational knowledge-sharing. Further efforts, however, are needed to reduce social 
barriers to adaptation (e.g., poverty, inequality, housing concerns, etc.) (Groulx, 2017). Adaptation initiatives 
have also contributed to building more livable and sustainable communities and local economies by 
incorporating a focus on local food production, alternative transportation options, age-friendly communities, 
clean energy practices and renewable energy project development into community planning and development 
efforts. Community members and concerned citizens in rural British Columbia, for example, are calling for 
integrated, holistic planning responses to environmental and social change (Drolet and Sampson, 2017). 
Rural and remote communities are also harnessing innovative technologies in their adaptation initiatives, 
including the use of telehealth (i.e., the delivery of health information and services through information and 
communications technologies), satellite imagery to assess unpredictable conditions and social media to 
respond to emergencies (Taylor, 2019; Goodridge and Marciniuk, 2016). Digital reconstruction has also been 
used to mobilize knowledge and help to digitally preserve sites of cultural and social significance that are at 
risk of damage from climate change. For instance, 3D laser scanning technology was used to create a digital 
reconstruction of Fort Conger, Nunavut—a former settlement, military fortification and research post-dating 
back to 1881—an example of a polar heritage site that is at risk of destruction due to climate change
(see Figure 3.2; Dawson and Levy, 2016; Science and Survival at Fort Conger, 2015). The digital reconstruction 
allows for public exploration of a site they may never see. Other technologies, such as GIS maps and 3D flood 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 116 
animations, have been used to better communicate climate risks related to flooding and infrastructure failure 
to community members (Lieske, 2015; Lieske et al., 2014). 
Figure 3.2: The Fort Conger historic site is being digitally preserved through the use of 3D laser scanning 
technology, which was used to create a digital reconstruction of the site. Source: Science and Survival at Fort 
Conger, 2015.
Residents of rural and remote communities have also actively participated in the development of national 
and provincial/territorial assessments, pilot projects, programs and policies pertaining to climate change 
impacts and adaptation, to ensure that their voices are heard and their circumstances are understood. 
Adaptation is also increasingly being supported by co-constructed planning and policy, although there is a 
clear and continuing need for greater local autonomy in adaptation-related decision-making, as well as for 
improved coordination and communication across different levels of government (see Section 3.8). Resilience 
has been enhanced in rural and remote communities through climate change action plans that are culturally 
relevant and that draw from social networks, experiences, diversity considerations, consensus building and 
place-specific emergency response plans. Specific examples of ways that rural and remote communities are 
leading adaptation actions across Canada are presented in Tables 3.1 to 3.6 and through various case stories 
included in this chapter (see Box 3.3).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 117 
Box 3.3: Examples of rural and remote communities across Canada 
leading adaptation actions 
•	
The Bagida-Waad Alliance—a not-for-profit organization founded by the Saugeen Ojibway Nation 
and the Chippewas of Nawash—is documenting Indigenous Knowledge and experiences of fishers 
about climate change impacts on Lake Huron and in Georgian Bay, Ontario.
•	
Agricultural producers in rural Saskatchewan are responding to climate variability through a range 
of environmental management practices such as fallowing, creating windbreaks, installing farm 
water infrastructure and growing new crops with support from government programming and 
partnerships. 
•	
Provincial officials in Nova Scotia are working with coastal planners and managers to develop 
strategies to reroute transportation lanes and update design standards. Also, municipal 
authorities in the province are using flood maps to warn future developers of projected risks, 
identify vulnerable key municipal infrastructure and adapt their emergency response plans and 
equipment accordingly.
•	
A number of community adaptation strategies in the Northwest Territories include educational 
workshops and physical activity programs to reduce health risks associated with wildfires.
•	
In the Nunatsiavut region of Labrador, community programs bring together youth and experienced 
harvesters serving as mentors to support social and cultural connections and to enhance skills, 
pride and food security. 
•	
Within watershed governance structures in British Columbia, actors at multiple levels are working 
together to provide decision-makers and stakeholders with up-to-date information about changing 
water quality and flows, as well as other climate change impacts and potential responses.
3.3 Local and Indigenous Knowledge are key to 
adaptation and understanding climate impacts 
Residents of rural and remote communities have a strong connection to the environments that they depend 
on for their livelihood, sustenance, well-being and way of life. Place-based knowledge systems, including 
local and Indigenous Knowledge, and lived experience are key to understanding and adapting to climate 
change impacts in rural and remote communities and areas.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 118 
Climate change impacts are dependent on a number of connected factors that are rooted in specific places. 
As a result, climate change is impacting individuals and communities in rural and remote areas across Canada 
in many different ways. It is important that place-based knowledge systems—including local and Indigenous 
Knowledge—be drawn upon in understanding and responding to climate change impacts. Both local knowledge 
and Indigenous Knowledge Systems are based on long-term, ongoing relationships between people and their 
natural environments. Such knowledge can provide useful insights on changing climatic conditions and on the 
lived experiences of those affected by climate change. 
3.3.1 Introduction
In many rural and remote areas across Canada, knowledge about the environment is strongly rooted to place 
(Chapin et al., 2015). Place-based knowledge systems, which are critical for understanding and responding 
to the impacts of climate change, are a strength of rural and remote communities that is already being 
leveraged in many climate change governance, policy and research contexts (EPCCARR, 2018; Arnold and 
Fenech, 2017; Ellis and Albrecht, 2017; Government of Northwest Territories, 2017; Horning et al., 2016a, b; 
Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a, b).
Indigenous Knowledge, local knowledge, and other place-based knowledge systems are commonly utilized in 
rural and remote Canada. Indigenous Knowledge, which is held by Indigenous Knowledge holders, has been 
defined as knowledge gained through cultural practices and lived experiences, including multi-generational 
observations, interactions with other community members, teachings and skills sharing (Pearce et al., 
2015; Ford et al., 2014). Indigenous Knowledge is systematic, cumulative and continually changing as new 
observations and experiences occur (Pearce et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014). At the foundation of Indigenous 
Knowledge Systems are generations of place-based observations and experiences; this knowledge is shared 
through stories, values and ways of knowing, which shape experiences, perceptions, understanding and 
responses to climate change (EPCCARR, 2018). Similarly, local knowledge—the knowledge that is gained from 
living and knowing in specific places and environments—is based on sustained interactions between people 
and the natural environments of which they are a part. In the context of climate change, local knowledge 
offers insight into human responses to changing environmental conditions (Chapin et al., 2015). Some 
research indicates that the rapid rate of climate change may challenge the capacity and applicability of some 
aspects of local and Indigenous Knowledge Systems (Pearce et al., 2015). However, due to their place-based 
nature, these forms of knowledge are robust, essential and have been highlighted as key to identifying and 
addressing the local impacts of climate change in rural and remote communities and areas (Ford et al., 2016; 
Chapin et al., 2015).
There are several important strengths of Indigenous and local knowledge systems in the context of 
understanding and responding to climate change, including: 1) understanding, monitoring and recording 
climate change impacts; 2) enhancing adaptive capacity and building resilience; 3) supporting sustainable 
risk reduction strategies; and 4) informing decision-making and policy change. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 119 
3.3.2 Monitoring and recording climate change impacts
In many rural and remote areas across Canada, place-based knowledge systems are being used to monitor 
the impacts of climate change (Arnold and Fenech, 2017; Savo et al., 2017; Statham et al., 2015; Gill and 
Lantz, 2014). For the Teetł’it Gwich’in in Fort McPherson, Northwest Territories, for example, Indigenous 
Knowledge is being used to monitor the environmental impacts of climate change and to provide place-based 
and context-specific information related to water security (Gill and Lantz, 2014). The data collected through 
this monitoring program has been used to create a web-based map that displays photos and videos provided 
by participants, ultimately producing descriptive and culturally relevant information about environmental 
changes (Gill and Lantz, 2014). In another example, communities throughout Nunavut used Indigenous 
Knowledge to provide insight into the climate changes observed in the region during the winter of 2010–2011, 
which included a range of climate extremes (e.g., extreme and unpredictable winds, warming temperatures), 
sea ice (e.g., later freeze-up, unpredictable thickness) and land conditions (e.g., icy land conditions) to 
inform future studies (Statham et al., 2015). In the Northwest Territories’ Knowledge Agenda, the role of 
Indigenous and local knowledge is acknowledged as key to identifying and understanding climate change 
and its implications for the landscape, wildlife, traditional activities, and human health and well-being, and for 
informing government decision-making (Government of Northwest Territories, 2017). In Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, 
Labrador, Indigenous Knowledge is being used to monitor climatic changes through a community-led 
monitoring program, which allows community members to record environmental and health changes 
associated with climate change using the eNuk mobile phone application (see Figure 3.3; Kipp et al., 2019; 
Sawatzky et al., 2017). Information collected through the app is being used to promote safer travel through 
information-sharing, to inform policy-level decision-making and to preserve important Inuit knowledge. 
These examples illustrate the key role that Indigenous and local knowledge holders play in understanding the 
impacts and extent of climate change. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 120 
Figure 3.3: The eNuk app is a tool for ongoing and near-real-time monitoring of observations, patterns and 
trends in climate and environmental conditions and associated health implications. The app allows community 
members to record their environmental and health observations in the form of photos, videos, audio recordings 
and text descriptions while travelling, hunting, fishing and harvesting on the land. The app includes indicators of 
environmental change (e.g., thinning ice or unusual weather patterns) and elements of both physical health (e.g., 
unintentional injuries) and wellness (e.g., feelings and emotions associated with certain conditions or places) 
(eNuk, n.d.). Photos courtesy of Ashlee Cunsolo and Inez Shiwak.
3.3.3 Enhancing adaptive capacity and building resilience
Place-based knowledge systems have also been recognized as enhancing adaptive capacity and resilience to 
the adverse effects of climate change in rural and remote areas at both the individual and community level. 
For many Indigenous communities in Northern Canada, Indigenous Knowledge is based on knowledge and 
skills that are at the root of safe practices while out on the land (e.g., responding to environmental dangers 
such as changing snow, ice and weather conditions) (Ford et al., 2014). As a result, Indigenous Knowledge 
has contributed to the flexibility and adaptability of individuals and communities, as well as to successful 
hazard avoidance and emergency preparedness in the context of changing climatic conditions (Pearce et al., 
2015). Place-based assessments can therefore be used not only as a way of accounting for local climatic 
conditions, but also as an avenue through which knowledge users can better understand adaptive capacity in 
specific contexts (Ford et al., 2015).
3.3.4 Supporting sustainable risk reduction strategies
The contextual nature of climate change has posed challenges for rural and remote communities in terms of 
creating and implementing sustainable and successful risk reduction strategies. Research examining rural 
and remote areas across Canada has found that incorporating place-based knowledge that is rooted in the 
lived experiences of local communities can positively contribute to sustainable development planning (Drolet 
and Sampson, 2017). For example, a study examining six rural communities in the interior and northern 
regions of British Columbia highlighted the ways in which each community experienced diverse climate 
change impacts. These communities expressed a need for adopting different approaches to sustainable 
development, which emphasize using a place-based approach rooted in local contexts and experiences 
(Drolet and Sampson, 2017). In a study examining best management practices for adapting to environmental 
impacts of climate change in agricultural communities in Alberta and Saskatchewan (located in the 
Swift Current Creek, Oldman River and Castle watersheds), community members highlighted the need to 
incorporate local knowledge and practices in sustainable social development planning. Agricultural producers 
acknowledged that, despite being subjected to changing weather stressors, they have been able to adapt by 
applying local knowledge from farmers, ranchers, watershed groups and irrigation districts to develop new 
technologies, practices and management strategies (McMartin and Merino, 2014). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 121 
3.3.5 Informing place-based decision-making and policy on adaptation
Place-based knowledge systems and the lived experiences of individuals and communities in rural and 
remote areas are being used to inform decision-making and policy. For example, a program examining 
environmental management practices for agriculture in rural Saskatchewan found that incorporating 
local knowledge into discussions about the uncertainties of climate change would increase the number 
of scenarios considered, thus helping to decrease policy concerns and ensure regional appropriateness 
(Hurlbert and Pittman, 2014). In areas where changes to permafrost alter existing structures, research 
has highlighted the role that local and Indigenous Knowledge can play in policy that relates to the built 
environment (Ford et al., 2015). Indigenous Knowledge Systems can also provide novel perspectives and 
options for action, which extend beyond scientific knowledge and help highlight priorities, build understanding 
and advance climate change adaptation (EPCCARR, 2018).
Despite the important knowledge highlighted in this chapter, there is a dearth of information focused on 
the place-based implications of climate change for those living in rural and remote communities in Canada 
(Rapaport et al., 2015). Although changes to the environment are affecting local peoples’ relationships with 
and knowledge about the land (Durkalec et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015, 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012), it 
is vital to continue supporting and drawing from Indigenous and local knowledge to effectively understand 
and respond to the context-specific nature of climate change impacts in rural and remote communities and 
areas (see Case Story 3.1).
Case Story 3.1: The Saugeen Ojibway Nation and tracking of climate 
change impacts on whitefish 
Many families in the Saugeen Ojibway Nation and Chippewas of Nawash rely closely on whitefish populations 
in Lake Huron and Georgian Bay for their culture, sustenance and livelihoods. As wind speeds increase and 
temperatures rise due to climate change, fishers have begun to notice changes to the fish in these areas. The 
Bagida-Waad Alliance was founded by these fishing communities to serve as a local research organization, 
with the aim of establishing a baseline for fish populations, tracking climate change impacts on Lake Huron 
and Georgian Bay and documenting Indigenous Knowledge of fishers. Leveraging the stories and experiences 
of fishers and Elders is expected to help the community develop its climate change adaptation capacity, as 
well as preserve place-based knowledge systems for future generations (Johnson, 2019).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 122 
3.4 Climate change is challenging livelihoods 
and economies 
Climate change is already impacting many of the economic sectors and subsistence activities that rural 
and remote communities rely on for their livelihoods and economic well-being. Local adaptation strategies 
are helping to protect traditional economies through planning and capacity building, changing land 
practices and use of technology.
Changing sea ice and ocean conditions, warmer temperatures and drought are already impacting economic 
sectors such as agriculture, forestry, fishing and tourism, as well as subsistence activities such as hunting and 
gathering. These industries and related activities are often dependent on climate-sensitive natural resources 
and are vital to livelihoods and economic well-being in rural and remote communities. Despite the significant 
intersecting challenges, individuals and organizations in many rural and remote communities have taken 
important steps to protect and adapt their livelihoods, while also encouraging new development options such 
as alternative energy projects. Many residents that rely on land-based subsistence economic activities have 
also adopted coping and adaptation strategies, which include changing travel times and routes, shifting to other 
target species, using new digital technologies and drawing on strong social networks to share food, equipment 
and knowledge. These strategies often come at a financial and personal cost, however, and require support and 
care to avoid maladaptation (i.e., adaptation actions that inadvertently increase the risk of adverse outcomes). 
3.4.1 Introduction
Many rural and remote communities in Canada have mixed economies with both formal (cash or wage-
based) and informal (primarily non-cash) sectors playing important roles. Further, many rural and remote 
communities depend on natural resource industries—including agriculture, forestry, fisheries, energy and 
mining—for their economic base and to support livelihoods (see Figure 3.4; Drolet and Sampson, 2017). In 
turn, these communities and their residents make vital contributions to provincial and national economies 
(Dampier et al., 2016). In more than 1,800 rural and remote communities in Canada—the majority with 
populations of 10,000 or less—an average of 30% of the local labour force is dependent on natural resource 
sectors for employment (see Figures 3.5 and 3.6). Current and potential climate change impacts on natural 
resource sectors, particularly those that have yet to develop or implement adaptation strategies, therefore 
make many rural and remote communities economically vulnerable. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 123 
Figure 3.4: Map displaying the average labour-force dependency of communities across Canada on natural 
resource sectors—including agriculture, fisheries, forestry, energy and mining—for the period 2001–2016. The 
colours on the map range from blue to red, where blue signifies low dependency, mostly in and surrounding large 
urban areas, and red indicates high dependency, which is mostly in rural and remote areas. The map shows that 
natural resource sectors provide as much as 50–100% of the base economic sector income for many rural and 
remote communities across Canada. Base economic sectors include natural resources (fisheries, agriculture, 
forestry, minerals, and petroleum and coal), utilities and construction, and manufacturing. Source: Eddy et al., 
2020a, b.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 124 
Figure 3.5: Graph illustrating the average labour-force dependency of different-size communities in Canada 
on natural resource sectors, as a percent of base economic sector income, for the period 2001–2016. Base 
economic sectors include natural resources (fisheries, agriculture, forestry, minerals, and petroleum and coal), 
utilities and construction, and manufacturing. Communities are grouped according to four different population 
sizes: 1) less than 5,000; 2) 5,000–10,000; 3) 10,000–100,000; and 4) greater than 100,000. The boxes indicate 
the maximum and minimum values for 95% of the data, the solid line within each box indicates the average value 
and the vertical lines extending from the boxes indicate the full data range. The graph shows that the labour 
force in communities with smaller populations tends to be more dependent on natural resource sectors than in 
communities with larger populations. Source: Eddy et al., 2020a, b.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 125 
Figure 3.6: Graph showing the distribution of the average labour-force dependency on natural resource sectors, 
for the period 2001–2016, for communities in Canada with populations ranging from 100 to 10,000,000 people. 
Labour force dependency is defined as the percentage of labour force income derived from natural resources 
as a proportion of the total base sector income. Base economic sectors include natural resources (fisheries, 
agriculture, forestry, minerals, and petroleum and coal), utilities and construction and manufacturing. Each 
dot in the graph represents a different community in Canada. The vertical dotted line illustrates the population 
threshold used in this chapter for communities that are considered as being rural and/or remote (e.g., 
communities with a population of 10,000 or less). The graph shows that the labour force in communities with 
smaller populations tends to be more dependent on natural resource sectors than in communities with larger 
populations. Source: Eddy et al., 2020a, b.
Climate change impacts on informal economies such as hunting, fishing, trapping and gathering threaten 
livelihoods and food security. Residents often rely on these culturally significant activities to supplement 
wage-income sources in locations where wage-sector employment prospects may be limited (Kornfeld, 
2016). Further, when access to locally harvested food (e.g., “country food”) is restricted, residents are 
often forced to switch to costly, nutritionally inferior store-bought products (Statham et al., 2015). Many of 
these communities are within the traditional territories of First Nations, Inuit and Métis populations whose 
livelihoods, culture and well-being are deeply connected to the health of the land and water (Gill and Lantz, 
2014; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012). This makes these populations more vulnerable to climate change than 
populations in urban environments (Kornfeld, 2016). These same rural and remote communities are often 
experiencing some of the most severe and cumulative effects of climate change. Dependency on ecosystem 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 126 
resources means that climate change impacts on the economies and livelihoods of rural and remote 
communities in Canada are particularly acute. 
3.4.2 Vulnerability and adaptation in the natural resource sectors
Climate change is expected to increase the vulnerability of natural resource-dependent economies due 
to impacts on supply, demand, and harvesting and processing operations. For example, climate variables 
(e.g., temperature and precipitation) and weather-related stressors play important roles in growing season 
length, as well as agricultural activities and productivity, making the agriculture sector highly vulnerable to 
climate change (Akkari and Bryant, 2016). Temperature extremes and extreme events have affected growing 
conditions across the country. Although hotter, drier summers and extreme weather events—including 
drought, heat waves and flooding—have negatively impacted many agricultural areas, prolonged growing 
seasons and increasing frost-free days could also provide new opportunities (Roussin et al., 2015; McMartin 
and Merino, 2014). Efforts to increase local food production as a result may enhance food security, create 
new jobs and income, and reduce reliance on food imports, which has the added co-benefit of reducing 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions related to the transportation of imports and reduced vulnerability to 
transportation system disruptions (Roussin et al., 2015). Research highlights the need to ensure that 
agriculture in new areas does not amplify or exacerbate existing risks. For example, caution would be needed 
in areas where there are existing water shortages and high demand on water for crop irrigation, as is the case 
in the area near the Oldman Dam in Alberta (Yusa et al., 2015). 
The forest industry and forest-based communities are being affected by multiple impacts related to climate 
change. The mountain pine beetle epidemic, for example, has provided a powerful illustration of related 
threats (e.g., loss of merchantable timber and related jobs and business revenues) and opportunities (e.g., for 
economic transition and biomass energy production) (Drolet and Sampson, 2017; Furness and Nelson, 2016; 
Blanco et al., 2015). Climate change is also affecting the availability of commercially harvested fish species 
and impacting fishing seasons and locations. For instance, increases in warmer water species like silver hake 
in Newfoundland and Labrador, and American lobster across the Scotian Shelf have been observed (Bernier 
et al., 2018). Also, herring seasons are being extended and there is a need to travel farther offshore for 
shrimp due to warmer near-shore waters in the Acadian Peninsula (Vasseur et al., 2017). In the Pacific Ocean, 
fisheries stocks are being affected by warming, acidification and extreme events such as marine heat waves. 
For example, increasing ocean temperatures are believed to have negatively impacted the survival, size and 
condition of Chinook Salmon, reducing catch sizes and value (Holsman et al., 2019). 
Climate change is also impacting tourism potential in rural and remote areas, many of which are increasingly 
relying on tourism as a component of their local economies. For example, warmer temperatures, changing 
sea ice dynamics and shifting weather patterns are expanding existing opportunities as well as opening 
up new ones in some areas (see Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter). Increased tourism, however, 
also brings associated direct and indirect impacts that negatively affect ecosystems and transportation, 
such as increased air travel, greywater discharge and GHG emissions (World Wildlife Fund, 2019; Stoddart 
and Sodero, 2015). Not all rural and remote communities are benefitting from expanded or new tourism 
opportunities due to climate change (see Table 3.1). For example, many ski areas are negatively impacted by 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 127 
changing weather patterns, shorter winter seasons and precipitation changes, and are becoming more reliant 
on snow-making equipment, which increases costs and water demand (Hock et al., 2019; Gilaberte-Búrdalo 
et al., 2014). Other impacts—including thawing permafrost, rising sea levels, storm surges, flooding and 
erosion—are leading to the loss and destruction of valued artifacts and heritage sites, such as Fort Conger, 
Nunavut (see Section 3.2). This is not only leading to the loss of cultural heritage, but is also damaging 
potential tourism opportunities (Abram et al., 2019; Meredith et al., 2019; Dawson and Levy, 2016). Other 
examples of impacts and adaptation efforts within each of these natural resource sectors are provided in 
Table 3.1 (see Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter).
Table 3.1: Climate change impacts and adaptation measures in rural 
and remote sectors
SECTOR
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
ADAPTATION MEASURES
Agriculture
and livestock
•	 New agricultural opportunities 
in West Kootenays, BC due to 
an extended growing season for 
vegetable crops include the possible 
expansion of fruit and vegetable 
varieties; use of poorer quality lands 
for niche crops such as tree fruits 
and grapes; and potential to increase 
mixed small-scale agriculture 
(Roussin et al., 2015).
•	 Scarce water resources are further 
depleted due to expanded agricultural 
development in newly cultivated land 
(Yusa et al., 2015).
•	 Use climate data and projections 
from climate models in combination 
with soil information to assess the 
agricultural potential of a region and 
plan for a change in the range and 
types of crops grown (Roussin et al., 
2015).
•	 Heat waves are increasing risks 
of dairy cow mortality in southern 
Ontario (Bishop-Williams et al., 2016). 
•	 Farm-level adaptation includes four 
main and often interdependent 
approaches: technological 
development; government programs 
and insurance; farm practices; and 
farm financial management (Akkari 
and Bryant, 2016).
•	 Use climate and crop insurance data 
to assess costs and risks and support 
farm planning (Akkari and Bryant, 
2016).
•	 Shifts in cropping regimes and 
seeding times (McMartin and Merino, 
2014). 
•	 Precision agriculture and other types 
of water reduction methods are used 
to conserve water, while maintaining 
harvest yields (Nicol and Nicol, 2018).
•	 Use climate data and projections 
from climate models in combination 
with soil information to assess the 
agricultural potential of a region and 
plan for a change in the range and 
types of crops grown (Roussin et al., 
2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 128 
SECTOR
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
ADAPTATION MEASURES
Agriculture
and livestock 
(continued)
•	 In the Province of Quebec, yield 
declines are expected for wheat, 
soybeans, green peas, onions, 
tomatoes and cabbage (with 
potential implications for costs of 
dairy production); however, yields for 
corn, sorghum, canola, sunflowers, 
potatoes, tobacco and sugar beets 
may increase (Akkari and Bryant, 
2016).
•	 Continued northward expansion of 
areas feasible for small cereal crops 
are expected, particularly in north-
central Canada, while summer water 
deficits in some boreal regions will 
accelerate soil carbon losses and 
diminish already limited soil quality 
(King et al., 2018).
•	 More proactive water management 
(McMartin and Merino, 2014).
•	 Use of farm environmental 
management practices and water 
infrastructure to reduce vulnerability 
(Hurlbert and Pittman, 2014). 
•	 Monitor herds more frequently during 
heat waves, using heat abatement 
strategies such as fans and soaking, 
communicating heat wave warnings 
through various media channels 
(Bishop-Williams et al., 2016).
•	 Implement nutritional changes and 
improved breeding techniques (Rojas-
Downing et al., 2017; Climate Action 
Initiative, 2013).
•	 Combine winter water storage to 
feed summer irrigation and develop 
drought-adapted crop varieties to 
support production and expansion 
(King et al., 2018).
Forestry
•	 More frequent and severe droughts, 
increased windstorms and changes 
to growing seasons together with 
other changes have reduced harvest 
revenues and increased ﬂuctuations 
in timber supply (Furness and Nelson, 
2016).
•	 Increased forest fire frequency, area 
burned and fire seasons (Blanco et al., 
2015).
•	 Use of guidebooks to assess adaptive 
capacity and measures to strengthen 
community assets (e.g., Reed et al., 
2014; Pearce and Callihoo, 2011).
•	 Thin and prune forests to reduce fire 
and drought risk (Furness and Nelson, 
2016).
•	 Improve forest health monitoring and 
response to disturbances (e.g., salvage 
logging and treatments) (Furness and 
Nelson, 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 129 
SECTOR
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
ADAPTATION MEASURES
Forestry  
(continued)
•	 Increased forest pest and disease 
infestations (e.g., warmer winter 
conditions led to a mountain pine 
beetle epidemic that has destroyed 
over 18 million acres of forest in 
British Columbia since the 1990s, 
with the beetle’s range expected to 
continue expanding into Canada’s 
northern and eastern pine forests) 
(Natural Resources Canada, 2018b).
•	 Market and policy pressures, due to 
the awareness of climate change 
impacts, for energy sources that 
reduce GHG emissions lead to the 
use of woody biomass in bioenergy 
projects (Blanco et al., 2015).
•	 Climate-informed modelling of future 
timber supply (Furness and Nelson, 
2016). 
•	 Adjust planting strategies for a 
diversity of species, trial seed from a 
variety of provenances and keep a mix 
of age classes to spread risk (Furness 
and Nelson, 2016). 
•	 Research expected impacts and 
changes that could be made; adjust 
work programs, processes, practices 
or structures to reduce vulnerability 
(Furness and Nelson, 2016).
•	 Generate woody biomass from 
reductions in stand density to reduce 
risk of future wildﬁres, which can 
support local bioenergy projects and 
reduce GHG emissions (Blanco et al., 
2015).
Fisheries
•	 The herring fishery is extended; 
shrimp are further offshore due to 
warmer near-shore waters; lobsters 
are larger due to milder winters; and 
there is increased prey in the Acadian 
Peninsula, New Brunswick (Vasseur et 
al., 2017).
•	 Collecting shellﬁsh is more difficult in 
areas that are experiencing sea-level 
rise (Vasseur et al., 2017).
•	 Fishers in New Brunswick are working 
with government scientists to report 
new species and predict biodiversity 
changes; assess infrastructure 
risks; and improve key fisheries 
infrastructure to enhance resilience to 
storm events (see Atlantic Provinces 
chapter).
•	 Reduced quotas and regional fisheries 
closures are used to manage and 
support declining fish stocks (Dawson, 
2019).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 130 
SECTOR
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
ADAPTATION MEASURES
Fisheries 
(continued)
•	 Damages to fishing-related 
infrastructure is particularly 
challenging for communities with 
limited ability to afford expensive 
coastal defenses or relocation 
(Vasseur et al., 2017). 
•	 Pacific salmon fisheries are 
being impacted by a rise in ocean 
temperature (Holsman et al., 2019).
Tourism
•	 Reduced sea ice duration and extent in 
Arctic Canada (Pizzolato et al., 2014).
•	 Increased tourism potential and 
the associated economic benefits 
and growth in cultural awareness 
(Johnston et al., 2017).
•	 Increased cruise ship traffic in the 
Arctic can lead to localised warming 
(Messner, 2020).
•	 Greywater discharge impacting fragile 
Arctic ecosystems (World Wildlife 
Fund, 2019).
•	 Decreased snowpack and 
unpredictable weather events (Bleau 
et al., 2015).
•	 Reduced length of winter sports 
seasons (Rutty et al., 2017).
•	 High water usage with increased 
snow-making at ski resorts (Gerbaux 
et al., 2020).
•	 Lower numbers of visitors to ski 
resorts as a result of deteriorating 
conditions for snow-based activities 
(Rutty et al., 2017). 
•	 Services and opportunities for tourists 
developed by locals living in Arctic 
regions.
•	 A focus on four-season tourist 
opportunities, rather than season-
specific tourism activities.
•	 Increased communication with tourists 
to inform them of potential weather 
events (Bleau et al., 2015).
•	 Smaller resorts are purchased by 
larger companies that are more able 
to adapt to climate change (Sorensen, 
2016).
•	 Greater reliance on snow-making 
(Rutty et al., 2017).
•	 A focus on four-season opportunities 
and activities to reduce the 
dependence on season-specific 
activities (Rutty et al., 2017). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 131 
3.4.3 Adaptation responses and opportunities
Residents of rural and remote communities have adopted numerous adaptation strategies to address 
climate change impacts (see Case Story 3.2), including in response to changes in subsistence economies. 
For example, adaptation related to hunting and food security include changing travel routes on the land for 
hunting; altering hunting patterns by learning to hunt new species as others change when ecosystems shift; 
increasing preparation and supplies for hunting trips; using new digital technologies for increased safety; and 
drawing on strong social networks to share food, equipment and knowledge (see Table 3.2). In Nunavut, for 
example, there have been reductions in caribou availability and quality (e.g., caribou are described as being 
skinnier, with less fat), along with shifts in migration to areas requiring further travel and with greater access 
restrictions. Under such conditions, hunters in Ulukhaktok, Inuvialuit Settlement Region, shifted their focus 
from harvesting caribou to muskox. Declining muskox populations now face increased harvest pressure, 
and hunters must travel further to hunt with varying success, leading to greater stress on the herds and 
on people who rely on muskox for food security (Fawcett et al., 2017). Longer, land-based routes are often 
harder on equipment and require more planning and supplies (Durkalec et al., 2015). Further, measures such 
as replacing canvas tents with cabin structures that can store supplies and withstand stronger winds—or 
replacing and purchasing new, often expensive safety equipment—are not feasible for all (Archer et al., 2017). 
In addition, meat returns may be reduced despite higher costs. Low-income hunters, including unemployed 
individuals and retirees that are dependent on pensions, are at particular risk from such challenges (Statham 
et al., 2015). New safety risks have also been introduced, especially for inexperienced hunters, as a result 
of shifting to unfamiliar routes, a reliance on technologies that can and do fail, and snowmobiles breaking 
down and being expensive to fix (Clark et al., 2016a, b). Reciprocity is also important in social networks: those 
less able to harvest country food (often due in part to climate-related changes) may become less likely to 
receive community and/or family support over time. Nevertheless, many communities continue to depend on 
sharing networks to support subsistence economies in a changing climate. With fewer people hunting, many 
hunters have increased the numbers of community members for which they provide, although this may be 
increasingly challenging with declining harvests and further climatic and environmental stressors (Statham et 
al., 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 132 
Table 3.2: Examples of existing and future adaptation strategies to 
address climate change impacts on informal economies in rural and 
remote communities across Canada
EXISTING ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Added caution and emergency preparedness, such that land users are 
prepared to overnight and make a shelter, call for help if needed, seek 
additional guidance from elders before leaving, consult satellite imagery 
of sea ice and weather forecasts, pack more supplies (e.g., gas, food and 
cooking fuel, tent, parts, extra clothing and ammunition), and stock gas 
barrels on land during the winter months for overland travel.
Clark et al., 2016a, b; 
Pearce et al., 2015; 
Statham et al., 2015
Altered trail routes and/or hunting locations and related modes of travel 
(e.g., abandoned boats and travel overland by ATV).
Clark et al., 2016a, b; 
Pearce et al., 2015; 
Statham et al., 2015
Use of new technology to address changing, unpredictable conditions 
combined with traditional navigation skills and knowledge (e.g., satellite 
navigation systems and emergency satellite response devices, CB and Very 
High Frequency radios, satellite phones, and distress beacons); widespread 
use of the internet (e.g., social media to share food and equipment, check 
online weather forecasts and sea ice reports, request help, coordinate 
unofficial search and rescue trips, satellite navigation relay); stronger 
(e.g., aluminum) boats and structures (e.g., cabins vs. tents equipped with 
stoves, fuel and basic provisions at strategic locations).
Archer et al., 2017; 
Fawcett et al., 2017; Clark 
et al., 2016a, b; Pearce et 
al., 2015
Adapting species hunted according to what is available (e.g., from caribou 
to muskox, from seals to caribou during longer boating seasons, and from 
marine-based to land-based animals during the dangerous sea ice season).
Clark et al., 2016a, b; 
Pearce et al., 2015; 
Statham et al., 2015
Experienced hunters often make adaptive decisions (e.g., changing trail 
routes) and then share these with the community through social networks. 
Clark et al., 2016a, b
Education and capacity building that strengthens land-based learning and 
intergenerational knowledge-sharing (e.g., traditional skills workshops, 
prevention programs, young hunter programs).
Clark et al., 2016a, b
Selling country food to offset increased expenditures on hunting equipment 
and safety technology, facilitated by markets and social media groups.
Statham et al., 2015
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 133 
EXISTING ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Household food strategies such as switching to cheaper and less preferred 
foods, reducing food intake, eating elsewhere (e.g., at a friend’s or family 
member’s house) and selling belongings.
Statham et al., 2015
Community sharing, intercommunity trade and fostering social capital (e.g., 
sharing of food, equipment, knowledge).
Clark et al., 2016a, b; 
Statham et al., 2015
Community-based food programs.
Statham et al., 2015
FUTURE ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Ongoing, community-based environmental monitoring, recording of 
systematic observations of environmental conditions that draw from 
Indigenous Knowledge and local ways of understanding and interacting 
with the environment.
Government of Canada, 
2016; Gill and Lantz, 
2014;
Community climate change adaptation plans that are directly linked to 
specific places on the landscape and ongoing place-specific monitoring. 
Gill and Lantz, 2014
Enhanced harvester assistance programs and support for the generation 
and transmission of skills among younger Inuit to travel and hunt under 
changing conditions.
Clark et al., 2016a, b
Improved financial awareness and budgeting skills to assist in coping with 
food-related stresses.
Statham et al., 2015
Growing demand for more sustainable, less carbon-intensive products and climate-related policy changes 
(e.g., carbon credits) challenges existing ways of operating in natural resource sectors. This creates new 
opportunities and encourages alternative development options that aid in transitioning to a more sustainable 
local economy (Drolet and Sampson, 2017). Examples include those noted above in agriculture, forestry, 
fisheries and tourism, as well as new biomass, wind and solar energy projects (Dampier et al., 2016; Kornfeld, 
2016; Schroth et al., 2015). Hybrid renewable energy projects have been successfully implemented in Deer 
Lake and Fort Severn, Ontario, and in Colville Lake, Northwest Territories (Arriaga et al., 2017). These efforts 
have been successful in reducing reliance on fossil fuels and associated spills, transport costs and GHG 
emissions. While there are some concerns about maladaptation—including potential negative ecosystem 
impacts, biomass supply and accessibility, transportation costs and, in particular, air quality from biomass 
energy production—these negative outcomes can be offset by the potential benefits of sustainable energy 
systems (Blanco et al., 2015). Skills training and local investments in new technology, innovation and 
transition planning may be required to support economic transition (Drolet and Sampson, 2017). Attention 
to “just transitions”—which require collaboration, respect, worker support and shared financial costs to 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 134 
build a sustainable future for communities—is essential for moving forward (Government of Canada, 2018). 
Government-imposed requirements for corporate carbon footprint reductions and green investment treaties 
with commitments to reduce GHGs, for example, have the potential to support such transitions (Kornfeld, 
2016). Lifecycle analyses and assessment of payback periods for initiatives seeking resiliency to climate 
change and extremes have also been identified as helpful strategies (McMartin and Merino, 2014).
In summary, the traditional industries and related jobs that rural and remote communities rely on face 
significant threats that are linked to circumstances including, and exacerbated by, a changing climate and 
environment. These communities are facing challenges associated with extreme weather events, rising sea 
levels, retreating sea ice, declining traditional food sources and changes in the populations of target species 
for resource sectors. To overcome these challenges, communities have taken important and often proactive 
measures to protect and adapt the subsistence harvesting and natural resource-based industries that support 
their livelihoods. These adaptations, however, continue to come at a cost and draw on human, social and 
financial capital. There is a need for ongoing attention to the threat of maladaptation, such as overharvesting 
of species or new agricultural activities that add excess stress to local water, forest and soil resources. 
Further support for adaptation can come from knowledge and technology sharing to better predict impacts 
and changes, investment in resiliency measures, and provision of technical expertise and training for rural 
and remote communities to provide new skills and knowledge relevant for a changing environment. In the 
longer term, there may be a need to support more significant measures in some circumstances, like managed 
retreat (i.e., the purposeful and coordinated movement of people and buildings away from risks) due to sea 
level rise or the development of new food and water resources.
Case Story 3.2: Government programming and partnerships in support 
of farm-level adaptation in Saskatchewan
Agricultural producers are playing a leading role in innovating responses to climate variability. They are 
implementing environmental management practices (such as fallowing, creating wind breaks and installing 
farm water infrastructure) and other measures (such as direct seeding and growing new crops like canola 
and lentils) that reduce farm- and ranch-level vulnerability to climate change impacts, including revenue loss 
due to drought (Hurlbert and Pittman, 2014). 
Some of these innovations have been supported by government programs, such as the Canada-
Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Program (FSP) (FSP, n.d.) and the Farm and Ranch Water Infrastructure 
Program (FRWIP) (FRWIP, n.d.). Each of these programs has assisted thousands of projects or producers 
in Saskatchewan each year with on-farm projects. The FRWIP helps to address drought by financing 
infrastructure projects such as dugouts, wells and water pipelines that increase water access. Federal and 
provincial governments share the costs with the beneficiary (e.g., farmer, rancher or municipality). The FSP 
supports environmental farm plans and beneficial management practices that assist with climate change 
adaptation or that maintain or improve water resources and biodiversity (e.g., through reduced soil erosion 
and improved pasture management). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 135 
After a multi-year drought in 2008, producers pushed for the decentralization of program administration 
from federal to provincial governments. The federal government continued to provide technological and 
engineering expertise, and the non-profit Provincial Council of Agriculture Development and Diversification 
Boards for Saskatchewan Inc. (PCAB) worked with producers to identify beneficial management practices 
and served as a networking organization to foster interactions between governance institutions at multiple 
levels, including local farms and grassroots organizations. This shift was identified as more effective in terms 
of localized adaptation, but also requires grassroots leadership.
One challenge, particularly within rural municipalities without a sufficient tax base to invest in infrastructure 
projects, has been the requirement for stakeholders to provide matching funds. Inconsistent and uncertain 
funding has also discouraged some stakeholders from taking advantage of the programs, and thus from 
implementing adaptation measures. Other challenges include limited staff resources within responsible 
agencies and political inertia. 
3.5 Critical infrastructure and services are at risk 
Critical infrastructure and related services, particularly in rural and remote coastal communities, are at 
risk of failure and disruption from increases in the number and severity of extreme weather events. In 
response, a growing number of these communities are mainstreaming climate change considerations 
into community planning and design, and are beginning to reimagine, reinforce and rebuild their built 
environments.
Rural and remote communities and areas in Canada often struggle with stressed and degraded infrastructure, 
a retreat from service programming and the centralization of resources and services. Increases in the 
frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, flooding, sea level rise, permafrost thaw, wildfires and 
other climate-related changes are substantially exacerbating these challenges. As a result, transportation 
and energy networks, delivery of services, and infrastructure that support activities necessary for daily life 
continue to face greater risk of failure and disruption. In response to increasingly severe and unpredictable 
climatic conditions, rural and remote communities are developing innovative adaptation strategies to address 
local and regional challenges. These include the consideration of climate change, natural infrastructure and 
the need for sustainable, livable communities in infrastructure and community planning. Projects that reduce 
reliance on vulnerable, fossil fuel-dependent energy and transportation networks are important to consider in 
the development of adaptation strategies. Information technology is also being used to better communicate 
risks of climate-related infrastructure failure and service disruptions, and to document vulnerable—and in some 
cases lost—heritage resources.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 136 
3.5.1 Introduction
Across Canada, adequate access to infrastructure and services is a growing concern for many rural and 
remote communities that are experiencing stressed and degraded infrastructure, and a retreat from service 
delivery. Changing environmental conditions are posing further challenges for both critical and community 
infrastructure in rural areas (see Box 3.4; Berner et al., 2016). Extreme weather events (e.g., high winds, 
increased precipitation, drought, ice storms, heat waves and storm surges), inland and coastal flooding, sea 
level rise, permafrost thaw and forest fires are having a significant impact on the built environment in these 
settings. Regionalization and reduction of services in rural communities forces residents to travel longer 
distances for services such as medical care and, therefore, to become increasingly reliant on vulnerable 
transportation networks (e.g., poor, seasonal or non-existent roads, and lack of alternative transportation 
options). Those responding to emergencies are also at increased risk due to vulnerable rural infrastructure 
(Nova Scotia Department of Environment and Climate Change, 2018). This makes the consideration of 
climate change impacts in planning, zoning and land-use decisions vital in reducing risk from climate impacts 
that adversely affect rural and remote communities (Doberstein et al., 2019).
Box 3.4: Critical and community infrastructure
According to Public Safety Canada, critical infrastructure is “essential to the health, safety, security or 
economic well-being of Canadians, and the effective functioning of government.” Disruptions “could result in 
catastrophic loss of life, adverse economic effects and significant harm to public confidence.” The agency 
identifies ten sectors of critical infrastructure, including health, information and communication technology, 
and transportation (Government of Canada, 2020). Examples of community infrastructure include municipal 
buildings, recreational facilities, schools and grocery stores (Government of Northwest Territories, 2017). 
Facilities such as recreation or school buildings often have multiple uses and contribute greatly to community 
functioning and well-being. For example, in Tofino, British Columbia, the community centre has been built 
with emergency preparedness in mind, containing a generator and supplies to serve people displaced by any 
emergency event, as well as for hosting regular events, classes and exercise opportunities (Studio 531, 2019). 
The loss of, or damage to, these facilities can be devastating (Lebel, 2014).
3.5.2 Transportation and energy systems 
Transportation infrastructure—including roads, bridges, railways, airstrips, marine shipping routes and trails—
are commonly reported in the literature and by community stakeholders as being the most critically the type 
of infrastructure most dramatically affected by climate change. These impacts are especially pronounced 
for ice roads. Evidence suggests the length of time that ice roads are viable has already been significantly 
reduced; in the future, rising temperatures and increased precipitation may be enough to limit the formation 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 137 
of ice roads of sufficient thickness for the transportation of essential goods and materials in many of the 
areas that now rely on them (Mullan et al., 2017). Recent projections suggest that damage to infrastructure 
from climate-related flooding, erosion and permafrost melt is likely to result in the greatest financial costs 
to communities, and that infrastructure such as roads, bridges, water management facilities and revetment 
systems are likely to require the most investments (Federation of Canadian Municipalities and Insurance 
Bureau of Canada, 2019; Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2018a). Recent research suggests that, 
among the top priorities for adaptation in rural and remote communities, is the need to address climate 
change impacts to infrastructure that result in interruptions to residents’ daily activities, such as shopping, 
visiting family and receiving medical treatment (Manuel et al., 2015).
Energy grids and systems are another commonly cited category of rural infrastructure that is negatively 
affected by climate change, mainly due to failing transmission lines, the high cost of fuel and transportation, 
and climate-vulnerable transportation routes. Many remote communities across Canada rely solely on diesel 
power and a grid connection is often not a viable or reliable option; as such, alternatives must be explored, 
such as natural gas generators and locally generated renewable energy sources (wind energy, solar energy 
and biomass heating) (Natural Resources Canada, 2018a; Knowles, 2016). Climate change awareness, 
policies and programs have encouraged the development of new renewable energy projects and other 
infrastructure aimed at reducing reliance on fossil fuels (Government of Canada, 2017; Province of New 
Brunswick, 2016). 
3.5.3 Regional variation in climate change impacts to infrastructure
While rural and remote communities across Canada are experiencing changing and variable climatic 
conditions, those located in the northern parts of the country are seeing more pronounced impacts to 
infrastructure due to rapidly increasing temperatures; changing precipitation patterns; increases in extreme 
and warm weather events; continued melting of Arctic sea ice, glaciers, and ice caps; rising sea levels; 
thawing permafrost; and coastal erosion (Bush and Lemmen, 2019; IPCC, 2018). These conditions are already 
evident and are having serious impacts on infrastructure in northern communities (Berner et al., 2016; 
Dawson and Levy, 2016; Ford et al., 2015; Boyle et al., 2013). 
In more southern regions, rural communities are also concerned about more extreme weather events that 
cause immediate impacts such as flooding, ice storms and heat waves, and that have the potential to cause 
damage to critical infrastructure (Félio, 2017; Caldwell, 2015). Rural coastal communities have the added 
threats of flooding, sea level rise and coastal erosion impacting their infrastructure and lives (Arnold and 
Fenech, 2017; Vasseur et al., 2017; Manuel et al., 2015; Webster et al., 2014). For example, buildings and 
services that are instrumental to daily life—such as housing, healthcare facilities, community centres, post 
offices, grocery stores, and water and wastewater treatment—are increasingly at risk of failure, particularly 
from flooding and extreme weather events (Félio, 2017). In Atlantic Canada, for example, disruption to these 
services and access to crucial community infrastructure due to changing climatic conditions is increasing 
the vulnerability of ageing communities (Krawchenko et al., 2016; Manuel et al., 2015). Rural and remote 
communities that have one or only a few roads into and out of their communities—found in both coastal 
and remote regions—are particularly vulnerable to climate change, due to potential isolation when roads are 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 138 
washed out, which can affect the availability of food and services (Mullan et al., 2017; Krawchenko et al., 
2016; Vodden et al., 2012).
3.5.4 Adaptation responses and opportunities
Rural and remote communities have undertaken a number of different approaches to infrastructure 
adaptation, which are often tailor-made to their specific needs and contexts (see Table 3.3; Case Story 
3.3). These include assessing the vulnerability of current municipal infrastructure; incorporating climate 
change into community planning, primarily by updating codes, practices and designs; and constructing new 
infrastructure with a longer service life (Government of Canada, 2017; Government of Northwest Territories, 
2017; Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada, 2017). Other responses include altering emergency 
transportation routes, diversifying energy sources, developing local action plans to transition to low carbon 
economies, and planning for smart growth and sustainable, livable communities. These include communities 
that facilitate healthy ageing, reduce reliance on daily commuting, and recognize the use of natural 
infrastructure (such as forests and wetlands) to reduce climate change impacts (Government of Canada, 
2017, 2016; Government of Ontario, 2016; Krawchenko et al., 2016; Province of New Brunswick, 2016; Manuel 
et al., 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 139 
Table 3.3: Infrastructure-related adaptation responses in rural and 
remote communities across Canada
CATEGORIES OF
ADAPTATION
RESPONSES*
DETAILS ABOUT ADAPTATION RESPONSES
LOCATION(S) WHERE
ADAPTATION
RESPONSES HAVE BEEN 
OBSERVED
Green infrastructure and 
sustainability planning 
•	 Incorporating green infrastructure into new 
rural planning 
•	 Creating age-friendly communities 
•	 Designing more compact communities
•	 Transitioning to renewable energy
•	 Designing and implementing waste 
management plans based on best practices
•	 Increasing government funding for low-carbon 
initiatives 
•	 Incorporating adaptation planning into 
municipal sustainability plans 
•	 Incorporating energy efficiency into building 
design
•	 Developing strategic planning practices
BC, NB, NL, NS, NU, 
NWT, ON, YT and at the 
national-level
Community planning
and zoning
•	 Incorporating climate change into new 
infrastructure planning
•	 Undertaking floodplain and flood-risk mapping
•	 Improving building standards by drawing on 
Indigenous Knowledge in building design
•	 Undertaking community-based vulnerability 
assessments
•	 Building walls and dykes
•	 Strengthening transmission lines 
•	 Upgrading treatment facilities
AB, NB, NL, NS, NWT, PEI, 
QC and at the national-
level
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 140 
CATEGORIES OF
ADAPTATION
RESPONSES*
DETAILS ABOUT ADAPTATION RESPONSES
LOCATION(S) WHERE
ADAPTATION
RESPONSES HAVE BEEN 
OBSERVED
Community planning 
and zoning (continued)
•	 Implementing land-use restrictions and 
considerations
•	 Incorporating “protect, accommodate, retreat 
or avoid” planning into land-use and zoning 
considerations
Alternative transportation 
options
•	 Using rail transport and bicycle paths
•	 Changing shipping times to correspond with 
changing climate conditions 
•	 Implementing changes to emergency 
transportation routes
•	 Exploring new options to reduce the need for 
ice roads
NS, NWT, ON and at the 
national-level
Diversification of 
energy sources
•	 Connecting communities to central grids
•	 Exploring the viability of renewable energy 
sources
•	 Implementing collaboratively designed and 
installed hybrid renewable energy systems with 
diesel backup power 
•	 Developing stand-alone renewable energy 
systems
NU, NWT, YT, ON, BC, NL 
and at the national-level
Use of technology
 in adaptation
•	 Creating virtual replicas of fragile, remote and 
culturally valuable sites
•	 Using multimedia technology to communicate 
risks from climate change
NB, NU
*Categories of adaptation responses are listed in the order of frequency that they are mentioned
 in the literature.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 141 
For rural and remote coastal communities, adaptations include revetment and building of new walls and 
dykes to safeguard against high-wave impacts and flooding (Vasseur et al., 2017; Hatcher and Forbes, 2015). 
Across Canada, rural and remote communities are converting their energy infrastructure by developing 
renewable energy sources and connecting communities to more centralized grids, where possible (Arriaga 
et al., 2017; Mortensen et al., 2017). Energy retrofits for homes and municipal facilities, as well as efforts to 
reduce reliance on fossil fuels for transportation, residential heating and cooking, are adaptation strategies 
that can also reduce GHG emissions, decrease the stress on fragile infrastructure, such as winter roads, and 
create cost savings (Climate Action Revenue Incentive Program, 2017; Yukon Legislative Assembly, 2017; 
Hatcher and Forbes, 2015).
The potential contribution of information and digital media technologies to adaptation in rural and remote 
communities is also being explored in various ways. For example, the Tantramar Planning District in 
New Brunswick has utilized information technology-based GIS maps and 3D flood animations to better 
communicate climate risks related to flooding and infrastructure failure to its residents (Lieske et al., 2014). 
In other regions, heritage and cultural buildings, trails and sites where physical infrastructure has already 
failed (or cannot be accessed without risk of injury) are being digitally reconstructed (see Section 3.2; Dawson 
and Levy, 2016). 
Although communities are finding innovative ways to adapt, there are challenges that continue to impede 
progress on climate change adaptation. These include the high costs of infrastructure investment and an 
already existing infrastructure deficit. For communities with low-average incomes or a limited tax base, 
measures such as relocating houses due to erosion or building protection walls may not be affordable, 
so responses are often limited to temporary adaptations (Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2018b; 
Vasseur et al., 2017). The lack of climate data, regional climate models, and inadequate and outdated 
flood-risk mapping, combined with a shortage of trained locals that can work with available climate change 
information, have led to difficulties in understanding and communicating climate-related risks (Mortensen et 
al., 2017; Dawson and Levy, 2016). Even where communities are able to access this information, short-term 
institutional memory can be a concern (Ford et al., 2017, 2013). For example, many northern communities 
often have high employee turnover rates. When there is a shift in management, large multi-year infrastructure 
projects may change, be cancelled or be significantly delayed (Ford et al., 2017). Communities require 
support in building adaptive readiness and establishing the governance, culture and social patterns (also 
known as “soft infrastructure”) needed to enhance understanding and make “hard” infrastructure investments 
possible (Pagano et al., 2018). These challenges will be familiar to most communities across Canada. 
Unfortunately, rural and remote communities often feel exacerbated impacts from these challenges due to 
their remote locations and the associated transportation and infrastructure limitations and costs.  
Case Story 3.3: Adapting to transportation and service disruption in 
Nova Scotia’s ageing communities 
Climate change and extreme weather events (e.g., high winds, storm surges and floods) are causing damage 
to critical transportation routes, which are necessary for delivering services and for responding to health and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 142 
environmental emergencies. At the same time, the Province is projecting increased demand for emergency 
services due these factors, which is further complicated by the Province’s ageing demographic (Climate 
Change Nova Scotia, 2018a, b; Krawchenko et al., 2016).
In response, provincial-level officials are working with planners and managers to develop strategies for 
rerouting transportation lanes and updating design standards to ensure that climate change is considered in 
new projects (Climate Change Nova Scotia, 2018a). Locally, municipal authorities are utilizing flood maps to 
warn future developers of projected risks from storm surges and associated flooding. 
In Annapolis Royal, for example, flood maps identified that the town’s fire hall is at risk of being cut off from 
the rest of the community in the event of projected storm surge flooding (see Figure 3.7). The fire department 
was able to use this information and adapt their emergency response plan, including purchasing a boat and 
redistributing rescue equipment throughout the community (Natural Resources Canada, 2015). 
Figure 3.7: Flood-risk mapping in Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia. Source: Webster et al., 2010.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 143 
3.6 Individual and community health and well-
being are being negatively affected2
In rural and remote communities, health and well-being are strongly influenced by social, cultural and 
physical environments. Climate change is negatively impacting the health and well-being of individuals and 
communities, both directly and indirectly. Reducing risk, adapting to climate change impacts and realizing 
co-benefits from GHG emissions reduction present important opportunities for the health sector.
In rural and remote areas, many individuals and communities have a close connection to the environment; 
this connection has led to climate change affecting human health and well-being in many ways. Human health 
challenges linked to climate change in rural and remote communities include challenges with accessing 
healthy food and water; worsening of existing illnesses and development of new ones; injury or death caused 
by extreme weather events and changing conditions; and increasing mental health challenges connected to 
environmental uncertainties. Rural and remote communities have already begun to develop and carry out 
health-related adaptation plans. For them to continue adapting to the health impacts of climate change, it is 
important for decision-makers at all levels of government to consider community context, including age, gender, 
cultural and socioeconomic composition; draw upon and support local knowledge; and view human health 
within the social, cultural and physical environments of rural and remote areas.
3.6.1 Introduction
In rural and remote areas, human health and well-being are often influenced by the close connection that 
individuals and communities have to their social, cultural and physical environments (Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; 
EPCCARR, 2018; Public Health Agency of Canada, 2017; IPCC, 2014). Many rural and remote communities, 
particularly Indigenous communities, rely closely on the land for their sustenance, livelihoods and cultural 
practices, which influences social determinants of health and well-being in a number of ways (Cunsolo and 
Ellis, 2018; EPCCARR, 2018; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; IPCC, 2014). As a result, climate change is leading to 
both direct (e.g., injury during extreme weather events) and indirect (e.g., poor nutrition caused by changing 
access to certain foods) effects on the health and well-being of individuals and communities (see Figure 2.8; 
Berner et al., 2016; EPCCARR, 2018; Durkalec et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014).
2 A modified version of this section was published as Kipp, A., Cunsolo, A., Vodden, K., King, N., Manners, S., and Harper, 
S.L. (2019). Climate Change Impacts on Health and Well-being in Rural and Remote Regions Across Canada: A 
Synthesis of the Literature. Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada: Special Issue on Climate 
Change, 39(4): 22–126. https://doi.org/10.24095/hpcdp.39.4.02.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 144 
Figure 3.8: Climate change impacts on the health and well-being of individuals living in rural and remote 
communities.
Examples of negative impacts on individual and community health and well-being in rural and remote areas 
include increased prevalence and severity of extreme weather events (EPCCARR, 2018; Government of 
Saskatchewan, 2017; Rapaport et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014); changes to sea ice, vegetation, fish, 
wildlife and water (EPCCARR, 2018; IPCC, 2018, 2014; Clark and Ford, 2017; Ford et al., 2014); and weather 
and environmental uncertainties (Young et al., 2016; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; IPCC, 2014). Negative health 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 145 
outcomes associated with these changes include an increased prevalence of poor nutrition, obesity and 
diabetes (EPCCARR, 2018; Barbeau et al., 2015; Loring and Gerlach, 2015); vectorborne, waterborne and 
foodborne disease (EPCCARR, 2018; Loring and Gerlach, 2015; Ford et al., 2014); cardiovascular disease 
(Barbeau et al., 2015; Loring and Gerlach, 2015; Harper et al., 2011); respiratory issues (Dodd et al., 2018a, 
b); injury and mortality (Clark and Ford, 2017; Young et al., 2016; Ford et al., 2014); and mental health issues 
(Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; Dodd et al., 2018a, b; Government of Northwest Territories, 2017; Cunsolo Willox 
et al., 2015; Statham et al., 2015). Characteristics of rural and remote areas that may increase sensitivity 
to these risks include their remote geography and limited transportation infrastructure; reliance on natural 
resources; under-resourced social and physical infrastructure; limited health system capacity due in part to 
there being fewer health professionals living and working in these areas; limited health infrastructure and 
access to health-sustaining resources; and reduced emergency response capacity (EPCCARR, 2018; IPCC, 2014).
Vulnerability to climate change is influenced by the intersection of demographic, social, cultural and political 
factors in rural and remote communities, as well as individual characteristics and circumstances (EPCCARR, 
2018; Drolet and Sampson, 2017; Krawchenko et al., 2016; IPCC, 2014). Furthermore, the literature highlights 
indigeneity, age, gender and socioeconomic status (see Box 3.2) as key factors influencing individual and 
community vulnerability to climate change in rural and remote communities.
3.6.2 Availability of nourishing, accessible and preferred food and 
water sources
Many rural and remote communities have experienced changing access to and quality of food and water 
systems linked to environmental changes such as rising temperatures (Medeiros et al., 2017; Berner et al., 
2016; Loring and Gerlach, 2015), changing precipitation patterns and increasing extreme weather events 
(Dodd et al., 2018a, b; Medeiros et al., 2017; Berner et al., 2016). For example, in many Northern remote First 
Nations and Inuit communities, climate change-related disruptions to sea ice, wildlife and vegetation impact 
the ability of individuals to hunt, fish and forage, leading to decreased consumption of healthy and culturally 
preferred local food and increased reliance on retail food (Dodd et al., 2018a, b; Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Medeiros et al., 2017; Berner et al., 2016; Loring and Gerlach, 2015). Water security may 
also be challenging for rural and remote communities, where rising temperatures and more frequent extreme 
weather events can overwhelm fragile water treatment systems and interrupt the provision of safe drinking 
water (Medeiros et al., 2017; Berner et al., 2016) (see Water Resources chapter). Across Northern Canada—
where many communities rely on surface water sources—changes to water levels, run-off, flow regimes and 
sediment accumulation can seriously affect drinking water availability and quality (Bakaic and Medeiros, 
2017; Medeiros et al., 2017). Both food and water insecurity have been linked to negative health outcomes, 
including poor nutrition, obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, acute gastrointestinal illness and mental 
health concerns (Berner et al., 2016; Harper et al., 2015; Loring and Gerlach, 2015; Ford et al., 2014). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 146 
3.6.3 Infectious disease and exacerbating existing chronic illnesses
Changing precipitation patterns, rising temperatures and increased frequency and severity of extreme 
weather can also exacerbate chronic illnesses and infectious diseases in rural and remote communities by 
increasing exposure to environmental contaminants and vectorborne, foodborne and waterborne diseases; 
putting enhanced stress on underlying chronic conditions (e.g., cardiovascular and respiratory illness) (Dodd 
et al., 2018b; Public Health Agency of Canada, 2017); and disrupting healthcare provision and chronic disease 
management (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015). Research has also documented increased risk of waterborne 
disease in rural and remote communities due to weather-related contamination events (EPCCARR, 2018; 
Harper et al., 2015). Changing winds, ocean currents and rivers carrying environmental contaminants in the 
North may also lead to increased levels of persistent organic pollutants and toxic heavy metals in local food 
and water sources in remote polar regions (see Northern Canada chapter; Medeiros et al., 2017; Berner et al., 
2016; Loring and Gerlach, 2015). Consumption of contaminants can result in many health concerns (Medeiros 
et al., 2017; Berner et al., 2016; Loring and Gerlach, 2015).
3.6.4 Increased risk of injury and mortality
Extreme and rapidly changing weather conditions—including heat waves, storms, droughts, floods and 
changing sea ice conditions—have had significant negative effects on the health of individuals living in rural 
and remote communities. For example, wildfires and associated health challenges—such as respiratory 
issues, mental health stressors and damage to critical health infrastructure—have been identified in forest 
communities across Canada as a threat to safety and well-being (see Case Story 3.4 and Sector Impacts 
and Adaptation chapter; Dodd et al., 2018a, b; Government of Northwest Territories, 2017; Government of 
Saskatchewan, 2017). Northern and remote communities have identified increased death and injury from 
changing weather and sea ice, leading to unsafe or unfamiliar travel conditions and reliance on technologies 
that can and do fail (e.g., snowmobiles breaking down, navigation systems failing) (Clark et al., 2016a, b).
3.6.5 Impacts on mental health and well-being
As environments change and people adapt to new and often less desirable conditions, the mental health and 
well-being of individuals living in rural and remote communities is also affected. For example, in Indigenous 
communities in rural and remote areas of Canada, individuals are often deeply connected to the land for their 
well-being; as climate change alters the environment, access to places and practices of cultural significance 
are often disrupted (Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; Cunsolo et al., 2017; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Ford et al., 
2014). For Inuit in Nunatsiavut, for example, these changes have led to increased anxiety, fear, distress, anger, 
grief and depression related to changes to land-based activities, connection to land, and cultural identity 
(Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; Cunsolo et al., 2017; Harper et al., 2015; Lament for the Land, 2014). Regional plans 
in Manitoba identify the potential loss of livelihoods associated with drought as a climate-sensitive mental 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 147 
health concern (Government of Manitoba, 2017). In Atlantic Canada, individuals have connected increases 
in the storm prevalence and severity in rural coastal communities and subsequent damage to important 
infrastructure with mental health challenges, which often differs by gender (Vasseur et al., 2015).
3.6.6 Adaptation responses and opportunities 
Despite these challenges, focusing on climate change adaptation, risk reduction and realizing co-benefits 
from GHG emissions reduction presents an important opportunity for the health sector. Already, many 
rural and remote communities in Canada have begun to develop and implement health-related adaptation 
strategies (see Table 3.4). To support adaptation to the health effects of climate change, recommended 
changes to existing adaptation strategies include: 
•	
using multiple knowledge systems that are specific to sociocultural contexts; 
•	
addressing non-climatic factors impacting adaptation; 
•	
utilizing innovative forms of technology; 
•	
improving and integrating health surveillance with environmental monitoring; 
•	
supporting sustainable development practices; 
•	
enhancing awareness of risks and response; 
•	
expanding knowledge of climate change impacts; and 
•	
developing the capacity of the health sector to respond to climate change. 
Ultimately, for rural and remote communities to continue adapting to the health impacts of climate change, 
it is important to consider specific local and regional, economic and geographic elements; support and draw 
upon existing expertise of individuals and communities in rural and remote areas in Canada; and continue 
viewing human health within the social-cultural and physical environments of rural and remote communities.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 148 
Table 3.4: Examples of existing and potential adaptation strategies 
to negative health effects of climate change in rural and remote 
communities across Canada
EXAMPLES OF EXISTING 
ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Introducing local food production systems
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Barbeau et 
al., 2015; Loring and Gerlach, 
2015
Using experience-based knowledge of local communities to support 
community resilience
Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; 
Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; 
Ford et al., 2014
Developing community-based monitoring programs and research to 
gather data about environment and health to inform decision-making
Dodd et al., 2018; EPCCARR, 
2018; Berner et al., 2016; 
Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; 
Harper et al., 2015
Using Indigenous and local knowledge about the physical environment 
to support hazard avoidance and emergency preparedness
Clark and Ford, 2017; Young 
et al., 2016; Ford et al., 2014
Utilizing a social development approach—which involves health 
professionals, social workers and people working in caring professions 
that support those directly impacted by climate change—to strengthen 
community capacity
Drolet and Sampson, 2017
Fostering protective factors for physical and mental health through 
connection to land-based activities, cultural arts and crafts, and 
opportunities for bringing community together
Cunsolo et al., 2017
Using local knowledge, Indigenous Knowledge and/or scientific 
knowledge to adapt in a way that responds to specific local sociocultural 
contexts
Drolet and Sampson, 2017; 
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Berner et 
al., 2016; Ford et al., 2014
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 149 
EXAMPLES OF POTENTIAL
ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Eliminating social barriers to adaptation (e.g., poverty, inequality, housing 
concerns, etc.) and reducing non-climatic factors (e.g., chronic disease)
EPCCARR, 2018; Drolet and 
Sampson, 2017
Utilizing innovative forms of technology (e.g., telehealth, mobile 
monitoring applications, satellite imagery)
EPCCARR, 2018; Government 
of Northwest Territories, 2017
Improving public health surveillance and furthering monitoring programs
EPCCARR, 2018; Bakaic and 
Medeiros, 2017; Medeiros et 
al., 2017; Berner et al., 2016; 
Province of New Brunswick, 
2016; Young et al., 2016; 
Barbeau et al., 2015; 
Durkalec et al., 2015; Ford et 
al., 2014
Supporting sustainable development practices (e.g., clean energy 
programs)
Drolet and Sampson, 2017; 
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Province of 
New Brunswick, 2016; Ford 
et al., 2014
Enhancing communication and awareness of risks and responses (e.g., 
lists of safe spaces, pamphlets regarding disease outbreaks, developing 
outreach strategies)
Dodd et al., 2018; EPCCARR, 
2018; Government of 
Northwest Territories, 2017; 
Province of New Brunswick, 
2016; Ford et al., 2014
Expanding knowledge of climate change impacts on health through 
research and investment, and sharing best practices for public health 
adaptation
EPCCARR, 2018; Government 
of Northwest Territories, 
2017; Province of New 
Brunswick, 2016
Developing the capacity of health systems and emergency response to 
withstand and respond to climate risks (e.g., creating technical guidance 
and training courses, integrating climate change into medical and public 
health training)
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Young et 
al., 2016
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 150 
Case Story 3.4: Coping with the health impacts of wildfire in the 
Northwest Territories
In the Northwest Territories, the summer of 2014 was one of the worst wildfire seasons on record, with 
prolonged smoke events and poor air quality. A study exploring the experiences of individuals in four 
subarctic communities found both short- and long-term effects of prolonged smoke exposure and isolation 
on their physical, emotional and mental health (Dodd et al., 2018a, b). While the prolonged smoke events were 
linked to extended time indoors and respiratory problems, interviewees also reported that their experiences 
of evacuation and isolation, as well as feelings of fear, stress and uncertainty, negatively impacted their 
mental and emotional well-being. In many cases, land-based activities were also impacted, with implications 
for individual and community well-being. Interviews also revealed that communities developed adaptation 
strategies that included educational workshops and physical activity programs to help reduce health risks. 
Nevertheless, there is a clear need for improved coordination and communication at the local and territorial 
level to better prepare for future wildfire events and reduce resulting health-related impacts.
3.7 Climate change is resulting in intangible 
losses and damages 
Climate change impacts are leading to a wide range of intangible losses and damages in many rural and 
remote communities and areas, including the loss of identity, cultural continuity and sense of place. These 
intangible losses and damages are expected to be widespread and cumulative, and are critical to consider 
in climate change adaptation and policy.
In rural and remote areas, individuals and communities often have strong social and cultural connections to 
the environment. As a result, when the climate changes, individuals and communities in rural and remote areas 
can face impacts on their identity, culture and sense of place. Climate change is contributing to these losses 
and damages through several pathways, including shifts in cultural practices and identity; changes to the 
social fabric of rural and remote communities; and damages and destruction to both landscapes and spaces 
of cultural and social importance. Adaptation to these negative impacts has already begun as individuals and 
communities come to understand the links between climate change and identity, culture and place. As places of 
social and cultural importance shift in new ways, more research is needed on how these changes will affect the 
cultural and social fabric of communities, including cultural practices and identities, sharing and social ties, and 
place meaning and connection. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 151 
3.7.1 Introduction
Individuals and communities living in rural and remote communities and areas often have a strong social and 
cultural ties to their environments, which influence identity, cultural continuity and sense of place in numerous 
ways. Examples of this connection to place can be seen in remote Indigenous communities across Canada, 
where many individuals rely on the land for their culture and well-being, and practice land-based cultural 
activities including hunting, fishing and berry picking (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Harper et al., 
2015; Loring and Gerlach, 2015; Pearce et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014). It is also seen in rural areas throughout 
the prairies, where individuals in agricultural communities often have a strong heritage associated with 
farming and daily personal interactions with their land (McMartin and Merino, 2014). Place-based connection 
is also reflected in other rural and small-town communities—such as coastal and forest communities—where 
individual and group identities are often tied to local landscapes and reliance on natural resources (Dodd et 
al., 2018a, b; Vasseur et al., 2017).
Climate change and associated environmental impacts are leading to wide-ranging intangible losses and 
damages in many rural and remote communities (see Figure 3.9; Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; Cunsolo Willox 
et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012). Specifically, recent studies have explored how climate change is disrupting 
cultural practices associated with the land (e.g., hunting, sewing, travelling on sea ice, etc.) (Cunsolo Willox et 
al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Loring and Gerlach, 2015; Pearce et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014); altering the inter-
generational transmission of Indigenous Knowledge (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Durkalec et 
al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014); limiting access to places of cultural significance (e.g., hunting camps, sources 
of fresh water, etc.) (Government of Northwest Territories, 2017; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012); 
and damaging or destroying landscapes and sites of cultural and social significance (e.g., heritage and 
archeological sites) (Vasseur et al., 2017; Dawson and Levy, 2016). These climate-related changes are further 
exacerbated by non-climatic changes that also affect identity, cultural continuity and sense of place, which 
include ageing populations, rural to urban outmigration and the adoption of labour-saving technologies.
Although the impacts of climate change on identity, cultural continuity and sense of place are experienced 
differently by each individual and community, prominent themes include shifts in cultural practices and 
identity; the changing social fabric of rural and remote communities; and the damage and destruction of 
landscapes and sites of cultural and social significance.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 152 
Figure 3.9: Summary of the intangible losses and damages of climate change on identity, cultural continuity and 
sense of place in rural and remote communities and areas in Canada.
3.7.2 Shifting cultural practices and identity related to place 
The deep connections that individuals and communities in rural and remote areas share with their natural 
environments mean that many of their cultural practices are strongly connected to the land. For example, 
in many remote Inuit communities, spending time on the land and engaging with land-based activities 
hold important cultural and spiritual value; contribute to Inuit identity and cultural autonomy; and provide 
opportunities for the inter-generational transmission of knowledge (Clark et al., 2016b; Cunsolo Willox et 
al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Durkalec et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015; Pearce et al., 2015). Changing climatic 
conditions that alter the natural environment—such as changes to harvesting seasons, wildlife and plant 
species, traditional medicines and waterways—have the potential to disrupt cultural practices in a number 
of ways (Province of New Brunswick, 2016; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Harper et al., 2015).
Indigenous communities in rural and remote areas are at particular risk of experiencing cultural changes 
as a result of climate change. For example, climate change has impacted culturally important subsistence 
activities in many Indigenous communities, such as hunting, fishing, trapping, berry-picking, water collection, 
and subsequently the consumption of culturally significant food and water (Boulanger-Lapointe et al., 2019; 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 153 
Archer et al., 2017; Government of Northwest Territories, 2017; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; 
Harper et al., 2015; Pearce et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014; Hanrahan et al., 2014). Such activities are altered 
as changes—including thinning sea ice, warming temperatures and increased storm prevalence—occur and 
impact the ability of Inuit to spend time on these changing landscapes (EPCCARR, 2018; Clark et al., 2016b; 
Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Durkalec et al., 2015; Odland et al., 2015; Pearce et al., 2015; Ford 
et al., 2014).
Climate change is also impacting the ability of Indigenous Knowledge holders and Elders to use their 
knowledge on the land in rural and remote areas, since past knowledge becomes less applicable to current 
conditions (Government of Northwest Territories, 2017). These changes are altering place meanings and 
attachment, decreasing transmission of knowledge, eroding land-based skills and disrupting cultural identity 
and continuity (Clark et al., 2016b; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 2012; Durkalec et al., 2015; Pearce et 
al., 2015; Ford et al., 2014). There is limited research in a Canadian context regarding the impacts of climate 
change on the cultural practices of individuals and communities in rural and remote areas more broadly (e.g., 
in agricultural, coastal, forest and mountain communities). However, international literature indicates this is 
an important area of concern (Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018; Casanova-Pérez et al., 2016; Hall et al., 2016; Cunsolo 
Willox, 2012; Wolf et al., 2012). Thus, more research and engagement are needed to further explore the 
cultural dimensions of climate change in rural and remote communities across Canada.
3.7.3 Changes to the social fabric of rural and remote communities 
Climate change is also influencing the social fabric of rural and remote communities, which includes the 
people living in these areas, interactions between people and the distribution and use of social spaces 
and services (Krawchenko et al., 2016). An example of climate change altering the social dimensions 
within communities can be seen in Saskatoon’s Swift Current Creek Watershed, where drought associated 
with climate change has led to both economic and social stressors (McMartin and Merino, 2014). The 
socioeconomic structure of rural and remote communities—which may include a gendered-stratified 
workforce, declining economies, low levels of education, youth migration, distance from decision-makers and 
reliance on natural resources—may heighten the vulnerability of individuals and communities to the negative 
social effects of climate change (Vasseur et al., 2015). For example, in the rural coastal community of Ste. 
Flavie, Quebec, storm damage associated with climate change was identified as enhancing social stress 
in the community and corresponded with an increase in the out-migration of youth and families, as well as 
familial tensions and interpersonal conflict (Vasseur et al., 2015). In Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, shifts in weather, 
ice and seasonal patterns led to increased family and community stress, with concerns for increased family 
violence (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a).
In addition to disrupting cultural practices, climate change and associated stresses and challenges have 
resulted in the fragmentation of previously robust social networks and a loss of social capital in many rural 
and remote communities (EPCCARR, 2018; Medeiros et al., 2017). Rural and remote Indigenous communities, 
in particular, are disproportionately burdened by the social impacts of climate change, which exacerbate 
existing socioeconomic challenges such as issues with service provision and limited economic opportunities 
(EPCCARR, 2018; Picketts et al., 2017). In rural and remote communities more broadly, individuals with 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 154 
limited social capital and a lack of access to resources are often more at risk to the adverse effects of 
climate change (EPCCARR, 2018; Krawchenko et al., 2016).
Climate change in rural and remote areas has also influenced the social structure of communities in terms 
of gender roles. In agricultural communities in Saskatchewan, for example, a study found that environmental 
crises further entrench traditional conceptions of women’s roles on farms, positioning men as the primary 
“farmer” and women as “caregivers, helpers and supporters,” and assigning women less agency over climate 
change adaptation strategies (Women’s Environment and Development Organization, 2018). Similarly, in 
forestry communities in Western Canada, women’s marginal economic and social positions have influenced 
their vulnerability to changing climatic conditions (Williams et al., 2018; Reed et al., 2014). In Clyde River and 
Qikiqtarjuaq, Nunavut, climate change-related impacts to the accessibility of wildlife have resulted in shifts 
to women’s primary economic roles in traditional food preparation and handicraft production (e.g., sewing of 
sealskin), with negative economic impacts for them and their communities, as well as important social and 
cultural impacts (Williams et al., 2018).
3.7.4 Loss and damage to landscapes and sites of cultural and social 
significance
Cultural landscapes and places of cultural and social significance, such as archeological and heritage sites, 
often contribute to a sense of place and cultural continuity for the individuals and communities connected 
to these places. In many rural and remote communities across Canada, climate change impacts—such as 
coastal erosion, changing precipitation patterns, increased forest fires and changes to freeze-thaw cycles—
are contributing to the destruction of these sites, leading to irreversible loss and damages (Clarke and Clarke, 
2018; EPCCARR, 2018). In rural and remote communities, such sites are at particular risk due to geographic 
locations, existing concerns with ageing infrastructure and limited resources for risk reduction and adaptation 
(EPCCARR, 2018). Furthermore, it is challenging to adapt to climate change by altering cultural landscapes or 
relocating heritage or archeological sites as their value is often tied directly to place; once these places are 
lost, they cannot be recovered (Clarke and Clarke, 2018; EPCCARR, 2018; Government of Canada, 2016). 
In rural and remote coastal communities, climate change impacts such as sea level rise, loss of sea ice, 
storm surges, increased wind speeds and coastal erosion are directly damaging sites of cultural and social 
importance (Clarke and Clarke, 2018). In rural Nova Scotia, for example, a study examining climate change 
impacts on elderly populations found that flooding related to storm surges and changing precipitation 
patterns was negatively impacting social spaces and assets in the community that are important for daily 
routine and social engagement (Manuel et al., 2015). Increased winds and storm surges have also contributed 
to the deterioration of structures along the coast (e.g., lighthouses, piers), as well as natural heritage and 
landscapes (e.g., blown-down trees and loss of beaches and dunes) (Clarke and Clarke, 2018). Similarly, in 
Arctic and Subarctic regions, climate change impacts have destroyed rich archaeological records, natural 
and constructed heritage sites, and landscapes of cultural and social significance (Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Andrews et al., 2016; Dawson and Levy, 2016).
In Northern regions, specific climate change concerns include the melting of sea ice and permanent snow 
pack; severe ice and snow storms; and a more dramatic rise in temperatures (Clarke and Clarke, 2018; 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 155 
Government of Northwest Territories, 2017; Andrews et al., 2016). Fort Conger in Nunavut (see Section 3.2) 
and other heritage sites in the Arctic have been damaged by the accumulation of ice, snow and water; strong 
winds; increased freeze-thaw cycles; and the increased presence of fungi and subsequent rot supported by 
warming Arctic temperatures (Clarke and Clarke, 2018; Dawson and Levy, 2016). Changing temperatures, 
including both heat and cold extremes, also have potential to influence local extinction of wildlife and 
plant species that are important aspects of natural heritage (Clarke and Clarke, 2018). Changing climatic 
conditions have altered important landmarks used by Indigenous harvesters along travel routes and disrupted 
access to places of cultural, social, spiritual and emotional significance (Andrews et al., 2016). Although 
there is a gap in understanding about the full impacts related to the destruction of social and cultural sites 
throughout Canadian rural and remote communities, preserving these cultural assets can be seen as a 
symbol of resilience and community stability in rapidly changing times (Clarke and Clarke, 2018; Government 
of Northwest Territories, 2017). 
3.7.5 Adaptation responses and opportunities
The intangible losses and damages of climate change on identity, cultural continuity and sense of place 
associated with climate change are widespread and cumulative, and will be critical to consider in climate 
change adaptation. Despite numerous challenges, adaptation to these negative impacts has already 
begun as individuals and communities in rural and remote areas identify how climate change impacts the 
interconnectedness and importance of identity, culture and place (see Table 3.5; Case Story 3.5). In many 
rural and remote Indigenous communities in Northern Canada, for example, the importance of drawing 
on Indigenous Knowledge, sharing networks and inter-generational transmission of knowledge has been 
highlighted as key to adaptation (Archer et al., 2017; Fawcett et al., 2017; Durkalec et al., 2015; Pearce et al., 
2015; Statham et al., 2015). In rural prairie communities, agricultural producers have recognized the vital role 
of community, social and natural capital, and the need to respond collectively to climate change (Sauchyn, 
2017). Moreover, in coastal communities in Atlantic and Northern Canada, where communities have identities 
that are strongly tied to cultural landscapes and sites of sociocultural significance, strategies to preserve 
and maintain at-risk sites are currently being explored (Clarke and Clarke, 2018; Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017).
Table 3.5: Examples of existing and future adaptation strategies to 
address the impacts of climate change on identity, cultural continuity 
and sense of place in rural and remote communities across Canada
EXISTING ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Using technology to mobilize knowledge about sites of cultural and 
social significance that are at risk due to climate change can help gain 
support for preserving them.
Dawson and Levy, 2016
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 156 
EXISTING ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Increasing technological capacity to address unpredictable conditions.
Archer et al., 2017; Fawcett et 
al., 2017
Community development programs focused on mobilizing local 
knowledge by drawing on local culture, skills and resources.
Drolet and Sampson, 2017
Using Indigenous Knowledge—including learned and land-based skills, 
experiences and group memory—to support flexibility and innovation 
in hunting (e.g., adapting seasonal cycles to hunt what is available); 
hazard avoidance; and emergency preparedness.
Fawcett et al., 2017; Cunsolo 
Willox et al., 2015, 2013a, b, 
2012; Durkalec et al., 2015; 
Harper et al., 2015; Pearce et 
al., 2015
Social networks, community sharing, intercommunity trade and 
fostering social capital (e.g., sharing of food, equipment and 
knowledge when individuals are in need; delivering skills-based 
workshops).
Archer et al., 2017; Durkalec et 
al., 2015; Pearce et al., 2015; 
Statham et al., 2015
Building community resilience by creating a climate change action plan 
that draws from social networks, experiences, diversity, consensus 
building and culturally relevant tools.
Clarke and Clarke, 2018
Resurgence of Indigenous ceremonies, practices and values.
EPCCARR, 2018
POTENTIAL ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Integrating the geographical, social and cultural context of a 
community, as well as risks posed by climate change, in policy may 
improve relevancy and help to avoid maladaptation.
Drolet and Sampson, 2017; 
Ford et al., 2017; Krawchenko 
et al., 2016; Manuel et al., 
2015
Inclusive design may contribute to recognizing the interdependency 
of social, economic and environmental considerations for adaptation, 
including social demographics (i.e., age, gender, socioeconomic 
status).
Drolet and Sampson, 2017; 
Rapaport et al., 2015; Vasseur 
et al., 2015
Developing and supporting adaptation strategies in Indigenous 
communities that are rooted in cultural values and Indigenous 
Knowledge can contribute to climate resilience (e.g., engaging 
community leaders and Elders).
Archer et al., 2017; Ford et 
al., 2017, 2014; Pearce et al., 
2015; Gill and Lantz, 2014
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 157 
POTENTIAL ADAPTATION STRATEGIES
REFERENCES
Developing new modes of knowledge mobilization through co-
production of knowledge; creating adaptation tools and messaging 
that provide concrete practical advice; and creating incentives for 
implementation.
Ford et al., 2017; Reed et al., 
2014
Establishing community-based environmental monitoring to encourage 
the protection of the land.
Government of Canada, 2016; 
Gill and Lantz, 2014
Incorporating culturally relevant and locally appropriate materials into 
education, programming and services; developing targeted education 
and knowledge transfer (e.g., teaching equipment and operability).
Clark et al., 2016a, b; Ford et 
al., 2014
Strengthening local autonomy in decision-making.
Ford et al., 2014
Strengthening land-based learning and inter-generational knowledge 
sharing.
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017; Ford et al., 
2014
Considering cultural value and cultural identity in terms of long-term 
benefits to the community.
Clarke and Clarke, 2018
Establishing interdisciplinary teams to make decisions about 
preserving and maintaining heritage and sites of sociocultural 
significance.
Clarke and Clarke, 2018
Prioritizing excavating and collecting information from archaeological 
sites at greatest risk from climate change impacts.
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017
Potentially moving sites and structures of cultural and social 
significance to protect them from climate-related risks.
Clarke and Clarke, 2018; 
Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2017

A strong sense of culture has been identified as a protective factor moderating exposure to climate-related 
risks and plays a crucial role in influencing adaptive capacity (Cunsolo et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2014). Although 
many rural and remote communities have traditional cultural practices, culture is dynamic. For example, 
in Dawson Creek, British Columbia—where local cultural identities of self-sufficiency are closely tied to a 
heritage of farming—the community has used climate change adaptation to promote a renewed community 
identity around sustainability and energy independence, including through the creation of the Bear Mountain 
Wind Farm (Shaw et al., 2014). Ultimately, existing social capital in rural and remote communities, such as 
strong social networks and place-based knowledge systems, are key to adaptation (Furness and Nelson, 
2016). As places of social and cultural significance shift in unprecedented ways, more research is needed on 
how these changes will alter the cultural practices and social fabric of communities.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 158 
Research indicates that intangible climate change impacts, such as adverse effects on culture or social 
capital, stem from direct impacts, as well as strategies for adaptation and GHG emissions reduction. In 
the movement towards clean energy, for example, the banning of a coal mine in the rural town of Atikokan, 
Ontario led to layoffs for approximately 90 individuals that worked for the power plant, with resulting adverse 
effects on the social fabric of the community (Dampier et al., 2016). Alternatively, as seen in the First Nations 
community of Fort Albany, Ontario, strategies for adaptation, risk reduction and GHG emissions reduction 
have promoted social cohesion and sharing (Barbeau et al., 2015). In this subarctic community, where 
local food systems have been introduced as a way of combating food insecurity, the act of gardening has 
strengthened family ties and provided space for knowledge transfer between generations (Barbeau et al., 
2015). New forms of social networks can also help to strengthen social connections, such as using social 
media to identify individuals at risk during extreme weather events and to facilitate food and equipment 
sharing (Archer et al., 2017).
Case Story 3.5: Supporting Inuit wellness, strength, resilience and 
cultural continuity in Nunatsiavut, Labrador
Inuit throughout Inuit Nunangat (Inuit homelands) are at the forefront of a rapidly changing climate and 
environment. As a result, a priority of many Inuit communities is to develop strategies to support community 
wellness, foster livelihoods, maintain cultural values, enhance resilience, and preserve and promote cultural 
continuity. Responding to these stressors and needs, and building on previous research conducted in the 
region, the Inuit communities of Nunatsiavut, Labrador have been actively designing research and evidence-
based programs to support Inuit wellness, strength, resilience and cultural continuity. 
For example, communities in Nain and Hopedale established the Aullak, Sangilivallianginnatuk (Going Off, 
Growing Strong) program to bring youth and experienced harvesters together to support social and cultural 
connections, and community food security. The Inuit Community Governments of Rigolet, Makkovik and 
Postville in the Nunatsiavut region of Labrador designed and piloted the IlikKuset-Ilingannet (Culture-
Connect!) program (Cunsolo et al., 2017; IllikKuset-Illingannet Team, 2014). This program was premised on 
the Inuit relational epistemology of piliriqatigiinniq (“working in a collaborative way for the common good”) 
and united youth with adult mentors to learn cultural skills, including trapping, snowshoe-making, carving, art 
and sewing. 
Both programs supported hands-on knowledge transmission; created new or enhanced relationships between 
and among the youth and mentors; revitalized cultural pride and well-being; promoted cultural preservation 
and promotion; and showed promise as a strategy for supporting cultural sustainability and resilience 
to change. This resonates with the growing emphasis on Indigenous-led programs that support cultural 
preservation, promotion, reclamation and resurgence, and contribute to a holistic understanding of, and 
strategies for, Northern sustainability.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 159 
3.8 Local participation in adaptation decision-
making improves outcomes 
Enhancing governance capacity and decision-making related to climate change adaptation in rural and 
remote communities requires access to additional resources, information and support. Decision-making 
processes related to adaptation programs and policy can be made more effective through greater 
participation of local residents and organizations, inclusion of local and Indigenous Knowledge, and 
consideration for the specific circumstances of rural and remote communities and areas.
Governments, civil society organizations, academic institutions and businesses are addressing climate change 
in various ways, including through planning, policy and program development. Access to resources, information 
and technical support have enhanced adaptive capacity in some rural and remote communities; however, 
further support in the form of region-specific information, trained personnel such as planners and engineers, 
and funding sources are needed to address adaptation planning and implementation requirements, and limited 
local governance capacity. Coordination among actors—including government agencies at all levels—is also 
critical, while recognizing the need for place-based planning and responses.
3.8.1 Introduction 
Rural and remote governance structures at multiple levels and across many sectors are facing challenges 
due to a changing climate (see Box 3.5), and are attempting to respond to these challenges and associated 
opportunities (Northwest Territories Legislative Assembly, 2018; Government of Canada, 2017; Hurlbert and 
Pittman, 2014; McMartin and Merino, 2014). Climate change impacts are affecting not only planning and 
policy, but also infrastructure and service delivery—particularly during emergencies and related to community 
and economic development, and the governance of lands and natural resources. 
Box 3.5: The governance of adaptation
Governance is understood as the ways in which government and non-government actors organize themselves 
to respond to societal problems or new opportunities, including establishing and shaping formal and informal 
institutions to help guide such responses. Adaptation governance, more specifically, refers to the combined 
efforts of these various actors to adapt to climate change. Efforts include the institutions, policies, plans and 
strategies that are formed or used to tackle adaptation issues, ideas of how adaptation should be undertaken 
and governed, and decisions that are made—such as the identification of problems, and mechanisms used for 
implementation and enforcement (Huitema et al., 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 160 
3.8.2 The need for a collaborative approach to governance
All levels of government are playing a role in responding to climate change within rural and remote 
communities (see Table 3.6). Current research highlights the importance of federal, provincial and 
territorial levels of governments, as well as Indigenous governments and organizations, and international 
intergovernmental initiatives in supporting rural and remote communities in their adaptation efforts. It is 
essential that institutionalized knowledge and research institutions meaningfully engage with local and 
Indigenous Knowledge holders and citizen scientists to better understand and respond to the challenges 
of climate change. Creating and setting new policies, legislation, funding, training and technical assistance 
programs are important tools used by these governments and organizations (Government of Northwest 
Territories, 2016; Hurlbert and Pittman, 2014). 
Table 3.6: Governance processes related to climate change 
adaptation in rural and remote communities across Canada
ADAPTATION GOVERNANCE 
PROCESSES
LOCATIONS 
OBSERVED*
LEVELS OF 
GOVERNMENT 
INVOLVED*
OTHER ACTORS 
INVOLVED*
Policy-setting and implementation: 
Legislative changes; devolution of 
planning powers to municipalities; 
development of community 
charters; social policy development; 
climate change strategic 
frameworks; and the Pan-Canadian 
Framework on Clean Growth and 
Energy.
BC, NS, NU, ON, 
SK and at the 
national level
Local/municipal, 
provincial/
territorial, federal, 
international 
Academic/
research, NGOs 
(non-governmental 
organizations)
Planning: Climate change 
adaptation planning; waste 
management plans; development 
of disaster risk management 
strategies; transportation planning; 
energy planning; integration 
of health planning and climate 
change watershed planning; and 
community planning.
BC, NB, NL, NWT, 
ON, QC, YT and at 
the national level
Local/municipal, 
Indigenous, Tribal 
Council, provincial/
territorial, federal, 
international
Academic/research, 
NGOs, private 
sector, industry
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 161 
ADAPTATION GOVERNANCE 
PROCESSES
LOCATIONS 
OBSERVED*
LEVELS OF 
GOVERNMENT 
INVOLVED*
OTHER ACTORS 
INVOLVED*
Program development and 
implementation: Implementation of 
adaptive management programs; 
pilot adaptation initiatives; training; 
supporting beneficial management 
practices; and other actions.
AB, BC, MB, 
NWT, ON, QC, 
SK, YT and at the 
national level
Local/municipal, 
Indigenous, 
provincial/
territorial, federal, 
international  
Academic/research, 
NGOs, private 
sector, industry
Information gathering and sharing: 
Development of risk assessment 
tools; information gathering; 
monitoring and evaluation; 
information sharing; research; and 
public engagement.
BC, MB, NB, NL, 
NWT, PEI, QC, 
SK and at the 
national level
Local/municipal, 
Indigenous, 
provincial/
territorial, federal, 
international
Academic/research, 
NGOs, private 
sector, industry
*As noted in recent literature that has been identified and reviewed.
Civil society organizations, including NGOs, as well as research institutions and the private sector are also 
playing crucial roles. Many governments are facilitating and fostering relationships with NGOs to assist 
with the implementation of adaptation initiatives (Drolet and Sampson, 2017; Caldwell, 2015). Civil society 
organizations, along with Indigenous and municipal governments, are taking on important roles in adaptation 
by providing place-based solutions to climate change impacts at the local and regional level. One way that 
adaptation is being addressed is through collaborative watershed management, where a range of different 
stakeholders (e.g., governments, local public health, local conservation, landowners, community groups, etc.) 
work together to protect a transboundary area (Healthy Lake Huron, 2019). For example, in British Columbia, 
watershed organizations such as the Similkameen Valley Planning Association, Fraser Basin Council, 
Nechako Watershed Alliance and Columbia Basin Trust are working with governments at all levels and post-
secondary, business and community partners to conduct climate change- and adaptation-related research, 
planning, education and monitoring (see Case Story 3.6; Horning et al., 2016a, b; Picketts et al., 2017). 
Local governments and organizations in rural and remote areas—in collaboration with provincial, territorial 
and federal partners—are developing community-, regional- and sector-specific adaptive management plans 
and strategies to address climate variability and uncertainty (Warren and Lemmen, 2014; McMartin and 
Merino, 2014). For example, recent projections include increases in average temperature, climate variability, 
droughts and soil degradation in the prairie region (Bush and Lemmen, 2019), creating great uncertainty for 
agricultural communities. Acknowledging that adaptation depends on both the availability of resources and 
the capacity to utilize them, the Canada-Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Program and Farm and Ranch 
Water Program were created to provide support to agricultural producers to adapt to environmental risks 
(Hurlbert and Pittman, 2014) (see Case Story 3.2). Similarly, in British Columbia, the Agriculture and Food 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 162 
Climate Action Initiative was created by the BC Agriculture Council in cooperation with federal and provincial 
governments to develop tools and resources that will help the agriculture sector to be more resilient in 
dealing with climate change (BC Agriculture and Food Climate Action Initiative, 2018). 
Climate change is straining the ability of existing governance structures and institutions to respond to the 
social, economic, cultural and environmental impacts faced by many rural and remote communities. In light 
of these challenges, civil society organizations, research institutions and local businesses have emerged 
to fill vital gaps. Their efforts are helping to turn research, funding and expertise into practical adaptation 
planning within communities. To this end, rural and remote communities are engaging in a number of formal 
and informal governance processes that include multiple agencies in adaptation planning, policies and 
programs to enhance local decision-making capacity, public engagement and action (Blanco et al., 2015; Schroth 
et al., 2015).
3.8.3 Responding to governance challenges
Climate change poses significant governance challenges. Although collaborative forms of adaptation 
governance are increasingly recommended, they require considerable intergovernmental and multi-
stakeholder coordination efforts (Auditor General of Canada, 2018). Responding to climate change in rural 
and remote communities is increasingly complex, as the associated roles and responsibilities are spread 
across multiple agencies, organizations and levels of government. Uncertainties related to ownership and 
responsibility for service delivery may have sometimes resulted in an inability to adequately respond to 
environmental emergencies across the country, such as floods and heat waves, which is indicative of the 
challenges associated with coordination (Caldwell, 2015). 
There is also concern that current forms of adaptation governance may further encourage or support 
the downloading of additional responsibility from senior levels of government to already stretched local 
institutions, without their agreement and/or additional required resources. For instance, many of the 
provincial mechanisms for addressing climate-related disasters in rural and remote communities have 
been structured to rely heavily on local volunteers and community members—many of whom may come 
from vulnerable or marginalized populations and face heightened risks associated with natural disasters, 
unemployment or even forced migration, for example, and may already be dealing with personal impacts 
related to livelihoods, healthcare and housing (Drolet and Sampson, 2017; Caldwell, 2015). For Indigenous 
communities, the development of collaborative governance approaches requires particular care, trust-building 
and acknowledgement of Indigenous rightsholders, given Canada’s colonial legacy and its impacts on 
relationships and adaptive capacity (Archer et al. 2017; Pearce et al., 2015). 
In addition to overcoming institutional legacies and the need for coordination, other challenges exist in 
developing local adaptation strategies (see Table 3.7; Climate Action Revenue Incentive Program, 2017; Yukon 
Legislative Assembly, 2017). Incomplete information or lack of research and evidence represents an ongoing 
challenge for rural and remote communities that are hoping to begin adaptation planning. While some 
communities in these regions have created partnerships with academic institutions and other organizations 
to address gaps in data collection, problem identification, monitoring and evaluation of adaptation options, 
these institutions are often located outside of rural and remote areas. As a result, these institutions are 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 163 
not always easily accessible to citizens residing in rural and remote areas who are seeking to understand, 
respond and adapt to climate change impacts (Harneet and Lantz, 2014). Further complicating the issue is the 
need for locally appropriate information, which is often lacking.
Table 3.7: Challenges related to adaptation governance in rural and 
remote communities across Canada
CATEGORIES OF GOVERNANCE CHALLENGES
LOCATION(S) OBSERVED*
Policy and planning: Problem identification; existence of pressing 
socioeconomic issues; delivery of services and support; inability to 
maintain infrastructure (e.g., winter roads); management of change 
and community support systems; lack of regional regulations; 
development of local adaptation strategies; and integration of 
climate change into spatial planning.
BC, ON, NS, NWT, NU, SK, YK
Responding to climate-related emergencies: Responding 
to floods and changing flood risks; developing strategies 
for combating wildfires; and responding to environmental 
emergencies.
BC, NB, ON, PEI, QC
Resources and capacity: Providing technical and financial 
training; providing funding and subsidization opportunities for 
local adaptation efforts; stimulating private sector investments; 
competing for resources at all levels; high costs of adaptation 
and responding to natural disasters; and measuring the adaptive 
capacity of communities.
AB, BC, MB, NB, ON, NL, NWT, PEI, 
QC, SK, YT and at the national level
Trade-offs between adaptation, GHG emissions reduction and 
resource development: Adaptation vs. GHG emissions reduction; 
carbon taxation; and reliance on natural resource sectors.
BC, YT
Intergovernmental coordination: Clarification of roles and 
responsibilities; increased cooperation between jurisdictions; 
fragmented communication between government departments; 
and water and watershed governance.
BC, ON, NL, NU, SK
Communicating risks: Communicating complexities of climate 
change to the public.
BC, QC
* Locations noted in recent literature that has been identified and reviewed.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 164 
Another challenge that is facing institutions responding to climate change in rural and remote communities is 
balancing the need to adapt to changing environmental conditions with meeting nationally set GHG reduction 
targets. In many cases, GHG emission reduction targets are being weighed against economic benefits that 
are derived from resource development (Drolet and Sampson, 2017). When planning adaptation, the need to 
remain competitive while adhering to international commitments to reduce emissions and to protect against 
environmental degradation can further stress already stretched resources and human capacity  (Government 
of Canada, 2017, 2016; Yukon Legislative Assembly, 2017; Furness and Nelson, 2016; Government of 
Ontario, 2016; Province of New Brunswick, 2016; The Ontario Bar Association, 2015). Oxford County, Ontario 
has incorporated national GHG emissions reduction targets into its sustainability plan, and goes further to 
address some of the regional challenges it is experiencing, with the aim of building a healthier environment 
and population, and a vibrant economy that supports sustainability (Oxford County Council, 2015).
Regional case studies provide insights into how factors such as human and financial resources relate to 
local governance capacity and climate change (see Case Story 3.6). Regional governance responses to 
climate change, such as watershed-scale efforts in British Columbia, point to the necessity of place-specific 
adaptation partnerships in policy and action (Breen and Rethoret, 2018). In another example, the Qalipu First 
Nation in Newfoundland has been conducting a regional assessment of climate change impacts on services, 
health and infrastructure, which will help communities adapt. This ongoing assessment is using information 
collected through interviews with residents, public data and GIS, and examining issues such as water 
quality, vulnerability and potential for flooding in nine communities (Sullivan, 2018). Support to strengthen 
asset management capacity, such as that provided by the Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM) to 
Municipalities Newfoundland and Labrador (the provincial-level municipal association), is vitally important 
in a province where just one quarter of municipalities have more than one staff person for all municipal 
responsibilities (Parewick, 2018; Irvine et al., 2016). The FCM has provided critical support to such initiatives 
through the Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program, which assists communities in both reducing GHG 
emissions and adapting to climate change through c apacity building (Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 
2018b; Infrastructure Canada, 2018).
Case Story 3.6: Co-constructing and building rural adaptation 
capacity
The impacts of climate change are already being felt in the rural Kootenay Region of southeast British 
Columbia and are expected to increase over time. Impacts include increases in the number and severity of 
wildfires and extreme weather events, as well as changes in the landscape. These impacts are also affecting 
infrastructure, emergency planning and community development. 
Local governments are front-line responders when it comes to adapting to climate change. However, in the 
Kootenays, like elsewhere, they face challenges including human and financial capacity limitations, reliance 
on natural resources, limited jurisdictional authority and a lack of appropriate supports and data. In this light, 
climate change can feel like an insurmountable hurdle. However, Kootenay communities also have unique, 
place-based assets that have been used to strengthen adaptive capacity, particularly in the form of local 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 165 
expertise and partner organizations like the Columbia Basin Rural Development Institute (RDI), a community 
college-based research institute, and the Columbia Basin Trust (CBT), a regional trust (Columbia Basin Rural 
Development Institute, 2017; Columbia Basin Trust, 2015).
In 2014, the RDI partnered with the CBT to explore how communities could measure their progress in 
adapting to climate change, resulting in the State of Climate Adaptation and Resilience in the Basin (SoCARB) 
indicator suite. SoCARB took a comprehensive view of adaptation by linking climate change indicators to 
indicators of environmental and community impacts, which were in turn linked to indicators of adaptation 
actions and capacity. SoCARB was also rooted in the regional context, with the indicators being organized 
into five “adaptation pathways” (each representing a regional adaptation priority) (Columbia Basin Trust, 2015). 
In 2016, the RDI initiated a pilot of the SoCARB indicators, with the intention of developing a replicable 
approach to adaptation measurement. RDI collaborated with the municipalities of Kimberley and Rossland, 
as well as the Regional Districts of Central Kootenay and East Kootenay. The project team included local 
government staff, elected officials, college researchers, a co-op student, a graduate student, two liaisons and 
advisors with climate change expertise. 
The team brainstormed how to operationalize the SoCARB approach, particularly in light of limited time and 
money. A review of the adaptation pathways against local priorities resulted in a custom list of indicators 
for each community. Researchers, local government staff and students gathered the related data. Liaisons 
and staff guided the analysis, based on what they needed to know. The resulting community reports were 
developed to support each community in identifying and tracking key indicators, and using the results to 
inform their actions and related plans. A graduate student conducted an evaluation of the process, providing 
an external reflection. 
This project is one example of an adaptation project that was locally driven, place-specific and collaborative. 
The partnerships were critical to the success of the project, with each team member playing a role in ensuring 
that the approach and results were rigorous, adaptive and locally relevant (Columbia Basin Rural Development 
Institute, 2017).
The RDI's work on rural climate change adaptation continues to grow and evolve. For more information, visit 
www.cbrdi.ca.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 166 
3.9 Moving forward 
3.9.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs
There has been substantial work to better understand and adapt to climate change in Canadian rural 
and remote communities, although many knowledge gaps remain. For instance, challenges in accessing, 
interpreting and applying regional climate trend data at the scales needed for decision-making are important 
obstacles to better understanding climate change and incorporating this understanding into all levels of 
governance. Gaps in the collection and analysis of local data result in a limited ability to understand and 
plan appropriate responses for reducing vulnerability and risk related to projected climate change impacts in 
communities. Other knowledge gaps include the need for information on changes in the behaviour of forest 
fires; baseline data about community-level water supply; identifying threats from pests, pathogens, weeds 
and invasive species; and the need for new or updated flood risk mapping. In particular, improved knowledge 
of how shoreline shape may relate to coastal flooding in different contexts would also be useful for examining 
vulnerability at the local level, and for informing planning and related policies (Vasseur et al., 2017). Increased 
knowledge of strategies for responding to these threats and to environmental emergencies is also needed 
(Furness and Nelson, 2016). Further studies are also needed related to climate change impacts in rural 
sectors such as aquaculture, mining, oil and gas, and tourism in Canada (Weatherdon et al., 2016). Overall, 
scientific challenges related to climate change modelling and analysis for rural and remote communities 
include the limited availability of locally relevant data, knowledge and expertise, as well as the associated 
financial resources.
While it is evident that climate change is having impacts on human health in rural and remote Canada, 
the extent to which these impacts are, and will continue to be, felt is not fully understood (Kipp et al., 
2019; Furness and Nelson, 2016). For example, changing dynamics related to travel on ice and land have 
the potential to contribute to injuries experienced during transit, as landscape features become exposed, 
temperatures rise and ice becomes thinner. However, understanding how these changing environmental 
conditions may be affecting injury rates, particularly in Inuit regions that often see higher rates of 
unintentional injury, is still lacking (Durkalec et al., 2015). Furthermore, research is needed to determine 
the extent to which injuries related to climate change differ based on individual capacities, activities and 
roles in communities (Clark et al., 2016a, b). There is very little information available about how different 
social dynamics (e.g., factors such as gender, age and culture) within communities contribute to their 
overall capacity and ability to adapt to climate change (Reed et al., 2014). Research related to changes in 
demographics and social cohesion is key to understanding social capacities in rural and remote communities.
There are also knowledge gaps in the understanding of the mental health ramifications of climate change, 
which are closely related to the impacts of climate change on physical and environmental health (Middleton 
et al., 2020; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a, b). Topics like ecological grief and anxiety (Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018) 
require further study to better understand their impact on different population groups. The mental health 
of Indigenous people and others who rely closely on the land for their culture, sustenance and livelihoods 
(e.g., farmers and fishers) is a particular area of concern. These groups are especially exposed to climate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 167 
change impacts, although research related to their mental health and well-being in the context of climate 
change is limited (e.g., Middleton et al., 2020; Dodd et al., 2018; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015; 
Cunsolo Willox et al. 2013a, b). Research on understanding how intangible losses affect different people and 
communities, and how best to account for these losses is similarly limited (Tschakert et al., 2019; Tschakert 
et al., 2017). Indeed, there is a general need to better examine the human component of climate change 
throughout rural and remote communities in Canada (Akkari and Bryant, 2016; Statham et al., 2015).
Research on place-based monitoring of environmental, health and social changes related to climate change 
and adaptation is urgently needed. More research is also needed to explore the impacts of environmental 
shifts on knowledge systems, language and cultural practices in rural and remote communities. Furthermore, 
for rural and remote Indigenous communities, mental health, sense of place and sociocultural well-being are 
topics that vitally require further inquiry (Durkalec et al., 2015). Despite considerable research in recent years 
on how climate change interacts with Inuit communities, little research has explored the long-term responses 
to, and experiences of, climate change in Inuit communities (Archer et al., 2017). It is also important to 
identify ways for better defining and including local and Indigenous Knowledge in adaptation research and action. 
The importance of community governance and values in relation to adaptive capacity suggests that further 
questions on these issues may need to be addressed (Furness and Nelson, 2016, 256). To assess their 
effectiveness and efficiency in implementation, plans and policy changes aimed at addressing the issues 
discussed here need to be closely analyzed. Two-way communication and knowledge transfer on the nature 
of climate change and related policy is key to ensuring the successful implementation of such policies. 
Another knowledge gap relates to the effective transfer and mobilization of climate change knowledge 
(Akkari and Bryant, 2016; Burch and Harris, 2014; Larsen et al., 2012). In general, more research is needed 
to determine the most effective ways for making local and regional climate change data available, as well 
as information on potential impacts and adaptation options. For instance, how climate change affects 
decision-making for farmers is an area in need of further research, and it has been suggested that focused 
and regularly timed reports on climate change to farm decision-makers would be useful for adaptation and 
response (Akkari and Bryant, 2016). Better understanding the nature and culture of climate denial within the 
Canadian context might also allow for the development of more effective and targeted educational tools to 
assist in increasing knowledge and action around adaptation, risk reduction and GHG emissions reduction in 
rural and remote communities (Furness and Nelson, 2016; Stoddart and Sodero, 2015). Finally, there is a need 
for a better understanding of the drivers and perspectives that drive people to learn about climate change, of 
how effectively and quickly that learning is happening and of the impacts and potential uses of technology for 
learning and knowledge sharing in rural and remote communities (Archer et al., 2017; Fawcett et al., 2017).
3.9.2 Emerging issues 
Throughout these sections, some of the emerging climate change-related issues facing rural and remote 
communities in Canada have been outlined. There are significant safety concerns for communities, not 
only in terms of the potential impact of extreme weather events, but also related to the impacts of gradual 
changes in climate. From a health perspective, it is also important to better understand how climate change 
will affect mental health in communities, as mentioned above. Rural and remote communities are undergoing 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 168 
multiple social and cultural changes throughout Canada, and researchers are only beginning to understand 
how these intersecting changes interact with climate change and the ability of communities to adapt. For 
example, although some Arctic water fish stocks are growing as a result of increases in ocean temperature, 
there are concerns that potential new opportunities related to this may be offset by factors such as rising 
competition for these new resources; increased presence of industrial fishing; reduced availability of 
traditionally harvested species; limited management controls; and issues concerning Indigenous access and 
sovereignty over fish stocks in their homelands (Bindoff et al., 2019; Meredith et al., 2019; Weatherdon et al., 
2016). Changes are also happening in communities related to GHG emissions reduction efforts—including 
shifts to low-carbon economies and a resulting growth in renewables and biofuels—which pose different 
challenges and opportunities, and require attention to ensure they are developed in sustainable ways and that 
rural and remote communities are provided with the necessary support for economic transition.
Climate change will require continued infrastructure upgrades and enhancements to services at the local 
level across Canada for adaptation efforts to be successful. However, these requirements come at the 
same time as growing infrastructure deficits, service withdrawals and demographic shifts in rural and 
remote communities. Governance has likewise become a core consideration in ensuring effective coping 
and adaptation in response to climate change. As with infrastructure and services, governance for climate 
change adaptation is evolving and will require local support, as community leaders continue to struggle with 
increasing demands from stakeholders, but with decreasing resources to meet those demands. Governance 
entails a complex series of relationships between different agencies across all levels of government, as 
well as other organizations. Communication and coordination are key to successful governance, as is 
ensuring that communities can lead adaptation activities with place-specific solutions. Indeed, national-
level and international-level climate policy, programs and measures may not always be well suited to the 
circumstances of rural and remote communities. Understanding these factors and evolving dynamics will be 
essential to future success; they are emerging issues worthy of ongoing attention.
3.10 Conclusion 
Rural and remote regions in Canada are experiencing significant climate change impacts. They are home 
to residents, businesses and organizations that tend to rely on climate-sensitive natural resources and 
ecosystems for their cultures, livelihoods and well-being, while also having fewer financial, human and formal 
institutional resources with which to respond than their urban counterparts (see Table 3.8 for short, medium 
and long-term risks of climate change for rural and remote communities). Despite these challenges and risks, 
rural and remote regions continue to display strong resilience, drawing upon assets such as strong informal 
economies, social networks, and connections to place, community and culture. Place-based knowledge 
systems (e.g., local and/or Indigenous Knowledge) and lived experience have been key to understanding the 
impacts associated with climate change, as well as for developing successful responses and adaptations.
Adaptation strategies related to local economies have included planning for economic change and protecting 
traditional economies through technology, capacity building and changing land practices. These efforts have 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 169 
been necessary responses to the effects of changing sea ice conditions, warmer temperatures and drought 
on economic sectors, such as agriculture, forestry, fishing and tourism, as well as subsistence activities, such 
as hunting and gathering, which are vital to livelihoods and economic well-being in many rural and remote regions.
Rural and remote transportation networks and services also continue to face a greater risk of failure and 
disruption from projected increases in extreme weather events, with coastal communities being particularly 
vulnerable to environmental emergencies disrupting infrastructure and activities necessary for carrying 
out daily life. As a result, rural and remote communities and regions are incorporating climate change 
considerations in their community planning and design and beginning to reinforce, rebuild and reimagine their 
built environments.
These climate-related changes directly and indirectly impact the physical and mental health and well-being of 
individuals and communities. Focusing on climate change adaptation, as well as realizing co-benefits from 
GHG emissions reduction and risk reduction, present an important opportunity for the health sector. Climate 
change and its associated impacts are leading to wide-ranging intangible losses and damages in many 
communities, including loss of identity, cultural continuity and sense of place. These effects are expected to 
be widespread and cumulative, and are critical to consider in climate change adaptation and policy.
Despite the tremendous resilience of rural and remote communities, their adaptive capacities are increasingly 
strained by ongoing and often rapid social-ecological change. Increased funding to support local adaptation 
planning and initiatives, information and support is needed to enhance governance capacity and decision-
making related to climate change adaptation in these regions. Furthermore, the diverse range of impacts 
and potential costs of adaptation will require communities to prioritize actions, and mainstream adaptation 
actions and related investments. Greater inclusion will be essential along with provincial and federal level 
planning, programs and policy that take into account the specific circumstances of rural and remote regions.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 170 
Table 3.8: Climate-related risk in rural and remote communities across 
Canada
NEAR
MEDIUM
LONG-TERM
Place-based knowledge systems
•	
Changing sea ice conditions, 
warmer temperatures and 
drought are posing immediate 
risks to local and Indigenous 
Knowledge in the agriculture, 
forestry, fishing and tourism 
sectors, as well as to 
subsistence activities such as 
hunting and gathering.
•	
Changing weather stressors 
are affecting agricultural 
production and local, land-
based knowledge systems.
•	
Climate change is creating 
an ongoing challenge for 
Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems that are founded on 
skills and knowledge related 
to the land, and which form 
the basis for safe practice and 
hazard avoidance while out on 
the land. 
•	
Threats to long-term and 
ongoing relationships 
between people and their 
natural environments.
•	
Disruptions to the social 
fabric and cultural identities 
of rural and remote 
communities.
Livelihoods and economy
•	
Immediate impacts to 
infrastructure that livelihood 
rely on due to severe 
weather, thawing permafrost, 
droughts, flooding, storm 
surges and erosion.
•	
Current observed changes in 
fish and wildlife species and 
related impacts. 
•	
Reduced accessibility of 
traditional food sources. 
•	
Changes in the supply of 
renewable resources related 
to species changes (e.g., 
agriculture, fishery, forestry) 
•	
Continued and cumulative 
changes in marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems, 
including changes in 
renewable resource supply.
•	
Continued impacts on 
accessibility of traditional 
food sources.
•	
Fluctuations in energy 
supply and demand (e.g., 
fossil fuels, hydroelectric, 
renewables).
•	
Continuation and 
intensification of all near-
term impacts, except for 
successful early adapters. 
•	
Interconnections between 
climate change impacts, 
adaptation measures and 
other socioecological 
changes at multiple levels, 
which are likely to create 
multiple and continually 
emerging risks.
•	
Maximum uncertainty 
related to extreme climate 
change impacts.
•	
Adaptive communities are 
likely still in transition. 
•	
Likely abandonment of non-
adapted communities. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 171 
NEAR
MEDIUM
LONG-TERM
Livelihoods and economy (continued)
•	
 Increasing risk related to 
economic uncertainty. 
•	
Early adapters begin 
transitioning their economies 
at higher costs and with 
greater risk of failure.
•	
Fluctuations in energy 
supply and demand (e.g., 
fossil fuels, hydroelectric, 
renewables).
•	
Potential loss of livelihoods 
and economies in many 
communities.
•	
Fundamental changes to 
infrastructure, planning and 
economic transition in most 
communities; some may be 
abandoned due to loss of 
livelihoods.
•	
Possible migration with 
new forms of livelihood and 
economy.
Infrastructure
•	
Transportation networks 
and services face increased 
risk of failure and disruption. 
•	
Impacts to transmission 
lines and energy grids.
•	
Serious impacts on Northern 
infrastructure due to 
rapidly increasing average 
temperatures, precipitation 
and related changes.
•	
Risk of injury from failure 
of physical infrastructure 
and stressed or degraded 
roads and traditional 
transportation routes.
•	
Issues sustaining water and 
food security.
•	
Coastal communities are 
increasingly vulnerable to 
environmental emergencies, 
which disrupt activities 
necessary for daily life.
•	
Loss and damage to 
critical and community 
infrastructure as a result 
of extreme weather events, 
inland and coastal flooding, 
sea level rise, permafrost 
thaw and forest fires.
•	
Continuation and 
intensification of all near-
term impacts.
•	
Continued disruptions to 
critical infrastructure, which 
are likely to result in adverse 
economic effects.
•	
Increased energy prices.
•	
Thawing permafrost and 
coastal erosion continue 
to affect residential and 
community infrastructure, 
particularly where planning 
and design have not 
considered changing 
climate conditions.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 172 
NEAR
MEDIUM
LONG-TERM
Health and well-being
•	
Increasing challenges with 
accessing healthy and 
culturally preferred food and 
water sources.
•	
Risk of contamination 
in local food and water 
sources in remote polar 
regions due to increased 
levels of persistent organic 
pollutants and toxic metals 
in the natural environment.
•	
Worsening of existing 
vectorborne, waterborne and 
foodborne diseases.
•	
Development of new 
infectious diseases. 
•	
Risk of injury and death 
caused by extreme weather 
events and changing climate 
conditions.
•	
Increasing mental health 
challenges connected to 
environmental uncertainties.
•	
Increasing prevalence and 
severity of poor nutrition, 
obesity and diabetes related 
to changing access to 
certain foods.
•	
Rising temperatures and 
more frequent extreme 
weather events may 
overwhelm fragile water 
treatment systems, affecting 
water security.
•	
Changes to water levels, 
run-off, flow regimes and 
sediment, affecting drinking 
water availability and quality.
•	
Increasing threats to safety 
and well-being in forest 
communities due to wildfire.
•	
Continued intensification of 
mental health challenges.
•	
The effectiveness of rural 
and remote health systems 
is increasingly challenged 
by reduced system capacity 
and the ongoing buildup of 
stresses related to climate 
change.
Identity, culture and society
•	
Shifts in cultural practices 
and identity associated with 
changes to the land.
•	
Altered inter-generational 
transmission of Indigenous 
Knowledge.
•	
Changes to the social 
fabric of rural and remote 
communities.
•	
Loss of Indigenous 
Knowledge and disruptions 
to cultural continuity.
•	
Erosion of land-based skills 
and knowledge.
•	
Potential outmigration 
of youth and families, 
associated with increases 
in climate-related extreme 
weather events.
•	
Climate-related stresses 
to the fabric of rural and 
remote communities.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 173 
NEAR
MEDIUM
LONG-TERM
Identity, culture and society (continued)
•	
Increased storms, wind, 
sea level rise and coastal 
erosion, directly damaging 
sites of social and cultural 
importance. 
•	
Changing conditions leading 
to altered travel routes and 
disruptions in accessing 
places of cultural, social, 
spiritual and emotional 
significance.
•	
Continued losses to sense 
of place and identity 
resulting from irreversible 
losses, damage and 
destruction to landscapes 
and areas of cultural and 
social importance.
•	
Continued alterations 
to place meanings and 
attachment, resulting from 
disruptions to connections 
to the land.
•	
Storm damage associated 
with climate change can 
lead to enhanced social 
stress. 
•	
Climate-related stresses can 
heighten familial tensions 
and interpersonal conflict.
•	
Climate-related stresses 
compound existing 
challenges to service 
provision and limited 
economic opportunities.
•	
Environmental crises may 
further entrench traditional 
gender roles, leading to less 
agency over adaptation 
strategies.
•	
Continued intensification 
of challenges to cultural 
autonomy.
•	
Continued losses to social 
capital. 
•	
Changing temperatures 
leading to potential extinction 
of local wildlife and plant 
species that are important 
aspects of natural heritage.
•	
Unintended negative 
consequences of GHG 
emissions reduction and 
adaptation strategies, 
including adverse effects 
on economic opportunities 
and on the social fabric of 
communities.
Governance and institutions
•	
Climate change impacts 
affecting infrastructure and 
service delivery, particularly 
during emergencies and 
related to the governance of 
land and natural resources.
•	
Climate change impacts 
continue to affect and 
require adaptation planning 
and policy.
•	
Continued strains on the 
ability of governance 
structures and institutions 
to respond to social, 
economic, cultural and 
environmental impacts 
related to climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 174 
NEAR
MEDIUM
LONG-TERM
Governance and institutions (continued)
•	
Difficulties in resolving 
disruptions to service 
delivery and in adaptation, 
due to disputes over 
jurisdictional responsibility 
and the need for 
continued improvements 
in communication and 
coordination. 
•	
Concern at local levels that 
senior levels of government 
are downloading additional 
responsibility to local 
institutions, which are 
already overstretched. 
•	
Challenges related to 
balancing the need to adapt 
to changing environmental 
conditions with meeting 
nationally-set GHG 
emissions reduction targets.
•	
Increases in average 
temperature, climate 
variability, drought and soil 
degradation result in high 
degrees of uncertainty 
for agricultural and other 
resource-dependent 
communities.
•	
Increased uncertainty 
and challenges related to 
the ability to respond to 
environmental emergencies. 
Increased concern related 
to local capacity, without 
the provision of increased 
resources and support. 
•	
Continued challenges 
associated with top-
down, inflexible 
governance structures, 
and in implementing 
intergovernmental and 
multi-stakeholder adaptation 
efforts.
•	
Incorporation of 
international perspectives 
into adaptation planning 
can further stress existing 
resources and human 
capacity.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 175 
3.11 References
Abram, N., Gattuso, J.P., Prakash, A., Cheng, L., Chidichimo, 
M.P., Crate, S., Enomoto, H., Garschagen, M., Gruber, N., Harper, 
S., Holland, E., Kudela, R.M., Rice, J., Steffen, K. and von 
Schuckmann, K. (2019). Summary for Policymakers, in IPCC 
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. 
Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama and N.M. Weyer In press. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://report.ipcc.ch/srocc/
pdf/SROCC_FinalDraft_FullReport.pdf>
Akkari, C. and Bryant, C.R. (2016). The co-construction approach 
as approach to developing adaptation strategies in the face 
of climate change and variability: A conceptual framework. 
Agricultural Research, 5, 162–173. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40003-016-0208-8>
Andrews, T.D., S.V. Kokelj, S.V., MacKay, G., Buysee, J., Kritsch, I., 
Andre, A. and Lantz, T. (2016). Permafrost thaw and Aboriginal 
cultural landscapes in the Gwich’in Region, Canada. The Journal 
of Preservation Technology, 47(1), 15–22. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.gwichin.ca/publications/permafrost-
thaw-and-aboriginal-cultural-landscapes-gwich%E2%80%99-
region-canada>
Archer L., Ford J.D., Pearce T., Kowal S., Gough W.A. and Allurut 
M. (2017). Longitudinal assessment of climate vulnerability: a 
case study from the Canadian Arctic. Sustainability Science, 12, 
15–29. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-016-0401-5>
Arnold, S. and Fenech, A. (2017). Prince Edward Island climate 
change adaptation recommendations report. University of 
Prince Edward Island Climate Lab, Charlottetown, Canada, 
172 p. Retrieved February 2020, from: <http://projects.upei.
ca/climate/files/2018/10/PEI-Climate-Change-Adaptation-
Recommendations-Report_medres.pdf> 
Arriaga, M., Nasr, E. and Rutherford, H. (2017). Renewable 
energy microgrids in northern remote communities. Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Potentials, 36(5), 22–29.
Auditor General of Canada (2018). Perspectives on climate 
change action in Canada – a collaborative report from Auditors 
General. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.oag-bvg.
gc.ca/internet/English/parl_otp_201803_e_42883.html#ex6>
Bakaic M. and Medeiros A.S. (2017). Vulnerability of northern 
water supply lakes to changing climate and demand. Arctic 
Science, 3(1), 1–16. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/as-2016-0029>
Barbeau C.D., Oelbermann M., Karagatzides J.D. and Tsuji L.J.S. 
(2015). Sustainable agriculture and climate change: producing 
potatoes (Solanum tuberosum L.) and bush beans (phaseolus 
vulgaris L.) for improved food security and resilience in a 
Canadian subarctic First Nations community. Sustainability, 
7(5), 5664–5681. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.3390/su7055664>
BC Agriculture and Food Climate Action Initiative (2018). 
About us. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
bcagclimateaction.ca/overview/about-us/> 
Berner, J., Brubaker, M., Revitch, B., Kreummel, E., Tcheripanoff, 
M. and Bell, J. (2016). Adaptation in Arctic circumpolar 
communities: food and water security in a changing climate. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://10.3402/ijch.v75.33820> 
Bernier, R.Y., Jamieson, R.E. and Moore, A.M. (Eds.) (2018). State 
of the Atlantic Ocean Synthesis Report. Canadian Technical 
Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 3167, 149 p. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/oceans/
publications/soto-rceo/2018/atlantic-synthesis-atlantique-
synthese/index-eng.html>
Bindoff, N.L., Cheung, W.W.L. Kairo, J.G., Arístegui, J., Guinder, 
V.A., Hallberg, R., Hilmi, N., Jiao, N., Karim, M.S., Levin, L., 
O’Donoghue, S., Purca Cuicapusa, S.R., Rinkevich, B., Suga, T., 
Tagliabue, A. and Williamson, P. (2019). Changing ocean, marine 
ecosystems, and dependent communities, Chapter 5 in IPCC 
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate, (Eds) H.O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. 
Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama and N.M. Weyer. In press. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/
download/>
Bishop-Williams, K.E., Berke, O., Pearl, D.L and Kelton, D.F. 
(2016). Mapping rural community and dairy cow heat stress in 
Southern Ontario: a common geographic pattern from 2010 to 
2012. Archives of Environmental and Occupational Health, 71, 
199–207. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.108
0/19338244.2015.1058235>
Bishop-Williams, K.E., Berke, O., Pearl D.L., Hand, K. and Kelton, 
D.F. (2015a). Heat stress related dairy cow mortality during 
heat waves and control periods in rural Southern Ontario from 
2010–2012. BioMed Central Veterinary Research, 11 (291). 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12917-
015-0607-2>
Bishop-Williams K.E., Berke, O., Pearl, D.L. and Kelton, D.F. 
(2015b). A spatial analysis of heat stress related emergency 
room visits in rural Southern Ontario during heat waves. BioMed 
Central Emergency Medicine, 15(1), 1–9. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12873-015-0043-4>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 176 
Blanco, J.A., Dubois D., Littlejohn, D., Flanders, D.N., Robinson, 
P., Moshofsky, M. and Welham, C. (2015). Fire in the woods or 
fire in the boiler: implementing rural district heating to reduce 
wildfire risks in the forest-urban interface. Process Safety and 
Environmental Protection, 96, 1–13. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2015.04.002> 
Bleau, S., Blangy, S. and Archambault, M. (2015). Adapting 
nature-based seasonal activities in Quebec (Canada) to climate 
change. Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation, 93–121. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
642-38670-1_44>   
Boulanger-Lapointe, N., Gérin-lajoie, J., Collier, L. S., Desrosiers, 
S., Spiech, C., Henry, G. H. R. and Cuerrier, A. (2019). Berry plants 
and berry picking in Inuit Nunangat: traditions in a changing 
socio-ecological landscape. Human Ecology, 47(1), 81–93. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-
018-0044-5> 
Boyle, J., Cunningham, M. and Dekens, J. (2013). Climate 
change adaptation and Canadian infrastructure, a review 
of the literature. IISD Report. The International Institute for 
International Development. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.iisd.org/publications/climate-change-adaptation-
and-canadian-infrastructure-review-literature>   
Breen, S. and Rethoret, L. (2018). Co-constructing adaptation: 
rural capacity and addressing climate change. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://grosmorneclimatesymposium.files.
wordpress.com/2018/09/co-constructing-adaptation-v3-sb.pdf> 
Burch, S. and Harris, S. (2014). Understanding Climate Change: 
Science, Policy, and Practice. University of Toronto Press, 
Toronto, Ontario, 328 p.
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s changing 
climate report. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 444 p. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/about/> 
Caldwell, W.J. (Ed.) (2015). Planning for Rural Resilience: Coping 
with Climate Change and Energy Futures. University of Manitoba 
Press, Manitoba, Canada, 192 p. 
Canadian Rural Revitalization Foundation (2015). State of rural 
Canada 2015. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://sorc.crrf.ca/> 
Casanova-Pérez, L., Martínez-Dávila, J.P., López-Ortiz, 
S., Landeros-Sánchez, C. and López-Romero, G. (2016). 
Sociocultural dimension in agriculture adaptation to climate 
change. Agroecology and Sustainable Food Systems, 40(8), 
848–862. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.108
0/21683565.2016.1204582>
Chapin, F. S., Sommerkorn, M., Robards, M. D. and Hillmer-
Pegram, K. (2015). Ecosystem stewardship: A resilience 
framework for arctic conservation. Global Environmental 
Change, 34, 207–217. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.07.003>  
Clark, D.G., Ford, J.D., Berrang-Ford, L., Pearce, T., Kowal, S. 
and Gough, W.A. (2016a). The role of environmental factors 
in search and rescue incidents in Nunavut, Canada. Public 
Health, 137, 44–49. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.puhe.2016.06.003>
Clark, D.G., Ford, J.D., Pearce T. and Berrang-Ford, L. (2016b). 
Vulnerability to unintentional injuries associated with land-use 
activities and search and rescue in Nunavut, Canada. Social 
Science and Medicine, 169, 18–26. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.09.026>     
Clark, D.G. and Ford J.D. (2017). Emergency response in a 
rapidly changing Arctic. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 
189, 135-36. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1503/cmaj.161085> 
Clarke, C. S. L. M. and Clarke, A. J. (2018). The adaptation 
primers. Canadian Society of Landscape Architects (1–4). 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.csla-aapc.ca/
primers>
Climate Action Initiative (2013). BC farm practices & climate 
change adaptation. Retrieved March 2020, from <https://www.
bcagclimateaction.ca/wp/wp-content/media/FarmPractices-
NutrientManagement.pdf> 
Climate Action Revenue Incentive Program (2017). Summary 
report on local government climate actions 2016. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/
british-columbians-our-governments/local-governments/
planning-land-use/carip_2017_summary.pdf>
Climate Change Nova Scotia (2018a). Health impacts. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://climatechange.novascotia.ca/
adapting-to-climate-change/impacts/health> 
Climate Change Nova Scotia (2018b). Transportation impacts. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://climatechange.
novascotia.ca/adapting-to-climate-change/impacts/
transportation> 
Columbia Basin Rural Development Institute (2017). 
Communities of the Columbia Basin. Selkirk College. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://cbrdi.ca/Communities>
Columbia Basin Trust. (2015). Measuring progress on climate 
adaptation in the Columbia Basin. Retrieved March 2020, from 
<http://datacat.cbrdi.ca/sites/default/files/attachments/
ClimateAdaptation_Summary_11-03-15%5B1%5D.pdf>
Cunsolo, A. and Ellis, N. R. (2018). Ecological grief as a mental 
health response to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate 
Change, 8(4), 275–281. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0092-2>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 177 
Cunsolo, A., Shiwak, I. and Wood, M. (2017). You need to be 
a well-rounded cultural person: youth mentorship programs 
for cultural preservation, promotion, and sustainability in 
the Nunatsiavut Region of Labrador, Chapter in Northern 
Sustainabilities: Understanding and Addressing Change in the 
Circumpolar World, (Eds.) G. Fondahl and G.Wilson. Springer 
Polar Sciences, 285–303. 
Cunsolo Willox, A. (2012). Climate change as the work of 
mourning. Ethics and the Environment, 17(2), 137–164. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.jstor.org/
stable/10.2979/ethicsenviro.17.issue-2>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S.L., Ford, J.D., Edge, V., Landman, 
K., Houle, K., Blake, S. and Wolfrey, C. (2013a). Climate change 
and mental health: an exploratory case study from Rigolet, 
Nunatsiavut, Labrador. Climate Change, 121(2), 255–270. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
013-0875-4>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Landman, 
K., Houle, K. Ford, J. D., and the Rigolet Inuit Community 
Government (2013b). The land enriches the soul: On climatic 
and environmental change, affect, and emotional health and 
well-being in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Emotion, Space and 
Society, 6(1), 14–24. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.emospa.2011.08.005>   
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S. L., Ford, J. D., Landman, K., Houle, 
K., Edge, V. L. and the Rigolet Inuit Community Government 
(2012). “From this place and of this place:” climate change, 
sense of place, and health in Nunatsiavut, Canada. Social 
Science and Medicine, 75(3), 538–547. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.03.043>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Stephenson, E., Allen, J., Bourque, F., Drossos, 
A., Elgarøy, S., Kral, M.J., Mauro, I., Moses, J., Pearce, T., 
MacDonald, J.P. and Wexler, L. (2015). Examining relationships 
between climate change and mental health in the Circumpolar 
North. Regional Environmental Change, 15(1), 169–182. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-
014-0630-z> 
Dampier, J. E. E., Chander, S., Lemelin, R.H. and Luckai, N. (2016). 
Assessment of potential local and regional induced economic 
impact of an energy policy change in rural Northwestern Ontario. 
Energy, Sustainability and Society, 6(14). Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13705-016-0079-7> 
Dawson, F. (2019). Sweeping closures in British Columbia for 
2019 fishing season. Sea West News. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://seawestnews.com/sweeping-closures-in-british-
columbia-for-2019-fishing-season/>
Dawson, P. and Levy, R. (2016). From science to survival: 
using virtual exhibits to communicate the significance of 
polar heritage sites in the Canadian Arctic. Open Archaeology 
2(1), 209–231. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1515/opar-2016-0016>   
Doberstein, B., Fitzgibbons, J. and Mitchell, C. (2019). Protect, 
accommodate, retreat or avoid (PARA): Canadian community 
options for flood disaster risk reduction and flood resilience. 
Natural Hazards, 98(1), 31–50. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-018-3529-z> 
Dodd, W., Scott P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A. and 
Orbinski, J. (2018). Lived experience of a record wildfire season 
in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health, 109(3), 327–337. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-0070-5>
Drolet, J. L. and Sampson, T. (2017). Addressing climate 
change from a social development approach: Small cities 
and rural communities’ adaptation and response to climate 
change in British Columbia, Canada. International Social Work, 
60(1), 61–73. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0020872814539984> 
Durkalec, A., Furgal, C., Skinner, M. W. and Sheldon, T. (2014). 
Investigating environmental determinants of injury and trauma 
in the Canadian North. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 11(2), 1536–1548. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph110201536> 
Durkalec, A., Furgal, C., Skinner, M. W. and Sheldon, T. (2015). 
Climate change influences on environment as a determinant of 
Indigenous health: Relationships to place, sea ice, and health in 
an Inuit community. Social Science and Medicine, 136-137, 17–
26. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2015.04.026>
Eddy, B.G., Muggridge, M., LeBlanc, R., Osmond, J., Kean, C. 
and Boyd, E. (2020a). The CanEcumene 2.0 GIS Database. 
Federal Geospatial Platform (FGP), Natural Resources Canada. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://open.canada.ca/data/en/
dataset/3f599fcb-8d77-4dbb-8b1e-d3f27f932a4b> 
Eddy, B., Muggridge, M., LeBlanc, R., Osmond, J., Kean, C. and 
Boyd, E. (2020b). An Ecological Approach for Mapping Socio-
Economic Data in Support of Ecosystems Analysis: Examples 
in Mapping Canada’s Forest Ecumene. One Ecosystem, 5, 
e55881. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3897/
oneeco.5.e55881>
Ellis, N. R. and Albrecht, G. A. (2017). Climate change threats 
to family farmers’ sense of place and mental well-being: A case 
study from the Western Australian Wheatbelt. Social Science 
and Medicine, 175, 161–168. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.01.009>
eNuk (n.d.). The eNuk environment and health monitoring 
program. Retrieved April 9, 2020, from <www.enuk.ca> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 178 
EPCCARR [Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and 
Resilience Results] (2018). Measuring progress on adaptation 
and climate resilience: Recommendations to the Government 
of Canada. Environment and Climate Change Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 188 p. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-
change/adapting/expert-panel-adaptation-resilience.html>     
Fawcett, D., Pearce, T., Ford, J.D. and Archer, L. (2017). 
Operationalizing longitudinal approaches to climate change 
vulnerability assessment. Global Environmental Change, 45, 79–
88. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2017.05.002> 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2018a). Rural challenges, 
national opportunity: Shaping the future of Canada. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://fcm.ca/sites/default/files/
documents/resources/report/rural-challenges-national-
opportunities.pdf> 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2018b). Year 2 annual 
progress report: Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://fcm.ca/sites/default/
files/documents/resources/report/annual-progress-report-yr2-
mcip.pdf>
Federation of Canadian Municipalities and Insurance Bureau of 
Canada (2019). Investing in Canada’s future: The cost of climate 
adaptation. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/
Documents/Disaster/The-Cost-of-Climate-Adaptation-Summary-
EN.pdf> 
Félio, G. (2017). Climate change impacts on water and 
wastewater infrastructure at Akwesasne. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/climate-change-
impacts-water-wastewater-akwesasne-05-18-e.pdf>
Fletcher, A. J. and Knuttila, E. (2016). Gendering change: 
Canadian farm women respond to drought, Chapter 7 in 
Vulnerability and Adaptation to Drought: The Canadian Prairies 
and South America. University of Calgary Press, Calgary, Alberta, 
159–177. 
Ford, J. D., Cameron, L., Rubis, J., Maillet, M., Nakashima, 
D., Willox, A. C. and Pearce, T. (2016). Including Indigenous 
Knowledge and experience in IPCC assessment reports. Nature 
Climate Change, 6(4), 349–353. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2954>
Ford, J. D., Champalle, C., Tudge, P., Riedlsperger, R., Bell, T. 
and Sparling, E. (2015). Evaluating climate change vulnerability 
assessments: A case study of research focusing on the built 
environment in northern Canada. Mitigation and Adaptation 
Strategies for Global Change, 20(8), 1267–1288. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-014-
9543-x>
Ford, J. D., Labbé, J., Flynn, M. Araos, M., and IHACC Research 
Team (2017). Readiness for climate change adaptation in the 
Arctic: A case study from Nunavut, Canada. Climate Change, 
145, 85–100. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-017-2071-4>
Ford, J. D., Cunsolo Willox, A., Chatwood, S., Furgal, C., Harper, 
S., Mauro, I. and Pearce, T. (2014). Adapting to the effects of 
climate change on Inuit health. American Journal of Public 
Health, 104(3), 9–17. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301724>
FRWIP [Farm and Ranch Water Infrastructure Program] (n.d.). 
Saskatchewan farm and ranch water infrastructure program. 
Retrieved April 9, 2020, from <https://www.saskatchewan.
ca/business/agriculture-natural-resources-and-industry/
agribusiness-farmers-and-ranchers/canadian-agricultural-
partnership-cap/environmental-sustainability-and-climate-
change/farm-and-ranch-water-infrastructure-program-frwip> 
FSP [Farm Stewardship Program] (n.d.). Saskatchewan farm 
stewardship program. Retrieved April 9, 2020, from <https://
www.saskatchewan.ca/business/agriculture-natural-resources-
and-industry/agribusiness-farmers-and-ranchers/canadian-
agricultural-partnership-cap/environmental-sustainability-and-
climate-change/farm-stewardship-program-fsp> 
Furness, E. and Nelson, H. (2016). Are human values and 
community participation key to climate adaptation? The case 
of community forest organizations in British Columbia. Climatic 
Change, 135, 243–259. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10584-015-1564-2> 
Gerbaux, M., Spandre, P., François, H., George, E. and Morin, S. 
(2020). Snow Reliability and Water Availability for Snowmaking 
in the Ski resorts of the Isère Département (French Alps), Under 
Current and Future Climate Conditions. Revue de géographie 
alpine, 108(1). Retrieved December 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4000/rga.6742> 
Gilaberte-Búrdalo, M., López-Martín, F., Pino-Otín, M. and López-
Moreno, J. (2014). Impacts of climate change on ski industry. 
Environmental Science and Policy, 44, 51–61. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2014.07.003>
Gill, H. and Lantz, T. (2014). A community-based approach to 
mapping Gwich’in observations of environmental changes in the 
Lower Peel River Watershed, Northwest Territories. Journal of 
Ethnobiology, 34(3), 294–314. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-0771-34.3.294> 
Goodridge, D. and Marciniuk, D. (2016). Rural and remote care: 
Overcoming the challenges of distance. Chronic Respiratory 
Disease, 13(2), 192–203. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1177/1479972316633414>
Government of Canada (2016). The Pan-Canadian Framework 
on clean growth and climate change. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.canada.ca/content/
dam/themes/environment/documents/weather1/20170125-en.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 179 
Government of Canada (2017). Budget of 2017: Chapter 2, 
communities built for change. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/themes/environment/
weather/climatechange/PCF-FirstSynthesis_ENG.pdf>
Government of Canada (2018). A just transition for Canadian 
coal power workers and communities. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.867000&sl=0>
Government of Canada (2020). Critical infrastructure. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/ntnl-
scrt/crtcl-nfrstrctr/index-en.aspx> 
Government of Manitoba (2017). A made-in-Manitoba 
climate and green plan: Hearing from Manitobans. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://www.gov.mb.ca/asset_library/en/
climatechange/climategreenplandiscussionpaper.pdf> 
Government of Northwest Territories (2016). Environment 
economy and climate change commitment progress report. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.eia.gov.nt.ca/en/
mandates/economy-environment-and-climate-change>
Government of Northwest Territories (2017). Climate change 
strategic framework 2018–2030: Draft for public comment. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/
sites/enr/files/resources/final_pdf_nwt_ccsf_draft_for_public_
comment_nov_29_2017.pdf> 
Government of Ontario (2016). Ontario’s Five year Climate 
Change Action Plan 2016–2017. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.ontario.ca/page/climate-change-action-plan> 
Government of Saskatchewan (2017). Prairie resilience: A 
made-in-Saskatchewan climate change strategy. Retrieved 
February, 2020, from <https://www.saskatchewan.ca/business/
environmental-protection-and-sustainability/a-made-in-
saskatchewan-climate-change-strategy>   
Groulx, M. (2017). “Other people’s initiatives”: Exploring 
mediation and appropriation of place as barriers to community-
based climate change adaptation. Local Environment, 22(11), 
1378–1393. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1
080/13549839.2017.1348343> 
Groulx, M., Lewis, J., Lemieux, C. and Dawson, J. (2014). Place-
based climate change adaptation: A critical case study of 
climate change messaging and collective action in Churchill, 
Manitoba. Landscape and Urban Planning, 132, 136–147. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2014.09.002>   
Hall, C.M., Baird, T., James, M. and Ram, Y. (2016). Climate 
change and cultural heritage: Conservation and heritage tourism 
in the Anthropocene. Journal of Heritage Tourism, 11(1), 10–24. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/174387
3X.2015.1082573>
Hanrahan, M., Sarkar, A. and Hudson, A. (2014). Exploring water 
insecurity in a northern indigenous community in Canada: 
The “never-ending job” of the Southern Inuit of Black Tickle, 
Labrador. Arctic Anthropology, 51(2), 9–22. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.jstor.org/stable/24475826>
Harneet, G. and Lantz, T. (2014). A community-based approach 
to mapping Gwich’in observations of environmental changes 
in the lower Peel River Watershed, NT. Journal of Ethnobiology, 
34(3), 294–314. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.2993/0278-0771-34.3.294> 
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Schuster-Wallace, C. J., Berke, O. and 
McEwen, S. A. (2011). Weather, water quality and infectious 
gastrointestinal illness in two Inuit communities in Nunatsiavut, 
Canada: Potential implications for climate change. EcoHealth, 
8(1), 93–108. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10393-011-0690-1>   
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L. and Willox, A. C. (2012). ‘Changing 
climate, changing health, changing stories’ profile: Using an 
EcoHealth approach to explore impacts of climate change on 
Inuit health. EcoHealth, 9(1), 89–101. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-012-0762-x> 
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Ford, J., Cunsolo Willox, A., Wood, M., 
Indigenous Health Adaptation to Climate Change Research 
Team, Rigolet Inuit Community Government, and McEwen, 
S. (2015). Climate-sensitive health priorities in Nunatsiavut, 
Canada. BioMed Central Public Health, 15(1), 605. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-1874-3>
Hatcher, S. V. and Forbes, D. L. (2015). Exposure to coastal 
hazards in a rapidly expanding northern urban centre, 
Iqaluit, Nunavut. Arctic Institute of North America, 68(4), 
453–471. Retrieved February 2020, from <www.jstor.org/
stable/43871361> 
Healthy Lake Huron (2019). Healthy Lake Huron: clean water, 
clean beaches. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.
healthylakehuron.ca/about/>
Hock, R., Rasul, G., Adler, C., Cáceres, B., Gruber, S., Hirabayashi, 
Y., Jackson, M., Kääb, A., Kang, S., Kutuzov, S., Milner, A., Molau, 
U., Morin, S., Orlove, B. and Steltzer, H. (2019). High Mountain 
Areas, Chapter 2 in IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and 
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. 
Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, 
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. 
Rama and N.M. Weyer. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.ipcc.ch/srocc/chapter/chapter-2/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 180 
Holsman, K., Hollowed, A., Ito, S. I., Bograd, S., Hazen, E., King, 
J., Mueter, F. and Perry, R. I. (2019). Climate change impacts, 
vulnerabilities and adaptations: North Pacific and Pacific Arctic 
marine fisheries, Chapter 6 in Impacts of climate change on 
fisheries and aquaculture synthesis of current knowledge, 
adaptation and mitigation options, (Eds.) M. Barange, T. Bahri, 
M.C.M. Bereridge, K.L. Cochrane, S. Finge-Smith and F. Poulain. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 19–39. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.fao.org/3/i9705en/
i9705en.pdf>
Horning, D., Bauer, B. O. and Cohen, S. J. (2016a). Missing 
bridges: Social network (dis)connectivity in water governance. 
Utilities Policy, 43, 59–70. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016%2Fj.jup.2016.06.006> 
Horning, D., Bauer, B. O. and Cohen, S. J. (2016b). Watershed 
governance for rural communities: Aligning network structure 
with stakeholder vision. Journal of Rural and Community 
Development, 11(2), 45–71. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://journals.brandonu.ca/jrcd/article/view/1453/305> 
Huitema, D., Adger, W. N., Berkhout, F. Massey, E., Mazmanian, 
D., Munaretto, S., Plummer, R. and Termeer, C. C. J. A. M. (2016). 
The governance of adaptation: Choices, reasons, and effects. 
Introduction to the Special Feature. Ecology and Society, 21(3), 
37. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/
ES-08797-210337>
Hurlbert, M. and Pittman, J. (2014). Exploring adaptive 
management in environmental farm programs in Saskatchewan, 
Canada. Journal of Natural Resources Policy Research, 6(2–3), 
195–212. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.108
0/19390459.2014.915131>
IllikKuset-Illingannet Team (2014). Introducing the IllikKuset-
Illingannet/Culture-Connect Program. Retrieved April 9, 2010, 
from <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EAulcH3uXnc> 
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (2017). 2017–2018 
Departmental Plan. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Retrieved February 
2020, from: <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/polar-polaire/
documents/pdf/POLAR_PAA_Based_2017-18_DP_FINAL_ENG.
pdf> 
Infrastructure Canada (2018). Communities across Canada 
receive support for green innovation, climate change resiliency, 
and infrastructure planning initiatives. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.newswire.ca/
news-releases/communities-across-canada-receive-support-for-
green-innovation-climate-change-resiliency-and-infrastructure-
planning-initiatives-700926721.html>  
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2014). Part 
B: Regional Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change) in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, 
and vulnerability, (Eds.) V.R. Barros, C.B. Field, J.D. Dokke, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, 
Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea and L.L. White. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, 
New York, 688-1132. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2018). 
Global Warming of 1.5 °C: IPCC special report on the impacts of 
global warming of 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels and related 
global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of 
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate 
change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate 
poverty, in Summary for Policy Makers. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <http://report.ipcc.ch/sr15/pdf/sr15_spm_final.pdf>
Irvine, M., Vodden, K. and Keenan, R. (2016). Developing 
assessment and adaptation capacity: Integrating climate change 
considerations into municipal planning in Newfoundland and 
Labrador, Chapter 6 in Sustainability Planning and Collaboration 
in Rural Canada: Taking the Next Steps, (Eds.) L. Hallstrom, 
M. Beckie, G. Hvenegaard and K. Mündel. University of Alberta 
Press, Edmonton, Alberta, 117–144.     
Johnson, R. (2019). Saugeen Ojibway Nation confronts effects 
of climate change on whitefish fishery. Retrieved April 9, 2020, 
from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/saugeen-ojibway-
whitefish-fishery-climate-change-1.4982666>. 
Johnston, M.E., Dawson, J. and Maher, P.T. (2017). Strategic 
development challenges in marine tourism in Nunavut. 
Resources, 6(3), 25. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.3390/resources6030025>
King, M., Altdorff, D., Li, P., Galagedara, L., Holden, J. and Unc, A. 
(2018). Northward shift of the agricultural climate zone under 
21st-century global climate change. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 
7904. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41598-018-26321-8.pdf> 
Kipp, A., Cunsolo, A., Gillis, D., Sawatzky, A., Wood, M. and 
Harper, S. (2019). The need for community-led, integrated, and 
innovative monitoring programs when responding to the health 
impacts of climate change. International Journal of Circumpolar 
Health, 78(2). Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.
1080/22423982.2018.1517581> 
Knowles, J. (2016). Power Shift: Electricity for Canada’s remote 
communities. The Conference Board of Canada, Ottawa. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.conferenceboard.
ca/e-Library/document.aspx?did=8249>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 181 
Kornfeld, I.E. (2016). The impact of climate change on American 
and Canadian Indigenous peoples and their water resources: 
A climate justice perspective. Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
Legal Research Paper No. 17–32. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2832879>
Krawchenko, T., Keefe, J., Manuel, P. and Rapaport, E. (2016). 
Coastal climate change, vulnerability and age friendly 
communities: Linking planning for climate change to the age 
friendly communities agenda. Journal of Rural Studies, 44, 55–
62. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jrurstud.2015.12.013> 
Lament for the Land (2014). Lament for the Land film. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://www.lamentfortheland.ca/film/>
Larsen, R.K., Swartling, Å.G., Powell, N., May, B., Plummer, 
R., Simonsson, L. and Osbeck, M. (2012). A framework for 
facilitating dialogue between policy planners and local climate 
change adaptation professionals: Cases from Sweden, Canada 
and Indonesia. Environment, Science and Policy, 23, 12–23. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2012.06.014> 
Lebel, D. (2014). Infrastructure Canada report on plans and 
priorities. Retrieved February 2020, from: <http://publications.
gc.ca/collections/collection_2014/infc/T91-2-2014-eng.pdf> 
Lemmen, D.S.,Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.) (2008). 
From impacts to adaptation: Canada in a changing climate. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 448 p. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/impacts-
adaptation-canada-changing-climate/10253>   
Lieske, D.J. (2015). Coping with climate change: The role 
of spatial decision support tools in facilitating community 
adaptation. Environmental Modelling Software, 68, 98–109. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsoft.2015.02.005> 
Lieske, D.J., Wade, T. and Roness, A.L. (2014). Climate change 
awareness and strategies for communicating the risk of coastal 
flooding: A Canadian Maritime case example. Estuarine and 
Coast Shelf Science, 140, 83–94. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2013.04.017> 
Loring, P. A. and Gerlach, S. C. (2015). Searching for progress on 
food security in the North American North: A research synthesis 
and meta-analysis of the peer-reviewed literature. Arctic, 
68(3), 380–392. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.14430/arctic4509>
Manuel, P., Rapaport, E., Keefe, J. and Krawchenko, T. (2015). 
Coastal climate change and aging communities in Atlantic 
Canada: A methodological overview of community asset and 
social vulnerability mapping. Canadian Geographer, 59(4), 433–
446. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cag.12203>
McMartin, D.W. and Merino, B.H.H. (2014). Analysing the links 
between agriculture and climate change: can “best management 
practices” be responsive to climate extremes? International 
Journal of Agricultural Resources, Governance and Ecology, 
10(1), 50. <http://doi.org/10.1504/IJARGE.2014.061042>
Medeiros, A.S., Wood, P., Wesche, S.D., Bakaic, M. and Peters, 
J.F. (2017). Water security for northern peoples: review of 
threats to Arctic freshwater systems in Nunavut, Canada. 
Regional Environmental Change, 17(3), 635–647. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10113-016-
1084-2>
Meredith, M., Sommerkorn, M., Cassotta, S., Derksen, C., 
A. Ekaykin, A., Hollowed, A., Kofinas, G.   Mackintosh, A., 
Melbourne-Thomas, J., Muelbert, M.M.C., Ottersen, G., Pritchard, 
H. and Schuur, E.A.G. (2019). Polar Regions, Chapter 3 in IPCC 
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. 
Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama and Weyer, N.M. In press. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/
chapter/chapter-3-2> 
Messner, S. (2020). Future Arctic shipping, black carbon 
emissions, and climate change, Chapter 11 in Maritime 
Transport and Regional Sustainability. (Eds.) K.Y. Adolf, J.M. Ng, 
C. Jiang. Elsevier Incorporated, 195–208. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/C2018-0-04694-0>
Middleton, J., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Wright, C. and 
Harper S.L. (2020). Indigenous mental health in a changing 
climate: A systematic scoping review of the global literature. 
Environmental Research Letters, 15(5). Retrieved December 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab68a9>. 
Minnes, S. and Vodden, K. (2019). Introduction, Chapter 1 in 
The Theory, Practice, and Potential of Regional Development: 
The Case of Canada, (Eds.) K. Vodden, D. Douglas, S. Markey, 
S. Minnes and B. Reimer. Routledge, London, United Kingdom, 
1–11. 
Mortensen, L., Hansen, A.M. and Shestakov, A. (2017). How 
three key factors are driving and challenging implementation of 
renewable energy systems in remote Arctic communities. Polar 
Geography, 40(3), 163–185. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/1088937X.2017.1329758> 
Mullan, D., Swindles, G., Patterson, T., Galloway, J., Macumber, 
A., Falck, H., Crossley, L., Chen, J. and Pisaric, M. (2017). Climate 
change and the long-term viability of the world’s busiest heavy 
haul ice road. Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 129(3–4), 
1089–1108. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00704-016-1830-x>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 182 
Nicol, L.A. and Nicol, C.J. (2018). Adoption of precision 
agriculture to reduce inputs, enhance sustainability and increase 
food production: A study of southern Alberta, Canada, Chapter 
in Sustainable development and planning, (Eds.) G. Passerini 
and N. Marchettini. WIT Press, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States, 327–336.
Northwest Territories Legislative Assembly (2018). 2030 NWT 
Climate Change Strategic Framework. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <http://library.assembly.gov.nt.ca/2018/ENR/a382207_
td_211-183_2030_NWT_Climate_Change_Strategic_Framework.
pdf> 
Nova Scotia Department of Environment and Climate Change 
(2018). Climate change impacts: Transportation. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://climatechange.novascotia.ca/
adapting-to-climate-change/impacts/transportation> 
Natural Resources Canada (2015). Preparing for Storm Surges 
in Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/resources/publications/
impacts-adaptation/tools-guides/16303>
Natural Resources Canada (2018a). Remote communities 
energy database. The Atlas of Canada. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://atlas.gc.ca/rced-bdece/en/index.html>
Natural Resources Canada (2018b). Mountain pine beetle. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
forests/fire-insects-disturbances/top-insects/13381> 
Odland, J. O., Donaldson, S., Dudarev, A. and Carlsen, A. (2015). 
Arctic monitoring and assessment program [AMAP] assessment 
2015: Human health in the Arctic. International Journal of 
Circumpolar Health, 75(1). Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v75.33949> 
Oxford County Council (2015). Future Oxford: Our path 
towards sustainability. Retrieved February 2020, from: 
<http://futureoxford.ca/general/sustainabilityplan/pdf/2015_
FutureOxford_CommunitySustainabilityPlan.pdf>
Pagano, A., Pluchinotta, I., Giordano, R. and Fratino, U. 
(2018). Integrating “hard” and “soft” infrastructural resilience 
assessment for water distribution systems. Complexity, 
2018, 1–16. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1155/2018/3074791> 
Parewick, K. (2018). BAM! NL – Building asset 
management here. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
grosmorneclimatesymposium.com/day-2/>   
Pearce, C. and Callihoo, C. (2011). Pathways to climate change 
resilience: A guidebook for Canadian forest-based communities. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.
net/profile/David_Natcher/publication/275011321_Linking_
gender_climate_change_adaptive_capacity_and_forest-based_
communities_in_Canada/links/56709ce608ae5252e6f1f39e/
Linking-gender-climate-change-adaptive-capacity-and-forest-
based-communities-in-Canada.pdf?origin=publication_detail>
Pearce, T., Ford, J.D., Caron, A. and Kudlak, B.P. (2012). Climate 
change adaptation planning in remote, resource-dependent 
communities: An Arctic example. Regional Environmental 
Change, 12(4), 825–837. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10113-012-0297-2>  
Pearce, T., Ford, J., Cunsolo Willox, A. and Smit, B. (2015). Inuit 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK), subsistence hunting 
and adaptation to climate change in the Canadian Arctic. Arctic, 
68(2), 233–245. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.
jstor.org/stable/43871322> 
Picketts, I.M., Parkes, M.W. and Déry, S.J. (2017). Climate 
change and resource development impacts in watersheds: 
Insights from the Nechako River Basin, Canada. The Canadian 
Geographer, 61(2), 196–211. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/cag.12327>  
Pizzolato, L., Howell, S.E.L., Derksen, C., Dawson, J. and Coplan, 
L. (2014) Changing sea ice conditions and marine transportation 
activity in Canadian Arctic waters between 1990 and 2012. 
Climate Change, 123, 161–173. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-1038-3>
Province of New Brunswick (2016). Transitioning to a low-
carbon economy: New Brunswick’s climate change action 
plan. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www2.gnb.ca/
content/dam/gnb/Departments/env/pdf/Climate-Climatiques/
TransitioningToALowCarbonEconomy.pdf>
Public Health Agency of Canada (2017). Climate change impacts 
on the health of Canadians. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2017/aspc-
phac/HP5-122-2017-eng.pdf>
Rapaport, E., Manuel, P., Krawchenko, T. and Keefe, J. (2015). 
How can aging communities adapt to coastal climate change? 
Planning for both social and place vulnerability. Canadian Public 
Policy, 41(2), 166–177. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://
doi.org/10.3138/cpp.2014-055>    
Reed, M.G., Scott, A., Natcher, D. and Johnston, M. (2014). 
Linking gender, climate change, adaptive capacity, and forest-
based communities in Canada. Canadian Journal of Research, 
44(9), 995-1004. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://doi.
org/10.1139/cjfr-2014-0174>   
Rojas-Downing, M.M., Nejadhashemi, A.P., Harrigan, T. and 
Woznicki, S.A. (2017). Climate change and livestock: Impacts, 
adaptation, and mitigation. Climate Risk Management, 16, 145–
163. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
crm.2017.02.001> 
Roussin, R., Wilson, J., Utzig, G. and Lavkulich, L. (2015). 
Assessing the potential for pocket agriculture in mountainous 
regions: A case study in West Kootenay, British Columbia, 
Canada. Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and Community 
Development, 6(1), 175–188. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.5304/jafscd.2015.061.016>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 183 
Rutty, M., Scott, D., Johnson, P., Pons, M., Steiger, R. and Vilella, 
M. (2017). Using ski industry response to climatic variability 
to assess climate change risk: An analogue study in Eastern 
Canada. Tourism Management, 58, 196–204. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2016.10.020>  
Sauchyn, D. (2017). Climate change adaptation on the farm and 
ranch. Policy Options. Retrieved February 2020, from: <http://
policyoptions.irpp.org/magazines/may-2017/climate-change-
adaptation-on-the-farm-and-ranch/>
Savo, V., Morton, C. and Lepofsky, D. (2017). Impacts of climate 
change for coastal fishers and implications for fisheries. Fish 
and Fisheries, 18(5), 877–889. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12212>
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Gillis, D., Shiwak, I., Flowers, C., 
Cook, O., Wood, M., the Rigolet Inuit Community Government, 
and Harper, S. (2017). Profiling the eNuk program: An Inuit-
led strategy for monitoring and responding to the impacts 
of environmental change on health and well-being in Rigolet, 
Nunatsiavut. Northern Public Affairs, 5(2). Retrieved February 
2020, from <http://www.northernpublicaffairs.ca/index/wp-
content/uploads/2017/07/npa_5_2_july_2017_pg18-22.pdf> 
Schroth, O., Pond, E. and Sheppard, S. R. (2015). Evaluating 
presentation formats of local climate change in community 
planning with regard to process and outcomes. Landscape 
Urban Planning, 142, 147–158. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2015.03.011>  
 Science and Survival at Fort Conger (2015). Why we’re still 
fascinated by Fort Conger. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<http://fortconger.org> 
Shaw, A., Burch, S., Kristensen, F., Robinson, J. and Dale, A. 
(2014). Accelerating the sustainability transition: Exploring 
synergies between adaptation and mitigation in British 
Columbian communities. Global Environmental Change, 
25(1), 41–51. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.01.002> 
Sorensen, C. (2016). How snowless ski resorts are adapting 
to climate change. MacLeans. Retrieved February 2020, from: 
<https://www.macleans.ca/economy/business/how-snowless-
ski-resorts-are-adapting-to-climate-change/>
Statham, S., Ford, J., Berrang-Ford, L., Lardeau, M.P., Gough, 
W. and Siewierski, R. (2015). Anomalous climatic conditions 
during winter 2010–2011 and vulnerability of the traditional Inuit 
food system in Iqaluit, Nunavut. Polar Record, 51(3), 301–317. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0032247414000151> 
Statistics Canada (2016). Census of population. Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www12.statcan.
gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/dp-pd/prof/details/page.
cfm?Lang=E&Geo1=CSD&Geo2=
PR&Code2=01&SearchType=Begins&SearchPR=01&TABID=1&B1
=All&type=0&Code1=3506008&SearchText=ottawa> 
Stoddart M.C.J. and Sodero S. (2015). From fisheries decline 
to tourism destination: Mass media, tourism mobility, and the 
Newfoundland coastal environment. Mobilities, 10(3), 445–465. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/174501
01.2013.860281> 
Studio 531(2019). Tofino indoor recreation centre. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://tofino.civicweb.net/filepro/
document/91262/Recreation%20Facility%20Design%20Report.pdf>
Sullivan, I. (2018). Impacts of climate change on Qalipu First 
Nation communities. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://
grosmorneclimatesymposium.files.wordpress.com/2018/09/
impactclimatechangeqfn_slides.pdf>  
Taylor, M.M. (2019). Public health solutions to rural health 
disparities, Chapter 3 in Rural Health Disparities. Springer, 
25–35. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://link.springer.
com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-030-11467-1>  
The Ontario Bar Association (2015). Ontario’s climate change 
discussion paper. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.oba.org/CMSPages/GetFile.
aspx?guid=f35f4dbb-ea42-4178-aa28-a7835e80b568>  
Tschakert, P., Barnett, J., Ellis, N., Lawrence, C., Tuana, N., New, 
M., Elrick-Barr, C., Pandit, R. and Pannell, D. (2017). Climate 
change and loss, as if people mattered: Values, places, and 
experiences. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 
8(5). Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.476> 
Tschakert, P., Ellis, N., Anderson, C., Kelly, A. and Obeng, J. 
(2019). One thousand ways to experience loss: A systematic 
analysis of climate-related intangible harm from around 
the world. Global Environmental Change, 55, 55–72. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2018.11.006> 
Vasseur, L., Thornbush, M. and Plante, S. (2015). Gender-
based experiences and perceptions after the 2010 winter 
storms in Atlantic Canada. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 12(10), 12518–
12529. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://dx.doi.
org/10.3390%2Fijerph121012518> 
Vasseur, L., Thornbush, M. and Plante, S. (2017). Climatic and 
environmental changes affecting communities in Atlantic 
Canada. Sustainability, 9(8), 1–10. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3390/su9081293> 
Vodden, K., Douglas, D., Minnes, S., Markey, S., Reimer, B. and 
Breen, S. (2019). Conclusions: Implications for policy and 
practice, Chapter in The Theory, Practice, and Potential of 
Regional Development: The Case of Canada, (Eds.) K. Vodden, D. 
Douglas, S. Markey, S. Minnes and B. Reimer, Routledge, London, 
United Kingdom, 212–234. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351262163> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 184 
Vodden, K., Catto, N., Irvine, M., Parewick, K. and Renaud, N. 
(2012). 7 Steps to Assess Climate Change Vulnerability in Your 
Community. Memorial University, Department of Geography. 
Prepared for the Atlantic Canada Adaptation Solutions 
Association and the Department of Environment & Conservation, 
1–278: <https://www.turnbackthetide.ca/pdf/7_Steps_Tool.pdf>
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S., (Eds.) (2014). Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 286 p. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/
Full-Report_Eng.pdf>  
Weatherdon, L.V., Magnan, A.K., Rogers, A.D., Sumaila, U.R. 
and Cheung, W.W.L. (2016). Observed and projected impacts 
of climate change on marine fisheries, aquaculture, coastal 
tourism, and human health: An update. Frontiers in Marine 
Science 3(48). Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.3389/fmars.2016.00048> 
Webster, Tim. L. (2010). Flood risk mapping using LiDAR for 
Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia, Canada. Remote Sensing, 2(9), 
2060–2082. Retrieved February 2020, from: <https://doi.
org/10.3390/rs2092060>  
Webster, T., McGuigan, K., Collins, K. and MacDonald, C. (2014). 
Integrated river and coastal hydrodynamic flood risk mapping of 
the Lahave River estuary and town of Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, 
Canada. Water, 6(3), 517–546. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/w6030517>   
Williams L., Fletcher A., Hanson, C., Neapole, J. and Pollack, 
M. (2018). Women and climate change impacts and action in 
Canada. Retrieved February 2020, from: <https://www.criaw-
icref.ca/images/userfiles/files/Women%20and%20Climate%20
Change_FINAL.pdf>
Wolf, J., Allice, I. and Bell., T. (2012). Values, climate change, and 
implications for adaptation: Evidence from two communities in 
Labrador, Canada. Global Environmental Change, 23(2), 548–
562. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2012.11.007>
Women’s Environment and Development Organization 
(2018). Climate change and gender in Canada: A review. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://wedo.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/GGCA-CA-RP-07.pdf> 
World Wildlife Fund (2019). Canadian Arctic greywater report: 
Estimates, forecasts and treatment technologies. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <http://d2akrl9rvxl3z3.cloudfront.net/
downloads/wwf_canada_grey_water_report_2018_1.pdf>
Young, S., Tabish, T., Pollock, N. and Young, T. (2016). 
Backcountry travel emergencies in Arctic Canada: A pilot 
study in public health surveillance, International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 13(3), 276. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13030276> 
Yukon Legislative Assembly (2017). Fall sitting. Number 32, 
2nd session, 34th legislature. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://yukonassembly.ca/sites/default/files/inline-files/
Journals-34-2-2017-10-03-2017-11-27.pdf> 
Yusa, A., Berry, P., Cheng, J., Ogden, N., Bonsal, B., Stewart, R. 
and Waldick, R. (2015). Climate change, drought and human 
health in Canada. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 12(7), 8359–8412. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph120708359> 
4-H Ontario. (n.d.). Field crops, weeds, insects, and disease. 
Retrieved April 9, 2020, from <https://4-hontario.ca/youth/club-
projects/field-crops-weeds-insects-diseases-project/>
CHAPTER 4
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Water
Resources
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 186 
Coordinating lead authors 
Hayley Carlson, Global Water Futures Program, Global Institute for Water 
Security, University of Saskatchewan 
Alain Pietroniro, PhD, P.Eng., Department of Civil Engineering, Schulich 
School of Engineering, University of Calgary
Lead authors 
Patricia Gober, PhD, Global Water Futures Program, Global Institute for 
Water Security, University of Saskatchewan
Wendy Leger, Boundary Water Issues Unit, Environment and Climate 
Change Canada, Government of Canada
Stephanie Merrill, Global Water Futures Program, Global Institute for 
Water Security, University of Saskatchewan
Contributing authors 
Laila Balkhi, University of Saskatchewan
Sarah Foley, University of Saskatchewan
Bob Halliday, R. Halliday & Associates Ltd.
Lawrence Martz, PhD, University of Saskatchewan
Recommended citation 
Carlson, H., Pietroniro, A., Gober, P., Leger, W., and Merrill, S. (2021): 
Water Resources; Chapter 4 in Canada in a Changing Climate: National 
Issues Report, (eds.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 187 
Table of contents
Key messages 
189
4.1 Introduction 
191
4.2 Climate change creates risks for water resources 
192
4.2.1 Observed changes 
192
Case Story 4.1: Extreme water level variability on the Great Lakes
194
4.2.2 Climate trends and projections 
196
4.3 Effective coordination across complex water systems enhances adaptation 
197
4.3.1 Introduction
198
4.3.2 Transboundary and watershed organizations
200
Case Story 4.2: Ontario Conservation Authorities and climate change adaptation in the Lake 
Simcoe Watershed
201
Case Story 4.3: The International Joint Commission and the Great Lakes Region
203
4.3.3 Adaptive capacity and the changing nature of water governance
204
4.3.4 Conclusion
207
4.4 Adaptation is advancing through innovation and adaptive management 
208
4.4.1 Introduction 
208
4.4.2 Institutional barriers to innovation
208
4.4.3 Leadership and water champions
209
4.4.4 Stakeholder participation and social learning
210
Case Story 4.4: Addressing climate vulnerability and sustainable water management in the South 
Saskatchewan River Basin
210
Case Story 4.5: Lake Superior and Lake Ontario outflow regulation: Addressing uncertainty in 
Great Lakes water levels
211
4.4.5 Adaptive management and water experiments
212
4.5 It is vital to engage the public and build awareness about adaptation opportunities
217
4.5.1 Introduction
217
4.5.2 Perceptions of water and climate
218
4.5.3 Building public support for adaptation
220
4.5.4 Diversifying policy tools
221
Case Story 4.6: The changing policy discourse for solutions to water-related hazards in the 
Canadian Prairies
221
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 188 
4.5.5 Conclusion
225
4.6 Water system vulnerability can be reduced through quality data and resilient design 
225
4.6.1 Introduction
226
4.6.2 Water information systems
226
4.6.3 Water-related infrastructure
239
Case Story 4.7: Climate change impacts on water and wastewater infrastructure at Akwesasne
243
4.7 Moving forward 
245
4.7.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs 
245
4.8 Conclusion 
246
4.9 References 
248
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 189 
Key messages 
Climate change creates risks for water resources (see Section 4.2)
Global climate change has already altered patterns of rainfall, snow, ice and permafrost melt, exacerbating 
existing water availability and quality issues, as well as changing the nature and timing of water-related 
natural hazards, such as floods and droughts.
Effective coordination across complex water systems enhances 
adaptation (see Section 4.3)
Canadian organizations and institutions are unevenly prepared to manage water-related risks associated with 
climate change. Partnerships and networks allow organizations at a variety of scales to access additional 
resources, share knowledge and risk, and enhance adaptive capacity. Transboundary and watershed 
organizations offer useful insights into effective coordination of water systems with diverse stakeholders that 
are dealing with high uncertainty.  
Adaptation is advancing through innovation and adaptive 
management (see Section 4.4)
There are promising examples of coordination and innovation in the water sector across Canada. New 
approaches use scenarios to explore how decision-making strategies perform across a range of plausible 
futures, implement iterative processes for monitoring and adjusting actions, and engage stakeholders in 
social learning, laying the groundwork for innovation and adaptation.
It is vital to engage the public and build awareness about adaptation 
opportunities (see Section 4.5)
Successful adaptation requires public buy-in to the science of climate change and the need to implement 
adaptation policies. A majority of Canadians support policies to address water-related problems, but 
managing water resources ranks low on their list of salient problems after the economy, health care, and cost 
of living. Extreme events, including floods, droughts and episodes of poor water quality, can often bring the 
need for better water management to the forefront. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 190 
Water system vulnerability can be reduced through quality data and 
resilient design (see Section 4.6)
Reducing vulnerabilities in water systems involves identifying weak spots under current and future climate 
conditions, and providing access to high quality and locally relevant data. While the quality and resolution 
of data for monitoring change in uncertain environmental systems is variable, resilient design practices are 
emerging.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 191 
4.1 Introduction 
Water is the vehicle that delivers many climate change impacts to society and the environment (IPCC, 2014). 
Water is a locally variable resource, and society’s vulnerability to climate-related hazards, such as the impacts 
from flooding and drought, differ from one region to another. Vulnerability to hazards also stems from the 
ability of societal institutions to adequately prepare for and manage the new risks of climate change.
The availability of water is naturally limited, and water is not always in the right place at the right time, or 
of the right quality or quantity. Significant and varied water infrastructure and management systems have 
developed across Canada, designed primarily around the assumption that past natural variability is a reliable 
and robust indicator of future variability (Milly et al., 2008). With climate change, this assumption is no longer as 
valid, leaving practitioners and water managers often facing difficult and complex decisions (Simonovic, 2017).
Canada faces some special challenges in adapting its water systems to climate change. These include our 
large land mass, diverse geography, northern location and wide range of climate and hydrological regimes, 
coupled with a broad range of consumptive and non-consumptive uses that control the timing and supply 
of water resources (Statistics Canada, 2017). There are, for example, over 15,000 dams of various sizes 
administered by myriad jurisdictions, including federal, provincial and territorial governments, municipalities, 
irrigators, industries and utilities, for a wide range of purposes, including hydroelectricity, water supply, flood 
control, and mining and tailings management (Canadian Dam Association, 2019). The highly fragmented 
nature of water governance is also significant. While the constitutional responsibility for water resources 
management lies primarily with the provinces, the nature of the resource means that water resources are 
governed and managed by a complex system of stakeholders and partners, including governments at 
different levels, with participation from a variety of non-governmental organizations, local communities, and 
Indigenous and environmental organizations (Renzetti and Dupont, 2017). Effective coordination across these 
decision-making units enhances the capacity to share risk, learn from one another and seize opportunities to 
reduce vulnerability.
This chapter assesses the most up-to-date knowledge on climate and hydrological science and adaptation 
processes, and applies this knowledge to discuss the challenges, needs and opportunities that lie ahead 
for Canadian water resource managers and planners. The science presents a compelling case for action. 
However, equally important to assessing adaptation are the strengths and capacities of Canadian water 
institutions for changing business-as-usual systems of practice. In a large and diverse country like Canada, 
it is not surprising that the pace of adaptation is uneven, with more evidence of innovative local-scale 
responses, and less progress towards comprehensive national-scale strategies.
This chapter summarizes major adaptation efforts, while assessing the capacity of Canadian water 
institutions to respond to climate change and its associated uncertainties and complexities. It investigates 
the capacity of these institutions to plan for a future that may be substantially different from the past, to 
initiate a conversation about the kind of water future that people want and the policies needed to get there. 
It is still unclear whether governance systems, institutional practices and monitoring programs can change 
quickly enough to avert significant disruption and missed opportunities. Canada’s institutional changes with 
respect to water resources are spotty and often bottom-up, but the case studies reviewed in this chapter 
demonstrate that local-level initiatives can serve as guides for more robust national action.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 192 
4.2 Climate change creates risks for water 
resources 
Global climate change has already altered patterns of rainfall, snow, ice and permafrost melt, exacerbating 
existing water availability and quality issues, as well as changing the nature and timing of water-related 
natural hazards, such as floods and droughts. 
Climate change impacts to the water cycle have already occurred, leading to damaged infrastructure, increased 
operating costs, disrupted operating seasons, and deteriorating water quality through excess nutrients and 
harmful algae blooms. Changes to overall water availability are projected to be more pronounced in the future, 
especially under high emissions scenarios. It is not always easy, however, to isolate climate change impacts 
from effects caused by human development, such as land use change. Human development can exacerbate or 
reduce climate-driven changes, introducing a considerable amount of uncertainty into the adaptation process.
4.2.1 Observed changes 
Climate change has already affected Canada’s cold-dominated water cycle, and has introduced risks to 
society and the environment (see Figure 4.1). Observed annual average temperature increases for Canada 
are about twice the global average, and more than three times the global average in Northern Canada (Zhang 
et al., 2019). Canada’s Changing Climate Report (Bush and Lemmen, 2019) synthesizes the most recent 
scientific evidence of climate change impacts. Observed changes from the report that are relevant to water 
resources include:
•	
Melting ice, thawing permafrost and shorter duration of snow cover. Glaciers and ice fields 
are melting, thinning and retreating at unprecedented rates. Permafrost has warmed at many 
sites from the edge of the boreal forest to the tundra, and is disappearing along its southern 
boundaries. The portion of the year with snow cover and lake ice cover has decreased by 5% to 
10% per decade since 1981 and seasonal snow accumulation has decreased in many regions 
(Derksen et al., 2019). These changes are particularly pronounced in Northern Canada, and 
present risks to the structural integrity of infrastructure (Lemmen et al., 2014) and can disrupt 
shipping routes and winter roads (Campbell et al., 2014; Lemmen et al., 2014). Over time, these 
changes may also introduce new mining and tourism opportunities in northern regions (Kovacs 
and Thistlethwaite, 2014; Lemmen et al., 2014), and are anticipated to increase the productivity of 
northern ecosystems as nutrients become more readily available (Orihel et al., 2017).
•	
Increasing precipitation and a transition from snow to rain. Precipitation has increased across 
all regions by an average of 20% since 1948. The greatest increases have occurred in Northern 
Canada and parts of Manitoba, Ontario, northern Quebec and Atlantic Canada. Precipitation is 
falling more often as rain rather than snow, especially in the spring and fall (Zhang et al., 2019). 
Increased precipitation and subsequent runoff have been linked with excess nutrients in water 
systems, increasing the incidence of harmful algae blooms (McCullough et al., 2012).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 193 
•	
Changes in the timing of water availability. The total volume of water flowing through a river 
basin1 in an average year shows very little change, but significant shifts in timing have been 
observed (Bonsal et al., 2019). There is an increasing risk that less water may be available in 
hotter months for energy (Lemmen et al., 2014) and food production (Campbell et al., 2014), as 
early snowmelt contributes to lower summer flows (Bonsal et al., 2019). River and lake freeze-
up now occurs later in the winter and over a shorter period of time, while ice break-up occurs 
earlier in the spring (Derksen et al., 2019). These shifts in timing can affect farming and industrial 
operations, and disrupt the natural patterns to which ecosystems have adapted (Islam et al., 2017; 
Campbell et al., 2014).
•	
Changes in the nature of extreme events. There are detectable changes in the nature of flood 
events in some areas, with more rain-on-snow events, rainfall-driven events and earlier spring 
flooding (Bonsal et al., 2019). For example, climate change played a role in the extreme rainfall 
events that contributed to the 2013 Calgary flood (Teufel et al., 2017), the 2014 Assiniboine flood 
(Szeto et al., 2015), and the 2017 Ottawa floods (Teufel et al., 2019). Canadian municipal planners 
rank extreme storm events and flooding as the two most frequently experienced climate change 
impacts (McMillan et al., 2019), and these events can increase contaminant loads in water 
systems, degrading water quality (Gooré Bi et al., 2015; Jalliffier-Verne et al., 2015). While costly, 
observed changes in droughts to date represent yearly variations from the normal, rather than the 
product of long-term trends related to climate change (Bonsal et al., 2019).
Thus far, these observed changes have resulted in varied impacts to average annual river flows and lake 
levels (Bonsal et al., 2019) due to the tremendous amount of variation in natural systems and increased 
evaporation (Bonsal et al. 2019; Bush et al., 2019). There remains considerable uncertainty, especially in 
terms of predicting the timing, magnitude and direction of changes in precipitation. For example, while there 
do not appear to be detectable trends in short-duration extreme precipitation events in Canada (Zhang et 
al., 2019), other studies find increasing trends in extreme precipitation events over large portions of North 
America (Kirchmeier-Young and Shang, 2020; Paplexiou and Montanari, 2019). Unfortunately there is no 
consensus in the literature, largely because rainfall is extremely difficult to simulate, especially summertime 
convection. Ultimately, reported changes are really a patchwork of different changes across Canada that are 
heavily influenced by such things as latitude, altitude and proximity to lakes, which makes a pan-Canadian 
assessment very local by necessity. Additionally, human management decisions related to land-use, water 
management and changing socioeconomic conditions (Bonsal et al., 2019; Statistics Canada, 2017), can 
reduce or exacerbate climate change-driven processes, and can impact the water cycle on the same order of 
magnitude as hydroclimatic changes (Döll et al., 2015). For example, while some climate change processes 
have been linked to deterioration of water quality in Canada, a number of studies have also found strong links 
to land-use intensification with agricultural production and urban development (Weiss et al., 2018; El-Khoury 
et al., 2015; Gooré Bi et al., 2015; Jalliffier-Verne et al., 2015; Taranu et al., 2015). These human management 
elements introduce considerable uncertainties into future projections and complexities into future decision 
making (see Case Story 4.1).
1 A river basin refers to the area of land that drains into a river, including its contributing tributaries such as streams 
and creeks. Watersheds represent smaller sub units of a river basin that capture precipitation and drains it towards a 
water source.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 194 
Figure 4.1: Major recent events and trends in Canada related to water resources that have had significant 
impacts to communities and the economy. Source: Adapted from Government of Canada, 2020a, b; Government 
of New Brunswick, 2019; Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019a; McKay, 2019; Ormiston and Sheldon, 2019; Poitras, 
2019; Smith et al., 2019; Wang and Strong, 2019; Abbott and Chapman, 2018; Environment and Climate Change 
Canada, 2018; Lindsay, 2018; Weber, 2018; Bakaic, 2017; Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019a, 2017; Maclean, 
2017; O’Neill and Burn, 2017; Phillips, 2017; Thurton, 2017; Weikle, 2017; Sills et al., 2016; Wheaton et al., 2008; 
Public Safety Canada, n.d.
Case Story 4.1: Extreme water level variability on the Great Lakes
The Great Lakes are the largest surface freshwater system on Earth and serve the diverse needs of 30 million 
people. Water levels across the Great Lakes were very high throughout 2019 and have continued to be high in 
2020, approaching or exceeding seasonal or all-time record-high water levels at various times throughout the 
year. During 2019, Lake Superior, Lake Saint Clair, Lake Erie and Lake Ontario all met or exceeded all-time 
record high levels for the period of record of 1918‒2018. In the case of Lake Ontario, the new record-high 
level set in 2019 exceeded the previous record-high level set only two years prior in 2017. Lake Michigan‒
Huron, which came very close to record highs in the summer of 2019, remained high through the fall, and was 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 195 
above seasonal records in the winter and spring of 2020. High water levels have caused flooding and erosion 
along the shorelines of all the Great Lakes, with enhanced local impacts during storm events generating 
wind-driven wave action (see Figure 4.2; Toronto and Region Conservation Authority, 2019; Great Lakes–St. 
Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee, 2018). While it is outside of the Great Lakes basin, the 
Ottawa River experienced its largest spring flows on record in 2019, surpassing its previous record reached 
just two years before, in 2017 (Ottawa River Regulation Planning Board, 2019), which caused flooding 
throughout the Ottawa River basin and downstream on the St. Lawrence River. Communities battled 
emergency conditions, and water regulators attempted to balance upstream and downstream flooding 
conditions (Ottawa River Regulation Planning Board, 2019; Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River Adaptive 
Management Committee, 2018; International Lake Ontario–St. Lawrence River Board, 2018). Only six short 
years earlier, shoreline communities on the Upper Great Lakes had been adjusting to a fifteen-year period of 
very low water levels, with Lake Michigan‒Huron at an all-time record low level in the winter of 2013 
(Gronewold et al., 2016).
Figure 4.2: Record high water levels and flooding on a dock near Saint Catharines, ON (left), and a walkway near 
Ontario Place in Toronto, ON (right). Photos courtesy of Environment and Climate Change Canada.
While water level fluctuations are normal on the Great Lakes, these extreme shifts between record low 
and high water levels fit the pattern of what would be expected under a changing climate. Projections for 
the future are not simply that water levels in the Great Lakes will trend up or down, but rather that they will 
experience more frequent periods of very high or very low levels (Gronewold and Rood, 2019; Mailhot et 
al., 2019; Music et al., 2015; Notaro et al., 2015). Extreme water levels have occurred in the recorded past 
(1918‒2018) (Canadian Hydrographic Service, 2019; Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2019), and therefore it is difficult to determine whether the 
record-breaking conditions in 2017 and 2019 are extraordinarily rare events for the climate in this region, or 
moderately rare events in a climate that is changing (Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management 
Committee, 2018). An event attribution study by Teufel et al. (2019) shows that events such as the heavy 
April 2017 precipitation accumulation over the Ottawa River basin are between two and three times more 
likely to occur in the present-day climate than they were in the pre-industrial climate, as the current warmer 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 196 
atmosphere holds more moisture. The record high and low water levels across the Great Lakes are a clear 
reminder that these types of extreme conditions are not only plausible, but are indeed occurring, with growing 
evidence of linkages to climate change. Planning is difficult in this context, as shoreline communities struggle 
to adjust and adapt to uncertain future conditions (Gronewold and Rood, 2019; McNeil, 2019).
Adaptation planning must manage uncertainty, rather than try to avoid it (Kwakkel et al., 2016). Emerging 
insights from adaptive management theory and practice suggest that building resilience―the ability to 
withstand a wide range of scenarios―into both human and ecological systems is an effective way to 
cope with environmental change characterized by future uncertainty (Pahl-Wostl, 2008; Panel on Adaptive 
Management for Resource Stewardship, 2004). Adaptive management techniques allow planners and 
practitioners to move forward with decisions and actions that meet current needs and conditions, and then 
to respond with modifications if conditions change in an unanticipated manner (Land Trust Alliance, 2019; 
Wood et al., 2017). The International Joint Commission has adopted such an adaptive management approach 
as a means of dealing with future uncertainty on the Great Lakes (see Case Story 4.5 and Section 4.4.5 for 
examples in the Great Lakes Region).
4.2.2 Climate trends and projections 
Combined changes in precipitation phase (e.g., rain or snow), earlier snowmelt, ice cover retreat and 
decreasing glacier mass affect Canadian river flows and lake levels. Future trends identified in Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report (Bush and Lemmen, 2019) and other studies, include:
•	
Less water availability in southern basins, particularly in the summer. Precipitation will continue 
to increase in the short term for all seasons, but summer rainfall in southern Canada is projected 
to decrease in a high emissions scenario near the end of the century (Zhang et al., 2019). Along 
with increasing evaporation rates, early snowmelt and less ice, this trend is expected to contribute 
to reduced annual flows in southern interior basins and southern lake levels (Bonsal et al., 2019), 
potentially initiating social and ecological conflict over increasingly scarce water resources in 
some basins (Clark et al., 2017).
•	
Increased frequency and intensity of water-related extremes. Some conditions that increase 
the potential for flooding, such as extreme rainfall events, are projected to be more common in 
the future, escalating the potential for rain-generated local flooding, particularly in urban areas 
(Zhang et al., 2019). Extreme precipitation events can lead to the loss of human life and property 
destruction (Simonovic, 2017), and can affect mining operations, energy transmission and 
tourism infrastructure (Kovacs and Thistlethwaite, 2014; Lemmen et al., 2014), as well as increase 
soil erosion and nutrient runoff, degrading water quality (Campbell et al., 2014; Crossman et al., 
2013). Extreme summer dry periods are expected to increase in frequency and will contribute 
to soil moisture deficits leading to drought, particularly across the southern Prairies and in the 
interior of British Columbia (Bonsal et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 197 
•	
Reduced water quality and more harmful algae blooms. There is significant potential for climate 
change to exacerbate current water quality issues (Liu et al., 2019; Gooré Bi et al., 2015; Jalliffier-
Verne et al., 2015). In particular, it is anticipated that warmer temperatures will contribute to 
additional occurrences of harmful algae in the future, particularly where nutrient concentrations 
are already elevated (Orihel et al., 2017; Paterson et al., 2017).
Climate change influences on the water cycle are already impacting Canadian food, energy and natural 
resource sectors, communities, and the natural environment. For example, property and casualty insurance 
payouts from extreme weather events have more than doubled every five to ten years since the 1980s, and 
the Insurance Bureau of Canada estimates that for every dollar of insured loss, home and business owners 
and governments spend three to four dollars for uninsured losses (Moudrak et al., 2018). Since 2009, insured 
losses from catastrophic severe weather events in Canada, such as flooding, have averaged $1.4 billion per 
year, compared to an average of $400 million per year prior to this (Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019b).
The current reality for water practitioners in every part of Canada is that design and operational protocols for 
water resources management are almost exclusively based on a historical understanding of the resource. 
However, as we move into the Anthropocene (i.e., the era in which human activity has been the dominant 
influence on climate and the environment), indications are that the future will no longer resemble the 
past. Adapting to new changes is made more complex by the interaction of climate change with human 
development and by rapidly changing socioeconomic conditions. While uncertainties create challenges 
for adaptation, they should not be an impediment to action. Instead, they can serve as a call to address 
uncertainty, and to develop more robust management systems that can cope with variability. The remainder 
of this chapter provides a national perspective on adaptation efforts in the water resources sector, with a 
focus on how governments, communities and civil societies are adapting to complex and uncertain change.
4.3 Effective coordination across complex water 
systems enhances adaptation 
Canadian organizations and institutions are unevenly prepared to manage water-related risks associated 
with climate change. Partnerships and networks allow organizations at a variety of scales to access 
additional resources, share knowledge and risk, and enhance adaptive capacity. Transboundary and 
watershed organizations offer useful insights into effective coordination of water systems with diverse 
stakeholders that are dealing with high uncertainty.
Canadian governance of water resources involves primarily the provincial and municipal/regional governments 
with involvement from federal and Indigenous governments, along with civic societal organizations such 
as watershed groups, environmental organizations, philanthropic foundations and scientific and research 
groups. Capacity challenges often occur in rural, northern and Indigenous communities. Coordination, sharing 
agreements and partnerships enhance the capacity to self-organize, share risk, and incorporate multiple 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 198 
sources of knowledge (e.g., scientific, Indigenous, social, practitioner). Networks enhance institutional capacity 
to address the uncertainty posed by climate change, and they support local organizations, help to share risk, 
and incorporate new forms of knowledge. Watershed organizations, such as Ontario’s Conservation Authorities, 
and transboundary organizations, such as the International Joint Commission, exemplify the benefits and 
challenges of coordination around shared water resources.
4.3.1 Introduction
A common climate change adaptation strategy involves coordination across organizations and institutions. 
An organization is a group of people devoted to a particular purpose, such as research or a business aim, 
while an institution is a type of formal organization, and also refers to systems of practices, norms and formal 
laws or policies (Hulbert and Gupta, 2017). For example, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is an 
organization providing world leadership and expertise in international cooperation in the delivery and use of 
high-quality, authoritative weather, climate, hydrological and related environmental services by its members. 
The WMO facilitates an international greater good, while member countries maintain sovereignty and provide 
funding to the WMO to maintain this oversight role. The Global Institute for Water Security at the University of 
Saskatchewan and the Water Institute at the University of Waterloo are examples of institutions that function 
similarly to an organization. The broader definition of water institutions also refers to formal water laws 
and policies (e.g., the Water Sustainability Act in British Columbia), water governance arrangements (e.g., 
Conservation Districts in Ontario), market-based mechanisms (e.g., Alberta’s water market), public opinions 
about water and climate change, and attitudes towards public and private ownership, among other things. 
Organizations are governed by rules and regulations, whereas institutions are governed by customs and 
values. Canadian water institutions have deeply engrained patterns of how we manage water, and they are 
in the process of adapting to climate-related water risks through new institutional arrangements, enhanced 
coordination, risk sharing and capacity building (Global Water Futures, 2020). Coordination allows institutions 
to respond more quickly and effectively to the challenges of an uncertain climate by defining clear roles, 
fostering information sharing and mobilizing additional resources (Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013; Bakker and Cook, 
2011). Risk-sharing tools distribute capacity to prepare for climate change impacts (Thistlethwaite and 
Henstra, 2017). 
In Canada, the constitutional division of power between federal, provincial, territorial and Indigenous 
governments, and the role of municipal and regional organizations means that adaptation in the water sector 
often occurs at a variety of scales (Global Water Futures, 2020; Renzetti and Dupont, 2017; Bakker and Cook, 
2011; Sandford et al., 2011; Simms and de Loë, 2010). This decentralized context for governance can lead to 
a mix of outcomes for adaptation in the water sector. On one hand, the fragmentation of governance across 
multiple authorities can result in inefficiencies and redundancies (Bakker and Cook, 2011) that contribute 
to unsustainable water use (Renzetti and Dupont, 2017), delayed policy development (Mitchell, 2017), and 
uneven adaptive capacity across stakeholder groups (Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013). In other circumstances, 
decentralized governance is inclusive of many groups and can produce outcomes that are responsive to local 
needs (Bakker and Cook, 2011). Often, intermediary groups such as watershed organizations (see Case Story 
4.2) and transboundary water organizations (see Case Story 4.3) can play an important coordination role 
across various stakeholder groups (Clancy, 2014). Municipalities, Indigenous communities and environmental 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 199 
organizations are also becoming more commonly included in water governance and adaptation activities, in 
part due to the fact that the federal role in water governance has declined over several decades (see Box 4.1; 
Renzetti and Dupont, 2017; Hurlbert et al., 2015; Bakker and Cook, 2011; Simms and de Loë, 2010; Hill et al., 
2009; Ivey et al., 2004). These diverse sets of new actors often have novel ideas about water management 
and adaptation to risk that can transform existing institutions (Clancy, 2014).
Ideally, networks and partnerships between governance authorities and stakeholders can play a significant 
role in strengthening adaptation of the Canadian water sector to climate change (Bauer and Steurer, 2014). 
Effective coordination implies that programs are necessary, efficient, consistent and comprehensive (de Loë, 
2017). Improved water governance arrangements are important for clarifying roles and coordinating policies 
across all orders of government (Bakker and Cook, 2011; de Loë, 2009), and in sectors beyond water, such as 
energy and agriculture (de Loë, 2017; Gober, 2013).
Box 4.1: Flood management in Canada
Floods are among the most costly natural disasters in Canada (Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019b; Public 
Safety Canada, 2011). Seventy-five percent of annual weather event expenditures under the Federal Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangement program are flood-related (Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer, 2016).
Historically, the federal government has played a substantial coordinating role in reducing flood risk. In 1970, 
Canada passed the Canada Water Act to design an enhanced national and comprehensive approach to water 
management (Watt, 1995). The federal‒provincial/territorial Flood Damage Reduction Program (FDRP) was 
introduced in 1976 to identify flood hazards, map floodplains, discourage flood-vulnerable development, 
and encourage effective land use in flood-vulnerable areas. This initiative was a significant shift away 
from reactive, ad hoc flood policy and towards a proactive approach and preventative philosophy. Between 
1976 and 1999, the FDRP was the main mechanism coordinating national action on flood risk reduction, 
including facilitating cost sharing between governments, supporting the development of flood risk maps, 
and assisting in the implementation of structural and non-structural methods for flood control (Scott et al., 
2017; Thistlethwaite and Henstra, 2017; Watt, 1995). Ultimately, the program designated 320 flood-risk areas 
covering more than 900 urban communities (Natural Resources Canada, 2018).
Since the FDRP was discontinued in 1999, flood management has become highly fragmented and currently 
reflects uneven adaptive capacity across the country. A 2014 review of flood risk approaches across Canada 
found that approximately half of existing flood mapping was completed after the discontinuation of the FDRP 
(MMM Group, 2014), with 59% of these instances being in Ontario, 21% in Quebec, 10% in British Columbia, 
and the remaining 10% distributed across the rest of the country. A more recent study found that, while many 
Canadian municipalities have some sort of flood map, most of these maps are of poor quality and are ill-
suited for communicating flood risk to the public (Henstra et al., 2019a). Institutional fragmentation appears 
to be a particular challenge to building resiliency. In interviews with city officials in 15 major Canadian cities, 
Feltmate and Moudrak (2015) found that cities have made minimal flood preparations in areas where they 
have limited or shared jurisdiction, such as food, electricity and petroleum supply. Similarly, Morrison et al. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 200 
(2018) interviewed experts in the Canadian Prairie provinces, and identified the lack of coordination between 
the various agencies responsible for flood risk management as a challenge to building resiliency, resulting in 
a duplication of efforts, siloed expertise and gaps in responsibilities.
The Federal Flood Mapping Guideline Series provides governments and organizations with resources, 
technical guidance and support for conducting risk assessments and floodplain mapping. The first document 
in the series, released in 2018, will facilitate a common national best practice and will increase the sharing 
and use of flood hazard information (Natural Resources Canada, 2018). Also, Natural Resources Canada and 
Public Safety Canada released the Federal Hydrologic and Hydraulic Procedures for Flood Hazard Delineation 
in 2019, which provides technical guidance to support the development of flood hazard maps in a Canadian 
jurisdiction, including on different types of flooding and how to consider climate change in the flood mapping 
process. In recent years, all levels of governments have been investing to update flood maps across Canada, 
which are outdated and lack consistent standards. Although there are examples of communities and 
jurisdictions incorporating climate change into flood mapping (Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety 
Canada, 2018), there is a need for further overarching guidance on how to address the potential impacts of 
climate change on floodplain mapping in Canada.
4.3.2 Transboundary and watershed organizations
Canadian water organizations with mandates spanning jurisdictional boundaries and involving a variety 
of stakeholders have built cooperative institutional structures to promote shared understanding, trust and 
capacity for addressing complex and contentious water management challenges in a coordinated fashion. 
These groups can effectively link decision-making processes and priorities across scales and regions, and 
they are well-positioned to continue to drive participatory and adaptive water governance (Rouillard and 
Spray, 2017; Mguni, 2015; Cook et al., 2013). Transboundary organizations are expected to be particularly 
important in addressing potential interregional or international water conflicts that may be exacerbated by 
climate change (De Stefano et al., 2012). However, the ability of these organizations to continue to collaborate 
and respond to increasing risks posed by climate change has not been sufficiently studied (Akamani and 
Wilson, 2011).
A variety of regional organizations with water management mandates exist in Canada, many of them based 
on watershed boundaries rather than political boundaries. Examples include Alberta’s Watershed Planning 
and Advisory Councils, Saskatchewan’s Watershed Associations, Manitoba’s Watershed Districts, Quebec’s 
organismes de bassins versants, watershed groups in Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, 
and water boards in the Yukon, Northwest Territories and Nunavut. Some of these groups have legislative 
authority, such as Ontario’s Conservation Authorities (see Case Story 4.2), others are financially supported by 
provincial government programming, such as in Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick, while others exist 
as non-profit organizations or citizen-run groups, such as the Fraser Basin Council in British Columbia (Scott 
et al., 2017; Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment, 2016). These groups have played key roles 
in coordinating action on adaptation planning across the country (Oulahen et al., 2018; Mitchell et al., 2014; 
Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 2011; Sandford et al., 2011). The watershed 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 201 
approach to governance can link land use and water management activities, and enable collaboration 
between a variety of upstream and downstream stakeholders (Mguni, 2015).
Case Story 4.2: Ontario Conservation Authorities and climate change 
adaptation in the Lake Simcoe Watershed
Ontario Conservation Authorities are 36 watershed-based partnerships between municipalities and the 
Province with legislative authority “to undertake watershed-based programs to protect people and property 
from flooding, and other natural hazards, and to conserve natural resources for economic, social and 
environmental benefits” (Conservation Ontario, 2020; Scott et al., 2017). Conservation Authorities were 
originally formed to foster greater cooperation and collaboration among the various groups involved in 
water management (Mitchell et al., 2014), and now play a key role in building resilience to water-related 
risks (Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 2011). For instance, the Lake Simcoe 
Region Conservation Authority (LSRCA; see Figure 4.3) was one of the partners involved in a multi-partner 
pilot project to develop a climate change adaptation strategy for the Lake Simcoe Watershed in Ontario. 
This watershed encompasses about 330,000 ha, is home to approximately 350,000 people, and generates 
over $200 million annually for the local economy, primarily through agriculture and recreation (Lake Simcoe 
Region Conservation Authority, 2016; Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 2012). 
The climate change adaptation plan was made possible through a number of enabling legislative and 
policy mechanisms, including the Lake Simcoe Protection Act (the first legislation in Canada to focus on 
a single watershed), the Lake Simcoe Protection Plan (the first plan in Ontario to integrate climate change 
considerations) and Ontario’s Climate Ready: Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan (2011‒2014) (Lemieux et 
al., 2014). With other partners, the LSRCA identified current and future climate change vulnerabilities, such 
as the drying of wetlands and spread of aquatic invasive species, using future scenarios of climate and non-
climate stressors. The team solicited adaptation ideas and prioritized them with an expert panel, organizing 
them into themes of engaging people (e.g., ensuring community engagement and interagency cooperation 
and coordination), reducing threats (e.g., encouraging and supporting water conservation), enhancing 
adaptive capacity (e.g., determining how well plans account for and protect important natural assets) and 
improving knowledge (e.g., instituting standardized monitoring of species at risk) (Lemieux et al., 2014).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 202 
Figure 4.3: Map of the Lake Simcoe Watershed in Ontario. Source: Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority, 
2016
The LRSCA is currently engaged in updating and improving the adaptation plan for the Lake Simcoe 
Watershed. In the meantime, it is building resilience to climate change impacts primarily through 
promoting low-impact development projects such as natural infrastructure (see Section 4.6.3), and through 
implementing a new Phosphorus Offsetting Policy. Excess phosphorus from land-use activities and their 
consequences, such as agriculture and urban runoff, is a major threat to the current health of Lake Simcoe, 
degrading water quality and leading to excessive growth of aquatic plants and algae (Weiss et al., 2018; Lake 
Simcoe Region Conservation Authority, 2017). Climate change is exacerbating this process by contributing 
to more extreme rainfall events and by changing the timing of seasonal flows, affecting runoff volumes into 
the lake (Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority, 2013). The LSRCA has been working with partners 
to improve urban storm water management, and has introduced an offsetting policy that requires new 
development to control 100% of the phosphorus leaving their property (Lake Simcoe Region Conservation 
Authority, 2019).
There are also a variety of transboundary water organizations in Canada. The most prominent of these is 
the International Joint Commission (IJC), established under the Boundary Waters Treaty of 1909. The IJC 
is a binational institution for the resolution of water disputes and cooperation on water policy priorities 
across the U.S.‒Canada border. There are a total of 13 transboundary water systems governed by the 1909 
Boundary Waters Treaty, including the Osoyoos, Kootenay and Columbia rivers, the Saint Mary and Milk 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 203 
rivers, the Souris River, the Red River, the Rainy River and Lake of the Woods, the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence 
River (see Case Story 4.3), Lake Champlain and the Richelieu River, and the Saint Croix River. Many of these 
transboundary systems have IJC boards, studies and committees dedicated to binational water management 
issues. Other transboundary organizations and agreements address interjurisdictional drainage basins, such 
as the Prairie Provinces Water Board (the 1969 Master Agreement on Apportionment), the Ottawa River 
Regulation Planning Board (1983 Agreement Respecting Ottawa River Basin Regulation) and the Mackenzie 
River Basin Board (the Mackenzie River Basin Transboundary Waters Master Agreement).
Case Story 4.3: The International Joint Commission and the Great 
Lakes Region
The role of the International Joint Commission (IJC) in the Great Lakes Region demonstrates successful 
coordination of policy design and implementation in a decentralized context. The Great Lakes Region is 
home to one of the largest freshwater basins on earth, serving more than 30 million people. Regional water 
governance is characterized by a complex set of policies and arrangements involving two countries, more 
than 75 First Nations communities along the coasts, eight states and two provinces, numerous municipalities, 
and a variety of users and stakeholders with different roles and concerns. While outstanding policy issues 
remain, the United States and Canada have slowed substantial ecological damage in the basin (Renzetti 
and Dupont, 2017; Carmichael and Boyer, 2016), with the IJC playing a key role in coordinating engagement 
across stakeholder groups, and completing technical and policy work around issues such as regulating 
shared water uses and water quality (Johns, 2017). Notable activities and accomplishments recognized 
internationally (United Nations, 2015) include the following:
•	
Large transboundary integrated assessments, such as the Lake Ontario‒St. Lawrence River Study 
(1990‒2005) and the International Upper Great Lakes Study (2007‒2012). These studies resulted 
in flexible management plans and operating rules to respond to climate variability and uncertainty 
(see Case Story 4.5; International Upper Great Lakes Study Board, 2012, 2009; Stakhiv et al., 2006).
•	
The Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement to maintain the chemical, physical and biological 
integrity of the Great Lakes Basin ecosystem. The Great Lakes Water Quality Protocol of 2012, 
enacted under the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, is one of the only transboundary 
coordinating instruments in the world to explicitly address the impacts of climate change on 
water quality (United Nations, 2015; Government of Canada and Government of the United States 
of America, 2012).
•	
A Climate Change Framework (2018) providing guidance for transboundary IJC boards for 
addressing climate change in policy and operations to maintain the resilience of Canada‒U.S. 
water systems (IJC, 2018).
Some of the success of the IJC can be credited to its multi-disciplinary teams, meaningful engagement with 
stakeholders, and willingness to incorporate new ways of learning and information sharing (Straith et al., 2014).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 204 
While transboundary organizations are strong coordinating forces in the Canadian water sector, their 
mandates and water sharing agreements rarely take into account climate change. Vulnerabilities such as 
the absence of flow apportionment agreements or drought provisions in periods of low or variable flow have 
been noted in the Columbia River Basin (Garrick, 2017) and the Red River Basin (de Loë, 2009). The Prairie 
Provinces Water Board, which oversees water sharing among Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba, has 
explicitly considered climate change and drought as key stressors in technical work, but finds it more difficult 
to take into account changing and uncertain socioeconomic factors, such as voluntary water sharing (Global 
Water Futures, 2020). The IJC considers climate change in multiple products, including in a framework 
to guide climate change considerations across transboundary boards (IJC, 2018), in the climate change 
impacts annex in the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement (United Nations, 2015) and in the creation of the 
Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee (IJC, 2015). An adaptive management 
approach to transboundary management can be an effective way to respond to changing circumstances 
and may include the following: periodic reviews; limited terms; special provisions for meeting environmental 
water needs; mechanisms for dealing with extreme circumstances, such as floods and droughts; information 
sharing; and the creation of organizations that are empowered by the parties to make adjustments in 
response to changing circumstances (see Section 4.4; de Loë, 2009).
While transboundary water organizations strengthen Canada’s ability to adapt, the existence of these 
organizations alone is not sufficient. A lack of leadership in coordinating action and a failure to sustain policy 
attention have been noted as issues impeding progress in both the Great Lakes Region (Johns, 2017) and the 
Mackenzie River Basin (Morris and de Loë, 2016).
4.3.3 Adaptive capacity and the changing nature of water governance
Access to adequate technical, human, social and financial capital is critical to adaptive capacity in the water 
sector (Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013; Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 2011). 
Practitioners in the field point to declining technical skills and resources (ICF, 2018; Hamlet, 2011; Patino, 
2010), employee turnover and burnout (Global Water Futures, 2020; Moncrieff-Gould et al., 2018; Straith et 
al., 2014), and a lack of stable funding (Moncrieff-Gould et al., 2018) as challenges to adaptation in the water 
sector (McMillan et al., 2019; Oulahen et al., 2018). Contextual, place-based knowledge, networks, and a wide 
range of interdisciplinary skills are all assets in enhancing a community’s ability to respond, survive and adapt 
to climate-related situations such as extreme events (Global Water Futures, 2020; Straith et al., 2014).
Capacity challenges are often more evident in communities and organizations that are most vulnerable 
to water-related risks of climate change, including in rural, northern and Indigenous communities (Global 
Water Futures, 2020; Archer et al., 2017; Ecology North, 2017; Clancy, 2014; Willox et al., 2013; Ford and 
Pearce, 2010; Wall and Marzall, 2006; Ivey et al., 2004). As a result, such organizations and communities 
are unevenly prepared for the water-related impacts of climate change. Financial resource constraints are 
particularly challenging for non-governmental groups and local communities. Many non-governmental 
water organizations are volunteer-based, or lack streamlined, stable core-funding opportunities to engage in 
effective networking with each other and with the public about water-related issues (Global Water Futures, 
2020; Mitchell et al., 2014; Telfer and Droitsch, 2011). Similarly, those in rural and Indigenous communities  
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 205 
are more susceptible to disruptions to reliable income sources, such as flooding on cropland or culturally 
significant foraging areas (Fletcher and Knuttila, 2018; Lemmen et al., 2014; Wandel et al., 2010; Wall and 
Marzell, 2006). However, communities that have recently experienced water-related natural hazards, such 
as flooding or drought, are generally more adaptive than those lacking this experience (Di Baldassarre et al., 
2015). For example, the long history of extreme climate variability experienced by rural communities in the 
Canadian Prairies has generally increased adaptive capacity across the region, through adaptations such as 
the expansion of irrigation infrastructure and crop diversification (see Prairie Provinces chapter; Kulshreshtha 
et al., 2016; Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013).
Significant progress has been made towards climate change adaptation in North America at the municipal 
level (Canadian Water Network, 2019; Oulahen et al., 2018). Municipalities, however, often lack capacity to 
raise the revenue necessary to maintain and upgrade infrastructure, despite being responsible for 60% of 
public infrastructure across Canada (Global Water Futures, 2020; Moncrieff-Gould et al., 2018; Thistlethwaite 
and Henstra, 2017; Miller, 2015). While about half of municipalities have undertaken a risk assessment of 
their water-related assets, fewer than 20% have formally introduced climate change adaptation strategies 
(Canadian Infrastructure Report Card, 2016). Others have not carried out any assessment whatsoever of their 
community’s vulnerability to specific climate change impacts (McMillan et al., 2019). As such, communities 
are unevenly prepared to handle water-related extremes like floods (Feltmate and Moudrak, 2015).
Indigenous communities have displayed remarkable resilience in the face of considerable and rapid change 
over the past century. In northern Canada, where the temperature is warming three times faster than the 
global average (Bush and Lemmen, 2019), the impacts of climate change have been felt acutely by Inuit 
communities in changing patterns of sea ice, thawing permafrost and the loss of snow and ice cover (Inuit 
Tapiriit Kanatami, 2019). Communities have already had to modify behaviour to cope with these rapid 
changes, including hunting in boats on open water rather than from ice floes, using all-terrain vehicles 
instead of snowmobiles, and utilizing sea routes rather than inland routes damaged by permafrost thaw 
(Berkes and Armitage, 2010). High levels of adaptive capacity exist in Inuit communities, via knowledge 
systems that incorporate change and uncertainty, and through adaptive practices, such as diversifying the 
timing and type of land-based activities (Cameron et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2015; Berkes and Armitage, 2010). 
However, adaptive capacity may not be able to keep pace with the rapid rate of environmental change in 
the north. Furthermore, many traditional Inuit strategies to manage change continue to be undermined by 
colonial processes that have severely affected Indigenous populations in the Arctic (Ford et al., 2017; Ford 
et al., 2015). Indigenous communities elsewhere in Canada face similar challenges, including the effects of 
industrial pollution, the downstream impacts of hydropower dam operations, and on-going socioeconomic 
issues, such as high costs of living and limited employment opportunities, many of which stem from the 
continuing legacy of systemic racism and colonial policies (Global Water Futures, 2020; Archer et al., 2017; 
Thompson, 2015; Castleden and Skinner, 2014; Clancy, 2014; Magzul and Rojas, 2006). These compounding 
factors inhibit the ability of these communities to consider and undertake water resource adaptation 
planning. Competing priorities and limited human and technical capacity mean that communities are not 
always able to take advantage of financial resources to promote and implement adaptation plans, even when 
such resources are available (Ecology North, 2017; Ford and Pearce, 2010).
To increase adaptive capacity, organizations across Canada are creating partnerships to address the water-
related risks of climate change. Partnerships exist across different scales (national, regional and local) and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 206 
types of organizations (government, industry, academia, civil society), and facilitate information sharing 
(Straith et al., 2014), trust building and cooperation (Moore et al., 2014; Patino, 2010), as well as adding 
technical and human resources (Global Water Futures, 2020; Dale et al., 2019; Hamlet, 2011; Cohen et al., 2006).
National and international institutions also support local self-organization and social networking around 
water issues. For example, a key facilitator of adaptation at the municipal level is the International Council 
for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI), a network of local governments and staff that provide technical 
capacity and networking opportunities. Working with the Federation of Canadian Municipalities, ICLEI is 
a key driver of municipal greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction and climate change adaptation in 
Canada (Dale et al., 2019; Guyadeen et al., 2018). While many provinces have released guidelines or funding 
programs supporting adaptation at the local level, Ontario was the first province to enact regulations 
requiring municipalities to consider climate change in asset management planning in 2017 (Canadian Water 
Network, 2019). In other provinces, key water-related policies, such as the Water Modernization Act in British 
Columbia, the 25 Year Water Security Plan in Saskatchewan and Guides to Water Withdrawal Approvals in 
Nova Scotia, are instrumental in supporting social networks and self-organization. For example, policies may 
provide extension services through field days and meetings, piloting the application of suggested practices, 
supporting local advisory committees, and offering workshops in key areas such as new standards and 
guidelines (Bizikova et al., 2013).
Risk-sharing policy tools are another way of enhancing capacity to address water-related climate change 
issues. There are a variety of risk-sharing tools available to Canadian municipalities to address flood risk, 
including disaster assistance programs that share the cost of recovering from disasters between the federal 
and provincial governments (e.g., the Ontario Municipal Disaster Recovery Assistance Program, the Alberta 
Disaster Recovery Program, the Saskatchewan Provincial Disaster Assistance Program, etc.) (Morrison et 
al., 2018; Thistlethwaite and Henstra, 2017). While there is a diversity of policy approaches to flooding in 
Canada (Morrison et al., 2018), cities do not always take advantage of the full suite of risk-sharing tools 
available (Thistlethwaite and Henstra, 2017). For example, both Calgary and Toronto attach a fee to property 
taxes and utility bills to fund flood mitigation and adaptation infrastructure, but do not employ a risk-based 
charge (a charge that is roughly proportional to the property’s contribution to urban flood risk), as a means 
of incentivizing the uptake of property-level flood protection (Thistlethwaite and Henstra, 2017). Alternatively, 
Edmonton, Mississauga, Kitchener and Waterloo are examples of municipalities that charge user fees for 
storm water management that is roughly based on how much the property contributes to runoff (EPCOR, 
2019; Aquije, 2016). While there are many methods to fund storm water management, including property 
taxes, development charges and intergovernmental transfers, user charges can provide a good balance of 
stability in revenue intake and equity (Aquije, 2016).
Organizations are finding ways to maintain valuable institutional knowledge while linking to a variety of 
knowledge communities in order to improve understanding of water management issues and potential 
solutions. For example, for the Prairie Provinces Water Board, contextual knowledge of working in an 
interjurisdictional context is very important. To ensure that this knowledge is maintained through turnover 
in members, the Board has begun a process of succession planning whereby each member identifies an 
alternate who shares their responsibilities and can therefore act as a replacement as turnover occurs (Global 
Water Futures, 2020). Indigenous Knowledge is also becoming more explicitly recognized in water research, 
and in the mandates and practices of water organizations. For example, the Northern Voices, Northern 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 207 
Waters Strategy of the Northwest Territories explicitly includes provisions for recognizing Indigenous 
rights and considers Indigenous Knowledge equivalent to science (Global Water Futures, 2020; Sandford 
et al., 2011). Similarly, the Red River Basin Commission signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the 
Southern Chiefs Organization in Manitoba, committing both partners to work collaboratively on issues such 
as deteriorating water quality and flooding (Southern Chiefs Organization, 2018). In Mittimatalik (Pond Inlet), 
Nunavut, youth and supporting partners use traditional knowledge from community Elders in tandem with 
Western scientific methods, such as water sampling, to study the increasing frequency of gastrointestinal 
illnesses in the community (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2019). Successful integration of Indigenous Knowledge 
can reveal variables previously unaccounted for (Sandford et al., 2011) and provide additional evidence about 
the meaning of change (Abu et al., 2019), though it can be challenging in practice (Mantyka-Pringle et al., 
2017). For example, while the Mackenzie River Basin Board has a mandate to include Indigenous peoples and 
integrate Indigenous Knowledge, it is difficult to adequately represent the diverse interests and knowledge of 
the many unique Indigenous communities in the Mackenzie River Basin’s work (Morris and de Loë, 2016).
Partnerships can also involve sharing power over decision making, such as in the case of the co-management 
arrangements that have resulted from negotiated land claim agreements with Indigenous nations across 
Canada (Latta, 2018; Zubrycki et al., 2016). For example, in the Northwest Territories, the Mackenzie Valley, 
Sahtu, Gwich’in and Wek’èezhii are four land and water boards that involve the co-management of natural 
resources by the territorial and federal governments of Canada, and the governments of some of the 
Indigenous peoples who occupy those territories (Tsatsaros et al., 2018;  Canadian Council of Ministers of the 
Environment, 2016). These co-management arrangements have been implemented with mixed success, but, 
overall, it is believed that they increase access to resources, and contribute to processes of social learning 
and knowledge exchange―particularly the bridging between Indigenous Knowledge and scientific knowledge 
(see Section 4.4.4, Mantyka-Pringle et al., 2017; Armitage et al., 2011).
4.3.4 Conclusion
Adaptation offers opportunities to address vulnerabilities in our water resources systems. Overall, progress 
in coordinating adaptation efforts in the water sector is uneven across Canada. Local communities, and 
Indigenous and civil society organizations are becoming more involved in water governance, yet often have 
limited capacity to effectively address impacts from climate changes. New organizational arrangements, 
such as water-based networks, offer an opportunity to draw on existing capacity and coordinate effectively 
among the myriad participants involved in adaptation to reduce the water-related risks of climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 208 
4.4 Adaptation is advancing through innovation 
and adaptive management 
There are promising examples of coordination and innovation in the water sector across Canada. New 
approaches use scenarios to explore how decision-making strategies perform across a range of plausible 
futures, implement iterative processes for monitoring and adjusting actions, and engage stakeholders in 
social learning, laying the groundwork for innovation and adaptation. 
While institutional barriers remain, innovations around water management and climate change adaptation have 
occurred across Canada. Innovation in the water sector is driven by leaders who propose new ideas and build 
coalitions around them, and by the creation of safe spaces for policy experimentation. Exploratory modelling 
and scenario exercises can build empathy and consensus between stakeholders and lead to the development of 
low- or no-regret adaptation strategies that perform reasonably well against a wide range of plausible futures. 
Adaptive management provides a systematic, iterative process of monitoring and adjusting actions to new 
information and changing circumstances.
4.4.1 Introduction 
Managing uncertainty is a key component of adaptation planning in the water resources sector. The same 
hydrologic or water quality model with slightly different inputs of initial environmental conditions can yield 
very different results, particularly at local and regional scales where most adaptive action takes place 
(Gober, 2018). Adaptive management aims to anticipate a wide range of future conditions and to reduce risk 
exposure (Hurlbert, 2018), leading to decisions that are more robust in the face of these uncertainties.
4.4.2 Institutional barriers to innovation
Inflexible institutional governance, water system design and planning can limit the ability of the water 
sector to adapt to climate change impacts. Many Canadian water systems were historically designed 
around the needs of influential regional groups with primarily single-use interest in water, such as irrigation 
or hydropower (Heinmiller, 2017; Clancy 2014). As such, policy and management failures can result from 
fixed commitments, such as water allocation rules based on historical appropriation that does not consider 
ecosystem needs or equitable distribution for newer users (Sandford et al., 2011; Hamlet, 2011). Effective 
adaptive governance systems are dynamic, analytical, nimble and responsive to current and emerging needs 
(Cosens et al., 2017; Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013); however, institutional support for flexible, diverse programming 
to encourage proactive policy design is not always available (Global Water Futures, 2020; Sandford et al., 
2011; Ivey et al., 2004). For example, the absence of a flexible regulatory framework and clear legal system 
around water reuse rights limits the adoption of demand-side management approaches to water conservation 
in Alberta (Alberta WaterSMART, 2013). Similarly, there is little in terms of water and ecosystem services 
market development in Canada, which impedes competition for conservation and wetland retention activities 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 209 
on private land (Global Water Futures, 2020). Actions to redesign or improve the institutional systems, 
including infrastructure upgrades (Sandford et al., 2011), and policy and administration processes (Straith et 
al., 2014; Patino, 2010), are sometimes accompanied by high financial and political costs that can be a barrier 
to action.
Despite these institutional barriers, there are pockets of innovation in the water sector across Canada. At the 
provincial level, the past two decades have seen many water policy reforms, with renewed focus on drinking 
and source water protection, and a rise in watershed-based decision-making organizations (Bakker and Cook, 
2011). Some notable water management modernizations include Alberta’s water markets, the Northwest 
Territories Northern Voices, Northern Waters strategy, which prioritizes water for nature, and Ontario’s 
requirements for full-cost pricing and accounting for water supply infrastructure (Global Water Futures, 2020; 
Bakker and Cook, 2011; Sandford et al., 2011). Innovation often stems from supportive local factors and the 
creation of safe spaces for policy experimentation (Moore et al., 2014; Straith et al., 2014).
4.4.3 Leadership and water champions
Adaptive organizations and policies require strong leadership to foster an institutional culture of innovation 
(Dale et al., 2019; Burch, 2010), take necessary risks to carry out mandates (Mitchell, 2017; Morris and de 
Loë, 2016; Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013), and successfully implement and follow through with adaptation plans 
(Zubrycki et al., 2016; Simms and de Loë, 2010). Leadership can play an important role in empowering water 
practitioners to do their best work, especially in a fragmented policy context where there is not always clear 
authority for adaptation work (Oulahen et al., 2018). For example, in the City of Vancouver, leadership by 
elected officials and city administrators was identified as critical to advancing flood risk adaptation efforts 
(Oulahen et al., 2018). Burch (2010) also details the actions of a persuasive practitioner within the City’s 
Planning Department, who noticed that cultural conflicts between staff in planning and operations were 
slowing progress on adaptation, and intentionally hired staff who valued inter-departmental collaboration. 
These actions contributed to a paradigm shift within the City that has led to systems being highly responsive 
to dealing with a changing climate, given the vulnerabilities of Vancouver and its surrounding municipalities.
Water “champions” propose innovation, build coalitions to support it, and appeal to the interests and 
concerns of those in the decision-making network (Daniell et al., 2014). These individuals can work 
inside or outside of an organization (Moore et al., 2014), but are usually more successful if they have 
implementing capacity (Daniell et al., 2014). They are change agents, highly skilled at recognizing cultural and 
institutional characteristics that inhibit or promote changes, and strategies that can successfully influence 
implementation. They usually have strong informal and formal networks, are good communicators who 
are willing to take necessary risks, and are humble, respectful and open to new ideas. They may also be 
skillful at managing and brokering relationships between different water communities and other relevant 
sectors (Hurlbert, 2018; Straith et al., 2014). These skills are fostered by leadership training and negotiating 
opportunities.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 210 
4.4.4 Stakeholder participation and social learning
Social networks and social learning are linked with innovation in water institutions. Social learning means that 
people learn as part of a group from observing behaviours and their consequences. Social networks connect 
water practitioners to different types of knowledge and resources, facilitating understanding and trust (Moore 
et al., 2014; Gupta et al., 2010; Folke et al., 2005). Stakeholder engagement that incorporates social learning 
enables participants to explore adaptation options and confront the inevitable trade-offs associated with them.
Exploration of the future often involves exploratory models and participatory exercises to investigate a 
range of potential future conditions (Maier et al., 2016). Scenarios are consistent stories about the future 
for systems that are too complex to predict (Wiek et al., 2015). They cover the range of plausible futures 
(Lemieux et al., 2014), including rare but potentially devastating events such as the failure of critical 
infrastructure or energy systems. Scenario development often involves local stakeholders who share their 
(often competing) views of the future to facilitate robust decision making (see Case Story 4.4 and Case 
Story 4.5; White et al., 2015). A goal of these exercises is to develop strategies that perform reasonably well 
against a wide range of plausible climate change and societal forces, even when confronted by surprise 
circumstances (Lempert et al., 2003). They provide a solid basis for consensus building and political action 
among stakeholders with different views of the future, because they provide a reasonable outcome no 
matter whose view of the future proves to be correct. They can also identify “no” or “low regret” strategies 
that increase climate resilience and also promote good water management broadly, often at little additional 
cost. Examples of these types of strategies include the following: enhancing operator training and improving 
coordination (Casello and Towns, 2017); upgrading monitoring networks contributing to forecasting 
(Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment, 2011); and water conservation and demand management 
(Mguni, 2015; de Loë et al., 2001). The latter is identified as important in the municipal sector in Ontario and 
in the Alberta Water for Life Strategy, resulting in an improvement in water use efficiency and productivity in 
Alberta by 30% between 2005 and 2015 (Alberta Water Council, 2017). In addition, scenarios can help identify 
potentially maladaptive behaviours, such as increased consumption, that could be associated with major 
capital projects (de Loë et al., 2001).
Case Story 4.4: Addressing climate vulnerability and sustainable water 
management in the South Saskatchewan River Basin
Southern Alberta has recently experienced disastrous floods and droughts. Added pressures from a growing 
economy, an expanding population and changing climate have significantly challenged the management 
of water resources in the South Saskatchewan River Basin (SSRB), and will continue to do so. To address 
these challenges, the Alberta WaterSMART project worked with representatives from irrigation districts, 
municipalities and watershed organizations to develop a set of plausible future water supply and demand 
scenarios for the SSRB. The scenarios linked data from historic drought and flood years with future climate 
projections, and also considered potential future land use and societal changes, such as wetland restoration, 
a major forest disturbance in the headwaters, increased water demands and possible decreased flows from 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 211 
the United States of America, resulting from changing glaciers extents and precipitation patterns attributed to 
climate change.
Working groups were asked to develop a list of adaptation strategies to address the high- and low-flow 
conditions that could result from each scenario (Alberta WaterSMART, 2016). A suite of performance 
measures were developed to help participants evaluate the success of each strategy. Performance measures 
reflected a desired water outcome for the SSRB or its sub-basins, and included metrics such as the 
“percentage of days when instream fish needs were not met” or “maximum flow violations.” The performance 
of each adaptation strategy was assessed using a water resources model designed for the SSRB. Participants 
used results from model runs to sort adaptation strategies into different levels, from strategies that could 
improve current conditions to those that would make the basin more resilient to climatic changes in the 
future. Strategies considered most promising by the group of multiple stakeholders for the SSRB included 
(Alberta WaterSMART, 2016):
•	
developing shortage-sharing frameworks by sub-basin;
•	
restricting greenfield development in the floodplain;
•	
redesigning operating policies for upstream Bow River reservoirs; and
•	
building net storage flow in the Bow River sub-basin.
Case Story 4.5: Lake Superior and Lake Ontario outflow regulation: 
Addressing uncertainty in Great Lakes water levels
Water levels of the Great Lakes are driven primarily by natural factors, including changes in precipitation 
and temperature (see Case Story 4.1), but are also partially affected by regulation of outflows from Lake 
Superior and Lake Ontario through dams and related control structures on the Saint Mary’s River and dams at 
Cornwall-Massena on the St. Lawrence River. Outflows are managed using regulation plans―rules that guide 
how much water is released through the regulatory structures under widely varying hydrological and climatic 
(hydroclimate) conditions to meet the needs of various water-using interests throughout the basin. The 
International Joint Commission (IJC) conducted studies (International Upper Great Lakes Study Board, 2012; 
International Lake Ontario–St. Lawrence River Study Board, 2006) to evaluate alternative regulation scenarios 
to address emerging needs and to consider climate change, and also used scenario analysis to review the 
rules for regulating outflows in the context of climate variability and change, and to better balance the water 
needs of diverse interests in the region.
The IJC studies included detailed hydroclimatic analysis to inform assessment of the current state of water 
resources modelling in the region, the construction of a timeline of historical climate variability, and the 
downscaling of global climate models to understand the impact of climate change on future regional water 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 212 
levels. This analysis revealed considerable uncertainty around how water levels could change in the future, 
using different hydroclimatic scenarios to represent a wide range of plausible future conditions including:
•	
historical (assumed stationary) climate to anticipate the next 30‒100 years;
•	
a large, 50,000-year sequence of stochastically-generated water supplies to each of the Great Lakes 
to capture a full range of climate variability (based on historical water supply conditions); and
•	
a changing climate leading to decreased and/or increased water levels. 
At the same time, researchers worked with stakeholders to define water interests in the basin, such as 
hydroelectric generation, commercial navigation, shoreline properties, recreational boating, municipal and 
industrial water uses and ecosystems, and their potential vulnerabilities to fluctuations in water levels. 
Performance indicators and/or coping zones (i.e., the range of conditions that would be considered tolerable) 
were derived for each interest, and a relationship between these and water levels was determined. Public 
and expert feedback led the Study Boards to recommend that the new regulation plans should improve the 
health of the environment, minimize damage from water-related natural hazards, and increase or maintain the 
economic viability of shipping, hydropower, recreation/tourism and industry.
Study participants then tested different sets of regulation plans using a “shared vision model” (SVM), a 
user-friendly computer platform that allowed the collaborative development of models and operating plans 
to simulate impacts in the basin. Participants used the SVM to compare the performance of the current 
regulation plan to that of alternative plans under a range of hydroclimate scenarios, and drew upon the 
performance indicators and coping zones to explore trade-offs associated with alternative plans.
Through this process, the Study Boards in each study narrowed down alternative regulation plans to those 
that were more robust to changing conditions, continued to balance upstream and downstream impacts 
and benefits, and promoted more natural flows and ecosystem benefits under a range of hydroclimatic 
conditions. After considerable public and government consultation, the IJC implemented a new plan for 
regulating Lake Superior outflows (Plan 2012) at the beginning of 2015, and in January 2017, adopted Plan 
2014 for regulating Lake Ontario outflows. An adaptive management strategy was developed to complement 
these new regulation plans as a means to review and refine the chosen regulation plans over time if 
conditions in the system changed. Adaptive management compares observed outcomes through on-going 
monitoring to the simulated results to improve the simulations over time. The on-going performance of the 
regulation plans can be assessed under a range of water level conditions and the regulation plans can be 
formulated and evaluated as more is learned and as conditions change. The final reports from these studies 
and the adaptive management process are available from the IJC website (ijc.org).
4.4.5 Adaptive management and water experiments
Many water planners seek adaptation measures that are robust under a wide range of possible future climate 
conditions. While there is no standardized paradigm for quantifying robustness in the water sector (Whateley 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 213 
et al., 2016), the idea of robustness generally implies acceptable performance over a wide range of future 
scenarios (Lempert and Groves, 2010; Groves and Lempert, 2007; Lempert and Collins, 2007). Therefore, 
decision makers need the ability to both assess how well decisions meet expectations and to adapt those 
management decisions as more information is received and conditions change. Adaptive management 
accepts that decisions are made with imperfect information and under high degrees of uncertainty, and 
provides a means for reviewing the performance of a decision through on-going monitoring of outcomes 
and stakeholder preferences, updating the modelling and evaluation tools used in the original decision, and 
recommending improvements as necessary (International Upper Great Lakes Study Board, 2012) (see Box 
4.2). In adaptive management, adaptation actions and policies are designed to be flexible and are subject to 
adjustment in an iterative, social learning process (Lee, 1999).
Box 4.2: Adaptation vs. adaptive management
Adaptation actions are interventions taken to respond to new or different information obtained through 
monitoring and experience. Simply stated, adaptation is about taking action to change something if it is not 
working. In current practice, questions of how to measure vulnerability, adaptive capacity, and resilience 
for effective adaptive actions are a challenge for policy makers and scientists (Lesnikowski et al., 2017). 
Adaptation is complex across multiple sectors and disciplines, and there is no single, universal metric that 
fits the reality of adaptation (Ford and King, 2015). In an examination of 15 scientific studies around water 
resources adaptation strategies, Salerno (2017) found that a common weakness of adaptation strategies is 
identifying approaches to address uncertainty (Woodruff, 2016). Specifically, adaptation plans commonly 
fail to provide detailed implementation processes, raising concerns about whether adaptation actions will 
translate into reductions in vulnerability or maladaptation (Salerno, 2017).
Adaptive management is an approach to adaptation that embraces risk and uncertainty as a way of building 
understanding based on continuous monitoring, predictive modelling, evaluation and learning. Adaptive 
management provides a structured, iterative process of robust decision making in the face of uncertainty, 
with the aim of reducing uncertainty over time via system monitoring (Williams and Brown, 2014). Adaptive 
management recognizes that:
•	
no matter how much we know, there is always more to learn;
•	
conditions are always changing, sometimes in ways that cannot even be imagined, let alone 
predicted; and
•	
decisions are made based on the best, albeit imperfect, evidence available and may not always be 
effective.
The concept of adaptive management is to challenge decisions (such as adaptive actions) if outcomes are 
not as expected and to make necessary adjustments as more is learned and/or as conditions change. Simply 
put, adaptive management goes further than adaptation by following up on actions to ensure that they are 
working as intended and, if not, to make adjustments (see Figure 4.4). Adaptive management requires good 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 214 
planning, collaboration and quantitative predictive modelling. A successful adaptive management strategy 
aims to develop and apply multi-objective, flexible and sustainable solutions through collaborative efforts that 
include (International Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management Task Team, 2013):
•	
monitoring and modelling for improved understanding of:
	»
why and how conditions are changing;
	»
existing and potential risks and complexities of problems; and
	»
performance metrics for understanding the success of options;
•	
tools for developing and evaluating adaptive options;
•	
transparent, accessible information readily available to users;
•	
on-going assessment and evaluation of solutions maintained with feedback to decision-making 
processes; and
•	
stakeholders that are fully engaged with mechanisms to inform the decision-making process.
Figure 4.4: Diagram illustrating the adaptive management cycle. Source: Adapted from International Great 
Lakes–St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management Task Team, 2013.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 215 
Evidence suggests Canadian water management frameworks vary in their ability to respond to unanticipated 
events. Bizikova et al. (2013) examined water-related policies in British Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba 
and Nova Scotia to assess the elements representing adaptability, such as multi-stakeholder deliberation, 
automatic policy adjustment, and integrated and forward-looking analysis. They found that these policies do 
not always include explicit monitoring and review processes (Bizikova et al., 2013). In some cases, formal 
reviews were completely absent (Roy, 2013), whereas in other instances, reviews were spontaneous or only 
done once, not feeding back into formal policy reviews and adjustments (Bizikova and Vodicka, 2013). In 
about half of the policies examined, a formal review was required, but no public report of this review was 
available, and no information on subsequent policy adjustment was required (Bizikova et al., 2013). Ultimately, 
the team examined 27 policies from the water sector, as well as the agriculture and forestry sectors, and 
scored them using the ADAPTool method, which assesses the adaptability of policies or programs in relation 
to any defined stressor or external change, such as climate. Despite the wide range of policies making it 
difficult to compare across jurisdictions, the team found a wide range of adaptability in the policies present 
(see Figure 4.5). High-scoring policies (in the green zone) were generally not vulnerable themselves to climate 
change, played a role in building adaptive capacity of groups, and were designed to use multi-stakeholder 
processes and/or foresight methods such as scenario analysis (Bizikova et al., 2013).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 216 
Figure 4.5: An overview of the ADAPTool Scoring Results (from 1 to 10) for 27 policies examined in British 
Columbia, Saskatchewan, Manitoba and Nova Scotia. ADAPTool is structured as a series of Excel spreadsheets 
that take analysts through a standardized step-by-step process to assess the ability of existing policies or 
programs to support adaptation measures and the general adaptability of the policies or programs themselves. 
Source: Adapted from Bizikova et al., 2013.
Adaptive management requires long-term commitments, collaboration (Global Water Futures, 2020) and 
funding, and an effective linkage of science-based monitoring to decision-making processes (Murphy and 
Weiland, 2014). While effective adaptive management is difficult to achieve, examples of this are reported 
in natural resource management broadly (Williams and Brown, 2014) and in the management of water 
resources in Canada (Failing et al., 2013). The 2012 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement between the United 
States and Canada includes adaptive management as a guiding principle in order to systematically assess 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 217 
the effectiveness of actions and adjust future actions to achieve the ecological integrity and water goals for 
the basin (IJC, 2017). An even more structured adaptive management effort was initiated for the Great Lakes 
in 2015 by the IJC with the establishment of the Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management 
(GLAM) Committee to provide on-going review and evaluation of newly implemented regulation plans of 
outflows from Lake Superior and Lake Ontario (IJC, 2015) (see Case Story 4.5). This initiative provides a 
structured approach to adaptive management to respond to climate changes and links the evaluation of 
plan performance directly to the IJC as the decision makers (Clamen and MacFarlane, 2018; Great Lakes‒St. 
Lawrence River Adaptive Management Committee, 2018).
4.5 It is vital to engage the public and build 
awareness about adaptation opportunities
Successful adaptation requires public buy-in to the science of climate change and the need to implement 
adaptation policies. A majority of Canadians support policies to address water-related problems, but 
managing water resources ranks low on their list of salient problems after the economy, health care and 
cost of living. Extreme events, including floods, droughts and episodes of poor water quality, can often 
bring the need for better water management to the forefront.
Canadians are concerned about water and want governments to play a strong role in instituting practices that 
protect water resources and prepare for water-related hazards. Lack of issue salience, misperceptions about 
how water systems function, and financial and technical barriers can impede the buy-in for climate change 
adaptation. Water practitioners are fostering public support by emphasizing financial and health-related co-
benefits, addressing barriers to action, and taking advantage of highly publicized water-related events. The 
discourse around options for adaptation in the water sector is expanding to include a wider variety of policy 
tools to address water issues.
4.5.1 Introduction
Water in Canada is generally perceived to be of high quality, abundant (Renzetti and Dupont, 2017; Royal 
Bank of Canada, 2017) and our most important resource (Royal Bank of Canada, 2017). However, Canadians 
make large per capita water withdrawals compared to those in other countries—which include consumptive 
and non-consumptive uses (Conference Board of Canada, 2013)—and water policy issues are ranked among 
the lowest in public opinion surveys―regarded as much lower in importance compared to the economy, 
healthcare and the rising cost of living (see Figure 4.6; Royal Bank of Canada , 2017; Clancy, 2014). These 
perceptions ultimately influence policy development (Heinmiller, 2017; Yates et al., 2017; Clancy, 2014) and 
can challenge efforts to implement adaptation strategies (Dale et al., 2019).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 218 
Figure 4.6: The annual RBC Canadian Water Attitudes Study, which asks respondents to indicate their degree 
of concern related to a range of issues, found that Canadians are concerned about water issues and climate 
change, but to a lesser degree than issues such as the cost of living, availability of healthcare and poverty. 
Source: Adapted from Royal Bank of Canada, 2017.
Practitioners in the water sector are working to influence perceptions in favour of proactive adaptation in the 
water resources sector (Global Water Futures, 2020). While improved scientific understanding can highlight 
trends, vulnerabilities and potential solutions to technical water management issues, decision makers must 
satisfy multiple, and often conflicting, needs and objectives (Bakker and Cook, 2011), and require processes 
that are responsive to public attitudes. Political turnover and the short time scales available for planning 
exacerbate this challenge (Dale et al., 2019; Hurlbert and Diaz, 2013; Hamlet, 2011).
4.5.2 Perceptions of water and climate
Perceptions about policy issues are important because they influence judgments around the acceptability 
or appropriateness of proposed solutions (Stone, 2002). According to surveys, most Canadians believe that 
climate change is occurring (Mildenberger et al., 2016; Lachapelle et al., 2014), and that climate change will 
have a negative impact on Canada’s supply and quality of fresh water (Royal Bank of Canada, 2017). They 
expect more frequent and intense extreme storms, flooding of rivers and coastal areas, and lengthy droughts 
(Akerlof et al., 2010). Despite these concerns, Canadians’ level of preparedness for water-related extremes 
has remained low for a number of years. In a survey by Royal Bank of Canada (2017) of over 2,000 Canadians, 
only 35% reported that they are prepared to deal with floods and drought. In another survey, almost all of the 
2,300 Canadians surveyed believed that homeowners are primarily responsible for flood protection, but less 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 219 
than 30% pursue protective measures and only 6% know whether they live in a designated flood-risk area 
(Henstra et al., 2019b; Thistlethwaite et al., 2017).
Despite some skepticism, there is widespread support for climate policy and government action to protect 
water resources as an alternative to “doing nothing” (Comeau, 2017; Mildenberger et al., 2016). Canadians 
want governments to play a strong role in managing water resources and in preparing for natural hazards 
(see Figure 4.7; Henstra et al., 2019b; Royal Bank of Canada , 2017), to enforce stricter regulations, and to 
require commercial and industrial users to pay full water supply costs (Real Estate Foundation of British 
Columbia, 2018; Royal Bank of Canada, 2017). This support can diminish, however, due to issue fatigue and 
politicization of the climate change issue (Groulx et al., 2014; Pidgeon, 2012).
Figure 4.7: A 2016 national survey of Canadians living in “flood risk areas” (as defined by Government of 
Canada, 2013), developed by researchers at the University of Waterloo, evaluated perceptions about how the 
responsibility associated with protecting their property and paying for costs related to flood damage should be 
shared between different organizations. Source: Adapted from Thistlethwaite et al., 2017.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 220 
4.5.3 Building public support for adaptation
The inconveniences of maintenance and the “invisible” nature of water services are additional challenges to 
garnering public support for adaptation in the face of a changing climate (Canadian Water and Wastewater 
Association, 2015). Quite literally, most water-related water infrastructure is “out of sight, out of mind.” Most 
water managers and regulators view ageing infrastructure as the most prominent future risk to the Canadian 
water sector (Global Water Futures, 2020; Moncrieff-Gould et al., 2018), yet only one in five Canadians 
believe that major investments in water-related infrastructure are required (Royal Bank of Canada, 2017). 
Building public support through emphasizing health, economic and environmental benefits of investments 
in water systems may increase the likelihood that decision makers will set water systems as a priority for 
action (Canadian Water and Wastewater Association, 2015). This process can involve framing water-related 
climate information in positive terms paired with consistent and constructive solutions (Global Water Futures, 
2020; Canadian Water and Wastewater Association, 2015; Patino, 2010), mainstreaming climate solutions 
within other policy areas such as urban development (Dale et al., 2019) and engaging stakeholders early and 
substantively in adaptation processes (Lemieux et al., 2014).
Canadians want information about water-related risks to be relevant to the issues that they care about, 
and want to know what to do with that information (Jones-Bitton et al., 2016; Henrich et al., 2015; Groulx 
et al., 2014). A recent survey of 2,300 Canadian households found that 92% of respondents want publicly 
available flood risk maps with flood mitigation information, and want access to this information when they 
are considering home ownership (Thistlethwaite et al., 2017). The climate change dimension may not matter 
if the benefits of the adaptation actions align with important values held by the target audience and lead 
to co-benefits. For example, despite the benefits for climate resilience, improved water quality is the main 
motivator for farmers restoring wetlands in Nova Scotia (Sherren and Verstraten, 2013). Other studies have 
found that framing water management policies in terms of personal benefits, such as a lower cost of living, 
sustainable economic development, and lower incidence of disease, have more appeal to a wider range of 
people (Henrich et al., 2015; Groulx et al., 2014; Semenza et al., 2011; Akerlof et al., 2010). With the necessary 
information, individuals who feel personally at risk tend to be more prepared (Semenza et al., 2011).
Financial and time constraints are also issues that can prevent or slow adaptive behaviour (Groulx et al., 
2014; Semenza et al., 2011). Efforts to reduce these barriers and promote behavioural change through the 
formation and dissemination of social norms, self-perception and memory prompts have been effective 
across Canada (Lieske et al., 2014; Lo, 2013; McKenzie-Mohr, 2000). For example, after identifying financial 
constraints as a major barrier to the adoption of water conservation behaviours, the City of Barrie, Ontario, 
introduced a rebate program and an interest-free pay-back scheme for water-efficient appliances and their 
installation, ultimately deferring millions of dollars in water infrastructure spending (Reily, 2004).
Extreme water-related events, such as floods, droughts and water quality crises, provide a window of 
opportunity for political and policy action that can enhance long-term climate resilience (Dale et al., 2019; 
Oulahen et al., 2018). Many successful adaptations in the water sector have been driven by institutional 
responses to a public crisis (Clancy, 2014). This occurred after floods and freeze-thaw events that caused 
significant road damages initiated a major adaptation process in Prince George, British Columbia (Dale et al., 
2019), and when source water protection was strengthened after water contamination incidents in Walkerton, 
Ontario (in 2000) and North Battleford, Saskatchewan (in 2001) (Hurlbert et al., 2015; Bakker and Cook, 2011; 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 221 
de Loë and Plummer, 2010). Similarly, significant flooding in 2011 and 2014 to downstream communities 
in Manitoba brought renewed attention to the flood control benefits of wetland retention, whereas previous 
attempts focusing on biodiversity protection failed to motivate political action (Global Water Futures, 2020). 
As a result, the Sustainable Watersheds Act was passed into law in 2018, employing a combination of 
economic incentives and disincentives, and regulation to promote a “no net loss of wetlands” policy in the 
province (Stevenson, 2018).
Water practitioners across Canada employ a number of strategies to increase issue saliency around the 
water-related risks of climate change. They will be required to draw on these strategies and innovate even 
more as water systems become increasingly complex and uncertain, and the stakes to win over public 
perceptions become more critical.
4.5.4 Diversifying policy tools
Traditional approaches to water resource issues have been regulatory in nature (Simms and de Loë, 2010), 
but researchers and practitioners are increasingly recognizing that acting with conventional policy tools will 
not be enough to adapt to the growing complexity in water systems (Simms and de Loë, 2010; Hurlbert et 
al., 2010; Okanagan River Basin Board, 2010). Innovations and variation in policy design and implementation 
can reduce risks, increase the chances of reaching desired outcomes, and meet diverse stakeholder needs 
(Bizikova et al., 2018; Thistlethwaite and Henstra, 2017). Conversations around policy options and adaptation 
strategies are expanding at all levels (see Case Story 4.6), and there now exists a diverse mix of regulatory, 
expenditure, institutional and economic instruments in water policies across Canada (Bizikova et al., 2018).
Case Story 4.6: The changing policy discourse for solutions to water-
related hazards in the Canadian Prairies
Much of the population in the Prairie provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba obtains its water from 
the Nelson-Churchill River Basin, the third largest watershed in North America (see Figure 4.8; International 
Institute for Sustainable Development, 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 222 
Figure 4.8: The drainage basins of the Nelson and Churchill Rivers. Source: Manitoba Hydropower, n.d.
In this basin, numerous organizations advocate for diverse approaches to address current water 
management that will likely be exacerbated by climate change (Global Water Futures, 2020). A wide range 
of policy approaches is discussed (see Figure 4.9). In policy and planning documents authored by different 
organizations operating within the basin, infrastructure solutions are the most discussed approach to address 
floods and droughts across the drainage basin. While built infrastructure approaches are most frequently 
referenced, natural infrastructure approaches are also mentioned and sometimes preferred, such as in the 
case of improving water quality (see Table 4.1).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 223 
Figure 4.9: Percentage of dialogue in policy and planning documents across the Nelson‒Churchill basin related to 
four policy instruments for addressing water issues. See Table 4.1 for specific examples.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 224 
Table 4.1: Examples of policy instruments and options to address 
water-related hazards in the Nelson–Churchill River Basin
BUILT 
INFRASTRUCTURE
NATURAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE
COORDINATION AND 
PLANNING
REGULATORY AND 
ECONOMIC
•	
Dyke and floodway 
construction
•	
Installing tile 
drainage
•	
Upgrading 
spillways and 
dams to new 
design standards 
for extremes
•	
Retaining and 
restoring wetlands
•	
Increasing soil 
organic matter on 
agricultural lands
•	
Emergency 
response planning
•	
Cooperative 
agreements
•	
Coordinated 
drought and flood 
plans
•	
Mandated water 
rationing
•	
Legislated 
penalties for 
drainage
•	
Compensating 
flood victims
•	
Tax credits for 
riparian (land along 
the banks of rivers 
and streams) 
management
•	
Water pricing or 
surcharges
Source: Global Water Futures, 2020.
Improving coordination and organizational policies across the basin is widely discussed as a means to 
enhance capacity to respond effectively to water-related hazards. This involves proactive planning (e.g., 
coordinated strategies for drought, wetlands and drainage, and invasive species), increasing financial 
and human resource capacity (e.g., reliably funding water resource groups, providing technical support to 
communities, increasing funding opportunities), and developing operating rules and procedures to enhance 
resilience to cope with new extremes. An example of the latter is the five-year agreement between TransAlta 
and the Government of Alberta that allows Alberta Environment and Parks to modify the levels of TransAlta-
owned reservoirs on the Bow River for the purposes of enhancing flows during dry years and providing 
additional storage during wet periods (Government of Alberta, 2018).
There are differences in strategies and advocacy approaches across organizations with different roles in 
water governance (Global Water Futures, 2020). For example, environmental and non-profit groups tend to 
favour information provision and community engagement work, and prefer a regulatory-based approach to 
water management, whereas agricultural and industry organizations preferentially discuss market-based 
solutions to water management challenges, such as funding infrastructure upgrades to improve efficiencies, 
subsidizing best management practices and establishing insurance schemes.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 225 
4.5.5 Conclusion
Adapting to climate change in the water sector involves strengthening water planning and management 
capacities and mobilizing public support for investments, and institutional and behavioural change. Multi-
sector engagement and enhanced opportunities for social learning amongst scientists, water professionals, 
civil society organizations and the general public are essential to building a social infrastructure that 
promotes adaptive decision making in the water sector. Shared learning about the need for action and the 
consequences of inaction would increase public support for policy action.
4.6 Water system vulnerability can be reduced 
through quality data and resilient design 
Reducing vulnerabilities in water systems involves identifying weak spots under current and future climate 
conditions, and providing access to high quality and locally relevant data. While the quality and resolution 
of data for monitoring change in uncertain environmental systems is variable, resilient design practices are 
emerging.
Since there are limited resources to address the broad range of complex and widespread water challenges, it is 
important to identify areas and sectors that are particularly vulnerable to climate change and require specific 
management attention. To address vulnerabilities, practitioners require access to high quality and locally 
relevant data. While there are many information sources, at various scales, about water systems and future 
climate change impacts available across Canada, there is considerable variation in quality, and in temporal 
and spatial resolution of the available data. Infrastructure design and management is often based on historical 
information that no longer has the same relevance in a climate change context. Requirements around design, 
building and operations are changing to address these vulnerabilities. The Public Infrastructure Engineering 
Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Protocol (Engineers Canada, n.d.) and the use of natural infrastructure have 
emerged as key tools for addressing the climate change-related vulnerability of water-resource infrastructure in 
Canada.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 226 
4.6.1 Introduction
Climate and water-related vulnerability and risk assessments have been carried out extensively across the 
country at different scales and for different issues. For example, assessments have been conducted in 
the Atlantic region for coastal areas and water resources (e.g., AMEC Environment & Infrastructure, 2012; 
Cochran et al., 2012; Ferguson and Beebe, 2012; Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2012); in 
Quebec for water quality and water use (e.g., Jalliffier-Verne et al., 2017; Tremblay, 2016; Carrière et al., 
2010); in the Great Lakes Region for wetlands and aquatic ecosystems (e.g., Tu et al., 2017; Chu, 2015; 
Lemieux et al., 2014; Mortsch et al., 2006); in the Prairies for drought and flooding (e.g., Wittrock et al., 2018; 
KGS Group, 2016; Thomson Agri-Environmental, 2011a, b; Magzul and Rojas, 2006); in British Columbia for 
hydroelectricity and coastal flooding (e.g., Associated Engineering (B.C.) Ltd., 2018; Northwest Hydraulic 
Consultants Ltd., 2014; Jost and Weber, 2013); and in Northern Canada for thawing permafrost and 
vulnerable water supplies (e.g., BGC Engineering, 2011; Goulding, 2011; Nesbitt, 2010).
Syntheses of these assessments emphasize the diversity in methodologies and organizations (e.g., 
watershed organizations, academia, governments) involved (Perdeaux et al., 2018), as well as the technical 
challenges in identifying a range of climate change impacts and hazards on water resource systems 
(Nodelcorp Consulting, 2014). This is especially true for organizations with limited financial and technical 
capacity (Lemieux et al., 2014; Plummer et al., 2012).
4.6.2 Water information systems
Effective monitoring is a key element of successful adaptation (Hall et al., 2014). Water practitioners require 
access to high quality and locally relevant data because many fundamental water decisions are local in 
scale (Global Water Futures, 2020), and good information is necessary to assess vulnerabilities to climate 
change risks (Canadian Water Network, 2019). Unfortunately, high quality, systematic, regularized data 
collection is not the norm in many parts of Canada (Nodelcorp Consulting, 2014), and climate change impact 
data is not always available or linked into decision-making processes (Canadian Water Network, 2019). Key 
datasets for water practitioners are administered by a variety of federal departments, while provincial and 
territorial agencies provide information such as snow depth, stream flows and lake levels (see Table 4.2). 
Non-governmental organizations, such as B.C.’s Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, the Prairie Climate 
Centre, the Ontario Climate Consortium and Ouranos, provide additional resources such as climate change 
and hydrologic scenarios. However, capacity to provide this information is uneven across organizations and 
governments, and data varies significantly in its quality, and temporal and spatial resolution (Koshida et al., 
2015; Dunn and Bakker, 2011).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 227 
Table 4.2: A collection of national and regional water and climate 
change datasets, resources and tools
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
Canada
The National Hydro 
Network (NHN) 
Geobase Series provides 
geospatial data and 
geometric attributes of 
Canada’s inland surface 
waters.
Shapefiles
Pan-Canada
<https://open.canada.
ca/data/en/dataset/
a4b190fe-e090-4e6d-
881e-b87956c07977>
The Canadian Tides 
and Water Levels 
Data Archive contains 
historical observations 
from Canadian and 
global monitoring sites.
Datasets
Pan-Canada 
(observations for 
up to 50 years, 
dating back to 
1848)
<https://open.
canada.ca/data/en/
dataset/87b08750-
4180-4d31-9414-
a9470eba9b42>
The Meteorological 
Service of Canada 50 
North Atlantic Wave 
Hindcast provides hourly 
wind and wave time 
series data from climate 
hindcast models.
Datasets
Canadian East 
Coast for the 
period 1954‒2018
<https://open.canada.
ca/data/en/dataset/
f3f0312d-d28b-400c-
b14a-28f51ff7f08a>
Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada 
(AAFC)
The Drought Watch 
website provides 
information on drought 
conditions, soil moisture, 
and other climate 
variables. 
Datasets 
and online 
mapping tools
Pan-Canada
<https://www.agr.gc.ca/
eng/agriculture-and-the-
environment/drought-
watch/?id=
1461263317515>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 228 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada 
(AAFC)
(continued)
The AAFC Watershed 
project (2013) provides 
watershed related 
datasets for the Prairie 
provinces. Data includes 
drainage information, 
area of drainage, 
information on gauging 
stations, etc.
Datasets
Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, and 
some portions of 
British Columbia, 
Northwest 
Territories, 
Nunavut, and 
Ontario.
<https://open.canada.
ca/data/en/dataset/
c20d97e7-60d8-4df8-
8611-4d499a796493>
Canadian Center
for Climate Services 
(CCCS)
The CCCS provides 
access to a variety of 
climate datasets.
Datasets 
and online 
mapping tools
Pan-Canada
<https://www.canada.
ca/en/environment-
climate-change/
services/climate-
change/canadian-
centre-climate-services/
display-download.html>
Environment and 
Climate Change 
Canada
The Water Survey of 
Canada shows real 
time and historical 
hydrometric data 
collected from stations 
across Canada.
Datasets 
and online 
graphing tools
Pan-Canada
<https://wateroffice.
ec.gc.ca/index_e.html>
Fisheries and 
Oceans Canada
The Canadian Extreme 
Water Level Adaptation 
Tool supports the 
adaptation of coastal 
infrastructure to water-
related extremes.
Online 
application
Coastline of 
Canada
<http://www.bio.gc.ca/
science/data-donnees/
can-ewlat/index-en.
php>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 229 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Natural Resources 
Canada
Canada's Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Platform provides links 
to various resources 
to support adaptation 
planning.
Collaborative 
forum with 
resources 
available 
for decision 
makers
Pan-Canada
<https://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/climate-change/
impacts-adaptations/
adapting-our-changing-
climate/10027>
The Federal Flood 
Mapping Guidelines 
Series guide flood-
mapping activities 
across the country (part 
of Canada's Platform 
for Disaster Risk 
Reduction).
Documents
Pan-Canada
<https://www.
publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-
prvntn-mtgtn/ndmp/
fldpln-mppng-en.aspx>
Public Safety 
Canada
The Canadian Disaster 
Database provides 
information on Canadian 
and international 
disasters since 1900.
Datasets
Pan-Canada 
(1900‒present)
<https://www.
publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
rsrcs/cndn-dsstr-dtbs/
index-en.aspx>
Global Institute for 
Water Security
The Changing Cold 
Regions Network 
provides online access 
to water-related 
data and outputs 
from models and 
observatories.
Datasets
Pan-Canada
<http://www.ccrnetwork.
ca/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 230 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
The Gordon 
Foundation
DataStream is an 
open access online 
data platform for 
sharing data across 
diverse data collection 
programs―from 
community groups to 
academic organizations. 
Datastreams exist for 
the Mackenzie, Lake 
Winnipeg and Atlantic 
Canada watersheds.
Datasets
Mackenzie, Lake 
Winnipeg and 
Atlantic Canada 
watersheds
<https://
gordonfoundation.ca/
initiatives/datastream/> 
Government
of Yukon
The Water Data 
Catalogue is an 
interactive map 
information on near 
real-time and historical 
water-related variables.
Interactive 
map with 
accessible 
data sources
Yukon
<http://yukon.maps.
arcgis.com/apps/
webappviewer/index.
html?id=
2365a4c0b8744
f34be7f1451
a38493d2>
Government of 
Northwest 
Territories
The NWT Discovery 
Portal allows users 
to browse, share and 
link a wide range of 
information, including 
water-related variables. 
Variable
Northwest 
Territories
<http://nwtdiscovery
portal.enr.gov.nt.ca/
geoportal/catalog/
main/home.page>
The Inventory of 
Landscape Change 
platform is an interactive 
map showing a variety 
of water variables.
Spatial data
Northwest 
Territories
<https://www.
enr.gov.nt.ca/en/
services/cumulative-
impact-monitoring-
program-nwt-cimp/
inventory-landscape-
change-webviewer>
Government of 
Nunavut
The Nunavut Water 
Board provides data 
on water licences and 
projects across the 
territory.
Interactive 
map and data
Nunavut
<https://www.nwb-oen.
ca/nwb-license-map>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 231 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
British Columbia
The BC Water Resources 
Atlas displays various 
detailed water-related 
data.
Dataset 
and online 
mapping tool
British Columbia
<http://maps.gov.bc.ca/
ess/hm/wrbc/>
Change in Timing and 
Volume of River Flow 
in BC is a long-term 
hydrological dataset 
from 1912 to 2012.
Datasets, 
graphs and 
associated R 
code
British Columbia
<http://www.env.gov.
bc.ca/soe/indicators/
climate-change/rivers.
html>
The GeoWeb Water 
Portal displays historical 
and current water and 
climate data for stations 
across the province.
Interactive 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
Northern British 
Columbia
<http://waterportal.
geoweb.bcogc.
ca/#12/54.3891/-
126.7240>
BC Water Tool displays 
watershed reporting, 
streamflow data, and 
groundwater and 
surface water quality 
data.
Interactive 
online 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
Southern and 
coastal British 
Columbia
<http://kwt.bcwatertool.
ca/streamflow>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 232 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
British Columbia
(continued)
The Provincial 
Groundwater 
Observation Well 
Network displays data 
from 190 provincial 
monitoring stations.
Interactive 
online 
map and 
downloadable 
dataset
British Columbia
<https://www2.gov.
bc.ca/gov/content/
environment/air-
land-water/water/
groundwater-wells-
aquifers/groundwater-
observation-well-
network>
Real-time Water Data for 
snow, groundwater, and 
hydrometric stations 
displayed on interactive 
map.
Interactive 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
British Columbia
<https://www2.gov.
bc.ca/gov/content/
environment/air-
land-water/water/
water-science-data/
water-data-tools/
real-time-water-data-
reporting>
Change in Sea Level 
in BC (1910‒2014) 
displays summary 
trends of sea level 
observations from four 
long-term monitoring 
stations.
Dataset
British Columbia
<https://www.env.
gov.bc.ca/soe/
indicators/climate-
change/sea-level.
html#:~:text=Average%
20sea%20level%20has
%20risen,centimetres%
20per%20century%20
at%20Vancouver>
Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium
Station Hydrologic 
Model Output provides 
simulated streamflow 
data for locations 
throughout BC.
Interactive 
map with 
downloadable 
datasets
British Columbia
<https://www.
pacificclimate.org/
data/station-hydrologic-
model-output>
Gridded Hydrologic 
Model Output provides 
gridded hydrologic 
projections for four 
watersheds in the 
province.
Interactive 
map with 
downloadable 
datasets
British Columbia 
(Four watersheds)
<https://www.
pacificclimate.org/data/
gridded-hydrologic-
model-output>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 233 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium
(continued)
PCIC’s Climate 
Explorer visualizes 
future projections of 
climate conditions in 
the Pacific and Yukon 
regions based on GCM 
CMIP5 10-km-resolution 
downscaled data with a 
daily time resolution.
Interactive 
map, graphs, 
downloadable 
datasets
Pacific and Yukon 
regions (1961–
2099)
<https://pacificclimate.
org/analysis-tools/pcic-
climate-explorer>
Fraser Basin
Council
The Retooling for 
Climate Change 
website supports 
local governments in 
preparing for climate 
change adaptation.
Guidebooks, 
synthesis 
reports, 
and other 
informational 
material
British Columbia
<https://www.retooling.
ca/>
University of British 
Columbia
Future Delta 2.0 is a 
serious videogame 
enabling real-time 
exploration of local 
climate change 
scenarios in local 
settings.
Educational 
videogame
British Columbia
<https://futuredelta2.
ca/>
Government of 
Alberta
Surface Water Quality 
Data users can view 
and download water 
quality variables in lakes 
and rivers across the 
province.
Datasets and 
interactive 
map
Alberta
<https://www.alberta.
ca/surface-water-
quality-data.aspx>
The Alberta River 
Basins Application is an 
interactive map showing 
a variety of near real-
time water-related data.
Interactive 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
Alberta
<https://rivers.alberta.
ca/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 234 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
Alberta
(continue)
The Alberta Water 
Licence Viewer is 
an interactive web 
application that allows 
users to search for 
existing water licences.
Interactive 
map
Alberta
<http://waterlicences.
alberta.ca/>
Saskatchewan 
Water Security 
Agency
The Lakes and Rivers 
website section provides 
near real-time stream 
flow, water levels and 
ten-day forecasts.
Hydrographs 
and 
streamflow 
data
Saskatchewan
<https://www.wsask.ca/
Lakes-and-Rivers/>
The Water Wells 
GIS Web application 
provides information 
on Water Wells in 
Saskatchewan, including 
information on local 
lithology, completion 
date, and well depth.
Interactive 
map with 
downloadable 
datasets
Saskatchewan
<https://gis.wsask.ca/
Html5Viewer/index.
html?viewer=
WaterWells.
WellsViewer/>
Government of 
Manitoba
The Manitoba Drought 
Monitor website 
provides hydrologic 
forecasts, reports, flood 
alerts and drought 
information.
Interactive 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
Manitoba
<https://www.gov.
mb.ca/water/drought_
condition/>
The Hydrologic Forecast 
Centre provides timely 
hydrologic forecasts, 
maps and information 
for lakes and rivers.
Data and 
interactive 
map
Manitoba
<https://gov.mb.ca/mit/
floodinfo/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 235 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
Ontario
Far North Major River 
Systems Maps provide 
stream and climate 
monitoring information.
Interactive 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
Ontario
<https://geohub.lio.gov.
on.ca/datasets/major-
river-systems-in-the-far-
north>
Provincial (Stream) 
Water Quality Monitoring 
Network online 
map provides water 
chemistry data from 
sampling sites.
Interactive 
map and 
downloadable 
datasets
Ontario
<https://www.ontario.
ca/environment-and-
energy/map-provincial-
stream-water-quality-
monitoring-network>
Baseline Hydrology 
Statistics provide data 
on streamflow regimes 
for Southwestern 
Hudson Bay and 
Nelson River watershed 
systems. Data includes 
frequency, timing, 
duration and discharge 
at Water Survey Canada 
gauge locations.
Datasets
Ontario, 
Southwestern 
Hudson Bay and 
Nelson River 
Watershed
<https://www.ontario.
ca/data/baseline-
hydrology-statistics>
The Intensity-Duration-
Frequency (IDF) Curve 
Lookup is a web-based 
application for retrieving 
rainfall IDF curves.
Datasets 
and online 
graphing
Ontario
<http://www.mto.gov.
on.ca/IDF_Curves/
terms.shtml>
Ontario Climate 
Consortium (OCC)
The OCC website 
provides high-quality 
and regionally specific 
climate information for 
decision makers.
Reports 
and other 
publications
Ontario
<https://
climateconnections.ca/
programs/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 236 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
International 
Institute for 
Sustainable 
Development (IISD)
IISD Experimental 
Lakes Area provides 
long-term ecosystem 
and atmospheric 
datasets―available by 
request. The metadata 
includes hydrology, 
physical limnology, 
zooplankton, fish, algae 
ecology, chemistry and 
meteorology research 
data.  
Metadata
Northwestern 
Ontario (58 small 
lakes and their 
watersheds) 
(1968‒present)
<https://www.iisd.org/
ela/science-data/our-
data/metadata/>
Government of 
Quebec
Ministère de 
l'Environnement et 
de la Lutte contre 
les changements 
climatiques provides 
hydrological and 
hydroclimatological 
forecasts, and historical 
data.
Datasets
Quebec
<https://www.cehq.
gouv.qc.ca/prevision/
index.asp>
The Hydroclimatic Atlas 
of Southern Quebec 
describes the current 
and future water regime 
of southern Quebec.
Interactive 
map and 
datasets
Quebec
<https://www.cehq.
gouv.qc.ca/hydrometrie/
index.htm>
Government of 
New Brunswick
The River Watch and 
Flood Forecast tool 
provides 5-day flood 
forecasts and historical 
water level information.
Datasets
New Brunswick
<https://www2.gnb.
ca/content/gnb/en/
news/public_alerts/
river_watch.html>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 237 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
New Brunswick
(continued)
Coastal Erosion Data 
displays trends of 
coastal erosion and 
shoreline displacement 
based on specific 
measurement sites.
Datasets
New Brunswick
<http://www.snb.ca/
geonb1/e/apps/apps-E.
asp>
Government of 
Nova Scotia
The Flood Event 
Database contains 
historical records of 
flood events in Nova 
Scotia since 1992.
Interactive 
map
Nova Scotia 
(1992‒Feb. 2015)
<https://mathstat.dal.
ca/~ameliay/flood/>
The DNR Coastal Flood 
Risk Map provides static 
coastal flood risk maps, 
and emergency coastal 
flooding decision-
support systems for 
different regions of the 
province.
Interactive 
map
Nova Scotia
<https://agrgims.
cogs.nscc.ca/
CoastalFlooding/lidar-
mapping>
The Potential Impact of 
Drought to Private Wells 
gridded interactive map 
shows potential water 
shortages and drought 
risk.
Interactive 
map
Nova Scotia
<https://fletcher.
novascotia.ca/DNR
Viewer/?viewer
=DroughtIndex>
Nova Scotia 
Community College
The Applied Geomatics 
Research Group Coastal 
Storm Surge Interactive 
Map is a Decision 
Support System for 
flood risk from storm 
surges and sea-level 
rise.
Interactive 
map and data
Nova Scotia
<http://agrgims.
cogs.nscc.ca/
CoastalFlooding/Map/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 238 
ORGANIZATION
RESOURCE 
DESCRIPTION
DATA TYPE
SCALE
LINK
Government of 
Prince Edward
Island
The Surface Water 
Quality Database 
provides information 
about sampling 
locations, downloadable 
data and visualizations.
Datasets and 
visualization 
tools
Prince Edward 
Island
<https://www.prince
edwardisland.ca/en/
service/view-surface-
water-quality>
Government of 
Newfoundland and 
Labrador
The interactive 
Geoscience Atlas allows 
users to select and 
view layers that include 
coastal monitoring 
variables.
Datasets and 
mapping tools
Newfoundland and 
Labrador
<https://gis.geosurv.gov.
nl.ca/>
Atlantic Climate 
Adaptation 
Solutions 
Association
The Coastal Community 
Adaptation Tool 
supports decision 
making around coastal 
flooding and erosion.
Reports and 
case studies
Atlantic Canada
<https://
atlanticadaptation.ca/
en/content/guidance-
coastal-flooding-and-
erosion-adaptation>
U.S. National Snow 
and Ice Data Center
The Ice Climatology 
dataset contains long-
term information on ice 
conditions over specific 
geographic regions.
Datasets
Arctic/Antarctic
<https://nsidc.org/data/
sipn/data-sets.html>
This list is not exhaustive and URLs may change over time.

To help address this issue and enhance collaboration around information sharing at the national level, the 
Canadian Centre for Climate Services (CCCS) was established by Environment and Climate Change Canada 
in 2018. The goal of the CCCS is to provide authoritative, relevant and timely climate change information 
and assistance interpreting this information. The Centre indirectly plays an important role in centralizing 
resources related to climate change and water resources spread across many organizations. It complements 
work undertaken by others, such as Canada’s Regional Adaptation Collaboratives (RACs), which produced a 
variety of vulnerability assessments, guidebooks and technical studies, and significantly increased awareness 
of climate-related issues, resulting in a number of outputs to address the water-related risks of climate 
change (Eyzaguirre, 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 239 
Despite these efforts, there are key gaps in Canadian water information systems, and these present 
challenges to adaptation in the water sector, including:
•	
Fewer weather and hydrometric monitoring stations in northern regions and watersheds (Koshida 
et al., 2015);
•	
Limited data availability for groundwater, water quality, evapotranspiration, return flows, glaciers, 
future trends and actual water use (Bakker and Cook, 2011; Corkal et al., 2011; Sandford et 
al., 2011; National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy, 2010; Stratton, 2005; 
Langsdale et al., 2004), ecological health (World Wildlife Fund, 2017), and water-related 
infrastructure (Canadian Council of Professional Engineers, 2008);
•	
Uneven regional research on hydrological trends. Current research is focused on northern regions, 
British Columbia and the Prairie region, with fewer studies in Eastern Canada. Drought analysis 
and climatological trend research is primarily focused on the Prairie region (Mortsch et al., 2015);
•	
Limited understanding of spatial and temporal variability in climate change impacts on water 
resources (Shrestha, et al., 2012);
•	
Uncertainty associated with hydrologic modelling tools, data inputs and methodologies for 
generating future projections (Milner et al., 2018; Cohen et al., 2015; Brown and Wilby, 2012; 
Poulin et al., 2011);
•	
Little standardization, centralization and consistency in data collection, indicators and 
methodologies for risk assessments (Moody and Brown, 2012) and water availability studies 
(Koshida et al., 2015; Dunn and Bakker, 2011); and
•	
Stakeholder uncertainty about what data exists, how it can be accessed and integrated into 
planning, and who is responsible for collecting and assembling data (Canadian Water Network, 
2019; Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, 2011; Telfer and Droitsch, 
2011; Diaz et al., 2009).
These limitations result in uneven information system capacity to build resilient and adaptive institutions and 
infrastructure.
4.6.3 Water-related infrastructure
Infrastructure provides critical services for Canadians. For example, dams provide flood control, water supply, 
and hydroelectric production; wastewater infrastructure removes harmful nutrients and toxins from effluent 
to meet health and environmental standards; and pumping stations deliver water to industries, communities 
and households. There is also a growing understanding that natural infrastructure, such as wetlands, forests 
and soils, provides outcomes similar to built infrastructure at a lower cost and more efficiently (Moudrak et. 
al, 2018), largely resulting from reduced maintenance and life-cycle management costs.
Water-related climate change impacts constitute some of the main hazards to all infrastructure in Canada 
(Public Safety Canada, 2018) and can manifest as physical damage, service disruptions, and increased 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 240 
maintenance and operational costs (Boyle et al., 2013). Ageing infrastructure is particularly vulnerable to 
climate change impacts (Public Safety Canada, 2018).
Three assessments provide a general overview of water-related climate change hazards, infrastructure 
vulnerabilities and adaptive actions across Canada (Andrey et al., 2014; Boyle et al., 2013; Canadian Council 
of Professional Engineers, 2008). While extensive vulnerability assessments have been undertaken at the 
local and regional levels, there is much less information available at the provincial and national scales (Boyle 
et al., 2013). Insufficient information is the main factor limiting a systematic pan-Canadian assessment of 
water infrastructure (Andrey et al., 2014); however, key hazards and risks to water infrastructure are identified 
in the assessments listed above and are summarized in Figure 4.10.
A key tool for assessing the vulnerability of water resource infrastructure in Canada is the Public 
Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Protocol (see Box 4.3).
Figure 4.10: Key climate change hazards and risks to water infrastructure.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 241 
Box 4.3: Assessing infrastructure vulnerability
The Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Protocol is a five-step procedure 
to systematically assess engineering vulnerability and risk from current and future climate impacts; this 
procedure can be applied to any type of infrastructure. The five steps include 1) project definition, 2) data 
gathering, 3) vulnerability assessment (see Figure 4.11), 4) vulnerability indicator analysis, and 
5) recommendations for building in resilience.
Figure 4.11: Flow chart illustrating step 3 of the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee 
(PIEVC) protocol. Step 3 includes a vulnerability assessment to identify the relationships between climate change 
and impacts to infrastructure. Source: Adapted from Félio, 2017.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 242 
The PIEVC protocol has been applied in dozens of local water infrastructure assessments, leading to a wide 
range of conclusions and recommendations. For example, the City of Calgary concluded that its water supply 
infrastructure is generally resilient to climate change impacts (Associated Engineering, 2011), while the City 
of Nelson found that storm water infrastructure required additional investment to alleviate flooding concerns 
(see Case Story 4.7; Paré, 2014). In general, case study findings point to best practices for resilient water 
infrastructure design and operation, including:
•	
good maintenance and management; older and/or poorly maintained and managed infrastructure 
is more at risk to climate impacts;
•	
building redundancies into water systems (e.g., multiple intake points and delivery mechanisms);
•	
for new infrastructure, considering climate change impacts during project design to avoid difficult 
and costly retrofits or facility upgrades once built; and
•	
ensuring infrastructure-related codes, standards and related instruments (CSRI) reflect reliable 
and up-to-date information and/or factor in climate change projections.
These assessments also call attention to three major vulnerabilities in existing water infrastructure systems. 
Firstly, these systems usually assume that conditions of the past will apply in the future, with design and 
operating rules based on empirical records from the past rather than anticipated future conditions (Sauchyn 
et al., 2016; Mguni, 2015; Boyle et al., 2013; Hamlet, 2011; de Loë and Plummer, 2010; Minville et al., 2010). As 
it is not always clear what climate information was used to develop codes, standards or related instruments, 
developing future standards is not always as simple as updating past climate data (Andrey et al., 2014). 
Secondly, there is a tendency to not account for low-probability climate events that have highly adverse 
impacts (Sauchyn et al., 2016). Case studies highlight the importance of robust emergency planning and 
preparedness, as well as back-up power and communications systems, to support infrastructure design 
and maintenance (Félio, 2015; Nodelcorp Consulting, 2014). Thirdly, there are significant costs associated 
with infrastructure maintenance, redundancies, upgrades and increasingly stringent regulations (de Loë and 
Plummer, 2010). The most recent Canadian Infrastructure Report Cards (2019, 2016) indicate that while the 
majority of potable water, wastewater and storm water systems are rated “good,” reinvestment rates in these 
systems remain below the rates required to maintain or improve them (Canadian Infrastructure Report Card, 
2019, 2016).
Requirements around design, building and operations are changing to address these vulnerabilities. For 
example, Infrastructure Canada introduced a “climate lens” assessment requirement for several of its funding 
initiatives in 2018. The assessment requires proponents to consider risk management approaches to adapt 
to climate change-related impacts during the lifecycle of the proposed infrastructure and potential upstream 
and downstream impacts (e.g., reduction of downstream flooding due to engineered wetland construction) 
(Infrastructure Canada, 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 243 
Case Story 4.7: Climate change impacts on water and wastewater 
infrastructure at Akwesasne
In 2015, Engineers Canada initiated discussions with the Ontario First Nations Technical Services Corporation 
about the impacts of climate change on infrastructure in Indigenous communities. The intent was to 
incorporate climate considerations into First Nations asset management planning.
Engineers Canada’s PIEVC Protocol was considered the best approach to assess climate risks for 
infrastructure, and work progressed in the Mohawk territory of Akwesasne. Akwesasne is a community 
of approximately 12,300 people distributed across three districts: Kawehno:ke (Cornwall Island, Ontario), 
Kana:takon (Saint Regis, Quebec) and Tsi:Snaihne (Snye, Quebec). The Akwesasne territory spans portions 
of Ontario, Quebec and New York, and is governed by the Mohawk Council of Akwesasne and the Saint Regis 
Mohawk Tribe.
The first phase of the study (Félio, 2017) employed the PIEVC protocol to evaluate the vulnerability to climate 
change impacts in potable water and wastewater collection and treatment systems for Cornwall Island, Saint 
Regis and Snye. Risks were ranked based on occurrence probability and severity, but included special cases 
such as low probability‒high impact events. The team analyzed climate‒infrastructure interactions that 
would impact infrastructure design, functionality, serviceability and community impacts, such as social and 
cultural effects and emergency response.
The risks assessed differed between the locations and systems evaluated, but largely included water-related 
climate change impacts such as ice storms, hail, snowfall and rain events, as well as tornadoes and strong 
winds. Of these, the hazard‒infrastructure interactions considered to pose “high” and “extreme” risks are 
projected to increase in the future (by the 2050s).
The study found that the water and wastewater infrastructure of Akwesasne appears to be in good condition 
to withstand some increases in frequency and intensity of the climate events predicted, with the caveat 
that deteriorating infrastructure will present a greater risk (Félio, 2017). Recommended adaptive and risk 
mitigation measures include maintaining high levels of operations staff, competencies and infrastructure 
conditions; reviewing land-use policies to avoid building in high-risk areas of the community; and emergency 
planning, such as implementing a weather alert system with public outreach (Félio, 2017).
The second phase of this study led to the development of a PIEVC Protocol tailored to First Nations 
communities. This version of the protocol provides guidance on how to integrate traditional ecological 
knowledge (TEK); it is adapted to unique circumstances that impact Indigenous communities (e.g., smaller 
communities, remote locations, etc.) (Engineers Canada, 2018).
There is also greater awareness of the potential of nature-based solutions or natural infrastructure to 
reduce the water-related impacts of climate change (Stanley et al., 2019; Moudrak et al., 2018). Natural 
infrastructure is defined as “a strategically planned and managed network of natural lands, such as forests 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 244 
and wetlands, working landscapes, and other open spaces that conserves or enhances ecosystem values 
and functions, and that provides associated benefits to human populations” (Benedict and McMahon, 2006). 
This infrastructure can be fully natural (e.g., conserved natural wetland) or engineered (e.g., restored wetland 
with an engineered outlet), and can complement existing built infrastructure (Moudrak et al., 2018). In water 
resource management, natural infrastructure tends to be more flexible than built infrastructure and provides 
important co-benefits, such as carbon sequestration and improved water quality and ecosystem health (see 
Ecosystem Services chapter; Goldstein et al., 2019; Stanley et al., 2019; Moudrak et al., 2018). Widespread 
implementation of natural infrastructure solutions has been hindered by a lack of knowledge and expertise, 
and policy and regulatory processes that favour built infrastructure (ICF, 2018). However, a number of recent 
examples across Canada have illustrated natural infrastructure success stories for reducing the water-related 
impacts of climate change (see Box 4.4).
Box 4.4: Nature-based options for adaptation
Floodplain preservation, wetland restoration, flood setbacks, two-stage channels (for high and low flows), 
relief channels (for high flows) and adding in-stream structures and bank vegetation are all nature-based 
strategies that reduce the risks from riverine flooding (ICF, 2018). These solutions are effective methods 
of enhancing the capacity of water systems to absorb the impacts of excess water. For example, a study 
demonstrated that naturally occurring wetlands in Ontario reduced flood damage costs to buildings by 
$3.5 million at a rural site and by $51.1 million at an urban site, while another study found a restored and 
engineered wetland in Manitoba provided flood reduction, water quality and other benefits valued at $3.7 
million (Moudrak et al., 2018). In urban centres, runoff from rainfall can contribute to urban flooding and 
increase contaminant loads to receiving waters. Nature-based adaptation options such as green roofs, 
bioswales (sloped, vegetated surfaces), bioretention ponds, rain gardens, urban trees and vegetative swales 
are effectively reducing the risks from storm water runoff in many sites across Canada (see Cities and Towns 
chapter; ICF, 2018). For example, Toronto’s Green Roof Program contributes to an estimated reduction of just 
over 12,000 m³ (435,000 ft³) of storm water annually, and enabled the creation of over 100 jobs related to 
the design, manufacturing, installation and maintenance of the infrastructure (ICF, 2018). Similarly, naturally 
occurring ponds in Gibsons, B.C., provide approximately $4 million of storm water storage services annually 
(Moudrak et al., 2018).
The vulnerability assessment process has helped water resource managers across Canada envision how 
climate change interacts with current systems to exacerbate existing risks or produce new ones. This 
process, in turn, is helping to identify adaptation actions, and ultimately guide planning and resource 
allocation in the face of uncertainty.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 245 
4.7 Moving forward 
4.7.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs 
This chapter highlights some key knowledge and information exchange gaps that present challenges for 
adaptive water resources management efforts in Canada. These include:
•	
Access to data: While there is a plethora of water and climate information and research actively 
produced at many scales and locations across Canada, there is considerable variation between 
this data, with little centralization or standardization (Dunn and Bakker, 2011). This contributes 
to uncertainty around what data exists, and how it can be accessed and interpreted or applied 
(Telfer and Droitsch, 2011; Diaz et al., 2009).
•	
Guidance for decision making: There is a critical need for translating scientific and technical 
knowledge into practical guidance for decision makers, managers, practitioners and stakeholders. 
This includes guidance for considering climate change in engineering design, codes and 
standards for built and natural infrastructure, and in policy and institutional mandates (IJC, 2018; 
de Loë, 2017; Andrey et al., 2014; Nodelcorp Consulting, 2014; Canadian Council of Professional 
Engineers, 2008).
•	
Engagement for shared understanding: Stakeholder engagement is critical to advancing 
adaptation in the Canadian water sector. The development of strategies to build consensus or 
compromise around solutions between the conflicting needs and objectives of water stakeholder 
groups is an emerging field of practice and study in the Canadian water sector. There is a need for 
practical and effective methods to assist decision makers in navigating stakeholder interactions, 
negotiating conflicts, accounting for changing social dynamics, and reconciling trade-offs 
between competing water uses (Global Water Futures, 2020; Clark et al., 2016; Hurlbert and Diaz, 
2013; Hamlet, 2011; Ivey et al., 2004).
•	
Knowledge mobilization between knowledge producers and users: Effective knowledge 
mobilization is required to bridge the gap between knowledge generated by the research 
community and water organizations, and knowledge held by water practitioners and stakeholders 
across Canada. Knowledge mobilization is a reciprocal exchange and uptake of knowledge 
between organizations and individuals dedicated to making research useful to society (Research 
Impact Canada, 2018). Social factors play a significant role in the uptake of new knowledge, and 
it is important to develop strong, trusting, meaningful relationships between researchers and 
knowledge user communities (Crona and Parker, 2011).
Addressing the following additional research needs and knowledge gaps would help to better understand the 
effectiveness of adaptation efforts and advance adaptive management processes:
•	
Monitoring and data collection: There is limited monitoring capacity, particularly in northern 
regions, and a need for additional observational data for groundwater, water quality, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 246 
evapotranspiration, return flows, glaciers and actual water use (Koshida et al., 2015; Bakker and 
Cook, 2011; Corkal et al., 2011; Sandford et al., 2011; National Round Table on the Environment 
and the Economy, 2010; Stratton, 2005; Langsdale et al., 2004).
•	
Modelling, forecasting and prediction: Detailed model inter-comparison studies would provide 
insights about shortcomings in specific models and multi-model analyses (Milner et al., 2018; 
Cohen et al., 2015; Brown and Wilby, 2012; Poulin et al., 2011). Such studies would allow world-
class hydrology and water quality prediction models to be deployed nationally for short-term 
forecasting and long-term prediction of changes to water availability and quality. Practical 
methods to clarify, reduce or prioritize key areas of model uncertainty need to be developed with 
the practitioner community and effectively mobilized in the Canadian water sector (Clark et al., 
2016; Razavi and Gupta, 2016; Brown and Wilby, 2012). 
•	
Understanding of institutional barriers: Institutional barriers to adaptation are under-studied, and 
not always comprehensively understood, despite their recognition as a real issue by Canadian 
water practitioners (Global Water Futures, 2020; Straith et al., 2014). There is an on-going need 
to look beyond the science and technology of climate change to drive governance change 
that will enhance the climate resilience of Canadian water systems (Gober, 2013; de Loë and 
Plummer, 2010). While the importance to adaptive governance is broadly recognized, indicators of 
institutional resilience are rarely reflected in vulnerability tools, and there is a limited understanding 
of how to adequately capture and measure these concepts (Plummer et al., 2012).
•	
Documentation of successes and failures: Evaluation of adaptive management processes is 
critical; however, it often lacks rigorous documentation in academic literature. Evaluation is 
necessary at local, regional and national scales, including monitoring of short-term and longer-
term outcomes from adaptation measures. Identifying and sharing failures, while often avoided, is 
sometimes more useful for informing adaptation efforts and social learning.
4.8 Conclusion 
Water is central to economic growth, environmental health and social stability in Canada. This chapter has 
shown that water systems are in the throes of rapid transformation as a result of climate change and human 
action. Global climate change has already affected Canada’s cold-dominated water cycle, melting ice and 
snow, altering the precipitation phase, and changing the nature and timing of water-related natural hazards. 
Future changes are uncertain, but include the following: risks of reduced water availability and more frequent 
drought, particularly in the southern Prairies and interior of British Columbia; extreme rainfall contributing to 
floods; and additional occurrences of harmful algae blooms.
There is much to be done to prepare Canada for an uncertain water future. Uncertainty is not an invitation 
to inaction; it does, however, change the way in which we must prepare. Canadian water institutions have 
historically been organized to deal with predictable future conditions where we can extrapolate a future based 
on the past. Climatic uncertainty has changed that. Water organizations are beginning to embrace exploratory 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 247 
modelling, scenario exercises and adaptive management as a way of planning under uncertainty and of 
adjusting plans to meet changing circumstances.
Responsibility for adaptation in the water resources sector is also spread across a complex array of 
governments and organizations involved in water stewardship activities. Effective coordination between these 
groups plays an important role in strengthening adaptation in the water resources sector, and is exemplified 
by transboundary water organizations in Canada. Case studies also emphasize that adaptation is a local, 
place-based process. While access to technical skills, resources and contextual, place-based knowledge 
are assets to adaptation, capacity challenges are often concentrated in rural, northern and Indigenous 
communities. These communities are often the most vulnerable to the water-related risks of climate change, 
and bear a disproportionate burden of the costs of adaptation.
Canadians experience climate change impacts in their own communities, and climate-related impacts vary 
significantly across Canada. Water practitioners benefit from access to high quality, locally relevant climate 
data to reduce vulnerabilities in systems and infrastructure, and Canadians are more likely to support 
adaptation efforts when they understand co-benefits and are armed with information to act decisively. One-
size-fits-all national adaptation strategies are unlikely to meet the challenge of climate change or the values 
of Canadians across regions.
Still, adaptation efforts lag behind what will be required to meet the challenges of climatic change. They 
are for the most part one-off experiments at local levels rather than part of institutionalized processes for 
environmental management and societal change. Water-related risks have not yet reached critical urgency in 
the minds of Canadians to trigger support for widespread, immediate action.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 248 
4.9 References 
Abbott, G. and Chapman, M. (2018). Addressing the New Normal 
21st Century Disaster Management in British Columbia. Report 
to the Government of British Columbia. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/safety/emergency-
preparedness-response-recovery/emergency-management-bc/
reports>
Abu, R., Reed, M.G. and Jardine, T.D. (2019). Using two-eyed 
seeing to bridge Western science and Indigenous knowledge 
systems and understand long-term change in the Saskatchewan 
River Delta, Canada. International Journal of Water Resources 
Development, 1–20. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/1
0.1080/07900627.2018.1558050>
Akamani, K. and Wilson, P.I. (2011). Toward the adaptive 
governance of transboundary water resources. Conservation 
Letters, 4, 409–416. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1755-263X.2011.00188.x>
Akerlof, K., DeBono, R., Berry, P., Leiserowitz, A., Rose-Renouf, 
C., Clarke, K.-L., Rogaeva, A., Nisbet, M.C., Weathers, M.R. and 
Maibach, E.W. (2010). Public perceptions of climate change 
as a human health risk: Surveys of the United States, Canada 
and Malta. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 7, 2559–2606. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph7062559>
Alberta Water Council (2017). Looking Back: Evaluating 
Sector Improvements in Water Conservation, Efficiency 
and Productivity. Edmonton, Canada. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.awchome.ca/_
projectdocs/?file=d86483b3094da16b>
Alberta WaterSMART (2013). Water Reuse in Alberta: 
Experiences and impacts on economic growth.  Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://watersmartsolutions.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/08/Water-Reuse-in-Alberta-2013-Sust-Reg-
Dev.pdf#:~:text=Water%20Reuse%20in%20Alberta%3A%20
Experiences%20and%20Impacts%20on,treatment%20
technologies%20have%20advanced%20significantly%20over%­
20the%20last>
Alberta WaterSMART (2016). Climate Vulnerability and 
Sustainable Water Management in the South Saskatchewan 
River Basin: Final Report. 129 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://albertawater.com/docs-work/projects-and-research/
ssrb/178-ssrb-water-project-final-report-adaptation-roadmap-for-
sustainable-water-management-in-the-ssrb-january-2016/file>
AMEC Environment & Infrastructure (2012). Flood Risk and 
Vulnerability Analysis Project. Report submitted to Atlantic 
Climate Adaptation Solutions Association. Department of 
Environment and Conservation, Newfoundland and Labrador. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/
islandora/object/acasa%3A446>
Andrey, J., Kertland, P. and Warren, F.J. (2014). Water and 
transportation infrastructure, Chapter 8 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 233‒252. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf>
Aquije, D.D. (2016). Paying for Stormwater Management: 
What are the Options? Report by The Institute on Municipal 
Finance and Governance. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
munkschool.utoronto.ca/imfg/uploads/342/imfg_perspectives_
no12_stormwater_daniella_davilaaquije_apr26_2016.pdf>
Archer, L., Ford, J.D., Pearce, T., Kowal, S., Gough, W.A. and 
Allurut, M. (2017). Longitudinal assessment of climate 
vulnerability: a case study from the Canadian Arctic. 
Sustainability Science, 12, 15–29. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-016-0401-5>
Armitage, D., Berkes, F., Dale, A., Kocho-Schellenberg, E. and 
Patton, E. (2011). Co-management and the co-production 
of knowledge: Learning to adapt in Canada’s Arctic. Global 
Environmental Change, 21(3), 995‒1004. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.04.006>
Associated Engineering (B.C.) Ltd. (2018). Final Report: 
Improving Coastal Flood Adaptation Approaches. Prepared for 
the City of Surrey, 351 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.surrey.ca/files/CFAS-ICFAA-FinalReport-29032018.pdf>
Associated Engineering (2011). City of Calgary Water 
Supply Infrastructure: Climate Change and Vulnerability Risk 
Assessment. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/
default/files/city_of_calgary_water_supply_infrastructure_report_
web.pdf>
Bakaic, M., Medeiros, A.S., Peters, J.F. and Wolfe, B.B. (2017). 
Hydrologic monitoring tools for freshwater municipal planning 
in the Arctic: the case of Iqaluit, Nunavut, Canada. Environmental 
Science and Pollution Research, 25, 32913–32925. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-9343-4>
Bakker, K. and Cook, C. (2011). Water governance in Canada: 
Innovation and fragmentation. International Journal of Water 
Resources Development, 27, 275–289. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2011.564969>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 249 
Bauer, A. and Steurer, R. (2014). Multi-level governance of 
climate change adaptation through regional partnerships in 
Canada and England. Geoforum, 51, 121–129. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geoforum.2013.10.006>
Benedict, M. and McMahon, E. (2006). Green infrastructure: 
Linking landscapes and communities. 2nd edition. Washington, 
DC: Island Press.
Berkes, F. and Armitage, D. (2010). Co-management institutions, 
knowledge, and learning: Adapting to change in the Arctic. The 
Inuit and Climate Change, 34(1), 109‒131. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.7202/045407ar>
BGC Engineering Inc. (2011). Public Infrastructure Engineering 
Vulnerability Committee Assessment for NWT Highway 3. 
Prepared for Government of Northwest Territories, Department 
of Transportation Territories, 212 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/2gnwt_hwy_3_west_
yellowknife_report_web.pdf>
Bizikova, L. and Vodicka, A. (2013). Adaptive Policy Analysis 
of Nova Scotia: Selected policies and programs of Nova Scotia 
Environment. IISD Report submitted to Climate Change Impacts 
and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/
publications/adaptool_nova_scotia.pdf>
Bizikova, L., Swanson, D., Tyler, S., Roy, D. and Venema, H.D. 
(2018). Policy adaptability in practice. Policy Design and 
Practice, 1, 47–62. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10
.1080/25741292.2018.1436376>
Bizikova, L., Tyler, S., Roy, D. and Swanson, D. (2013). 
Strengthening Adaptive Capacity in Four Canadian Provinces: 
ADAPTool analysis of selected sectoral policies. A synthesis 
report. International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) 
Report submitted to Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Division, Natural Resources Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/adaptool_
synthesis.pdf>
Bonsal, B.R., Peters, D.L., Seglenieks, F., Rivera, A. and Berg, 
A. (2019). Changes in freshwater availability across Canada, 
Chapter 6 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush 
and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
261–342. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://changingclimate.
ca/CCCR2019/chapter/6-0/>
Boyle, J., Cunningham, M. and Dekens, J. (2013). Climate 
Change, Adaptation and Canadian Infrastructure: A review of the 
literature. Prepared by the International Institute for Sustainable 
Development (IISD), 40 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/adaptation_can_
infrastructure.pdf>
Brown, C. and Wilby, R.L. (2012). An alternate approach to 
assessing climate risks. Eos, Transactions American Geophysical 
Union, 93(41), 401–402 Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2012EO410001>
Burch, S. (2010). Transforming barriers into enablers of action 
on climate change: Insights from three municipal case studies 
in British Columbia, Canada. Global Environmental Change, 20(2), 
287–297. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2009.11.009> 
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing Climate 
Report. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario. 444 p. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/site/assets/uploads/
sites/2/2019/04/CCCR_FULLREPORT-EN-FINAL.pdf>
Bush, E., Gillett, N., Watson, E., Fyfe, J., Vogel, F. and Swart, 
N. (2019). Understanding observed global climate change, 
Chapter 2 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush 
and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
24–72. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/chapter/2-0/>
Cameron, E., Mearns, R. and McGrath, J.T. (2015). Translating 
Climate Change: Adaptation, Resilience, and Climate Politics 
in Nunavut, Canada. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 105(2), 274–283. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2014.973006>
Campbell, I.D., Durant D.G., Hunter, K.L. and Hyatt, K.D. (2014). 
Food production, Chapter 4 in Canada in a Changing Climate: 
Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. 
Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 233‒252. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf>
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (2011). 
Selected tools to evaluate water monitoring networks for climate 
change adaptation. 164 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/water/climate_change/pn_1464_
wmcc_tools_en.pdf>
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (2016). 
Summary of integrated watershed management approaches 
across Canada. 27 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/water/water_conservation/
Summary%20of%20Integrated%20Watershed%20
Management%20Approaches%20Across%20Canada%20PN%20
1559.pdf>
Canadian Council of Professional Engineers (2008). Adapting 
to Climate Change Canada’s First National Engineering 
Vulnerability Assessment of Public Infrastructure. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/adapting_
to_climate_change_report_final.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 250 
Canadian Dam Association (2019). “Dams in Canada”. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.cda.ca/EN/Dams_in_Canada/
Dams_in_Canada/EN/Dams_In_Canada.aspx?hkey=97232972-
53dc-4deb-87bd-dc023e0a0bfd>
Canadian Hydrographic Service (2019). Historical Monthly Mean 
Water Levels from the Coordinated network for each of the Great 
Lakes. Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://www.tides.gc.ca/C&A/network_means-eng.html>
Canadian Infrastructure Report Card (2016). The Canadian 
Infrastructure Report Card: Informing the Future. 164 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/
downloads/Canadian_Infrastructure_Report_2016.pdf>
Canada Infrastructure Report Card (2019). The Canadian 
Infrastructure Report Card: Monitoring the State of Canada’s 
Core Public Infrastructure. 55 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/downloads/canadian-
infrastructure-report-card-2019.pdf>
Canadian Water Network (2019). Using Better Data to Identify 
Climate Change-Related Infrastructure Vulnerabilities in 
Canadian Communities. Case Study Series. In partnership 
with Federation of Canadian Municipalities. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://cwn-rce.ca/wp-content/uploads/Case-
Studies-Using-Better-Data-to-Identify-Climate-Change-Related-
Infrastructure-Vulnerabilities-in-Canadian-Communities.pdf>
Canadian Water and Wastewater Association (2015). Public 
Attitudes Project: Changing Public Attitudes on the Value of 
Canada’s Water System Infrastructure. 28 p. 
Carmichael, W.W. and Boyer, G.L. (2016). Health impacts from 
cyanobacteria harmful algae blooms: Implications for the North 
American Great Lakes. Harmful Algae, 54, 194–212. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2016.02.002>
Carrière, A., Prévost, M., Zamyadi, A., Chevalier, P. and Barbeau, 
B. (2010). Vulnerability of Quebec drinking-water treatment 
plants to cyanotoxins in a climate change context. Journal 
of Water and Health, 8, 455–465. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2009.207>
Casello, J. and Towns, W. (2017). Urban, Chapter 9 in Climate 
Risks and Adaptation Practices for the Canadian transportation 
Sector 2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 264‒309. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-9e.pdf>
Castleden, H. and Skinner, E. (2014). Whitewashing Indigenous 
water rights in Canada: How can we Indigenize climate change 
adaptation if we ignore the fundamentals?, Chapter 11 in 
Adaptation to Climate Change Through Water Resources 
Management: Capacity, Equity and Sustainability. (Eds.) D. 
Stucker, and E. López-Gunn. Routledge, 223‒242. 
Chu, C. (2015). Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment 
for Inland Aquatic Ecosystems in the Great Lakes Basin, 
Ontario. Ontario Ministry of National Resources and Forestry. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_
Publications/CCRR-43.pdf>
Clamen, M. and Macfarlane, D. (2018). Plan 2014: The historical 
evolution of Lake Ontario–St. Lawrence River regulation. 
Canadian Water Resources Journal / Revue canadienne des 
ressources hydriques, 43, 416–431. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2018.1475263>
Clancy, P. (2014). Freshwater Politics in Canada. University of 
Toronto Press. 
Clark, M.P., Wilby, R.L., Gutmann, E.D., Vano, J.A., Gangopadhyay, 
S., Wood, A.W. and Brekke, L.D. (2016). Characterizing 
uncertainty of the hydrologic impacts of climate change. Current 
Climate Change Reports, 2(2), 55–64. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-016-0034-x>
Clark, R., Andreichuk, I., Sauchyn, D. and McMartin, D.W. (2017). 
Incorporating climate change scenarios and water-balance 
approach to cumulative assessment models of solution potash 
mining in the Canadian Prairies. Climatic Change, 145, 321–334. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-
2099-5>
Cochran, M., Manuel, P. and Rapaport, E. (2012). Section 5: 
Social Vulnerability to Climate Change in the Municipality of the 
District of Lunenburg, Nova Scotia, in Municipality of the District 
of Lunenburg: A Case Study in Climate Change Adaptation-Part 
2. Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association (ACASA). 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/
islandora/object/acasa%3A548>
Cohen, S., Koshida, G. and Mortsch, L. (2015). Climate and water 
availability indicators in Canada: Challenges and a way forward. 
Part III – Future scenarios. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 
40, 160–172. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.108
0/07011784.2015.1006021>
Cohen, S., Neilsen, D., Smith, S., Neale, T., Taylor, B., Barton, 
M. and Tansey, J. (2006). Learning with local help: Expanding 
the dialogue on climate change and water management in the 
Okanagan Region, British Columbia, Canada. Climatic Change, 
75(3), 331–358. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-006-6336-6>
Comeau, L. (2017). Healthy Water, Healthy People: New 
Brunswickers’ concerns and attitudes about fresh water and 
preparedness for extreme weather events. Report prepared for 
the Conservation Council of New Brunswick. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://www.conservationcouncil.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2013/02/WaterSummaryReportFeb2017.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 251 
Conservation Ontario (2020). About Conservation Authorities. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://conservationontario.ca/
conservation-authorities/about-conservation-authorities/>
Cook, B.R., Atkinson, M., Chalmers, H., Comins, L., Cooksley, S., 
Deans, N., Fazey, I., Fenemor, A., Kesby, M., Litke, S., Marshall, 
D. and Spray, C. (2013). Interrogating participatory catchment 
organisations: cases from Canada, New Zealand, Scotland and 
the Scottish–English Borderlands. The Geographical Journal, 
179(3), 234‒247. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1475-4959.2012.00492.x>
Corkal, D.R., Diaz, H. and Sauchyn, D. (2011). Changing Roles in 
Canadian Water Management: A Case Study of Agriculture and 
Water in Canada’s South Saskatchewan River Basin. International 
Journal of Water Resources Development, 27, 647–664. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.parc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/Corkal_Diaz_Sauchyn-2011-Changing_roles_in_
Canadian_water_management_a_case_study_of_agriculture_and_
water_in_Canadas_South_Saskatchewan_River_Basin.pdf>
Cosens, B.A., Craig, R.K., Hirsch, S., Arnold, C.A.(T.), Benson, 
M.H., DeCaro, D.A., Garmestani, A.S., Gosnell, H., Ruhl, J. and 
Schlager, E. (2017). The role of law in adaptive governance. 
Ecology and Society, 22, 30. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.5751/ES-08731-220130> 
Crona, B.I. and Parker, J.N. (2011). Network determinants of 
knowledge utilization: Preliminary lessons from a boundary 
organization; Science Communication, 33, 448–471. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1177/1075547011408116>
Crossman, J., Futter, M.N., Oni, S.K., Whitehead, P.G., Jin, L., 
Butterfield, D., Baulch, H.M. and Dillon, P.J. (2013). Impacts of 
climate change on hydrology and water quality: Future proofing 
management strategies in the Lake Simcoe watershed, Canada. 
Journal of Great Lakes Research, 39, 19–32. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jglr.2012.11.003>
Dale, A., Robinson, J., King, L., Burch, S., Newell, R., Shaw, A. 
and Jost, F. (2019). Meeting the climate change challenge: local 
government climate action in British Columbia, Canada. Climate 
Policy, 1–15. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080
/14693062.2019.1651244>
Daniell, K.A., Coombes, P.J. and White, I. (2014). Politics of 
innovation in multi-level water governance systems. Journal of 
Hydrology, 519, 2415–2435. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.08.058> 
de Loë, R. (2009). Sharing the Waters of the Red River Basin: 
A Review of Options for Transboundary Water Governance. 
Prepared for International Red Rivers Board, International 
Joint Commission. Rob de Loë Consulting Services, Guelph, 
Ontario. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.org/
publications/Sharing%20the%20Waters%20of%20the%20Red%20
River%20Basin.pdf>
de Loë, R. (2017). Coordinating water policies: necessary, but 
not sufficient, in Water Policy and Governance in Canada, (Eds.) 
S. Renzetti, D. Dupont. Global Issues in Water Policy Series, 17, 
231‒248. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland.
de Loë, R. and Plummer, R. (2010). Climate change, adaptive 
capacity, and governance for drinking water in Canada, in 
Adaptive Capacity and Environmental Governance, (Eds.) D. 
Armitage and R. Plummer. Springer Series on Environmental 
Management, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
de Loë, R., Kreutzwisera, R. and Morarub, L. (2001). Adaptation 
options for the near term: climate change and the Canadian 
water sector. Global Environmental Change, 11, 231–245. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-
3780(00)00053-4>
De Stefano, L., Duncan, J., Dinar, S., Stahl, K., Strzepek, K.M. 
and Wolf, A.T. (2012). Climate change and the institutional 
resilience of international river basins. Journal of Peace 
Research, 49(1), 193‒209. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1177/0022343311427416>
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., 
Smith, S., Thackeray, C. and Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). 
Changes in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada, Chapter 
5 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 194–260. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/chapter/5-0/>
Di Baldassarre, G., Viglione, A., Carr, G., Kuil, L., Yan, K., 
Brandimarte, L. and Blöschl, G. (2015). Debates—Perspectives 
on socio-hydrology: Capturing feedbacks between physical 
and social processes. Water Resources Research, 51, 
4770–4781. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2014WR016416>
Diaz, H., Hurlbert, M., Warren, J. and Corkal, D.R. (2009). Unit 
1E Institutional Adaptation to Climate Change Project, in 
Saskatchewan Water Governance Assessment Final Report. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.parc.ca/mcri/pdfs/
papers/gov01.pdf>
Döll, P., Jiménez-Cisneros, B., Oki, T., Arnell, N.W., Benito, G., 
Cogley, J.G., Jiang, T., Kundzewicz, Z.W., Mwakalila, S. and 
Nishijima, A. (2015). Integrating risks of climate change into 
water management. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 60, 4–13. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/02626667.2
014.967250>
Dunn, G. and Bakker, K. (2011). Fresh water-related indicators in 
Canada: an inventory and analysis. Canadian Water Resources 
Journal, 36(2), 135‒148. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4296/cwrj3602815>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 252 
Ecology North (2017). Northwest Territories Climate Change 
Adaptation Needs Assessments. 
El-Khoury, A., Seidou, O., Lapen, D.R., Que, Z., Mohammadian, 
M., Sunohara, M. and Bahram, D. (2015). Combined impacts 
of future climate and land use changes on discharge, nitrogen 
and phosphorus loads for a Canadian river basin. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 151, 76–86. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.12.012>
Engineers Canada (n.d.). About | Public Infrastructure 
Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC). Retrieved MONTH 
2020, from <https://pievc.ca/>
Engineers Canada (2018). Combining traditional knowledge 
with the PIEVC framework to strengthen climate resilient 
infrastructure in First Nations communities. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://engineerscanada.ca/news-and-events/news/
combining-traditional-knowledge-with-the-pievc-framework-to-
strengthen-climate>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2018). Lake Winnipeg 
Basin Initiative: Phase II Final Report. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2019/
eccc/En4-137-3-2019-eng.pdf>
EPCOR (2019). FAQs. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.epcor.com/products-services/drainage/rates-terms-and-
conditions/Pages/faqs.aspx>
Eyzaguirre, J. (2015). The Impact of Canada’s Regional 
Adaptation Collaboratives on Climate Adaptation. Prepared 
by ESSA Technologies Ltd. for Natural Resources Canada. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/environment/pdf/RAC_Project_Impact_Report-
eng.pdf>
Failing, L., Gregory, R. and Higgins, P. (2013). Science, 
Uncertainty, and Values in Ecological Restoration: A Case Study 
in Structured Decision-Making and Adaptive Management. 
Restoration Ecology, 21, 422–430. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-100X.2012.00919.x>
Félio, G. (2015). Tools to evaluate the vulnerability and 
adaptation of infrastructure to climate change. Proceedings, 
Annual Conference - Canadian Society for Civil Engineering, 2, 
742–751. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.scopus.com/
inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84977083808&partnerID=40&md5=
87be43609bbdb474d764b0e528e4248d>
Félio, G. (2017). Climate Change Impacts on Water and 
Wastewater Infrastructure at Akwesasne. Prepared for Ontario 
First Nations Technical Services Corporation (OFNTSC).  Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/climate-
change-impacts-water-wastewater-akwesasne-05-18-e.pdf>
Feltmate, B. and Moudrak, M. (2015). Preparedness of Fifteen 
Canadian Cities to Limit Flood Damage. Report prepared for 
the Co-operators. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
cooperators.ca/en/~/media/Cooperators%20Media/Section%20
Media/AboutUs/Sustainability/Flood%20Paper_Preparedness%20
of%20Cities_FINAL_ENG_21May2015.pdf>
Ferguson, G. and Beebe, C. (2012). Vulnerability of Nova Scotia’s 
Coastal Groundwater Supplies to Climate Change. Atlantic 
Climate Adaptation Solutions Association (ACASA). Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/
object/acasa%3A572>
Fletcher, A.J. and Knuttila, E. (2018). Gendering change, in 
Vulnerability and Adaptation to Drought: The Canadian Prairies 
and South America, (Eds) H. Diaz, M. Hurlbert, and J. Warren. 
University of Calgary Press, 159–178.
Folke, C., Hahn, T., Olsson, P. and Norberg, J. (2005). 
Adaptive governance of social-ecological systems. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 15, 441–473. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
energy.30.050504.144511>
Ford, J.D. and King, D. (2015). A framework for examining 
adaptation readiness. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 20, 505–526. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11027-013-9505-8>
Ford, J.D., and Pearce, T. (2010). What we know, do not know, 
and need to know about climate change vulnerability in the 
western Canadian Arctic: A systematic literature review. 
Environmental Research Letters, 5. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/5/1/014008>
Ford, J.D., McDowell, G. and Pearce, T. (2015). The adaptation 
challenge in the Arctic. Nature Climate Change, 5(12), 1046–
1053. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2723>
Ford, J.D., Couture, N., Bell, T. and Clark, D.G. (2017). Climate 
change and Canada’s north coast: research trends, progress, 
and future directions. Environmental Reviews, 26(1), 82–92. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2017-
0027>
Garrick, D.E. (2017). Water Security and Adaptation to Climate 
Extremes in Transboundary Rivers of North America, in Water 
Policy and Governance in Canada, (Eds.) S. Renzetti, D. Dupont. 
Global Issues in Water Policy Series, 17, 231‒248. Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland.  
Global Water Futures (2020). Interviews with Canadian Water 
Experts. Prepared by Global Institute of Water Security. 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 253 
Gober, P. (2013). Getting Outside the Water Box: The Need for 
New Approaches to Water Planning and Policy. Water Resources 
Management, 27, 955–957. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11269-012-0222-y>
Gober, P. (2018). Building resilience for uncertain water futures. 
Palgrave Macmillan, Springer Nature, 213 p.
Goldstein, A., Turner, W.R., Gladstone, J. and Hole, D.G. (2019). 
The private sector’s climate change risk and adaptation blind 
spots. Nature Climate Change, 9, 18–25. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0340-5>
Gooré Bi, E., Monette, F., Gachon, P., Gaspéri, J. and Perrodin, Y. 
(2015). Quantitative and qualitative assessment of the impact of 
climate change on a combined sewer overflow and its receiving 
water body. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 
22(15), 11905–11921. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11356-015-4411-0>
Goulding, H. (2011). Yukon Water: An Assessment of Climate 
Change Vulnerabilities. Prepared by Government of Yukon, 98 
p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://open.yukon.ca/data/sites/
default/files/yukonwater_climatechange_report_0.pdf>
Government of Alberta (2018). Bow River TransAlta Agreement. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/
d0ee8794-b79b-4bd6-b50a-210c9af60104/resource/fa28185b-
1ca8-4fa5-9ada-371de208f582/download/aep-flood-mitigation-
bow-river-transalta-fact-sheet.pdf>
Government of Canada (2020a). Ending long-term drinking water 
advisories. Indigenous Services Canada. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1506514143353/153
3317130660>
Government of Canada (2020b). Long-term advisories affecting 
water systems not financially supported by the Government of 
Canada South of 60. Indigenous Services Canada. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/151613431
5897/1533663683531>
Government of Canada (2013). Flood Damage Reduction 
Program. Environment and Climate Change Canada. 
Government of Canada and Government of United States of 
America (2012). Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement: Protocol 
amending the agreement between Canada and the United States 
of America on Great Lakes Water Quality, 1978, as amended on 
October 16, 1983, and on November 18, 1987, signed September 
12, 2012. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://binational.net/wp-
content/uploads/2014/05/1094_Canada-USA-GLWQA-_e.pdf>
Government of New Brunswick (2019). Historic Water Levels 
as of 2019. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www2.gnb.
ca/content/dam/gnb/Departments/pa-ap/River_Watch/pdf/
HistoricWaterLevels.pdf>
Government of Newfoundland and Labrador (2012). Logy 
Bay - Middle Cove - Outer Cove Case Study. Climate Change 
Vulnerability Assessment by Policy and Planning Division of 
Department of Environment and Conservation. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/object/
acasa%3A542>
Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory, National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2019). Great Lakes 
Water Levels. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.glerl.
noaa.gov/data/wlevels/>
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Adaptive Management 
Committee (2018). Summary of 2017 Great Lakes Basin 
Conditions and Water Level Impacts to Support Ongoing 
Regulation Plan Evaluation. Prepared for the International Joint 
Commission. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://ijc.org/en/
adaptive-management-study-supports-great-lakes-st-lawrence-
river-water-outflow-regulation-plans>
Gronewold, A.D., Bruxer, J.,Durnford, D., Smith, J.P., Clites, 
A.H., Seglenieks, F., Qian, S.S., Hunter, T.S. and Fortin, V. 
(2016). Hydrological drivers of record-setting water level rise 
on Earth’s largest lake system. Water Resources Research, 
52, 4026–4042. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2015WR018209>
Gronewold, A.D. and Rood, R.B. (2019). Climate Change Sends 
Great Lakes Water Levels Seesawing. The Conversation 
US, June 8, 2019. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
scientificamerican.com/article/climate-change-sends-great-
lakes-water-levels-seesawing/>
Groulx, M., Lewis, J., Lemieux, C. and Dawson, J. (2014). 
Place-based climate change adaptation: A critical case 
study of climate change messaging and collective action 
in Churchill, Manitoba. Landscape and Urban Planning, 132, 
136–147. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2014.09.002>
Groves, D.G. and Lempert, R.J. (2007). A new analytic method 
for finding policy-relevant scenarios. Global Environmental 
Change, 17, 73–85. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.11.006>
Gupta, J., Termeer, C.J.A.M., Klostermann, J., Meijerink, S., van 
den Brink, M., Jong, P., Nooteboom, S. and Bergsma, E., (2010). 
The adaptive capacity wheel: A method to assess the inherent 
characteristics of institutions to enable the adaptive capacity of 
society. Environmental Science & Policy, 12(6). Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2010.05.006>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 254 
Guyadeen, D., Thistlethwaite, J. and Henstra, D. (2018). 
Evaluating the quality of municipal climate change plans in 
Canada. Climatic Change, 152, 121‒143. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2312-1>
Hall, J.W., Grey, D., Garrick, D., Fung, F., Brown, C., Dadson, S.J. 
and Sadoff, C.W. (2014). Coping with the curse of variability: 
Adaptation pathways to water security. Science, 346(6208), 
429‒430. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.oxfordmartin.
ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/201410_Hall_Freshwater.pdf>
Hamlet, A.F. (2011). Assessing water resources adaptive 
capacity to climate change impacts in the Pacific Northwest 
Region of North America. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences, 
15, 1427–1443. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.5194/hess-15-1427-2011>
Heinmiller, B.T. (2017). The Politics of Water Policy Development 
in Canada, in Water Policy and Governance in Canada, (Eds.) 
S. Renzetti, D. Dupont. Global Issues in Water Policy Series, 17, 
215‒229. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
42806-2>
Henrich, N., Holmes, B. and Prystajecky, N. (2015). Looking 
upstream: Findings from focus groups on public perceptions 
of source water quality in British Columbia, Canada. PLoS ONE, 
10, 1–16. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0141533>
Henstra, D., Minano, A. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2019a). 
Communicating disaster risk? An evaluation of the availability 
and quality of flood maps. Natural Hazards and Earth System 
Sciences, 19, 313–323. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.5194/nhess-19-313-2019>
Henstra, D., Thistlethwaite, J., Brown, C. and Scott, D. (2019b). 
Flood risk management and shared responsibility: Exploring 
Canadian public attitudes and expectations. Journal of Flood 
Risk Management, 12, 1–10. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1111/jfr3.12346>
Hill, C., Furlong, K., Bakker, K. and Cohen, A. (2009). 
Harmonization Versus Subsidiarity in Water Governance: A 
Review of Water Governance and Legislation in the Canadian 
Provinces and Territories. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 
33(4), 315–332. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4296/cwrj3304315>
Hurlbert, M.A. (2018). Adaptive Governance (Management, 
Co-management and Anticipatory), in Adaptive Governance 
of Disaster: Drought and Flood in Rural Areas, in the Water 
Governance - Concepts, Methods, and Practice book series 
(WGCMP), 21‒48. Springer, Cham, Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-57801-9_2>
Hurlbert, M.A. and Diaz, H. (2013). Water Governance in Chile 
and Canada. Ecology and Society, 18. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-06148-180461>
Hurlbert, M., Andrews, E., Tesfamariam, Y. and Warren, 
J. (2015). Governing Water, Deliberative Institutions and 
Adaptation. Report for Water Governance and Climate Change: 
the engagement of civil society project. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <http://www.parc.ca/vacea/assets/PDF/reports/local%20
water%20governance%20final%20report.pdf>
Hurlbert, M., Corkal, D. and Diaz, H. (2010). Government 
Institutions and Water Policy, in The New Normal: The Canadian 
Prairies in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) D. Sauchyn, H. Diaz, and S. 
Kulshreshtha. Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative, Regina, 
Saskatoon, 239–245. 
ICF (2018). Best practices and resources on climate resilient 
natural infrastructure. Prepared for Canadian Council of 
Ministers of the Environment, 60 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/climate_change/Natural_
Infrastructure_Report_EN.pdf>
IJC [International Joint Commission] (2015). A Real-Time Flood 
Forecasting and Flood Inundation Mapping System for the Lake 
Champlain-Richelieu River Watershed. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.org/publications/Lake-Champlain-
IJC-Report-to-Govts-Dec-2015-NEW.pdf>
IJC [International Joint Commission] (2017). First Triennial 
Assessment of Progress on Great Lakes Water Quality. Prepared 
by the International Joint Commission Pursuant to Article 7 (1) 
(k) of the 2012 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement November 
28, 2017. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ijc.org/sites/
default/files/2018-08/TAP.pdf>
IJC [International Joint Commission] (2018). A Climate Change 
Guidance Framework for IJC Boards. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://ijc.org/en/what/climate/framework>
Infrastructure Canada (2018). Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation 
Fund - Frequently Asked Questions. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/faq-eng.html>
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2017). “Spring flooding in Ontario 
and Quebec caused more than $223 million in insured damage.” 
Retrieved February 2021, from <http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/
media-centre/media-releases/spring-flooding-in-ontario-and-
quebec-caused-more-than-223-million-in-insured-damage>
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2019a). “Eastern Canada Spring 
Flooding Caused Close to $208 million in Insured Damage.” 
Retrieved February 2021, from <http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/
media-centre/media-releases/eastern-canada-spring-flooding-
caused-close-to-208-million-in-insured-damage>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 255 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2019b). 2019 Facts of the Property 
and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada, 74 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/industry-resources/
insurance-fact-book>
International Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River Adaptive 
Management Task Team (2013). Building Collaboration Across 
the Great Lakes – St. Lawrence River System: An Adaptive 
Management Plan for Addressing Extreme Water Levels. Report 
to the International Joint Commission, May 30, 2013. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.org/publications/
FinalReport_AdaptiveManagementPlan_20130530.pdf>
International Institute for Sustainable Development (2016). 
Large Area Planning in the Nelson-Churchill River Basin (NCRB): 
Laying a foundation in northern Manitoba. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/large-
area-planning-nelson-churchill-river-basin-full-report.pdf>
International Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence River Study Board 
(2006). Options for Managing Lake Ontario and St. Lawrence 
River Water Levels and Flows. Final Report by the International 
Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence River Study Board to the International 
Joint Commission. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.losl.
org/PDF/report-main-e.pdf>
International Lake Ontario-St. Lawrence River Board (2018). 
Observed Conditions and Regulation Outflows in 2017. Report 
to the International Joint Commission, May 25, 2018. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://ijc.org/en/loslrb/observed-conditions-
regulated-outflows-2017>
International Upper Great Lakes Study Board (2009). Impacts 
on Upper Great Lakes Water Levels: St. Clair River. Prepared for 
the International Joint Commission, 244 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.org/publications/IUGLS%20St%20
Clair%20Report%20Summary.pdf>
International Upper Great Lakes Study Board (2012). Lake Superior 
Regulation: Addressing Uncertainty in Upper Great Lakes Water 
Levels. Prepared for the International Joint Commission, 176 p.  
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2012/ijc/E95-2-15-2012-eng.pdf>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (2019). National Inuit Climate Change 
Strategy. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/ITK_Climate-Change-Strategy_English_
lowres.pdf>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2014). 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability 
- Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects (Contribution of 
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, 
V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. 
Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, 
E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and 
L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 1132 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/
WGIIAR5-PartA_FINAL.pdf>
Islam, S. ul, Déry, S.J. and Werner, A.T. (2017). Future climate 
change impacts on snow and water resources of the Fraser 
River Basin, British Columbia. Journal of Hydrometeorology, 18, 
473–496. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1175/
jhm-d-16-0012.1>
Ivey, J., Smithers, L.J., de Loë, R. and Kreutzwiser, R.D. (2004). 
Community capacity for adaptation to climate-induced water 
shortages: Linking institutional complexity and local actors. 
Environmental Management, 33, 36–47. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-003-0014-5>
Jalliffier-Verne, I., Leconte, R., Huaringa-Alvarez, U., Madoux-
Humery, A.-S., Galarneau, M., Servais, P. and Dorner, S. (2015). 
Impacts of global change on the concentrations and dilution 
of combined sewer overflows in a drinking water source. The 
Science of the Total Environment, 508, 462–476.  Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.11.059>
Jalliffier-Verne, I., Leconte, R., Huaringa, U., Heniche, M., 
Madoux-Humery, A.-S., Autixier, L., Galarneau, M., Servais, 
P., Prevost, M. and Dorner, S. (2017). Modelling the impacts 
of global change on concentrations of Escherichia coli in 
an urban river. Advances in Water Resources, 108, 450–460. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
advwatres.2016.10.001>
Johns, C.M. (2017). The Great Lakes, Water Quality and Water 
Policy in Canada, in Water Policy and Governance in Canada, 
(Eds.) S. Renzetti and D. Dupont. Global Issues in Water Policy 
Series, 17, 13‒28. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
Switzerland.
Jones-Bitton, A., Gustafson, D.L., Butt, K. and Majowicz, S.E. 
(2016). Does the public receive and adhere to boil water advisory 
recommendations? A cross-sectional study in Newfoundland and 
Labrador, Canada. BMC Public Health, 16(14). Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-2688-z>
Jost, G. and Weber, F. (2013). Potential Impacts of Climate 
Change on BC Hydro-Managed Water Resources. Prepared by BC 
Hydro, 1–28. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.bchydro.
com/content/dam/BCHydro/customer-portal/documents/
corporate/environment-sustainability/environmental-reports/
potential-impacts-climate-change-on-bchydro-managed-water-
resources.pdf>
Kirchmeier-Young, M.C. and Zhang, X. (2020). Human influence 
has intensified extreme precipitation in North America. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 
117(24), 13308–13313. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1921628117>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 256 
KGS Group (2016). Assiniboine River and Lake Manitoba Basins 
Flood Mitigation Study. Report for Manitoba Infrastructure. 
Government of Manitoba.  Retrieved August 2018, from <https://
www.gov.mb.ca/mit/wms/wm/study.html>
Koshida, G., Cohen, S. and Mortsch, L. (2015). Climate and water 
availability indicators in Canada: Challenges and a way forward. 
Part I – Indicators. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 40, 
133–145. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
07011784.2015.1006023>
Kovacs, P. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2014). Industry, Chapter 5 in 
Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts 
and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.233‒252.  Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf>
Kulshreshtha, S., Wheaton, E. and Wittrock, V. (2016). 
The Impacts of the 2001-2 Drought in Rural Alberta and 
Saskatchewan, and Canada, Chapter 4 in Vulnerability and 
Adaptation to Drought: The Canadian Prairies and South 
America, (Eds.) H. Diaz, M. Hurlbert, and J. Warren. University 
of Calgary Press, Calgary, 79‒107. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://prism.ucalgary.ca/bitstream/handle/1880/51490/
Vulnerability_and_adaptation_to_drought_2016_part%203.
pdf?sequence=5&isAllowed=y>
Kwakkel, J.H., Walker, W.E. and Haasnoot, M. (2016). Coping 
with the wickedness of public policy problems: Approaches 
for decision making under deep uncertainty. Journal of Water 
Resources Planning and Management, 142(3). Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)WR.1943-
5452.0000626>
Lachapelle, E., Borick, C.P. and Rabe, B.G. (2014). Public Opinion 
on Climate Change and Support for Various Policy Instruments 
in Canada and the US: Findings from a Comparative 2013 Poll. 
Issues in Energy and Environmental Policy, 11. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://ssrn.com/abstract=2652429>
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority (2013). A Local 
Perspective on Climate Change. Lake Simcoe Science Newsletter, 
5. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.lsrca.on.ca/Shared%20
Documents/newsletter/science-newsletter-vol5.pdf>
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority (2016). “Our 
Watershed” | Lake Simcoe Watershed. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.lsrca.on.ca/our-watershed>
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority (2017). Lake 
Simcoe Phosphorus Load: Update 2012/13-2014/15. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.lsrca.on.ca/Shared%20
Documents/reports/Phosphorus_Load_Report.pdf>
Lake Simcoe Region Conservation Authority (2019). Phosphorus 
offsetting policy. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.lsrca.
on.ca/Shared%20Documents/Phosphorus_Offsetting_Policy.pdf>
Latta, A. (2018). Indigenous Rights and Multilevel Governance: 
Learning From the Northwest Territories Water Stewardship 
Strategy. International Indigenous Policy Journal, 9. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.18584/iipj.2018.9.2.4>
Land Trust Alliance (2019). Conservation in a Changing Climate 
– Adaptive Management. <https://climatechange.lta.org/get-
started/adapt/adaptive-management/>
Langsdale, S., Cohen, S., Welbourn, R. and Tansey, J. (2004). 
Dialogue on Adaptation to Climate Change in the Okanagan 
Basin, British Columbia, Canada. Critical Transitions in Water and 
Environmental Resource Management, 1–9. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1061/40737(2004)154>
Lee, K. (1999). Appraising Adaptive Management- Ecology and 
Society. Ecology and Society, 3, 1–16. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-00131-030203>
Lemieux, C.J., Gray, P.A., Douglas, A.G., Nielsen, G. and Pearson, 
D. (2014). From science to policy: The making of a watershed-
scale climate change adaptation strategy. Environmental Science 
& Policy, 42, 123–137. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2014.06.004>
Lemmen, D.S., Johnston, M., Ste-Marie, C. and Pearce, T. (2014). 
Natural Resources, Chapter 3 in Canada in a Changing Climate: 
Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. 
Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 65‒98. Retrieved June 2020, form <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/
assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf>
Lempert, R.J. and Collins, M.T. (2007). Managing the risk 
of uncertain threshold responses: comparison of robust, 
optimum, and precautionary approaches; Risk Analysis: an 
Official Publication of the Society for Risk Analysis, 27, 1009–
1026. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1539-6924.2007.00940.x>
Lempert, R.J. and Groves, D.G. (2010). Identifying and evaluating 
robust adaptive policy responses to climate change for water 
management agencies in the American west. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 7(6), 960‒974. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2010.04.007>
Lempert, R., Popper, S.W. and Bankes, S. (2003). Shaping the 
Next One Hundred Years: New Methods for Quantitative, Long-
Term Policy Analysis. RAND, Santa Monica, California, 187 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.rand.org/content/dam/
rand/pubs/monograph_reports/2007/MR1626.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 257 
Lesnikowski, A., Ford, J., Biesbroek, R., Berrang-Ford, L., Maillet, 
M., Araos, M. and Austin, S.E. (2017). What does the Paris 
Agreement mean for adaptation? Climate Policy, 17, 825–831. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2
016.1248889>
Lieske, D.J., Wade, T. and Roness, L.A. (2014). Climate change 
awareness and strategies for communicating the risk of coastal 
flooding: A Canadian Maritime case example. Estuarine, Coastal 
and Shelf Science, 140, 83–94. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecss.2013.04.017>
Lindsay, B. (2018). “The future looks grim after 2 years of 
devastating B.C. wildfires.” CBC News. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/
the-future-looks-grim-after-2-years-of-devastating-b-c-
wildfires-1.4801181>
Liu, J., Baulch, H.M., Macrae, M.L., Wilson, H.F., Elliott, J.A., 
Bergström, L. and Vadas, P.A. (2019). Agricultural Water Quality 
in Cold Climates: Processes, Drivers, Management Options, 
and Research Needs. Journal of Environmental Quality, 48, 
792–802. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.2134/
jeq2019.05.0220>
Lo, A.Y. (2013). The role of social norms in climate adaptation: 
Mediating risk perception and flood insurance purchase. Global 
Environmental Change, 23, 1249–1257. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.019>
MMM Group (2014). National Floodplain Mapping Assessment 
- Final Report. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
slideshare.net/glennmcgillivray/national-floodplain-mapping-
assessment>
MacLean, C. (2017). “5-year fight removes less than 1% of 
phosphorus from Lake Winnipeg Basin.” CBC News. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/
manitoba/lake-winnipeg-phosphorus-algae-blooms-1.4293366>
Magzul, L. and Rojas, A. (2006). Report on the Blood Tribe 
(Kainai Nation): community vulnerabilities. Institutional 
Adaptation to Climate Change (IACC) Project report. IACC, La 
Sarena, Chile. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.parc.ca/
mcri/pdfs/papers/iacc051.pdf> 
Maier, H. R., Guillaume, J.H.A., van Delden, H., Riddell, G.A., 
Haasnoot, M. and Kwakkel, J.H. (2016). An uncertain future, 
deep uncertainty, scenarios, robustness and adaptation: How 
do they fit together? Environmental Modelling & Software, 81, 
154–164. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsoft.2016.03.014>
Mailhot, E., Music, B., Nadeau, D.F., Frigon, A. and Turcotte, R. 
(2019). Assessment of the Laurentian Great Lakes’ hydrological 
conditions in a changing climate. Climatic Change, 157, 
243–259. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-019-02530-6>
Manitoba Hydropower (n.d.). The Manitoba Hydro system 
watershed. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
manitobahydropower.com/who-we-are/>
Mantyka-Pringle, C.S., Jardine, T.D., Bradford, L., Bharadwaj, 
L., Kythreotis, A.P., Fresque-Baxter, J. and Lindenschmidt, 
K.-E. (2017). Bridging science and traditional knowledge to 
assess cumulative impacts of stressors on ecosystem health. 
Environment International, 102, 125–137.  Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2017.02.008>
McCullough, G.K., Page, S.J., Hesslein, R.H., Stainton, M.P., Kling, 
H.J., Salki, A.G. and Barber, D.G. (2012). Hydrological forcing of 
a recent trophic surge in Lake Winnipeg. Journal of Great Lakes 
Research, 38, 95–105. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jglr.2011.12.012>
McKay, J. (2019). “City of Iqaluit declares 2nd water emergency 
in 2 years.” CBC News. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/lake-geraldine-city-iqaluit-water-
emergency-1.5235383>
McKenzie-Mohr, D. (2000). Fostering sustainable behavior 
through community-based social marketing. American 
Psychologist, 55(5), 531. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.5.531>
McMillan, T., Causley, D., Hanna, K., Lulham, N., Seasons, M. 
and Boddy, S. (2019). Local Adaptation in Canada, Survey 
Report. Federation of Canadian Municipalities, University of 
British Columbia, and the University of Waterloo. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://ok-cear.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2019/06/Local-
Adaptation-in-Canada-Full-web.-1.pdf>
McNeil, D. (2019). An Independent Review of the 2019 Flood 
Events in Ontario. A report to the Hon. John Yakabuski, Minister 
of Natural Resources and Forestry. Retrieved April 2021, from 
<https://files.ontario.ca/mnrf-english-ontario-special-advisor-on-
flooding-report-2019-11-25.pdf>
Mguni, V. (2015). Integrated Risk Management for Municipal 
Water Systems in Canada through Inter-jursidctional ecosystem 
management using conservation authorities as a model. White 
paper prepared for the Canadian Water Network. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://cvc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/
Appendix-K-Integrated-Risk-Management-for-Municiplal-Water-
Systems-in-Canada-through-inter-jurisdictional-ecosystem-
management.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 258 
Mildenberger, M., Howe, P. Lachapelle, E., Stokes, L., Marlon, J. 
and Gravelle, T. (2016). The distribution of climate change public 
opinion in Canada. PLoS ONE, 11, e0159774. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159774>
Miller, L. (2015). Updating Infrastructure in Canada: An examination 
of needs and investments. Report of the Standing Committee on 
Transport, Infrastructure and Communities. Retrieved June 2020, 
form <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2015/parl/
xc27-1/XC27-1-1-412-9-eng.pdf>
Milly, P.C.D., Betancourt, J., Falkenmark, M., Hirsch, R.M., 
Kundzewicz, Z.W., Lettenmaier, D.P. and Stouffer, R.J. (2008). 
Stationarity Is Dead: Whither Water Management? Science, 319, 
573‒574. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1151915>
Milner, G., Delaney, F., Baginski, B., Baus, N., Hall, A., Jackson, A. 
and Witt, J. (2018). Prioritizing climate science knowledge gaps 
in the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. Prepared jointly by 
the Ontario Climate Consortium and the Centre for Environment 
and Sustainability to advise Annex 9 – Climate Change 
Impacts under the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://climateconnections.ca/app/
uploads/2019/02/Prioritizing-Climate-Science-Knowledge-Gaps-
in-the-Great-Lakes-Basin3.pdf>
Minville, M., Krau, S., Brissette, F. and Leconte, R. (2010). 
Behaviour and performance of a water resource system in 
Québec (Canada) under adapted operating policies in a climate 
change context. Water Resources Management, 24, 1333–1352. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11269-009-
9500-8>
Mitchell, B., Priddle, C., Shrubsole, D., Veale, B. and Walters, 
D. (2014). Integrated water resource management: lessons 
from conservation authorities in Ontario, Canada. International 
Journal of Water Resources Development, 30(3), 460–474. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07900627.2
013.876328>
Mitchell, B. (2017). The Hydrological and Policy Contexts for 
Water in Canada, in Water Policy and Governance in Canada, 
(Eds.) S. Renzetti and D. Dupont. Global Issues in Water Policy 
Series, 17, 13‒28. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
Switzerland. 
Moncrieff-Gould, G., Quigley, K. and Burns, C. (2018). 
Strengthening the resilience of the Canadian water sector: Final 
report. MacEachen Institute for Public Policy and Governance. 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <http://rdrmug.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/REPORT-
Stregthening-the-Resilience-of-the-Canadian-Water-Sector.pdf>
Moody, P. and Brown, C. (2012). Modeling stakeholder-defined 
climate risk on the Upper Great Lakes. Water Resources 
Research, 48. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2012WR012497>
Moore, M.-L., von der Porten, S., Plummer, R., Brandes, O. 
and Baird, J. (2014). Water policy reform and innovation: A 
systematic review. Environmental Science & Policy, 38, 263–
271. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2014.01.007>
Morris, M. and de Loë, R. (2016). Cooperative and adaptive 
transboundary water governance in Canada’s Mackenzie River 
Basin: status and prospects. Ecology and Society, 21(1), 26. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-08301-
210126>
Morrison, A., Noble, B.F. and Westbrook, C.J. (2018). Flood 
risk management in the Canadian Prairie provinces: 
Defaulting towards flood resistance and recovery versus 
resilience. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 43(11), 33‒46.  
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2
018.1428501>
Mortsch, L., Cohen, S. and Koshida, G. (2015). Climate and water 
availability indicators in Canada: Challenges and a way forward. 
Part II – Historic trends. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 40, 
146–159. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/
07011784.2015.1006024>
Mortsch, L., Ingram, I., Hebb, A. and Doka, S. (Eds.) (2006). 
Great Lakes Coastal Wetland Communities: Vulnerabilities to 
Climate Change and Response to adaptation strategies. Final 
report submitted to the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Program, Natural Resources Canada. Environment Canada 
and the Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Toronto, Ontario. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://glslcities.org/wp-content/
uploads/2015/09/Great_Lakes_Coastal_Wetland_Communities_-_
Vulnerabilities_to_Climate_Change_and_Response_to_
Adaptation_Strategies_2006_1.pdf>
Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H. and Osman, H. (2018). 
Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural infrastructure is 
an underutilized option. Prepared for Insurance Bureau of Canada 
by Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. University of Waterloo. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/
Resources/IBC-Natural-Infrastructure-Report-2018.pdf>
Murphy, D.D. and Weiland, P. (2014). Science and structured 
decision making: Fulfilling the promise of adaptive management 
for imperiled species. Journal of Environmental Studies and 
Sciences, 4. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13412-014-0165-0>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 259 
Music, B., Frigon, A., Lofgren, B., Turcotte, R. and Cyr, J.-F. 
(2015). Present and future Laurentian Great Lakes hydroclimatic 
conditions as simulated by regional climate models with an 
emphasis on Lake Michigan-Huron. Climatic Change, 130, 
603–618. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-015-1348-8>
Nesbitt, L. (2010). Assessment of the Vulnerability of 
Tsiigehtchic’s Water and Wastewater Systems to Climate 
Change Impacts. Prepared by Ecology North, 25 p. 
Nodelcorp Consulting (2014). Review and Analysis of Climate 
Change Vulnerability Assessments of Canadian Water 
Management and Drainage Infrastructure. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.th.gov.bc.ca/climate_action/documents/hwy_
Risk_Assessments_from_Climate_Changes_Review.pdf>
Northwest Hydraulic Consultants Ltd. (2014). City of Vancouver 
Coastal Flood Risk Assessment. Prepared for the City of 
Vancouver, 117 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://vancouver.
ca/files/cov/CFRA-Phase-1-Final_Report.pdf>
Notaro, M., Bennington, V. and Lofgren, B. (2015). Dynamical 
Downscaling–Based Projections of Great Lakes Water Levels. 
Journal of Climate, 28, 9721–9745. Retrieved JUNE 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-14-00847.1>
Natural Resources Canada (2018). Federal Flood Mapping 
Framework. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://publications.
gc.ca/site/eng/9.871554/publication.html?wbdisable=true>
Natural Resources Canada and Public Safety Canada (2018). 
Case studies on climate change in floodplain mapping, volume 
1, in Government of Canada, Federal Floodplain Mapping 
Guidelines Series 91 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4095/306436>
National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy 
(2010). Changing Currents: Water Sustainability and the Future 
of Canada’s Natural Resource Sectors, Ottawa. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://nrt-trn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/
changing-currents-water-report-eng.pdf>
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (2016). Estimate 
of the average annual cost for disaster financial assistance 
arrangements due to weather events. Ottawa, Canada. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/
Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf>
Okanagan River Basin Board (2010). From Rain to Resource: 
Managing Stormwater in a Changing Climate. A Report on the 
workshop and trade show October 28-29, 2010. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.obwb.ca/fileadmin/docs/rain_to_
resource/Rain_to_Resource_2010_Report.pdf>
Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources 
(2011). Watershed Adaptation in Ontario: Conservation 
Authority Perspectives Final Report. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/workshop/2011FebMarch/
FinalReport/Watershed%20Adaptation%20in%20Ontario%20-%20
Conservation%20Authority%20Perspectives%20-%20Final%20
Report.pdf>
Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources 
(2012). A Climate Adaptation Strategy for the Lake Simcoe 
Watershed: The planning process. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/casestudies/LakeSimcoeClim
ateChangeAdaptationStrategy-CaseStudy.pdf>
O’Neill, B.H. and Burn, C.R. (2017). Impacts of variations in 
snow cover on permafrost stability, including simulated snow 
management, Dempster Highway, Peel Plateau, Northwest 
Territories. NRC Research Press. Arctic Science, 3(2), 150–178
Orihel, D.M., Baulch, H.M., Casson, N.J., North, R.L., Parsons, 
C.T., Seckar, D.C.M. and Venkiteswaran, J.J. (2017). Internal 
phosphorus loading in Canadian fresh waters: a critical review 
and data analysis. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Sciences, 74(12), 2005–2029. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2016-0500>
Ormiston, S. and Shelton, M. (2019). “How climate change is 
thawing the ‘glue that holds the northern landscape together.” 
CBC News. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.cbc.
ca/news/canada/north/the-national-permafrost-thaw-inuvik-
tuktoyaktuk-1.5179842>
Ottawa River Regulation Planning Board (2019). Integrated 
Management of the Principal Reservoirs of the Ottawa River 
Basin. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://ottawariver.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/2018_ORRPB_CPRRO_Reservoir.pdf>
Oulahen, G., Klein, Y., Mortsch, L., O’Connell, E. and Harford, D. 
(2018). Barriers and Drivers of Planning for Climate Change 
Adaptation across Three Levels of Government in Canada. 
Planning Theory & Practice, 19(3), 405–421. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/14649357.2018.1481993>
Pahl-Wostl, C. (2008). Requirements for Adaptive Water 
Management, in Adaptive and Integrated Water Management, 
(Eds.) C. Pahl-Wostl, P. Kabat and J. Möltgen. Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg.
Panel on Adaptive Management for Resource Stewardship 
(2004). Adaptive Management for Water Resource Project 
planning. National Research Council. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.17226/10972>
Paré, E. (2014). City of Nelson Stormwater Infrastructure Assessment. 
Prepared by Focus Corporation for City of Nelson, 44 p.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 260 
Paterson, A.M., Rühland, K.M., Anstey, C.V. and Smol, J.P. (2017). 
Climate as a driver of increasing algal production in Lake of the 
Woods, Ontario, Canada. Lake and Reservoir Management, 33(4), 
403–414. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/10
402381.2017.1379574>
Patino, L. (2010). Understanding Climate Change Adaptation and 
Adaptive Capacity: Synthesis Report. PRI Project Sustainable 
Development. Natural Resources Canada, Government of 
Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://publications.gc.ca/
site/eng/376882/publication.html>
Perdeaux, S., Nunn, J.A. and Delaney, F. (2018). Approaches for 
Conducting Vulnerability Assessments in the Great Lakes Basin: 
A Review of the Literature. Report submitted to Annex 9 (Climate 
Change Impacts) of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://binational.net/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/VAReport-Final.pdf>
Phillips, D. (2017). Canada’s top ten weather stories of 2013: 
Alberta’s Flood of Floods. Environment and Climate Change 
Canada. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.ec.gc.
ca/meteo-weather/default.asp?lang=En&n=5BA5EAFC-
1&offset=2&toc=hide>
Pidgeon, N. (2012). Public understanding of, and attitudes 
to, climate change: UK and international perspectives and 
policy. Climate Policy,12, S85–S106. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14693062.2012.702982>
Plummer, R., de Loë, R. and Armitage, D. (2012). A systematic 
review of water vulnerability assessment tools. Water Resources 
Management, 26(15), 4327‒4346. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11269-012-0147-5>
Poitras, J. (2019). “Is climate change causing the recent floods 
along the St. John River?” CBC News. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/new-brunswick/future-
floods-new-brunswick-climate-change-1.5134035#>
Poulin, A., Brissette, F., Leconte, R., Arsenault, R. and Malo, J.S. 
(2011). Uncertainty of hydrological modelling in climate change 
impact studies in a Canadian, snow-dominated river basin. 
Journal of Hydrology, 409, 626–636. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2011.08.057>
Public Safety Canada (2011). An Emergency Management 
Framework for Canada (2nd Edition). Prepared by Emergency 
Management Policy Directorate, Public Safety Canada, Ottawa. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
rsrcs/pblctns/mrgnc-mngmnt-frmwrk/mrgnc-mngmnt-frmwrk-
eng.pdf>
Public Safety Canada (2018). Canada’s National Disaster Mitigation 
Strategy. Prepared by Department of Public Safety Canada, Ottawa. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
rsrcs/pblctns/mtgtn-strtgy/index-en.aspx>
Public Safety Canada (n.d.). Canadian Disaster Database. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/
cnt/rsrcs/cndn-dsstr-dtbs/index-en.aspx>
Razavi, S. and Gupta, H. (2016). A new framework for 
comprehensive, robust, and efficient global sensitivity analysis: 
1. Theory. Water Resources Research, 52, 423‒439. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/2015WR017558>
Real Estate Foundation of British Columbia (2018). 2018 BC 
Freshwater Public Opinion Insights Topline Report: Results of a 
public opinion survey conducted June 11-21st, 2018. Conducted 
by McAllister Opinion Research. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/freshwateralliance/
pages/2377/attachments/original/1537895583/2018_water_
polling_toplines_S25.pdf?1537895583>
Reily, D. (2004). Barrie Water Conservation Program. Tools 
of Change. Retrieved February 2019, from <http://www.
toolsofchange.com/en/case-studies/detail/103>
Renzetti, S. and Dupont, D. (Eds.) (2017). Water Policy and 
Governance in Canada. Global Issues in Water Policy Series, 17. 
Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland. 
Research Impact Canada (2018). Knowledge Mobilization. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://researchimpact.ca/knowledge-
mobilization/>
Rouillard, J.J. and Spray, C.J. (2017). Working across scales 
in integrated catchment management: lessons learned for 
adaptive water governance from regional experiences. Regional 
Environmental Change, 17(7), 1869–1880. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-016-0988-1>
Roy, D. (2013). Adaptive Policy Analysis of Saskatchewan’s 25-
year Water Security Plan. Prepared by International Institute for 
Sustainable Development for Water Security Agency for Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources 
Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.iisd.org/sites/
default/files/publications/adaptool_saskatchewan_water.pdf>
Royal Bank of Canada (2017). Canadian Water Attitudes Study. 
Blue Water Project, 92 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.
rbc.com/community-sustainability/_assets-custom/pdf/CWAS-
2017-report.pdf>
Salerno, F. (2017). Adaptation Strategies for Water Resources: 
Criteria for Research. CNR IRSA Water2017, 9(10), 805. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/w9100805>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 261 
Sandford, B., Neilson-Welch, L., Morton, C., Robinson, J., Ord, A. 
and Martens, L. (2011). Climate Change Adaptation and Water 
Governance: Background Report. Prepared by Adaptation to 
Climate Change Team (ACT). Retrieved June 2020, from <http://
act-adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/09-11-Water-
Background-Report-WEB.pdf>
Sauchyn, D.J., St-Jacques, J.M., Barrow, E., Nemeth, M.W., 
Macdonald, R.J., Sheer, A.M.S. and Sheer, D.P. (2016). Adaptive 
Water Resource Planning in the South Saskatchewan River 
Basin: Use of Scenarios of Hydroclimatic Variability and 
Extremes. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 
52, 222–240. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/1752-1688.12378>
Scott, P., Tayler, B. and Walters, D. (2017). Lessons from 
implementing integrated water resource management: a case 
study of the North Bay-Mattawa Conservation Authority, Ontario. 
International Journal of Water Resources Development, 33(3), 
393–407. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07
900627.2016.1216830>
Semenza, J.C., Ploubidis, G.B. and George, L.A. (2011). 
Climate change and climate variability: personal motivation 
for adaptation and mitigation. Environmental Health, 10, 46. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-
069X-10-46>
Sherren, K. and Verstraten, C. (2013). What Can Photo-Elicitation 
Tell Us About How Maritime Farmers Perceive Wetlands as 
Climate Changes? Wetlands, 33, 65–81. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s13157-012-0352-2>
Shrestha, R.R., Schnorbus, M.A., Werner, A.T. and Berland, A.J. 
(2012). Modelling spatial and temporal variability of hydrologic 
impacts of climate change in the Fraser River basin, British 
Columbia, Canada. Hydrological Processes, 26, 1841–1861. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/hyp.9283>
Sills, D., Ashton, A., Knott, S., Boodoo, S., Klaassen, J., Bélair, 
S., and Yang, H. (2016). A Billion Dollar Flash Flood in Toronto - 
Challenges for Forecasting and Nowcasting [Conference paper] 
28th AMS Conference on Severe Local Storms, Portland Oregon. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.researchgate.
net/publication/311645033_A_Billion_Dollar_Flash_Flood_in_
Toronto_-_Challenges_for_Forecasting_and_Nowcasting>
Simms, G. and de Loë, R.C. (2010). Challenges for Water 
Governance in Canada: A Discussion Paper Governance for 
Source Water Protection in Canada. Governance for Source 
Water Protection in Canada Report No. 2,  1–24. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://uwaterloo.ca/water-policy-and-governance-
group/sites/ca.water-policy-and-governance-group/files/uploads/
files/simms_and_deloe_2010.pdf>
Simonovic, S.P. (2017). Bringing Future Climatic Change into 
Water Resources Management Practice Today. Water Resources 
Management, 31, 2933–2950. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11269-017-1704-8>
Smith, R., Bass, B., Sawyer, D., Depew, D. and Watson, S. (2019). 
Estimating the economic costs of algal blooms in the Canadian 
Lake Eerie Basin. Harmful Algae, 87, 101624. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.hal.2019.101624>
Southern Chiefs Organization Inc. (2018). 2017‒2018 
Annual Report, Chiefs-in-Summit. Ebb and Flow First Nation. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://scoinc.mb.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/09/SCO-Annual-Report-Final.pdf>
Stakhiv, E., Sciremammano, F., Snyder, J., Barletta, D., Cleary, L. 
and Lussier, M. (2006). Options for Managing Lake Ontario and 
St. Lawrence River Water Levels and Flows. Final Report by the 
International Lake Ontario–St. Lawrence River Study Board for 
the International Joint Commission, 146 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://silo.tips/download/report-main-e-6kb>
Stanley, M., Puzyreva, M. and Roy, D. (2019). Advancing Natural 
Infrastructure in Canada: A forum report. International Institute 
for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.iisd.org/sites/default/files/publications/
advancing-natural-infrastructure-canada.pdf>
Statistics Canada (2017). Human Activity and the Environment 
2016: Freshwater in Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-201-x/16-201-x2017000-eng.
htm>
Stevenson, L. (2018). New law aims to protect wetlands, 
lakes, rivers. Manitoba Co-operator. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.manitobacooperator.ca/news-opinion/news/new-
law-aims-to-protect-wetlands-lakes-rivers/>
Stone, D. (2002). Policy Paradox: The Art of Political Decision 
Making, Revised Edition. W.W. Norton & Company, New York, 
New York.
Straith, D., Adamowski, J. and Reilly, K. (2014). Exploring the 
behavioral attributes, strategies and contextual knowledge of 
champions of change in the Canadian water sector. Canadian 
Water Resources Journal / Revue canadienne des ressources 
hydriques, 39(3), 255‒269. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2014.942576>
Stratton, E. (2005). Local Involvement in Water Management 
and Adaptive Capacity in the Oldman River Basin, Alberta. MA 
Thesis, University of Guelph.
Szeto K., J. Brimelow J., Gysbers, P. and Stewart, R. (2015). 
The 2014 Extreme Flood on the Southeastern Canadian 
Prairies. Special Supplement to the Bulletin of the American 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 262 
Meteorological Society, 96(12), 20‒24. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1175/BAMS-D-15-00110.1>
Taranu, Z.E., Gregory-Eaves, I., Leavitt, P.R., Bunting, L., Buchaca, 
T., Catalan, J. and Vinebrooke, R.D. (2015). Acceleration of 
cyanobacterial dominance in north temperate-subarctic lakes 
during the Anthropocene. Ecology Letters, 18(4), 375–384. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.12420>
Telfer, L. and Droitsch, D. (2011). The Canadian Waterscape: 
assessing the needs of Canada’s water leaders. Walter and 
Duncan Gordon Foundation. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.deslibris.ca/ID/231388>
Teufel, B., Diro, G.T., Whan, K., Milrad, S.M., Jeong, D.I., Ganji, A. 
and Sushama, L. (2017). Investigation of the 2013 Alberta flood 
from weather and climate perspectives. Climate Dynamics, 48(9), 
2881–2899. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00382-016-3239-8>
Teufel, B., Sushama, L., Huziy, O., Diro, G.T., Jeong, D.I., Winger, 
K., Garnaud, C., de Elia, R., Zwiers, F.W., Matthews, H.D. and 
Nguyen, V.T.V. (2019). Investigation of the mechanisms leading 
to the 2017 Montreal flood. Climate Dynamics, 52, 4193‒4296. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-018-
4375-0>
Thistlethwaite, J. and Henstra, D. (2017). Municipal flood risk 
sharing in Canada: A policy instrument analysis. Canadian Water 
Resources Journal, 42, 349–363. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2017.1364144>
Thistlethwaite, J., Henstra, D., Peddle, S. and Scott, D. (2017). 
Canadian voices on changing flood risk: Findings from a 
national survey. Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo, 
Ontario, 1–8.  Retrieved June 2020, from <https://uwaterloo.
ca/climate-centre/sites/ca.climate-centre/files/uploads/files/
canadian_voices_on_changing_flood_risk_fnl.pdf>
Thompson, S. (2015). Flooding of First Nations and Environmental 
Justice in Manitoba: Case Studies of the Impacts of the 2011 
Flood and Hydro Development in Manitoba. Manitoba Law Journal, 
38(2), 220‒259. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://ecohealthcircle.
com/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/Flooding-of-First-Nations-and-
Environmental-Justice-in-Manitoba.pdf>
Thomson Agri-Environmental (2011a). Vulnerabilities & 
Adaptations to Extreme Climatic Variability: North Saskatchewan 
River Watershed. An analysis of socio-economic vulnerabilities 
to drought and excessive moisture events in the North 
Saskatchewan River Watershed. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.prairiesrac.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/
Vunerabilities-and-Adaptations-to-Extreme-Climatic-Variability-
North-Saskatchewan-River-Watershed.pdf>
Thomson Agri-Environmental (2011b). Vulnerabilities & 
Adaptations to Extreme Climatic Variability: Old Wives Lake 
Watershed. An analysis of socio-economic vulnerabilities 
to drought and excessive moisture events in the Old Wives 
Lake Watershed. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
prairiesrac.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Vunerabilities-
and-Adaptations-to-Extreme-Climatic-Variability-in-the-Old-Wives-
Lake-Watershed.pdf>
Thurton, D. (2017). “Fort McMurray seeing big spike in water-
treatment costs.” CBC News. Retrieved February 2020, from 
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/fort-mcmurray-
wildfire-water-treatment-costs-contaminants-1.3973249>
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (2019). Flood 
Forecasting and Warning Centre. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://trca.ca/app/uploads/trca_flood/57262.pdf>
Tremblay, H. (2016). La gestion des conflits d’usage relatif aux 
ressources en eau par le droit dans un contexte de variabilité 
hydrologique. Centre de recherche en droit public, Faculté 
de droit, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, 26 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-
scientifique/RapportTremblay2016.pdf>
Tsatsaros, J.H., Wellman, J.L., Bohnet, I.C., Brodie, J.E. and 
Valentine, P. (2018). Indigenous Water Governance in Australia: 
Comparisons with the United States and Canada. Water, 10, 
1639. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/
w10111639>
Tu, C., Milner, G., Lawrie, D., Shrestha, N. and Hazen, S. (2017). 
Natural Systems Vulnerability to Climate Change in Peel Region. 
Technical Report. Toronto and Region Conservation Authority 
and Ontario Climate, Toronto, Ontario. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://climateconnections.ca/app/uploads/2012/03/Final-
Natural-Systems-VA.pdf>
United Nations (2015). Water and Climate Change Adaptation 
in Transboundary Basins: Lessons Learned and Good Practices. 
Prepared by Economic Commission for Europe (ECE) and 
International Network of Basin Organizations (INBO), 106 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.unece.org/fileadmin/
DAM/env/water/publications/WAT_Good_practices/ece.
mp.wat.45.pdf>
Wall, E. and Marzall, K. (2006). Adaptive capacity for climate 
change in Canadian rural communities. Local Environment, 
11, 373–397. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1080/13549830600785506>
Wandel, J., Pittman, J. and Prado, S. (2010). Rural vulnerability to 
climate change in the South Saskatchewan River Basin, in The New 
Normal: The Canadian Prairies in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) D. 
Sauchyn, H. Diaz and S. Kulshreshtha. Prairie Adaptation Research 
Collaborative, Regina, Saskatoon, 245–258.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 263 
Wang, J. and Strong, K. (2019). British Columbia’s forest fires, 2018. 
Statistics Canada. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www150.
statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-508-x/16-508-x2019002-eng.htm>
Watt, W.E. (1995). The National Flood Damage Reduction 
Program: 1976‒1995. Canadian Water Resources Journal / Revue 
canadienne des ressources hydriques, 20, 237–247. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.4296/cwrj2004237>
Weber, B. (2018). “Almost every part of Canada’s largest national 
park deteriorating: federal study.” CBC News. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/wood-
buffalo-national-park-deteriorating-study-1.4747721>
Weikle, B. (2017). “Climate change causes glacial river in Yukon 
to change direction.” CBC News. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/technology/climate-change-yukon-
river-piracy-1.4070153>
Weiss, L., Thé, J., Winter, J. and Gharabaghi, B. (2018). 
Optimizing best management practices to control anthropogenic 
sources of atmospheric phosphorus deposition to inland lakes. 
Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 68(10), 
1025–1037. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/
10962247.2018.1463929>
Westbrook and Ecogestion (2020). Action Plan to Protect 
the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence 2020-2030: Implementing 
Innovations in Science and in Governance. The Great Lakes 
and St. Lawrence Collaborative. Prepared by Westbrook Public 
Affairs and Écogestion Solutions. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://www.glfc.org/pubs/pdfs/2020%20Great%20Lakes%20
and%20St.%20Lawrence%20Collaborative-ENG-Web.pdf>
Whateley, S., Steinschneider, S. and Brown, C. (2016). Selecting 
Stochastic Climate Realizations to Efficiently Explore a Wide 
Range of Climate Risk to Water Resource Systems. Journal of 
Water Resource Planning and Management, 142(2), 6016002. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
WR.1943-5452.0000631>
Wheaton, E., Kulshreshtha, S., Wittrock, V. and Koshida, G. 
(2008). Dry Times: Hard Lessons from the Canadian Drought 
of 2001–2002. The Canadian Geographer, 52(2), 241‒262. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1541-0064.2008.00211.x>
White, D.D., Withycombe Keeler, L., Wiek, A. and Larson, K.L. 
(2015). Envisioning the Future of Water Governance: A Survey 
of Central Arizona Water Decision Makers. Environmental 
Practice, 17(1), 25–35. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1466046614000489>
Wiek, A., Keeler, L.W., Schweizer, V. and Lang, D.J. (2015). 
Plausibility indications in future scenarios. International Journal 
of Foresight and Innovation Policy, 9, 133‒147. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1504/ijfip.2013.058611>
Williams, B.K. and Brown, E.D. (2014). Adaptive Management: 
From More Talk to Real Action. Environmental Management, 53, 
465–479. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00267-013-0205-7>
Willox, C.A., Harper, S.L., Edge, V.L., Landman, K., Houle, K. 
and Ford, J.D. (2013). The land enriches the soul: On climatic 
and environmental change, affect, and emotional health and 
well-being in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Emotion, Space 
and Society, 6, 14–24. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.emospa.2011.08.005>
Wittrock, V., Halliday, R.A., Corkal, D.R., Johnston, M., Wheaton, 
E., Lettvenuk, J., Stewart, I., Bonsal B. and Geremia, M. (2018). 
Saskatchewan Flood and Natural Hazard Risk Assessment. 
Prepared by Saskatchewan Research Council for Saskatchewan 
Ministry of Government Relations. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://publications.gov.sk.ca/documents/313/109701-109701-
SK-FloodandNaturalHazardRiskAssessment.pdf>
Wood, M.D., Thorne, S., Butte, G., Linkov, I. and Kovacs, D. 
(2017). Adaptive Management for Climate Change, in Mental 
Modeling Approach. Risk, Systems and Decisions. Springer, 
New York, New York. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4939-6616-5_5>
Woodruff, S.C. (2016). Planning for an unknowable future: 
Uncertainty in clmate change adaptation planning. Climatic 
Change, 139, 445–459. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-016-1822-y>
World Wildlife Fund (2017). A National Assessment of Canada’s 
Freshwater (Watershed Reports). Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://wwf.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/WWF-Watershed-
Reports-Summit-FINAL.pdf>
Yates, J., Harris, L., and Wilson, N. (2017). Multiple 
ontologies of water: Politics, conflict and implications for 
governance. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 
35(5), 797‒815. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0263775817700395>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., 
Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. and Kharin, V.V. (2019). Global 
observed climate change, Chapter 2 in Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. Lemmen. Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 112‒193. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/energy/
Climate-change/pdf/CCCR_FULLREPORT-EN-FINAL.pdf>
Zubrycki, K., Roy, D., Osman, H., Lewtas, K., Gunn, G. and 
Grosshans, R. (2016). Large Area Planning in the Nelson‒
Churchill River Basin (NCRB): Laying a Foundation in Northern 
Manitoba. International Institute for Sustainable Development. 
Canadian Electronic Library/desLibris, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.deslibris.ca/
ID/10065330>
CHAPTER 5
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Ecosystem
Services
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 265 
Coordinating lead author 
Michelle Molnar, David Suzuki Foundation
Lead authors 
Paige Olmsted, PhD., Institute for Resources, Environment and 
Sustainability, University of British Columbia
Matthew Mitchell, PhD., University of British Columbia
Ciara Raudsepp-Hearne, PhD., McGill University
Mark Anielski, Anielski Management Inc. 
Contributing authors 
Elizabeth Nelson, PhD., Parks Canada
Ian Hanington, David Suzuki Foundation
Theresa Beer, David Suzuki Foundation
Olga Shuvalova, David Suzuki Foundation
John Sommerville, Natural Resources Canada
Meredith Caspell, Natural Resources Canada
Recommended citation 
Molnar, M., Olmstead, P., Mitchell, M., Raudsepp-Hearne, C. and Anielski, 
M. (2021): Ecosystem Services; Chapter 5 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: National Issues Report, (eds.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 266 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
268
5.1 Introduction 
269
5.1.1 Chapter scope and structure
269
5.1.2 Canadian context
270
5.1.3 Ecosystems, ecosystem services and biodiversity
274
5.1.4 Direct and indirect drivers of change in ecosystem services 
278
5.1.5 Feedbacks, thresholds and tipping points
279
5.2 Climate change is threatening Canada’s ecosystems and the services they provide 
282
5.2.1 Introduction
282
5.2.2 Phenology
283
5.2.3 Changing distributions
283
Case Story 5.1: Addressing sea-level rise in Boundary Bay, B.C. through a “Living Dyke” approach
285
5.2.4 Protected and conserved areas
285
5.3 Impacts will vary across Canada’s ecosystems and regions 
287
5.3.1 Introduction
287
5.3.2 Northern regions
289
5.3.3 Mountain regions
291
5.3.4 Forested regions
291
Case Story 5.2: Assisted migration of Whitebark Pine in B.C. and Alberta in response to 
climate change
292
5.3.5 Coastal regions
295
5.3.6 Enhancing adaptive capacity
296
5.4 Indigenous Knowledge is vital to maintaining ecosystems 
297
5.4.1 Introduction
297
5.4.2 Indigenous ways of knowing
298
Case Story 5.3: Preserving Tłı̨chǫ culture in the face of declining Barren ground caribou populations 299
5.4.3 Co-management and Indigenous-led natural resource management
301
Case Story 5.4: Maintaining ecosystems and their services through Indigenous Protected and 
Conserved Areas
302
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 267 
5.5 Nature-based approaches to adaptation maximize benefits 
304
5.5.1 Introduction
304
5.5.2 Nature-based approaches to adaptation 
304
Case Story 5.5: Restoring tidal wetlands and their ecosystem services in Truro, Nova Scotia
306
Case Story 5.6: Promoting ecosystem-friendly shoreline development through the Green 
Shores program
308
Case Story 5.7: Addressing urban heat island in Kingston, Ontario by increasing the urban
 tree canopy
310
Case Story 5.8: Ecosystem services provided by Ontario’s Greenbelt
311
Case Story 5.9: Municipal natural asset management and service delivery 
316
5.6 Moving forward 
318
5.6.1 Knowledge gaps
319
5.6.2 Emerging issues
320
5.7 Conclusion 
322
5.8 References 
323
5.9 Appendix 1 
337
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 268 
Key messages 
Climate change is threatening Canada’s ecosystems and the services 
they provide (see Section 5.2)
Climate change is already affecting the capacity of Canada’s ecosystems to provide services. Extreme 
weather events, in particular, and shifts in seasonal climate patterns are interacting with other pressures on 
ecosystems causing a range of impacts. These will continue to intensify.
Impacts will vary across Canada’s ecosystems and regions 
(see Section 5.3)
Ecosystem responses to climate change across Canada’s regions will vary. Northern, mountainous and 
coastal regions are especially vulnerable to climate change impacts on ecosystem services, due in large part 
to limited adaptation options. Strengthening the adaptive capacity of people and communities living in these 
regions is vital to maintaining ecosystem services.
Indigenous Knowledge is vital to maintaining ecosystems 
(see Section 5.4)
Indigenous Knowledge is critical for maintaining ecosystems and the services they provide in a changing 
climate. Indigenous Knowledge Systems encompass different perspectives for understanding environmental 
complexity, and provide strategies to reduce, manage and adapt to environmental change in a place-based 
and holistic manner.
Nature-based approaches to adaptation maximize benefits 
(see Section 5.5)
Nature-based approaches to adaptation reduce climate change risks to communities, and are often cost-
effective and flexible compared with engineered alternatives. They also deliver a wide range of social, 
environmental and economic co-benefits, and help to strengthen the adaptive capacity of communities.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 269 
5.1 Introduction 
Ecosystems play an important role in supporting society through the goods and services they provide, such 
as food, clean water, air purification and climate regulation. They also contribute to climate change mitigation, 
by sequestering carbon from the atmosphere. The services provided by ecosystems are impacted by multiple 
factors, including land-use change and overexploitation, which can reduce their capacity to deliver benefits in 
the short and long term. As the climate continues to change and ecosystems shift in response to changing 
environmental conditions, their capacity to provide these services will be affected. Maintaining, restoring and 
managing ecosystems to address climatic and non-climatic stressors are key strategies for reducing their 
vulnerability in the face of climate change, by enhancing their resilience to changing conditions. Considering 
the important connections between Indigenous communities and nature, Indigenous Knowledge is vital 
to understanding how climate change is affecting ecosystems and to the design and implementation of 
approaches for their preservation and management.
Ecosystems also play an important buffering role in reducing the severity of climate change impacts on 
society, including through services such as flood attenuation and storm surge protection. Increasingly, 
nature-based approaches to climate change adaptation are being explored and adopted at different levels as 
lower-cost measures (in comparison to engineered approaches) for reducing climate change risks, while also 
delivering a range of social and economic co-benefits.
5.1.1 Chapter scope and structure
This chapter explores the risks and complex impacts that climate change poses for Canada’s ecosystems 
and the services they provide, as well as opportunities for adapting to climate change. It begins by presenting 
an overview of key concepts, definitions and considerations. The chapter then discusses the diverse ways in 
which climate change is currently affecting and is anticipated to affect ecosystems and their services in the 
future, with examples pertaining to different types of ecosystems and in various regions across the country. 
The chapter also discusses the role of Indigenous Knowledge in understanding and responding to climate 
change impacts to ecosystems. The chapter then addresses the growing role and rapidly evolving recognition 
of nature-based approaches to adaptation for reducing climate change impacts to society. Case stories are 
included throughout the chapter to provide practical, on-the-ground examples of adaptation in this field.
The chapter focuses on four key messages, which highlight the current state of knowledge on issues of 
priority. As such, it does not provide a comprehensive summary of climate change impacts and adaptation 
considerations across all regions, ecosystems and social groups. The author team recognizes that many 
knowledge gaps remain and that there are a number of emerging issues related to this topic, which are 
discussed towards the end of the chapter.
This chapter builds from the Biodiversity and Protected Areas chapter of Canada in a Changing Climate: 
Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation (Nantel et al., 2014). It is, however, the first chapter within 
Canada’s national knowledge assessment process to examine ecosystem services and nature-based 
approaches to adaptation. As such, it is intended to serve as an initial input into the rich and rapidly-evolving 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 270 
dialogue around this topic. Future assessments will build from this chapter and endeavour to capture 
and reflect the learning and new knowledge that is being generated through the multitude of projects and 
research currently underway in this area.
5.1.2 Canadian context
Canada is home to a wide range of ecosystems, which deliver extensive services to society. The Canadian 
Council on Ecological Areas (2014) defines 18 terrestrial ecozones, 12 marine ecozones and one freshwater 
ecozone for the country, where an “ecozone” is the broadest level of ecological classification used in Canada 
(see Figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1: Map of Canada’s terrestrial and marine ecozones. Source: Adapted from Canadian Council on 
Ecological Areas, 2014.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 271 
Canadians derive indispensable benefits from ecosystem services, which contribute to culture, economies, 
jobs, health and other dimensions of human well-being. The economic value of ecosystem services in Canada 
is estimated to be at least $3.6 trillion per year (Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem Services [IPBES], 2018), which was more than double the nation’s GDP in 2018. Canada is 
recognized as one of five countries that, together, host 70% of the world’s remaining untouched wilderness 
areas (Watson et al., 2018), and is considered to hold a greater capacity to supply ecosystem services than 
the global average (IPBES, 2018). An estimated 285.8 million tonnes of biomass—agricultural crops, livestock 
and poultry, milk, maple products, honey, forestry and fisheries—were extracted for human use in 2010 from 
Canada’s terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems (Statistics Canada, 2013). While Canada overall scores highly on 
the new Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services Index developed by Swiss Re Institute (2020), ecosystems in 
some parts of the country may be in decline, with resulting impacts to ecosystem services (see Box 5.1).
Box 5.1: The Swiss Re Institute’s Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services 
Index
Recognizing nature’s important contributions to quality of life and the economy, the Swiss Re Institute 
recently launched a Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (BES) Index1, which aggregates data from across 
ten different categories—including habitat intactness, local air quality and climate regulation, erosion control 
and coastal protection—at a resolution of 1 km² (see Figure 5.2). This approach allows for a localized analysis 
of ten categories of biodiversity and ecosystem services, as well as assessments at the countrywide and 
regional levels. The index is also helpful for highlighting connections between BES and economic sectors 
(Gray, 2020).
1 Patent pending.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 272 
Figure 5.2: Ten categories that are considered within the new Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services Index 
developed by Swiss Re, which allows for country-wide or regional assessments of the state of biodiversity and 
ecosystem services. Source: Adapted from Gray, 2020.
Swiss Re considers locations with high BES Index values (i.e., in the upper 15th percentile globally) to be 
"intact" ecosystems, with high capacity to provide ecosystem services. In contrast, locations with low BES 
Index values (i.e., in the lower 15th percentile globally) are considered to be "fragile" ecosystems, whose 
capacity to deliver services has been comparatively compromised due to biodiversity loss and ecosystem 
degradation. Although Canada has a very high BES Index value overall, some areas within the country score 
very low (see Figure 5.3; Retsa et al., 2020).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 273 
Figure 5.3: Map indicating Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services Index values for different parts of the world. 
Source: Adapted from Gray, 2020.
The BES Index can help to guide decision making on the use of natural assets for making businesses and 
investments more resilient to climate change impacts by assessing the state of biodiversity and ecosystem 
services, as well as the dependence of economic activity on these services (Retsa et al., 2020). The BES Index 
can also be helpful for informing government decision making on efforts to restore and preserve ecosystems, 
thereby safeguarding the services they provide.
The preservation of ecosystem services in the face of climate change and the application of nature-based 
approaches to climate change adaptation, as discussed throughout this chapter, may be a strategy to 
help achieve multiple goals. For instance, Canada has made a range of climate- and ecosystem-related 
commitments as a signatory to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, the UN Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement, is also 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 274 
a participant and supporter of the Global Commission on Adaptation, and is co-leading the Nature-based 
Solutions Action Track with Mexico. Reporting on progress made towards these commitments is a federal 
requirement and can be a leverage point for mobilizing coordinated efforts across government agencies and 
non-government organizations that are working to reach similar goals.
5.1.3 Ecosystems, ecosystem services and biodiversity
Ecosystems are a dynamic complex, composed of living organisms—plants, animals and micro-organisms—
and their environment, which interact in a multitude of ways as a functional unit (Minister of Supply and 
Services Canada, 1995). Biological diversity, also known as biodiversity, refers to the variability among 
living organisms—including those living in terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems—as well as the 
ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within and between species, as well 
as diversity across ecosystems (Convention on Biological Diversity, 1992). Nantel et al. (2014) provide an 
overview of climate change impacts on biodiversity in Canada.
Biodiversity and ecosystems produce a rich assortment of benefits that people depend upon and value, 
which are often referred to as “ecosystem services” (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005) or “nature’s 
contributions to people” (IPBES, 2018). Examples of ecosystem services include climate regulation, regulation 
of freshwater and coastal water quality, carbon sequestration (see Box 5.2), and regulation of hazards 
and extreme events (see Table 5.1; IPBES, 2018). While ecosystem services and biodiversity are related, 
they are distinct concepts. For instance, managing ecosystem services can sometimes result in positive 
outcomes for biodiversity (e.g., promoting regulating services such as erosion control can positively influence 
biodiversity by safeguarding habitat), whereas other management actions can have negative repercussions 
for biodiversity (e.g., the selection of tree species based solely on optimizing carbon sequestration, which can 
lead to changes within an ecosystem that negatively affects biodiversity).
Ecosystem services are generated through an ecosystem’s organization and structure, as well as through 
ecological processes and functions (see Figure 5.4). Ecological processes refer to any change or reaction 
(physical, chemical or biological) that occurs within an ecosystem, such as decomposition and nutrient 
cycling (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005). Ecosystem functions—a subset of the interactions 
between biophysical structures, biodiversity and ecosystem processes—represent the potential or capacity of 
an ecosystem to deliver services (TEEB, 2010). For example, wetlands (an ecosystem structure) offer a form 
of regulation (an ecosystem function) that helps to limit the negative impacts of flooding or extreme weather 
events on nearby communities (an ecosystem service) (de Groot et al., 2010a).
Ecosystem services can be classified in different ways, but for the purposes of this chapter, three categories 
are used: 1) regulating contributions (i.e., functional and structural aspects of organisms and ecosystems 
that may modify environmental conditions as experienced by people or that sustain or regulate material 
and non-material benefits); 2) material contributions (i.e., substances, objects or other material elements 
taken from nature that help to sustain people’s physical existence and infrastructure, and that are typically 
consumed or consciously perceived); and 3) non-material contributions (i.e., services that affect people’s 
subjective or psychological quality of life, individually and collectively) (see Table 5.1; IPBES, 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 275 
Figure 5.4: The interdependencies of ecosystems, biodiversity, biophysical process, ecosystem function and 
service, and human well-being. Source: Adapted from de Groot et al., 2010b.
Table 5.1: Intergovernmental Science Policy Platform on Biodiversity 
and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) classification of ecosystem services
CLASSIFICATION
ECOSYSTEM SERVICE
DESCRIPTION
Regulating 
contributions
Habitat creation and 
maintenance
Maintaining the ecosystem structures and processes 
that allow the other of nature’s contributions to people to 
be provided.
Pollination and dispersal 
of seeds and other 
propagules
The ways that nature contributes to the productivity of 
plants through fertilizing and dispersing seeds and other 
vegetative propagules (IPBES, 2016). 
Regulation of air quality
Regulation of CO2/O2 balance, ozone for ultraviolet-B 
absorption and polluting gases.
Regulation of climate
Including regulating albedo, some aspects of 
greenhouse gas emissions and carbon sequestration 
(see Box 5.2).
Regulation of ocean 
acidification
Maintaining the pH of the ocean through buffering 
the increases and decreases of carbonic acid, caused 
mainly by the uptake of CO2 in the oceans.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 276 
CLASSIFICATION
ECOSYSTEM SERVICE
DESCRIPTION
Regulating 
contributions
(continued)
Regulation of freshwater 
quantity, location and 
timing
For direct uses by people and indirect use by biodiversity 
and natural habitats (see Water Resources chapter).
Regulation of freshwater 
and coastal water quality
Capacity of healthy terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems 
to regulate the delivery of water supply and/or filter and 
retain nutrients, sediments and pathogens affecting 
water quality (see Water Resources chapter).
Formation, protection 
and decontamination of 
soils and sediments
Sediment retention and erosion control, soil formation 
and maintenance of soil structure, decomposition and 
nutrient cycling.
Regulation of natural 
hazards and extreme 
events
The role of preserved ecosystems in moderating the 
impact of floods, storms, landslides, droughts, heat 
waves and fire.
Regulation of organisms 
detrimental to humans
Including pests, pathogens, predators and competitors.
Material 
contributions
Energy
Biomass-based fuels.
Food and feed
Wild and domesticated sources, feed for livestock 
and cultured fish (see Sector Impacts and Adaptation 
chapter).
Materials and assistance
Production of materials derived from organisms in crops 
or wild ecosystems for construction, clothing, printing, 
ornamental purposes or decoration.
Medicinal, biochemical 
and genetic resources 
Plants, animals and microorganisms that can be used 
to maintain or protect human health either directly or 
through organism processes or their parts.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 277 
CLASSIFICATION
ECOSYSTEM SERVICE
DESCRIPTION
Non-material 
contributions
Learning and inspiration
Opportunities from nature for the development of the 
capabilities that allow humans to prosper through 
education, acquisition of knowledge and development of 
skills.
Physical and 
psychological 
experiences
Opportunities for physically and psychologically 
beneficial activities, healing, relaxation, recreation, 
leisure, tourism and aesthetic enjoyment (see Rural and 
Remote Communities chapter and Sector Impacts and 
Adaptation chapter). 
Supporting identities
Basis for religious, spiritual and social cohesion 
experiences, for narrative and story-telling, and for 
sense of place, purpose, belonging, rootedness or 
connectedness (see Rural and Remote Communities 
chapter).
Maintenance of options
Continued existence of a wide variety of species, 
populations and genotypes to allow yet unknown 
discoveries and unanticipated uses of natures, and 
ongoing evolution.
Source: IPBES, 2018.
Box 5.2: Storage of carbon by ecosystems
Many ecosystems sequester and store carbon, helping to reduce the accumulation of greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere. Within Canada, the soils of the tundra, forests, wetlands and grasslands are of particular 
importance for carbon storage. Once ecosystems are disturbed, however, stored carbon—which may have 
built up for decades, centuries or millennia—is released to the atmosphere (IPBES, 2018). The northern 
permafrost region contains 1672 Petagram (Pg) of organic carbon, mostly stored in permafrost (i.e., soil 
or rock that remains frozen from one year to the next), which accounts for approximately 50% of the global 
belowground carbon pool (Tarnocai et al., 2009). Thawing permafrost due to climate change, however, 
increases microbial decomposition of organic carbon, releasing it into the atmosphere and triggering a 
positive feedback process (Schuur et al., 2008). Forest growth can sequester carbon for up to 800 years 
(Luyssaert et al., 2008); while boreal forests, for instance, store an immense amount of carbon, climate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 278 
change is threatening their carbon storage capacity (Balshi et al., 2009; Kurz et al., 1999). Wetlands and 
peatlands also deliver critical services related to carbon capture, and store approximately 450 Pg of carbon 
(Mitsch and Gosselink, 2015; Lal, 2008). Grasslands store large amounts of carbon in plant biomass and soil, 
but the degree of storage is dependent on how grasslands are managed, particularly for livestock (Wang et 
al., 2014).
5.1.4 Direct and indirect drivers of change in ecosystem services 
Ecosystems and their services are affected by a range of direct and indirect drivers. The most prominent 
direct drivers for the degradation of ecosystem services include habitat conversion, fragmentation and 
overexploitation/overharvesting, with climate change exacerbating the impacts of other drivers and poised 
to become the leading driver soon (IPBES, 2018). Climate change threatens the viability and resilience of 
some natural ecosystems and the human societies that depend upon them (Malhi et al., 2020). However, 
understanding of the complex ways in which ecosystems and the services they provide are affected by 
climate change is currently incomplete (IPCC, 2019a).
Climate change affects biodiversity and ecosystem services in a multitude of ways. Since biodiversity is 
critical to ecosystem resilience and functioning, it is important to consider ecosystem services within the 
context of broader life support systems when investigating climate change impacts, ecosystem responses, 
climate change adaptation and green house gas (GHG) emissions reduction (Biodiversity Adaptation Working 
Group, 2018). Appendix 1 provides a more comprehensive review of how climate change threatens different 
types of ecosystem services, the social and economic consequences of these climate change impacts, 
and the ways that we can harness ecosystems to adapt to new environmental conditions and reduce GHG 
emissions. Figure 5.5 illustrates how climate change could impact the extent to which different types of 
physical, social and economic drivers result in changes to various ecosystem services globally by 2050.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 279 
Figure 5.5: A visual summary of the relationship between supply and demand for the ecosystem services 
surveyed by Scholes (2016), both at the present time (open circles) and around 2050 (filled circles), under climate 
change. The range of possible outcomes around the year 2050 is depicted with a horizontal bar. Source: Adapted 
from Scholes, 2016.
Other drivers of ecosystem change include human activities such as land-use change, overexploitation of 
resources, pollution and changes in water balance. At the global level, infrastructure, farms, settlements 
and road networks occupy more than 75% of the habitable surface of the Earth (Ellis et al., 2010). Human 
activities have also affected oceans through, for example, eutrophication and fish stock depletion (Halpern et 
al., 2008), leaving only about 13% of the ocean that has not experienced human impacts (Jones et al., 2018).
Indirect drivers of ecosystem change include population and demographic trends, patterns of economic 
growth, weaknesses in governance systems and inequality (IPBES, 2018). Failure to account for the full 
economic value of ecosystem services in decision making has been identified as a key contributing factor to 
their loss and degradation (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2019).
5.1.5 Feedbacks, thresholds and tipping points
It is critical to recognize that drivers of change, including climate change, do not act on ecosystem services 
in a linear manner. Ecosystems respond to climate change through: 1) feedbacks that can limit, reduce 
or further magnify impacts on ecosystems and people; 2) thresholds, where a relatively small change or 
disturbance (e.g., change in temperature) in external conditions causes a rapid change in an ecosystem; and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 280 
3) tipping points that identify the particular threshold where an ecosystem shifts to a new state, significantly 
changing biodiversity and ecosystem services.
With respect to climate change, a feedback loop is something that accelerates or decelerates a warming 
trend—these are two-way interactions between climate and ecosystems that amplify or dampen the climate's 
initial response to elevated GHG concentrations or other external climatic forcings (Kueppers et al., 2007). 
If the impacts of climate change result in accelerated warming, then this is called a “positive feedback”; if 
it results in decelerated warming, on the other hand, then this is called a “negative feedback” (see Figure 
5.6). An example of a positive feedback loop related to climate change is the northward advance of forest 
vegetation with climate warming, which reduces land surface albedo and thereby promotes additional 
warming (see Figure 5.7).
Figure 5.6: Illustration of positive vs. negative feedback loops related to climate-ecosystem interactions. Source: 
Adapted from Kueppers et al., 2007.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 281 
Figure 5.7: Example of a positive feedback loop, whereby the northward advance of forest vegetation due 
to climate warming reduces land surface albedo, thereby promoting additional warming (a positive climate-
ecosystem feedback). Source: Adapted from Kueppers et al., 2007.
Ecosystems are only able to absorb pressure to a particular threshold or tipping point. Beyond these points, 
large and abrupt changes in ecosystem structure and function occur. Regime shifts caused by the crossing 
of thresholds tend to be persistent, costly to reverse (if reversal is possible) and can profoundly impact 
ecosystem services, as well as social and economic well-being (Leadley et al., 2014; Folke et al., 2004; 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 282 
Scheffer et al., 2001). Improving our understanding of how climate change affects ecosystems and their 
services, combined with conservation and efforts to maintain ecosystems services (see Section 5.2.4), can 
help to minimize the negative impacts associated with changing conditions.
5.2 Climate change is threatening Canada’s 
ecosystems and the services they provide 
Climate change is already affecting the capacity of Canada’s ecosystems to provide services. Extreme 
weather events, in particular, and shifts in seasonal climate patterns are interacting with other pressures 
on ecosystems causing a range of impacts. These will continue to intensify.
Climate change is already reducing the capacity of ecosystems to deliver services in the long term, including 
food, water, air purification and climate regulation. Impacts from extreme weather events and changes in 
climate patterns are of particular concern, both now and as they continue to intensify in the future. Maintaining, 
restoring and managing ecosystems are key strategies for reducing climate change impacts on the services 
that they provide.
5.2.1 Introduction
Canada’s climate is changing and will continue to change. Ecosystems are sensitive to the changes outlined 
in Canada’s Changing Climate Report (Bush and Lemmen, 2019), including higher temperatures, shifting 
precipitation patterns, increased risk of floods, drought and wildfire, and loss of sea ice and glaciers. These 
changes affect species distribution and ecosystems in several ways. First, changes in climate alter the 
growth of individual species and the timing of critical life events for plant and animal species—a phenomenon 
known as phenology (Körner and Basler, 2010; Yang and Rudolf, 2009). Second, species generally shift their 
spatial distributions northward in response to climate change (Chen et al., 2011), but can also shift in multiple 
directions (VanDerWal et al., 2013), thereby altering biodiversity, and ecosystem composition and functioning 
(Van der Putten et al., 2010). Third, increased frequency of extreme weather and disturbance events (e.g., 
heat waves, droughts, storms, fires, pest and disease outbreaks) related to climate change (Dale et al., 2001) 
can alter species composition and ecosystem functioning (Weed et al., 2013). Disturbances to specific 
ecosystems and their services are discussed in more detail in Section 5.3.
These climate-related impacts are already affecting the ability of ecosystems to supply services, both 
negatively and positively, and in many cases are projected to increase in severity as the climate continues to 
change into the future (Kareiva et al., 2012). Climate change impacts also combine with non-climate stressors 
(e.g., pollution, overharvesting and habitat loss) to reduce the capacity for species and ecosystems to provide 
services for human well-being (Nelson et al, 2013; Staudt et al., 2013; Hansen and Hoffman, 2011a).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 283 
5.2.2 Phenology
Species rely on a range of natural cues to signal changes in their life cycles—the study of which is referred 
to as phenology—and some of these cues can be impacted by a changing climate. For example, warmer 
temperatures can send a signal to migrating birds to arrive at breeding grounds earlier than usual, which is 
problematic if what they eat is dependent upon seasonal changes and not available until well after their arrival 
(Møller et al., 2008). At the global scale, there is strong evidence that climate change impacts on phenology 
are already affecting the timing of migration and breeding, and leading to asynchronies between interacting 
species (Cohen et al., 2018). Nantel et al. (2014) provide a summary of observed climate change impacts 
on phenology in Canada. These include earlier flowering of plants in the parklands of Alberta by up to two 
weeks (Beaubien and Hamann, 2011), delayed emergence from hibernation of Columbian ground squirrels in 
the Rockies (Lane et al., 2019) and extended autumn flight periods of boreal butterflies by up to one month 
in Manitoba (Pohl et al., 2014). While species may be able to apply adaptive response strategies to deal with 
phenological mismatches, these are not always ideal alternatives. For example, puffins in the Maritimes have 
started eating butterfish instead of herring, which has led to reports of increased juvenile starvation due to 
the larger butterfish being more difficult to consume (Kress et al., 2016).
The impacts of phenological changes on the provision of ecosystem services have not been widely 
documented across Canada, but have the potential to be widespread and significant. Consider the predicted 
increase in the interaction between eastern spruce budworm and black spruce lifecycles, which can lead to 
loss of biodiversity and potentially reduce the supply of ecosystem services (Donnelly et al., 2011). Another 
example is how species, such as polar bears and seals, are negatively affected by the loss of sea ice for 
hunting and mating (Stirling and Derocher, 2012). Also, caribou populations could decline with the loss of 
important lichen forage habitat or extreme weather events (Joly et al., 2012; Festa-Bianchet et al., 2011). 
These examples have the potential to negatively impact food webs, including threatening food security for 
northern communities (see Case Story 5.3; Stern and Gaden, 2015) and nature-based recreation in the North 
(Hall and Saarinen, 2010), even as warmer conditions and sea ice loss lengthen the tourist season (Stewart 
et al., 2012). There is also evidence of climate change disrupting plant-pollinator interactions, with studies 
showing complex and uneven responses of pollinators to climate warming (Morton and Rafferty, 2017). 
Bumblebees, for example appear less able to shift their ranges northward in response to warming, leading to 
shrinking distributions (Kerr et al., 2015), with implications for the many crops they pollinate.
5.2.3 Changing distributions
Ecosystems and species are shifting in response to changing climate conditions. Place-based observations, 
meta-analyses and models indicate that climate shifts have already begun to alter the geographical range 
of plant and animal species on land and in marine systems (IPCC, 2019a, b; 2014), which has implications 
for ecosystem composition and ecosystem service delivery. Mobile species are likely to shift over longer 
distances (e.g., birds, pollinators, etc.). Changes in tree species distributions and the poleward migration of 
freshwater fish appear to be affecting where and how timber harvesting and freshwater fishing occurs in 
Canada (Poesch et al., 2016; Ste-Marie, 2014).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 284 
Range shifts for a variety of tree species in Canada have been observed, including northward shifts in red 
maple, sugar maple and paper birch (Boisvert-Marsh et al., 2014). There is limited evidence of southward 
shifts for balsam fir, white spruce and black spruce based on sapling establishment; however, this may be 
related to the effects of natural or human-induced disturbances (Boisvert-Marsh et al., 2014). In the north, 
northward shifts in the sub-Arctic tree line have been observed (Rees et al., 2020; Gamache and Payette, 
2005), and shrubification is causing an irreversible shift from tundra to shrubland (Fraser et al., 2014, Hill and 
Henry, 2011; Myers-Smith et al., 2011). These range shifts have implications for a variety of forest-associated 
ecosystem services, including timber production, carbon storage (see Box 5.2), nature-based recreation, the 
provision of wild food and water quality regulation. Range shifts of forest insects (Nantel et al., 2014) and 
agricultural pests (see Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter; Campbell et al., 2014) are also likely to impact 
these services, but in often unpredictable ways (Scheffers et al., 2016), as the exact nature of these changes 
over space and time is uncertain.
Similarly, range shifts in lake-dwelling fish species have been observed, such as the northward shift in sunfish 
species of 13 km per decade to occupy more northern lakes in eastern Canada (Alofs et al., 2014). Changing 
ocean conditions due to climate change have led to substantial geographic shifts in marine animals, a pattern 
that is expected to continue or accelerate in the future. With rising ocean temperatures, marine species are 
already shifting poleward (Palacios-Abrantes et al., 2020; Poloczanska et al., 2016) or into deeper water (Dulvy 
et al., 2008) to stay within their preferred temperature range. Movements can be temporary; for example, 
greater proportions of Pacific hake (whiting) migrated northward into Canadian waters during the warm 
1998 and 2015 El Niño events (Berger et al., 2017). Shifts are also associated with ecological responses and 
altered food-web interactions, which increase uncertainty of stock productivity and the vulnerability of fish to 
pollution and exploitation (Cheung, 2018; Cheung et al., 2016). These distribution shifts may simultaneously 
lead to the loss of native fish (e.g., Arctic cod) and opportunities for new fisheries (Stern and Gaden, 2015). 
Similar patterns with variable effects across economically-valuable species are expected for other locations 
in Canada, including the Pacific Coast (Okey et al., 2014) and the Great Lakes (Collingsworth et al., 2017).
Other potential changes to ecosystem services due to shifts in species and ecosystem distributions include 
the loss of berry production in the Arctic due to shrubification (Stern and Gaden, 2015), tree range expansion 
(Pearson et al., 2013), increased risk of diseases (such as Lyme disease) as host species (e.g., deer tick) 
expand their ranges northwards (Ogden et al., 2014; Leighton et al., 2012) and reduced diversity of crop 
pollinators (Kerr et al., 2015).
The capacity of ecosystems and individual species to adapt to climate change through range shifts, however, 
is not without limits. Organisms are limited in the range of environments to which they can adapt. Many have 
limited dispersal ability and there is not always access to newly suitable habitat in which to colonize (Lipton 
et al., 2018). In coastal regions, for example, beaches, dunes, sand spits, barrier islands and their associated 
coastal marshes can adjust to increasing sea levels by continuous landward migration (Savard et al., 2016). 
In some cases, however, this migration is impeded by infrastructure (such as sea walls) or by naturally-rising 
land (Pontee, 2013). This leads to coastal squeeze, and can result in the loss of coastal marshes and other 
valuable ecosystems (see Case Story 5.1).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 285 
Case Story 5.1: Addressing sea-level rise in Boundary Bay, B.C. through 
a “Living Dyke” approach
Boundary Bay, located in the greater Vancouver area on the west coast of British Columbia, is an important 
marine ecosystem that provides many ecosystem services to the surrounding communities of Surrey, Delta, 
White Rock and Semiahmoo First Nation. With 400 ha of salt marsh, the area provides habitat for many 
species, including juvenile salmon, and is recognized as an Important Bird Area of the Pacific Flyway (IBA 
Canada, n.d.). The Boundary Bay marsh also provides flood regulation, by reducing the level of wave energy 
that reaches the approximately 15 km of coastal dykes installed to protect the surrounding communities 
and regional infrastructure (Carlson, 2020). However, it is projected that by 2100, the salt marsh may be 
completely inundated and lost due to coastal squeeze (Carlson, 2020)—the intertidal habitat loss that arises 
due to the high water mark being fixed by the dyke and the low water mark migrating landwards in response 
to sea-level rise (Pontee, 2013). To prevent this from happening, the City of Surrey, the City of Delta and the 
Semiahmoo First Nation are collaborating to find an innovative solution.
The “Living Dyke” concept, led by West Coast Environmental Law, seeks to elevate areas of the salt marsh 
habitat by gradually delivering salt marsh material, coupled with the recurring planting of salt marsh 
vegetation (SNC-Lavalin Inc., 2018). By raising the marsh slowly over the course of 25 to 30 years, organisms 
will be able to adapt as they migrate southward, while the marsh continues to provide ecosystem services 
such as wave protection (SNC-Lavalin Inc., 2018). A roundtable of representatives from federal, provincial and 
local governments, as well as First Nations, will continuously monitor and evaluate the progress of this pilot 
project (Carlson, 2020).
5.2.4 Protected and conserved areas
Protected and conserved areas constitute a key component of Canada’s approach to climate change 
adaptation and GHG emissions reduction, and are important tools for maintaining ecosystems and their 
services (Mitchell et al., 2021). By providing habitat and refuge for biodiversity and sequestering carbon 
(see Box 5.2), protected and conserved areas increase adaptive capacity and the resilience of ecosystems as 
a whole, while also conserving their ability to deliver ecosystem services. Understanding where ecosystem 
services are produced and where people benefit from them is another factor to consider when it comes to 
effectively conserving ecosystems services (Mitchell et al., 2021).
As a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity, Canada has committed to protecting at least 17% of 
terrestrial areas and inland water, and 10% of coastal and marine areas by 2020 (Biodivcanada, 2020). At 
the end of 2019, 12.1% of Canada’s terrestrial area (land and freshwater) was conserved (including 11.4% in 
protected areas), and 13.8% of Canada’s marine territory, was conserved (including 8.9% in protected areas), 
having surpassed the original target for marine areas (Government of Canada, 2020).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 286 
There are many types of protected and conserved areas, allowing for different activities and resource uses at 
the national, provincial, territorial and local level. Examples include:
•	
Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas (IPCAs) (see Case Story 5.4), which are a 
classification developed through the 2020 Biodiversity Goals and Targets for Canada 
(Biodivcanada, 2020), in response to Canada’s commitment under the Convention on Biological 
Diversity. This classification recognizes the important leadership role played by Indigenous 
people in managing their land, as well as the importance that such areas can play in biodiversity 
conservation and the protection of cultural heritage.
•	
Large forested national and provincial protected areas, which can serve as an important carbon 
sink at the global level, while also providing a range of ecosystem services (e.g., improved water 
and air quality, recreational opportunities for people, refugia for migrating species and pollinators, 
etc.).
•	
Protected and conserved areas at the local level—including urban greenspaces, municipal parks 
and wetlands—which deliver a range of services, such as benefits to human health by reducing 
the impacts of extreme heat related to climate change (see Case Story 5.7 and Section 5.5.2.4).
The national network of protected and conserved areas takes into account diversity across ecosystems 
and species, and at the genetic level. For instance, more biodiverse forests can sequester more carbon and 
are better equipped to resist invasions and disease (Bunker et al., 2005). Habitat connectivity is another 
important consideration for protected and conserved areas in the face of climate change, as species ranges 
respond and adapt to changing conditions. For instance, the Yellowstone to Yukon initiative is an international 
effort to link conserved land, and maintain and connect substantial suitable habitat for wildlife to migrate and 
adapt as needed in a changing climate (Yellowstone to Yukon Conservation Initiative, n.d.). As viable habitats 
move northwards, it may be necessary to reconsider park and refuge boundaries to continue to protect 
species, while providing habitat and services for nature and people (Graumlich and Francis, 2010).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 287 
5.3 Impacts will vary across Canada’s ecosystems 
and regions 
Ecosystem responses to climate change across Canada’s regions will vary. Northern, mountainous and coastal 
regions are especially vulnerable to climate change impacts on ecosystem services, due in large part to limited 
adaptation options. Strengthening the adaptive capacity of people and communities living in these regions is 
vital to maintaining ecosystem services.
Climate change is affecting Canada’s ecosystems in different ways, affecting their ability to deliver services 
to the communities that rely on them. Ecosystem responses will also vary depending on their exposure and 
sensitivity to climate change impacts, and their particular thresholds and tipping points. Understanding, 
assessing and mapping ecosystem changes, threats to ecosystem services and the vulnerability of 
communities to these changes can help to identify priority areas and pathways for adaptation. Strengthening 
the adaptive capacity of the communities that rely on ecosystem services is important for their preservation 
in the face of a changing climate, and also for minimizing the consequences to these communities in terms of 
human health, well-being and livelihoods.
5.3.1 Introduction
Climate change impacts on Canada ecosystems will be unevenly distributed across the country (see Figure 
5.8). Similarly, responses of ecosystems to these changes will also vary (Breshears et al., 2011). In particular, 
Canada’s northern, mountain and coastal regions are projected to see large and rapid changes due to 
climate change (Bush and Lemmen, 2019; IPCC, 2019a; IPBES, 2018). In many of these locations, impacts 
from climate change are overwhelming the capacity of ecosystems to buffer variability, with accompanying 
changes to ecosystem services. Managing these changes will challenge the ability of social-ecological 
systems to react adaptively.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 288 
Figure 5.8: Climate change impacts in different regions across Canada, many of which have implications for 
ecosystems and their services. Source: Adapted from Government of Canada, 2014.
At the same time, certain segments of the Canadian population are more vulnerable to changes in ecosystem 
services due to their physical location, reliance on these services or socioeconomic status (Pearce et al., 
2012; Ford and Pearce, 2010). Examples include Indigenous communities; communities that depend on 
natural resources for livelihoods (see Rural and Remote Communities chapter); communities located in 
Arctic, alpine or coastal areas; and individuals that are socioeconomically disadvantaged. While often resilient 
and adaptive, many of these communities have limited resources, access to technology and alternatives to 
ecosystem services that they can use to efficiently adapt to changes in ecosystem service provision. Various 
tools exist that can help to enhance the adaptive capacity of these communities, including by facilitating 
the integration of biophysical and socioeconomic data into risk identification processes and to support 
management decisions (see Box 5.3).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 289 
Box 5.3: Tools for measuring ecosystem flows
Measuring ecosystem service flows can be challenging due to the many interactions and feedback loops 
within ecosystems, as well as the influence of political boundaries, jurisdictional regulations and economic 
factors on management decisions and ultimately ecological outcomes. A variety of strategies have emerged 
to address measurement challenges, including using ecological boundaries (such as watersheds), proxy 
indicators, modelling and seeking expert input, as well as using tools to combine different types of ecosystem 
data. More comprehensive assessment tools and approaches are being sought, including a range of different 
expertise and types of knowledge (Wei et al., 2017). Threat assessment frameworks are among the various 
tools that can help to identify how multiple stresses are intensifying climate change impacts and to locate 
hotspots where ecosystem service supply is decreasing and demand is increasing (Mace et al., 2012). 
Likewise, ecosystem service maps that include supply and demand, as well as watersheds, economic data 
and other important values, are useful decision-support tools (Haines-Young et al., 2012; Naidoo et al., 2008).
5.3.2 Northern regions
Northern Canada has warmed and will continue to warm at more than double the global rate (Bush and 
Lemmen, 2019), with implications for biodiversity and ecosystem functioning (Pithan and Mauritsen, 
2014; Screen and Simmonds, 2010). Canada’s North is projected to experience increased temperature 
and precipitation, and decreased snowfall (Cohen et al., 2019; Vavrus et al., 2012; Callaghan et al., 2011), 
with associated changes in permafrost, sea ice and glaciers (Derksen et al., 2018). Rapid, widespread and 
significant ecosystem changes that have been observed and/or are expected, include:
•	
Increased growth of shrubs (shrubification), vegetation shifts and loss of Arctic tundra (Pearson 
et al., 2013; Myers-Smith et al., 2011);
•	
Poleward shifts in species and ecosystem distributions, including animal and plant species, and 
forest ecosystems (Kortsch et al., 2015; Brommer et al., 2012);
•	
Changes in snow cover, snowmelt, water availability and quality (Evengard et al., 2011);
•	
Invasions of new fish species and changes to freshwater and marine fisheries (Wassmann et al., 2011);
•	
Decline in caribou (see Case Story 5.3; Cressman, 2020; Mallory and Boyce, 2017), related to 
reduced access to food due to earlier and faster snowmelt and increasing freeze-thaw cycles, and 
increased harassment by insects (Cressman, 2020; Johnson et al., 2012; Hansen et al., 2011b).
•	
Loss of sea ice and negative impacts on polar bear and seal populations (Stirling and Derocher, 
2012); 
•	
Thawing of permafrost, destabilizing infrastructure and loss of soil carbon (Schuur et al., 2015); and
•	
Increases in net primary productivity in some areas in the western Northwest Territories and 
Yukon (Boone et al., 2018; Stralberg et al., 2018), with implications for carbon dynamics and 
carbon storage.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 290 
These ecological changes will have cascading impacts that affect a wide range of ecosystem services, 
including food provision, freshwater supply and quality, climate regulation, community health and recreation 
opportunities (Stern and Gaden, 2015; Allard et al., 2012; Kelly and Gobas, 2001). Cascading impacts are 
when a hazard generates a sequence of secondary events in natural and human systems that result in 
physical, natural, social or economic disruption, and where the resulting impact is significantly larger than 
the initial impact (IPCC, 2019b). Such impacts are complex and multi-dimensional. For example, projected 
thawing of permafrost in the Arctic is anticipated to affect plant and animal distributions, which could lead to 
a decline in hunting species and negative impacts on local food security (see Figure 5.9). 
Figure 5.9: The effects of climate change on permafrost and their cascading impacts throughout society and 
environment. Data source: IPCC, 2019b.
Northern communities are especially vulnerable to ecosystem shifts and the corresponding changes to 
ecosystem services. Many northern and Indigenous communities rely on provisioning services for their food 
security—including wild game, marine mammals, fish and plant species (Hoover et al., 2016)—which climate 
change is already threatening (see Case Story 5.3 and Rural and Remote Communities chapter; Beaumier 
and Ford, 2010; Wesche and Chan, 2010). Alternatives to these food sources are limited and also extremely 
expensive given transport costs to the North (Mead et al., 2010). As a result, climate change may increase 
food insecurity in the North. Nature-based recreation, sport hunting and wildlife viewing are important 
components of northern economies (Chanteloup, 2013); the loss of wildlife species and shifts in their 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 291 
distributions may make these activities more difficult and unpredictable, while also threatening traditional 
cultural activities (Ford and Pearce, 2010).
Due to their remoteness, small populations and being located near the northern range limits of many 
species, northern communities tend to have fewer options available for adapting to changes in climate—
such as extreme weather events, sea ice decline and thawing of permafrost (with resultant impacts 
on infrastructure)—thereby affecting their adaptive capacity (Meredith et al., 2019). While Indigenous 
communities are highly adaptive, limited financial resources and organizational capacity can further constrict 
adaptation options (see Northern Canada chapter; Meredith et al., 2019).
5.3.3 Mountain regions
Canada’s mountainous regions are vulnerable to changes in climate, including increased temperatures and 
rainfall, more extreme weather events, more variable snowfall (Kohler et al., 2014; Gonzalez et al., 2010) 
and increased frequency of wildfires (Rocca et al., 2014). Alpine species and ecosystems are considered 
to be especially vulnerable to climate change, as their ability to move to higher altitudes and track climate 
conditions is limited by the physical height of the mountains where they are located (Rudmann-Maurer et al., 
2014). Climate change is projected to result in changes to snowpack (Würzer et al., 2016), loss of mountain 
glaciers (Shugar and Clague, 2018), the upward movement of the tree line, and the loss of alpine species and 
ecosystems (Rudmann-Maurer et al., 2014). For example, glaciers of the Columbia Icefield in the Canadian 
Rocky Mountains experienced dramatic changes from 1919 to 2009, losing 22.5% of their total area while 
retreating more than 1.1 km on average over this time period (Derksen et al., 2019; Tennant and Menounos, 2013).
These changes are expected to impact key ecosystem services in these regions. In particular, loss of glacier 
and snow cover in mountain areas and thawing of permafrost, in combination with more extreme rainfall 
events, is predicted to result in increased rock fall and mudslides in some alpine areas (Huggel et al., 2011). 
Changes to mountain forests may also compromise their ability to protect against flooding, debris flow, 
landslide, rock fall and avalanches (Lindner et al., 2010). In addition, increased frequency of disturbances 
such as fires, wind throws and pest infestations would affect water runoff and quality (Lindner et al., 2010). 
Finally, landscape aesthetics may be impacted by glacier retreat and the loss of snow-covered areas for 
significant portions of the year, as well as shifting patterns of recreation as new areas for tourism emerge 
and people seek out mountain areas as refuge from heat waves (Palomo, 2017). For example, the Canadian 
Rockies are predicted to see a tourism increase of up to 36% by 2050 driven by warmer weather, but a 
potential decrease by 2080 as environmental impacts and glacier disappearance reduce the area’s suitability 
for nature-based recreation (Palomo, 2017).
5.3.4 Forested regions
Climate change impacts on forest ecosystems and services will vary across Canada’s forested regions and 
will often be cumulative (see Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter). Climate change is a critical driver of 
progressive disturbances—such as pest infestations, which influence the likelihood of immediate disturbance 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 292 
events—while also affecting long-term forest structure and composition (van Lierop et al., 2015; Sturrock et 
al., 2011; Burton, 2010). Increasing disturbance is likely also affecting carbon storage (see Box 5.2; Arora et 
al., 2016; Kurz et al., 2008), recreation and water quality regulation (Ford, 2009).
Increased wind throw risks in eastern Canadian forests, as a consequence of decreased soil frost duration 
(Saad et al., 2017), and the die-off of aspen from drought in Alberta and Saskatchewan are also anticipated 
(Michaelian et al., 2010). A similar regional vegetation die-off occurred in the southwestern US due to drought 
and a bark beetle outbreak in 2002‒2003 (Breshears et al., 2005). In this case, tree die-off led to decreased 
firewood and piñon pine harvesting, reduced soil erosion regulation, altered viewsheds and reduced recreation 
quality, although it did increase fodder production for cattle (Breshears et al., 2011). Similar changes to forest 
ecosystem service provision in Canada as a result of climate change may occur in specific regions.
There is an increased risk of wildland fire and drought, in the short term (Boucher et al., 2018; Boulanger 
et al., 2017a), as increases in temperature are projected to surpass the moderating effects of increasing 
precipitation on fire weather (Zhang et al., 2019). Across Canada, fire dynamics and resulting impacts 
on forest ecosystem services will vary substantially (Boulanger et al., 2017a; Hope et al., 2016). This 
spatial variation in fire activity will have significant impacts on forest ecosystem services and costs of fire 
suppression across Canadian provinces. For example, the Fort McMurray wildfire of 2016 cost over $3.9 billion 
(Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019) and has resulted in long-term and widespread effects on rivers in the 
region, with resultant impacts on water quality (see Water Resources chapter; Emmerton et al., 2020). The 
potential for “mega-fires” in temperate and boreal forests due to climate change and forest management (e.g., 
fire suppression) will also increase with climate change (Adams, 2013). These types of large fires can shift 
vegetation from conifer-dominated boreal forest ecosystems to deciduous ones, or could have the potential 
to change temperate forests in certain locations to non-forested vegetation (Boulanger et al., 2017b). Such 
thresholds, if crossed, would have significant impacts on ecosystem services such as carbon storage, timber 
supply, climate regulation, water provision (since vegetation regrowth reduces available water) and recreation 
(see Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter; Mina et al., 2017; Adams, 2013).
Various approaches are being used to reduce the impacts of climate change on forest ecosystems and 
species, such as reducing the risk of fire through active fuel management (e.g., thinning, debris removal 
and prescribed burning) (Astrup et al., 2018; Schroeder, 2010), planting a greater proportion of fire-tolerant 
species and deciduous trees (Bernier et al., 2016) and, in certain cases, pursuing assisted migration of 
vulnerable and important species (see Case Story 5.2)
Case Story 5.2: Assisted migration of Whitebark Pine in B.C. and 
Alberta in response to climate change
As suitable habitat for certain tree species shifts northward under a changing climate, natural migration of 
tree populations may not occur at the speed required for populations to remain coupled with the ecosystems 
in which they have evolved (Sáenz-Romero et al. 2021). This decoupling results in abiotic and biotic stresses, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 293 
such as drought stress, that lead to mass tree mortality (Sáenz-Romero et al., 2021). As climate change 
progresses, traditional conservation methods may no longer be sufficient for protecting populations and new 
adaptive strategies may be required (Hällfors et al., 2017)
Assisted migration—“the human assisted relocation of genotypes through reforestation and restoration 
intended to mitigate future impacts of climate change on forest health and productivity” (Sáenz-Romero et al., 
2021, p. 2)—is an emerging adaptation strategy that is gaining attention globally. By expanding populations 
in the direction that climate change will eventually take them, forest health and the ecosystem services they 
provide can be maintained.
Whitebark Pine (Pinus albicaulis) is a tree species that is foundational to diverse high elevation and sub-alpine 
ecosystems in the mountainous areas of British Columbia and Alberta. Its root systems help to stabilize 
snow, moisture and soil, and its large nutritious seeds feed a variety of bird and mammal species including 
Clark’s nutcrackers, red squirrels and bears (Government of British Columbia, 2021). The Whitebark Pine has 
been listed as “endangered” under Canada’s Species at Risk Act since 2012, due to its population being in 
steep decline over much of its range (see Figure 5.10). This is resulting from the combined effects of drivers 
such as the Mountain Pine Beetle, an introduced pathogen that causes white pine blister rust (Cronartium 
ribicola), and climate change (Government of Canada, 2011). It is projected that Whitebark Pine will be largely 
extirpated from its current range over the next 70 years (McLane and Aitken, 2012). 
The recovery strategy for the Whitebark Pine in Canada (ECCC, 2017) reports that assisted migration 
techniques may need to be part of the approach used to combat habitat loss as a result of climate change, 
and that suitable habitat for growth needs to be identified. Field tests have been initiated to assess the 
capacity for assisted migration of Whitebark Pine within predicted future ranges (Sáenz-Romero et al., 2021; 
McLane and Aitken, 2012). One study found that the successful establishment of Whitebark Pine outside 
of its current range is possible, but there are certain factors that must be considered (Sáenz-Romero et al., 
2021), including the potential for natural seed dispersal (i.e., whether the bird species responsible for most of 
the dispersal in the current species range will follow the assisted range shift) and the degree of public support 
for assisted migration outside of the current range (e.g., there may be resistance by local and/or Indigenous 
communities in introducing a non-native species into the proposed areas). 
Despite the ongoing debate on the long-term success or appropriate methods of assisted migration, there is a 
general agreement that more field studies are needed to better evaluate and quantify the effectiveness of this 
approach as a long-term climate change adaptation strategy (Bucharova, 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 294 
Figure 5.10: Map of the current observed range and predicted future range in 2055 for Whitebark Pine (Pinus 
albicaulis), as well as trial locations for the assisted migration experiment. Source: Adapted from Sáenz-Romero 
et al., 2021.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 295 
5.3.5 Coastal regions
Canada has the world’s longest coastline, measuring over 240,000 kilometers (Taylor et al., 2014). Coastal 
regions are home to approximately 6.5 million Canadians and are a defining element of our national identity 
(Lemmen et al., 2016), as well as critical contributors to the economy (Association of Canadian Port 
Authorities, 2021, 2013). Given the importance of coastal ecosystems for coastal protection, erosion control, 
marine fisheries, carbon storage, habitat-fishery linkages and recreation (Barbier et al., 2011), the loss and 
degradation of coastal areas are likely to have substantial impacts on the provision of ecosystem services 
from these regions (Bernhardt and Leslie, 2013). The extent of impacts to ecosystems and people will depend 
on the success of adaptation measures.
Although the impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems remain poorly quantified (Lemmen et al., 
2016), documented climate risks within Canada include higher temperatures and changing precipitation 
patterns, more intense storm surge events, changing sea levels, diminishing sea ice, changes to hydrology 
(including glacier melt) and changes to ocean-water properties (e.g., temperature, salinity, acidification and 
hypoxia) (Lemmen et al., 2016). The impacts of changes in sea ice, sea level changes and ocean acidity are 
briefly reviewed in the Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter.
Rising sea level can lead to the reduction and loss of important coastal habitats such as salt marshes 
through a process known as “coastal squeeze” (Savard et al., 2016; Hartig et al., 2002). This occurs when 
ecosystems are unable to migrate landward in response to sea level rise due to a barrier, such as a sea wall or 
cliff (see Case Story 5.1; Atkinson et al., 2016). Projections of changes in sea level up to 2100 fluctuate from 
a rise of almost 100 cm in some East and West Coast regions, to an equivalent fall in sea level (i.e., of almost 
100 cm) in some central North Coast regions (Lemmen et al., 2016), due to differences in vertical land motion 
(e.g., Atkinson et al., 2016). Rising sea levels will lead to increased risk of flooding, inundation and, in some 
instances, will threaten the viability of low-lying communities, particularly when coastal storms intensify the 
effects of sea-level rise (Yang et al., 2014).
The North and East Coast regions are experiencing changes to the extent, thickness and duration of sea ice, 
with declines in extent ranging from about 2.9–10% per decade in the North and 2.7% per decade since 1969 
in areas of the East Coast (Canadian Ice Service, 2007). Impacts to people are most pronounced in the North, 
where changes to sea ice have made travel more dangerous, affected subsistence species (see Figure 5.11), 
compromised traditional harvesting activities and impacted well-being (Lemmen et al., 2016). Lastly, increasing 
ocean acidity threatens shellfish and other aquatic organisms, which can impact food provision from 
fisheries and aquaculture operations in the East and West Coast regions.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 296 
Figure 5.11: Impacts of changes in sea ice on species used for food or other purposes (subsistence species). 
Source: Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2019.
5.3.6 Enhancing adaptive capacity
Strengthening the capacity of vulnerable communities to adapt to climate change (i.e., adaptive capacity) is 
key to facilitating successful adaptation to changes in ecosystem services resulting from climate change. 
Adaptive capacity can take a variety of forms. Indigenous Knowledge has provided and will continue to 
provide an important foundation for climate change adaptation (Pearce et al., 2015) in the face of changes 
to ecosystem services (see Section 5.4 and Case Story 5.3). Diversified sources of livelihood and economic 
support, and regional planning initiatives that work to collectively conserve and manage ecosystem services 
also increase adaptive capacity (see Rural and Remote Communities chapter).
Increased educational, logistical and financial resources to support the management and restoration of key 
ecosystems that provide ecosystem services enhance adaptive capacity (Keesstra et al., 2018). Maintaining 
and restoring coastal ecosystems, for instance, can reduce the vulnerability of coastal areas to climate 
change impacts and to the associated loss or reduction in ecosystem services (see Case Story 5.1 and Case 
Story 5.6). These measures are most effective when specific climate change and ecosystem service risks 
and hazards are identified and incorporated into nature-based approaches to adaptation (see Section 5.5; 
Wamsler et al., 2016).
It is also important to address barriers to adaptive capacity. Comprehensive assessments of vulnerability 
to changes in ecosystem services and capacity to adapt to future climate change impacts have not been 
completed for Canada (e.g., Ford and Pearce, 2010). These could, however, help to identify opportunities for 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 297 
enhancing adaptive capacity with respect to ecosystem services (Boyd, 2010). In particular, most studies 
focus on the biophysical impacts of climate change and ecosystem services, but few studies consider the 
equally important socioeconomic aspects (Ford and Pearce, 2010) or seek to understand how to incorporate 
this information into management decisions (Keenan, 2015). This lack of information and knowledge will 
make it difficult for vulnerable communities, which often have limited resources and information, to adapt to 
the ecosystem service impacts of climate change.
5.4 Indigenous Knowledge is vital to maintaining 
ecosystems 
Indigenous Knowledge is critical for maintaining ecosystems and the services they provide in a 
changing climate. Indigenous Knowledge Systems encompass different perspectives for understanding 
environmental complexity, and provide strategies to reduce, manage and adapt to environmental change in 
a place-based and holistic manner.
Indigenous peoples are increasingly taking a leadership role in addressing the challenges of climate change 
and environmental degradation. Given their close connections to nature and the land, Indigenous peoples are 
closely attuned to, and often directly affected by, changes in ecosystems and their services, which can have 
important ties to their culture and identity. Future land-use management practices can be better informed 
by Indigenous Knowledge in a way that optimizes ecological, cultural and economic benefits across their 
traditional territories and beyond.
5.4.1 Introduction
Indigenous peoples in Canada—including First Nations, Inuit and Métis—have been leading the protection 
and conservation of their traditional territories and homelands for millennia. Today, this continues through 
the work of Indigenous Water Protectors, Guardians, Watchmen and many other Indigenous-led initiatives to 
champion resiliency and harmony with Mother Earth. Indigenous peoples have strong cultural and spiritual 
connections to land and water, as well as long histories of adapting to social and environmental changes. 
They have often resided for millennia in their territories through the learning and sharing of adaptive 
knowledge (Houde, 2007), and this has led in many cases to increases in local biodiversity (Harlan, 1995; 
Blackburn and Anderson, 1993). For instance, a recent study found that Indigenous-managed lands in 
Canada have slightly greater levels of vertebrate biodiversity than protected areas, while also supporting a 
greater number of threatened vertebrate species (Schuster et al., 2019). Partnerships between Indigenous 
communities and other government agencies could further enhance biodiversity conservation efforts.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 298 
However, the decoupling of Indigenous lifestyles from traditional lands and the degradation of the 
environment can erode cultural practices, language and local ecological knowledge, ultimately compromising 
the sustainability of both cultural and environmental systems. Worldwide and within Canada, significant 
portions of Indigenous populations live in regions—such as coastal, low-lying and flood-prone areas—that 
are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Indigenous populations also tend to practice 
resource-based livelihoods; depend upon the land as a source of food, traditional medicine and identity; and 
continue to live with the impacts of colonization and historical trauma. Climate change often exacerbates 
these pre-existing conditions (Pearce et al., 2015; Berrang-Ford et al., 2012; Nakashima et al., 2012).
5.4.2 Indigenous ways of knowing
It would be misleading to imply that a list of common cultural traits could describe the richness and diversity 
of Indigenous peoples. Within Canada, there exists a wide variety of nations, customs, traditions, languages 
and worldviews. Nonetheless, there are similarities between Indigenous Knowledge Systems (ways of 
knowing). These relate to in-depth knowledge of place accumulated over long timeframes, as well as a 
framework for understanding complexity.
Indigenous Knowledge has been described as a process that explores how constituent parts of a system 
interrelate, and how the systems they are a part of change over time and relate to larger systems (Berkes, 
1998). It is a cumulative body of knowledge, practice and values, which are acquired through experience 
and observations on the land or from spiritual teachings, and handed down from generation to generation 
(Noongwook et al., 2007; Government of Northwest Territories, 2005; Cruikshank, 1998; Huntington, 1998). 
This may include an understanding of the interrelationships that occur among species, their connections 
within the biophysical environment, the spatial distributions and historical trends of spatial and population 
patterns. This form of knowledge evolves over long time periods and involves constant learning-by-doing, 
experimenting and knowledge-building (Houde, 2007; Neis et al., 1999; Nickels, 1999; Duerden and Kuhn, 
1998; Ferguson and Messier, 1997; Mailhot, 1993; Freeman, 1992; Johnson, 1992a, b). Indigenous Knowledge 
provides insights, for example, to:
•	
Understand the condition of, and changes to, ecosystem service functions within traditional 
territories, serving as a means of measuring ecological integrity and resilience;
•	
Provide early warnings of stressors to the natural environment (e.g., changes among plant or 
animal species), including to the impacts of climate change (Olsson et al., 2004); and
•	
Create an expanded and multidimensional picture of adaptation related to concepts such as 
flexibility (e.g., responding to changes in seasonal cycles of harvest and resource use), hazard 
avoidance (from detailed knowledge of the local environment and understanding of ecosystem 
processes) and emergency preparedness (e.g., knowledge of how to respond in emergency 
situations) (Pearce et al., 2015).
The growing realization that many management policies fail to account for the complexity of ecosystems or 
local contexts has driven the need for new adaptive processes to cope with change (Houde, 2007; Gunderson, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 299 
1999; Holling and Meffe, 1996). Indigenous Knowledge provides insights into implications for livelihoods, 
cultures and ways of life, as well as locally-appropriate and culturally-relevant adaptation strategies (see Case 
Story 5.3 and Rural and Remote Communities chapter; Pearce et al., 2015; Ford and Pearce, 2012; Pearce et 
al., 2011) by building quantitative and qualitative data from a large number of variables (Berkes and Berkes, 
2008). Recognizing that Indigenous Knowledge Systems differ from non-Indigenous Knowledge and that they 
form an equal part in policy development, programs and decision making yields richer and more balanced 
outcomes for maintaining ecosystems and their services, upon which many Indigenous communities rely.
Case Story 5.3: Preserving Tłı̨ chǫ culture in the face of declining Barren 
ground caribou populations
The Tłı̨chǫ people are working to build resilience in the face of climate change impacts on their land and 
culture. The Tłı̨chǫ people, whose traditional territory lies within the Northwest Territories, have witnessed 
dramatic climate change impacts on their most culturally and socially important animal, the ekwò or 
barrenland caribou (also referred to as the Barren ground or Bathurst caribou). The Tłı ̨chǫ people depend on 
the caribou herd not only for food, but also for clothing and equipment (see Figure 5.12 and Figure 5.13). This 
keystone species, located at the centre of Tłı̨chǫ culture, is in rapid decline and climate change is playing 
a significant role (Cressman, 2020; Mallory and Boyce, 2017). Earlier, quicker snowmelt and increasing 
freeze-thaw cycles throughout the year have decreased food availability and increased harassment by 
insects, compounding stresses on the herd and resulting in higher instances of starvation and calf mortality 
(Cressman, 2020; Johnson et al., 2012; Hansen et al., 2011b).
Surveys of the caribou population show that the barrenland herd has been declining sharply for decades, 
from 472,000 animals in 1986 to only 8,200 animals in 2018 (Government of Northwest Territories, n.d.). To 
protect the barrenland caribou, and in turn the Tłı ̨chǫ culture, the Tłı̨chǫ Government and the Government of 
the Northwest Territories placed a ban on barrenland caribou harvest in 2015, which is still in effect. Due to 
the decline of caribou, the Tłı̨chǫ people do not go to the barrenlands as often, where they share traditional 
knowledge, learn the language and go hunting with their families (Galloway and Arvidson, 2020). Losing the 
caribou entirely poses even greater risks to a part of the Tłı ̨chǫ identity and culture. It is important for these 
communities to have agency in adapting to these changes and support in undertaking their approaches to 
adaptation.
The Tłı̨chǫ Government, with support from Indigenous Services Canada, initiated the Tłı ̨chǫ Dǫtaàts’eedı 
program (“to share food among the people”) in 2018 in all four Tłı̨chǫ communities. The program pairs young 
adults with experienced harvesters to go fishing, hunting, trapping, snaring and berry picking. Food that is 
harvested is brought to the community and distributed by the youth to Elders. The program not only 
addresses the impacts of climate change, but also does so in a way that reinforces food security, and Tłı ̨chǫ 
values and culture (Cressman, 2020). Young people who participate in the program spend time on the land 
learning traditional skills and provide a service to their communities, while interacting with Elders. When the 
Tłı̨chǫ Dǫtaàts’eedı program concludes in March 2021, more than 100 youth and 60 harvesters will have 
collectively distributed approximately 4,000 kg of fish and meat to community Elders. The program enables 
 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 300 
communities to adapt to the impacts of climate change with cultural knowledge transfer, working with the 
land, using traditional skills and empowering youth (Cressman, 2020).
Figure 5.12: An Elder from Wekweètı̀ teaches a younger member of the community to scrape and tan Caribou 
hides. Hides are soaked and stretched over a board before being scraped with a k’edze, a tool made from a 
Caribou’s lower leg bone. Photo courtesy of Vanita Zoe.
Figure 5.13: Clothing and tools made by artisans in Wekweètı̀ from tanned Caribou hide. Photo courtesy of Pat Kane.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 301 
5.4.3 Co-management and Indigenous-led natural resource management
Co-management arrangements that are designed to involve Indigenous peoples from the initial, strategic 
stages of planning allow for improved, holistic decision making and Indigenous empowerment over the 
activities taking place on their land (Houde, 2007). This may require flexible legal frameworks to allow for 
co-management arrangements that change and adapt over time, as trust builds between partners (Houde, 
2007). Indigenous ownership and control of their Indigenous Knowledge must be respected. Recognizing 
the fundamental rights of Indigenous Knowledge holders includes sharing of the monetary benefits obtained 
from the use of this knowledge (Mauro and Hardison, 2000).
Knowledge co-production—the contribution of multiple knowledge sources and capacities to co-create 
knowledge—requires open partners who are willing to proceed with humility (Moller et al., 2009b). It is also 
important to recognize that there are limits to the extent to which scientific and Indigenous Knowledge 
Systems can be combined. Given that they are based on different methodologies and world views, care must 
be taken to ensure that knowledge is not blended or extracted from its cultural context so that it retains 
its own integrity (Moller et al., 2009a; Parlee et al., 2005; Davidson-Hunt and Berkes, 2003). One knowledge 
system does not need the other to corroborate it in order for it to be perceived as valid (The Indigenous Circle 
of Experts, 2018).
Canada’s response to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Minister of Supply and Services Canada, 1995) 
provides guidance on applying Indigenous Knowledge through a code of ethical conduct, which advises to:
•	
Respect, preserve and maintain the knowledge, innovations and practices of Indigenous and local 
communities, embodying traditional lifestyles relevant to the conservation of biological diversity 
and sustainable use of natural resources; 
•	
Promote the wider application of Indigenous Knowledge with the approval and involvement of the 
holders of such knowledge; and 
•	
Encourage the equitable sharing of the benefits that arise from the utilization of such knowledge.
Indigenous peoples across Canada are playing an important role in demonstrating leadership on climate 
action, stewardship and the maintenance of ecosystem services. This can be seen through efforts to 
safeguard carbon sinks and the development of adaptation solutions—including nature-based approaches 
and the development and management of Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas (see Case Story 5.4)—
as well as through the implementation of innovative GHG emissions reduction technologies and approaches. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 302 
Case Story 5.4: Maintaining ecosystems and their services through 
Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas
Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas (IPCAs) refer to lands and waters where Indigenous governments 
have the primary role in conserving and maintaining ecosystems through Indigenous laws, governance 
and knowledge systems (see Figure 5.14; The Indigenous Circle of Experts, 2018). They aim to support 
ecosystems and biodiversity while safeguarding Indigenous rights, including the right to exercise free, prior 
and informed consent. Examples include Tribal Parks, Indigenous Cultural Landscapes, Indigenous Protected 
Areas and Indigenous conserved areas.
The need for restoration of the land and the culture is often an important component of IPCAs. Indigenous 
peoples are beginning to lead the call for restoration of lands that have been heavily affected by industrial 
development and degradation from human activities. Driven by the recognition that people, culture and their 
lands are inseparable, priority restoration areas are being identified for wildlife, as well as degraded cultural 
values. IPCAs can also provide safe, nurturing places for people to gain strength and heal from a legacy 
of intergenerational trauma and the ongoing stress of biological and cultural loss, while deepening their 
relationship to and understanding of the land.
The IPCA model is rooted in the exercise of constitutionally-upheld Indigenous rights in accordance with 
Indigenous laws. Exercising agency in how these lands are managed, restored and protected resonates 
with Section 35 of Canada’s Constitution, as well as international declarations that Canada has pledged to 
support—such as the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples—securing a space 
where communities can actively practice Indigenous ways of life. The model also aligns with the Government 
of Canada’s Federal Adaptation Policy Framework, which promotes the consideration of Indigenous 
Knowledge in decision making.
IPCAs can also deliver important benefits to Canadians. Increasing the amount of protected and conserved areas 
in Canada has positive implications for biodiversity and ecosystems, which in turn contributes to maintaining the 
important ecosystem services that many communities rely on. However, much work remains to enable IPCAs as a 
viable option for protecting natural areas and to secure these areas from development pressures.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 303 
Figure 5.14: Map of Canada outlining locations of existing and proposed Indigenous Protected and Conserved 
Areas (note: the map is not a complete picture and some areas remain missing and disputed). Source: Adapted 
from David Suzuki Foundation.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 304 
5.5 Nature-based approaches to adaptation 
maximize benefits 
Nature-based approaches to adaptation reduce climate change risks to communities, and are often cost-
effective and flexible compared with engineered alternatives. They also deliver a wide range of social, 
environmental and economic co-benefits, and help to strengthen the adaptive capacity of communities.
There is a rapidly growing interest in nature-based approaches to climate change adaptation in Canada. 
Nature-based approaches for addressing climate change impacts—such as marshland restoration, low 
impact shoreline development and urban forests—are wide-ranging and tend to offer significant benefits over 
engineered adaptation options. They have embedded flexibility that allows for greater degrees of uncertainty 
in future climatic and environmental conditions, and have been shown to deliver a wide range of social, 
environmental and economic co-benefits, maximizing overall returns on investment. Furthermore, nature-based 
approaches contribute to strengthening the adaptive capacity of the communities that they are intended to 
serve, while reducing risks associated with a changing climate.
5.5.1 Introduction
Ecosystems and nature-based approaches to adaptation can play an important role in reducing climate 
change risks to communities by providing buffering capacity, strengthening the adaptive capacity of society 
and social-ecological systems, and contributing to GHG emissions reduction efforts through carbon storage 
(see Box 5.2). However, the potential and limits of nature-based approaches to adaptation are generally not 
well understood or quantified (Malhi et al., 2020).
5.5.2 Nature-based approaches to adaptation 
Within the context of this section, “nature-based approaches” is used as an umbrella term for the range of 
approaches to adaptation that are nature-driven—including nature-based solutions, natural infrastructure, 
ecosystem-based approaches, natural asset management and protected areas. These approaches are 
rooted in the knowledge that healthy ecosystems, whether natural or managed, provide a diverse range of 
services that benefit human activity, health and well-being. These approaches also allow for flexibility and 
learning, which is important when addressing uncertainty and complexity in decision making. Nature-based 
approaches to adaptation are a rapidly growing area of interest in Canada and are also gaining international 
recognition. Leading economic and environmental organizations—including the IPBES, Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), Global Adaptation Commission, United Nations and World Economic Forum—are just a 
few that have endorsed the approach.
Nature-based approaches encompass strategies that integrate the management of land, water and living 
resources (Convention on Biological Diversity, 2020). Such approaches position decision makers to manage 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 305 
for multiple benefits and build resiliency to change by considering ecosystems as a whole. For example, 
managing forests for timber production alone would produce different results than also managing for 
biodiversity and species at risk, while also considering erosion and carbon sequestration. Similarly, a nature-
based approach to commercially-valuable seafood considers the range of interactions within and between 
coastal ecosystems.
Multiple benefits can be gained through the use of nature-based approaches, for both climate change 
adaptation and GHG emissions reduction, including (see Figure 5.15; IISD, 2019; Raymond et. al, 2017):
•	
Reduced impact of flooding;
•	
Protection from storm surges and saline intrusion;
•	
Provision of habitat and biodiversity preservation; 
•	
Carbon sequestration;
•	
Protection against erosion;
•	
Drought mitigation;
•	
Regulation of water flow and supply;
•	
Improvement of place attractiveness;
•	
Improvements to health, well-being and quality of life; and
•	
Creation of green jobs.
Figure 5.15: Framework used by Raymond et al. (2017) for the assessment of co-benefits from nature-based 
approaches. Source: Adapted from Raymond et al., 2017.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 306 
The role of nature-based approaches is evolving rapidly, as interest and the knowledge base grows. This 
section discusses different types of nature-based approaches and includes a series of case stories describing 
these approaches in practice. Future assessments will have a more robust body of existing knowledge to 
draw from and will discuss the topic in greater detail.
5.5.2.1 Marshland restoration in response to sea-level rise
Restoration of riparian zones and riverine buffers support water infiltration, reduce erosion and regulate water 
availability throughout a season. Municipalities are increasingly acquiring and restoring land in floodplains 
(see Case Story 5.5), as well as restricting development in flood-prone regions through insurance regulation 
(e.g., in Montreal). For example, the Tantramar Marshlands near Sackville, NB, are an ecologically and 
culturally significant region that is at risk from sea-level rise and increased inland flooding events (Wilson et 
al., 2012). Traditional infrastructure in the form of dykes are being installed to alleviate flooding, alongside 
salt marsh restoration—a nature-based approach to adaptation. Restored salt marsh can provide flexible 
protection from certain climate change impacts (see Case Story 5.1 and Case Story 5.5; van Proosdij et al, 
2016). In addition to addressing water level concerns, salt marshes provide habitat for birds and marine 
species, trap sediment and distribute nutrients to key coastal species (Deegan et al., 2012). Recognizing 
the important role of wetlands in combating climate change and its impacts, an allocation of $1.8 million 
from the $75 million federal Coast Restoration Fund was announced in 2018 for further wetland and marsh 
restoration of 75 hectares in the Bay of Fundy, NB.
Case Story 5.5: Restoring tidal wetlands and their ecosystem services 
in Truro, Nova Scotia
Tidal wetlands form the first line of defense during severe storm events; however, the development of Nova 
Scotia’s coastlines has led to the loss of nearly 85% of tidal wetlands (Hanson and Calkins, 1996). In the 
Upper Bay of Fundy—the area with the highest tides in the world—projected sea-level rise, under a high 
emissions scenario, is close to 1.2 m by 2100 (Greenberg et al., 2012). A large portion of the wetland habitat 
loss can be attributed to hardened coastal protection measures (such as dykes, berms and shore armouring), 
which are already beginning to fail with current storm surges and sea-level rise (Sherren et al., 2019).
Truro, Nova Scotia is a town of 12,000 people, located on the floodplain of the Salmon River that flows into 
the Bay of Fundy, and is part of a large network of dykes along the Salmon River. These dykes were originally 
constructed to protect agricultural lands from flooding. Due to increased development over the years, 
however, they are now also protecting residential, commercial and transportation infrastructure (Sherren et 
al., 2019). The confluence of the Salmon River and North River creates complex patterns of water, sediment 
and ice movement in the area, making this site very challenging to manage and resulting in high maintenance 
costs for dyke and aboiteau infrastructure (Sherren et al., 2019). Although Truro regularly experiences 
frequent and severe flooding from the combined effects of rainwater accumulation, high tides and ice jams, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 307 
a particular flooding event in 2012 breached a dyke in several places, which resulted in significant damage to 
infrastructure. The Province of Nova Scotia performed emergency repairs on the dyke, but there is concern 
about the long-term maintenance and functionality of the dyke system (Cottar, 2019).
To ensure the long-term protection of the community and to maintain the coastal ecosystem, a Joint 
Flood Advisory Committee was formed, with representatives from the County of Colchester, Town of Truro, 
Millbrook First Nation and provincial government departments and the public. The committee commissioned 
a comprehensive flood risk study of Truro that recommended several options for reducing flood risk (CBCL 
Ltd., 2017). Of the options provided, no single solution was found to be effective and no measure under 
CAD$100 million was found to protect more than 20% of the priority areas (Sherren et al., 2019). This led to 
the stakeholders’ decision to opt for managed retreat, allowing for the shortening and realignment of the 
dyke and restoration of the tidal wetland (see Figure 5.16). The restored tidal wetland will foster a range of 
ecosystem services—fish nursery habitat, storm buffer and carbon sequestration to name a few (ICF, 2018). It 
is estimated that within three years post-breach, the restored North Onslow tidal wetland will be operating as 
a near optimum salt marsh habitat and regulating (e.g. acting as a storm buffer) ecosystem services.
Figure 5.16: Map of the North Onslow marsh in Truro, NS illustrating the extent of the area to be restored as a 
tidal wetland. Source: Sherren et al., 2019.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 308 
5.5.2.2 Low impact shoreline development
Low impact shoreline development is an approach that can be used for waterfront property owners and 
managers to develop their properties in a shore-friendly way that helps to preserve or restore physical 
processes, maintain or enhance habitat function and diversity along the shoreline, prevent or reduce 
pollutants entering the aquatic environment, and avoid or reduce cumulative impacts (Green Shores, 2021).  
In B.C., the voluntary and incentive-based rating program, Green Shores, is providing training, credit and 
rating guidance, as well as certification for nature-based shoreline development that reduces impacts on 
ecosystems and increases resilience to climate change (see Case Story 5.6).
Case Story 5.6: Promoting ecosystem-friendly shoreline development 
through the Green Shores program
A large portion of Canada’s coastline is developed, which has implications for the overall health of shoreline 
ecosystems and the services they provide. With climate change, Canada’s coasts and coastal communities 
are vulnerable to climate change impacts such as sea level rise, storm surge, flooding and increased erosion. 
There is growing recognition that “hard” or engineered structures alone are not always the most appropriate 
or cost-effective approaches for reducing these risks. Programs like Green Shores and the Municipal 
Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) are contributing to the evidence-base on the effectiveness of nature-based 
approaches for addressing impacts of climate change on coastal ecosystems, and several programs across 
Canada are now supporting the implementation of natural shorelines in developed areas (Eyzaguirre et al., 2020).
The Stewardship Centre for British Columbia (SCBC) runs the Green Shores program—a voluntary and 
incentive based rating program that seeks to reduce the impact of residential development on shoreline 
ecosystems (SCBC, n.d.). The program offers capacity building, tools and best practice standards to 
encourage approaches to shoreline development that protect the land from flooding and erosion (with 
consideration for projected sea-level rise of one metre or more by 2100 for coastal shorelines), increase the 
ability to access shorelines for recreation, and maintain and restore natural habitats (Eyzaguirre et al., 2020). 
In 2018, SCBC and ESSA Technologies Ltd. released the findings from a joint study on the impact and social, 
environmental and economic value of the Green Shores program. The study also provided recommendations 
for improving the delivery of the program in BC, and on strategies for making the program available in Atlantic 
Canada. Recommendations for improving program delivery include (Eyzaguirre et al., 2020):
•	
Incorporating appropriate incentives for landowners (e.g., payment for ecosystem services or user 
pay models);
•	
Strengthening linkages with other change-makers in the system (e.g., identifying areas of overlap 
and complementary tools with leaders such as MNAI);
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 309 
•	
Delivering targeted education and outreach to address barriers and opportunities (e.g., working 
with contractors to better share information about incorporating soft shoreline protection in 
development projects); and
•	
Enhancing learning and monitoring of current and planned Green Shores projects to increase 
acceptance of soft and hybrid shoreline approaches (e.g., enhancing long-term monitoring of 
projects).
The report also featured several successful projects that went through the Green Shores program, including 
the New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat Restoration Project in Vancouver, BC (Eyzaguirre et al., 2020). 
This project achieved a Gold rating through the Green Shores program and involved elongating the original 
shoreline from 150 m to 440 m through the creation of tidal marsh channels (see Figure 5.17). The study also 
undertook an economic analysis of the project, finding that for every $1 spent, social welfare increased by 
$2.50 (Eyzaguirre et al., 2020).
The findings from this report add to the mounting evidence on the socioeconomic merits of using nature-
based approaches to promote more sustainable and resilient shoreline management in Canada.
Figure 5.17: Photographs of the New Brighton Park Shoreline Habitat Restoration Project in Vancouver, B.C. prior 
to the project starting and in 2018, when the project was completed. Photos courtesy of the Vancouver Fraser 
Port Authority.
5.5.2.3 Urban forests
Urban forests provide ecosystem services evaluated at $330 million per year for Halifax, Montreal, Vancouver 
and Toronto, without including the value associated with tourism, recreation or increased property values 
(Alexander and DePratto, 2014). They also deliver a wide range of benefits and can help to reduce impacts 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 310 
associated with climate change impacts (see Case Story 5.7), such as higher temperatures and heat 
waves (Sinnett, 2018; Brandt et al., 2016; Livesley et al., 2016; Rahman et al., 2015), while also storing 
water and reducing stormwater runoff (Berland et al., 2017; Bartens et al., 2008) and contributing to carbon 
sequestration (Nowak and Crane, 2001). They also deliver a number of social and economic benefits, 
including (Bardekjian, 2018):
•	
Promoting physical activity by providing space for recreation and creating an appealing outdoor 
environment;
•	
Promoting mental well-being and stress reduction; 
•	
Promoting social interaction and a sense of community, including stronger ties to neighbours, a 
greater sense of safety, and more use of outdoor public spaces;
•	
Making cities more beautiful and hiding unattractive features like walls, freeways, and parking lots;
•	
Reducing air pollution and provide oxygen; and
•	
Helping provide habitat for wildlife and preserve biodiversity.
Case Story 5.7: Addressing urban heat island in Kingston, Ontario by 
increasing the urban tree canopy
Canada’s urban centres are projected to see an increase in the annual number of extreme heat days (over 
30°C) as a result of climate change (Climate Atlas of Canada, 2019), which have a wide range of health-
related implications for Canadians. Many urban surfaces continue to radiate heat captured throughout the 
day, which can result in as much as a 12°C difference between cities and their surrounding areas at night 
(Climate Atlas of Canada, 2019). Urban areas also tend to have fewer trees and less vegetation, which provide 
important cooling services through shading and increased evapotranspiration.
To help address the heat island effect, the City of Kingston, Ontario released their Urban Forest Management 
Plan (SENES Consultants Ltd., 2011) in 2011. The goal of the plan was to establish guidelines and actions for 
the City to maintain its urban forest cover at the time (21% coverage in 2009), to support the expansion of the 
urban forest and to ensure its long term preservation in line with the plan’s 25 year vision. The City’s official 
plan outlines a target of achieving 30% urban forest coverage (at a minimum) by 2025 (City of Kingston, 
2019). Kingston’s urban forest is estimated to generate roughly $1.87 million annually in environmental 
benefits (SENES Consultants Ltd., 2011). The increase in urban tree canopy will not only help to reduce the 
heat island effect in Kingston, but can provide:
•	
shade for buildings in the summer;
•	
habitat for animals;
•	
filtration of air pollution;
•	
filtration and reduction of the amount of stormwater runoff;
•	
bank stabilization along open watercourses; 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 311 
•	
natural wind breaks; and
•	
an increase in the aesthetic beauty of the city. 
The success of the Urban Forest Management Plan is supported by other City of Kingston policies and 
measures, including its Official Plan, Drought Protection Strategy, Tree Bylaw and a Tree Watering Alert 
system to engage the citizens (City of Kingston, 2021). The creation of a tree advisory board that included 
local stakeholders and representatives from the local conservation authority and Parks Canada has also 
contributed to the plan’s implementation (Guilbault, 2016).
5.5.2.4 Greenways and greenbelts around urban areas
Several urban centres in Canada (e.g., the National Capital Region in Ottawa, Ontario; Calgary, Alberta; 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; and the Greater Toronto Area, Ontario) have developed greenways around the 
cities to conserve green space and maintain the ecosystems in the region and the services they provide (see 
Case Story 5.8). 
Case Story 5.8: Ecosystem services provided by Ontario’s Greenbelt
In Southern Ontario, where the rapidly growing urban area is home to more than one third of the Canadian 
population, there is concern associated with development risk to forests, wetlands and agricultural lands, 
which provide key food provisioning, carbon sequestration, water filtration and key habitat, including for 
species at risk. The Government of Ontario’s Greenbelt Act (2005) led to the production of a land-use plan 
covering 7,200 km2, which extends 325 km from the eastern end of the Oak Ridges Moraine in the east to the 
Niagara River in the west (Ministry of Municipal Affairs, 2017). 
Although the Ontario Greenbelt was primarily created to guard against urban sprawl, it is aligned with 
Ontario’s Climate Change Strategy (2015). The Greenbelt, while sensitive to changes in climate, also plays 
a role in adaptation by helping to protect biodiversity, allowing agriculture and food systems to adapt to 
climate change and providing a refuge from the heat of urban centres (Friends of the Greenbelt Foundation, 
2011). While ecosystem valuations vary in their methodologies, one study has estimated the value of 
additional ecosystem services provided by the Greenbelt, including recreation, carbon sequestration and flood 
protection for private property to be over $3.2 billion dollars per year (Green Analytics, 2016).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 312 
5.5.2.5 Nature-based vs. engineered approaches
While adaptation is often associated with technological innovations or new infrastructure, strategic 
maintenance and management of natural systems can yield similar outcomes that are less expensive than 
engineered options and often deliver additional benefits beyond the targeted issue (Shreve and Kelman, 
2014). Recent syntheses found that restored habitats for coastal defence (e.g., salt marshes and mangroves) 
are cost-effective alternatives to traditional infrastructure, with significantly lower costs for certain habitats 
(Morris et al., 2018; Narayan et al., 2016).
A 2014 study evaluated the effectiveness of three “soft” or nature-based approaches in BC for addressing 
sea-level rise, in comparison to equally appropriate “hard” or engineered approaches (Lamont et al, 2014). 
The “soft” approaches in question included a beach nourishment/shore replenishment alternative, use of 
nearshore intertidal rock features and use of a typical headland beach system to maintain a conventional 
beach. The study found that in the three case examples, the “soft” alternatives provided a significant cost 
advantage over the “hard” alternatives, with a margin of cost savings ranging from 30–70% of the cost of the 
“hard” alternative (Lamont et al., 2014). Other examples of cost-benefit analysis can be found in the Costs and 
Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter.
The Green Infrastructure Guide for Water Management discusses ecosystem-based management approaches 
for water-related infrastructure projects (UNEP, 2014). The guide outlines nature-based approaches that 
are relevant for water resources management—this also includes approaches that consist of built or “grey” 
elements, which interact with natural features to enhance water-related ecosystem services (see Table 5.2; 
UNEP, 2014). At the municipal level, the approach of natural asset management has also been gaining traction 
in recent years (see Case Story 5.9 and Cities and Towns chapter).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 313 
Table 5.2: Nature-based approaches for water resource management
WATER MANAGEMENT 
ISSUE (PRIMARY SERVICE 
TO BE PROVIDED)
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION
LOCATION
CORRESPONDING 
GREY 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION (AT THE 
PRIMARY SERVICE 
LEVEL)
WATERSHED
FLOODPLAIN
URBAN
COASTAL
Water supply regulation 
(including drought 
mitigation)
Re/afforestation and forest 
conservation
•	 Dams and 
groundwater 
pumping
•	 Water 
distribution 
systems
Reconnecting rivers to 
floodplains
Wetlands restoration/
conservation
Constructing wetlands
Water harvesting*
Green spaces (bioretention and 
infiltration)
Permeable pavements*
Water 
quality 
regulation
Water 
purification
Re-afforestation and forest 
conservation
Water treatment 
plant
Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to 
floodplains
Wetlands restoration/
conservation
Constructing wetlands
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 314 
WATER MANAGEMENT 
ISSUE (PRIMARY SERVICE 
TO BE PROVIDED)
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION
LOCATION
CORRESPONDING 
GREY 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION (AT THE 
PRIMARY SERVICE 
LEVEL)
WATERSHED
FLOODPLAIN
URBAN
COASTAL
Water 
quality 
regulation
(continued) 
Water 
purification
(continued)
Green spaces (bioretention and 
infiltration)
Water treatment 
plant
Permeable pavements*
Erosion 
control
Re-afforestation and forest 
conservation
Reinforcement of 
slopes
Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to 
floodplains
Biological 
control
Re-afforestation and forest 
conservation
Water treatment 
plant
Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to 
floodplains
Wetlands restoration/
conservation
Constructing wetlands
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 315 
WATER MANAGEMENT 
ISSUE (PRIMARY SERVICE 
TO BE PROVIDED)
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION
LOCATION
CORRESPONDING 
GREY 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION (AT THE 
PRIMARY SERVICE 
LEVEL)
WATERSHED
FLOODPLAIN
URBAN
COASTAL
Water 
quality 
regulation
(continued)
Water 
temperature 
control
Re-afforestation and forest 
conservation
Dams
Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to 
floodplains
Wetlands restoration/
conservation
Constructing wetlands
Green spaces (shading of water 
ways)
Moderation 
of extreme 
events 
(floods)
Riverine 
flood 
control
Re-afforestation and forest 
conservation
Dams and levees
Riparian buffers
Reconnecting rivers to 
floodplains
Wetlands restoration/
conservation
Constructing wetlands
Establishing flood bypasses
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 316 
WATER MANAGEMENT 
ISSUE (PRIMARY SERVICE 
TO BE PROVIDED)
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION
LOCATION
CORRESPONDING 
GREY 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
SOLUTION (AT THE 
PRIMARY SERVICE 
LEVEL)
WATERSHED
FLOODPLAIN
URBAN
COASTAL
Moderation 
of extreme 
events 
(floods)
(continued)
Urban 
stormwater 
runoff
Green roofs
Urban stormwater 
infrastructure
Green spaces (bioretention and 
infiltration)
Water harvesting*
Permeable pavements*
Coastal 
flood 
(storm) 
control
Maintaining/restoring 
mangroves, coastal marshes 
and dunes
Sea walls
Maintaining/restoring reefs 
(coral/oyster)
Note: Green infrastructure solutions marked with ‘*’ consist of a hybrid of "green" and “grey” elements that 
interact to enhance ecosystem services.
Source: UNEP, 2014.
Case Story 5.9: Municipal natural asset management and service 
delivery 
The Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI) was established in 2016 to refine, test and scale up natural 
asset management work that was first initiated by the Town of Gibsons, B.C. The initiative is changing the 
way in which municipalities across Canada deliver services and increase the quality and resilience of natural 
infrastructure in the face of climate change at lower costs and reduced risk.
The MNAI is testing how to manage natural assets such as woodlands, wetlands and creeks in urban areas 
as part of a sustainable infrastructure strategy. This approach identifies and determines the value of natural 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 317 
assets, and accounts for their contribution to municipal government services delivery—services that would 
otherwise need to be delivered by engineered assets. Municipal natural assets are defined by MNAI as the 
stock of natural resources or ecosystems that a municipality, regional district, or other form of local government 
could rely upon or manage for the sustainable provision of one or more local government services.
New approaches to manage natural assets are being driven by declining urban infrastructure that is 
expensive to replace, by the dramatic decline in natural ecosystems, and the urgency of addressing 
infrastructure challenges in the face of growing populations and climate change impacts such as floods and 
droughts. Canadian local governments that are seeking new strategies to better deliver core services in a 
financially sustainable manner are turning to asset management.
Evidence from the MNAI suggests that an asset management-based approach holds great promise for 
tackling the twin challenges of deteriorating quality of urban infrastructure and declining ecosystem health. 
For instance, Table 5.3 provides an overview of water-related municipal services that have the potential to be 
provided by natural assets and ecosystem services, instead of engineered approaches.
The MNAI’s lifecycle view of natural assets includes completing an inventory of a community’s existing 
assets, determining the current state and value of those assets, and implementing asset management 
plans to maintain or replace them. The emphasis on asset management for sustainable service delivery―as 
opposed to the underlying asset that delivers those services―means that natural capital can form a core 
element of municipal asset management strategies.
The MNAI team developed a methodology and guidance documents to help local governments identify, 
valuate and manage natural assets within traditional financial and asset management planning frameworks. 
Encouraging early results from cohort communities across the country are providing support for this concept. 
The Gibsons’ aquifer, for example, was found to provide sufficient water storage to supply about 70% of the 
town’s projected population for the foreseeable future (Waterline Resources Inc., 2013), with no capital costs 
and operating costs of $30,000 per year for monitoring―a fraction of the cost of engineered water supply 
infrastructure.
The first cohort communities―the City of Nanaimo, B.C., City of Grand Forks, B.C., District of West Vancouver, 
B.C., Region of Peel, ON and the Town of Oakville, ON―assessed the value of stormwater services provided 
by a natural asset under various scenarios. While results from each project were unique, they shared some 
key findings: natural assets were found to provide equivalent stormwater management services to engineered 
ones, and all communities found that their natural asset of interest was meeting at least the 100-year flood 
storage requirements under current standards. The value of natural assets was also found to increase under 
scenarios associated with both climate change and intensified development. Overall, early results of the MNAI 
demonstrate that newly-recognized ecosystem service values are improving local government understanding 
of how nature is providing municipal services and impacting decision making.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 318 
Table 5.3: Examples of water-related municipal services that can be 
provided by natural assets and ecosystem services
MUNICIPAL WATER 
SERVICES
ECOSYSTEM SERVICE
NATURAL ASSET
ENGINEERED 
REPLACEMENT
Drinking water
supply
Aquifer recharge
Aquifer and source water 
area
Pipes for bringing in 
water supply, water 
treatment plant
Lake recharge
Lake watershed
River headwaters
Headwater lands
Drinking water
treatment
Water purification
Wetlands, forests, 
vegetation
Water treatment plant
Water filtration
Stormwater 
Management
Rainwater absorption
Wetlands, forests, 
vegetation
Stormwater pipes, 
culverts, storm drains, 
stormwater ponds
Rainwater filtration
Water treatment plant
Flood Mitigation
Rainwater absorption
Wetlands, forests, 
vegetation
Dams, retaining walls, 
embankments
Source: Adapted from MNAI, 2019.
5.6 Moving forward 
There are a number of emerging issues, knowledge gaps and research needs related to how climate change 
is affecting ecosystem services, and to help integrate ecosystem service considerations and adaptation 
opportunities into climate change planning.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 319 
5.6.1 Knowledge gaps
While there is ongoing research on biodiversity and ecosystem services across the country, there are areas 
where further knowledge is needed.
5.6.1.1 Climate change impacts to ecosystems and their services
Considering the complexity of ecosystems, it is challenging to anticipate the multitude of ways in which 
climate change will affect individual species, interactions between species, changes in ecosystem processes 
and functions, and how these various changes will translate to impacts for ecosystem services. 
Additional research is also needed to better understand how changes to ecosystem services under a 
changing climate will affect the communities that rely on them for livelihoods, health and well-being. 
Comprehensive assessments of vulnerability to changes in ecosystem services and capacity to adapt to 
future climate change impacts would help to identify opportunities for enhancing adaptive capacity with 
respect to ecosystem services (Boyd, 2010).
5.6.1.2 Data and information
More open source data, national standards on what constitutes successful and sustainable nature-based 
approaches, metrics, approaches for monitoring and inventories, and improved collection and sharing of 
baseline data would support more cohesive and coordinated biodiversity research on climate change impacts 
and adaptation (Biodiversity Adaptation Working Group, 2018). Specific data and information needs include:
•	
Improvements of spatial datasets and indicators of ecosystem service flows;
•	
More data on the impacts of phenological changes on ecosystem services and non-monetary 
valuation of ecosystem service flows; 
•	
Development of metrics and standards (beyond forests) to track rates of land-based and coastal 
carbon sequestration and storage;
•	
Better identification of hotspots of vulnerability and resilience; and
•	
Increased monitoring to understand the effectiveness of adaptation approaches. 
Gaps also exist in the mechanisms for providing access to information and facilitating collaboration beyond 
government agencies. Accessible guidance, resources and tools are also needed to support decision makers 
in integrating adaptation and landscape-level resilience through ecosystem service approaches.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 320 
5.6.2 Emerging issues
Achieving and maintaining resilient ecosystems, communities and economies will benefit all Canadians. As 
research and implementation of climate change strategies emerge and evolve, there are several areas where 
progress may advance quickly, as well as issues that require further attention. This section highlights some 
emerging issues that may play key roles in the resilience conversation with respect to ecosystem services, as 
it moves forward.
5.6.2.1 Valuation of nature-based approaches
Valuing ecosystem services and natural assets, applying different approaches to decision making and 
assessing the costs and benefits of nature-based approaches to adaptation compared with engineered 
approaches are rapidly evolving areas of work that are gaining considerable interest and profile in Canada.
With increased incidences of flooding across Canadian urban centres and in coastal regions, there is renewed 
interest in valuing and utilizing nature-based approaches to meet needs that are normally provided by “grey” 
or engineered infrastructure. For example, forests and wetlands reduce the impact of floods, soil erosion 
and landslides, while improving water security (Seddon et al., 2020), as well as providing further ecological 
benefits (e.g., providing habitat, cultural services, etc.) and cost savings.
Municipalities are making economic arguments for maintaining natural systems to provide needed services, 
particularly those related to water provision and regulation (see Case Story 5.9). Currently, a range of 
approaches to valuation have been applied, including replacement cost (where services have the potential to 
align with Public Sector Accounting Board requirements), restoration costs (where Low Impact Development 
is utilized), and land value (where management requires transfer of ownership rights). In the process, it is 
important for municipalities to recognize that natural systems can be overwhelmed when their capacity is 
exceeded, and begin to consider natural systems as a component of a sustainable infrastructure strategy that 
includes both “grey” and natural components.
5.6.2.2 Improved integration of Indigenous Knowledge
As highlighted in Section 5.4, improved integration and consideration of Indigenous Knowledge will play an 
important role in addressing climate change impacts to ecosystems and their services, and for adaptation 
planning across Canada. This cannot be done without acknowledging the harms that have historically eroded 
trust between Indigenous groups and settler communities. As part of the national effort to commit deeply to 
the truth and reconciliation process, capacity building and empowering Indigenous leadership and autonomy 
are important elements in partnering and deeply engaging with Indigenous communities on climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 321 
5.6.2.3 Growing role for citizen science
With mobile technology and applications that permit real-time data-sharing about natural phenomena to 
online repositories (e.g., for water quality, migrating birds, documenting flowering times, etc.), citizens can 
participate in improving the coverage of knowledge related to changes in ecosystem services, while also 
becoming involved in tracking changes across the country. Many tools are available to leverage human 
interest in monitoring information with a great deal of coverage, for very little cost. Interest in participating in 
unique activities has created opportunities to gather monitoring information in a number of places that could 
not feasibly be monitored previously, and this interest can be channelled as an effective tool for building 
knowledge and awareness. Furthermore, engaging local citizens in data collection can built adaptive learning, 
social capital, and encourage the ethos of stewardship and care of local ecosystems over the long term.
5.6.2.4 Broadening collaboration
Extending beyond traditional partners and seeking new collaborations in maintaining ecosystem services, 
and the design and implementation of nature-based approaches to adaptation will help to fuel innovation. In 
some cases, this may require overcoming barriers in communicating the value of biodiversity and ecosystem 
protection, particularly in terms of maintaining ecosystem services under a changing climate. The promotion 
of ecosystem services within the context of climate change adaptation measures could be tailored to 
different audiences using terminology that is familiar to them, while highlighting the relevance of these 
measures to target groups. The term “ecosystem services” is not understood by all, but the concept of deriving 
benefits from nature is widely recognized and is relatively easy to explain and connect to particular groups.
5.6.2.5 Innovative investments and partnerships
Innovative investments and partnerships are emerging for investments in nature-based approaches and 
the preservation of ecosystems and their services. For instance, the Government of Canada announced 
the $500 million Canada Nature Fund in late 2018, which will provide matching funds for provincial, 
territorial, municipal and NGO-led projects to achieve conservation goals. Other financing opportunities that 
blend public and private funds―such as green bonds, social finance models, and nature-based insurance 
mechanisms, among others―can be devised to provide needed investments in nature-based approaches and 
the preservation of ecosystems and their services. Major federal infrastructure funding also exists under the 
Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund and the Adaptation, Resilience and Disaster Mitigation sub-stream of 
the federal Green Infrastructure Fund.
5.6.2.6 Growing private interest in nature-based approaches to adaptation
Globally, the private sector is increasingly acknowledging the importance of healthy and intact ecosystems. 
The World Economic Forum (2020) has listed biodiversity loss and environmental damage, failure to 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 322 
reduce GHG emissions and adapt to climate change, and extreme weather and natural disasters as the top 
three risks to the global economy over the past six years. Businesses are increasingly seeking enhanced 
understanding of operational risks, supply chain continuity, liability risks and market disruptions that could 
result from the loss and degradation of ecosystems and their associated services.
5.7 Conclusion 
Climate change presents a multitude of risks, opportunities and trade-offs for Canada’s ecosystems and 
the people that rely on them. The nature and severity of the impacts will depend on the rate and magnitude 
of climate changes in the years to come and in the success of adaptation measures. An improved 
understanding of the multiple drivers of change that affect ecosystem services, as well as the ways in which 
changes to ecosystem services affect communities and vulnerable segments of the population can help to 
target the most effective adaptation strategies. Natural systems can also play an important buffering role 
in terms of reducing the severity of climate change impacts. Nature-based approaches to adaptation have 
been shown to provide comprehensive, multi-disciplinary and flexible approaches that promote a suite of co-
benefits, particularly compared with engineered approaches to adaptation. This is a rapidly growing field of interest 
and study in Canada, which promises to produce new knowledge and lessons learned in the years to come.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 323 
5.8 References 
Adams, M.A. (2013). Mega-fires, tipping points and ecosystem 
services: managing forests and woodlands in an uncertain 
future. Forest Ecology and Management, 294, 250–261. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2012.11.039>
Alexander, C. and DePratto, B. (2014). The Value of 
Urban Forests in Cities Across Canada. Special Report 
– TD Economics. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
www.td.com/document/PDF/economics/special/
UrbanForestsInCanadianCities.pdf>
Allard, M., Lemay, M., Barrett, M., Sheldon, T. and Brown, R. 
(2012). From Science to Policy in Nunavik and Nunatsiavut: 
Synthesis and recommendations in Nunavik and Nunatsiavut: 
From science to policy. An Integrated Impact Study (IRES) of 
climate change and modernization, (eds.) Allard M. and Lemay 
M. ArcticNet Inc., Quebec City, Canada. 72 p.
Alofs, K. M., D. A. Jackson, and N. P. Lester. (2014). Ontario 
freshwater fish demonstrate differing range-boundary shifts 
in a warming climate. Diversity and Distributions 20(2), 123–
136. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
ddi.12130>
Arora, V.K., Peng, Y., Kurz, W.A., Fyfe, H.C., Hawkins, B. and 
Werner, A.T. (2016). Potential near-future carbon uptake 
overcomes losses from a large insect outbreak in British 
Columbia, Canada. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(6), 
2590–2598. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2015GL067532>
Association of Canadian Port Authorities (2013). Industry 
information – Canadian port industry; Association of Canadian 
Port Authorities. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.acpa-
ports.net/industry/industry.html>
Association of Canadian Port Authorities (2021). Economy: 
CPAs generate billions of dollars for the economy and support 
hundreds of thousands of jobs. Retrieved April 2021, from 
<https://acpa-aapc.ca/our-impact/economy/> 
Astrup, R., Bernier, P.Y., Genet, H., Lutz, D.A. and Bright, R.M. 
(2018). A sensible climate solution for the boreal forest. Nature 
Climate Change, 8, 11–12. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41558-017-0043-3>
Atkinson, D.E., Forbes, D.L. and James, T.S. (2016): Dynamic 
coasts in a changing climate; Chapter 2 in Canada’s Marine 
Coasts in a Changing Climate, (ed.) D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, 
T.S. James and C.S.L. Mercer Clarke; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, 27–68. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/canadas-
marine-coasts-changing-climate/18388>
Balshi, M.S., McGuire, A.D., Duffy, P., Flannigan, M., Kicklighter, 
D.W. and Melillo, J. (2009). Vulnerability of carbon storage in 
North American boreal forests to wildfires in the 21st century. 
Global Change Biology 15, 1491‒1510. Retrieved April 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.01877.x>
Barbier, E.B., Hacker, S.D., Kennedy, C., Koch, E.W., Stier, A.C., 
and Silliman, B.R. (2011). The value of estuarine and coastal 
ecosystem services. Ecological Monographs, 81(2), 169–193. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/10-
1510.1>
Bardekjian, A. (2018). Compendium of best urban forest 
management practices. Second Edition. Originally 
commissioned to Tree Canada by Natural Resources Canada. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://treecanada.ca/resources/
canadian-urban-forest-compendium/>
Bartens, J., Day, S.D., Harris, J.R., Dove, J.E. and Wynne, T.M. 
(2008). Can Urban Tree Roots Improve Infiltration through 
Compacted Subsoils for Stormwater Management? Journal 
of Environmental Quality: Bioremediation and Biodegradation, 
37(6), 2048–2057. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.2134/jeq2008.0117>
Beaubien, E. and Hamann, A. (2011). Spring flowering response 
to climate change between 1936 and 2006 in Alberta, Canada. 
BioScience 61(7): 514-524. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1525/bio.2011.61.7.6>
Beaumier, M.C. and Ford, J.D. (2010). Food insecurity among 
Inuit women exacerbated by socio-economic stresses and 
climate change. Canadian Journal of Public Health, 101(3), 
196–201. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
bf03404373>
Berger, A.M., Grandin, C.J., Taylor, I.G., Edwards, A.M. and 
Cox, C. (2017). Status of the Pacific Hake (whiting) stock 
in U.S. and Canadian waters in 2017. Prepared by the Joint 
Technical Committee of the U.S. and Canada Pacific Hake/
Whiting Agreement, National Marine Fisheries Service and 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://www.cio.noaa.gov/services_programs/prplans/pdfs/
ID403_2019finalassessment_PacificHake.pdf>
Berkes, F. (1998). Indigenous knowledge and resource 
management systems in the Canadian subarctic in Linking 
social and ecological systems: management practices and 
social mechanisms for building resilience. (Eds.) F. Berkes and 
C. Folke. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 98–128.
Berkes F. and Berkes M.K. (2008). Ecological complexity, fuzzy 
logic and holism in indigenous knowledge. Futures 41(1), 
6–12. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
futures.2008.07.003>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 324 
Berland, A., Shiflett, S.A., Shuster, W.D., Garmestani, A.S., 
Goddard, H.C., Hermann, D.L. and Hopton, M.E. (2017). The role 
of trees in urban stormwater management. Landscape and Urban 
Planning, 162, 167–177. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2017.02.017>
Bernhardt, J.R. and Leslie, H.M. (2013). Resilience to Climate 
Change in Coastal Marine Ecosystems. Annual Review of Marine 
Science, 5, 371–392. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-marine-121211-172411>
Bernier, P.Y., Gauthier, S., Jean, P.-O., Manka, F., Boulanger, Y., 
Beaudoin, A. and Guindon, L. (2016). Mapping local effects of 
forest properties on fire risk across Canada. Forests, 7(8), 157. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/f7080157>
Berrang-Ford, L., Dingle, K., Ford., J.D., Lee, C., Lwawa, S., 
Namanya, D.B., Henderson, J., Llanos, A., Carcamo, C. and Edge, 
V. (2012). Vulnerability of Indigenous health to climate change: 
A case study of Uganda’s Batwa Pygmies. Social Science and 
Medicine 75(6), 1067–1077. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2012.04.016>
Biodivcanada (2020). 2020 Biodiversity Goals and Targets for 
Canada. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://biodivcanada.chm-
cbd.net/2020-biodiversity-goals-and-targets-canada>
Biodiversity Adaptation Working Group (2018). Adaptation 
State of Play Report. Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation 
Platform. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/
publication-scientifique/Biodiversity-Adaptation-Working-Group-
State-of-Play-Report.pdf>
Blackburn, T. C. and Anderson, K. (eds.) (1993). Before the 
wilderness: environmental management by native Californians. 
Ballena Press, Menlo Park, California, USA, 476 p.
Boisvert-Marsh, L., Périé, C. and de Blois, S. (2014). Shifting with 
climate? Evidence for recent changes in tree species distribution 
at high latitudes. Ecosphere 5(7), 1–33. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1890/ES14-00111.1>
Boone, R.B., Conant, R.T., Sircely, J., Thornton, P.K. and Herrero, 
M. (2018). Climate change impacts on selected global rangeland 
ecosystem services. Global Change Biology, 24, 1382–1392. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
gcb.13995>
Boucher, D., Boulanger, Y., Aubin, I., Bernier, P.Y., Beaudoin, 
A., Guindon, L. and Gauthier, S. (2018). Current and projected 
cumulative impacts of fire, drought, and insects on timber 
volumes across Canada. Ecological Applications, 285, 1245–
1259. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
eap.1724>
Boulanger, Y., Girardin, M., Bernier, P.Y., Gauthier, S., Beaudoin, 
A. and Guindon, L. (2017b). Changes in mean forest age in 
Canada’s forests could limit future increases in area burned but 
compromise potential harvestable conifer volumes. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 47(6), 755–764. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2016-0445>
Boulanger, Y., Taylor, A.R., Price, D.T., Cyr, D., McGarrigle, 
E., Rammer, W., Sainte-Marie, G., Beaudoin, A., Guindon, 
and Mansuy, N. (2017a). Climate change impacts on forest 
landscapes along the Canadian southern boreal forest transition 
zone. Landscape Ecology, 32(7), 1415–1431. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0421-7>
Boyd, J. (2010). Ecosystem Services and Climate Adaptation. 
Resources for the Future. July 2010, Issue Brief 10–16.
Brandt, L., Derby Lewis, A., Fahey, R., Scott, L., Darling, L. and 
Swanston, C. (2016). A framework for adapting urban forests 
to climate change. Environmental Science & Policy, 66, 393–
402. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.06.005>
Breshears, D.D., Cobb, N.S., Rich, P.M., Price, K.P. Allen, C.D., 
Balice, R.G., Romme, W.H., Kastens, J.H., Floyd, M.L., Belnap, 
J., Anderson, J.J., Myers, O.B. and Meyer, C.W. (2005). Regional 
vegetation die-off in response to global-change-type drought. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the USA 
102(42), 15144–15148. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0505734102>
Breshears, D.D., López-Hoffman, L. and Graumlich, L.J. (2011). 
When ecosystem services crash: preparing for big, fast, patchy 
climate change. AMBIO, 40(3), 256–263. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-010-0106-4>
Brommer, J.E., Lehikoinen, A., Valkama, J. (2012). The breeding 
ranges of central European and Arctic bird species move 
poleward. PLoS One, 7(9), e43648. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0043648>
Bucharova, A. (2017). Assisted migration within species range 
ignores biotic interactions and lacks evidence. Restoration 
Ecology, 25(1), 14–18. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/rec.12457>
Bunker D.E., DeClerck F., Bradford J.C., Colwell R.K., Perfecto 
I., Phillips O., Sankaran M. and Naeem S. (2005). Species loss 
and aboveground carbon storage in a tropical forest. Science, 
310(5750), 1029–1031. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1117682>
Burton, P.J. (2010). Striving for sustainability and resilience in 
the face of unprecedented change: the case of the mountain 
pine beetle outbreak in British Columbia. Sustainability, 
2(8), 2403–2423. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.3390/su2082403>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 325 
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON. 444 p. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/>
Callaghan, T.V., Johansson, M., Brown, R.D., Groisman, P.Y., 
Labba, N., Radionov, V., Barry, R.G., Bulygina, O.N., Essery, 
R.L.H., Frolov, D.M., Golubev, V.N., Grenfell, T.C., Petrushina, 
M.N., Razuvaev, V.N., Robinson, D.A., Romanov, P., Shindell, D., 
Shmakin, A.B., Sokratov, S.A., Warren, S. and Yang, D. (2011). 
The changing face of Arctic snow cover: a synthesis of observed 
and projected changes. AMBIO, 40, 17–31. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s13280-011-0212-y>
Canadian Council on Ecological Areas (2014). Ecozones 
Introduction. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://ccea-ccae.
org/ecozones-introduction/>
Canadian Ice Service (2007). Canadian Ice Service digital 
archive – regional charts: Canadian Ice Service ice regime 
regions (CISIRR) and sub-regions with associated data quality 
indices; Canadian Ice Service, Archive Documentation Series, 
no. 3, 90 p.
Carlson, D. (2020). Natural infrastructure for Coastal Flood 
Protection in Boundary Bay, BC. Presentation by West Coast 
Environmental Law at the Nature-Based Climate Solutions 
Summit, February 5–6, 2020. Summit Report, 54. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://sjdavidson1.files.wordpress.
com/2017/12/85b33-climate-summit-summary-report-v6.pdf>
CBCL Ltd. (2017). Truro Flood Risk Study, Town of Truro. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.truro.ca/living-intruro/
truro-flood-risk-study.html>
Chanteloup, L. (2013). Wildlife as a tourism resource in Nunavut. 
Polar Record, 49(3), 240–248. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0032247412000617>
Chen, I.-C., Hill, J.K., Ohlemüller, R., Roy, D.B. and Thomas, C.D. 
(2011). Rapid range shifts of species associated with high levels 
of climate warming. Science, 333(6045), 1024-1026. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1206432>
Cheung, W.W.L. (2018). The future of fishes and fisheries in 
the changing oceans. Journal of Fish Biology, 92(3), 790–803. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
jfb.13558>
Cheung, W.W.L., Reygondeau, G. and Frölicher, T.L. (2016). Large 
benefits to marine fisheries of meeting the 1.5°C global warming 
target. Science, 354, 1591–1594. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aag2331>
City of Kingston (2019). Official Plan. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://www.cityofkingston.ca/
documents/10180/541790/Official+Plan/17793cad-90db-4651-
8092-16c587600001>
City of Kingston (2021). Urban Forest Management Plan. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.cityofkingston.ca/
resident/trees-nature/urban-forest-management-plan>
Climate Atlas of Canada (2019). Urban Heat Island Effect. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://climateatlas.ca/urban-heat-
island-effect>
Cohen, S., Bush, E., Zhang, X., Gillett, N., Bonsal, B., Derksen, C., 
Flato, G., Greenan, B., Watson, E. (2019). Changes in Canada’s 
Regions in a National and Global Context, Chapter 8 in Canada’s 
Changing Climate Report, (eds.) E. Bush and D.S. Lemmen; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 424–443. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/
chapter/8-0/>
Cohen, J.M., Lajeunesse, M.J. and Rohr, J.R. (2018). A global 
synthesis of animal phenological responses to climate change. 
Nature Climate Change 8, 224–228 (2018). Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0067-3>
Collingsworth, P.D., Bunnell, D.B., Murray, M.W., Kao, Y-C., Feiner, 
Z.S., Claramunt, R.M., Lofgren, B.M., Höö k, T.O., and Ludsin, S.A. 
(2017). Climate change as a long-term stressor for the fisheries 
of the Laurentian Great Lakes of North America. Reviews in Fish 
Biology and Fisheries, 27, 363–391. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11160-017-9480-3>
Convention on Biological Diversity (1992). Convention on 
Biological Diversity, United Nations, 28 p. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://www.cbd.int/doc/legal/cbd-en.pdf>
Convention on Biological Diversity (2020). Article 2: Use of 
Terms. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.cbd.int/
convention/articles/?a=cbd-02>
Cottar, S. (2019). Setting a new precedent: Dyke realignment and 
managed retreat facilitate coastal climate adaptation in Truro, 
Nova Scotia. Canadian Coastal Resilience Forum, University of 
Waterloo. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://uwaterloo.ca/
canadian-coastal-resilience/blog/post/setting-new-precedent-
dyke-realignment-and-managed-retreat>
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate 
Change Risks. The Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks and 
Adaptation Potential, Council of Canadian Academies, Ottawa, ON.
Cressman, P. (2020). Tłı̨chǫ Dǫtaàts’eedı (Tłı̨chǫ Sharing Food 
Amongst the People) [Conference presentation]. Adaptation 
Canada 2020, Vancouver, British Columbia.
Cruikshank, J. (1998). The social life of stories: Narrative and 
knowledge in the Yukon Territory. Vancouver: UBC Press, 240 p.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 326 
Dale, V.H., Joyce, L.A., McNulty, S., Neilson, R.P., Ayres, M.P. 
Flannigan, M.D., Hanson, P.J., Irland, L.C., Lugo, A.E., Peterson, 
C.J., Simberloff, D., Swanson, F.J., Stocks, B.J. and Wotton, 
B.M. (2001). Climate change and forest disturbances: climate 
change can affect forests by altering the frequency, intensity, 
duration, and timing of fire, drought, introduced species, insect 
and pathogen outbreaks, hurricanes, windstorms, ice storms, or 
landslides. BioScience 51(9), 723–734. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568(2001)051[0723:CCAF
D]2.0.CO;2>
Davidson-Hunt, I. and Berkes, F. (2003). Learning as you journey: 
Anishnaabe perception of social-ecological environments and 
adaptive learning. Conservation Ecology, 8(1), 5. Retrieved March 
2021, from <http://www.consecol.org/vol8/iss1/art5/>
de Groot, R.S., Alkemade, R., Braat, L., Hein, L. and Willemen, L. 
(2010b). Challenges in integrating the concept of ecosystem 
services and values in landscape planning, management 
and decision making. Ecological Complexity, 7(3), 260–272. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecocom.2009.10.006>
de Groot, R.S., Fisher, B., Christie, M., Aronson, J., Braat, L., 
Haines-Young, R., Gowdy, J., Maltby, E., Neuville, A., Polasky, S., 
Portela, R. and Ring, I. (2010a). Integrating the ecological and 
economic dimensions in biodiversity and ecosystem service 
valuation, Chapter 1 in The Economics of Ecosystems and 
Biodiversity: Ecological and Economic Foundations, (ed.) P. 
Kumar; Earthscan, London, UK.
Deegan, L.A., Johnson, D.S., Warren, R.S., Peterson, B.J., Fleeger, 
J.W., Fagherazzi, S., and Wollheim, W.M. (2012). Coastal 
eutrophication as a driver of salt marsh loss. Nature, 490(7420), 
388–392. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature11533>
Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada (2019). Canada’s 
Oceans Now: Arctic Ecosystems 2019. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/40833574.pdf>
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., 
Smith, S., Thackeray, C. and Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). 
Changes in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada; Chapter 
5 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (ed.) E. Bush and D.S. 
Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 194–260. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/chapter/5-0/>
Donnelly, A., Caffarra, A. and O’Neill, B.F. (2011). A review 
of climate-driven mismatches between interdependent 
phenophases in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. International 
Journal of Biometeorology, 55(6), 805–817. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-011-0426-5>
Duerden, F. and Kuhn, R.G. (1998). Scale, context, and 
application of traditional knowledge of the Canadian north. Polar 
Record, 34(188), 31–38. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0032247400014959>
Dulvy, N.K., Rogers, S.I., Jennings, S., Stelzenmuller, V., Dye, 
S.R. and Skjoldal, H.R. (2008). Climate change and deepening 
of the North Sea fish assemblage: a biotic indicator of 
warming seas. Journal of Applied Ecology, 45(4), 1029–1039. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2664.2008.01488.x>
ECCC [Environment and Climate Change Canada] (2017). 
Recovery Strategy for the Whitebark Pine (Pinus albicaulis) in 
Canada [Proposed]. Species at Risk Act Strategy Series. ECCC, 
Ottawa, ON, 54 p. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/species-risk-
public-registry/recovery-strategies/whitebark-pine-2017.html>
Ellis, E.C., Klein Goldewijk, K., Siebert, S., Lightman, D. and 
Ramankutty, N. (2010). Anthropogenic transformation of the 
biomes, 1700 to 2000. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 19(5), 
589–606. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1466-8238.2010.00540.x>
Emmerton, C., Cooke, C., Hustins, S., Silins, U., Emelko, M.B., 
Lewis, T., Kruk, M.K., Taube, N., Zhu, D., Jackson, B., Stone, 
M., Kerr, J.G. and Orwin, J.F. (2020). Severe western Canadian 
wildfire affects water quality even at large basin scales. Water 
Research, 183, 116071. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.116071>
Evengard, B., Berner, J., Brubaker, M., Mulvad, G. and Revich, B. 
(2011). Climate change and water security with a focus on the 
Arctic. Global Health Action, 4(1), 8449. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v4i0.8449>
Eyzaguirre, J., Boyd, R., Prescott, S., Morton, C., Nelitz, M. and 
Litt, A. (2020). Green Shores 2020: Impact, Value and Lessons 
Learned, Final Project Report. Prepared by ESSA Technologies 
Ltd. for the Stewardship Centre for British Columbia. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <http://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_docs/
greenshores/Resources/Green%20Shores%202020_%20
Impact,%20Value%20and%20Lessons%20Learned_%20Full%20
Report_July2020.pdf>
Ferguson, M.A.D. and Messier, F. (1997). Collection and analysis 
of traditional ecological knowledge about a population of Arctic 
tundra caribou. Arctic, 50(1), 17–28. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic1087>
Festa-Bianchet, M., Ray, J.C., Boutin, S., Côté, S.D. and Gunn, 
A. (2011). Conservation of caribou (Rangifer tarandus) in 
Canada: an uncertain future. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 89(5), 
419–434. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/
z11-025>
Folke, C., Carpenter, S., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Elmqvist, 
T., Gunderson, L. and Holling, C.S. (2004). Regime Shifts, 
Resilience, and Biodiversity in Ecosystem Management. Annual 
Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 35, 557–581. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
ecolsys.35.021103.105711>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 327 
Ford, L.B. (2009). Climate Change and Health in Canada. McGill 
Journal of Medicine, 12(1), 78–84. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2687921/>
Ford, J.D. and Pearce, T. (2010). What we know, do not know, and 
need to know about climate change vulnerability in the western 
Canadian Arctic: a systematic literature review. Environmental 
Research Letters, 5(1), 1–9. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/5/1/014008>
Ford, J.D. and Pearce T. (2012). Climate change vulnerability 
and adaptation research focusing on the Inuit subsistence 
sector in Canada: Directions for future research. The Canadian 
Geographer, 56(2), 275-287. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0064.2012.00418.x>
Fraser, R.H., Lantz, T.C., Olthof, I., Koklj, S.V., Sims, R.A. (2014). 
Warming-induced shrub expansion and lichen decline in the 
western Canadian Arctic. Ecosystems, 17(7), 1151–1168. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-
014-9783-3>
Freeman, M.M.R. (1992). The nature and utility of traditional 
ecological knowledge. Northern Perspectives, 20(1), 9–12. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/269576083_The_nature_and_utility_of_traditional_
ecological_knowledge>
Friends of the Greenbelt Foundation (2011). Climate Change 
Adaptation: Ontario’s Resilient Greenbelt. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/greenbelt/
pages/41/attachments/original/1376571502/Climate_Change_
Adaption_Ontario’s_Resilient_Greenbelt.pdf?1376571502>
Galloway, C. and Arvidson, V. (Director). (2020). Hozìıdeè [Film]. 
Tłı̨chǫ Government. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
tlicho.ca/news/boots-ground-mini-documentary-about-bathurst-
caribou>
Gamache, I. and Payette, S. (2005). Latitudinal response of 
subarctic tree lines to recent climate change in eastern Canada. 
Journal of Biogeography 32(5), 849–862. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2699.2004.01182.x>
Gonzalez, P., Neilson, R.P., Lenihan, J.M. and Drapek, R.J. (2010). 
Global patterns in the vulnerability of ecosystems to vegetation 
shifts due to climate change. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 
19(6), 755–768. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.
1111/j.1466-8238.2010.00558.x>
Government of British Columbia (2021). Whitebark Pine 
Restoration. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www2.gov.
bc.ca/gov/content/environment/plants-animals-ecosystems/
species-ecosystems-at-risk/implementation/conservation-
projects-partnerships/whitebark-pine-restoration>
Government of Canada (2011). Species at risk public registry, 
Species profile, Whitebark Pine. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://wildlife-species.canada.ca/species-risk-registry/
species/speciesDetails_e.cfm?sid=1086>
Government of Canada (2014). Canada’s Sixth National Report 
on Climate Change: Actions to Meet Commitments under the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
288 p. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://unfccc.int/
files/national_reports/annex_i_natcom/submitted_natcom/
application/pdf/nc6_can_resubmission_english.pdf> 
Government of Canada (2020). Canada’s conserved areas. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/environmental-indicators/
conserved-areas.html>
Government of Northwest Territories (n.d.). Barren-ground 
Caribou, Bathurst Herd. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
www.enr.gov.nt.ca/en/services/barren-ground-caribou/
bathurst-herd#:~:text=The%20Bathurst%20caribou%20
is%20named,the%20herd’s%20traditional%20calving%20
grounds.&text=Caribou%20have%20shaped%20the%20­
cultural,mutual%20relationships%20built%20on%20respect>
Government of Northwest Territories (2005). Policy 53.03: 
Traditional knowledge. Northwest Territories Policy. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://www.eia.gov.nt.ca/sites/eia/files/
content/53.03-traditional-knowledge.pdf>
Government of Ontario (2005). Greenbelt Act, 2005, S.O. 2005, 
c. 1. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ontario.ca/laws/
statute/05g01>
Government of Ontario (2015). Climate Change Strategy. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ontario.ca/page/
climate-change-strategy>
Graumlich, L. and W.L. Francis (Eds.). (2010). Moving Toward 
Climate Change Adaptation: The Promise of the Yellowstone 
to Yukon Conservation Initiative for addressing the Region’s 
Vulnerabilities. Yellowstone to Yukon Conservation Initiative. 
Canmore, AB. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://y2y.net/wp-
content/uploads/sites/69/2019/08/963y2yclimchangeweb.pdf>
Gray, C (2020). Protecting and Enabling Nature-Based Solutions. 
Swiss Re. Retrieved March 2021, from < https://www.swissre.
com/dam/jcr:19ebcb33-03c6-41bb-9047-917c95116b43/nature-
based-solutions-pss.pdf>
Green Analytics (2016). Ontario’s Good Fortune: Appreciating 
the Greenbelt’s Natural Capital. Produced for: The Friends 
of the Greenbelt Foundation, 92 p. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/greenbelt/
pages/2825/attachments/original/1485878510/OP_20_Web_
version_2017.pdf?1485878510>
Green Shores (2021). Green Shores Shoreline Development 
Program. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
stewardshipcentrebc.ca/green-shores-home/gs-programs/
gssd/> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 328 
Greenberg, D.A. Blanchard, W., Smith, B. and Barrow, E. (2012). 
Climate change, mean sea level and high tides in the Bay of 
Fundy. Atmosphere-Ocean, 50(3), 261–276. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2012.668670>
Guilbault, S. (2016). Kingston: Using the urban forest to mitigate 
the urban heat island effect in Cities Adapt to Extreme Heat: 
Celebrating Local Leadership. Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction, 56–59. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.iclr.
org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/11_Kingston.pdf>
Gunderson, L. (1999). Resilience, flexibility and adaptive 
management – Antidotes for spurious certitudes? Conservation 
Ecology, 3(1), 7. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol3/iss1.art7/>
Haines-Young, R., Potschin, M. and Kienast, F. (2012). Indicators 
of ecosystem service potential at European scales: mapping 
marginal changes and trade-offs. Ecological Indicators, 21, 
39–53. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2011.09.004>
Hall, C.M. and Saarinen, J. (2010). Tourism and change in polar 
regions: climate, environments and experiences. Routledge, New 
York. 337 p.
Hällfors, M.H., Aikio, S. and Schulman, L.E. (2017). Quantifying 
the need and potential of assisted migration. Biological 
Conservation, 205, 34–41. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2016.11.023>
Halpern, B.S., McLeod, K.L., Rosenberg, A.A. and Crowder, 
L.B. (2008). Managing for cumulative impacts in ecosystem-
based management through ocean zoning. Ocean and Coastal 
Management, 51(3), 203–211. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2007.08.002>
Hansen, B.B., Aanes, R., Herfindal, I., Kohler, J. and Sæther, 
B.-E. (2011b). Climate, icing, and wild arctic reindeer: Past 
relationships and future prospects. Ecology, 92(10), 1917–1923. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/11-
0095.1>
Hansen, L.J. and Hoffman, J.R. (2011a). Climate Savvy: Adapting 
Conservation and Resource Management to a Changing World. 
Island Press, Washington, D.C. 245 p.
Hanson, A. and Calkins, L. (1996). Wetlands of the Maritime 
Provinces: revised documentation for the wetlands inventory, 
Environment Canada, Canadian Wildlife Service, Atlantic Region. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.publications.gc.ca/
site/eng/9.857785/publication.html>
Harlan, J. (1995). The living fields: our agricultural heritage. 
Cambridge University Press, New York, New York, USA, 288 p.
Hartig, E.K., Gornitz, V., Kolker, A., Mushacke, F. and Fallon, D. 
(2002). Anthropogenic and climate-change impacts on salt 
marshes of Jamaica Bay, New York City. Wetlands, 22(1), 71–89. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1672/0277-
5212(2002)022[0071:AACCIO]2.0.CO;2>
Hill, G.B. and Henry, G.H. (2011). Responses of High Arctic wet 
sedge tundra to climate warming since 1980. Global Change 
Biology, 17(1), 276–287. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02244.x>
Holling, C.S. and Meffe, G.K. (1996). Command and control and 
the pathology of natural resource management. Conservation 
Biology, 10(2), 328–337. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1739.1996.10020328.x>
Hoover, C., Ostertag, S., Hornby, C., Parker, C., Hansen-Craik, 
K., Loseto, L., Pearce, T. (2016). The continued importance of 
hunting for future Inuit food security. Solutions, 7(4), 40–51. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://thesolutionsjournal.
com/2016/08/20/continued-importance-hunting-future-inuit-
food-security/>
Hope, E.S., McKenney, D.W., Pedlar, J.H., Stocks, B.J. and 
Gauthier, S. (2016). Wildlife suppression costs for Canada under 
a changing climate. PLoS One, 11(8): e0157425. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0157425>
Houde, N. (2007). The Six Faces of Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge Challenges and Opportunities for Canadian Co-
Management Arrangements. Ecology and Society, 12(2), 34. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/
vol12/iss2/art34/>
Huggel, C., Clague, J.J. and Korup, O. (2011). Is climate change 
responsible for changing landslide activity in high mountains? 
Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 37(1), 77–91. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.2223>
Huntington, H.P. (1998). Observations on the utility of the semi-
directive interview for documenting ecological knowledge. Arctic 
51(3), 237–242. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.14430/arctic1065>
IBA [Important Bird Area] Canada (n.d.). IBA Site Summary 
BC017: Boundary Bay – Roberts Bank – Sturgeon Bank (Fraser 
River Estuary). Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
ibacanada.ca/site.jsp?siteID=BC017>
ICF (2018). Best Practices and Resources on Climate Resilient 
Natural Infrastructure. Prepared for Canadian Council of 
Ministers of the Environment. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://www.preventionweb.net/publications/view/64196>
IISD [International Institute for Sustainable Development] 
(2019). Sustainable Asset Valuation Tool: Natural Infrastructure. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.iisd.org/publications/
sustainable-asset-valuation-tool-natural-infrastructure>
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2019). 2019 Facts of the Property 
and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada, 41st edition. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/
Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 329 
IPBES [Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services] (2016). Summary 
for policymakers in the Assessment Report on Pollinators, 
Pollination and Food Production; (eds.) S.G. Potts, V.L. 
Imperatriz-Fonseca, H.T. Ngo, J.C. Biesmeijer, T.D. Breeze, L.V. 
Dicks, L.A. Garibaldi, R. Hill, J. Settele, A J. Vanbergen, M.A. 
Aizen, S.A. Cunningham, C. Eardley, B.M. Freitas, N. Gallai, 
P.G. Kevan, A. Kovcs-Hostynszki, P.K.Kwapong, J. Li, X. Li, D 
J. Martins, G. Nates-Parra, J.S. Pettis, R. Rader, & B.F. Viana, 
36 p. Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. Retrieved 
from <www.ipbes.net/sites/default/files/downloads/pdf/spm_
deliverable_3a_pollination_20170222.pdf>
IPBES [Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services] (2018). The regional 
assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services 
for the Americas. (eds.) Rice, J., Seixas, C.S., Zaccagnini, 
M.E., Bedoya-Gaitán, M., and Valderrama N. Secretariat of the 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services, Bonn, Germany. 656 p. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://ipbes.net/assessment-reports/americas>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2014). 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to 
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. (Eds.) Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, 
Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, 
USA, 688 p.
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2019a). 
Summary for Policymakers in Climate Change and Land: an 
IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land 
degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and 
greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems; (eds.) P.R. 
Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.- O. 
Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van 
Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. 
Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. 
Belkacemi, J. Malley. Retrived March 2021, from <https://www.
ipcc.ch/srccl/chapter/summary-for-policymakers/>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2019b). 
Summary for Policymakers in IPCC Special Report on the Ocean 
and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, (eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. 
Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, 
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. 
Rama, N.M. Weyer. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
ipcc.ch/srocc/chapter/summary-for-policymakers/>
Johnson, M. (1992a). Dene traditional knowledge. Northern 
Perspectives, 20(1), 2. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.
carc.org/pubs.v20no1/dene.htm>
Johnson, M. (Ed.) (1992b). Lore: capturing traditional 
environmental knowledge. Dene Cultural Institute and 
International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada, 
200 p. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.idrc.ca/en/
book/lore-capturing-traditional-environmental-knowledge>
Johnson, C.J., Croft, B., Gunn, A. and Poirier, L.M. (2012). 
Gauging climate change effects at local scales: weather‐based 
indices to monitor insect harassment in caribou. Ecological 
Applications, 22(6), 1838–1851. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1890/11-0569.1>
Joly, K., Duffy, P.A. and Rupp, T.S. (2012). Stimulating the effects 
of climate change on fire regimes in Arctic biomes: implications 
for caribou and moose habitat. Ecosphere 3(5), 1–18. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES12-00012.1>
Jones, K.R., Klein, C.J., Halpern, B.S., Venter, O., Grantham, H., 
Kuempel, C.D., Shumway, N., Friedlander, A.M., Possingham, 
H.P. and Watson, J.E.M. (2018). The location and protection 
status of Earth’s diminishing marine wilderness. Current Biology, 
28(15), 2506–2512. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.06.010>
Kareiva, P., Ruckelshaus, M., Arkema, K., Geller, G., Girvetz, 
E., Goodrich, D., Nelson, E., Matzek, V., Pinsky, M., Reid, W., 
Saunders, M., Semmens, D. and Tallis, H. (2012). Impacts of 
Climate Change on Ecosystem Services, Chapter 4 in Impacts 
of Climate Change on Biodiversity, Ecosystems, and Ecosystem 
Services: Technical Input to the 2013 National Climate 
Assessment. (Eds.), Staudinger, M.D., Grimm, N.B., Staudt, 
A., Carter, S.L., Stuart III, F.S., Kareiva, P., Ruckelshaus M. and 
Stein, B.A. Cooperative Report to the 2013 National Climate 
Assessment. 296 p. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://pubs.
er.usgs.gov/publication/70039460>
Keenan, R.J. (2015).Climate change impacts and adaptation 
in forest management: a review. Annals of Forest Science 72, 
145–167. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s13595-014-0446-5>
Keesstra, S., Nunes, J., Novara, A., Finger, D., Avelar, D., Kalantari, 
Z. and Cerdà, A. (2018). The superior effect of nature based 
solutions in land management for enhancing ecosystem 
services Science of the Total Environment, 610–611, 997–1009. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.08.077>
Kelly, B.C. and Gobas, F.A.P.C. (2001). Bioaccumulation of 
persistent organic pollutants in lichen-caribou-wolf food chanins 
of Canada’s central and western Arctic. Environmental Science 
and Technology, 35(2), 325–334. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<http://doi.org/10.1021/es0011966>
Kerr, J.T., Pindar, A., Galpern, P., Packer, L., Potts, S.G., Roberts, 
S.M., Rasmont, P., Schweiger, O., Colla, S.R., Richardson, L.L., 
Wagner, D.L., Gall, L.F., Sikes, D.S. and Pantoja, A. (2015). 
Climate change impacts on bumblebees converge across 
continents. Science, 349(6244), 177–180. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa7031>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 330 
Kohler, T., Wehrli, A. and Jurek, M. (eds.) (2014). Mountains 
and climate change: a global concern. Sustainable Mountain 
Development Series. Bern, Switzerland, Centre for Development 
and Environment (CDE), Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation (SDC) and Geographica Bernensia. 136 p.
Körner, C. and Basler, D. (2010). Phenology under global 
warming. Science, 327(5972), 1461–1462. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1186473>
Kortsch, S., Primiceria, R., Fossheim, M., Dolgov, A.V. and 
Aschan, M. (2015). Climate change alters the structure of 
arctic marine food webs due to poleward shifts to boreal 
generalists. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 282(1814). Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1098/rspb.2015.1546>
Kress, S.W., Shannon, P. and O’Neal, C. (2016). Recent changes 
in the diet and survival of Atlantic puffin chicks in the face of 
climate change and commercial fishing in midcoast Maine, USA. 
FACETS, 1(1), 27–43. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/facets-2015-0009>
Kueppers, L. M., Torn, M. and Harte, J. (2007). Quantifying 
ecosystem feedbacks to climate change: Observational 
needs and priorities. A report to the Office of Biological and 
Environmental Research and the Office of Science, U. S. 
Department of Energy. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://
faculty.ucmerced.edu/lkueppers/pdf/Feedbacks%20Report%20
pq_10May07.pdf> 
Kurz, W.A., Dymond, C.C., Stinson, G., Rampley, G.J., Neilson, 
E.T., Carroll, A.L., Ebata, T. and Satranyik, L. (2008). Mountain 
pine beetle and forest carbon feedback to climate change. 
Nature, 452, 987–990. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature06777>
Kurz, W.A. and Apps, M.J. (1999). A 70-year retrospective 
analysis of carbon fluxes in the Canadian forest sector. 
Ecological Applications, 9(2), 526–547. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1890/1051-0761(1999)009[0526:AYRA
OC]2.0.CO;2>
Lal, R. (2008). Carbon sequestration. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society, Biological Sciences, 363(1492), 815–
830. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2007.2185>
Lamont, G., Readshaw, J., Robinson, C. and St-Germain, 
P. (2014). Greening Shorelines to Enhance Resilience: an 
evaluation of approaches for adaptation to sea level rise. 
Report prepared by SNC-Lavalin for the Stewardship Centre 
for British Columbia. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://www.
stewardshipcentrebc.ca/PDF_docs/greenshores/Resources/
Greening_Shorelines_to_Enhance_Resilience.pdf>
Lane, J.E., Czenze, Z.J., Findlay-Robinson, R. and Bayne, E. 
(2019). Phenotypic plasticity and local adaptation in a wild 
hibernator evaluated through reciprocal translocation. The 
American Naturalist, 194(4), 516–528. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1086/702313>
Leadley, P. Proença, V., Fernández-Manjarrés, J., Pereira, 
H.M., Alkemade, R., Biggs, R., Burley, E., Cheung, W., Cooper, 
D., Figueiredo, J., Gilman, E., Guénette, S., Hurt, G., Mbow, C., 
Oberdorff, T., Revenga, C., Scharlemann, J.P.W., Scholes, R., 
Smith, M.S., Sumaila, U.R. and Walpole, M. (2014). Interacting 
Regional-Scale Regime Shifts for Biodiversity and Ecosystem 
Services, BioScience, 64(8), 665–679. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biu093>
Leighton, P.A., Koffi, J.K., Pelcat, Y., Lindsay, L.R., Ogden, N.H. 
(2012). Predicting the speed of tick invasion: an empirical 
model of range expansion for the Lyme disease vector Ixodes 
scapularis in Canada. Journal of Applied Ecology, 49(2), 
457–464. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2664.2012.02112.x>
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S. and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. 
(eds.) (2016). Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 274 p. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-
adaptations/canadas-marine-coasts-changing-climate/18388>
Lindner, M., Maroschek, M., Netherer, S., Kremer, A., Barbati, A., 
Garcia-Gonzalo, J., Seidl, R., Delzon, S., Corona, P., Kolström, 
M., Lexer, M.J. and Marchetti, M. (2010). Climate change 
impacts, adaptive capacity, and vulnerability of European forest 
ecosystems. Forest Ecology and Management, 259(4), 698–
709. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2009.09.023>
Lipton, D., Rubenstein, M.A., Weiskopf, S.R., Carter, S., Peterson, 
J., Crozier, L., Fogarty, M., Gaichas, S., Hyde, K.J.W., Morelli, T.L., 
Morisette, J., Moustahfid, H., Muñoz, R., Poudel, R., Staudinger, 
M.D., Stock, C., Thompson, L., Waples, R. and Weltzin, J.F. 
(2018). Ecosystems, Ecosystem Services, and Biodiversity, 
Chapter 7 in Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States: 
Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II; (eds.) D.R. 
Reidmiller, Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, 
T.K. Maycock and B.C. Stewart. U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, Washington, DC, USA, 268–321. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH7>
Livesley, S.J., McPherson, E.G. and Calfapietrac, C. (2016). The 
Urban Forest and Ecosystem Services: Impacts on Urban Water, 
Heat, and Pollution Cycles at the Tree, Street, and City Scale. 
Journal of Environmental Quality, 45(1), 119–124. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.2134/jeq2015.11.0567>
Luyssaert, S., Schulze, E.-D., Börner, A., Knohl, A., Hessenmöller, 
D., Law, B.E., Ciais, P. and Grace, J. (2008). Old-growth forests 
as global carbon sinks. Nature, 455(7210), 213–215. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/nature07276>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 331 
Mace, G. M., Norris, K. and Fitter, A. H. (2012). Biodiversity 
and ecosystem services: a multilayered relationship. Trends in 
Ecology and Evolution, 27(1), 19–26. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.08.006>
Mailhot, J. (1993). Traditional ecological knowledge: the 
diversity of knowledge systems and their study. Great whale 
environmental assessment. Background paper number 4. Montréal 
Great Whale Public Review Support Office, Montréal, Canada.
Malhi, Y., Franklin, J., Seddon, N., Solan, M., Turner, M.G., Field, 
C.B. and Knowlton, N. (2020). Climate change and ecosystems: 
threats, opportunities and solutions. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society; Biological Sciences, 375(1794). Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0104>
Mallory, C.D. and Boyce, M.S. (2017). Observed and predicted 
effects of climate change on Arctic caribou and reindeer. 
Environmental Reviews, 26(1), 13–25. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2017-0032>
Mauro, F. and Hardison, P. (2000). Traditional Knowledge of 
Indigenous and Local Communities: International Debate and 
Policy Initiatives. Ecological Applications, 10(5), 1263–1269. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/1051-
0761(2000)010[1263:TKOIAL]2.0.CO;2>
McLane, S.C. and Aitken, S.N. (2012). Whitebark pine (Pinus 
albicaulis) assisted migration potential: testing establishment 
north of the species range. Ecological Application, 22(1), 142–
153. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/11-
0329.1>
Mead, E., Gittelsohm, J., Kratzmann, M., Roache, C. and Sharma, 
S. (2010). Impact of the changing food environment on dietary 
practices of an Inuit population in Arctic Canada. Journal of 
Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 23(s1), 18–26. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-277x.2010.01102.x>
Meredith, M., M. Sommerkorn, S. Cassotta, C. Derksen, A. 
Ekaykin, A. Hollowed, G. Kofinas, A. Mackintosh, J. Melbourne-
Thomas, M.M.C. Muelbert, G. Ottersen, H. Pritchard, and E.A.G. 
Schuur, (2019). Polar Regions; Chapter 3 in IPCC Special Report 
on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate; (eds.) H.-O. 
Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, 
E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, 
J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/chapter/chapter-3-2/>
Michaelian, M., Hogg, E.H., Hall, R.J., and Arsenault, E. (2010). 
Massive mortality of aspen following severe drought along the 
southern edge of the Canadian boreal forest. Global Change 
Biology, 17(6), 2084–2094. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
dx.doi.org/10.1111%2Fj.1365-2486.2010.02357.x>
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (2005). Ecosystems 
and Human Well-Being: Synthesis. Island Press, 
Washington, DC. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
millenniumassessment.org/en/index.html>
Mina, M., Bugmann, H., Cordonnier, T., Irauschek, F., Klopcic, M., 
(2017). Future ecosystem services from European mountain 
forests under climate change. Journal of Applied Ecology, 
54(2), 389–401. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/1365-2664.12772>
Minister of Supply and Services Canada (1995). Canadian 
Biodiversity Strategy: Canada’s Response to the Convention 
on Biological Diversity. Environment Canada, Hull, Quebec. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://biodivcanada.chm-cbd.net/
documents/canadian-biodiversity-strategy#wsAD9483C2> 
Ministry of Municipal Affairs (2017). Greenbelt Plan (2017). 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ontario.ca/document/
greenbelt-plan-2017>
Mitchell, M.G., Schuster, R., Jacob, A.L., Hanna, D.E., Ouellet 
Dallaire, C., Raudsepp-Hearne, C., Bennett, E.M., Lehner, B. 
and Chan, K.M. (2021). Identifying key ecosystem service 
providing areas to inform national-scale conservation planning. 
Environmental Research Letters, 16(1). Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/abc121> 
Mitsch, W.J. and Gosselink, J.G. (2015). Wetlands (5th ed.); 
Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, USA, 752 p.
MNAI [Municipal Natural Assets Initiative] (2019). What are 
municipal natural assets: defining and scoping municipal natural 
assests, Decision-maker summary. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://mnai.ca/media/2019/07/SP_MNAI_Report-1-_
June2019-2.pdf>
Moller, H., Charleton, K., Knight, B., Lyver, P.O.B. (2009a). 
Traditional ecological knowledge and scientific inference of 
prey availability: harvests of sooty shearwater (Puffinus griseus) 
chicks by Rakiura Māori. New Zealand Journal of Zoology, 
36(3), 259–274. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1080/03014220909510154>
Moller, H., Lyver, P.O.B, Bragg, C., Newman, J., Clucas, R., 
Fletcher, D., Kitson, J., McKechnie, S., Scott, D. and Rakiura 
Titi Islands Administering Body (2009b). Guidelines for cross-
cultural participatory action research partnerships: a case study 
of a customary seabird harvest in New Zealand. New Zealand 
Journal of Zoology, 36(3), 211–241. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/03014220909510152>
Møller, A.P., Rubolini, D. and Lehikoinen, E. (2008). Populations 
of migratory bird species that did not show a phenological 
response to climate change are declining. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 105(42), 16,195–16,200. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0803825105>
Morris, R.L., Konlechner, T.M., Ghisalberti, M. and Swearer, 
S.E. (2018). From grey to green: Efficacy of eco-engineering 
solutions for nature-based coastal defence. Global Change 
Biology, 24(5), 1827–1842. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14063>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 332 
Morton, E.M. and Rafferty, N.E. (2017). Plant-pollinator 
interactions under climate change: the use of spatial and 
temporal transplants. Applications in Plant Sciences, 5(6), 
special issue: Studying plant-pollinator interactions facing 
climate change and changing environments. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.3732/apps.1600133>
Myers-Smith, I.H., Forbes, B.C., Wilmking, M., Hallinger, M., 
Lantz, T., Blok, D., Tape, K.D., Macias-Fauria, M., Sass-Klaassen, 
U., L.vesque, E., Boudreau, S., Ropars, P., Hermanutz, L., Trant, 
A., Siegwart Collier, L., Weijers, S., Rozema, J., Rayback, S.A., 
Martin Schmidt, N., Schaepman-Strub, G., Wipf, S., Rixen, C., 
M.nard, C.B., Venn, S., Goetz, S., Andreu-Hayles, L., Elmendorf, 
S., Ravolainen, V., Welker, J., Grogan, P., Epstein, H.E. and Hik, 
D.S. (2011). Shrub expansion in tundra ecosystems: dynamics, 
impacts and research priorities. Environmental Research 
Letters, 6(4), 1–15. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/6/4/045509>
Naidoo, R., Balmford, A., Costanza, R., Fisher, B., Green, R.E., 
Lehner, B., Malcom, T.R. and Ricketts, T.H. (2008). Global 
mapping of ecosystem services and conservation priorities. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(28), 
9495–9500. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.0707823105>
Nakashima, D.J., Galloway McLean, K., Thulstrup, H.D., Ramos 
Castillo, A. and Rubris, J.T. (2012). Weathering uncertainty: 
Traditional knowledge for climate change assessment and adaptation. 
Paris: UNESCO; Darwin: United Nations University, 120 p.
Nantel, P., Pellatt, M.G., Keenleyside, K. and Gray, P.A. (2014). 
Biodiversity and Protected Areas, Chapter 6 in Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 159–190. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/
canada-changing-climate-sector-perspectives-impacts-and-
adaptation/16309>
Narayan, S., Beck, M.W., Reguero, B.G., Losada, I.J., van 
Wesenbeeck, B. Pontee, N., Sanchirico, J.N., Ingram, J.C., Lange, 
G.-M. and Burks-Copes, K.A. (2016). The effectiveness, costs 
and coastal protection benefits of natural and nature-based 
defences. PLoS ONE, 11(5), e0154735. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0154735>
Neis, B., Felt, L.F., Haedrich, R.L. and Schneider, D.C. (1999). An 
interdisciplinary method for collecting and integrating fishers’ 
ecological knowledge into resource management in Fishing 
place, fishing people: traditions and issues in Canadian small-
scale fisheries. (Eds.) D. Newell and R.E. Ommer. University of 
Toronto Press, Toronto, Canada, 217–238.
Nelson E.J., Kareiva, P., Ruckelshaus, M., Arkema, K., Geller, 
G., Girvetz, E., Goodrich, D., Matzek, V., Pinsky, M., Reid, W., 
Saunders, M., Semmens, D. and Tallis, H. (2013). Climate 
change’s impact on key ecosystem services and the human 
well‐being they support in the US. Frontiers in Ecology and 
the Environment, 11(9), 483–893. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1890/120312>
Nickels, S. (1999). Importance of experiential context for 
understanding indigenous ecological knowledge: the Algonquins 
of Barriere Lake, Québec. (Dissertation). McGill University, 
Montréal, Canada.
Noongwook, G., The Native Village of Savoonga, The Native 
Village of Gambell, Huntington, H.P. and George, J.C. (2007). 
Traditional knowledge of the bowhead whale (Balaena 
mysticetus) around St. Lawrence Island, Alaska. Arctic 60(1):47–
54. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.14430/
arctic264>
Nowak, D.J. and Crane, D.E. (2001). Carbon storge and 
sequestrian by urban trees in the USA. Environmental Pollution, 
116(3), 381–389. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0269-7491(01)00214-7>
Ogden, N.H., Koffi, J.K., Pelcat, Y. and Lindsay, L.R. (2014). 
Environmental risk from Lyme disease in central and eastern 
Canada: a summary of recent surveillance information. Canadian 
Communicable Disease Reports, 40(5), 74–82. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/
reports-publications/canada-communicable-disease-report-
ccdr/monthly-issue/2014-40/ccdr-volume-40-5-march-6-2014/
ccdr-volume-40-5-march-6-2014.html>
Okey, T.A., Alidina, H.M., Lo, V., and Jessen, S. (2014). Effects 
of climate change on Canada’s Pacific marine ecosystems: a 
summary of scientific knowledge. Reviews in Fish Biology and 
Fisheries, 24(2), 519–559. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11160-014-9342-1>
Olsson, P., Folke, C. and Berkes, F. (2004). Adaptive co-
management for building resilience in social–ecological 
systems. Environmental Management, 34(1), 75–90. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-003-0101-7>
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(2019). Biodiversity: Finance and the Economic and Business 
Case for Action. Report prepared for the G7 Environment 
Ministers’ Meeting, 5–6 May 2019. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://www.oecd.org/env/resources/biodiversity/biodiversity-
finance-and-the-economic-and-business-case-for-action.htm>
Palacios-Abrantes, J., Reygondeau, G., Wabnitz, C.C. and 
Cheung, W.W. (2020). The transboundary nature of the world’s 
exploited marine species. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1–12. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
020-74644-2>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 333 
Palomo, I. (2017). Climate change impacts on ecosystem 
services in high mountain areas: a literature review. 
Mountain Research and Development, 37(2), 179–187. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1659/MRD-
JOURNAL-D-16-00110.1>
Parlee, B., Berkes, F. and Teetl’it Gwich’in Renewable Resources 
Council (2005). Health of the land, health of the people: a case 
study on Gwich’in berry harvesting from northern Canada. 
EcoHealth, 2, 127–137. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10393-005-3870-z>
Pearce, T., Ford, J., Caron, A. and Kudlak, B.P. (2012). Climate 
change adaptation planning in remote, resource-dependent 
communities: an Arctic example. Regional Environmental 
Change, 12(4), 825–837. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10113-012-0297-2>
Pearce, T., Ford, J., Cunsolo Willox, A. and Smit, B. (2015). 
Inuit Traditional Knowledge (TEK), subsistence hunting and 
adaptation to climate change in the Canadian Arctic. Arctic, 
68(2), 233–245. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.14430/arctic4475>
Pearce, T., Ford, J.D., Duerden, F., Smit, B., Andrachuk, M., 
Berrang-Ford, L. and Smith, T. (2011). Advancing adaptation 
planning for climate change in the Inuvialuit Settlement 
Region (ISR): A review and critique. Regional Environmental 
Change, 11(1), 1–17. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10113-010-0126-4>
Pearson, R.G., Phillips, S.J., Loranty, M.M., Beck, P.S.A., 
Damoulas, T., Knight, S.J., and Goetz, S.J. (2013). Shifts in Arctic 
vegetation and associated feedbacks under climate change. 
Nature Climate Change, 3, 673–677. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1858>
Pohl, G.R., Schmidt, B.C., Lafontaine, J.D., Landry, J.-F., Anweiler, 
G.G. and Bird, C.D. (2014). Moths and butterflies of the prairies 
ecozone in Canada in Arthropods of Canadian Grasslands. 
Volume 4: Biodiversity and Systematics, Part 2. Biological 
Survey of Canada, 169–239; (eds.) D.J. Giberson and H.A. 
Cárcamo. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/
publications?id=35856>
Poloczanska, E.S., Burrows, M.T., Brown, C.J., Garcia Molinos, 
J., Halpern, B.S., Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Kappel, C.V., Moore, 
P.J., Rochardson, A.J., Schoeman, D.S. and Sydemand, W.J. 
(2016). Responses of Marine Organisms to Climate Change 
across Oceans. Frontiers in Marine Science, 3(62), 1–21. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2016.00062>
Pontee, N. (2013). Defining coastal squeeze: a discussion. 
Ocean & Coastal Management, 84, 204–207. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2013.07.010>
Pithan, F. and Mauritsen, T. (2014). Arctic amplification 
dominated by temperature feedbacks in contemporary climate 
models. Nature Geoscience, 7, 181–184. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <http://doi.org/10.1038/NGEO2071>
Poesch, M.S., Chavarie, L., Chu, C., Pandit, S.N. and Tonn, 
W. (2016). Climate Change Impacts on Freshwater Fishes: A 
Canadian Perspective. Fisheries, 41(7), 385–391, Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/03632415.2016.11
80285>
Rahman, M.A., Armson, D. and Ennos, A.R. (2015). A comparison 
of the growth and cooling effectiveness of five commonly 
planted urban tree species. Urban Ecosystems, 18(2), 371–389. 
Retrieved from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11252-014-0407-7>
Raymond, C.M., Frantzeskaki, N., Kabisch, N., Berry, P., Breil, M., 
Nita, M.R., Geneletti, D. and Calfapietra, C. (2017). A framework 
for assessing and implementing the co-benefits of nature-based 
solutions in urban areas. Environmental Science & Policy, 77, 
15–24. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2017.07.008>
Rees, W.G., Hofgaard, A., Boudreau, S., Cairns, D.M., Harper, K., 
Mamet, S., Mathisen, I., Swirad, Z. and Tutubalina, O. (2020). Is 
subarctic forest advance able to keep pace with climate change? 
Global Change Biology, 26(7), 3965–3977. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.15113>
Retsa, A., Schelske, O., Wilke, B., Rutherford, G. and de Jong, 
R. (2020). Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services: a business 
case for re/insurance. Swiss Re Management Ltd., (ed.) L. 
Kelly, 60 p. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.swissre.
com/institute/research/topics-and-risk-dialogues/climate-and-
natural-catastrophe-risk/expertise-publication-biodiversity-and-
ecosystems-services.html>
Rocca, M.E., Brown, P.M., MacDonald, L.H., Carrico, C.M. 
(2014). Climate change impacts on fire regimes and key 
ecosystem services in Rocky Mountain forests. Forest Ecology 
and Management, 327, 290–305. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2014.04.005>
Rudmann-Maurer, K., Spehn, E. and Körner, C. (2014). 
Biodiversity in Mountains: Nature Heritage Under Threat 
in Mountains and climate change: a global concern. (Eds.) 
Kohler, T., Wehrli, A., and Jurek, M. Sustainable Mountain 
Development Series. Bern, Switzerland, Centre for Development 
and Environment (CDE), Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation (SDC) and Geographica Bernensia. 136 p.
Saad, C., Boulanger, Y., Beaudet, M., Gachon, P., Ruel, J. C. and 
Gauthier, S. (2017). Potential impact of climate change on the 
risk of windthrow in eastern Canada’s forests. Climatic Change, 
143(3-4), 487–501. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-017-1995-z>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 334 
Sáenz-Romero, C., O’Neill, G., Aitken, S.N. and Lindig-Ciseros, R. 
(2021). Assisted Migration Field Tests in Canada and Mexico: 
Lessons, Limitations, and Challenges. Forests, 12(9), 1–19. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
f12010009>
Savard, J.-P., van Proosdij, D. and O’Carroll, S. (2014). 
Perspectives on Canada’s East Coast Region; Chapter 4 in 
Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate. (Eds.) D.S. 
Lemmen, F.J. Warren, T.S. James and C.S.L. Mercer Clarke; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 99–152. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-
adaptations/canadas-marine-coasts-changing-climate/18388>
SCBC [Stewardship Centre for British Columbia] (n.d.). 
Stewardship Centre for British Columbia: homepage. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://stewardshipcentrebc.ca/green-
shores-home/gs-about/>
SCBC [Stewardship Centre for British Columbia] (2020). Green 
Shores Case Studies: New Brighton Park Shoareline Habitat 
Restoration Project. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
stewardshipcentrebc.ca/new-brighton-park/>
Scheffer, M., Carpenter, S., Foley, J.A., Folke, C. and Walker, 
B. (2001). Catastrophic shifts in ecosystems. Nature, 
413, 591–596. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1038/35098000>
Scheffers, B.R., De Meester, L., Bridge, T.C.L., Hoffmann, A.A., 
Pandolfi, J.M., et al. (2016). The broad footprint of climate 
change from genes to biomes to people. Science 354(6313), 
719–730. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aaf7671>
Scholes, R.J. (2016). Climate change and ecosystem services. 
WIREs Climate Change, 7(4), 537–550. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.404>
Schroeder, D. (2010). Fire behaviour in thinned jack pine: two 
case studies of FireSmart treatments in Canada’s Northwest 
Territories. FPInnovations, Eastern Region, Pointe-Claire, Quebec 
and Western Region, Vancouver, British Columbia. Advantage 
Report, 12(7), 12.
Schuster, R., Germain, R.R., Bennett, J.R., Reo, N.J. and Arcese, 
P. (2019). Vertebrate biodiversity on indigenous-managed lands 
in Australia, Brazil, and Canada equals that in protected areas. 
Environmental Science and Policy, 101, 1–6. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2019.07.002>
Schuur, E.A.G., Bockheim, J., Canadell, E.E., Field, C.B., 
Goryachkin, S.V., Hagemann, S., Kuhry, P., Lafleur, P.M., Lee, 
H., Mazhitova, G., Nelson, F.E., Rinke, A., Romanosvsky, V.E., 
Shiklomanov, N., Tarnocai, C., Venevsky, S., Vogel, J.G. and 
Zimov, S.A. (2008). Vulnerability of permafrost carbon to climate 
change: Implications for the global carbon cycle. BioScience, 
58(8), 701–714. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1641/B580807>
Schuur, E.A.G., McGuire, A.D., Schädel, C., Grosse, G., Harden, 
J.W., Hayes, D.J., Hugelius, G., Koven, C.D., Kuhry, P., Lawrence, 
D.M., Natali, S.M., Olefeldt, D., Romanovsky, V.E., Schaefer, 
K., Turetsky, M.R., Treat, C.C. and Vonk, J.E. (2015). Climate 
change and the permafrost carbon feedback. Nature, 520, 
171–179. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature14338>
Screen, J.A. and Simmonds, I. (2010). The central role of 
diminishing sea ice in recent Arctic temperature amplification. 
Nature, 464, 1334–1337. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://doi.
org/10.1038/nature09051>
Seddon, N., Chausson, A., Berry, P., Girardin, C.A.J., Smith, A. and 
Turner, B. (2020). Understanding the value and limits of nature-
based solutions to climate change and other global challenges. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 375(1794). Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0120>
SENES Consultants Ltd. (2011). Kingston’s Urban Forest 
Management Plan: a plan for city-owned trees. Prepared for 
the City of Kingston. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.
cityofkingston.ca/residents/environment-sustainability/nature-
forests-gardens/urban-forest-management-plan>
Shreve, C.M. and Kelman, I. (2014). Does mitigation save? 
Reviewing cost-benefit analyses of disaster risk reduction. 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 10(A), 213–
235. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijdrr.2014.08.004>
Shugar, D.H. and Clague, J.J. (2018). Changing glaciers, 
changing rivers in State of the Mountains Report; (eds.) Parrott, L., 
Robinson, Z. and Hik, D. Alpine Club of Canada, Canmore, AB. 23 p.
Sherren, K., Bowron, T., Graham, J.M., Rahman, H.M.T. and 
van Proosdij, D. (2019). Coastal infrastructure realignment 
and salt marsh restoration in Nova Scotia, Canada, Chapter 
5 in Responding to Rising Seas: OECD Country Approaches 
to Tackling Coastal Risks, 111–135. OECD Publishing: Paris, 
France. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.oecd-ilibrary.
org/environment/responding-to-rising-seas_9789264312487-en>
Sinnett, D. (2018). Mitigating air pollution and the urban heat 
island effect: The roles of urban trees in Handbook of Urban 
Ecology. Routledge [In Press]. (Eds.) I. Douglas, D. Goode, M. 
Houck and D. Maddox. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://
eprints.uwe.ac.uk/38014>
SNC-Lavalin Inc. (2018). Design Basis for the Living Dike 
Concept. Report prepared for West Coast Environment Law. 
Document No.: 644868-1000-41EB-0001, Rev 1. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://www.wcel.org/publication/design-basis-
living-dike-concept>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 335 
Statistics Canada (2013). Human Activity and the Environment: 
Measuring ecosystem goods and services in Canada. Statistics 
Canada; Environmental Accounts and Statistic Division. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
en/pub/16-201-x/16-201-x2013000-eng.pdf?st=jS_oifjP>
Staudt A., Leidner, A.K., Howard, J., Brauman, K.A., Dukes, J.S., 
Hansen, L.J., Paukert, C., Sabo, J. and Solórzano, L.A. (2013). 
The added complications of climate change: understanding and 
managing biodiversity and ecosystems. Frontiers in Ecology and 
the Environment, 11(9), 494–501. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1890/120275>
Ste-Marie, C. (2014). Adapting sustainable forest management 
to climate change: A review of assisted tree migration and its 
potential role in adapting sustainable forest management to 
climate change. Canadian Council of Forest Ministers, Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ccfm.org/
releases/adapting-sustainable-forest-management-to-climate-
change-a-review-of-assisted-tree-migration-and-its-potential-
role-in-adapting-sustainable-forest-management-to-climate-
change/>
Stern, G.A. and Gaden, A. (2015). Synthesis and 
Recommendations in Science to Policy in the Western and 
Central Canadian Arctic: An Integrated Regional Impact Study 
(IRIS) of Climate Change and Modernization, (eds.) Bell, T. and 
Brown, T. ArcticNet, Quebec City, 40 p. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <http://www.arcticnet.ulaval.ca/pdf/media/29170_IRIS_
East_full%20report_web.pdf>
Stewart, E.J., Dawson, J., Howell, S.E.L., Johnston, M.E., 
Pearce, T. and Lemelin, H. (2012). Local-level responses to sea 
ice change and cruise tourism in Arctic Canada’s Northwest 
Passage. Polar Geography 36(1-2), 142–162. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/1088937X.2012.705352 >
Stirling, I. and Derocher, A.E. (2012). Effects of climate warming 
on polar bears: a review of the evidence. Global Change Biology 
18(9): 2694–2706. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-2486.2012.02753.x>
Stralberg, D., Wang, X., Parisien, M. A., Robinne, F.N., Sólymos, 
P., Mahon, C.L., Nielsen, S.E. and Bayne, E.M. (2018). Wildfire‐
mediated vegetation change in boreal forests of Alberta, 
Canada. Ecosphere, 9(3), e02156. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2156>
Sturrock, R.N., Frankel, S.J., Brown, A.V., Hennon, P.E., 
Kliejunas, J.T., Lewis, K.J., Worrall, J.J. and Woods, A.J. (2011). 
Climate change and forest diseases. Plant Pathology, 60(1), 
133–149. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-3059.2010.02406.x>
Tarnocai, C., Canadell, J.G., Schuur, E.A.G., Kuhry, P., Mazhitova, 
G., and Zimov, S. (2009). Soil organic carbon pools in the 
northern circumpolar permafrost region. Global Biogeochemical 
Cycles, 23(2). Retrieved March 2021, from <http://doi.
org/10.1029/2008GB003327>
Taylor, R.B., Forbes, D.L., Frobel, D., Manson, G.K. and Shaw, J. 
(2014). Coastal geoscience studies at the Bedford Institute of 
Oceanography, 1962–2012 in Voyage of Discovery: Fifty Years of 
Marine Research at Canada’s Bedford Institute of Oceanography, 
(eds.) D.N. Nettleship, D.C. Gordon, C.F.M. Lewis and M.P. 
Latremouille; Bedford Institute of Oceanography–Oceans 
Association, Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, 197–204.
TEEB [The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity] (2010). 
The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity: Ecological and 
Economic Foundations. (Ed.) P. Kumar. Earthscan, London and 
Washington, DC, 456 p.
Tennant, C. and Menounos, B. (2013). Glacier change of the 
Columbia Icefield, Canadian Rocky Mountains, 1919–2009. 
Journal of Glaciology, 59(216), 671–686. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3189/2013JoG12J135>
The Indigenous Circle of Experts (2018). We Rise Together. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://static1.squarespace.com/
static/57e007452e69cf9a7af0a033/t/5ab94aca6d2a7338ecb1d0
5e/1522092766605/PA234-ICE_Report_2018_Mar_22_web.pdf>
UNEP [United Nations Environment Programme] (2014). 
Green Infrastructure: guide for water management, 
ecosystem-based management approaches for water-related 
infrastructure projects. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/9291/-
Green%20infrastructure%3a%20guide%20for%20water%20
management%20%20-2014unep-dhigroup-green-infrastructure-
guide-en.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y>
Van der Putten, W.H., Macel, M. and Visser, M.E. (2010). 
Predicting species distribution and abundance responses to 
climate change: why it is essential to include biotic interactions 
across trophic levels. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences 365(1549), 2025–2034. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0037>
Van Lierop, P., Lindquist, E., Sathyapala, S. and Franceschini, 
G. (2015). Global forest area disturbance from fire, insect 
pests, diseases and severe weather events. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 352, 78–88. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2015.06.010>
van Proosdij, D., MacIsaac, B., Christian, M. and Poirier, E. 
(2016). Guidance for Selecting Adaptation Options, Part 1 in 
Adapting to Climate Change in Coastal Communities of the 
Atlantic Provinces, Canada: Land use Planning and Engineering 
and Natural Approaches – Part 3 Engineering Tools Adaptation 
Options, (eds.) V. Leys and D. Bryce. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/object/
acasa%3A789>
VanDerWal, J., Murphy, H.T., Kutt, A.S., Perkins, G.C., Bateman, 
B.L., Perry, J.J. and Reside, A.E. (2013). Focus on poleward 
shifts in species’ distribution underestimates the fingerprint of 
climate change. Nature Climate Change 3, 239-243. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1688>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 336 
Vavrus, S.J., Holland, M.M., Jahn, A., Bailey, D.A. and Blazey, B.A. 
(2012). Twenty-first century Arctic climate change in CCSM4. 
Journal of Climate 25(8), 2696–2710. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00220.1>
Wamsler, C., Niven, L., Beery, T.H., Bramryd, T., Ekelund, N., 
Jönsson, K.I., Osmani, A., Palo, T. and Stålhammar, S. (2016). 
Operationalizing ecosystem-based adaptation: harnessing 
ecosystem services to buffer communities against climate 
change. Ecology and Society, 21(1), 31. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-08266-210131>
Wang, X., VandenBygaart, A.J. and McConkey, B.C. (2014). Land 
Management History of Canadian Grasslands and the Impact on 
Soil Carbon Storage. Rangeland Ecology and Management, 67(4), 
333–343. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.2111/
REM-D-14-00006.1>
Wassmann, P., Duarte, C.M., Agustí, S. and Sejr, M.K. (2011). 
Footprints of climate change in the Arctic marine ecosystem. 
Global Change Biology, 17(2), 1235–1249. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02311.x>
Waterline Resources Inc., (2013). Aquifer mapping study, 
Town of Gibons, British Columbia. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://gibsons.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Aquifer-
Mapping-Report-Final.pdf>
Watson, J.E.M., Venter, O., Lee, J., Jones, K.R., Robinson, J.G., 
Possingham, H.P., and Allan, J.R. (2018). Protect the last of the 
wild. Nature, 563, 27–30. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/d41586-018-07183-6>
Weed, A.S., Ayres, M.P. and Hicke, J.A. (2013). Consequences 
of climate change for biotic disturbances in North American 
Forests. Ecological Monographs, 83(4), 441–470. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/13-0160.1>
Wei, H., Fan, W., Wang, X., Lu, N., Dong, X., Zhao, Y., Ya, X. 
and Zhao, Y. (2017). Integrating supply and social demand 
in ecosystem services assessment: A review. Ecosystem 
services, 25, 15–27. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.03.017>
Wesche, S.D. and Chan, H.M. (2010). Adapting to the impacts 
of climate change on food security among Inuit in the western 
Canadian Arctic. EcoHealth, 7(3), 361–373. Retrieved March 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-010-0344-8>
Wilson, J., Trenholm, R., Bornemann, J. and Lieske, D. (2012). 
Forecasting Economic Damages from Storm Surge Flooding: A 
Case Study in the Tantramar Region of New Brunswick. Prepared 
for: Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association. Retrieved 
March 2021, from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/
object/acasa%253A722>
World Economic Forum (2020). The Global Risks Report 2020. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.weforum.org/reports/
the-global-risks-report-2020>
Würzer, S.T., Jonas, T., Wever, N. and Lehning, M. (2016). 
Influence of Initial Snowpack Properties on Runoff Formation 
during Rain-on-Snow Events. Journal of Hydrometeorology, 
17(6), 1801–1815. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1175/JHM-D-15-0181.1>
Yang, L.H., and Rudolf, V.H.W. (2009). Phenology, ontogeny 
and the effects of climate change on the timing of species 
interactions. Ecology Letters 13(1): 1–10. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2009.01402.x>
Yang, Z., Wang, T., Leung, R., Hibbard, K., Janetos, T., Kraucunas, 
I., Rice, J., Preston, B. and Wilbanks, T. (2014). A modeling study 
of coastal inundation induced by storm surge, sea-level rise, and 
subsidence in the Gulf of Mexico. Natural Hazards, 71(3), 1771–
1794. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11069-013-0974-6>
Yellowstone to Yukon Conservation Initiative (n.d.). Connecting 
and protecting habitat from Yellowstone to Yukon so people and 
nature can thrive. Retrieved March 2021, from <y2y.net>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. and Kharin, V.V. (2019). 
Changes in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada; 
Chapter 4 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report. (Eds.) E. Bush 
and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
112–193. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://changingclimate.
ca/CCCR2019/chapter/4-0/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 337 
5.9 Appendix 1 
The following table was developed by the author team for this chapter and reflects their collective expert 
opinion on the ways in which climate change is affecting ecosystem services in Canada, the social and 
economic consequences of those impacts and related opportunities for nature-based approaches to 
adaptation and/or GHG emissions reduction.
Table 5.4: Ecosystem services, threats and opportunities
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
REGULATING CONTRIBUTIONS
Maintenance of options
(i.e., the ability of 
ecosystems to provide 
services and maintain 
options for present and 
future generations)
•	 Land-use change 
leading to loss 
of species and 
ecosystems, carbon 
storage
•	 Degraded water 
sources
•	 Increased costs to 
society
•	 Increased prevalence 
of disease
•	 Limited options for 
future generation
•	 Loss of local 
cultures, practices, 
languages and 
knowledge
•	 Protecting species 
and maintaining 
ecosystems (e.g., 
Indigenous Protected 
and Conserved 
Areas)
•	 Ecosystem 
restoration
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 338 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
Climate regulation
(i.e., the ability of 
ecosystems to sequester 
and store carbon)
•	 Land-use change 
and deforestation 
leading to reduced 
rates of carbon 
sequestration
•	 Altered vector 
population dynamics
•	 Impacts to water 
and food security
•	 Reductions in 
biodiversity
•	 Loss of livelihoods 
(e.g., ecotourism, 
fishing and forestry)
•	 Reduced water and 
food security
•	 Economic losses 
associated with 
flooding, drought 
and loss of land
•	 Emergence of 
climate refugees
•	 Green infrastructure
•	 Reforestation 
and restoration of 
ecosystems
•	 Climate friendly 
urban design, 
biomimicry
Regulation of freshwater 
quantity, flow and timing
(i.e., the use of 
freshwater for 
domestic consumption, 
agriculture, industry, 
transportation and 
recreation)
•	 Changes to seasonal 
stability and timing 
of water supplies
•	 Depletion of aquifers 
and base flows
•	 Deglaciation
•	 Loss of vegetative 
cover
•	 Increased reliance 
on technological 
solutions for 
water storage and 
transport
•	 Impacts to human 
health 
•	 Impacts to 
livelihoods
•	 Flooding and 
associated social, 
health, and 
economic costs
•	 Restoration 
of freshwater 
ecosystems 
•	 Improvements in 
efficiency of water 
use
•	 Green infrastructure 
(e.g., creation of 
wetlands)
•	 Decreasing 
impermeable 
surfaces
•	 Increasing natural 
vegetation in urban 
and semi-urban areas
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 339 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
Regulation of freshwater 
and coastal water 
quality
(i.e., delivery of high 
water quality for 
human consumption, 
biodiversity and 
economic development)
•	 Altered vector 
population dynamics
•	 Increased prevalence 
of disease and pests
•	 Land-use change in 
upland ecosystems
•	 Contamination 
resulting from 
natural disasters 
including floods
•	 Impacts to public 
health
•	 Increase of disease/
costs of health care 
from contaminated 
water.
•	 Economic loss
•	 Maintaining upland 
ecosystems
•	 Revise wastewater 
regulations to 
require tertiary 
treatment and 
resource recovery
Regulation of hazards 
and extreme events
(i.e., biodiverse and 
healthy ecosystems 
reduce impact of fires, 
flood, landslides, drought 
and extreme heat)
•	 Loss of plant and 
animal communities
•	 Reduction in long-
term groundwater 
storage
•	 Impacts of extreme 
heat, drought and 
fire to ecosystem 
functioning
•	 Vulnerability of 
forest ecosystems 
to fire
•	 Mortality
•	 Injury
•	 Economic loss
•	 Increased cost to 
society for mitigating 
hazards
•	 Opportunity cost
•	 Green infrastructure 
to help buffer 
impacts of extreme 
events 
•	 Utilization of nature 
for refuge and 
recovery spaces 
after extreme events
•	 Incentives to vacate 
flood areas and 
restore natural 
ecosystems instead 
of building dykes
Habitat creation and 
maintenance
(i.e., sufficiently intact 
natural habitat to 
support biodiversity)
•	 Land-use change 
leading to loss of 
ecosystem services
•	 Shifting species 
distribution ranges
•	 Disturbance
•	 Opportunity cost
•	 Reduction in 
population for 
species of cultural 
and economic 
importance to 
communities
•	 Increasing 
connectivity of 
ecosystems
•	 Green infrastructure 
in urban areas
•	 Connectivity across 
transportation routes
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 340 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
Regulation of air quality
(i.e., the exchange 
of trace gasses and 
deposition of particulate 
matter by ecosystems)
•	 Reduced capacity 
to regulate from 
excessive pollution
•	 Harvesting of forests
•	 Increased disease 
and mortality
•	 Increasing 
healthcare costs
•	 Green infrastructure 
in urban areas to 
increase service 
(e.g., tree planting)
•	 Reforestation 
and restoration of 
ecosystems
Regulation of organisms 
detrimental to humans
(i.e., the contribution 
of biodiversity and 
ecosystems to human 
health)
•	 Habitat loss
•	 Land-use change
•	 Altered vector 
population dynamics
•	 Increase in invasive 
alien species
•	 Loss of biodiversity; 
shifts in species range
•	 Increased disease 
and mortality from 
extreme weather 
and water-borne 
diseases
•	 Increasing 
healthcare costs 
•	 Economic loss
•	 Fostering greater 
biodiversity in all 
systems
•	 Management of 
vector species
Pollination and dispersal 
of seeds and other 
propagules
(i.e., the role of 
pollinator species in 
plant reproduction, 
food production 
and maintenance of 
terrestrial biodiversity)
•	 Habitat loss
•	 Lack of diversity in 
systems
•	 Environmental 
pollution
•	 Introduction of alien 
species
•	 Economic loss
•	 Loss of cultural 
traditions and 
diversity
•	 Reduced food 
security
•	 Loss of pollinated 
foods and medicinal 
plant crops
•	 Fostering greater 
biodiversity in all 
systems
•	 Green infrastructure 
(e.g., to increase 
connectivity in 
systems, provide 
habitat and food 
sources)
•	 Increase diversity in 
food systems
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 341 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
Regulation of ocean 
acidification
(i.e., the contribution of 
ocean ecosystems to 
climate regulation)
•	 Loss of coastal 
ecosystems leading 
to loss of mitigation 
opportunities
•	 Environmental 
pollution
•	 Introduction of alien 
species
•	 Economic loss 
(decrease in 
commercial and 
subsistence shellfish 
fisheries)
•	 Reduction in coastal 
tourism
•	 Loss of livelihoods 
and entire economies 
in some places
•	 Protection of coastal 
habitats
Formation, protection 
and decontamination of 
soils and sediments
(i.e., the role of soil in the 
provision of water and 
nutrients for terrestrial 
vegetation; global 
carbon and nitrogen 
cycles)
•	 Land-use change 
contributing to soil 
loss and erosion
•	 Loss of carbon 
storage
•	 Reduction in quality 
and quantity of water
•	 Economic loss
•	 Increased risk of 
disease by pests and 
pathogens
•	 Food security (less 
nutritious foods)
•	 Flooding and 
relocation related to 
sea level rise 
•	 Soil biodiversity 
management 
practices
•	 Low input 
agricultural practices
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 342 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
MATERIAL CONTRIBUTIONS
Food and feed
(e.g., crops, livestock, 
fisheries, aquaculture, 
wild foods)
•	 Competition for land, 
water and energy
•	 Overexploitation
•	 Availability of land 
with adequate 
climatic and soil 
conditions
•	 Available sources of 
water for irrigation
•	 Increased prevalence 
of pests and toxic 
contamination
•	 Loss of livelihoods 
and entire 
economies in some 
places
•	 Reduced food 
security (from 
impacts on crops 
and fisheries)
•	 Economic loss
•	 Depression and 
reduced job security 
for workers
•	 Encouraging natural 
pest regulation
•	 Managing regulating 
services for system 
resilience
•	 Managing wetlands 
for flood control
•	 Land-use 
management 
regulations that 
expand/retain areas 
for conservation and 
agricultural 
•	 Moving production 
further north when 
environmental 
requirements of 
species allow
Materials and 
assistance
(e.g., timber and fibre for 
construction material, 
clothing and raw 
materials)
•	 Fire management
•	 Soil degradation
•	 Reduced water 
regulation and quality
•	 Impeded carbon 
storage capacities
•	 Overexploitation
•	 Reduction in diversity 
of species
•	 Compromised 
ecosystem integrity
•	 Loss of livelihoods 
and entire 
economies in some 
places
•	 Loss of cultural 
traditions and 
diversity
•	 Reduced security 
from increased fires
•	 Fire management
•	 Natural pest 
management
•	 Building Code 
requirements for 
timber construction
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 343 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
Energy
(e.g., charcoal, 
hydropower, wind, 
biomass, solar power, 
geothermal)
•	 Increased reliance 
on renewable energy
•	 Competition for land, 
water and energy
•	 Impacts to 
biodiversity
•	 Impacts to food 
security and human 
health
•	 Loss of livelihoods
Medicinal, biochemical 
and genetic resources
(e.g., medicines derived 
from biochemical and 
genetic resources)
•	 Climate-related 
biodiversity loss
•	 Invasive species
•	 Overexploitation
•	 Loss of cultural 
traditions and 
diversity
•	 Impacts to human 
health
•	 Risks associated 
with disease
NON-MATERIAL CONTRIBUTIONS
Learning and inspiration
(i.e., nature-based 
opportunities for 
scientific research, 
art, restoration, and 
inspiration)
•	 Land-use change 
associated with 
urban areas
•	 Overharvesting of 
resources
•	 Loss of local 
cultures, practices
•	 Loss of culture, 
identity
•	 Decrease in well-
being
•	 Fostering greater 
biodiversity in all 
systems
•	 Management 
focused on key 
ecosystems, 
biodiversity
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 344 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
CLIMATE CHANGE 
THREATS TO 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
CONSEQUENCES OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS ON 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
OPPORTUNITIES 
FOR NATURE-BASED 
ADAPTATION AND/
OR GHG EMISSIONS 
REDUCTION
Supporting identities
(i.e., physical places that 
are symbolic and/or 
that are a part of social 
relationships that form 
cultural identities)
•	 Loss of local 
cultures, practices, 
languages and 
knowledge
•	 Restricted 
availability of local 
resources
•	 Loss of biodiversity 
of significance 
•	 Impacts to culture, 
identity, emotional 
and social well-being 
•	 Decrease in well-
being; impacts to 
mental health
•	 Loss of subsistence 
economy
•	 Social-ecological 
modelling to 
understand impacts 
of climate change on 
Identity
•	 Indigenous 
Protected and 
Conserved Areas 
(IPCAs)
Physical and 
psychological 
experiences
(i.e., the importance of 
nature to physical and 
mental health)
•	 Land-use change 
leading to lack of 
access to nature
•	 Loss of local 
cultures, practices
•	 Impacts to culture, 
identity, emotional 
and social well-being
Source: This table is based on the expert opinion of the author team.
CHAPTER 6
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Costs and 
Benefits of 
Climate Change 
Impacts and 
Adaptation
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 346 
Coordinating lead authors 
Richard Boyd, PhD, All One Sky Foundation
Anil Markandya, PhD, Basque Centre for Climate Change
Recommended citation 
Boyd, R. and Markandya, A. (2021): Costs and Benefits of Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation; Chapter 6 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: National Issues Report, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 347 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
349
6.1 Introduction 
351
6.1.1 Introduction
351
6.1.2 Context
352
6.2 Economic analysis helps to inform adaptation planning 
353
6.2.1 Introduction 
353
6.2.2 Entry points for economic analysis in risk management frameworks
354
6.2.3 Shift towards policy-centric adaptation planning
356
6.2.4 Focus on early adaptation and the timing and sequencing of options
357
6.2.5 Implications of changing practices for economic analysis
359
6.3 Climate change leads to a wide range of economic and social costs
361
6.3.1 Direct and indirect costs
361
6.3.2 Macroeconomic costs
362
6.3.3 Welfare losses 
362
6.3.4 Co-benefits and other co-impacts
363
6.3.5 Private and social costs
364
Case Story 6.1: Climate action by cities around the world is resulting in co-benefits
364
6.4 Costs related to extreme weather events are increasing 
365
6.4.1 Introduction
365
6.4.2 Global trends in damages
366
6.4.3 Damage trends in Canada
368
6.4.4 What is influencing growing losses?
371
6.5 Future climate change costs for Canada will be high 
373
6.5.1 Introduction
373
6.5.2 Multi-sector national cost assessments
374
Case Story 6.2: The impact of climate change on labour and output
378
6.5.3 Sector and regional cost assessments
379
6.5.4 Municipal cost assessments
383
Case Story 6.3: The City of Edmonton’s assessment of the net costs of climate change
384
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 348 
6.6 Economic decision support tools help with assessing adaptation options 
388
6.6.1 Introduction
388
6.6.2 Decision criteria
388
6.6.3 Conventional economic decision support tools
392
6.6.4 Key methodological challenges
396
Case Story 6.4: Managing uncertainty in the appraisal of adaptation options for addressing s
ea-level rise in London, UK
402
6.7 The benefits of adaptation actions in Canada outweigh the costs 
409
6.7.1 Economic analysis of adaptation options in Canada 
409
Case Story 6.5: Assessing the costs and benefits of adaptation options for coastal areas in 
Quebec and Atlantic Canada
411
Case Story 6.6: Considering co-benefits in the economic appraisal of adaptation actions for 
water retention at Pelly’s Lake, Manitoba
416
6.7.2 The economic case for adaptation
418
6.7.3 Residual damages
421
6.8 There are economic barriers and limits to adaptation 
421
6.8.1 Introduction
422
6.8.2 Barriers and limits to adaptation from an economic perspective
422
6.8.3 Role for governments
425
6.9 Moving forward 
426
6.9.1 Costs of inaction
427
6.9.2 Costs and benefits of adaptation
428
6.9.3 Emerging issues
429
6.10 Conclusion 
430
6.11 References 
433
6.12 Appendices 
448
Appendix 6.1: Summary of select national and regional studies of the economic consequences 
of climate change for specific climate-sensitive sectors in Canada
448
Appendix 6.2: Summary of select studies of the economic consequences of climate change 
for Canadian municipalities
465
Appendix 6.3: What is discounting?
469
Appendix 6.4: Summary of select economic appraisals of adaptation actions in Canada using 
a cost-benefit analysis tool
470
Appendix 6.5: Using equity weights to account for the distribution of costs and benefits
487
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 349 
Key messages 
Economic analysis helps to inform adaptation planning 
(see Section 6.2)
Faced with limited resources and competing priorities, decision makers can use economic analysis to clarify 
trade-offs and make the case for allocating resources to specific adaptation actions by obtaining information 
on the costs and benefits of different options.
Climate change leads to a wide range of economic and social costs 
(see Section 6.3)
Climate change results in a wide range of direct and indirect costs, with numerous economic and social 
implications. Actions to adapt to climate change can deliver significant co-benefits in other areas, as well as 
result in unintended costs.
Costs related to extreme weather events are increasing 
(see Section 6.4)
Costs associated with damage from extreme weather events in Canada are significant and rising, largely due 
to growing exposure and increasing asset values. The scale of costs suggests that households, communities, 
businesses and infrastructure are not sufficiently adapted to current climate conditions and variability.
Future climate change costs for Canada will be high (see Section 6.5)
While climate change will present some benefits for Canada, the associated economic impacts are 
overwhelmingly negative. Much of the available evidence covers only a subset of the full extent of potential 
economic impacts from climate change for Canada. Projected costs are likely very conservative.
Economic decision support tools help with assessing adaptation 
options (see Section 6.6) 
Economics offers a range of tools to help decision makers appraise adaptation actions, understand trade-offs 
and generate information on the costs and benefits of different options. The appropriate economic tool to use 
depends on the criteria for the adaptation decision, the nature of the climate change impacts and the level of 
uncertainty.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 350 
The benefits of adaptation actions in Canada outweigh the costs 
(see Section 6.7)
The benefits of planned actions to adapt to climate change in Canada generally exceed the costs, sometimes 
significantly, providing a strong business case for proactive investment in adaptation. Even when beneficial 
adaptations are adopted, residual damage costs are often still incurred, suggesting that there are economic 
limits to adaptation.
There are economic barriers and limits to adaptation (see Section 6.8)
There is a range of ecological, technological, economic and institutional barriers to adaptation, which limit the 
potential to reduce negative climate change impacts and benefit from new opportunities. Government can 
play an important role in addressing these barriers, although an economically efficient level of adaptation will 
likely involve some residual costs.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 351 
6.1 Introduction 
6.1.1 Introduction
Climate change already results in economic impacts and will do so increasingly in the future. These impacts 
affect different aspects of the economy, public health and the natural environment. Assessing the economic 
impacts of climate change is a complex undertaking, with considerable uncertainties surrounding the 
magnitude of future biophysical impacts and the monetary value of those impacts. Notwithstanding these 
difficulties, economists have been examining the relationship between climate change and economic impacts 
for over 20 years. In 2011, for example, the National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy 
(NRTEE) estimated the average future cost of a high climate change‒rapid growth scenario for Canada at 
$35‒$62 billion (2019 dollars) annually by 2050, with a 5% chance that costs could exceed $72‒$131 billion 
per year (NRTEE, 2011).
Information on the economic consequences of climate change, as well as on the costs and benefits of 
alternative courses of action, is increasingly being demanded by a wide range of private and public sector 
actors. This information is needed to inform resource allocation decisions in response to actual and projected 
climate change risks (National Research Council, 2010; 2009). Two generic response options are available: 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions reduction and adaptation measures (see Box 1.2 in Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report)—an effective and efficient policy response will require a mix of both options. Indeed, from 
an economic perspective, the total costs associated with climate change can only be minimized through a 
combination of GHG emissions reduction and adaptation actions (e.g., Agrawala et al., 2011; de Bruin et al., 
2009a).
The economics profession has historically been more focused on GHG emissions reduction (Fankhauser, 
2017), although the number of studies on adaptation costs and benefits is increasing. The Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) dedicated an entire chapter to the 
economics of adaptation (Chambwera et al., 2014) and several other recent reviews have also focused on this 
subject (e.g., Kahn, 2016; Rouillard et al., 2016a; Markandya et al., 2014).
This chapter assesses the state of knowledge and practice on climate change impacts and adaptation 
economics in Canada. It focuses on answering the following questions: What do we know about the 
economic costs of climate change for Canada? What is the distribution of these costs across different 
regions, sectors and population centres? What are the costs and benefits of actions taken to moderate 
potential damages or to seize beneficial opportunities? And what economic tools and methodologies can 
be used by practitioners to address these questions? Decision makers need answers to these questions in 
order to allocate scarce public and private resources for climate change adaptation, and to ensure that these 
resources are directed towards the most efficient actions. This chapter will be of interest to a wide range of 
decision makers, economists and practitioners at all levels of government, and to businesses operating in 
climate-sensitive sectors.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 352 
6.1.2 Context
Over the last several decades, extreme weather events—such as wildfires, flooding, heat waves and storms—
have caused billions of dollars in economic damages annually worldwide (Aon, 2020; Swiss Re Institute, 
2020). Since 1980, cumulative damages worldwide have surpassed $4.9 trillion (2019 dollars)1 (Munich RE, 
2020); the U.S. alone has sustained about $2.2 trillion (2019 dollars) in damages resulting from 265 weather 
and climate disasters over the last 40 years (National Centers for Environmental Information, 2020). Over 
a similar period, damages in Canada totalled about $31 billion (2019 dollars) (Public Safety Canada, 2020). 
Inflation-adjusted damages have also been trending upwards—globally, regionally and in Canada (see Section 
6.4.2; Aon, 2020; National Centers for Environmental Information, 2020; Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019).
Climate change has increased the likelihood of certain types of extreme climate and weather events occurring 
(Zhang et al., 2019; National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine, 2016) and is expected to 
intensify some events in the future (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). Unabated climate change is projected to result 
in hundreds of trillions of dollars in economic damages globally in 2100 (Warren et al., 2018)—both from the 
intensification of certain climate extremes and from the impacts of slow-onset climate trends (e.g., processes 
like sea-level rise and melting of permafrost). A recent study, for example, suggests that a persistent increase 
in average global temperature of 0.04°C per year (consistent with a scenario of no major policy changes and 
continued GHG emissions) will reduce global economic output per capita by about 7.2% below where it would 
otherwise be in 2100; projected declines in per capita output in the U.S. and Canada are higher still, at 10.5% 
and 13.1%, respectively (Kahn et al., 2019).
Adaptation can significantly reduce the projected costs of climate change by billions of dollars per year 
(U.S. Global Change Research Program, 2018), though it is unlikely to entirely offset economic damages 
(see Section 6.8.2). Ambitious policies to reduce global GHG emissions are also needed to limit the negative 
impacts of climate change (OECD, 2015; Agrawala et al., 2011; de Bruin and Dellink, 2011; Wang and McCarl, 
2011). However, adaptation is not costless. Globally, it is estimated that investment needs for climate change 
adaptation in industrialized countries will reach US $29–$138 billion (2019 dollars) per year by 2030 (UNFCCC, 
2007). Adapting coastlines and water, transportation and energy infrastructure in the United States could cost 
tens to hundreds of billions of dollars annually by 2050 (Sussman et al., 2014). In Canada, an investment of 
just over $5 billion (2019 CAD dollars) will be needed annually, on average, over the next 50 years to adapt 
municipal infrastructure (buildings, facilities, roads, etc.) to climate change (Insurance Bureau of Canada and 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2020). The exponential shape of adaptation cost curves suggests that 
initial levels of adaptation can be achieved at relatively low cost, but that costs could be substantially higher 
in the long term as increasingly less cost-effective actions are required to achieve greater levels of adaptation 
(Agrawala et al., 2011). Nevertheless, judicious adaptation decisions can yield benefits—in the form of avoided 
damages—that far exceed costs (Global Commission on Adaptation, 2019; Lempert et al., 2018).
Given the potential magnitude of investment costs for climate change adaptation in the short and long terms, 
there is a need to provide decision makers with reliable economic information on costs and associated 
benefits to support adaptation investment decisions. Decision makers—whether in the public or private 
sector—face limited human and financial resources. They will not be able to pursue every prospective program 
1 Unless specified otherwise, all values presented in this chapter are in Canadian dollars (CAD).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 353 
or policy, and so must justify and set priorities for allocating available resources, including for climate 
change adaptation strategies and actions. In this regard, the field of economics can be of assistance, as it 
encompasses the study of how to efficiently allocate resources to meet desired goals. Specifically, economic 
analysis can help decision makers to weigh the costs of acting vs. the costs of inaction (i.e., continuing with 
a business-as-usual approach); to choose how much to invest in relation to competing priorities that are not 
climate-related; to decide which types of adaptation options, sectors and locations should receive resources; 
to balance near-term and long-term objectives; and, relatedly, to consider the impacts for future generations 
(Chambwera et al., 2014; National Research Council, 2010). Many adaptation benefits (i.e., avoided damages) 
will also deliver impacts in other areas, including health and safety, cultural heritage, ecosystem services and 
equity. Failure to include these types of non-market considerations in the decision-making process leads to 
underinvestments in adaptation. Economic analysis can be helpful in this regard as well, offering specialist 
techniques for capturing non-market climate change impacts in decision making.
6.2 Economic analysis helps to inform adaptation 
planning 
Faced with limited resources and competing priorities, decision makers can use economic analysis to 
clarify trade-offs and make the case for allocating resources to specific adaptation actions by obtaining 
information on the costs and benefits of different options.
Information on the costs associated with climate change provides the impetus for action. Providing decision 
makers with the costs and benefits of adaptation informs the overall scale of investment in adaptation and the 
selection of specific measures. Economic analysis has evolved from focusing on cost-benefit analysis (CBA) to 
identify the “optimal” adaptation option towards providing tools to inform early action, with greater emphasis 
placed on the value of information, and the costs and benefits of capacity building and overcoming barriers to 
adaptation. Increasing emphasis is also being placed on the use of adaptive risk management frameworks and 
the need to better manage uncertainties.
6.2.1 Introduction 
As decision makers become increasingly aware of the risks of climate change, there is growing demand for 
more effective ways to support adaptation decisions (Moss et al., 2014; National Research Council, 2010). 
The framing for adaptation planning has changed to meet these demands. With increased recognition of 
the need to manage uncertainty and develop practical early actions, there has been a shift towards a more 
policy-centric approach. Such an approach has the starting objective of climate change adaptation, as 
well as increased interest in the timing and sequencing of adaptation options, and the use of adaptive risk 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 354 
management frameworks for decision making (Rouillard et al., 2016a; Watkiss, 2015). These changes have 
important consequences for the use of economic analysis in informing adaptation decisions.
6.2.2 Entry points for economic analysis in risk management frameworks
Decision support in the context of climate change presents unparalleled challenges. Uncertainties associated 
with climate change—relating to how future social and economic systems will evolve; time lags between 
human activities and the response of the climate system; the dynamics of climate and biophysical systems; 
the diverse mix of potentially affected stakeholders; and autonomous adaptation by natural and human 
systems—make it hugely difficult to predict when and where climate change impacts will occur, as well as 
their relative importance (Chambwera et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2014; Heal and Millner, 2013). Regarding 
adaptation, these uncertainties are exacerbated at the regional and local levels, where many adaptation 
options are implemented. Adaptation decisions are complicated by further uncertainties relating to different 
stakeholder perspectives, multiple and competing objectives, long decision time frames, the choice of 
monetary values, and the broad range of adaptation options to select from (e.g., private or public, reactive or 
planned, stand-alone or integrated (“mainstreamed”) (Rouillard et al., 2016a; Jones et al., 2014; Li et al., 2014; 
Randall et al., 2012).
Consideration of uncertainty is fundamental to adaptation decisions and related economic analyses. Given 
the multifaceted and uncertain nature of adaptation decisions, the consensus view is that such decisions are 
best considered in an adaptive (i.e., iterative) risk management framework (Lempert et al., 2018; Jones et al., 
2014; Moss et al., 2014; IPCC, 2012; National Research Council, 2010).
Adaptive risk management provides a framework in which potentially significant, but uncertain, 
consequences of current and future climate change and adaptation actions are continually identified, 
assessed, prioritized, managed and revised; this framework includes monitoring, which takes into account 
new information, experience and stakeholder input (Lempert et al., 2018; National Research Council, 2010). It 
entails an ongoing cycle of assessment, action, reassessment and response that will continue in perpetuity, 
rather than informing one-off decisions at a single point in time (Lempert et al., 2018; Willows and Connell, 
2003). The National Research Council (2010) draws an analogy with decisions in a chess game, where pieces 
are repositioned and risk is reassessed in response to the opponent’s moves.
From an economic analysis perspective, adaptive risk management provides a useful framework for 
adaptation decision making. It allows for the use of a broad range of concepts, processes and decision 
support tools—including traditional tools like cost-benefit analysis (CBA), cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) and 
multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) (see Table 6.4), as well as tools that are more adept at accommodating 
deep uncertainties, such as robust analysis and dynamic adaptation pathways (see Figure 6.3; Table 6.4; 
Moss et al., 2014). Importantly, adaptive risk management allows decision makers to consider a broad range 
of criteria (e.g., costs, benefits, co-benefits and co-impacts (see Section 6.3.4), equity, affordability, flexibility, 
robustness, etc.) when formulating adaptation strategies in the face of uncertainty (see Section 6.6.1).
The awareness, assessment and planning stages of a generalized adaptive risk management framework 
provide specific entry points for economic information, analysis and decision support (see Figure 6.1). During 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 355 
the awareness raising stage, information on the costs of inaction (i.e., the net cost reflecting the difference 
between economic damages and any beneficial opportunities arising from climate change) can be used 
to persuade decision makers of the need and urgency to allocate resources to adaptation planning. This 
information may include estimates of the scale of climate-related costs; the distribution of those costs across 
locations, sectors, population groups, etc.; and the time frame over which they are projected to become 
significant, if they are not already so. The same information can also be used by analysts and stakeholders to 
inform the prioritization of current and future climate risks and vulnerabilities during the assessment stage. 
Economic analysis also plays an important role during the planning stage, where it can be used to inform the 
overall scale of investment in adaptation; the selection, timing and sequencing of specific adaptation options; 
as well as the distribution of adaptation costs and benefits.
Figure 6.1: The generalized adaptive risk management framework for climate change adaptation comprises five 
stages: 1) awareness, 2) assessment, 3) planning, 4) implementation and 5) monitoring and evaluation. Not all 
feedback loops are shown in the figure for ease of presentation (e.g., between planning and awareness, and 
between planning and assessment). Source: Adapted from Lempert et al., 2018; Rouillard et al., 2016a; and Meyer 
et al., 2015. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 356 
6.2.3 Shift towards policy-centric adaptation planning
The assessment and planning stages of an adaptive risk management framework are typically navigated 
following one of two generic analytical processes (Jones et al., 2014). Historically, the predominant approach 
is based on a “science-first” (also known as “top-down”, “scenario-led” and “predict-then-act”) impact 
assessment-driven process (Gregory et al., 2012; Wilby, 2012; Ranger et al., 2010). This involves first defining 
impact pathways—climate change projections combined with socioeconomic information to assess future 
risks and costs—using impact models or damage functions (i.e., an empirical relationship characterizing 
the predicted change in monetary damages that is attributable to a change in a climate variable or index). 
The range of estimated risks is then used to frame the selection of adaptation options. Identified options 
are appraised as a final step in the process to determine the desired adaptation level, which is informed by 
adaptation costs, benefits and residual costs (i.e., the monetary damages attributable to climate change that 
will remain after adaptation) (Watkiss, 2015). With this approach, however, uncertainty is compounded at 
each stage of the analytical process (see Figure 6.2) and is seldom adequately characterized (Wilby, 2012). 
In the presence of such ballooning uncertainties, the range of plausible impacts and adaptation responses 
can become unworkable, rendering the “science-first” approach impractical (Dessai et al., 2009; Dessai et al., 
2005). Further issues with the “science-first” process include the following: it does not adequately address 
non-climate drivers of impacts and risks; its long-term focus does not align with immediate policy needs to 
inform near-term adaptation decisions; it fails to consider the adaptation process itself and ignores potential 
barriers, transaction costs and baseline policies; and it tends to emphasize “hard” (i.e., engineered) adaptation 
options over “soft” options, like building adaptive capacity (Rouillard et al., 2016a; Watkiss, 2015; Patt et al., 2010).
Given the shortcomings of the “science-first” approach, there has been a shift in adaptation practice towards 
“policy-first” analytical processes (Rouillard et al., 2016a; Watkiss, 2015; Watkiss et al., 2015a; Downing, 
2012). “Policy-first” approaches—also known as “bottom-up”, “assess-risk-of-policy” and “decision-centric” 
approaches (Pielke et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2011; Ranger et al., 2010; Dessai and Hulme, 2007)—place 
greater emphasis on adaptation as the starting objective, rather than considering it as the final step, which 
is usually the case in a traditional “science-first” impact assessment. With the “policy-first” approach, a 
significant amount of effort is devoted at the outset to characterizing the decision problem (e.g., a flood 
risk management plan). This includes first identifying relevant objectives, current practices, constraints 
and drivers of change, as well as stakeholder preferences and related decision criteria, all of which frame 
subsequent analyses. Next, the process involves assessing the vulnerability of the defined system to current 
climate, socioeconomic and policy conditions, before considering sensitivities to future stressors, including 
climate and non-climate related stressors (Ranger et al., 2010). Once the limitations of current practices are 
understood, alternative options are identified if necessary and assessed with respect to achieving the stated 
objectives across a range of plausible future scenarios. For instance, the Thames Estuary 2100 Project in 
London, U.K., (see Case Story 6.4) was one of the first large-scale infrastructure projects to adopt a “policy-
first” approach to adaptation planning (Ranger et al., 2013).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 357 
Figure 6.2: Illustration of ballooning uncertainties along a “science-first” causal impact chain. The level of 
uncertainty increases as one moves along the impact chain (from left to right), leading to a high level of 
uncertainty in the cost and benefit estimates at the end of the chain. Source: Adapted from Fussel, 2003.
Compared to the classic “science-first” approach, the “policy-first” approach has a number of advantages 
(Gregory et al., 2012; Pielke et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2011; Ranger et al., 2010; Wilby and Dessai, 2010; Dessai 
et al., 2009). For example, because the “policy-first” approach requires only climate information pertinent to 
the decision problem at hand and focuses the assessment on adaptation options that are acceptable given 
the objectives and constraints of a particular decision, the analysis is streamlined and targeted from the 
outset, which makes it less resource- and data-intensive, as well as less sensitive to ballooning uncertainties. 
Furthermore, because the analysis is context-driven and not unduly influenced by scientific modelling, it 
emphasizes “big picture thinking” and encourages decision makers to consider interactions with broader 
policy priorities and to seek adaptation options that deliver co-benefits with other policy areas.
6.2.4 Focus on early adaptation and the timing and sequencing of 
options
Alongside the shift towards a “policy-first” approach and the use of adaptive risk management frameworks, 
increased consideration is also being given to the timing and sequencing of adaptation as a further means 
to manage uncertainties (Wise et al., 2014). There has been a move away from viewing adaptation as 
comprising one single response (e.g., a wall to reduce future flood risk). Instead, there has been a shift 
towards viewing adaptation as a coherent package of options to address current vulnerabilities and to 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 358 
prepare for medium- and long-term climate change risks, with a focus on practical early implementation 
(Rouillard et al., 2016a; Watkiss, 2015). Packages of options will typically comprise three types of activities or 
building blocks for early action (Rouillard et al., 2016a; Watkiss, 2015; Watkiss et al., 2014):
1.	 Actions to address the existing adaptation deficit: Immediate adaptation options that address 
risks arising today from current weather and climate extremes and, in so doing, also build 
resilience to future climate change. This would include “win-win”, “no-regret” and “low-regret” 
adaptation options that provide clear, immediate benefits or co-benefits.
2.	 Actions to adapt decisions with long lifespans: Adaptations that are mainstreamed into near-
term decisions that have long lifetimes (e.g., decisions relating to climate-sensitive infrastructure 
or land-use planning), and thus will be influenced by future climate conditions and future risks, 
in addition to current conditions. In contrast to the previous category, uncertainty over future 
benefits is a much bigger concern. As a result, greater emphasis is placed on using robust 
options (i.e., actions that provide future benefits under a range of plausible future scenarios) and 
flexible strategies that provide opportunities for learning, with options that can be delayed or 
brought forward, and/or scaled up or down as new information emerges over time.
3.	 Actions to support long-term adaptation: This includes activities such as monitoring, 
surveillance, research and engagement, which immediately start building the capacity needed 
to support future actions to manage long-term climate impacts and risks. Examples include 
generating better information—which is required to inform later decisions about managing major, 
highly uncertain long-term risks—and actions that are needed to create a suitable policy and 
socio-cultural environment to enable and ensure that future options are still possible.
When viewed collectively as an integrated adaptation strategy, these three building blocks form a dynamic 
adaptation pathway (Haasnoot et al., 2018; 2013), as shown in Figure 6.3..
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 359 
Figure 6.3: Illustration of the timing and sequencing of adaptation options within short, medium and long time 
frames along an adaptation pathway. Source: Adapted from Watkiss et al., 2014.
6.2.5 Implications of changing practices for economic analysis
The shift towards a “policy-first” assessment process, coupled with greater emphasis on the timing and 
sequencing of adaptation, and use of adaptive risk management frameworks, has had significant implications 
for the economic analysis of adaptation strategies. Mainly, these changing practices have necessitated the 
development, application and refinement of alternative decision support tools. Traditional economic decision 
support tools (e.g., CBA, CEA) are adequate for appraising early actions to address the existing adaptation 
deficit, where uncertainty over future impacts is less of a concern. However, for mainstreaming adaptation 
into decisions with long lifespans—where consideration of climate and non-climate-related uncertainties over 
future drivers of change is much more important, and where decision makers are thus looking for robust 
options or flexible strategies—alternative economic decision support tools like real options analysis, robust 
decision making, portfolio analysis and dynamic adaptation pathways are more appropriate for appraising 
options (see Table 6.5). Use of these tools globally in a climate change adaptation context is still in its 
infancy, and they have yet to be formally applied in Canada (see Section 6.7.1).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 360 
Further consequences of these changing practices for the economic analysis of adaptation include:
•	
With greater importance being placed on 1) mainstreaming and understanding the process 
of adaptation (including barriers to action), and 2) capacity building to ensure that long-term 
adaptation options remain possible (such as research, monitoring and institutional strengthening), 
there is an increasing need to assess the costs and benefits of non-technical options, including 
behavioural interventions to overcome barriers to change, and the value of information collated 
through monitoring systems. The characteristics of these options are different from those of 
outcome-based or engineered actions, with costs and benefits that are more challenging to 
measure and to include in economic analysis.
•	
Likewise, the increased emphasis on no-regret and low-regret adaptation options places greater 
importance on the need to fully capture co-benefits in the economic analysis, which requires the 
monetization of a broader range of non-climate impacts, in addition to avoided climate-related 
damages.
•	
Viewing adaptation strategies as a set of time-sequenced activities presents challenges for 
economic analysis, since each building block is unique and may require different information 
and methods for the quantification and valuation of physical impacts, and may entail resource 
implications for the analysis.
•	
All economic analyses typically need to consider trade-offs between early costs and future 
benefits, rendering the results sensitive to the discounting process and choice of discount rate 
(see Section 6.6.3.2). Analysis of actions to address the current adaptation deficit will generally be 
less sensitive to discounting assumptions. However, for early actions to adapt long-life decisions 
and keep long-term options open over many decades, outcomes will be more sensitive to the 
discounting of future benefits, making it essential to consider alternative and inter-generational 
discounting practices.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 361 
6.3 Climate change leads to a wide range of 
economic and social costs
Climate change results in a wide range of direct and indirect costs, with numerous economic and social 
implications. Actions to adapt to climate change can deliver significant co-benefits in other areas, as well 
as result in unintended costs.
There is a wide spectrum of terms used to characterize the economic consequences of climate change 
impacts, including direct costs (e.g., damage from a flooding event) and indirect costs (e.g., disruption in 
service delivery), macroeconomic impacts (e.g., reduction in gross domestic product (GDP) growth) and losses 
in the welfare of affected populations. Adaptation actions can result in a range of co-benefits in other areas, 
but can also lead to unintended costs. The range of terms used in the literature—many of which overlap and are 
sometimes used interchangeably—can lead to confusion among practitioners and decision makers, and can 
also impede efforts to compare the estimated costs and benefits of different adaptation actions.
This section describes key cost and benefit terms as they are used in the remainder of this chapter, based on 
common definitions from the literature.
6.3.1 Direct and indirect costs
Typologies of the economic consequences of climate change impacts—specifically impacts arising from 
extreme events—often distinguish between direct and indirect impacts, similar to the literature on natural 
disaster impacts. Direct and indirect impacts can be negative or positive, giving rise to costs (i.e., from losses 
or damages) or benefits (i.e., gains), respectively. This section refers solely to costs, although it applies 
equally to benefits.
Direct costs arise from the physical impacts of climate hazards, such as damage or disruption to tangible 
goods and services that can be traded in a market and thus have an observed price (e.g., costs incurred 
to repair or replace damaged homes, medical treatment costs for heat stress, lost revenue from reduced 
crop yields, etc.). Direct costs also arise from physical impacts to intangible items not bought or sold in a 
traditional market and thus having no readily observable price (e.g., ecosystem services, stress or pain levels, 
and general quality of life). Economists have developed multiple techniques to allocate a “shadow price”—
an estimated price for a good or service whose market price does not accurately reflect its actual value or 
for which no market price exists—to these intangible items, which are referred to as non-market impacts. 
When non-market impacts are rendered equivalent to market impacts using shadow prices, they can be 
substantial—perhaps larger than market costs (Nordhaus and Boyer, 2000). Omitting relevant non-market 
impacts from the economic analysis of adaptation strategies could substantially bias the outcomes.
Indirect costs stem from direct climate change impacts. When infrastructure, a building or a park is damaged 
or destroyed, this can interrupt normal use or service flows (e.g., a flooded shop may have to temporarily 
close for repairs). Damaged infrastructure may result in disruption to the delivery of critical services 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 362 
(e.g., electricity, water, sanitation), which may interrupt the operations of businesses that are not directly 
affected by climate hazards. Workers may also not be able to get to work if road networks or transit 
infrastructure have been affected. These impacts are referred to as business interruption costs (Kousky, 
2012). Interactions between businesses may in turn result in secondary or multiplier impacts through the 
economy (e.g., a flooded shop that closed its doors for repairs will not need to purchase supplies until it 
reopens). Like direct costs, indirect losses can also be divided into market costs (e.g., business interruption 
costs) and non-market costs (e.g., delayed illnesses and mental health disorders, increased inequality, etc.). 
In contrast to direct costs, indirect costs often span a longer time period and take place over a wider spatial 
scale than the site of the direct physical impacts of climate change (Hallegatte, 2013).
The sum of all relevant direct and indirect, market and non-market costs provides one measure of the total 
economic impact of climate change. Interest often focuses on the overall net result—the sum of potentially 
positive and negative impacts—and whether climate change produces net costs or net benefits.
6.3.2 Macroeconomic costs
If the sum of direct and indirect market costs is sufficiently significant, it may impact macroeconomic 
indicators, such as consumer and producer price inflation, the unemployment rate and GDP. GDP measures 
the value of output in an economy, part of which reflects investment and part of which reflects consumption. 
The GDP impacts of climate change can be estimated directly using computable general equilibrium (CGE) 
models—large-scale numerical models that simulate the main economic interactions (e.g., those between 
different product markets) in an economy—or through supply and use tables available from Statistics Canada 
that capture all relevant direct and indirect market costs. Projected changes in macroeconomic indicators, 
like GDP, should be used only as a supplementary lens through which to view the economic consequences 
of climate change. Macroeconomic indicators capture the aggregated direct and indirect climate change 
impacts on the economy. Macroeconomic impacts, if estimated directly, should not be added to other 
estimates of direct and indirect market costs, as this would entail double counting (Ratti, 2017; Kousky, 
2012). At the same time, focusing solely on aggregate macroeconomic indicators like GDP can be misleading 
from a distributional perspective. The spatial scale of an extreme weather event can be different from the 
scale over which GDP is measured. Significant losses for local populations may have no visible impact 
on national GDP, or even on provincial or territorial GDP. However, this does not imply that the impacts are 
negligible for the people who are affected. This particularly applies to disadvantaged populations or locations, 
whose economic output is generally invisible in aggregate macroeconomic indicators. A further distributional 
issue regarding the spatial scale of climate change impacts and the use of aggregate macroeconomic 
indicators is that losses at one location can be offset by gains at another.
6.3.3 Welfare losses 
The theoretically correct measure of the economic consequences of climate change is the resultant change 
in the welfare of affected populations (Kousky, 2012; Stern, 2006; Nordhaus and Boyer, 2000). Estimating 
changes in a theoretical metric like welfare is nonetheless difficult in practice. Consequently, GDP is often 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 363 
used as a practical, though far from perfect, proxy for welfare (Diaz and Moore, 2017a, b; Jones and Klenow, 
2016). In addition to the aforementioned problems with using GDP to measure climate change costs, GDP 
only captures the value of impacts to market goods and services. As noted above, non-market impacts 
can be substantial—perhaps larger than market costs. Failure to account for non-market impacts will lead 
to seriously underestimating welfare losses. The output of the economy, as measured by GDP, also does 
not directly affect the welfare of individuals—what matters most to people is consumption and the loss of 
consumer surplus (Hallegatte, 2013). In the aftermath of extreme events, GDP can increase as the amount 
of investment increases to repair damaged assets—while this might suggest an increase in welfare based 
on the above definition, welfare will actually fall since households are foregoing consumption that they 
would otherwise have enjoyed in favour of investment. As a result, a more appropriate proxy for welfare costs 
resulting from climate change is a measure of consumption loss, rather than output loss as measured by GDP. 
Notwithstanding these concerns, the welfare costs of climate change in monetary terms are sometimes 
expressed as a percentage of projected GDP, referred to as a GDP-equivalent impact (Vivid Economic, 2013).
6.3.4 Co-benefits and other co-impacts
When making adaptation decisions, it is essential to consider another category of impacts that are important 
from an economic perspective and are referred to as “co-impacts”—these are more commonly referred to 
as “co-benefits” when the impacts are positive. In addition to applicable lifecycle costs and avoided climate-
related damages, adaptation options can give rise to various ancillary impacts of potential significance, 
known as co-impacts (Chambwera et al., 2014). Recognizing co-impacts in adaptation decisions is important, 
as evidence suggests that people are more likely to act on climate change if the related impacts associated 
with specific actions are highlighted (Bain et al., 2015). 
Many different terms are used with reference to co-impacts, depending on whether they are positive or 
negative, and intentional or unintentional (Floater et al., 2016; Urge-Vorsatz et al., 2014). Intentionality refers 
to the degree to which co-benefits are explicitly pursued by the decision maker, as early no-regret and low-
regret adaptation options are prioritized to manage uncertainty (see Section 6.2.3). In addition to avoiding 
climate-related damages, adaptation options can contribute to GHG emissions reduction and other non-
climate policy objectives related to issues such as economic development, public health, sustainability and 
equity. Avoiding climate-related damages can be the secondary objective of GHG emissions reduction or 
non-climate policies, or can serve as one of a number of objectives to be pursued simultaneously as part of 
a coherent, integrated package of policies (Floater et al., 2016). For example, the use of green roofs in cities 
as a strategy for reducing urban heat also helps to manage storm water, sequester carbon and improve urban 
biodiversity. In this case, using green infrastructure to address the adverse health effects of heat waves also 
contributes to the co-benefits of reducing GHG emissions, flood management, and the delivery of ecological 
services (see Case Story 6.1).
A range of terms are used to describe negative co-impacts—which are treated as unintentional—including co-
costs, ancillary costs, adverse side-effects and externalities (Urge-Vorsatz et al., 2014). Examples of negative 
co-impacts generated by adaptation options would include increasing GHG emissions, increasing risks to 
other groups or sectors that are not targeted by the option, or limiting future adaptation choices.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 364 
6.3.5 Private and social costs
The final set of economic terms commonly encountered in the literature relates to the perspective adopted 
by the decision maker for appraising adaptation options. The costs and benefits of adaptation options can 
be assessed from a social, as well as a private, perspective (Halsnæs et al., 2007). From a social perspective, 
where a public policymaker is looking for a socially optimal allocation of resources to climate change 
adaptation, the appraisal of adaptation options should consider co-benefits, as well as potential negative 
consequences alongside estimated lifecycle costs and avoided damages (Floater et al., 2016; Chambwera 
et al., 2014). In contrast, households and businesses will be interested in a narrower set of private costs 
and benefits when making adaptation decisions—specifically, those costs and benefits that accrue to the 
individual decision maker. These private costs and benefits (sometimes referred to as financial impacts) 
are typically based on actual market prices. To understand the importance of the difference between the 
two perspectives, consider, for example, a home damaged by a flood event, where some direct costs are 
reimbursed through the Government of Canada’s Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) 
program. The private cost of the event to the homeowner is the difference between the repair costs incurred 
(not covered by private insurance) and the amount of aid received from the government. However, from 
the perspective of society, the aid represents a transfer payment from one taxpayer (a loss) to another (an 
equivalent gain); the loss and gain cancel each other out, leaving the full cost of repairs as a measure of the 
social cost of the flood event.
Case Story 6.1: Climate action by cities around the world is resulting in 
co-benefits
In 2015, the Economics of Green Cities Programme at the London School of Economics in the U.K. published 
a working paper called “Co-benefits of urban climate action: A framework for cities” that includes a literature 
review of the state of knowledge regarding urban co-benefits for climate action, based on a review of actions 
by cities around the world (Floater et al., 2016).
Overall, 116 co-benefits from 34 policy actions with a climate change adaptation focus were identified across 
13 key urban sectors. The highest number of economic co-benefits from adaptation-related policies occurred 
in the health, land use and buildings sectors, and the highest number of social co-benefits generated from 
adaptation-related policies were recorded in the land use, Health and education sectors. The highest number 
of environmental co-benefits from these policies was observed in the land use, water and food security 
sectors. Generally, climate change adaptation policies in the land use and health sectors were found to 
generate the largest number of co-benefits.
Policies in other urban sectors were also found to generate co-benefits for climate change adaptation, GHG 
emissions reduction or both. Relatively high numbers of adaptation co-benefits were associated with policies 
in the following sectors: disaster and emergency management; food security; and tourism, culture and sport. 
Both climate change adaptation and GHG emissions reduction co-benefits were relatively strong for policies 
in the land use, health, water and education sectors.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 365 
6.4 Costs related to extreme weather events are 
increasing 
Costs associated with damage from extreme weather events in Canada are significant and rising, largely 
due to growing exposure and increasing asset values. The scale of costs suggests that households, 
communities, businesses and infrastructure are not sufficiently adapted to current climate conditions and 
variability.
The number of extreme events has increased since 1983, although the distribution of these events across 
Canada varies significantly, with Alberta being affected the most. Studies on the attribution of such events in 
Canada indicate that climate change is increasing the likelihood of certain types of extreme weather events, 
and may be playing a role in the trend of growing losses from such events. However, the majority of rising 
losses related to extreme weather events are the result of growing exposure and rising asset values. The scale 
of costs suggests that there is an adaptation gap or deficit, whereby households, communities, businesses and 
infrastructure are not sufficiently adapted to current climate conditions and variability.
6.4.1 Introduction
Prior to reviewing evidence of the projected economic consequences of climate change for Canada, 
information on the costs of past severe climate and weather events is presented for context. Extreme 
events—such as heat waves, drought, flooding or strong storms—have the potential to cause extensive 
damage and impacts to people, buildings, infrastructure and the natural environment; severe weather 
causes tens of billions of dollars of damage each year worldwide (Aon, 2020; Swiss Re Institute, 2020). It is 
anticipated that climate change will intensify some types of extreme weather events in the future (Bush and 
Lemmen, 2019) and will contribute to rising damages in the coming decades. As a result, an appreciation of 
current vulnerabilities and gaps in preparedness in Canada is a good starting point for building a robust case 
for early action for climate change adaptation (see Section 6.2.3).
This section focuses on a single line of evidence—damages associated with weather extremes in Canada, as 
documented by the insurance industry. While extreme events might be the face of climate change, gradual 
trends in Canada’s climate (e.g., rising mean annual and seasonal temperatures, rising sea levels, melting 
glaciers and permafrost, etc.) may also be leading to impacts with important economic consequences, 
including recent problems with mountain pine beetle infestations in B.C. (Withey et al., 2015) and the spread 
of Lyme disease vectors (Ebi et al., 2017). Compared to the impacts of extreme weather events, evidence of 
the economic consequences of these slow-onset impacts is sparse. The information presented in this section 
provides only a partial picture of the economic costs of past climate-related hazards in Canada, recognizing 
that current risks from weather extremes are significant and rising, and warrant early action. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 366 
6.4.2 Global trends in damages
The insurance industry is a key source of information on the economic consequences of weather extremes. 
Large reinsurers, such as Munich RE and Swiss Re, monitor and record information on losses from natural 
catastrophes globally to evaluate the capacity of national and international reinsurance markets to absorb 
losses (see Box 6.1 for a description of key insurance industry terminology).
Box 6.1: Commonly used insurance industry terminology
Economic losses represent the financial costs directly attributable to a natural disaster, such as damage to 
building structures and contents, infrastructure and vehicles, as well as losses due to business interruption 
as a direct consequence of damage to buildings. Economic losses include insured losses (i.e., economic 
losses = insured losses + uninsured losses). Economic losses do not, however, include indirect (i.e., ripple, 
secondary or multiplier) losses that result from the upstream or downstream disruption to the flow of goods 
and services as a result of damage to buildings, infrastructure, vehicles, etc. They also do not include non-
financial impacts, such as impaired quality of life or loss of reputation.
A natural disaster or catastrophe is an event caused by natural forces. Weather-related natural disasters 
include hydrological (e.g., flooding), meteorological (e.g., storms, wind, hail, lightning, tornado, tropical 
cyclone) and climatological events (e.g., wildfires, extreme heat), but exclude geophysical events (e.g., 
earthquakes, volcanoes).
Source: Munich RE, 2018; Swiss Re Institute, 2018.
In 2018, weather-related natural disasters globally caused total economic losses of about $215 billion (2018 
dollars USD), of which private insurers paid out a record $100 billion in losses (Munich RE, 2020). The global 
protection gap—the difference between insured losses and total losses—was therefore $115 billion (54% 
of total economic losses). These figures are similar to those produced by the Swiss Re Institute for 2018; 
estimated total economic losses and insured losses from weather-related natural disasters globally were, 
respectively, about $201 billion and $98 billion (2018 dollars USD), making the protection gap about 
$103 billion (or 51% of total economic losses) (Swiss Re Institute, 2019a). Both economic losses and insured 
losses in 2018 were higher than the corresponding inflation-adjusted annual average for the last ten years 
(2008–2018), which are $174 billion and $65 billion, respectively (Munich RE, 2020).
Globally, economic losses from natural disasters are rising. Overall losses and insured losses have been 
trending upward over the last several decades; this is evident in Figure 6.4, which shows worldwide loss 
data for the period 1980–2018 as recorded by Munich RE, the world’s largest reinsurance company. Loss 
data recorded by the Swiss Re Institute also shows rising economic damages from weather-related natural 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 367 
disasters worldwide (Swiss Re Institute, 2019a). In terms of five-year moving averages, overall losses 
recorded by Munich RE grew by 5.1% annually between 1980 and 2018, and insured losses grew by 4.3% 
annually. With growth in overall economic losses outpacing insured losses, the protection gap has risen 
in absolute dollar terms over time, although the gap is falling in percentage terms. Despite increasing 
penetration of relevant insurance products with a greater proportion of damages covered by insurance (Swiss 
Re Institute, 2019a), society is absorbing increasing residual losses from weather-related natural disasters.
Economic losses from natural disasters affecting the U.S. are also rising (e.g., National Centers for 
Environmental Information, 2020). For example, the frequency of billion-dollar disasters between 1980 and 
2011 increased at about 5% per year (Smith and Katz, 2013). During the period of 1980–2019, the U.S. 
experienced, on average, 6.6 events annually; over the most recent 5 year period (2015–2019), the annual 
average number of billion-dollar disasters was roughly double, at 13.8 events (National Centers for 
Environmental Information, 2020).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 368 
Figure 6.4: The figure shows annual insured and uninsured losses (in 2018 Canadian dollars) from 15,788 
weather-related events (e.g., flooding, storms, wildfires, extreme heat, etc.) worldwide that meet Munich RE’s 
NatCatSERVICE inclusion thresholds for dollar losses and fatalities over the period 1980‒2017. a) The dark blue 
bars indicate the total insured losses and the light blue bars indicate the total uninsured losses from all weather-
related loss events globally in each year. The combined light blue and dark blue bars indicate the total economic 
losses from all weather-related loss events globally in each year. b) This figure illustrates the “protection gap”—
the proportion of insured losses compared with total economic losses—highlighting the economic loss generated 
by catastrophes that are not covered by insurance. Data source: Munich RE, 2020.
6.4.3 Damage trends in Canada
Public Safety Canada’s Canadian Disaster Database (CDD) monitors overall economic losses from significant 
meteorological and hydrological disasters, including payments made under the DFAA program (see below) 
and those made by private insurers. The Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) also tracks private insurance 
payouts for extreme weather events dating back to 1983. However, data on overall losses in the CDD seems 
incomplete considering that, in over half of the years since 1983, insured losses recorded by the IBC exceeded 
total economic losses in the CDD. Due to the incomplete nature of the economic loss data, the narrative below 
focuses only on insured losses. If the U.S. can be considered to provide a reasonable analogy for Canada, 
overall losses from weather extremes are roughly double the amount of the insured losses (Aon, 2020).
Insured losses in Canada have been rising since 1983, as is evident from the trend line in Figure 6.5. Between 
1983 and 2007, annual losses averaged about $0.4 billion (2018 dollars); in contrast, over the most recent 
decade, losses have averaged about $1.9 billion per year (Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2018). The largest 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 369 
insured loss in a single year on record was $5.3 billion (2018 dollars) in 2016, with the wildfire in Fort 
McMurray and the surrounding area resulting in insurance payouts totalling $3.9 billion (Insurance Bureau of 
Canada, 2019). 
Figure 6.5: The figure shows annual insured losses plus adjustment expenses (in 2018 dollars) from extreme 
weather events in Canada over the period 1983‒2018. The height of the bars shows the total losses plus 
expenses from all extreme weather-related events in each year. The solid orange line shows the estimated 
upward trend in insured losses plus adjustment expenses. Data source: Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2018.
Like insured losses, the number of extreme weather events has been increasing over time—the five-year 
moving average grew by about 7% annually between 1983 and 2018. In terms of the distribution of extreme 
weather events in Canada, Alberta was affected the most, with 55 events impacting the province over the 
period 1983‒2018, followed closely by Ontario, with 52 events. The Maritime provinces experienced the 
fewest events. Alberta is the epicentre of extreme weather events when it comes to losses—six of the ten 
largest insured loss events in Canada since 1983 occurred in this province (see Table 6.1).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 370 
Table 6.1: Top 10 most costly weather-related disasters in Canada, in 
terms of insured losses (1983–2018)
RANK
DATE OF EVENT
AFFECTED AREA, 
PROVINCE
WEATHER-RELATED 
EVENT(S)
INSURED LOSS
($ MILLION)*
1
May 3‒19, 2016
Fort McMurray, AB
Fire
3,899.1
2
January 1998
Southern Quebec
Ice storm
2,022.3
3
June 19‒24, 2013
Southern Alberta
Flooding, water
1,737.4
4
July 8, 2013
Greater Toronto Area, 
ON
Flooding, lightning, water
1,004.6
5
August 19, 2005
Southern Ontario
Hail, tornadoes, wind
779.7
6
May 4, 2018
Hamilton, ON; Greater 
Toronto Area, ON; and 
Quebec
Windstorm, water
680.0
7
May 15‒16, 2011
Slave Lake, AB
Fire, windstorm
587.6
8
August 7, 2014
Central Alberta
Windstorm, hail, lightning, 
water
582.3
9
August 12, 2012
Calgary, AB
Hail, lightning, water
571.8
10
July 12, 2010
Calgary, AB
Hail, flooding, windstorm, 
lightning
557.7
* All figures are in 2018 dollars.
Data source: Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019.

As with payments from private insurers, the annual cost of the federal DFAA program has been rising since 
the 1970s (Office of the Auditor General Canada, 2016; Parliamentary Budget Officer, 2016). In the event 
of a disaster—and if the response and recovery costs exceed certain thresholds deemed acceptable for a 
province or territory to bear on its own—the Government of Canada provides financial assistance on a sliding 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 371 
scale through the DFAA program. Payments are made directly to provinces, which then distribute funds to 
individuals, businesses, non-profit organizations and local governments. Between 1970 and 1994, annual 
average DFAA payouts for hurricanes, convective storms, floods and winter storms averaged $56 million 
(2018 dollars) (Parliamentary Budget Officer, 2016). In contrast, annual average payouts averaged $303 
and $427 million (2018 dollars) over the periods of 1995‒2004 and 2005‒2014, respectively (Parliamentary 
Budget Officer, 2016).
Long-term trends in losses have been interpreted as indicative of a contemporary adaptation deficit (Burton, 
2009) and of increasing future climate-related risks (Hallegatte, 2014; Schipper and Pelling, 2006). There are 
many reasons for the observed adaptation deficit, including a range of market, behavioural and policy failures 
(see Section 6.8.1). The deficit has been increasing and is anticipated to widen with climate change (Burton, 
2009), strengthening the case for early adaptation efforts. 
6.4.4 What is influencing growing losses?
The observed increase in losses from weather-related disasters has led to questions about whether climate 
change is contributing to the trend (Bouwer, 2011). The IPCC, for example, suggested that the upward trend 
in historic losses provided indirect evidence of a potential climate change signal. However, some scholars 
argued that to make reliable comparisons between the losses of past and more recent weather-related 
natural disasters, it is necessary to control for changes in various socioeconomic factors that influence 
the magnitude of losses; otherwise, one is comparing apples to oranges (e.g, Pielke, 2007). The process 
of making adjustments for relevant socioeconomic and non-climate related factors is known as “loss 
normalization” (Swiss Re Institute, 2020; Pielke et al., 2003). Normalization helps to address the following 
question: “What would the magnitude of losses be if present-day assets and values were exposed to a historic 
event?” Analyses of normalized losses help to clarify the extent to which socioeconomic factors contribute 
to observed rising damages over time and, by inference, the role of other factors in shaping loss trends. One 
likely factor contributing to the trend of rising losses is improved and more comprehensive data collection over 
time; similarly, lower observed losses in the early 1980s may partly be explained by a lack of available data.
Studies that analyze time series of normalized economic and insured losses from weather-related disasters—
whether they occur at a global or regional level—generate mixed results. Some studies find no significant 
upward trends, despite substantial increases in nominal losses (e.g., Bouwer, 2011; Neumayer and Barthel, 
2011). Other studies find statistically significant long-term trends in losses (e.g., Gall et al., 2011; Schmidt 
et al., 2009). A recent study of normalized natural disaster losses globally uncovered strong evidence of 
a rightward skewing of the loss distribution and a corresponding increasing trend in the most extreme 
damages, but weaker evidence for an increasing trend in mean losses (Coronesea et al., 2019).
Figure 6.6 presents normalized insured losses for the same extreme weather events in Canada as shown in 
Figure 6.5. Losses are normalized using a conventional approach (e.g., Miller et al., 2008; Pielke et al., 2008; 
Pielke et al., 2003): the original nominal values, not adjusted for inflation, are modified by three multipliers 
to account for changes in producer prices, population and wealth, which are measured in terms of GDP per 
capita over time. A significant, though slightly weaker, positive trend is still observed in normalized losses 
from weather-related disasters in Canada. This upward trend is also evident when considering the five-
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 372 
year moving average of normalized losses, which produced an annual growth rate of 3.5% between 1983 
and 2018; this rate was still increasing, but at a much slower rate than that of nominal losses (10.6%) and 
real losses (8.2%), adjusted for inflation, over the same period. Since 1983, the increasing trend in insured 
losses associated with extreme weather disasters in Canada has primarily been due to an accumulation 
of value (e.g., people, assets, wealth) year-on-year. But rising losses cannot entirely be explained by 
growing exposures, asset values and general price inflation—climate change may be playing a role. While 
a rise in normalized losses is not “proof” of climate change, it is certainly consistent with the anticipated 
intensification of some weather extremes with rising temperatures (Swiss Re Institute, 2020; Coronesea et al., 
2019; IPCC, 2013).
Research on event attribution in Canada—which assesses how the likelihood of extreme weather events is 
altered by GHG emissions from human activity—found that climate change increased the likelihood of the 2016 
Fort McMurray wildfire and the extreme rainfall that contributed to the 2013 flooding in southern Alberta (Zhang 
et al., 2019), two of the most costly weather disasters on record in Canada (see Prairie Provinces chapter).
Figure 6.6: Normalized annual insured losses plus adjustment expenses (in 2018 dollars) from extreme weather 
events in Canada over the period 1983‒2018. Losses are normalized following the approach used in Pielke et 
al., 2008, Miller et al., 2008, and Pielke et al., 2003, which adjusts for inflation and changes in population and 
wealth over time. The height of the bars shows the total normalized losses (orange) and real losses (blue), plus 
expenses from all extreme weather-related events in each year. The solid lines show the estimated upward trend 
in normalized losses (orange) and real losses (blue), plus adjustment expenses. Data source: Insurance Bureau 
of Canada, 2019.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 373 
6.5 Future climate change costs for Canada will 
be high 
While climate change will present some benefits for Canada, the associated economic impacts are 
overwhelmingly negative. Much of the available evidence covers only a subset of the full extent of 
potential economic impacts from climate change for Canada. Projected costs are likely very conservative.
In the absence of new adaptation actions, the available evidence suggests that climate change will adversely 
impact the rate of economic growth in Canada and will result in negative economic consequences for forestry, 
coastal regions, the Great Lakes region (associated with low water levels), public health, and ski resorts in 
Quebec and B.C. Under high-emissions scenarios, the economic costs to these sectors could range from 100s 
of millions to 10s of billions of dollars annually by mid-century, and could amount to higher still by the end of 
the century. Most studies project economic benefits to the agriculture sector from climate change—with the 
largest gains in the Prairie provinces—while some large-scale global studies project minor losses for Canada’s 
agriculture sector. The limited evidence available for cities suggests that climate change will have potentially 
significant negative economic impacts. Approaches for investigating the economic consequences of climate 
change have advanced considerably over the last decade. However, improving consistency across studies 
related to scope, assumptions and foundational data, and further refining methods are necessary to form more 
robust conclusions about the importance of economic impacts for one sector or region relative to another. 
There are also important knowledge gaps to fill. Information on the economic impacts of climate change is 
limited to a few sectors, regions and municipalities, and is lacking for Indigenous peoples.
6.5.1 Introduction
A key piece of economic information supporting climate-related decisions is the future cost of inaction—
the economic consequences that result from allowing climate change to continue unabated and without 
further planned adaptation (Ackerman and Stanton, 2011; European Environment Agency, 2007). While the 
magnitude of the projected cost of inaction is uncertain, judiciously caveated estimates can be used in 
tandem with information on the current costs of climate and weather extremes (see Section 6.4) to persuade 
decision makers of the urgent need to allocate resources for adaptation, and to prioritize the allocation of 
such resources to address key climate risks. Projected costs also provide a baseline for weighing the cost of 
adaptation projects, programs and policies. To supplement the observed cost information for historic extreme 
weather events presented in Section 6.4, this section reviews available evidence relating to the projected 
future costs of climate change for Canada: looking at aggregate, multi-sector and national-level cost 
assessments; cost assessments for single climate-sensitive sectors at the national, regional and provincial 
level; and cost assessments for specific municipalities. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 374 
6.5.2 Multi-sector national cost assessments
Aggregate estimates of the economic consequences of climate change strictly for Canada and across 
multiple sectors are scarce. The frequently cited study by the NRTEE (2011) remains the benchmark multi-
sector national assessment of the economic costs of climate change for Canada. Using the integrated 
assessment model, PAGE09 (Hope, 2011), the future economic cost of climate change for Canada was 
estimated for two climate and two socioeconomic scenarios, producing four plausible futures: 1) "low 
climate change–slow growth", 2) "low climate change–rapid growth", 3) "high climate change–slow growth" 
and 4) "high climate change–rapid growth".2 Projected annual costs for Canada in 2050—assuming no new 
adaptations—range from $30 billion (2019 dollars) under the “low climate change–slow growth” scenario to 
$62 billion under the “high climate change–rapid growth” scenario. Under the “high climate change–rapid 
growth” scenario, more people, assets and wealth are exposed to a larger temperature change than under the 
“low climate change–slow growth” scenario, resulting in larger projected costs. The PAGE09 model explicitly 
captures uncertainty in its parameters, which generates a frequency distribution of estimated annual costs. 
The distributions of possible costs across all scenarios suggest a small chance that costs could be much 
higher—there is a 5% chance that the annual cost of climate change in 2050 could exceed $131 billion 
under the “high climate change–rapid growth” scenario. By 2075, under the same four plausible scenario 
combinations, annual costs are projected to range from $74 to $319 billion, with a 5% chance that they could 
exceed $1,185 billion annually under the “high climate change–rapid growth” scenario. These projections 
reflect the undiscounted expected costs to traditional economic sectors (e.g., construction, manufacturing, 
retail trade, educational services, etc.) and non-economic sectors (e.g., impacts to health and ecosystems) 
from warming, the expected costs of sea-level rise and the expected costs of “fat-tail” catastrophic events3 
(e.g., from rapid melting of the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets) (NRTEE, 2011).
The only other multi-sector national estimates of the aggregate impact of climate change on Canada come 
from large-scale global macroeconomic studies. Results for Canada from three of these studies are presented 
in Table 6.2. All three studies use similar approaches, which involve integrating information about biophysical 
impacts and economic valuation derived from independent damage assessments for specific sectors (like 
agriculture) into a multi-regional, multi-sector model of the global economy to estimate the impact of climate 
change on economic output (GDP). The studies include similar sector-specific impact categories (see Table 
6.2) and draw damage information to inform the magnitude of projected impacts largely from the same set of 
primary studies (e.g., Lafakis et al., 2019; Kompass et al., 2018; Roson and Sartori, 2016; Kjellstrom et al., 2009; 
Bosello et al., 2006; Hamilton et al., 2005). Despite these similarities, the results are not strictly comparable 
due to, among other things, different time horizons and modelled temperature changes, and differences in how 
the independently estimated climate impacts are integrated into each macroeconomic model.
2 The low climate change scenario (IPCC SRES B1) assumes an annual average temperature change for Canada of 
+3.4°C by 2050, with a +28 cm rise in sea level. The assumed changes in temperature and sea level under the high-
climate-change scenario (IPCC SRES A2) by 2050 are +3.6°C and +29 cm, respectively (NRTEE, 2011). Annual average 
growth in GDP under the slow-growth scenario and the rapid-growth scenario is assumed to be 1.3% and 3.0%, 
respectively (NRTEE, 2011).
3 A “fat-tail” catastrophic event is one where the costs of climate catastrophes are more probable, characterized by a 
probability distribution that does not have a typical bell shape, but rather has a long, fat tail that extends out to the right.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 375 
Table 6.2: Summary of national economic consequences for Canada 
from a selection of large-scale global macroeconomic studies
STUDY
PROJECTED IMPACT 
ON GDP
CLIMATE CHANGE 
SCENARIO
CATEGORIES OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACT INCLUDED IN THE 
ASSESSMENTS1
Organisation 
for Economic 
Co-operation 
and 
Development 
(2015)
+0.89% change in real 
GDP per year in 2060, 
relative to projected 
GDP without climate 
change impacts
Projected regional 
change in mean 
annual temperature 
in 2060 under 
RCP8.5 relative to 
pre-industrial levels 
(1850–1900)
•	
Agriculture and fisheries: 
changes in crop yields and 
changes in fishery catches
•	
Coastal zones: loss of land and 
capital from sea-level rise
•	
Extreme events: damages from 
hurricanes
•	
Public health: changes in labour 
productivity and healthcare 
expenditures due to vector-borne 
diseases, heat- and cold-related 
diseases, diarrhea
•	
Occupational health: changes in 
labour productivity due to heat 
stress
•	
Residential energy demand: 
changes in space heating and 
cooling costs 
•	
Tourism: changes in net 
tourism flows and associated 
expenditures
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 376 
STUDY
PROJECTED IMPACT 
ON GDP
CLIMATE CHANGE 
SCENARIO
CATEGORIES OF CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACT INCLUDED IN THE 
ASSESSMENTS1
Kompass et al. 
(2018)
-0.10% (+1°C) to 
-0.32% (+4°C) change 
in real GDP per year 
in 2100, relative to 
projected GDP without 
climate change 
impacts
+1°C to +4°C change 
in global mean 
annual temperature 
by 2100 relative to 
pre-industrial levels 
(1850–1900)
•	
Agriculture: changes in crop 
yields
•	
Coastal zones: loss of land from 
sea-level rise
•	
Public health: changes in labour 
productivity and healthcare 
expenditures due vector-borne 
diseases, heat- and cold-related 
diseases, diarrhea
•	
Occupational health: changes in 
labour productivity due to heat 
stress
Lafakis et al. 
(2019)
+0.31% change in real 
GDP in 2048 (fourth 
quarter), relative to 
forecast GDP without 
climate change 
impacts
Projected global 
change in mean 
annual temperature 
in 2048 under RCP8.5 
relative to 1986–2005
•	
Agriculture: changes in crop 
yields
•	
Coastal zones: loss of land
•	
Public health: changes in labour 
productivity and healthcare 
expenditures due vector-borne 
diseases, heat- and cold-related 
diseases, diarrhea
•	
Occupational health: changes in 
labour productivity due to heat 
stress
•	
Residential energy demand: 
changes in space heating and 
cooling costs
•	
Tourism: changes in net 
tourism flows and associated 
expenditures
1 Biophysical and economic impacts are derived from independent studies for each climate change 
impact category, and this information is used to develop “shocks” to the global macroeconomic models to 
simulate impacts on GDP. For example, Lafakis et al., 2019, used projected changes in oil prices to shock 
the Moody’s Analytical Macroeconomic Model for projected changes in residential energy demand related 
to climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 377 
All three studies suggest that projected climate change impacts on annual real Canadian GDP will be less 
than (plus or minus) 1%. Though small in percentage terms from a national perspective, this still equates 
to very large dollar amounts, which will be significant for affected Canadian sectors and regions. Both the 
Moody’s Analytics study and the OECD study project small net gains for the Canadian economy. In each case, 
the dominant driver behind the result is projected increases in tourism flows, with fewer domestic departures 
and more international arrivals expected as Canada warms. These gains more than offset output losses 
attributable to the other climate impacts that were analyzed. However, the projected increases in tourism 
flows for Canada should be viewed with caution, due to the simplified and aggregate nature of the underlying 
impact model, in which tourist flows only depend on mean annual temperature, per capita incomes, an 
attractiveness index, and the distance between the capitals of origin and destination countries (Hamilton et 
al., 2005). Other key determinants of future tourism flows are ignored, including the influence of changing 
precipitation patterns, supply-side constraints on the availability of tourist infrastructure, and feedback 
effects on international arrivals due to reduced incomes in origin countries related to climate change impacts 
on other sectors of the global economy. Kompass et al. (2018) deliberately excluded climate change damage 
functions for tourism from their analysis because of these concerns, and they projected small net losses for 
the Canadian economy related to climate change.
Estimates of the aggregate impact of climate change on the Canadian economy are available from another 
global macroeconomic study. Kahn et al. (2019) used a “top-down” empirical approach—which estimates a 
relationship between a climate variable (e.g., temperature) and an aggregate measure of economic output for 
the whole economy (e.g., national GDP)—to investigate the impact of climate change on long-term economic 
growth across 174 countries, including Canada. To put the results of this study into perspective, the PAGE09 
integrated assessment model used by the NRTEE measures climate change impacts on GDP levels, not the 
GDP growth rate (i.e., it measures short-term growth effects). However, climate change can cause lasting 
damage to capital stocks and productivity in most sectors of the economy, and is likely to impact long-term 
growth rates (Revesz et al., 2014; Stern, 2013). In this case, output and consumption at some future date 
will not depend solely on the temperature at that date, but is more likely to be affected by the entire path of 
temperature, output and consumption up to that date. Studies that have investigated the impact of climate 
change on GDP growth rates have found substantially larger losses than studies that measured impacts 
on the annual level of GDP (Diaz and Moore, 2017a, b). The assessments summarized in Appendix 6.1 
incorporated a mix of both effects—some of the sector-specific impacts that were analyzed affected GDP 
growth rates (e.g., damage from sea-level rise to capital stocks), while others affected output levels (e.g., 
changes to crop yields).
Kahn et al. (2019) used a model linking mean annual temperature deviations from historic norms over the 
period 1960–2014 to changes in labour productivity (see Case Story 6.2), and in turn to real GDP per capita. 
The model was used to investigate the cumulative effect of changes in labour productivity resulting from 
persistent increases in mean annual temperature under RCP8.5. In contrast to the projections presented in 
Appendix 6.1, Kahn et al. (2019) found that climate change would substantially reduce real GDP per capita in 
Canada in 2050 and 2100 by 4.4% and 13.1%, respectively.
The global macroeconomic studies discussed above have several limitations, meaning that the projected 
impacts of climate change for Canada are likely overwhelmingly negative and much higher than shown. For 
a start, many important impacts were omitted, including impacts on livestock and aquaculture, changes to 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 378 
forestry yields, impacts associated with the spread of invasive species and pests, impacts of water stress 
on electricity production and the availability of potable water for end users, impacts on human security (e.g., 
conflict and migration) and impacts on the provision of ecosystem services. Furthermore, macroeconomic 
studies cannot capture non-market impacts, such as welfare losses from impacts to cultural ecosystem 
services, premature mortality, or pain and suffering from illness or injury. The economic consequences of 
extreme weather events were also not covered, with the exception of hurricanes in the OECD study. The costs 
of these disasters can be considerable (see Sections 6.4, 6.5.2 and 6.5.3). Finally, large scale disruptive or 
“fat-tail” catastrophic events were not captured.
Case Story 6.2: The impact of climate change on labour and output
An emerging field of research on the macroeconomic consequences of climate change is the examination of 
the impact of temperature and heat stress on the productivity of workers across the economy (e.g., Newell 
et al., 2018; Heal and Park, 2016; Kjellstrom et al., 2015; Dell et al., 2014). There is an observable relationship 
between workplace temperatures and performance—beyond a certain temperature, the hourly productivity of 
workers or the time allocated to work declines (Zivin and Neidell, 2014; Dunne et al., 2013; Kjellstrom et al., 
2013; 2009). For example, Vanos et al. (2019) found that labourers at an outdoor industrial site in Ontario lost, 
on average, 22 hours each summer (equivalent to about 1% of annual work hours) as a result of taking breaks 
or stopping work due to heat stress.
The risk of overheating increases with the level of physical exertion required to perform a given task, the 
duration of the task, the experience of the worker in performing the task and the ambient temperature of 
the work environment (Employment and Social Development Canada, 2018). Heat generated by the body 
needs to be transferred to the external environment to avoid increases in the body’s temperature. If the 
body is unable to dissipate the heat, then it begins to experience dizziness, muscle cramps and fever. In 
extreme circumstances, exposure to hot temperatures can cause acute cardiovascular, respiratory and 
cerebrovascular distress, which can be life-threatening (Employment and Social Development Canada, 2018).
At lower temperatures in the workplace, before these more serious health effects occur, workers can 
experience diminished “work ability” (Kjellstrom et al., 2015), where temperature stress may affect workers 
in two ways (Heal and Park, 2016): 1) direct physical or psychological discomfort and 2) reduced task 
productivity, altering the increment of effort exerted within any given hour or the marginal return of that 
effort. These two direct effects may adversely affect labour supply and/or productivity, resulting in a loss 
of economic output (ILO, 2019; Dell et al., 2012). A growing body of literature finds that these losses can be 
substantial under different climate futures, especially for high-risk sectors with a largely outdoor workforce 
(e.g., agriculture, forestry, construction, mining, transportation, utilities) (Zivin and Neidell, 2014). For example, 
the US Environmental Protection Agency (2017) found that about 1.9 billion labour hours in high-risk sectors 
will be lost annually in the United States by 2090 under RCP8.5 due to workplace exposure to temperature 
extremes (i.e., mean daily maximum temperatures above 80 °F) (see also Chavaillaz et al., 2019; Behrer 
and Park, 2017; US Environmental Protection Agency, 2015; Rhodium Group, 2014; Kovats et al., 2011). 
This equates to about $160 billion (2015 US dollars) in foregone wages—gross wages are used as a proxy 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 379 
measure for the value of lost economic output (US Environmental Protection Agency, 2015)—per year by 
2090, which represents just under one-third of the total estimated annual damages under RCP8.5 across all 
impact categories analyzed. Projected impacts on labour productivity were the most economically significant 
impact category (US Environmental Protection Agency, 2017).
Estimates of the impact of climate change on occupational heat stress and associated labour decisions, 
labour productivity and economic output for Canada are only available from global studies, and only at the 
national level (e.g., Chavaillaz et al., 2019; Kahn et al., 2019). Kahn et al. (2019) found that the cumulative 
effect of changes in labour productivity due to persistent increases in mean annual temperature under 
RCP8.5, relative to historic norms over the period 1960–2014, substantially reduced real GDP per capita in 
Canada in 2050 and 2100 by, respectively, 4.4% and 13.1%. One would expect these national-level losses to 
be unevenly distributed across Canada. The magnitude of losses in a region will depend on the projected shift 
in the historic distribution of daily temperatures with climate change and the structure of economy, in terms 
of the relative contributions of high-risk (largely outdoor workforce) and low-risk (largely indoor workforce) 
sectors to aggregate output.
The available evidence makes a strong case for including impacts on occupational heat stress in future 
macroeconomic analyses of the economic consequences of climate change for Canada. It is important that 
such assessments account for heterogeneity between regions in terms of the sectoral make-up of the economy.
6.5.3 Sector and regional cost assessments
While only a few studies provide aggregate cost estimates across multiple sectors for Canada,many more 
studies have investigated the economic consequences of climate change for individual climate-sensitive 
sectors (e.g., forestry, agriculture, coastal areas). Appendix 6.1 provides a summary of these studies and 
results, organized by climate-sensitive sector.
It is nearly impossible to compare the relative magnitude and significance of estimated economic 
consequences between climate-sensitive sectors, or even within a sector, due to differences in assumptions 
and methodologies across studies. In addition to differences in geographical scope, key differences between 
studies that influence the results relate to:
•	
The choice of emissions scenario(s) driving the biophysical impacts and, relatedly, the future time 
period(s) and climate norms used to measure changes in relevant climate variables. Looking at 
coastal areas, for example, some studies use the old IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios 
(SRES), whereas others use the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). This affects the 
time horizon over which streams of losses or gains are aggregated (e.g., the studies in Appendix 
6.1 assessing the same coastal area sites use three different time periods: 2009–2054, 2015–
2064 and 2011–2100).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 380 
•	
Assumptions about future socioeconomic developments, which will influence both the quantity 
and monetary valuation of buildings, infrastructure, crops, etc. that are affected under the 
assumed baseline and against which the impacts of projected climate change are assessed. 
Some of the studies examined the impact of future climate change on the sector today (based on 
current or historical information), while others—such as the NRTEE (2011) forestry and coastal 
area studies—investigated the impact of future climate change on future projections for the 
sector.
•	
Whether one or more biophysical impacts are considered. For example, some studies that 
focused on coastal areas included erosion and flooding from sea-level rise and storm surge, while 
others only considered impacts from flooding.
•	
The types of economic consequences resulting from the biophysical impacts included in the 
analysis. Most studies considered only direct impacts (e.g., damage-related costs, changes in 
agricultural land values, foregone ski revenues, increases in ski resort operating costs or fire 
suppression costs), while some studies also assessed indirect and macroeconomic impacts. The 
more recent studies measured economic consequences in terms of changes in projected GDP or 
welfare, which were estimated using CGE models. Furthermore, some studies that measured only 
direct impacts considered both market and non-market impacts (e.g., coastal area studies for 
Quebec), while others included only the former.
•	
The choice of economic modelling tool, specifically with respect to agriculture. Most agricultural 
studies estimate using a Ricardian model (an approach that estimates an empirical relationship 
between land values and climate variables) to measure the economic consequences of climate 
change on farmland values, while some use CGE models. As noted above, CGE models measure 
direct and indirect impacts, and account for market-driven behavioural (price) responses 
throughout the economy; Ricardian models capture only direct impacts and typically assume 
that prices are fixed. Results from both modelling approaches applied to agriculture are not 
comparable.
•	
Whether the economic consequences are measured in current (nominal) dollars or constant (real) 
dollars, and which base year is selected in the latter case (e.g., coastal area studies measured 
costs in 2000, 2008 and 2012 constant dollars). This is less of an issue, though, since it is 
possible to express all results in the prices of a common base year.
•	
The choice of discount rate, where results are reported as the present value of cumulative 
losses or gains over a defined time horizon (e.g., some studies use a real annual discount rate 
of 3%, whereas others use 4%). A higher discount rate will produce lower present-value costs or 
benefits, and a lower discount rate will produce the opposite. For reference, the value of a $1 cost 
(in 2020) incurred in the 2080s is $0.15 and $0.08 at a discount rate of 3% and 4%, respectively. 
Some studies also present undiscounted costs or benefits. Discounting and discount rates are 
discussed in Section 6.6.3.2.

While the above factors make it difficult to arrive at firm conclusions about the magnitude of economic 
impacts, it is possible to draw conclusions about the direction of projected impacts for all sectors studied, 
except for agriculture. The available evidence (based on the studies listed in Appendix 6.1) suggests that 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 381 
climate change will have predominantly negative economic consequences for forestry, coastal areas, human 
health in Quebec, low water levels in the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence River region, ski resorts in British 
Columbia and Quebec, and ice-based access roads in the Northwest Territories. Below are key observations 
across this series of studies, by climate-sensitive sector.
6.5.3.1 Forestry
Climate change impacts on timber supply (related to factors such as forest productivity, fires, pests and 
disease) are projected to reduce forest sector output, GDP and welfare. Nationally, present-value cumulative 
GDP losses over 70 years through 2080 could be as high as $459 billion (2008 dollars), without adaptation 
measures (Ochuodho et al., 2012). Losses are not evenly distributed across Canada—British Columbia, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba and the Territories are the worst affected areas in terms of projected GDP losses 
(Ochuodho et al., 2012; NRTEE, 2011). In contrast, Quebec and Ontario could experience slight improvements 
in GDP under the most optimistic scenario of climate change impacts on timber supply, and modest 
losses under the most pessimistic scenario (Ochuodho et al., 2012). Climate change is also projected to 
increase historical fire management costs nationally by 60‒120% per year by the 2080s, with Alberta and 
Saskatchewan seeing much larger increases in costs than the national average (Hope et al., 2015).
6.5.3.2 Coastal regions
Climate change is projected to impose costs on Canada’s coastal regions. By 2050, annual damages from 
coastal flooding attributable to climate change could range from $1 to $8 billion (in 2008 dollars), depending 
on the growth and emissions scenario (NRTEE, 2011). In present value terms, cumulative losses over the 
period of 2011–2100 could be as high as $380 billion (in 2008 dollars) (NRTEE, 2011). As in the forestry 
sector, losses are distributed unevenly across Canada—British Columbia is estimated to incur the largest 
losses, accounting for upwards of 80–90% of the total losses nationally (Withey et al., 2016; NRTEE, 2011). 
Detailed regional studies of specific stretches of coast in Quebec and Atlantic Canada also find significant 
variation in projected losses, suggesting that the economic costs of climate-related coastal flooding are very 
site-specific (Boyer-Villemaire et al., 2016; Circé et al., 2016b; Parnham et al., 2016).
6.5.3.3 Water levels
Low water levels in parts of the Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence River system due to future climate change 
are anticipated to adversely affect a range of economic activities, recreational opportunities and other 
shoreline amenities. Present-value cumulative costs associated with these impacts are projected to amount 
to $12 billion over 50 years through 2065 (in 2012 dollars) (Dorling and Hanniman, 2016; Millerd, 2005). 
Approximately 90% of these costs result from three economic impacts: the replacement of lost hydroelectric 
output (50%), foregone earnings from ecological services and fishing (25%) and lost shipping capacity (15%) 
(Dorling and Hanniman, 2016; Millerd, 2005).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 382 
6.5.3.4 Human health
Changes to the incidence of climate-sensitive health outcomes under future climate conditions can increase 
healthcare expenditures and welfare losses. In Quebec, the present value of cumulative expenditures on 
health services attributable to the impact of climate change on vector-borne diseases, extreme heat events 
and aeroallergens is estimated at just under $1 billion over 50 years through 2065 (in 2012 dollars) (Larrivée 
et al., 2015). The present value of cumulative welfare losses associated with increased mortality—measured 
using the Value of Statistical Life—is approximately $35 billion (in 2012 dollars) over the same period 
(Larrivée et al., 2015). This finding is consistent with other economic studies of the impact of climate change 
on human health; welfare losses can substantially exceed healthcare resource costs (e.g., Paci, 2014; Kovats 
et al., 2011).
6.5.3.5 Ski resorts
Climate change is anticipated to adversely impact the economic viability of ski resorts. For instance, the net 
income of three resorts in Quebec is estimated to fall by just under 30% over a 20-year period through 2045, 
as a result of changes in the length of the ski season and in snow conditions (DaSilva et al., 2019). Evidence 
for Fernie and Whistler in British Columbia also shows that the impact of climate change on snow conditions 
can reduce the value of property in resorts (Butsic et al., 2011).
6.5.3.6 Agriculture
In contrast to other climate-sensitive sectors, most of the available literature summarized in Appendix 6.1 
suggests that the economic consequences of climate change for agriculture in Canada could be positive and 
potentially significant—even by the 2080s—and especially for the Prairie provinces. For example, estimated 
increases in farmland values by the 2050s on the Prairies resulting from climate change are as high as +40% 
(Amiraslany, 2010). The exception is a small area of southeast Alberta, where farmland values are anticipated 
to decrease through the century. In dollar terms, projected increases in farmland values on the Prairies 
by the 2050s could amount to just under 25% of the value of agricultural GDP in 2011 (Amiraslany, 2010). 
These estimated benefits are derived from Ricardian models of agricultural land values and should thus be 
viewed as optimistic. It is assumed that the estimated relationships embedded in these statistical models 
are valid beyond the range of empirical evidence from which they were derived; however, this may not be the 
case, especially towards the end of the century. Furthermore, the estimated relationships capture historical 
autonomous adaptations by farmers. However, farmers may face new barriers to private action in the future 
(see Section 6.8.1), reducing the efficacy of autonomous adaptation. None of the agricultural studies in 
Appendix 6.1 account for the impacts of climate and extreme weather events on agricultural output and land 
values, nor do they account for the changes in pest damage or the timing of precipitation.
Studies using CGE models—which capture interprovincial and international trade flows—have produced 
more conservative and differing values. One study indicated that climate change impacts on agricultural 
crops would increase GDP in Canada through 2050 (Ochuodho and Lantz, 2015), while another study that 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 383 
considered impacts on livestock and processed foods, in addition to impacts on crops, estimated that GDP 
in Canada would decrease slightly by the 2080s (Zhai et al., 2009). The latter result was mainly due to large 
decreases in livestock output. Using a global multi-sector model, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (2015) likewise projected a decline in GDP from climate change impacts on agriculture in 
Canada by 2060.
One study (Ochuodho and Lantz, 2015) that generated regional results for Canada using a CGE model found 
the largest GDP gains primarily in the Prairie provinces, in terms of percentage increases in GDP. Interestingly, 
GDP increases due to climate change do not translate into proportional welfare changes for consumers and 
do not necessarily lead to increased welfare. Price changes, input substitution and trade dynamics may result 
in welfare losses for consumers, despite increases in GDP. For example, the present cumulative GDP value in 
Manitoba over 45 years is projected to increase by 1.3%, while welfare is projected to decline by 0.1% over the 
same period. For the same reasons, while increasing the wealth of farmers, the beneficial impacts of climate 
change estimated by the Ricardian models do not necessarily translate to improvements in consumer welfare.
6.5.4 Municipal cost assessments
Projections of the economic consequences of climate change have also been made for individual cities 
in Canada. Appendix 6.2 provides a summary of key city-specific studies, which vary markedly in scope, 
methods, emissions scenarios, socioeconomic assumptions, time horizons considered and measures of 
economic impact, making comparisons difficult. The small number of studies also makes it difficult to draw 
assured conclusions. Nevertheless, initial observations from the available evidence suggest that the net 
economic consequences of climate change for cities are projected to be negative.
It is also evident from the studies in Appendix 6.2 that the scope of the analysis—the number of climate 
hazards, biophysical impacts and exposures considered, and whether the economic impacts include both 
direct and indirect impacts, as well as market and non-market impacts—is an important determinant of the 
magnitude of projected costs. For example, non-market impacts accounted for 23‒42% of total flooding 
costs in Fredericton due to climate change (Lantz et al., 2012). The omission of non-market impacts from 
these analyses would result in a significant underestimate of projected climate-related costs. The scope 
of the City of Edmonton analysis (see Case Story 6.3) was more comprehensive than the other city studies 
and included many more climate-related impacts (17 rapid-onset impacts alongside changes in heating and 
cooling degree days) on a broader inventory of exposed buildings, assets, infrastructure and services, as well 
as non-market economic impacts on human health and the natural environment. This more expansive scope 
also included direct and indirect impacts, explaining why the projected climate-related costs found by the 
study are relatively high; expected annual GDP costs are $1.6 billion in 2055 and $3.5 billion in 2085 (both in 
2016 dollars), which is equivalent to 1.6% and 1.9%, respectively, of the city’s projected GDP.
All studies employed bottom-up, process-based modelling approaches. The City of Edmonton and the Cities 
of Halifax and Mississauga studies also adopted good practices, determining incremental losses attributable 
to climate change with and without socioeconomic development relative to today. This allows for an analysis 
of how socioeconomic development in relation to climate change contributes to projected economic costs, 
as well as an analysis that isolates the fraction attributable solely to climate change. Consistent with 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 384 
observations from the multi-sector regional studies discussed in Section 6.5.3, growth in the “stock at risk” 
to climate change and rising valuations of that stock can be an equally important determinant of future 
economic costs as climate change itself (see Case Story 6.3).
Case Story 6.3: The City of Edmonton’s assessment of the net costs of 
climate change
In 2016, the City of Edmonton began an investigative process to better understand how the local climate 
has changed historically and how it might change in the future. As part of the process, a multi-sector, 
stakeholder-led climate vulnerability and risk assessment (VRA) was conducted to measure potential risks 
and opportunities resulting from these changes. This included quantifying both the social costs and GDP 
costs of climate change for Edmonton to strengthen the business case for action. The scope of the VRA and 
economic analysis (Boyd, 2018) was extensive and included adopting a community-wide approach, as well 
as considering climate-related biophysical impacts to 17 “asset-service areas” (e.g., population health, critical 
infrastructure, roads, managed natural areas, urban forest, buildings, etc.). Impacts and costs attributable to 
19 climate hazards were assessed, including a range of extreme events (e.g., extreme heat, freezing rain, high 
winds, heavy rainfall, etc.) and slow-onset changes (e.g., timing of the frost-free period, heating degree days, 
etc.). For each extreme event considered, impacts were quantified for a specific level of intensity (e.g., wind 
speeds ≥ 90 km per hour). The following impact chains were included in the analysis:
•	
Direct physical damage to, or loss of, public and private infrastructure, buildings and facilities 
(e.g., repair and replacement costs for structures, equipment, contents and inventories);
•	
Direct physical and mental, morbidity and mortality health outcomes (e.g., welfare losses);
•	
Direct physical damage to, or loss of, managed natural sites and urban trees (e.g., restoration and 
replacement costs);
•	
Service losses from damage to, or loss of, urban trees (e.g., foregone non-market ecological 
value);
•	
Service losses from impairment to aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems (e.g., foregone non-market 
ecological value);
•	
Road transportation service losses (e.g., total value per foregone passenger-kilometres travelled 
and per foregone freight vehicle kilometres travelled);
•	
Service losses from residential buildings (e.g., relocation costs); and
•	
Service losses from damaged public, commercial and industrial buildings (e.g., relocation costs, 
value of lost output).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 385 
The projected costs of climate change for Edmonton were estimated in four steps:
1.	 Biophysical impacts and costs were assessed for the exposure of Edmonton’s 2018 inventory 
of all “assets/services” to average climate conditions over the 1981–2010 climate normal. This 
provides a baseline measure of costs in 2018.
2.	 To account for future socioeconomic development, each component in the 2018 inventory of 
assets/services was projected through to 2100, using a combination of existing growth studies 
for Edmonton and relationships estimated from historical data. Relevant market and non-market 
valuation data were likewise projected through to 2100. The projected future inventory and value 
of all “assets/services” was then re-exposed to average climate conditions over the 1981–2010 
climate normal. The incremental annual costs attributable to socioeconomic development in 
the absence of further climate change (and assuming no additional planned adaptation) was 
estimated at about $3.1 billion by the 2050s and $8.5 billion by the 2080s (see Figure 6.7a). These 
cost projections reflect the undiscounted stream of costs (in 2016 constant dollars) attributable 
to climate-related impacts on Edmonton in an average year, centered within each time period 
(2041–2070 and 2071–2100).
3.	 The projected future inventory and value of all “assets/services” is exposed to projected climate 
conditions under RCP8.5 for the 2050s and 2080s (assuming no additional planned adaptation). 
For extreme events within scope, only changes to their annual probability of occurrence were 
modelled; the intensity of the event was held constant. The incremental annual costs attributable 
to climate change and socioeconomic development were estimated at about $7.8 billion by the 
2050s and $19.1 billion by the 2080s.
4.	 The incremental or imposed cost of projected climate change on a future Edmonton was 
estimated by examining the difference between the results of step 3 and step 2. By the 2050s and 
2080s, the imposed annual cost of climate change on a concurrent future Edmonton is projected 
to be about $4.7 billion and $10.3 billion, respectively.
Provincial input-output tables were used in combination with employment and output data for Edmonton 
to generate city-level GDP, labour income, employment and output multipliers. These multipliers were 
subsequently applied to projected output losses (i.e., the market-based components of the costs shown 
in Figure 6.7a) to estimate the total direct, indirect and induced annual GDP cost of climate change for 
Edmonton. The GDP cost for the City of Edmonton imposed by climate change is about $1.6 billion annually 
by the 2050s, rising to about $3.5 billion annually by the 2080s (see Figure 6.7b).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 386 
Figure 6.7: a) Projected annual social costs and b) Gross Domestic Product (GDP) costs for the City of Edmonton 
attributable to climate change by the 2050s and 2080s. Source: Adapted from Boyd, 2018.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 387 
The damage functions underlying the results shown in Figure 6.7 were used to present the rising economic 
consequences of projected climate change on Edmonton, as functions of increasing mean annual 
temperature above the 1981–2010 climate normal (see Figure 6.8).
Figure 6.8: Projected annual social and Gross Domestic Product (GDP) costs for the City of Edmonton 
attributable to different levels of climate change above the 1981–2010 climate normal. Source: Adapted from 
Boyd, 2018.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 388 
6.6 Economic decision support tools help with 
assessing adaptation options 
Economics offers a range of tools to help decision makers appraise adaptation actions, understand trade-
offs and generate information on the costs and benefits of different options. The appropriate economic 
tool to use depends on the criteria for the adaptation decision, the nature of the climate change impacts 
and the level of uncertainty.
Although there is no one-size-fits-all approach, economics offers a range of tools that can support decision 
makers in appraising adaptation options—each tool has strengths and weaknesses depending on the context 
for the adaptation decision. Appraising adaptation actions requires weighing a diverse range of factors, as 
well as quantifiable financial costs and benefits. This includes non-monetary and non-market impacts, positive 
and negative co-impacts, barriers to implementation, equity and, importantly, uncertainty. There are methods 
to capture distributional impacts, intergenerational equity issues and non-market impacts within traditional 
economic decision-support tools like cost-benefit analysis (CBA). There are also a range of new approaches 
that work with traditional tools like CBA, but are better at supporting decision making under deep uncertainty, 
and incorporating the time-phasing of actions and multi-metric evaluations, such as adaptation pathways and 
robust decision making. When the chosen economic tools do not account for this diverse range of factors, 
decision making can be biased against vulnerable populations, disadvantaged groups, future generations, and 
“soft” actions with fewer quantifiable costs, benefits and non-market impacts.
6.6.1 Introduction
In addition to seeking evidence on the economic consequences of climate change, decision makers are 
increasingly requesting information on the costs, benefits and key trade-offs of actions to support their 
adaptation decisions. This section provides a review of economic analysis tools to support adaptation 
decision making and will provide context for the next section, which reviews the application of these tools 
in Canada. Prior to an examination of the economic decision support tools, common evaluation criteria are 
introduced to highlight the trade-offs that decision makers often consider in making adaptation decisions.
6.6.2 Decision criteria
Decision makers bring diverse objectives, interests, knowledge and values to climate change adaptation 
decisions. This results in a diverse range of decision criteria to consider as various courses of action are 
weighed. The literature contains many decision criteria and groupings of those criteria to support the 
appraisal of adaptation actions and their implementation (e.g., Rouillard et al., 2016b; Weiland and Tröltzsch, 
2015; PROVIA, 2013; United Nations Environment Programme, 2011). These reviews conclude that the 
appraisal of adaptation actions should ideally capture trade-offs between all relevant outputs (benefits) and 
all relevant inputs (costs) that are needed to deliver those outputs. Two further important considerations 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 389 
relate to uncertainty surrounding the anticipated outputs and the ease with which an adaptation action can 
be successfully implemented, which will also affect costs. Based on these reviews, the main decision criteria 
typically used to assess the relative merit of investment in adaptation actions are described in Table 6.3.
Table 6.3: Description of main decision criteria commonly used to 
appraise adaptation actions
INPUTS
POTENTIAL GOAL OF THE 
DECISION MAKER
Costs
Total lifecycle costs
The total costs of the adaptation action, including 
the following, where relevant: upfront investment 
costs (capital), annual recurring costs (operations 
and maintenance), renewal and reinvestment costs, 
decommissioning costs and transaction costs.
Minimize total lifecycle 
costs for a given target 
output.
Negative co-impacts
Negative side-effects of the adaptation action for other 
economic, social or environmental objectives of the 
decision maker. Examples include increasing GHG 
emissions, increasing risks to other groups or sectors 
that are not the target of the option, or limiting future 
adaptation options.
Keep aggregate negative co-
impacts to a minimum.
Ease of 
Implementation
Feasibility
The capacity of the decision maker to successfully 
implement the adaptation action, including accessing 
the necessary knowledge, technologies, human 
resources, budget etc. (all of which could act as 
barriers to action). Feasibility is also influenced by the 
presence of entry points or windows of opportunity to 
implement the option. 
Prioritize the most feasible 
actions.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 390 
INPUTS
POTENTIAL GOAL OF THE 
DECISION MAKER
Ease of 
Implementation
(continued)
Acceptability
The degree of social, cultural, economic and political 
support for the adaptation action, both from those 
directly affected (i.e., groups that benefit and bear 
costs) and the general public.
Prioritize actions with the 
most support and the least 
opposition.
OUTPUTS
POTENTIAL GOAL OF THE 
DECISION MAKER
Benefits
Effectiveness
The degree to which the adaptation action achieves the 
goal(s) of the decision maker (e.g., reduces anticipated 
adverse consequences of a specific climate-related 
threat, enables anticipated beneficial consequences of 
a climate-related opportunity to be realized, etc.).
Maximize effectiveness 
through project design.
Relevance
The significance of the climate-related threat or 
opportunity targeted by the adaptation action. Threats 
and opportunities with “extreme” consequences 
that are “almost certain” to occur would have high 
relevance. 
Prioritize actions that target 
threats or opportunities of 
highest relevance.
Co-benefits
Positive side-effects of the adaptation action for other 
economic, social or environmental objectives of the 
decision maker. Examples include GHG emissions 
reduction, recreation opportunities, maintaining 
or enhancing ecosystem services, employment 
opportunities, encouraging innovation and decreasing 
risks to other groups or sectors that are not the target 
of the option.
Take account of aggregate 
positive co-impacts when 
selecting among candidate 
adaptation options.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 391 
OUTPUTS
POTENTIAL GOAL OF THE 
DECISION MAKER
Benefits
(continued)
Equity
Equitable distribution of adaptation costs, benefits 
and residual impacts between population groups 
and generations. The action benefits the broadest 
possible range and number of people. Equity also 
encapsulates the degree to which options reduce 
existing inequalities (e.g., to disadvantaged groups or 
neighbourhoods).
Prioritize equitable actions 
that support disadvantaged 
and low-income groups, 
and that address existing 
inequalities.
Uncertainty
Urgency
Refers to how soon the adaptation action needs 
to be implemented. Addressing priority threats 
or opportunities that occur under current climate 
conditions would be assigned greater urgency 
than actions that target threats or opportunities 
expected only under projected future climate 
conditions. Adaptations that target future threats and 
opportunities with the potential to affect near-term 
decisions with long lifetimes, such as current land-use 
planning and infrastructure choices, would also be 
treated with greater urgency. 
Prioritize actions that 
address risks from current 
climate conditions or that 
mainstream adaptation 
considerations into near-
term, long-lived decisions.
Static robustness
The degree to which an action is effective in terms of 
achieving the decision maker’s objectives, over a range 
of plausible emissions scenarios and socioeconomic 
scenarios. This criterion is most relevant to near-term, 
long-lived decisions.
Prioritize actions that 
reduce vulnerability to the 
largest possible range 
of future climate and 
socioeconomic conditions.
Dynamic robustness (flexibility)
Adjustable actions that can be implemented 
incrementally and readily adapted if future climate and 
socioeconomic conditions change or turn out differently 
from what is expected today. This criterion is also most 
relevant to near-term decisions with long lifespans.
Prioritize actions that 
are readily adaptable to 
changing climate and 
socioeconomic conditions, 
with minimal transition 
costs.
Source: Weiland and Tröltzsch, 2015; PROVIA, 2013
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 392 
6.6.3 Conventional economic decision support tools
There are multiple methods for appraising adaptation actions. The standard analytical technique used for the 
economic appraisal of policies, programs and projects is cost-benefit analysis (CBA) (see Figure 6.9). CBA 
is a suitable method for economic appraisal when the adaptation goal is to minimize the economic costs 
of a climate-related threat or to maximize the economic benefits of a climate-related opportunity. In some 
decision contexts, however, the adaptation goal might be to achieve a given level of risk reduction or to cancel 
out all adverse climate-related impacts (i.e., to maintain baseline conditions) (Chambwera et al., 2014). In 
this context, the other main economic appraisal method, cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA), could be used 
to identify the action or portfolio of actions necessary to achieve this goal at the lowest cost or the greatest 
level of risk reduction for a fixed investment budget.
A third traditional method that can be used to appraise adaptation actions is multi-criteria decision analysis 
(MCDA). Though it is not technically an economic appraisal tool, it can accommodate monetized costs and 
benefits information in the decision calculus, alongside a range of other decision criteria. A decision maker 
may want to use MCDA when economic efficiency is not the sole decision criterion of interest or when 
important inputs to, or outcomes of, the adaptation action cannot be valued in monetary terms. Given the 
multiple criteria now being considered when making adaptation decisions, increasing emphasis is being placed 
on such “multi-metric” appraisal tools to provide support for decision makers (see Table 6.4; Chambwera et al., 
2014).4 Only CBA, however, has been applied in the available literature for Canada (see Section 6.7).
4 Interested readers can access several guidelines that focus on the economic appraisal of adaptation actions—e.g., 
Asian Development Bank (2015); Meyer et al. (2015); Boyd et al. (2013); PROVIA (2013); USAID (2013); Economics of 
Climate Adaptation (2009) and Metroeconomica (2004). Other resources are available that provide specific guidance 
to help with selecting economic appraisal methods (e.g., Tröltzsch et al., 2016; Watkiss et al., 2015a; Swart and Singh, 
2013; and Watkiss and Hunt, 2013).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 393 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 394 
Figure 6.9: This stylized depiction of present-value benefits, costs and residual damage costs of adaptation 
(in 2016 dollars) assumes that the decision makers’ objectives are as follows: to reduce negative impacts and 
minimize the total cost of climate change. a) Projected baseline scenario (estimated damage function with 
climate change), b) estimated present-value social costs of climate change under the baseline scenario with 
no new adaptation actions, c) estimated reduction in projected social costs with new adaptation actions (i.e., 
defines the present-value benefits of adaptation), and d) estimated net benefits of adaptation actions, once the 
lifecycle costs of actions are taken into account. Source: Adapted from Metroeconomica, 2004, and based on the 
social cost damage function for the City of Edmonton in Boyd, 2018.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 395 
Table 6.4: Commonly used economic appraisal methods for adaptation 
decision support
TOOL
SUMMARY
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFIT 
METRIC
COMPLEXITY
Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 
(CBA)
This method appraises options in 
terms of their monetary value, weighing 
the lifecycle costs of options against 
projected benefits (e.g., Boyer-Villemaire 
et al., 2016). The option with the highest 
net present value or benefit-cost ratio 
is selected. CBA requires the setting 
of a baseline against which costs 
and future expected benefits will be 
measured. This is challenging because 
it requires predicting autonomous 
adaptation behaviour by individuals 
and organizations in the absence of the 
option.
Does not 
explicitly deal 
with uncertainty, 
but can be 
combined with 
probabilistic 
information 
to generate 
expected 
values.
Economic 
(dollars)
Medium
Cost-
Effectiveness 
Analysis 
(CEA)
This method identifies the most 
economically efficient option to achieve 
a specific adaptation goal (e.g., Boyd 
and Walton, 2006): for instance, which 
of several options alleviates the risk of 
water shortages at the lowest cost, or 
how much of the risk can be alleviated 
for a given expenditure. CEA is useful 
when the primary benefit metric cannot 
be expressed in monetary terms. 
However, as it can only be used to 
compare options in relation to a single 
benefit metric (e.g., cubic metres of 
water), it is generally not possible to 
appraise options that address impacts 
across different sectors that do not have 
a common benefit metric.
Does not 
explicitly deal 
with uncertainty, 
but can be 
combined with 
probabilistic 
information 
to generate 
expected 
values.
Quantitative
Medium
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 396 
TOOL
SUMMARY
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFIT 
METRIC
COMPLEXITY
Cost-
Effectiveness 
Analysis 
(CEA)
(continued)
As with CBA, this method requires the 
setting of a baseline. In contrast to CBA, 
it cannot say whether an option is “worth 
doing”—the starting premise for applying 
CEA is that a decision has already 
been taken and that the outcome to be 
achieved has already been justified as 
“worthy” of pursuing. 
Multi-Criteria 
Decision 
Analysis 
(MCDA)
This method uses multiple metrics, 
in addition to economic efficiency, to 
assess adaptation options in terms 
of achieving specified adaptation 
goals (e.g., de Bruin et al., 2009b). 
MCDA is useful when it is difficult 
to assign monetary values to one 
or more outcomes of importance, 
or when it is simply not possible to 
quantify some outcomes, as qualitative 
and quantitative information can be 
combined. As with CBA, this method 
requires the setting of a baseline.
Can incorporate 
uncertainty as 
an evaluation 
criterion, 
typically 
relying on the 
subjective 
judgement 
of experts or 
stakeholders.
Economic, 
quantitative 
or 
qualitative
Low to 
medium
Source: Rouillard et al., 2016a; Watkiss et al., 2015a; Boyd et al., 2013; PROVIA, 2013; Watkiss and Hunt, 2013. 
6.6.4 Key methodological challenges
Key methodological challenges related to the economic appraisal of adaptation actions include how to handle 
uncertainty in economic appraisal, discounting choices and distributional considerations. Because of these 
challenges, the literature is skeptical about relying mainly on traditional economic appraisal tools to rank 
adaptation actions (e.g., Dennig, 2018; Lempert, 2014; Li et al, 2014).
6.6.4.1 Handling deep uncertainty
When appraising adaptation actions, climate-related uncertainties arise from both climate modelling and 
socioeconomic aspects (see Figure 6.10). These are in addition to the usual uncertainties about the costs and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 397 
effectiveness of actions that are present in all economic appraisals. The point of departure is the unknown 
path of future GHG emissions, which feed into climate projections through climate models. The specification 
of the relationships between projected emissions and projected changes in the global climate is subject to 
uncertainty, and different models resolve this in different ways. Most models provide projections at a scale 
that is too broad to be used for assessing actions at the local level, where adaptation generally takes place. 
Some downscaling must be done, which creates additional uncertainties. In addition, uncertainty arises from 
socioeconomic scenarios, which provide a range of estimates for populations at risk in different locations, 
and also take into account socioeconomic status and wealth. These scenarios are linked to GHG emissions 
since the latter will in part influence future living standards, and also because different development 
pathways will influence the amount of GHG emissions. These elements, however, are highly uncertain, 
especially over the time frames that most analyses need to consider. Finally, there are uncertainties regarding 
the effectiveness of different adaptation actions. In short, uncertainties “balloon” along the impact chain from 
GHG emissions to adaptation choices (see Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.10: The structural elements involved in assessing climate change impacts and adaptation. 
Source: Adapted from Markandya et al., 2014.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 398 
If the range of possible outcomes can be represented by a probability distribution, one can calculate an 
expected value. A “risk value” or “premium” can also be calculated, including a component to account for 
there being a range of possible outcomes. Methods for doing this are well established (e.g., Ranger et al., 
2010). The problem is that such probability distributions are rarely available, and it is frequently not possible 
to calculate the risk value. When probabilities are not available, the traditional practice is to undertake a 
sensitivity analysis, which involves using scenarios to identify the robustness of the chosen adaptation action 
in relation to the dominant uncertainties.
While many of the uncertainties described above are reducible, there is little prospect that they will be 
resolved in a time frame that is useful for early adaptation decisions (Fankhauser, 2017). As a result, scholars 
have developed a range of heuristics (e.g., Hallegatte et al., 2012) and appraisal tools (e.g., Bloemen et al., 
2018; Dittrich, et al., 2016; Watkiss et al., 2015a; Lempert, 2014; Walker et al., 2013) to support adaptation 
decision making in the presence of deep uncertainty (i.e., uncertainty that cannot be quantified with 
probabilities) (Weaver et al., 2013). The main approaches for accommodating uncertainty in the economic 
appraisal of adaptation actions include real options analysis (ROA), adaptation pathways, robust decision 
making (RDM) and portfolio analysis. See Table 6.5 for a brief description of each tool, how it deals with 
uncertainty and measures benefits, the resource demands that it places on users, and an example application.
Table 6.5: Economic appraisal methods for adaptation decision 
support under uncertainty
DESCRIPTION
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFIT 
METRIC
COMPLEXITY
EXAMPLE(S)
Robust decision making (RDM)
Uses quantitative models/scenario 
generators to evaluate how different 
adaptation options perform under large 
ensembles of scenarios, each reflecting 
different plausible future conditions (both 
climate and socioeconomic). The goal 
is to identify options that are robust to 
many different futures (i.e., options that 
are not necessarily “optimal”, but “good 
enough” and that minimize negative 
outcomes). This tool is useful when future 
uncertainties are poorly characterized and 
probabilistic information is not available.
Explicitly 
incorporates 
uncertainties 
and risks—
particularly 
systemic 
risks—to derive 
solutions that 
are robust to 
multiple future 
conditions
Quantitative 
or economic
Medium to 
high
Lempert et 
al., 2013; 
Dessai and 
Hulme, 2007
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 399 
DESCRIPTION
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFIT 
METRIC
COMPLEXITY
EXAMPLE(S)
Portfolio analysis
Traditionally used to evaluate trade-offs 
between returns on an investment and 
the riskiness of that investment. In a 
climate change adaptation context, the 
trade-off is between the likelihood of a 
high degree of effectiveness in reducing 
a threat and the risk that the options 
under consideration will fail to be effective 
under certain future conditions. This 
tool helps to identify the set of options 
that, collectively, are effective over a 
range of plausible future conditions, as 
opposed to one option that is optimal 
for one future. It is useful when there are 
many complementary adaptation options 
available to achieve a goal and when good 
data is available. It requires probabilistic 
information to compute the variance of 
returns (net present values) across the 
portfolio of options under consideration.
Deals explicitly 
with uncertainty 
by examining the 
complementarity 
of a mix of 
adaptation 
options for 
dealing with 
future conditions
Quantitative 
or 
economic
High
Hunt, 2009
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 400 
DESCRIPTION
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFIT 
METRIC
COMPLEXITY
EXAMPLE(S)
Real options analysis (RDA)
Used to explicitly assess the level of 
flexibility in the timing for implementing 
one or more adaptation options (i.e., 
whether to invest now or wait). It is also 
used to assess the flexibility for adjusting 
an adaptation option over time, once it 
has been implemented (e.g., allowing 
an option to scale up or scale down in 
response to changing conditions or as 
new information becomes available). 
In this way, the tool reveals whether it 
is better to invest in options that offer 
greater flexibility in the future.It is useful 
for adaptation decisions involving large, 
upfront and irreversible investments, 
where there is flexibility in the timing 
of the investment, opportunity for new 
information to emerge, and the ability to 
adjust the option in response to learning.
Deals explicitly 
with uncertainty 
by analyzing the 
performance 
of adaptation 
options related 
to different 
potential future 
conditions
Economic
High
Jeuland and 
Whittington, 
2013; van 
der Pol et 
al., 2013; 
Woodward et 
al., 2011
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 401 
DESCRIPTION
UNCERTAINTY
BENEFIT 
METRIC
COMPLEXITY
EXAMPLE(S)
Adaptation pathways
Used to operationalize the criterion of 
flexibility by characterizing adaptation 
options in terms of: 1) “adaptation turning 
points” (i.e., points in time beyond which 
options are no longer effective); and 
2) what alternative adaptation options 
are available once a turning point has 
been reached. Rather than taking an 
irreversible decision now to implement an 
“optimal” adaptation option—which may 
or may not actually be needed depending 
on how future climate conditions evolve—
this tool encourages decision makers to 
adopt a flexible plan, where adaptation 
decisions are made over time and the 
plan is adjusted as pertinent information 
emerges. Additional options can be 
brought forward or delayed to a later 
time, depending on future conditions. 
The main challenge relates to defining 
appropriate “turning points” and data to 
monitor.
Deals explicitly 
with uncertainty 
by promoting 
iterative 
analysis, 
monitoring, 
evaluation, 
learning and 
adjustment
Quantitative 
or economic
Medium to 
high
See Case 
Story 6.4; 
Rosenzweig 
and Solecki, 
2014; 
Haasnoot 
et al., 2013; 
Ranger et al., 
2013
Source: Rouillard et al., 2016a; Scussolini et al., 2015; Watkiss et al., 2015a; Boyd et al., 2013; PROVIA, 2013;
Watkiss and Hunt, 2013.

The most appropriate appraisal method depends on the decision-making context and the level of uncertainty 
(Chambwera et al., 2014). Choosing an economic appraisal tool could itself be viewed as a decision problem. 
For instance, in decision contexts where uncertainty is less of an issue (perhaps relevant probabilities are 
known) and where adaptation actions are short-term (i.e., low-regret and no-regret actions to address current 
climate risks), it may be possible to apply traditional CBA or CEA. When uncertainties are deeper, however, 
and when considering choices among a range of complementary actions to achieve the same adaptation 
goal, portfolio analysis can be used to help decision makers evaluate trade-offs between the benefits of an 
action and the riskiness of that action, thereby formulating a portfolio of actions that strike the best balance 
between risk and return. When uncertainties are anticipated to reduce over time and where individual actions 
or an adaptation strategy have some degree of flexibility, approaches that support iterative decision making 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 402 
will be more appropriate (such as ROA and adaptation pathways). These approaches encourage decision 
makers to develop flexible plans where the most efficient adaptation decisions are made sequentially over 
time, as evidence emerges on how future conditions are evolving. If there is little prospect for uncertainties 
to be resolved—where decisions are required in the short term with respect to long-lived adaptation actions—
then RDM will provide appropriate decision support, helping to identify adaptation actions that achieve the 
decision maker’s goals under a range of different futures.
While the above economic appraisal methods have been presented individually, they are not mutually 
exclusive. All of the available tools to support adaptation decision making under uncertainty essentially 
provide an alternative framing for the application of CBA, CEA, MCDA or some combination thereof. This is 
demonstrated in Case Story 6.4, where CBA and MCDA are embedded in an adaptation pathways approach to 
flood management on the Thames River in London, UK.
Case Story 6.4: Managing uncertainty in the appraisal of adaptation 
options for addressing sea-level rise in London, UK
The Thames Barrier is a movable structure that spans roughly 500 m across the River Thames, east of 
London. It is part of a comprehensive flood management system, comprising 36 industrial gates and over 
330 km of floodwalls and embankments that protect London from storm surge from the North Sea. The 
Barrier was designed to last until 2030 and to provide a high standard of protection (equivalent to a one-in-
1,000-year event). The goal of the Thames Estuary 2100 (TE2100) project was to develop a strategic flood 
risk management plan for London that would be in place until the end of the 21st century.
Owing to deep uncertainty surrounding future extreme water levels in the Estuary with climate change and 
the long-lived nature of the decisions involved, and with high irreversible costs, TE2100 used an adaptation 
pathways approach. This method integrates dynamic robustness (flexibility) to climate and non-climate 
uncertainties into the adaptation strategy itself, such that the strategy adapts to climate over time, but 
with individual actions left open to deal with the full range of plausible futures. Four potential packages 
of adaptation actions—referred to as “High-level Options” (HLO1, 2, 3a and 3b, and 4)—were developed by 
TE2100 (see Figure 6.11). Each HLO consists of a pathway through the century that can be adapted to the 
rate of change of observed sea-level rise. For example, under HLO1, sea-level rise of 20–30 cm would require 
improving and raising smaller walls and embankments on the Thames to extend their operational lives. If sea 
levels increased by 60–70 cm, the existing Barrier would be over-rotated, and interim (high wall) protection 
upstream of the Barrier would be restored. If sea levels rose by 80–90 cm, however, the existing Barrier would 
need to be improved and downstream defenses raised. Overall, HLO1 provides protection for up to about 
2.3 m of sea-level rise, which is the “most probable” current projection of sea-level rise affecting extreme 
water levels in the Thames. HLO4, which culminates in the construction of a new barrage, would provide 
protection for the “worst-case” current projection of sea-level rise (4.3 m).
It would be risky, however, to select one pathway based on the projections available today, since the current 
choice of adaptation path is extremely sensitive to mean sea-level rise and storm surge projections, which 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 403 
are highly uncertain. The risk of maladaptation would be high. Therefore, the HLOs are designed to be flexible, 
and it is possible to move from one HLO to another depending on the rate of sea-level rise experienced. 
Figure 6.11: Adaptation pathways developed by the Thames Estuary 2100 project in the UK to address future sea-
level rise. This includes four packages of adaptation options, referred to as “high-level options”, for addressing 
different possible increases in sea level rise. Source: Adapted from Ranger et al., 2013 with permission from 
Springer Nature Customer Service Centre GmbH.
Crucial to the adaptation pathways approach is the need to define “decision points” in advance of a climate 
change impact taking place (i.e., to identify future times when decision makers will need to choose a more 
irreversible option, as well as the information needed to inform that decision). For each adaptation action, 
the TE2100 project assessed the following (see Figure 6.12): the key threshold at which that action would 
be needed (e.g., extreme water levels); the lead time required to implement the action; and the estimated 
decision point to trigger a decision regarding implementation (e.g., in terms of an indicator value being 
reached—such as observed extreme water levels—with an uncertainty range).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 404 
`
Figure 6.12: Illustration of the thresholds, lead times and adaptation decision points in the Thames Estuary 2100 
project in the UK. Source: Adapted from Ranger et al., 2013, with permission from Springer Nature Customer 
Service Centre GmbH.
Each HLO and the associated individual actions were subject to a formal economic options appraisal, using 
a combination of CBA and MCDA. The appraisal included a range of readily monetized impacts (e.g., property 
damage, risk to life, loss of agricultural land) and non-monetized impacts (e.g., water quality and quantity, 
recreation, habitat and biodiversity, sense of community). Informed by the results of the appraisal, improving 
the existing system of protections—a low-regret measure—was recommended as the optimum approach for 
the first 60 years, with new options required by 2070 (based on current projections of sea-level rise) for 2100 
and beyond. In the first iteration of the plan, to be reviewed in 10 years, all four HLOs remain open and are 
under consideration. However, due to the long lead-in time for the construction of some of the options that 
are needed by 2070, a decision on the preferred option must be made by 2050. This allows decision makers 
an additional forty years to accumulate knowledge about climate change and sea-level rise, and to gain a 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 405 
greater understanding of the uncertainties involved prior to committing to an irreversible and costly action. 
If monitoring reveals that extreme water levels (or another indicator, such as barrier closures) are increasing 
faster or slower than anticipated under current projections, the 2050 decision point may be brought forward 
or pushed back to ensure that decisions are made at the right time to allow for a cost-efficient response. 
Monitoring key indicators is important for the overall approach to be successful.
Two aspects of the application of traditional economic decision support tools in relation to climate change 
have been the focus of much critical debate: 1) the practice of discounting future economic consequences, 
and 2) valuing all contemporary consequences equally, regardless of who bears the costs or benefits (Dennig, 
2018; Li et al., 2014).
6.6.4.2 Discounting choices
Adaptation actions will typically entail an upfront investment that yields a stream of benefits—and possibly 
costs—that do not occur in the same year as the investment, but rather are spread out over many years and 
even decades into the future. The practice of discounting (i.e., of assigning weights to future impacts) has 
been developed to assist with comparing costs and benefits that occur at different points in time (see Boyd 
et al., 2013 for a more in-depth review of this topic). Individuals acting on their own, as well as societies 
acting collectively, prefer to have something now rather than in the future5—in short, they give more weight 
to the present than to the future. The difference between the value of a dollar today and the value of a dollar 
in one year’s time is referred to as an individual’s or society’s discount rate. This rate determines how quickly 
the weight-assigned future costs and benefits decline over time; the higher the rate, the less influence future 
costs and benefits have on present values. The discount rate is hugely instrumental in determining the weight 
assigned to future economic impacts (see Appendix 6.3 for more on the discounting process).
The choice of discount rate in climate policy analysis has been the subject of much debate among 
economists, though primarily in the context of GHG emissions reduction (e.g., Markandya, 2019; Stern, 2008; 
Nordhaus, 2007). The debate has focused on what rate to apply and, more recently, on whether that 
rate should be constant over time. On the first question, there is a distinction between the “prescriptive 
approach” and the “descriptive approach” (Arrow et al., 1996). The former—often referred to as the social 
discount rate—is based on what rate should be applied on ethical and policy grounds, while the latter—often 
associated with the opportunity cost of capital—is based on rates applied in the decisions that businesses 
5 Strictly speaking, there are two main rationales for giving less weight to future economic effects. One is based on 
consumption and the other on investment (Arrow et al., 2012). Regarding the former, individuals and society give 
less weight to the future because of the expectation that future generations will be wealthier and the welfare that 
they receive from additional consumption will decline as their level of consumption increases. In other words, society 
exhibits a time preference for current consumption over future consumption. The investment rationale takes the 
view that so long as society can earn a positive rate of return on investment, it can invest less than one dollar today 
to obtain a dollar of benefits in the future. In this case, the discount rate would be equated to the rate of return on 
investment. Each rationale leads to different discount rates.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 406 
and individuals make in their daily lives. Prescriptive rates are typically lower than descriptive ones, but there 
are also substantive differences between scholars as to what the prescriptive rate should be. For example, 
in the discussion on what rate to apply in deciding on targets for reducing GHG emissions, Stern (2006) 
advocates for a social discount rate of about 1.4%, whereas Nordhaus (2007) and Weitzman (2007) present 
arguments for rates in the range of 4–6%. Furthermore, a survey of 197 experts on the determinants of the 
social discount rate found a mean recommended long-term rate of 2.27% (Drupp et al., 2015). There was 
considerable disagreement on the value of the rate, as indicated by the range of values recommended by 
individual experts (with values ranging from 0–10%). However, 92% of experts were comfortable with social 
discount rates somewhere in the range of 1–3% (Drupp et al., 2015). The official social discount rate for CBA 
of proposed federal regulations in Canada, as recommended by the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat 
(TBS), is 3% (TBS, 2007); this rate was still effective as of September 1, 2018. According to the TBS (2018), 
it is appropriate to use the social discount rate test when “a regulatory proposal primarily affects private 
consumption of goods and services and [the] proposal’s impacts occur over the long term (50 years or more).” 
Still, even when the social discount rate is used in CBA, present values based on the opportunity cost of 
capital should still be presented.
Descriptive rates also vary a lot depending on the nature of the investment, the risks entailed and the 
opportunities for alternative investments in the country. From 1976 until the release of the CBA guidelines in 
2007, the TBS required that federal departments use an annual real discount of 10% (Boardman et al., 2008), 
derived from market data. The revised guidelines, which are still effective today, recommend a discount rate 
of 8% per annum (TBS, 2007, estimated from market data by Jenkins and Kuo, 2007).6 This rate is based on 
the weighted opportunity cost of capital from three sources—domestic private-sector investors, domestic 
private-sector savers and foreign savers—and is characterized as a descriptive approach, in contrast to the 
prescribed 3% “social” discount rate.
On the question of whether a discount rate should be constant over time, the view has gradually been shifting 
away from a single constant discount rate to one that declines over time (Howard and Sylvan, 2015). This is 
a major change in thinking, as the determination of the discount rate as described above assumes that the 
rate does not change over time—although there is no reason for this to be the case. Several scholars have 
presented arguments for why the discount rate should decline with time. For instance, there is evidence 
suggesting that individuals and societies do not discount the future at a constant rate, but rather that they 
adopt a declining or “hyperbolic” path (Gowdy, 2013; Kim and Zauberman, 2009; Settle and Shogren, 2004). 
Consider the following example: an individual is faced with two choices: 1) postponing consumption for one 
year from now, and 2) deferring an equal amount of consumption for one year from year 50 to year 51 in the 
future. While postponing consumption right now for one year might mean a lot to the individual, postponing 
it for one year in 50 years might not. The weight placed on an extra year in the future declines with time. 
However, the standard formula for constant discounting gives the same value to both types of postponement.
 Other arguments, which are often technical in nature, have been made for declining discount rates relating 
to uncertainty about the future (e.g., Epper et al., 2011; Newell and Pizer, 2003; Sozou, 1998) or the “right” 
discount rate (e.g., Weitzman, 2001; Azfar, 1998).
6 Some of the assumptions used by Jenkins and Kuo (2007) to arrive at the rate of 8% have been questioned by 
Boardman et al. (2008), who suggest that it should be in the range of 2.5% to 4.7%.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 407 
This work has provided a compelling case for using declining discount rates (Arrow et al., 2014, 2012; Cropper 
et al., 2014), especially when deciding on investments with long lifetimes (i.e., 30–50 years). It is important to 
maintain as much consistency as possible, however, in the way that discount rates are used. It is noteworthy 
that both the United Kingdom and France have shifted to declining discount rate schedules for the economic 
appraisal of public investments (see Figure 6.13). Boardman et al. (2008) propose a declining social discount 
rate schedule for intergenerational, public investments in Canada with lifetimes greater than 50 years: 
discount costs and benefits at 3.5% per annum from year 0 to year 50, 2.5% per annum from year 51 to year 
100, 2.0% per annum from year 100 to year 200, and 1.5% per annum from year 200 onwards.
Figure 6.13: Declining social discount rate schedules in practice in the UK and France. The solid red line shows 
the social discount rate if it were assumed to be constant over time, whereas the solid blue line shows the 
schedule of declining discount rates used to appraise public policies, programs and projects in each country. The 
social discount rate schedule for the United Kingdom declines in discrete steps from 3.5% per annum to 1% per 
annum. In France, the official rate begins to decline after 30 years, following a hyperbolic path. In both countries, 
the discount rate to be applied to benefits in year 200 is lower than the rate for year 100. As a result, more weight 
is being assigned to the future rather than applying a constant discount rate to benefits in all years. Source: 
Adapted from Damon et al., 2013.
Across available examples of the economic appraisal of adaptation actions in Canada (see Appendix 6.4), 
present values are determined using a discount rate of 3–4% per annum. This implies that studies are using 
a social or “prescriptive” discount rate. The discount rate is also kept constant over time, even over time 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 408 
horizons of 50 to 100 years.
The choice of discount rate and schedule may not be as critical an issue for appraising adaptation 
investments as it is for investments in GHG emissions reduction. With the increasing emphasis on early 
adaptation, and the timing and sequencing of adaptation actions, time horizons for adaptation decisions can 
be relatively short—typically involving costs and benefits spread over decades, rather than centuries, as with 
the benefits of GHG emissions reduction projects. For “flow” adaptation actions7, the costs and benefits will 
fall in the same time period. Furthermore, for most public and private sector decision makers, the discount 
rate will already be prescribed for specific decision contexts. When contrasting the economic performance 
of multiple actions to achieve the same adaptation goal that has been appraised using different discount 
rates, it is important to understand how the different discounting decisions influence the results to avoid 
“comparing apples and pears.”
6.6.4.3 Distributional considerations
When it comes to aggregating costs and benefits, the standard approach has been to apply equal weights to 
impacts experienced by diverse actors. This can present decision makers with a different set of distributional 
concerns, since all potentially exposed actors are not equally at risk. For instance, low-income and 
disadvantaged groups are often more vulnerable to climate change impacts and have reduced capacities to 
adapt. From a public policy perspective, it is important to include the distribution of the costs and benefits of 
adaptation in decision making. The Canadian Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide published by the TBS (2007)—which 
requires federal departments to analyze the costs and benefits of proposed regulations—explicitly refers to 
the need for distributional analysis: “Distributional analysis determines the impact of the regulatory proposal 
on affected stakeholders by category, such as―but not limited to―business size (small, medium-sized and 
large businesses), income, age, region and gender. Departments are to perform distributional analysis to 
assess how the estimated costs and benefits are distributed among stakeholders” (TBS, 2018).
Adaptation actions would, of course, be no exception to such a requirement. While trade-offs between an 
action’s net present value and its distributional impacts remain a political consideration, the literature includes 
an approach that explicitly integrates distributional dimensions into the summary estimate of net present 
value. It does this by weighting the different benefits and costs to reflect society’s value of a benefit or cost 
to one income group relative to the average (see Appendix 6.5). This method of dealing with distributional 
considerations (e.g., Alder, 2016)—where estimated benefits or costs are multiplied by weighting factors that 
are inversely proportional to people’s income—dates back to the 1950s and was included in the 
first CBA manuals (Squire and van der Tak, 1975). While this method does not capture all distributional issues 
that could be of interest to decision makers, it does focus on income inequality.
7 Flow adaptation actions are typically low-cost, short-lived responses to climate change impacts, where the costs 
and benefits are borne in the same time period. They are generally flexible and can be readily scaled up or down, or 
modified. For instance, a farmer who chooses to plant new heat-resistant crops in response to the climate getting 
warmer exemplifies a “flow” adaptation. The farmer will incur the costs of the new seeds, and accrue the benefits in 
the same period (Felgenhauer and Webster, 2014; de Bruin, 2011).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 409 
In practice, it is rare for equity weights to be applied in traditional economic analysis (Li et al., 2014). None 
of the economic appraisals of adaptation actions in Canada examined in Section 6.7 consider distributional 
issues or the formal use of equity weights. In general, however, there is renewed interest in incorporating 
equity considerations into the economic appraisal of climate change impacts and adaptation (Dennig, 2018), 
and the application of equity weights is an established way to do it (Rouillard et al., 2016b).
6.7 The benefits of adaptation actions in Canada 
outweigh the costs 
The benefits of planned actions to adapt to climate change in Canada generally exceed the costs, 
sometimes significantly, providing a strong business case for proactive investment in adaptation. Even 
when beneficial adaptations are adopted, residual damage costs are often still incurred, suggesting that 
there are economic limits to adaptation.
Studies of the costs and benefits of adaptation in Canada have used traditional cost-benefit analysis (CBA). 
Across a sample of 60 adaptation actions to address impacts such as coastal flooding, low water levels, 
reduced timber supply, heat stress and poor air quality, the average benefit-cost ratio was 5.6:1, with 75% of 
actions having a ratio greater than one. Across this sample, soft adaptation actions (e.g., changes to planning 
and pest control practices) performed better than hard engineered actions (e.g., dykes and sea walls). The 
economic performance of adaptation actions is also highly site-specific and context-specific. Adaptation 
does not generally cancel out all costs related to climate change costs—some level of residual damage cost is 
generally still incurred.
6.7.1 Economic analysis of adaptation options in Canada 
The body of literature on the appraisal of adaptation costs and benefits in Canada is limited to the public 
sector and a few climate-sensitive sectors; it therefore covers a narrow range of climate change impacts, 
regions and potential adaptation actions. This makes it difficult to form widespread generalizations about the 
costs and economic attractiveness of adaptation actions in all contexts. This section reviews the application 
in Canada of the methods discussed in Section 6.6.
6.7.1.1 Economic appraisals of adaptation
In general, while the body of evidence on the benefits and costs of climate change adaptation actions has 
increased significantly in recent years, its scope remains very narrow in terms of climate-sensitive sectors 
considered, the regional representation of economic studies, and the application of different economic 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 410 
appraisal methods. Nearly 75% of the individual adaptation actions appraised relate to the potential adoption 
of adaptation actions in coastal areas to address the risk of sea-level rise, storm surge flooding and erosion 
(see Case Story 6.5). It is worth noting that, while all the available studies perform prospective appraisals 
of potential adaptation actions that could be adopted, none provide retrospective appraisals of adopted 
actions. Several studies appraised adaptation actions to address the adverse impacts of low water levels on 
issues such as marine transport, hydroelectric generation, waterfront property prices, ecological services and 
fishing in the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River system. The remaining studies performed economic appraisals 
of adaptation actions to address adverse climate change impacts on timber supply across Canada, heat 
stress and air quality in Toronto, snow conditions and length of the ski season at resorts in Quebec, and the 
functionality of a winter ice road in the Northwest Territories.
These studies clearly represent only a sub-set of climate-sensitive sectors in Canada; there are significant 
evidence gaps with respect to the economic appraisal of climate change adaptation actions for sectors such 
as transportation (rail, road and air), water resources (water security and quality), sanitation, energy (including 
electricity), fishing, agriculture, tourism, ecosystem services and human health. There is also a dearth of 
evidence on the benefits and costs of planned adaptation to climate-related health impacts, although impacts 
associated with human health can be some of the most economically significant. As the Larrivée et al. (2015) 
study for Quebec shows, the total present-value costs of premature mortality due to temperature extremes 
over the period 2015–2064—measured from a social perspective—were estimated at $33 billion (in 2012 
dollars). When also considering Lyme disease, West Nile virus and aeroallergens, the total present-value cost 
rises to about $35 billion (see Appendix 6.1; Larrivée et al., 2015).
The concentration of accessible studies on a narrow set of sectors means that specific regions of Canada are 
well represented in the literature (e.g., coastal areas, particularly in Quebec and Atlantic Canada), while others 
are poorly represented. Except for the forestry sector, there are significant evidence gaps for the Northwest 
Territories, the Yukon and Nunavut, Ontario, the Interior of British Columbia and the Prairie provinces. Even 
though Alberta has historically experienced a disproportionate share of weather-related natural catastrophes 
in Canada (see Section 6.4.2), no accessible studies have examined the benefits and costs of adaptation to 
climate change in the province. Several studies have performed cost-benefit analyses of measures to reduce 
impacts from riverine flooding (e.g., IBI Group 2015a, b and c for the City of Calgary), although these studies 
make no reference to climate change.
There is also a scarcity of accessible literature on the benefits and costs of climate change adaptation 
actions in Indigenous communities. As part of the First Nation Adapt Program of Crown-Indigenous Relations 
and Northern Affairs Canada, a methodology was developed to provide department staff with guidance on 
how to assess the economic implications of continuing to meet the department’s obligations with respect 
to Indigenous communities in the face of climate change (Girard, 2018). This methodology has been used 
to appraise the economic impacts of adaptation actions in two different decision contexts (Girard, 2018). 
The first considered the impact of projected warming on winter roads, and adaptation costs and benefits 
for the Northern Ontario winter road network. The second considered the costs and benefits of adaptation 
to coastal flooding from sea-level rise for Indian Island First Nation and Eel River Bar First Nation, both in 
New Brunswick. In the former context, the economic appraisal determined that building an all-season road 
network to service communities is economically inefficient compared with the status quo (i.e., winter roads 
plus emergency fuel subsidy funding), under all scenarios considered. In the second context, the appraisal 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 411 
concluded that investing in near-term flood reduction measures generated benefits that greatly exceeded the 
associated costs under all flood protection scenarios examined. Quantitative results were not available for 
these two studies.
In all studies summarized in Appendix 6.4, the appraisal of adaptation benefits and costs was performed 
using CBA. The available body of literature for Canada does not include applications of CEA or MCDA, or 
applications of new economic tools—such as RDM, ROA, portfolio analysis and adaptation pathways—to 
support adaptation decision making under uncertainty.
Case Story 6.5: Assessing the costs and benefits of adaptation options 
for coastal areas in Quebec and Atlantic Canada
Coastal settlements in Eastern and Atlantic Canada are vulnerable to erosion and flooding. Risks attributable 
to these hazards are anticipated to increase with climate change, threatening communities. To inform the 
business case for investing in adaptation measures, standard cost-benefit analysis (CBA) was used to 
appraise a range of adaptation actions at 11 case study sites (encompassing 46 smaller coastal segments) 
across Quebec and Atlantic Canada. These sites include Percé, Maria, Carleton-sur-Mer, Îles-de-la-Madeleine 
and Kamouraska in Quebec; the Chignecto Isthmus, which spans New Brunswick and Nova Scotia; the Halifax 
Harbour in Nova Scotia; the North Cape Coastal Drive and Provincial Park, and Tracadie Small Craft Harbour 
and Road in Prince Edward Island; and Bay Bulls-Witless Bay and Marystown in Newfoundland.
CBA—like all economic decision support tools—compares the costs and benefits of a “with project” scenario 
(i.e., what is anticipated to happen as a result of the adoption of an adaptation action) to those of a “without 
project” scenario (i.e., what is anticipated to happen if that adaptation action is not adopted). In this case, 
the “without project” scenario is given by the direct economic damage costs resulting from projected coastal 
flooding and erosion with climate change over a 50-year period (2015‒2064), assuming no socioeconomic 
change (i.e., no population and economic growth) or additional adaptation actions at each site. Impacts 
with market and non-market economic consequences included in the assessment are shown in Table 6.6; 
not all impacts are relevant at all case study sites. The cost of adaptation actions included both investment 
expenditures and maintenance expenses; benefits reflected direct damage costs avoided plus the monetary 
equivalent of positive co-impacts generated.
A portfolio of suitable adaptation options was developed for each site, drawing from the following 
intervention categories:
•	
Hard-engineering structures (e.g., concrete walls, dykes, rock armour, riprap, sheet pile walls, 
seawalls, T-groynes);
•	
Soft-engineering structures (e.g., beach nourishment alone or in combination with groynes); and
•	
Preventative options (e.g., planned retreat of buildings, elevation of buildings and infrastructure, 
both of the previous interventions together, abandonment of parks).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 412 
Table 6.6: Economic costs and benefits included in the cost-benefit 
analysis of adaptation actions
TYPE OF SOURCE OF 
COSTS AND BENEFITS
COSTS ORIGINATING FROM NEGATIVE IMPACTS
BENEFITS 
ORIGINATING FROM 
POSITIVE IMPACTS
Related to erosion
Loss of land
Complete or partial loss of residential or commercial 
buildings
Loss of or damage to public infrastructure
Emergency evacuation
Related to flooding
Damage to land
Damage to residential or commercial buildings
Damage to public infrastructure
Emergency evacuation
Traffic congestion or detour
Debris clean-up
Economic
Reduced land value
Loss of goods and commercial revenues
Loss of trade
Loss of tourism revenues
Gain in tourism 
revenues
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 413 
TYPE OF SOURCE OF 
COSTS AND BENEFITS
COSTS ORIGINATING FROM NEGATIVE IMPACTS
BENEFITS 
ORIGINATING FROM 
POSITIVE IMPACTS
Environmental
Loss of natural habitats
Improvement in fish 
spawning grounds
Loss of fish spawning grounds
Social
Loss of sea view
Improvement in the 
coast’s recreational 
use
Loss of sea access
Decline in the coast’s recreational use
Reduced quality of life (anxiety, insecurity, etc.) 
Improvement in quality 
of life (security, etc.)
Deterioration in the landscape
Improvement in the 
landscape
Deterioration in historical and cultural heritage
Key
Cost included by Quebec and Atlantic Canada
Cost included by Quebec only
Benefit included by Quebec only.
Source: Boyer-Villemaire et al., 2016

Two metrics of economic performance were generated through the CBA: 1) net present value (i.e., present-
value benefits less present-value costs), and 2) the benefit-cost ratio (i.e., present-value benefits divided by 
present-value costs). Present values were calculated over 50 years (2015–2064) using a constant discount 
rate of 4% per annum (sensitivity analysis used rates of 2% and 4%). All costs and benefits are measured in 
constant 2012 dollars.
The results of the CBA (see Figure 6.14) suggest that implementing the best performing adaptation action at 
each coastal segment would result in net economic gains (i.e., the net present value is positive) in 27 of 46 
segments (59% of cases). In these 27 coastal segments, the preferred intervention on average is not a hard- 
or soft-engineering measure, but rather a preventative option, such as a planned retreat, elevation of buildings 
and infrastructure, or the use of both an engineering measure and a preventative option in combination 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 414 
(see Figure 6.15). The large range of estimated net present values and the number of adaptation actions 
or segments falling within a particular performance group in Figure 6.14 suggest that both the decision to 
intervene and the choice of adaptation action cannot be generalized for application elsewhere. The economic 
case for adaptation action is greatly influenced by site-specific factors.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 415 
Figure 6.14: Net present values of the best performing adaptation actions for each of 46 coastal segments 
across 11 case study sites in Quebec and Atlantic Canada, listed from high (left) to low (right) economic 
advantage of intervention. Source: Adapted from Circé et al., 2016b.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 416 
Figure 6.15: Distribution of the best performing adaptation actions by category of intervention, based on a cost-
benefit analysis of 46 coastal segments across 11 case study sites in Quebec and Atlantic Canada. Source: 
Adapted from Boyer-Villemaire et al., 2016.
Case Story 6.6: Considering co-benefits in the economic appraisal of 
adaptation actions for water retention at Pelly’s Lake, Manitoba
Pelly's Lake is a naturally occurring retention basin near Holland, Manitoba, that flows into the Boyne River, 
a tributary of the Red River, which has a history of significant flooding. Fertile agricultural lands surround 
the lake, producing a range of crops, including canola, spring wheat, alfalfa and barley. The water storage 
capacity of the lake is 2.1 million m3, making it a large water source for irrigation to help farmers manage the 
risk of variable precipitation with climate change. In 2017, researchers from the University of Saskatchewan 
performed an economic assessment of adaptation actions involving Pelly’s Lake (Moudrak et al., 2018; Berry 
et al., 2017a, b), with the goal of reducing water stress on agricultural crops by supporting irrigation during 
periods of drought under different emissions scenarios (RCP2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 417 
Projected changes in precipitation and temperature (based on ensemble mean values from four downscaled 
General Circulation Models obtained from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium) were input into an 
integrated “hydrological-reservoir-irrigation-plant growth” economic model of the watershed, developed 
from 2005‒2014 data. Projections of aggregate crop gross margins, with and without irrigation, were made 
for two future time periods: the 2050s (10-year average over 2050‒2059) and the 2090s (10-year average 
over 2090‒2099). On average, compared to the “no irrigation” case, projected future gross income (in 2015 
$ per hectare) with irrigation increased by about $12.1 (RCP2.6), $14.4 (RCP4.5) and $13.5 (RCP8.5) in the 
2050s, and by about $14.3 (RCP2.6), $13.4 (RCP4.5) and $11.8 (RCP8.5) in the 2090s. This suggested that 
crop yields increased with irrigation. However, when the investment and maintenance costs of the irrigation 
system are taken into account, the difference in gross margins (for the “with irrigation” case less those for the 
“no irrigation” case) is consistently negative for both time periods across all three emissions scenarios. For 
example, projected gross margins with irrigation in the 2090s are about $146–$148 per hectare lower than 
gross margins without irrigation. Even though the availability of irrigation water increases crop yields, the 
corresponding increase in gross income is insufficient to compensate for the costs of the irrigation system.
The water retention system at Pelly’s Lake provides a range of services, in addition to storing water and 
supporting crop irrigation. The system can be used for biomass (cattail) production and nutrient retention, 
thereby reducing downstream nutrient and sediment loading. It can also sequester carbon and capture 
excess spring runoff and rainfall from extreme precipitation events—the latter reduces potential flood risks 
downstream. These positive co-benefits have been valued at about $25,505 per hectare per year.
Use of the multi-purpose water retention system at Pelly’s Lake as an adaptation measure to help farmers 
manage risks related to water stress under climate change conditions does not pass a standard cost-
benefit test, when considering only the irrigation benefits provided to participating farmers. However, if 
the range of co-benefits provided by the system were to be included in the analysis, the system would be 
deemed economically viable as an adaptation measure. The private co-benefits provided by the system—if 
monetized—would be enough to create a business case for farmers to invest in irrigation, while providing 
wider economic and environmental benefits to the region.
6.7.1.2 Cost of adaptation
Appendix 6.4 provides some information on the estimated cost of adaptation options, which serve as inputs 
to cost-benefit analyses. In general, understanding of the cost of climate change adaptation in Canada is in 
its infancy. Two recent studies, however, have sought to address this knowledge gap. The Insurance Bureau 
of Canada and the Federation of Canadian Municipalities (2020) estimate that $5.3 billion dollars (in 2019 
dollars) need to be invested annually, on average, over a 50-year planning horizon to adapt Canadian public 
infrastructure (e.g., roads, dykes, water treatment facilities, sewer systems, etc.) to climate hazards. This is 
equivalent to about 0.26% of national GDP per year. This level of spending on climate change adaptation is 
consistent with large cities internationally; for example, actual expenditure on climate change adaptation in 
London, New York and Paris in 2014–2015 amounted to 0.22–0.23% of the GDP for these cities (Georgeson 
et al., 2016). In terms of individual climate hazards and types of infrastructure, reducing flood risk and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 418 
investment in grey infrastructure (such as buildings, dykes, roads, etc.), respectively, were associated with 
the highest levels of expenditures. Regionally, planned annual expenditures on climate change adaptation in 
Atlantic Canada account for about two-thirds ($3.6 billion) of the national total. The relative cost at a regional 
level should be viewed with caution, however. The above results are derived from a database of over 400 cost 
estimates from the climate change adaptation plans of 34 communities across Canada (Insurance Bureau 
of Canada and Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2020). Some regions of Canada are underrepresented 
(such as British Columbia and Nunavut), as are mid-sized urban centres, while other regions (Alberta) and 
small population centres are over-represented. Furthermore, the adaptation planning process used by the 
13 Alberta communities (40% of the sample) in the database encourages prioritization of no-regret and 
low-regret “soft” measures, with low investment requirements. For these reasons, and the fact that the 
adaptation actions costed in the community plans likely focus on the top-priority climate risks—and not all 
risks—the estimated expenditure of $5.3 billion per year is likely an underestimate of the needed investment 
in adaptation.
A further recent study estimated the required expenditure to adapt municipal infrastructure in Quebec for 
climate-related risks at $2.8–$5.4 billion (2019 dollars) over the next five years (AGECO Group, 2019).8 This is 
equivalent to about 0.12–0.23% of GDP annually. Again, the full scale of the required investment in adaptation 
is likely underestimated, since only a sub-set of public infrastructure is included in the analysis—specifically, 
water assets (drinking water, sanitation and drainage), green infrastructure and roads.
6.7.2 The economic case for adaptation
To help draw conclusions regarding the economic case for climate change adaptation from the available 
studies listed in Appendix 6.4, adaptation actions where a benefit-cost ratio (BCR) was reported or could 
be derived (60 actions in total) are rank-ordered and presented in Figure 6.16. A BCR is given based on the 
present value of benefits of an adaptation action, divided by its present value costs. As such, it controls 
for the scale of adaptation actions, thereby facilitating comparisons across actions of different size (other 
factors limiting comparisons are discussed below). A BCR greater than one indicates that an adaptation 
action’s benefits exceed the costs incurred to generate those benefits—such an action would typically be 
a justifiable investment on economic efficiency grounds. However, not all actions with a BCR greater than 
one are necessarily implemented, as their implementation depends on a range of factors, including available 
resources (see Section 6.8.1).
Figure 6.16 shows that, across the 60 adaptation actions, 75% pass a cost-benefit test. The unweighted 
average BCR is 5.6 (i.e., every dollar invested in climate change adaptation actions generates, on average, 
$5.60 in benefits). The average BCR is heavily skewed by a handful of extremely high values, however. The 
unweighted median BCR is 1.5, and half of the values lie between 0.9 and 2.7. These values are consistent 
with international experience—for example, in a review of a statistical sample of the nearly 5,500 Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) grants in the U.S. awarded between 1993 and 2003 for addressing 
8 There may be some overlap with the cost estimate by the Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (2020) of $5.3 billion annually, which included four municipalities from Quebec.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 419 
earthquake, flood and wind hazards, Rose et al. (2007) found that the overall average BCR ratio was about 
4.0, whereas the average BCR for flood reduction measures was 5.1. Likewise, the Global Commission 
on Adaptation found that $1 judiciously invested in climate change adaptation could generate $2–10 in 
economic benefits (Global Commission on Adaptation, 2019).
The available examples from the 60 adaptation actions suggest that “soft” adaptation actions (with a 
mean BCR of more than 10:1) represent more economically efficient investments than “hard engineering” 
adaptation actions (with a mean BCR of about 3:1). This is largely due to the higher upfront investment 
expenditures needed for the latter set of actions. It is also partly due to the inclusion of monetized co-benefits 
generated by some of the “soft” actions (specifically in the appraisal of coastal adaptation actions in Quebec) 
and to the inclusion of both direct and indirect benefits (i.e., avoided costs) in a couple of studies (e.g., timber 
supply) that examined only “soft” adaptation actions. As noted in Section 6.6.1, the economic performance 
of a project is only one of several important criteria for selecting adaptation options. In some cases, “soft” 
options may not offer an acceptable level of risk reduction, thus necessitating the adoption of “hard” options, 
which may have less attractive BCRs.
In general, the diversity of methodological choices makes comparing results across available appraisals of 
adaptation costs and benefits difficult. Studies use different time horizons, emissions scenarios and norms; 
they make different assumptions about socioeconomic development, and monetize different combinations 
of market and non-market impacts, co-benefits, and direct and indirect impacts (see Case Story 6.6). They 
also use different discount rates, though this is less of an issue regarding the comparability of studies, 
since nearly all apply constant rates of 3–4% per annum, which is indicative of a prescriptive rather than a 
descriptive approach to discounting (see Section 6.6.3.2).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 420 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 421 
Figure 6.16: The figure shows estimated benefit-cost ratios (BCR)—present-value benefits divided by present-
value costs—for 60 adaptation actions in Canada (see Appendix 6.4). Of the actions considered, 75% have a 
BCR greater than one, indicating that the benefits exceed the costs incurred to generate those benefits (i.e., 
these would typically be considered as justifiable investments on economic efficiency grounds). The unweighted 
average BCR across the 60 actions is 5.6, although the unweighted median BCR is 1.5. a) shows the benefit-cost 
ratios of different types of adaptation actions from the sample, differentiated by climate-sensitive sector, and 
b) shows the benefit-cost ratios of these actions, differentiated by category of adaptation action: “soft policy” 
actions (e.g., planned retreat, enhanced pest control, flexible scheduling); “soft engineering” actions (e.g., beach 
nourishment, green roofs); “hard engineering” actions (e.g., dykes, weirs, sea walls); and “combination” actions. 
Data source: see Appendix 6.4.
6.7.3 Residual damages
It is evident from the NRTEE (2011) studies in Appendix 6.4 that, even with adaptation actions in place, residual 
costs from damage due to climate change remain. For instance, the cost of adopting a portfolio of adaptation 
actions to address the impacts of climate change on timber supply is $2.3–3.6 billion (in present value terms, at 
a 3% constant discount rate over the period 2010‒2080) and reduces economic losses by $19.9‒137.9 billion, 
but residual losses of $4.6‒37.1 billion remain. The total costs of climate change in this case are therefore 
$6.9‒40.7 billion. While not explicitly reported by the other studies listed in Appendix 6.4, a quick comparison of 
the results in Appendix 6.1 and Appendix 6.2 with those in Appendix 6.4 reveals the presence of residual damage 
costs in most cases, suggesting potential—though undefined—limits to what adaptation can achieve (see Section 
6.8.1). The presence of residual costs does not indicate that an action is poorly designed or that an insufficient 
level of adaptation was implemented; it may simply indicate that aiming for zero residual damages is not feasible 
or that its costs would exceed the dollar value of avoided damages. 
6.8 There are economic barriers and limits to 
adaptation 
There is a range of ecological, technological, economic and institutional barriers to adaptation, which limit 
the potential to reduce negative climate change impacts and benefit from new opportunities. Government 
can play an important role in addressing these barriers, although an economically efficient level of 
adaptation will likely involve some residual costs.
In addition to financial constraints, various market, behavioural and policy barriers are contributing to an 
adaptation gap—the difference between the level of adaptation required to offset all negative climate change 
impacts or to benefit from all new opportunities. This is further complicated by ecological and technological 
limits to adaptation. Government intervention can play a strong role in addressing these barriers and 
incentivizing adaptation by other actors. Some adaptation actions and public policies designed to support 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 422 
adaptation cannot be justified on economic grounds (i.e., with social costs that exceed social benefits) or will 
simply be too costly relative to available resources. Consequently, the level of adaptation that is achievable, 
even with government intervention, will generally not overcome all consequences of climate change. Residual 
damages will likely be part of any economically efficient adaptation strategy.
6.8.1 Introduction
Both theory and evidence indicate that adaptation cannot cancel out all negative climate change impacts, nor 
can it capture all positive impacts (Chambwera et al., 2014; Dow et al., 2013). Earlier sections in this chapter 
highlight potential instances of insufficient or ineffective adaptation (e.g., the current adaptation deficit with 
respect to extreme weather events in Canada) (see Section 6.4.2). This section examines barriers and limits 
to adaptation from an economic perspective. A barrier refers to any type of challenge, obstacle or constraint 
that can impede or stop the adoption of certain adaptation actions by businesses or households, but that 
is surmountable with concerted effort; a limit is a constraint that cannot be overcome without incurring 
unreasonable costs or taking unreasonable action (Eisenack et al., 2014; Productivity Commission, 2012).
6.8.2 Barriers and limits to adaptation from an economic perspective
From an economic perspective, private actors such as businesses and households are expected to undertake 
a significant amount of adaptation as they modify decisions and behaviours in response to climate signals to 
maximize their profit or welfare (Mendelsohn, 2012). Such behavioural reactions to climate stimuli form the 
premise underlying what is referred to as autonomous adaptation (Fankhauser, 2017). For example, people 
adjust their vacation destinations or travel dates in response to climate (Hamilton et al., 2005), and farmers 
adjust crops or use different harvest or seeding dates in response to changing precipitation patterns (Food 
and Agriculture Organization, 2007).
However, there is evidence that autonomous adaptation by businesses and individuals is not always adequate 
or efficient (Eisenack et al., 2014; Klein et al., 2014; Porter et al., 2014; de Bruin et al., 2011; Agrawala et al., 
2010). There are multiple barriers and limits to private adaptation (Biesbroek et al., 2013), which means that 
only a subset of adaptation needs may be met in practice (see Figure 6.17). Limits can be technological 
(e.g., snow-making equipment may not be able to sustain adequate snow cover at lower altitude ski resorts 
as the climate warms), ecological (i.e., ecosystems and species may be unable to adapt at higher rates of 
warming), economic (i.e., the level of adaptation that is justified on economic grounds once the lifecycle 
costs of actions have been considered, in relation to the projected benefits), and institutional (e.g., available 
funding and capacity) (Chambwera et al., 2014). The gap between the level of adaptation required to 
cancel out all negative impacts (or capture benefits from all opportunities) and the maximum potential for 
adaptation after taking into account technological and ecological limits is referred to as the “unavoidable 
impacts” (Chambwera et al., 2014). However, not all actions for overcoming avoidable impacts will pass a 
basic cost-benefit test, which is indicative of the economic potential for adaptation. The lifecycle costs of 
some adaptation actions will exceed the economic costs averted, indicating that alternative investments offer 
better value for money.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 423 
Figure 6.17: Economic barriers and limits to the maximum potential for adaptation. Source: Adapted from 
Chambwera et al., 2014; US Environmental Protection Agency, 2007.
6.8.2.1 Market failures
Simply because an adaptation action passes a cost-benefit test in theory does not necessarily mean that it 
will be adopted in practice. The economics literature is rife with a long list of barriers that can hamper the 
ability of individuals and businesses to allocate resources to welfare-improving adaptation actions (Klein et 
al., 2014). Markets may fail to provide decision makers with appropriate information about all of the costs and 
benefits of adaptation, leading to inefficient levels of investment in adaptation. This may happen because the 
required information is inadequate or not equally available to all parties in a decision, and may also be due to 
the presence of externalities, public goods and misaligned incentives, where the benefits of adaptation do not 
accrue to the individual or entity paying for it (see Box 6.2; Productivity Commission, 2012; Braeuninger et al., 
2011; Ekstrom et al., 2011; Cimato and Mullan, 2010; Moser and Ekstrom, 2010; Stern, 2006).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 424 
Box 6.2: Market failures and adaptation
Market failures are imperfections in market mechanisms that lead to an inefficient allocation of resources. 
In the context of adaptation, market failures can lead to less efficient or effective adaptation, missed 
opportunities and higher costs (Moser and Ekstrom, 2010). There are several reasons why market 
mechanisms fail:
Information failures
Private actors may not have access to perfect information to inform their decisions. They may lack 
information on current and future climate risks, and the range of adaptation actions that are at their disposal; 
they may also be unaware of the costs and benefits of these actions. This makes it difficult to make efficient 
decisions. There may also be situations where information is known to some actors (e.g., homeowners), but 
not to others (e.g., potential buyers and insurers). This can lead to opportunistic behaviour by the individuals 
who hold superior information. For instance, a homeowner may underinvest in adaptation in the belief that 
someone else (insurers or government) will deal with any impacts. In other situations—like the management 
of property or assets—misaligned incentives might be an issue, whereby the costs of adaptation are borne by 
certain actors (e.g., property owners), while the benefits accrue to others (e.g., tenants). A property owner has 
little incentive to invest in water efficiency measures, for instance, when tenants pay the water bills.
Public goods
Markets have difficulty in supplying public goods because of the “free-rider” problem. This problem arises 
when individuals can benefit from the presence of a good or service without having to contribute to its 
provision. Examples of public goods in the case of adaptation include large-scale community flood protection, 
climate models and information about climate change impacts, public health and safety, and emergency 
preparedness. These goods will be underprovided or not provided at all by private markets. One reason for 
this is the difficulty of excluding nonpayers from enjoying the benefits of the good (such as coastal protection 
infrastructure), making it challenging to turn a profit. Furthermore, for some goods and services that are 
affected by climate change (such as ecosystems), markets do not exist. In these cases, there is no market 
mechanism for allocating resources to adaptation.
Externalities
Externalities occur when adaptation actions by some individuals result in unintended consequences (positive 
or negative) for other individuals, without payment or compensation taking place between the parties; this is 
because the unintended consequences are not captured by market prices. For example, increased use of air 
conditioning by some individuals in response to rising temperature extremes might result in increased GHG 
emissions, poorer air quality and adverse health effects for other individuals, though the associated health 
and welfare costs are typically not borne by those who are using air conditioners.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 425 
6.8.2.2 Behavioural failures
Even when markets send private actors the right signals, these actors do not necessarily make choices in 
their best interests or those of society at large, due to several behavioural anomalies and biases. The type, 
complexity and volume of information available, and the way in which it is communicated and by whom, all 
have a significant impact on the likelihood that people will read, understand and use it efficiently. Cognitive 
capacity, for instance, is known to affect our ability to make efficient adaptation decisions involving complex, 
probabilistic information (Grothmann and Patt, 2005). Other potential behavioural anomalies and biases 
manifest as decision inertia, procrastination and high discount rates (e.g., Boyd et al, 2015). As a result, 
individuals are observed to make seemingly irrational choices that deviate from what classical economics 
would predict (i.e., to maximize net benefits or welfare). Such irrational aspects of decision making are often 
referred to as behavioural failures.
6.8.2.3 Policy failures
Policy failures can also create barriers to the adoption of an economically efficient level of adaptation (Her 
Majesty’s Government, 2013; Cimato and Mullan, 2010). These failures arise when regulation distorts market 
transactions, thus incentivizing private actors to under- or over-invest in adaptation. For example, government 
transfers for hard flood protection measures and disaster aid provide incentives that fuel a self-reinforcing 
cycle of continued growth in coastal areas that are prone to flooding, even though retreat or abandonment 
represents the welfare-maximizing course of action (Kousky, 2014; Filatova 2013; Filatova et al., 2011). Taxes 
on insurance products and property transactions are another example (Boyd et al., 2015). Policy failures can 
also occur in the presence of conflicting or competing policy objectives, or when there is a lack of clarity 
around objectives.
6.8.3 Role for governments
The presence of market, behavioural and policy failures means that the economic potential for adaptation is 
not fully realized. This creates a key role for government (Fankhauser, 2017):
•	
Firstly, to remove policy distortions that impede economically efficient adaptation choices by 
private actors: for example, to reform (e.g., reduce, restructure or eliminate) the subsidies that 
fuel the self-reinforcing cycle of continued growth in coastal or riverfront areas that are prone to 
flooding (Boyd et al., 2015).
•	
Secondly, to use regulatory and economic instruments to overcome market and behavioural 
failures, and to provide incentives for efficient private adaptation (e.g., Boyd et al., 2015; Hotte 
and Nelson, 2015). Regarding the use of economic instruments to incentivize adaptation, it is 
important for the design of these instruments to account for common behavioural failures that 
have the potential to undermine their effectiveness (Boyd et al. 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 426 
•	
Thirdly, to provide public goods and services dedicated to adaptation, like the production and 
dissemination of climate information, spending on research and monitoring programs, investment 
in large-scale flood protection, early warning systems for communities, improvements to 
emergency planning and preparedness, and the development of policies to enhance the resilience 
of ecosystems.
However, not all forms of government intervention will make sense from an economic perspective. It 
is also necessary to demonstrate that the benefits arising from such interventions exceed the costs of 
implementation for private actors and government (Productivity Commission, 2012). Only a certain level of 
adaptation is achievable after accounting for the effectiveness of regulatory and economic instruments to 
redress barriers to efficient adaptation, with these instruments themselves having passed a cost-benefit test 
(see Figure 6.11).
Some individuals, businesses or communities may be unable to afford or finance the required investment in 
planned adaptation actions, even though they know it is in their best interest to do so (Lecocq and Shalizi, 
2007).9 Another role for government is to aid vulnerable and disadvantaged groups and communities that 
do not have access to the necessary resources to adapt sufficiently (Fankhauser, 2017). At the same time, 
governments too will face financial and capacity constraints, and must allocate resources among competing 
needs. When an economically efficient level of adaptation is achieved after allowing for technical, social and 
ecological constraints, residual damages may well occur. The fact that some level of residual damages may 
be unavoidable gives rise to a range of important ethical and social justice issues that are at the core of the 
“loss and damage” discourse at the international level—referring to unavoidable impacts beyond the limits 
of adaptation (van der Geest and Warner, 2015). While a discussion of these issues is outside the scope of 
this chapter (see Wallimann-Helmer et al., 2019 for an overview of the main ethical and justice challenges), 
government may also have a role in defining what is an acceptable level of residual damage and how best to 
reconcile the welfare effects of these unavoidable impacts.
6.9 Moving forward 
Decision makers are increasingly demanding information on the current breadth and depth of evidence 
available for characterizing the costs of climate change for Canada, as well as the net value of different 
adaptation actions, for the purpose of informing the business case for action. There is an increase both in the 
volume and quality of evidence on the costs of climate change, and on the costs and benefits of adaptation, 
reflecting the growing importance of economic information for decision makers. However, there are also 
many knowledge gaps, which points to a rich new research agenda.
9 Market failures can also occur in financial systems (e.g., if a potential borrower has better information about their 
ability to repay a loan than the lender) and can limit how much, if anything, an individual or business can borrow, or 
can lead to unfavourable financing terms and interest rates.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 427 
6.9.1 Costs of inaction
There is much that is yet to be known about the costs of climate change for Canada, both in aggregate 
and for specific sectors, regions, communities and vulnerable populations. Future projections of the total 
economic consequences of climate change for Canada are highly uncertain. Some simplified, highly 
aggregate modelling exercises project net gains for Canada’s economy, while others project net losses. 
Further study is needed to resolve uncertainty around the aggregate cost of climate change for Canada.
Adaptation decisions are largely made at the local or provincial level, where the current state of knowledge 
regarding the cost of inaction is highly fragmented. There are large knowledge gaps when it comes to 
the Prairie provinces, the Northwest Territories, the Yukon and Nunavut, the Interior of British Columbia, 
Ontario, as well as First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. Furthermore, high-quality estimates of economic 
consequences exist for only a few Canadian cities. Given that most adaptation decision making takes place 
at the local level, a priority for future research should be not only to resolve uncertainty around the total 
economic consequences for Canada in aggregate, but to improve the geographical coverage and scope of 
damage estimates for municipalities, as well as the level of disaggregation by sectors, assets and services, 
and climate hazards. This implies the need for a bottom-up, multi-sector approach that addresses several 
cross-cutting gaps in the current literature. Recommendations for new economic studies include the 
following:
Studies considering a broader range of climate hazards: Most of the available national-level aggregate 
projections (and most regional projections) are focused on slow-onset climate impacts (i.e., gradual changes 
in temperature and precipitation, and select biophysical impacts that result from these changes). Future 
investigations of economic consequences would benefit from increased attention on extreme events and 
catastrophes (i.e., low-probability and high-consequence events).
Studies considering a broader range of climate-sensitive sectors: Some sectors are better represented in 
the current economic literature than others. A range of estimates are available for coastal zones, agriculture 
and forestry. For other sectors—namely, tourism, labour, water resources and public health—only a few 
incomplete estimates are available. There are also major gaps in our understanding of the economic 
consequences of climate change for public health. Other sectors are not yet represented in the literature, 
such as ecosystems, fisheries, energy infrastructure (including oil and gas), transportation infrastructure 
(including rail, air and ports), water quality and security (e.g., crime, migration, conflict).
Studies considering a broader range of economic impacts: A comprehensive assessment of economic 
consequences would capture both market and non-market impacts. An important consequence of climate 
change for welfare is the loss of goods and services that are not traded in markets and therefore cannot be 
valued using market prices or captured by CGE models. Examples of broader economic impacts worthy of 
study include species loss, pain and discomfort, loss of cultural heritage, conflict and forced migration. These 
welfare losses can be sizeable, even though they are largely omitted from current estimates. Research is 
needed to ensure that they are better represented in future estimates of economic impacts.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 428 
Studies considering inter-sectoral impacts: There is a broad range of potentially important inter-sectoral 
impacts that are not well captured, especially within a bottom-up, multi-sector approach. For example, water 
is used to produce electricity (e.g., for thermal cooling), and electricity is used to supply water (e.g., to operate 
pump stations). These linkages are typically omitted from estimates. Some non-biophysical interactions 
occur through market mechanisms and can be captured using CGE models, for instance. Other interactions 
do not function in this manner, such as when damage to ecosystems amplifies other impacts. Research is 
needed to understand which inter-sectoral linkages are economically significant at a local or regional level, 
and should therefore be captured in the next generation of estimates.
Studies considering socioeconomic developments: An important conclusion from the current literature 
concerns the importance of future socioeconomic change (e.g., growth in populations, assets and wealth) as 
a key driver of the absolute magnitude of projected economic costs. Despite the demonstrable role of such 
change as a determinant of the cost of inaction, socioeconomic futures are either incompletely addressed or 
not addressed at all in many current studies. 
6.9.2 Costs and benefits of adaptation
Knowledge relating to the appraisal of adaptation costs and benefits in Canada is currently restricted in 
scope to a few climate-sensitive sectors, which in turn means that only a narrow range of adaptations to 
a limited set of climate impacts in specific regions has been considered to date. Also, existing studies are 
almost exclusively focused on the public sector. Consequently, despite the promising results from existing 
studies (see Section 6.7.1), it is not possible to make widespread generalizations about the economic 
attractiveness of adaptation actions in all contexts. There is a lot to learn about the costs and benefits of the 
full range of adaptation that is likely needed to manage the impacts of climate change regarding tolerable 
levels. Research is needed to understand more about the economic efficiency of capacity building actions 
and public policy interventions to overcome barriers to adaptation. This includes understanding how lessons 
from behavioural economics can be used to improve the design and effectiveness of policies to provide 
incentive for implementing desirable levels of private adaptation. At the same time, a better understanding of 
current public policies that promote maladaptation is needed; removing prevailing policy failures is crucial if 
interventions to incent adaptation are to be effective.
While theory favours short-lived, flexible and relatively inexpensive “soft” adaptation measures over long-lived, 
capital-intensive, “hard” adaptation measures in the face of deep uncertainties, it has yet to be demonstrated 
in Canada through practical applications which adaptations have the greatest merits, and under what 
circumstances. Case studies are needed to better understand the economic merits of sequencing adaptation 
decisions over time under multiple futures, rather than making a single, seemingly optimal decision now. All 
of the current “proof of principle” examples are international.
Current economic appraisals pay scant attention to distributional issues and to the political economy of 
adaptation (i.e., how adaptation decisions are made, taking into account political, cultural and economic 
factors). Adaptation, like any form of intervention, will typically have winners and losers, although none of the 
economic studies that have been formally reviewed considered the distribution of costs and benefits across 
actors. Since distributional impacts are a major talking point in local, provincial and national debates about 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 429 
climate policy, a sounder understanding of these impacts would aid in both the design of adaptation actions 
and in moving towards implementation.
Finally, awareness of the cost of climate change adaptation in Canada is only starting to develop, helped by 
two recent studies of the level of investment needed to adapt public infrastructure to climate change at the 
national level (Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2020) and in Quebec 
(AGECO Group, 2019). However, many knowledge gaps remain. For instance, there is no information on 
the aggregate level of investment needed to adapt other economic sectors for anticipated climate change 
impacts. Even regarding public infrastructure, there is poor understanding of adaptation investment needs 
for certain parts of the country (e.g., British Columbia and Nunavut) and for larger population centres. These 
knowledge gaps make it difficult to characterize the scale of the required adaptation effort, how it should be 
financed and—in conjunction with estimates of adaptation benefits—how available funds should be deployed.
6.9.3 Emerging issues
The framing of adaptation decision making is changing, with implications for adaptation economics. 
Whereas the predominant approach to navigating the assessment and planning stages of an adaptive risk 
management framework was historically based on a “science-first” (or “top-down”) approach, there has been a 
recent shift in the economic literature towards a “policy-first” (or “bottom-up”) analytical process, with a focus 
on early action (see Section 6.2.3).
This shift has significant implications for the economic analysis of adaptation actions and necessitates the 
development and application of alternative decision support tools. Where consideration of deep uncertainties 
over future impacts is important—and where decision makers are looking for flexible or robust options—new 
economic decision support tools like adaptation pathways, real options analysis, robust decision making 
and portfolio analysis are more appropriate for economic appraisal than conventional tools like cost-benefit 
analysis (see Section 6.2.5).
The greater importance placed on capacity building, behavioural interventions and the value of information 
under the “policy-first” approach also creates challenges for the monetization of costs and benefits, requiring 
different approaches to the quantification of physical impacts and their subsequent valuation. Increased 
consideration of the adaptation process also places greater emphasis on understanding barriers and 
economic limits to efficient adaptation (e.g., market, behavioural and policy failures), and on the costs and 
benefits of government interventions designed to overcome these barriers (see Section 6.8). Designing 
effective policy interventions requires an understanding of behavioural responses to different incentives. In 
short, economic decision support is itself adapting to meet the evolving needs of decision makers.
There is growing recognition that an efficient level of adaptation is being hampered by more than issues 
of affordability. A combination of market failures (e.g., lack of quality, accessible information on relevant 
risks and adaptation responses, or the presence of public goods or externalities), behavioural anomalies 
(e.g., cognitive capacity, inertia, high discount rates) and prevailing policy distortions (e.g., subsidies that 
ultimately promote maladaptation) limit the potential for adaptation (see Section 6.8). There is a greater role 
for government at all levels to do more than provide financial assistance and invest in public goods (such as 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 430 
climate information services). Other important steps to take include removing prevailing policy distortions, 
and designing and implementing regulations and economic instruments to overcome relevant market 
imperfections and behavioural failures. Equally important is the need for governments to reflect on what 
would be an acceptable level of residual damage and how best to address the welfare effects of unavoidable 
impacts, given the potential for significant ethical and social justice concerns.
Another talking point in the economic literature is the extent to which the economic consequences of climate 
change could be much higher than current projections suggest—not because of the limitations of emissions 
and climate change impact models, which omit important risks, but because of how economic models treat 
damages and growth. The issue is whether the level of economic output is either reduced by a climate shock 
or stress, but with the underlying rate of economic growth being unaffected, or whether climate change has 
a more persistent, cumulative impact on the growth rate itself. Until recently, most estimates of the cost of 
climate change were based on static losses of annual economic output. However, if climate change causes 
lasting damage to capital stock, land and the efficiency at which these factors and labour are turned into 
economic output, as some scholars suggest, then the annual growth rate will be affected in addition to the 
output level, leading to much deeper and longer-lasting impacts on economic output, due to the compounding 
effects of reduced growth. The debate remains unsettled in the literature.
6.10 Conclusion 
This chapter assessed the state of knowledge and practice of climate change impacts and adaptation 
economics in Canada. Information on the economic consequences of climate change, as well as the costs 
and benefits of adaptation actions, are increasingly being demanded by a wide range of decision makers. 
Within an adaptive risk management framework, economic information can be used to raise awareness 
about the need to allocate resources to adaptation planning, as well as to inform the prioritization of current 
and future climate risks and vulnerabilities. Economic information can also be used to inform the selection 
and level of resources allocated to adaptation actions. Overall, the breadth, depth and quality of knowledge 
in Canada on this topic are increasing. There is much that we now know about the potential costs of 
climate change for certain regions, sectors and cities. A strong business case is also evident for adaptation 
investments in specific contexts. While the state of knowledge and practice is improving, it is clear that the 
evidence base is still highly fragmented and that important gaps in knowledge and coverage remain.
There is evidence of an adaptation deficit or gap in Canada, demonstrated by the fact that households, 
businesses and infrastructure, etc. are under-adapted to current climate conditions and variability. Not all of 
the rising losses can be explained by growing exposures, asset values and general price inflation, suggesting 
that climate change may be playing a role, potentially foreshadowing growing levels of losses that might be 
expected in the future with climate change anticipated to intensify. Do projections of future climate change 
costs for Canada support this conjecture? The short answer is yes. The bulk of the evidence suggests 
that climate change will impose increasing overall welfare losses on Canadians, though welfare gains are 
expected in some sectors and in some parts of the country.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 431 
Looking to the future, climate change is projected to impose substantial economic costs on individual sectors 
and regions. Under high-emissions scenarios without new adaptation actions, economic costs in some 
sectors and regions could amount to 100s of millions to 10s of billions of dollars annually by the 2050s, and 
higher still by the end of the century (NRTEE, 2011). Affected sectors and regions include forestry, coastal 
areas, public health, ski resorts, marine transport, hydroelectric generation, municipal water treatment and 
waterfront properties in the Great Lakes–St. Lawrence River system. Projections of economic consequences 
for agriculture vary—most studies project economic benefits from climate change impacts on crops, with 
the largest gains being in the Prairie provinces. The limitation is that these studies only consider changes 
under average conditions, and do not consider the negative impacts associated with changes in climate and 
weather extremes. For the few cities for which information is available, climate change is anticipated to have 
negative economic consequences.
The economic consequences of climate change for Canada can be assessed at a mix of different spatial 
scales (national, provincial/territorial, regional, municipal) and sectoral scales (single-sector or multi-sector). 
At each scale, cost assessments may also differ significantly in scope—in terms of the climate impacts 
considered (e.g., one or more slow-onset impacts or rapid-onset impacts), the types of costs measured (e.g., 
direct, indirect, macroeconomic, market, non-market) and time frames (e.g., short-term, medium-term, long-
term). In general, existing studies of the economic impact of climate change have been very narrow in scope 
and sectoral coverage. Higher damage costs are projected by studies with wider scopes that considered 
extreme weather and climate events in addition to slow-onset climate change impacts, captured impacts 
on multiple sectors, included non-market impacts and measured impacts on the welfare of Canadians, as 
opposed to changes in GDP. If cost assessments adopted a more comprehensive scope, then the estimated 
costs of climate change for Canada would likely be significantly higher than the current studies suggest.
Economic appraisals of adaptation actions in Canada find that the benefits generally exceed the costs, 
though results are highly context-specific. Across a narrow sample of 60 appraisals of actions (largely 
in municipal settings) to reduce impacts from coastal flooding, low water levels in the Great Lakes–St. 
Lawrence River system, reduced timber supply, heat stress and poor air quality in Toronto, 75% of the 
actions passed a cost-benefit test. The median benefit-cost ratio was 5.6:1 (1.5:1)—each dollar spent on risk 
reduction generated, on average, $5.60 in benefits (see Section 6.7.2). Returns on investment in adaptation of 
these magnitudes are consistent with the international experience.
Several observations can be drawn from the available evidence. Firstly, among the sample of adaptation 
actions that were assessed, “soft” adaptation actions provided better value for money than did “hard” 
engineering actions, due primarily to lower investment costs and the propensity to provide greater co-
benefits. A number of these actions are also characterized as nature based solutions, where action is taken 
to reinforce and protect existing ecosystems. Secondly, the economic performance of adaptation actions is 
highly site-specific and context-specific—the same action that passes a cost-benefit test at one location may 
fail at another location, and results are not generally transferable. Thirdly, adaptation does not typically cancel 
out all climate change costs—some residual damage costs persist. This latter point highlights potential 
ecological, technological and economic limits to adaptation. It also implies that even with an economically 
efficient level of adaptation, welfare levels might still be lower than they otherwise would be in the absence 
of climate change. The fact that some level of loss may be unavoidable presents a range of ethical and social 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 432 
justice challenges, requiring governments to define what is an acceptable level of residual damage and how 
best to reconcile the welfare effects of these unavoidable impacts.
Overall, the emerging business case for adaptation looks promising, although the evidence base is 
incomplete. There is still a lot to learn about the costs and benefits of adapting to current and future climate 
change in a broader range of sectors (including the private sector), about the broader range of risks, and the 
need to consider a broader set of actions, including regulatory and economic instruments. Little is known 
about the distribution of adaptation costs and benefits. All current studies reviewed in this chapter are 
prospective appraisals of largely hypothetical adaptation actions that could—in principle—be adopted. None 
of the findings are based on retrospective evaluations of implemented actions; thus, the findings are more 
representative of the theoretical “economic potential” for adaptation, as opposed to the more realistic “policy 
potential” (see Figure 6.11).
Providing projections of quantifiable financial costs and benefits is not enough given the diverse objectives, 
interests, knowledge and values that decision makers now bring to climate change adaptation decisions. 
There are many available economic tools that can support multi-metric appraisals, although only simple 
forms of traditional CBA have been applied to date. Firstly, there are approaches to capture distributional 
impacts, intergenerational equity issues, co-impacts and non-market impacts within traditional tools like 
CBA. Secondly, economics offers a set of new approaches that work with traditional tools like CBA to provide 
useful support for adaptation decision making under deep uncertainty, incorporating the time-phasing of 
actions over long time frames and the potential for learning. Each of the available tools has unique strengths 
and weaknesses depending on the adaptation decision context and the level of uncertainty. There is no “best” 
one-size-fits-all approach to the economic appraisal of adaptation actions.
The choice of economic decision support tool(s) might be case-specific, but the literature does identify 
several best practices that would characterize good economic analysis, in particular the following: covering 
a broad representation of specific climate and biophysical impacts—including both extreme rapid-onset 
and slow-onset impacts; considering projected socioeconomic developments; considering multiple “hard” 
and “soft” adaptation actions, including analysis of barriers to their effective adoption, and interventions 
to address these barriers; investigating both climate and non-climate sources of uncertainty, including 
consideration of the time phasing and sequencing of actions using new economic tools for decision making 
under uncertainty (e.g., adaptation pathways, real options analysis); analyzing lifecycle costs (including 
transaction costs) and benefits across the broadest practical scope of market and non-market impacts; and 
scrutinizing distributional impacts on vulnerable populations, disadvantaged groups and future generations.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 433 
6.11 References 
Ackerman, F. and Stanton, E. (2006). Climate Change – the Costs 
of Inaction. Report for Friends of the Earth England, Wales and 
Northern Ireland. Global Development and Environment Institute, 
Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts, 38 p. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <http://frankackerman.com/publications/
climatechange/Climate_Change_Costs_Inaction.pdf>
AGECO Group (2019). Vers de grandes villes résilientes : le 
coût de l’adaptation aux changements climatiques. Groupe 
AGECO, Montréal, Quebec, 25 p. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://umq.qc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/adaptations-
chgt-climat-caucus-gdes-viles-10mai19b.pdf> 
Agrawala, S., Carraro, C., Bosello, F. and de Bruin, K. (2010). 
Plan or react? Analysis of adaptation costs and benefits 
using integrated assessment models, OECD Environment 
Working Papers No. 23, OECD, Paris, France. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/plan-or-
react_5km975m3d5hb.pdf?itemId=%2Fcontent%2Fpaper%2F5k
m975m3d5hb-en&mimeType=pdf> 
Agrawala, S., Bosello, F., Carraro, C., De Cian, E., Lanzi, E., de 
Bruin, K. and Dellink, R.B. (2011). Plan or react? Analysis of 
adaptation costs and benefits using Integrated Assessment 
Models. Climate Change Economics, 2(3), 175–208. 
Retrieved December 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1142/
S2010007811000267>
Alder. M. (2016). Benefit-cost analysis and distributional 
weights: an overview. Review of Environmental Economics and 
Policy, 10(2), 264–285. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://
scholarship.law.duke.edu/faculty_scholarship/3110> 
Amiraslany, A. (2010). The impact of climate change on 
Canadian agriculture: a Ricardian approach. Doctoral 
dissertation, Department of Bioresource Policy, Business 
and Economics, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, 
Saskatchewan, 169 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://
harvest.usask.ca/handle/10388/etd-05252010-102012> 
Aon (2020). Weather, climate and catastrophic insight: 2019 
annual report. Aon plc, Chicago, Illinois, U.S., 80 p. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://www.aon.com/global-weather-
catastrophe-natural-disasters-costs-climate-change-2019-
annual-report/index.html?utm_source=regionemeauk&utm_
campaign=natcat20> 
Arrow, K.J., Cline, W.R., Maler, K-G., Munasinghe, M., Squitieri, 
R. and Stiglitz, J.E. (1996). Intertemporal equity, discounting, 
and economic efficiency, Chapter 5 in Climate Change 
1995: Economic and social dimensions of climate change 
(Contribution of Working Group III to the Second Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 
(Eds.) J.P. Bruce, H. Lee and E.F. Haites. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 125–144. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar2/
wg3/#report-chapters> 
Arrow, K.J., Cropper, M.L., Gollier, C., Groom, B., Heal, G.M., 
Newell, R.G., Nordhaus, W.D., Pindyck, R.S., Pizer, W.A., Portney, 
P.R., Sterner, T., Tol, R.S.J. and Weitzman, M.L. (2012). How 
should benefits and costs be discounted in an intergenerational 
context? The views of an expert panel. Resources for the Future 
Discussion Paper No.12–53, Washington, D.C., 31 p. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=2199511> 
Arrow, K.J., Cropper, M.L., Gollier, C., Groom, B., Heal, G.M., 
Newell, R.G., Nordhaus, W.D., Pindyck, R.S., Pizer, W.A., Portney, 
P.R., Sterner, T., Tol, R.S.J. and Weitzman, M.L. (2014). Should 
governments use a declining discount rate in project analysis? 
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 8(2), 145–163. 
Retrieved December 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/
reu008>
Asian Development Bank (2015). Economic analysis of climate-
proofing investment projects. Mandaluyong City, Philippines, 
85 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.adb.org/
sites/default/files/publication/173454/economic-analysis-
climate-proofing-projects.pdf> 
Aubé, M., Hébert, C., Wilson, J., Trenholm, R. and Patriquin, M. 
(2016). Cost benefit analysis of climate change adaptation 
strategies for the Acadian Peninsula. Green Analytics and 
the Coastal Zones Research Institute Inc., Shippagan, New 
Brunswick, 87 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://
adaptationpa.ca/images/PDF_-_Progression/R-Cost_Benefit_
Analysis_of_Climate_Change_Adaptation_Strategies.pdf> 
Ayouqi, H. and Vercammen, J. (2014). Evaluating the 
impact of climate change on Canadian prairie agriculture. 
Linking Environment and Agriculture Research Network 
(LEARN). Research Project PR-01-2014, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, 18 p. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://learnnetwork.ualberta.ca/wp-content/uploads/
sites/70/2018/07/PR_01_2014_Ayouqi-Vercammen.pdf> 
Azfar, O. (1998). Rationalizing hyperbolic discounting. Journal 
of Economic Behaviour and Organization, 38(2), 245–252. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-
2681(99)00009-8>
Bain, P.G., Milfont, T.L., Kashima, Y., Bilewicz, M., Doron, G., 
Garðarsdóttir, R.B., Gouveia, V.V., Guan, Y., Johansson, L-O., 
Pasquali, C., Corral-Verdugo, V., Aragones, J.I., Utsugi, A., 
Demarque, C., Otto, S., Park, J., Soland, M., Steg, L., González, 
R., Lebedeva, N., Madsen, O.J., Wagner, C., Akotia, C.S., Kurz, T., 
Saiz, J.L., Wesley Schultz, P., Einarsdóttir, G. and Saviolidis, N.M. 
(2015). Co-benefits of addressing climate change can motivate 
action around the world. Nature Climate Change, 6, 154–157. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2814> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 434 
Berry, P., Yassin, F., Belcher, K. and Lindenschmidt, K. E. (2017a). 
An economic assessment of local farm multi-purpose surface 
water retention systems under future climate uncertainty. 
Sustainability, 9(3), 456. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.3390/su9030456> 
Berry, P., Yassin, F., Belcher, K. and Lindenschmidt, K. E. (2017b). 
An economic assessment of local farm multi-purpose surface 
water retention systems in a Canadian Prairie setting. Applied 
Water Science, 7(8), 4461–4478. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s13201-017-0592-7> 
Biesbroek, G.R., Klostermann, J.E.M., Termeer, C.J.A.M. and 
Kabat, P. (2013). On the nature of barriers to climate change 
adaptation. Regional Environmental Change, 13, 1119–1129. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-
013-0421-y> 
Bloemen, P., Reeder, T., Zevenbergen, C., Rijke, J. and 
Kingsborough, A. (2018). Lessons learned from applying 
adaptation pathways in flood risk management and challenges 
for the further development of this approach. Mitigation and 
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 23, 1083–1108. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-
017-9773-9> 
Boardman, A.E., Moore, M.A. and Vining, A.R. (2008). Social 
Discount Rates for Canada. University of British Columbia 
and Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, 28 p. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/236935295_The_Social_Discount_Rate_in_Canada>
Bosello, F., Roson, R. and Tol, R. (2006). Economy-wide 
estimates of the implications of climate change: human health. 
Ecological Economics, 58, 579–591. Retrieved December 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2005.07.032>
Bouwer, L.M. (2011). Have disaster losses increased due 
to anthropogenic climate change? Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 92, 39–46. Retrieved December 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1175/2010BAMS3092.1>
Boyd, R. (2018). Economic impacts of climate change on  
municipalities: Edmonton case study. Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (FCM) Climate and Asset Management Network 
(CAMN) Webinar, 26th November 2018. 
Boyd, R., Gados, A. and Maynes, T. (2013). Economic guidance 
for the appraisal and prioritization of adaptation actions. Report 
prepared for the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Program of Natural Resources Canada, Climate Change Central, 
Calgary, Alberta, 242 p. 
Boyd, R. and Walton, H. (2006). Water resources, Chapter 9 in 
Climate change impacts and adaptation: cross-regional research 
programme project. Report by Metroeconomica Limited (UK) for 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), 
London, United Kingdom. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://
sciencesearch.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=
More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectID=13231>
Boyd, R., Zukiwsky, J. and Pringle, T. (2015). Economic tools 
for climate adaptation: private real estate decisions. Report 
prepared for the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Program of Natural Resources Canada, All One Sky Foundation, 
Calgary, Alberta, 139 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://
www.retooling.ca/_Library/ReTooling_Resource_Library/
Economic_Tools_for_Climate_Change_Adaptation.pdf> 
Boyer-Villemaire, U., Circé, M., Da Silva, L., Desjarlais, C. and 
Morneau, F. (2016). Atlantic-Quebec cost-benefit analysis of 
adaptation options in coastal areas: synthesis report. Ouranos, 
Montréal, 33 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.
ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/Synthesis-Report-Atl-Qc.pdf>
Braeuninger, M., Butzengeiger-Geyer, S., Dlugolecki, A., 
Hochrainer-Stigler, S., Koehler, M., Linnerooth-Bayer, J., 
Mechler, R. and Michaelowa, A. (2011). Application of 
economic instruments for adaptation to climate change. Final 
Report, Brussels, Belgium. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Michael_Braeuninger/
publication/248399515_Application_of_economic_
instruments_for_adaptation_to_climate_change_Final_report/
links/53e0041b0cf2a768e49ea3dc/Application-of-economic-
instruments-for-adaptation-to-climate-change-Final-report.pdf>
Brown, C., Werick, W., Leger, W. and Fay, D. (2011). A decision-
analytic approach to managing climate risks: application to the 
Upper Great Lakes. Journal of the American Water Resources 
Association, 47, 524–534. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.2011.00552.x>
Burton, I. (2009). Climate change and the adaptation deficit, in 
The Earthscan Reader on Adaptation to Climate Change, (Eds.) L. 
Shipper and I. Burton. Earthscan, London, United Kingdom, 480 p.
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D. (Eds.), 2019: Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 444 p. 
Retrieved December 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/>
Butsic, V., Hanak, E. and Valletta, R. (2011). Climate change and 
housing prices: hedonic estimates for ski resorts in Western 
North America. Land Economics, 87(1), 75–91. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3368/le.87.1.75>
Chambwera, M., Heal, G., Dubeux, C., Hallegatte, S., Leclerc, 
L., Markandya, A., McCarl, B.A., Mechler, R. and Neumann, J.E. 
(2014). Economics of adaptation, Chapter 17 in Climate Change 
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 
945–977. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/
site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap17_FINAL.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 435 
Chavaillaz, Y., Roy, P., Partanen, A.-I., Da Silva, L., Bresson, É., 
Mengis, N., Chaumont, D. and Matthews, H.D. (2019). Exposure 
to excessive heat and impacts on labour productivity linked to 
cumulative CO2 emissions. Scientific Reports: Nature, 9, 13711. 
Retrieved December 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-019-50047-w> 
Cimato, F. and Mullan, M. (2010). Adapting to climate change: 
analysing the role of government. Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs (DEFRA), London, United Kingdom, 79 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/69194/pb13341-analysing-role-government-100122.pdf> 
Circé, M., Da Silva, L., Boyer-Villemaire, U., Duff, G., Desjarlais, C. 
and Morneau, F. (2016a). Cost-benefit analysis for adaptation 
options in Quebec’s coastal areas – Synthesis Report. Ouranos, 
Montréal, 89 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.
ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/Synthesis-Report-Qc.pdf> 
Circé, M., Boyer-Villemaire, U., Da Silva, L. and Jardine, D. 
(2016b). Atlantic-Quebec cost-benefit analysis of coastal 
adaptation options – integrated results. Ouranos, Montréal, 24 p.
Ciscar, J.-C., Iglesias, A., Feyen, L., Szabó, L., Van Regemorter, D., 
Amelung, B., Nicholls, R., Watkiss, P., Christensen, O.B., Dankers, 
R., Garrote, L., Goodess, C.M., Hunt, A., Moreno, A., Richards, J. 
and Soria, A. (2011). Physical and economic consequences of 
climate change in Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS). Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011612108> 
Cline, W.R. (2007). Global warming and agriculture: impact 
estimates by country. Peterson Institute of International 
Economics, Washington, D.C., 250 p.
Corbett, L.J., Withey, P., Lantz, V.A. and Ochuodho, T.O. (2015). 
The economic impact of the mountain pine beetle infestation 
in British Columbia: provincial estimates from a CGE analysis. 
Forestry, 0, 1–6. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1093/forestry/cpv042> 
Coronesea, M., Lampertia, F., Kellerc, K., Chiaromontea, F. 
and Roventinia, A. (2019). Evidence for sharp increase in the 
economic damages of extreme natural disasters. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America (PNAS), 166(43), 21450–21455. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1907826116> 
Cropper, M.L., Freeman, M.C., Groom, B. and Pizer, W.A. (2014). 
Declining discount rates. American Economic Review: Papers 
and Proceedings, 104(5), 538-543. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.5.538> 
Daigle, R. (2012). Sea-level rise and flooding estimates for 
New Brunswick coastal sections. Report commissioned by the 
Atlantic Climate Solutions Association, managed by Climate 
Change Secretariat, New Brunswick Department of Environment, 
Fredericton, New Brunswick, 45 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://atlanticadaptation.ca/fr/islandora/object/
acasa%253A569> 
Damon, M., Mohlin, K. and Sterner, T. (2013). Putting a price on 
the future of our children and grand-children, in The globalization 
of cost–benefit analysis in environmental policymaking, (Eds.) 
M.A. Livermore and R.L. Revesz. Oxford University Press, 
New York, 352 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199934386.001.0001> 
DaSilva, L., Desrochers, F.-A., Pineault, K., Gosselin, C.-A., Grenier, 
P. and Larose, G. (2019). Analyse économique des mesures 
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques appliquée au secteur 
du ski alpin au Québec. Ouranos, Montréal, 119 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-
scientifique/RapportDaSilva2019.pdf>
de Bruin, K. and Dellink, R. (2011). How harmful are restrictions 
in adapting to climate change? Global Environmental Change, 
21(1), 34–45. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.09.008> 
de Bruin, K. (2011). Distinguishing between proactive (stock) 
and reactive (flow) adaptation. Centre for Envrionmental and 
Resource Economics (CERE) Working Papers 2011:8, Umea 
University, Umea, Sweden, 45 p. Retrieved March 2021, from 
<http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1854285> 
de Bruin, K., Dellink, R. and Agrawala, S. (2009a). Economic 
aspects of adaptation to climate change: Integrated Assessment 
Modelling of adaptation costs and benefits. OECD Environment 
Working Papers No. 6, Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD), Paris, France, 48 p. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1787/225282538105> 
de Bruin, K., Dellink, R.B., Ruijs, A., Bolwidt, L., van Buuren, A., 
Graveland, J., de Groot, R.S., Kuikman, P.J., Reinhard, S., Roetter, 
R.P., Tassone, A., Verhagen, A. and van Ierland, E.C. (2009b) 
Adapting to climate change in The Netherlands: an inventory of 
climate adaptation options and ranking of alternatives. Climatic 
Change, 95, 23–45. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-009-9576-4> 
Dell, M., Jones, B.F. and Olken, B.A. (2012). Temperature 
shocks and economic growth - evidence from the last half 
century. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4, 
66–95. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1257/
mac.4.3.66> 
Dell, M., Jones, B.F. and Olken, B.A. (2014). What do we learn 
from the weather? The new climate-economy literature. Journal 
of Economic Literature, 52, 740–798. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.52.3.740> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 436 
Dennig, F. (2018). Climatic change and the re-evaluation of cost-
benefit analysis. Climate Change, 151, 43–54. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-2047-4> 
Dessai, S. and Hulme, M. (2007). Assessing the robustness of 
adaptation decisions to climate change uncertainties: a case 
study on water resources management in the East of England. 
Global Environmental Change, 17(1), 59–72. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.11.005> 
Dessai, S., Hulme, M., Lempert, R.J. and Pielke Jr, R. (2009). 
Climate prediction: a limit to adaptation? in Adapting to climate 
change: thresholds, values, governance, (Eds.) W.N. Adger, 
I. Lorenzoni and K.L. O’Brien. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom, 49–57.
Dessai, S., Lu, X. and Risbey, J.S. (2005). On the role of climate 
scenarios for adaptation planning. Global Environmental 
Change, 15, 87–97. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2004.12.004> 
Diaz, D. and Moore, F. (2017). Valuing Potential Climate 
Impacts: A Review of Current Limitations and the Research 
Frontier. Technical update, product ID 3002011885. Electric 
Power Research institute (EPRI), Palo Alto, California, 36 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.epri.com/research/
products/3002011885> 
Dittrich, R., Wreford, A. and Moran, D. (2016). A survey of 
decision-making approaches for climate change adaptation: are 
robust methods the way forward? Ecological Economics, 122, 
79–89. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolecon.2015.12.006>
Dorling, R. and Hanniman, K. (2016). Restoring water levels on 
Lake Michigan-Huron: A cost benefit analysis. Mowat Centre, 
Munk School of Global Affairs and Public Policy, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, 74 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
munkschool.utoronto.ca/mowatcentre/wp-content/uploads/
publications/120_restoring_water_levels_on_lake_michigan-
huron.pdf> 
Dow, K., Berkhout, F., Preston, B.L., Klein, R.J.T., Midgley G. 
and Shaw, M.R. (2013). Limits to adaptation. Nature Climate 
Change, 3, 305–307. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate1847> 
Downing, T.E. (2012). Views of the frontiers in climate change 
adaptation economics. WIREs Climate Change, 3(2), 161–170. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.157> 
Drupp, M., Freeman, M., Groom, B. and Nesje, F. (2015). 
Discounting disentangled: an expert survey on the determinants 
of the long-term social discount rate. Working Paper 172. 
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the 
Environment, London School of Economics and Political 
Science, London, United Kingdom, 42 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <http://www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/wp-content/
uploads/2015/06/Working-Paper-172-Drupp-et-al.pdf>
Dunne, J.P., Stouffer, R.J. and John, J.G. (2013). Reductions in 
labour capacity from heat stress under climate warming. Nature 
Climate Change, 3, 563–566. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1827> 
Ebi, K., Ogden, N., Semenza, J. and Woodward, A. (2017). 
Detecting and attributing health burdens to climate change. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(8), 085004. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1509> 
Economics of Climate Adaptation (2009). Shaping climate 
resilient development: a framework for decision-making. A 
report of the Economics of Climate Adaptation (ECA) Working 
Group. Swiss Re, McKinsey, Global Environment Facility, 
European Commission, the Rockefeller Foundation, Climate 
Works, and Standard Chartered Bank, Zurich, Switzerland, 159 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <http://ccsl.iccip.net/climate_
resilient.pdf> 
Employment and Social Development Canada (2018). Thermal 
stress in the workplace: guideline 2018. Employment and Social 
Development Canada, Ottawa, 30 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/employment-social-development/
services/health-safety/reports/thermal-stress-work-place.html> 
European Environment Agency (2007). Climate change: the cost 
of inaction and the cost of adaptation. EEA Technical Report 
No 13/2007, European Environment Agency (EEA), Copenhagen, 
Denmark, 67 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.eea.
europa.eu/publications/technical_report_2007_13/at_download/
file> 
Eisenack, K., Moser, S.C., Hoffman, E., Klein, R.J.T., Oberlack, C., 
Pechan, A., Rotter, M. and Termeer, C.J.A.M. (2014). Explaining 
and overcoming barriers to climate change adaptation. Nature 
Climate Change, 4, 867–872. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2350>
Ekstrom, J., Moser, S. and Torn, M. (2011). Barriers to climate 
change adaptation: a diagnostic framework. Report prepared 
for California Energy Commission. Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory, Berkeley, California. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<http://www.susannemoser.com/documents/Ekstrom-Moser-
Torn_2011_BarriersFrameworkReport_CEC-500-2011-004.pdf> 
Epper, T., Fehr-Duda, H. and Bruhin, A. (2011). Viewing the future 
through a warped lens: Why uncertainty generates hyperbolic 
discounting? Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 43, 169–203. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11166-
011-9129-x> 
Fankhauser, S. (2017). Adaptation to climate change. Annual 
Review of Resource Economics, 9(1), 209–230. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
resource-100516-033554> 
Felgenhauer, T. and Webster, M. (2014). Modeling adaptation 
as a flow and stock decision with mitigation. Climatic Change, 
122, 665–679. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-013-1016-9> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 437 
Filatova, T. (2013). Market-based instruments for flood risk 
management: a review of theory, practice and perspectives 
for climate adaptation policy. Environmental Science and 
Policy, 37, 227–242. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envsci.2013.09.005> 
Filatova, T., Mulder, J. and van der Veen, A. (2011). Coastal risk 
management: how to motivate individual economic decisions to 
lower flood risk? Ocean and Coastal Management, 54, 164–172. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ocecoaman.2010.10.028> 
Floater, G., Heeckt, C., Ulterino, M., Mackie, L., Rode, P., Bhardwaj, 
A., Carvalho, M., Gill, D., Bailey, T. and Huxley, R. (2016). Co-
benefits of urban climate action: a framework for cities. A 
working paper by the Economics of Green Cities Programme, 
LSE Cities, London School of Economics and Political Science, 
London, United Kingdom, 86 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/68876/1/Cobenefits_Of_Urban_
Climate_Action.pdf>  
Fleurbaey, M. and Rafeh, R. (2016). The use of distributional 
weights in benefit-cost analysis: insights from welfare 
economics. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 
10(2), 286–307. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1093/reep/rew003> 
Food and Agriculture Organization (2007). Adaptation to climate 
change in agriculture, forestry and fisheries: perspective, 
framework and priorities. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) 
of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, 24 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://www.preventionweb.net/files/8342_j9271e1.pdf> 
Fussel, H.-M. (2003). Impacts of climate change on human 
health — opportunities and challenges for adaptation planning. 
EVA Working Paper No. 4. Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact 
Research, Potsdam, Germany.
Gall, M., Borden, K., Emrich, C. and Cutter, S. (2011). The 
unsustainable trend of natural hazard losses in the United 
States. Sustainability, 3, 2157–2181. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3390/su3112157> 
Georgeson, L., Maslin, M., Poessinouw, M. and Howard, S. 
(2016). Adaptation responses to climate change differ between 
global megacities. University College London, London, United 
Kingdom, 15 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate2944> 
Girard, N. (2018). Personal communication with Nicholas 
Girard, Environmental Policy Analyst, First Nation Adapt 
Program, Climate Change and Clean Energy Directorate, Natural 
Resources and Environment Branch, Crown-Indigenous Relations 
and Northern Affairs Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
Global Commission in Adaptation (2019). Adapt now: a global 
call for leadership on climate resilience. Global Commission on 
Adaptation, 81 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://cdn.gca.
org/assets/2019-09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf>
Gowdy, J. (2013). Valuing nature for climate change policy: from 
discounting the future to truly social deliberation, in Handbook 
on energy and climate change, (Ed.) R. Fouquet. Edward Elgar, 
Cheltenham, 752 p.
Gregory, R., Failing, L., Harstone, M., Long, G., McDaniels, T. 
and Ohlson, D. (2012). Structured decision making: a practical 
guide to environmental management choices. Wiley-Blackwell, 
Chichester, 315 p.
Groom, B. and Maddison, D. (2018). New estimates of the 
elasticity of marginal utility for the UK. Environmental and 
Resource Economics, 72, 1–28. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-018-0242-z> 
Grothmann, T. and Patt, A. (2005). Adaptive capacity and 
human cognition: the process of individual adaptation to 
climate change. Global Environmental Change, 15(3), 199–213. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2005.01.002> 
Haasnoot, M., Warren, A. and Kwakkel, J.H. (2018). Dynamic 
adaptive policy pathways (DAPP), in Decision making under 
deep uncertainty: from theory to practice, (Eds.) V. Marchau, et 
al. Springer Open Access, Cham, Switzerland, 71-91. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.springerprofessional.
de/content/pdfId/16610888/10.1007/978-3-030-05252-
2_4?canonical=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.springerprofessional.
de%2Fen%2Fdynamic-adaptive-policy-pathways-dapp%2F16610
888%3FfulltextView%3Dtrue> 
Haasnoot, M., Kwakkel, J.H., Walker, W.E. and ter Maat, J. 
(2013). Dynamic adaptive policy pathways: A method for 
crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world. Global 
Environmental Change, 23(2), 485–498. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.12.006> 
Haigh, N. and Fisher, J. (2010). Using a “Real Options” approach 
to determine a future strategic plan for flood risk management 
in the Thames Estuary. Government Economic Service Working 
Paper. Her Majesty’s Treasury, London, United Kingdom. 
Hallegatte, S. (2013). The indirect cost of natural disasters 
and an economic definition of macroeconomic resilience. 
Impact Appraisal for Sovereign Disaster Risk Financing 
and Insurance Project: Phase 1 Public Finance and 
Macroeconomics, Paper 3. Sustainable Development 
Network, Office of the Chief Economist, The World Bank, 
Washington, D.C., 35 p. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
handle/10986/22238/The0indirect0c0oeconomic0resilience.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>
Hallegatte, S. (2014). Trends in hazards and the role of climate 
change, in Natural disasters and climate change. Springer, 
Cham, Switzerland, 77–97. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 438 
Hallegatte, S., Shah, A., Lempert, R., Brown, C. and Gill, S. 
(2012). Investment Decision Making Under Deep Uncertainty: 
Application to Climate Change. Policy Research Working Papers 
6193. World Bank, Washington, D.C., 41 p. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1596/1813-9450-6193> 
Halsnæs, K., Shukla, P., Ahuja,D., Akumu, G., Beale, R., 
Edmonds, J., Gollier, C., Grübler, A., Ha Duong, M., Markandya, 
A., McFarland, M., Nikitina, E., Sugiyama, T., Villavicencio A. 
and Zou, J. (2007). Framing issues, in Climate Change 2007: 
Mitigation (Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave and 
L. A. Meyer. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, New York, 118–167. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/
ar4-wg3-chapter2-1.pdf> 
Hamilton, J., Maddison, D. and Tol, R. (2005). Climate 
change and international tourism: a simulation study. Global 
Environmental Change, 15(3), 253–266. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2004.12.009> 
Heal, G. and Millner, A. (2013). Uncertainty and decision in 
climate change economics. Grantham Research Institute on 
Climate Change and the Environment, Working Paper No. 108, 
London School of Economics, London, United Kingdom, 24 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/
ret023> 
Heal, G. and Park, J. (2016). Temperature stress and the direct 
impact of climate change: a review of an emerging literature. 
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(2), 1–17. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/
rew007> 
Her Majesty’s Government (2013). The national adaptation 
programme: making the country resilient to a changing climate. 
Her Majesty’s Government, The Stationery Office, London, 
United Kingdom, 182 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/727259/pb13942-nap-20130701.
pdf> 
Hope, C. (2011). The PAGE09 integrated assessment model: 
A technical description. Working paper series 4/2011, Judge 
Business School, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom, 40 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.jbs.
cam.ac.uk/fileadmin/user_upload/research/workingpapers/
wp1104.pdf> 
Hope, E., McKenney, D., Pedlar, J., Stocks, B. and Gauthier, S. 
(2015). Wildfire suppression costs for Canada under a changing 
climate. PLoS ONE, 11(8), e0157425. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0157425> 
Hotte, N. and Nelson, H. (2015). Economic instruments for 
adaptation to climate change in forestry. Report prepared for 
the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Program of Natural 
Resources Canada, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
British Columbia. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://harry-
w-nelson-forestry.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2015/06/Final-Report-
Economic-Instruments-for-Adaptation-to-Climate-Change-
June-2-2015.pdf> 
Howard, P. and Sylvan, D. (2015). Expert Consensus on the 
Economics of Climate Change. Institute of Policy Integrity, 
New York University School of Law, New York, New York, 31 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.edf.org/sites/
default/files/expertconsensusreport.pdf> 
Hunt, A. (2009). Economic aspects of climate change impacts 
and adaptation in the UK. PhD Thesis, University of Bath, Bath, 
United Kingdom.
IBI Group (2015a). Benefit-cost analysis of flood mitigation 
projects for the City of Calgary: Glenmore Reservoir diversion. 
Report prepared for the Government of Alberta by IBI Group, 
Calgary, Alberta, 9+ p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
open.alberta.ca/publications/benefit-cost-analysis-of-flood-
mitigation-projects-for-the-city-of-calgary-glenmore-reservoir> 
IBI Group (2015b). Benefit-cost analysis of flood mitigation 
projects for the City of Calgary: Springbank off-stream flood 
storage. Report prepared for the Government of Alberta by 
IBI Group, Calgary, Alberta, 10+ p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/ca7f0d55-e9bc-4efa-
8657-9f6014c85f45/resource/e80f53f7-7fd6-45f4-abd7-
4ad85d7fd07e/download/springbank-benefit-cost.pdf> 
IBI Group (2015c). Benefit-cost analysis of flood mitigation 
projects for the City of Calgary: McLean Creek flood 
storage. Report prepared for the Government of Alberta by 
IBI Group, Calgary, Alberta, 10+ p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/33e478fc-1c01-428c-
90c7-365e898d969d/resource/58cde7b5-3795-4c25-ba9b-
978ef4047ed7/download/mclean-creek-benefit-cost.pdf> 
ILO [International Labour Organization] (2019). Working on a 
warmer planet: the impact of heat stress on labour productivity 
and decent work. International Labour Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 103 pp. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://
www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/---
publ/documents/publication/wcms_711919.pdf> 
Insurance Bureau of Canada and Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (2020). Investing in Canada’s future: the cost 
of climate adaptation at the local level. Toronto and Ottawa, 
Ontario, 59 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://data.fcm.
ca/documents/reports/investing-in-canadas-future-the-cost-of-
climate-adaptation.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 439 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2015). The economic impacts 
of the weather effects of climate change on communities. 
Insurance Bureau of Canada, Toronto, Ontario, 201 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Studies/
IBC-The-Economic-Impacts.pdf> 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2018). 2018 facts of the property 
and casualty insurance industry in Canada. Insurance Bureau 
of Canada (IBC), Toronto, Ontario, 69 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_
Book/2018/IBC-Fact-Book-2018.pdf> 
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2019). Facts of the Property and 
Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada, 41st edition. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20
Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf> 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2001). 
Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, New York, USA, 1032 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/WGII_TAR_
full_report-2.pdf> 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2012). 
Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance 
climate change adaptation. A Special Report of Working Groups 
I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and 
New York, New York, USA, 582 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/SREX_Full_
Report-1.pdf> 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2013). 
Summary for policymakers, in Climate Change 2013: The 
Physical Science Basis (Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change), (Eds.) T. Stocker, T., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. 
Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and 
P.M. Midgley. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 3–29. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/
WG1AR5_SPM_FINAL.pdf> 
Jenkins, G. and Kuo, C.-Y. (2007). The economic opportunity cost 
of capital for Canada—an empirical update. Queen’s Economics 
Department Working Paper Number 1133. Department of 
Economics, Queen’s University, Kingston, Canada, 25 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.econ.queensu.ca/
sites/econ.queensu.ca/files/qed_wp_1133.pdf>
Jeuland, M. and Whittington, D. (2013). Water resources 
planning under climate change: assessing the robustness 
of real options for the Blue Nile. Water Resources 
Research, 50. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2013WR013705>  
Johansson-Stenman, O. (2005). Distributional weights in cost-
benefit analysis—should we forget about them? Land Economics, 
81(3), 337–352. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.jstor.
org/stable/4129689> 
Jones, C.I. and Klenow, P.J. (2016). Beyond GDP? Welfare across 
countries and time. American Economic Review, 106, 2426–
2457. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1257/
aer.20110236> 
Jones, R.N., Patwardhan, A., Cohen, S.J., Dessai, S., Lammel, 
A., Lempert, R.J., Mirza, M.M.Q. and von Storch, H. (2014). 
Foundations for decision making, in Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 
195–228. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/
site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap2_FINAL.pdf> 
Kahn, M.E. (2016). The Climate Change Adaptation Literature. 
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(1), 166–178. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/
rev023> 
Kahn, M.E., Mohaddes, K., Ng, R.N.C., Hashem Pesaran, M., 
Raissi, M. and Yang, J.-C. (2019). Long-term macroeconomic 
effects of climate change: a cross-country analysis. IMF 
working Paper (WP/19/215), International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), Washington, D.C., 58 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/Publications/WP/2019/
wpiea2019215-print-pdf.ashx> 
Kim, B. and Zauberman, G. (2009). Perception of anticipatory 
time in temporal discounting. Journal of Neuroscience, 
Psychology, and Economics, 2, 91–101. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017686> 
Kjellstrom, T., Holmer, I. and Lemke, B. (2009). Workplace heat 
stress, health and productivity – an increasing challenge for 
low and middle-income countries during climate change. Global 
Health Action, 2. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.3402/gha.v2i0.2047>
Kjellstrom, T., Lemke, B. and Otto, M. (2013). Mapping 
occupational heat exposure and effects in South-East Asia: 
Ongoing time trends 1980–2011 and future estimates to 2050. 
Industrial Health, 51(1), 56–67. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.2486/indhealth.2012-0174> 
Kjellstrom, T., Lemke, B., Matthias Otto, P., Hyatt, O.M., Briggs, 
D.J. and Freyberg, C.A. (2015). Heat impacts on work, human 
performance and daily life, in Climate Change and Public Health, 
(Eds.) B. Levy and J. Patz. Oxford University Press, New York, 
73–86. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/
med/9780190202453.003.0004> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 440 
Klein, R.J.T., Midgley, G.F., Preston, B.L., Alam, M., Berkhout, 
F.G.H., Dow, K. and Shaw, M.R. (2014). Adaptation opportunities, 
constraints and limits, in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral 
Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L.White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 
899–943. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/
site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap16_FINAL.pdf> 
Kompass, T., Pham, V. and Che, T. (2018). The effects of 
climate change on GDP by country and global economic 
gains from complying with the Paris Accord. Earth’s Future, 
6, 1153–1173. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2018EF000922> 
Kousky, C. (2012). Informing climate adaptation: a review of the 
economic costs of natural disasters, their determinants, and 
risk reduction options. RFF DP 12-28. Resources for the Future, 
Washington, D.C., 62 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://
dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2099769> 
Kousky, C. (2014). Managing shoreline retreat: a US perspective. 
Climatic Change, 124, 9–20. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-1106-3> 
Kovats, S., Lloyd, S., Hunt, A. and Watkiss, P. (2011). Technical 
Policy Briefing Note 5: The Impacts and Economic Costs on 
Health in Europe and the Costs and Benefits of Adaptation. 
Results of the EC RTD ClimateCost Project, in The ClimateCost 
Project, Final Report, Volume 1: Europe, (Ed.) P. Watkiss. 
Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.sei.org/mediamanager/
documents/Publications/sei-climatecost-health.pdf> 
Lafakis, C., Ratz, L., Fazio, E. and Cosma, M. (2019). The 
economic implications of climate change. Moody’s Analytics, 
London, United Kingdom. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
ma.moodys.com/rs/961-KCJ-308/images/2019-08-08-Climate-
Change.pdf> 
Lantz, V., Trenholm, R., Wilson, J. and Richards, W. (2012). 
Assessing market and non-market costs of freshwater flooding 
due to climate change in the community of Fredericton, Eastern 
Canada. Climatic Change, 110(1–2), 347–372. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0063-3> 
Larrivée, C., Desjarlais, C., Roy, R. and Audet, N. (2016). 
Regional economic study on the potential impacts of climate-
change-induced low water levels on the Saint-Laurent River 
and adaptation options: Synthesis of the findings from six 
sector-specific studies. Report submitted to Natural Resources 
Canada’s Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division and 
the Government of Quebec, Ouranos, Montréal. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/
ACA-GLSL_synthesis_english_final.pdf>
Larrivée, C., Sinclair-Désgagné, N., Da Silva, L., Revéret, J.P. and 
Desjarlais, C. (2015). Évaluation des impacts des changements 
climatiques et de leurs coûts pour le Québec et l’État québécois. 
Report by Ouranos, Montréal. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/2016/03/
RapportLarrivee2015_FR-1.pdf> 
Lecocq, F. and Shalizi, Z. (2007). Balancing expenditures on 
mitigation of adaptation to climate change: an exploration 
of issues relevant to developing countries. Policy Research 
Working Paper Series 4299. The World Bank, Washington, 
D.C. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/7487/wps4299.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y> 
Lempert, R.J. (2014). Embedding (some) benefit-cost concepts 
into decision support processes with deep uncertainty. Journal 
of Benefit-Cost Analysis, 5(3), 487–514. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1515/jbca-2014-9006> 
Lempert, R.J., Kalra, N., Peyraud, S., Mao, Z. and Tan, 
S.B. (2013). Ensuring robust flood risk management 
in Ho Chi Minh City. Policy Research Working Paper 
6465. The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 63 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.net/
profile/Dean_Cira/publication/255698092_Ensuring_
Robust_Flood_Risk_Management_in_Ho_Chi_Minh_City/
links/54e3223e0cf2d90c1d9bff24/Ensuring-Robust-Flood-Risk-
Management-in-Ho-Chi-Minh-City.pdf> 
Lempert, R., Arnold, J., Pulwarty, R., Gordon, K., Greig, K., 
Hawkins Hoffman, C., Sands, D. and Werrell, C. (2018). 
Reducing Risks Through Adaptation Actions, in Impacts, Risks, 
and Adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate 
Assessment, Volume II, (Eds.) D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. 
Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock and B.C. 
Stewart. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., USA, 1309–1345. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
nca2018.globalchange.gov/downloads/NCA4_Ch28_Adaptation_
Full.pdf> 
Li, J., Mullan, M. and Helgeson, J. (2014). Improving the practice 
of economic analysis of climate change adaptation. Journal of 
Benefit-Cost Analysis, 5(3), 445–467. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1515/jbca-2014-9004> 
Markandya, A. (2019). Natural Capital and the Rate of Discount, 
in Mainstreaming Natural Capital and Ecosystem Services 
into Development Policy, (Ed.) P. Kumar. Routledge Taylor and 
Francis, London, United Kingdom.
Markandya, A., Galarraga, I. and Sainz de Murieta, S. (Eds.) 
(2014). Routledge Handbook of the Economics of Climate 
Change Adaptation. Routledge International Handbooks, 
Abingdon, United Kingdom, 464 p.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 441 
Martinich, J., DeAngelo, B.J., Diaz, D., Ekwurzel, B., Franco, G., 
Frisch, C., McFarland, J. and O’Neill, B. (2018). Reducing risks 
through emissions mitigation, in Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation 
in the United States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, 
Volume II, (Eds.) D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. Easterling, K.E. 
Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock and B.C. Stewart. U.S. Global 
Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., USA, 1346–1386. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://nca2018.globalchange.
gov/downloads/NCA4_Ch29_Mitigation_Full.pdf> 
Mendelsohn, R. (2012). The economics of adaptation to climate 
change in developing countries. Climate Change Economics, 
3(2). Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1142/
S2010007812500066> 
Metroeconomica (2004). Costing the impacts of climate change 
in the UK: Implementation report. Guidelines prepared for the 
United Kingdom Climate Impacts Program. Oxford, United 
Kingdom, 373 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.
ukcip.org.uk/wp-content/PDFs/Costings_Implementation.pdf> 
Meyer, V., Gebhardt, O. and Alves, F.A. (Eds.) (2015). Economic 
evaluation of adaptation options. Bottom-up Climate Adaptation 
Strategies Towards a Sustainable Europe (BASE Project). 
Ecologic Institute, Berlin, Germany, 547 p. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://base-adaptation.eu/sites/default/files/
Deliverable_5_2_FINAL.pdf> 
Miller, S., Muir-Wood, R. and Boissonade, A. (2008). An 
exploration of trends in normalized weather-related catastrophe 
losses, in Climate Extremes and Society, (Eds.) H.F. Diaz 
and R.J. Murnane. Cambridge University Press, New York, 
383 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1017/
CBO9780511535840.015> 
Millerd, F. (2005). The economic impact of climate change on 
Canadian commercial navigation on the Great Lake. Canadian 
Water Resources Journal, 30(4), 269–280. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.4296/cwrj3004269> 
Moser, S.C. and Ekstrom, J.A. (2010). A framework to diagnose 
barriers to climate change adaptation. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
(PNAS), 107(51), 22026–22031. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1007887107> 
Moss, R., Scarlett, P.L., Kenney, M.A., Kunreuther, H., Lempert, 
R., Manning, J., Williams, B.K., Boyd, J.W., Cloyd, E.T., Kaatz, L. 
and Patton, L. (2014). Decision support: Connecting science, 
risk perception, and decisions, Chapter 26 in Climate Change 
Impacts in the United States: The Third National Climate 
Assessment, (Eds.) J.M. Melillo, T.C. Richmond and G.W. Yohe. 
U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, D.C., 620–
647. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://data.globalchange.
gov/file/3b8af927-bb15-4eac-8107-860e65e6fc6c> 
Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H. and Osman, H. (2018). 
Combating Canada’s rising flood costs: natural infrastructure is 
an underutilized option. Report prepared for Insurance Bureau 
of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University 
of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 66 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Resources/IBC-Natural-
Infrastructure-Report-2018.pdf> 
Munich RE (2018). TOPICS Geo natural catastrophes 2017: 
a stormy year. Munich RE, Munich, Germany, 64 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.munichre.com/content/
dam/munichre/global/content-pieces/documents/TOPICS_
GEO_2017-en.pdf/_jcr_content/renditions/original.media_file.
download_attachment.file/TOPICS_GEO_2017-en.pdf> 
Munich RE (2020). NatCatSERVICE. Munich Re. Retrieved May 
2020, from <https://www.munichre.com/en/solutions/for-
industry-clients/natcatservice.html> 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 
(2016). Attribution of extreme weather events in the context of 
climate change. The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 186 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.17226/21852> 
National Centers for Environmental Information (2020). NOAA 
National Centers for Environmental Information, U.S. Billion-
Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters. Retrieved May 2020, from 
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/billions/> 
Neumayer, E. and Barthel, F. (2011). Normalizing economic loss 
from natural disasters: a global analysis. Global Environmental 
Change, 21(1), 13–24. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.10.004> 
Newell, R.G. and Pizer, W.A. (2003). Discounting the distant 
future: How much do uncertain rates increase valuations? 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 46, 
52–71. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0095-0696(02)00031-1> 
Newell, R.G., Prest, B.C. and Sexton, S.E. (2018). The GDP-
temperature relationship: implications for climate change 
damages. Resources for the Future Working Paper 18–17, 
Washington, D.C., 61 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
www.rff.org/documents/2655/RFF_WP-18-17_rev_10-20.pdf> 
Nordhaus W.D. (2007). A review of the “Stern Review on the 
Economics of Climate Change.” Journal of Economic Literature, 
45, 686–702. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1257/jel.45.3.686> 
Nordhaus, W.D. and Boyer, J. (2000). Warming the world: 
economic modeling of global warming. Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 258 p.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 442 
National Research Council (2009). Informing Decisions in 
a Changing Climate. Panel on Strategies and Methods for 
Climate-Related Decision Support, Committee on the Human 
Dimensions of Global Change. Division of Behavioral and 
Social Sciences and Education, The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 188 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.17226/12626> 
National Research Council (2010). Informing an Effective 
Response to Climate Change. The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 346 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.17226/12784> 
NRTEE [National Round Table on the Environment and the 
Economy] (2011). Paying the price: the economic impacts 
of climate change for Canada. Ottawa, Ontario, 162 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <http://nrt-trn.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2011/09/paying-the-price.pdf> 
Office of the Auditor General of Canada (2016). Mitigating 
the impacts of severe weather events. Spring 2016 Reports 
of the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable 
Development, Report 2, Ottawa, Ontario, 24 p. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/docs/parl_
cesd_201605_02_e.pdf> 
Ochuodho, T.O. and Lantz, V.A. (2015). Economic impact of 
climate change on agricultural crops in Canada by 2051: a global 
multi-regional CGE model analysis. Environmental Economics, 
6(1), 113–125. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.
businessperspectives.org/index.php/component/zoo/economic-
impacts-of-climate-change-on-agricultural-crops-in-canada-by-
2051-a-global-multi-regional-cge-model-analysis> 
Ochuodho, T.O., Lantz, V.A., Lloyd-Smith, P. and Benitez, P. 
(2012). Regional economic impacts of climate change and 
adaptation in Canadian forests: a CGE modeling analysis. Forest 
Policy and Economics, 25, 100–112. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2012.08.007> 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(2015). The Economic Consequences of Climate Change. OECD 
Publishing, Paris, 140 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
dx.doi.org/10.1787/9789264235410-en>
Paci, D. (Ed.) (2014). Human Health Impacts of Climate Change 
in Europe. Report for the PESETA II Project, JRC Technical 
Reports, Seville, Spain, 28 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.2791/64481> 
Parliamentary Budget Officer (2016). Estimate of the average 
annual cost of Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements 
due to extreme weather. Office of the Parliamentary Budget 
Officer, Ottawa, Ontario, 46 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/
Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf>
Parnham, H., Arnold, S. and Fenech, A. (Eds.) (2016). Using 
cost–benefit analysis to evaluate climate change adaptation 
options in Atlantic Canada. Report submitted to Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources 
Canada, Ottawa, 90 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
atlanticadaptation.ca/en/islandora/object/acasa%253A779> 
Patt, A. G., van Vuuren, D. P., Berkhout, F., Aaheim, S., Hof, A. 
F., Isaac, M. and Mechler, R. (2010). Adaptation in integrated 
assessment modeling: where do we stand? Climatic Change, 99, 
383–402. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-009-9687-y> 
Penning-Rowsell, E.C., Haigh, N., Lavery., S. and McFadden. 
L. (2013). A threatened world city: the benefits of protecting 
London from the sea. Natural Hazards, 66, 1383–1404. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-0075-3> 
Perrin, A., Dion, J., Eng, S., Sawyer, D., Nodelman, J. R., Comer, N., 
Auld, H., Sparling, E., Harris, M., Nodelman, J.Y.H. and Kinnear, 
L. (2015). Economic implications of climate change adaptations 
for mine access roads in Northern Canada. Northern Climate 
ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, 93 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.yukonu.ca/sites/
default/files/inline-files/Economic_Implications_TCWR_FINAL_
web3.pdf> 
Pielke, R.A. Sr, Wilby, R., Niyogi, D., Hossain, F., Dairuku, K., 
Adegoke, J., Kallos, G., Seastedt, T. and Suding, K. (2012). 
Dealing with complexity and extreme events using a bottom-
up, resource-based vulnerability perspective, in Extreme events 
and natural hazards: the complexity perspective. Geophysical 
Monograph Series 196, 345–359. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://pielkeclimatesci.files.wordpress.com/2012/10/r-3651.
pdf> 
Pielke, R.A., Jr. (2007). Mistreatment of the economic impacts 
of extreme events in the Stern Review Report on the Economics 
of Climate Change. Global Environmental Change, 17, 302–310. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2007.05.004> 
Pielke, R.A., Jr., Gratz, J., Landsea, C.W., Collins, D., Saunders, 
M.A. and Musulin, R. (2008). Normalized hurricane damages 
in the United States: 1900–2005. Natural Hazards Review, 9(1), 
29-42. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)1527-6988(2008)9:1(29)>  
Pielke, R.A., Jr., Rubiera, J., Landsea, C., Fernández, M.L. and 
Klein, R. (2003). Hurricane vulnerability in Latin America and the 
Caribbean: normalized damages and loss potentials. Natural 
Hazards Review, 4(3), 101–114. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)1527-6988(2003)4:3(101)> 
Porter, J., Dessai, S. and Tompkins, E. (2014). What do we know 
about UK household adaptation to climate change? A systematic 
review. Climatic Change, 127, 371–379. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-1252-7> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 443 
Productivity Commission (2012). Barriers to effective climate 
change adaptation, Report No. 59, Final Inquiry Report. 
Productivity Commission, Canberra, Australia, 385 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.pc.gov.au/inquiries/completed/
climate-change-adaptation/report/climate-change-adaptation.pdf>
PROVIA (2013). PROVIA guidance on assessing vulnerability, 
impacts and adaptation to climate change. Consultation 
document. United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 
Nairobi, Kenya, 198 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
www.adaptation-undp.org/sites/default/files/downloads/provia-
guidance-nov2013.pdf> 
Public Safety Canada (2020). Canadian Disaster Database 
(CDD). Retrieved May 2020, from <https://www.publicsafety.
gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/cndn-dsstr-dtbs/index-en.aspx> 
Randall, A., Capon, T., Sanderson, T., Merrett, D. and Hertzler, 
G. (2012). Choosing a decision-making framework to 
manage uncertainty in climate adaptation decision-making: A 
practitioner’s handbook. National Climate Change Adaptation 
Research Facility, Gold Coast, Australia, 25 p. Retrieved May 
2020, from <https://www.nccarf.edu.au/sites/default/files/
attached_files_publications/Randall_2012_Practitioner_
handbook.pdf> 
Ranger, N., Millner, A., Dietz, S., Fankhauser, S., Lopez, A. and 
Ruta, G. (2010). Adaptation in the UK: a decision-making 
process. Policy Brief. Grantham Research Institute on Climate 
Change and the Environment, London School of Economics 
and Political Science, London, United Kingdom, 61 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/
publication/adaptation-in-the-uk-a-decision-making-process/> 
Ranger, N., Reeder, T. and Lowe, J. (2013). Addressing ‘deep’ 
uncertainty over long-term climate in major infrastructure 
projects: four innovations of the Thames Estuary 2100 Project. 
EURO Journal of Decision Process, 1, 233–262. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40070-013-0014-5> 
Ratti, M. (2017). The economics of natural disasters: an 
overview of the current research issues and methods. CERE 
Working Paper 2017:3, Centre for Environmental and Resource 
Economics, Umeå University. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2957459> 
Reeder, T. and Ranger, N. (2011). How do you adapt in an 
uncertain world? Lessons from the Thames Estuary 2100 
project. World Resources Report, Uncertainty Series. World 
Resources Institute, Washington, D.C., 16 p. Retrieved December 
2020, from <https://wriorg.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/
uploads/wrr_reeder_and_ranger_uncertainty.pdf>
Reinsborough, M.J. (2003). A Ricardian model of climate change 
in Canada. Canadian Journal of Economics, 36(1), 21–40. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-
5982.00002> 
Revesz, R.L., Howard, P.H., Arrow, K., Goulder, L.H., Kopp, R.E., 
Livermore, M.A., Oppenheimer, M. and Sterner, T. (2014). Global 
warming: Improve economic models of climate change. Nature, 
508, 173–175. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.
nature.com/news/global-warming-improve-economic-models-of-
climate-change-1.14991> 
Rhodium Group (2014). American climate prospectus: economic 
risks in the United States. Rhodium Group, New York, New York, 
201 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://rhg.com/research/
american-climate-prospectus-economic-risks-in-the-united-
states/> 
Rodgers, C. and Douglas, A. (2015). Cost benefit analysis of 
climate change impacts and adaptation measures for Canadian 
mines: final report. Report submitted to the Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada, 
Ottawa, 36 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://www.
climateontario.ca/doc/p_ECCC/1-AP261-FinalReport-FINAL.
PDF> 
Rose, A., Porter, K., Dash, N., Bouabid, J., Huyck, C., Whitehead, 
J., Shaw, D., Eguchi, R., Taylor, C., McLane, T., Thomas Tobin, L., 
Ganderton, P.T., Godschalk, D., Kiremidjian, A.S., Tierney, K. and 
West, C. (2007). Benefit-cost analysis of FEMA hazard mitigation 
grants. Natural Hazards Review, 8(4), 97–111. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)1527-
6988(2007)8:4(97)> 
Roson, R. and Sartori, M. (2016). Estimation of climate change 
damage functions for 140 regions in the GTAP9 database. Policy 
Research Working Paper 7728, World Bank Group, Washington, 
D.C., 40 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/handle/10986/24643>  
Rosenzweig, C. and Solecki, W. (2014). Hurricane Sandy 
and adaptation pathways in New York: lessons from a first-
responder city. Global Environmental Change, 28, 395–408. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2014.05.003> 
Rouillard, J., Tröltzsch, J., Tarpey, J., Lago, M., Watkiss, P., Hunt, 
A. Bosello, F., Ermolieva, T., Goodess, C., Mechler, R., Parrado, R., 
Sainz de Murieta, E. and Scussolini, P. (2016a). The economic 
analysis of climate adaptation: insights for policy-makers. 
ECONADAPT project, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom, 
45 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://econadapt.eu/sites/
default/files/docs/Deliverable%2010-3.pdf> 
Rouillard, J., Tröltzsch, J., Lago, M., Markandya, A., Sainz de 
Murieta, E. and Galarraga, I. (2016b). Distributional objectives 
and monetary metrics. ECONADAPT project, University of 
Bath, Bath, United Kingdom, 60 p. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.ecologic.eu/14384> 
Schipper, L. and Pelling, M. (2006). Disaster risk, climate change 
and international development: Scope for, and challenges to, 
integration. Disasters, 30, 19–38. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9523.2006.00304.x> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 444 
Schmidt, S., Kemfert, C. and Hoppe, P. (2009). Tropical cyclone 
losses in the USA and the impact of climate change—a trend 
analysis based on data from a new approach to adjusting storm 
losses. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 29, 359–369. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
eiar.2009.03.003> 
Scussolini, P., Kuik, O., Veldkamp, T., Hudson, P., Sainz de 
Murieta, E., Galarraga, I., Kaprová, K., Melichar, J., Lago, M., 
Rouillard, J., Troeltzsch, J., Hunt, A., Skourtos, M., Goodess, 
C. and Christensen, O. (2015). The economic appraisal 
of adaptation investments under uncertainties: policy 
recommendations, lessons learnt and guidance. ECONADAPT 
project, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom, 37 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://econadapt.eu/sites/default/files/
docs/Deliverable%206-4%20approved%20for%20publishing.pdf> 
Settle, C. and Shogren, J. (2004). Hyperbolic discounting and 
time inconsistency in a native exotic species conflict. Resource 
and Energy Economics, 26, 255–274. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.reseneeco.2003.11.010> 
Smith, A.B. and Katz, R. (2013). U.S. billion-dollar weather and 
climate disasters: data sources, trends, accuracy and biases. 
Natural Hazards, 67, 387–410. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-013-0566-5> 
Sozou, P. (1998). On hyperbolic discounting and uncertain 
hazard rates. Proceedings of the Royal Society, 265(1409), 2015-
2020. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1098/
rspb.1998.0534> 
Squire, L. and van der Tak, H. (1975). Economic analysis of 
projects. Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 153 p.
Stern N. (2008). The economics of climate change. The 
American Economic Review, 98, 1–37. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.98.2.1> 
Stern, N. (2006). The economics of climate change: Stern 
review. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 
662 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://webarchive.
nationalarchives.gov.uk/20100407172811/http://www.hm-
treasury.gov.uk/stern_review_report.htm> 
Stern, N. (2013). The structure of economic modeling of 
the potential impacts of climate change: grafting gross 
underestimation of risk onto already narrow science models. 
Journal of Economic Literature, 51(3), 838–859. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1257/jel.51.3.838> 
Sussman, F., Krishnan, N., Maher, K., Miller, R., Mack, C., Stewart, 
P., Shouse, K. and Perkins, B. (2014). Climate change adaptation 
cost in the US: What do we know? Climate Policy, 14(2), 242–
282. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/1469
3062.2013.777604> 
Swart, R.J. and Singh, T. (2013). Mediation and the adaptation 
challenge: identifying appropriate methods and tools to 
support climate change adaptation decision making. Alterra, 
Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, the 
Netherlands, 32 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://www.rec.
org/publication.php?id=392> 
Swiss Re Institute (2018). Sigma, natural catastrophes and 
man-made disasters in 2017: a year of record-breaking losses. 
Sigma No. 1/2018. Swiss Re Institute, Zurich, Switzerland, 
53 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.swissre.
com/institute/research/sigma-research/sigma-2018-01.
html#:~:text=sigma%20research-,sigma%201%2F2018%3A%20
Natural%20catastrophes%20and%20man%2Dmade%20
disasters,recorded%20in%20a%20single%20year>
Swiss Re Institute (2019a). Sigma, natural catastrophes and 
man-made disasters in 2018: secondary perils on the frontline. 
Sigma No. 2/2019. Swiss Re Institute, Zurich, Switzerland, 30 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.swissre.com/dam/
jcr:c37eb0e4-c0b9-4a9f-9954-3d0bb4339bfd/sigma2_2019_
en.pdf> 
Swiss Re Institute (2019b). Sigma, world insurance: the great 
pivot east continues. Sigma No. 3/2019. Swiss Re Institute, 
Zurich, Switzerland, 45 p.
Swiss Re Institute (2020). Natural catastrophes in times of 
economic accumulation and climate change. Swiss Re Sigma 
No. 2/2020. Swiss Re Institute, Zurich, Switzerland, 31 p. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.swissre.com/
institute/research/sigma-research/sigma-2020-02.html> 
TBS [Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat] (2018). Policy on 
Cost-Benefit Analysis. Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat, 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved April 2021, from <https://www.canada.
ca/en/government/system/laws/developing-improving-federal-
regulations/requirements-developing-managing-reviewing-
regulations/guidelines-tools/policy-cost-benefit-analysis.html>
TBS [Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat] (2007). Canadian 
Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide. September 2018 revision. Treasury 
Board of Canada Secretariat, Ottawa, ON, 47 p. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/rtrap-parfa/analys/
analys-eng.pdf> 
Thistlethwaite, J., Minano, A., Blake, J.A., Henstra, D. and Scott, 
D. (2018). Application of re/insurance models to estimate 
increases in flood risk due to climate change. Geoenvironmental 
Disasters, 8(8). Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s40677-018-0101-9> 
Tröltzsch, J., Rouillard, J., Tarpey, J., Lago, M., Watkiss, P. and 
Hunt, A. (2016). The economics of climate change adaptation: 
insights into economic assessment methods. ECONADAPT 
project, University of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom, 42 p. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://econadapt.eu/sites/default/files/
docs/Deliverable%2010-2.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 445 
United Nations Environment Programme (2011). A practical 
framework for developing pro-climate development policy. 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, 
Kenya, 142 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.
unenvironment.org/resources/report/practical-framework-
planning-pro-development-climate-policy> 
UNFCCC [United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change] (2007). Investment and financial flows to address 
climate change. UNFCCC, Climate Change Secretariat, Bonn, 
Germany, 262 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://unfccc.
int/resource/docs/publications/financial_flows.pdf> 
Urge-Vorsatz, D., Tirado-Herrero, S. and Dubash, N. (2014). 
Measuring the co-benefits of climate change mitigation. Annual 
Review of Environment and Resources, 39(1), 549–582. Retrieved 
December 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
environ-031312-125456> 
USAID (2013). Methods for economic analysis of climate 
change adaptation interventions. Washington, D.C., 
60 p. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.
climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/document/
Methods%2520of%2520Economic%2520Analysis_CLEARED.pdf>   
US Environmental Protection Agency (2007). Guide to resource 
planning with energy efficiency. A resource of the national 
action plan for energy efficiency, US Environmental Protection 
Agency, Washington, D.C., 81 p. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-08/
documents/resource_planning.pdf> 
US Environmental Protection Agency (2015). Climate change in 
the United States: benefits of global action. US Environmental 
Protection Agency, Office of Atmospheric Programs, EPA 430-R-
15-001. Washington, D.C. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
www.epa.gov/cira/downloads-cira-report> 
US Environmental Protection Agency (2017). Multi-model 
Framework for Quantitative Sectoral Impacts Analysis: A 
Technical Report for the Fourth National Climate Assessment. 
EPA 430-R-17-001. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
Washington, D.C., 271 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_file_download.cfm?p_download_
id=537327&Lab=OAP> 
U.S. Global Change Research Program (2018). Impacts, risks, 
and adaptation in the United States: Fourth National Climate 
Assessment, Volume II, (Eds.) D.R. Reidmiller, C.W. Avery, D.R. 
Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. 
Stewart. U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington, 
D.C., 1515 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://doi.
org/10.7930/NCA4.2018> 
Van der Geest, K. and Warner, K. (2015). Editorial: loss 
and damage from climate change: emerging perspectives. 
International Journal of Global Warming, 8(2), 133–140. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.
net/profile/Kees-Van-Der-Geest/publication/282322818_
Editorial_Loss_and_damage_from_climate_change_Emerging_
perspectives/links/560bac8108ae7fa7b886e9ea/Editorial-Loss-
and-damage-from-climate-change-Emerging-perspectives.pdf>  
van der Pol, T.D., van Ierland, E. and Weikard, H.-P. (2013). 
Optimal dike investments under uncertainty and learning about 
increasing water levels. Journal of Flood Risk Management, 
7(4), 308–318. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/jfr3.12063> 
Vanos, J., Vecellio, D.J. and Kjellstrom, T. (2019). Workplace 
heat exposure, health protection, and economic impacts: a 
case study in Canada. American Journal of Industrial Medicine, 
62(12), 1024–1037. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/ajim.22966> 
Vivid Economics (2013). The macroeconomics of climate 
change. Report prepared for the UK Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, London, United 
Kingdom. 95 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <http://
randd.defra.gov.uk/Document.aspx?Document=11138_
TheMacroeconomicsofClimateChangeFinalReportMay2013.pdf> 
Wallimann-Helmer, I., Meyer L., Mintz-Woo K., Schinko T. and 
Serdeczny O. (2019). The ethical challenges in the context of 
climate loss and damage, in Loss and damage from climate 
change, (Eds.) R. Mechler, L. Bouwer, T. Schinko, S. Surminski, 
J. Linnerooth-Bayer. Climate Risk Management, Policy and 
Governance, Springer Open, Cham, Switzerland, 39–62. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
319-72026-5_2> 
Walker, W.E., Haasnoot, M. and Kwakkel, J. H. (2013). Adapt or 
perish: a review of planning approaches for adaptation under 
deep uncertainty. Sustainability, 5, 955–979. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/su5030955> 
Wang, W. and McCarl, B. (2011). Temporal investment in climate 
change adaptation and mitigation. Climate Change Economics, 
4(2). Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1142/
S2010007813500097> 
Warren, R., Andrews, O., Brown, S., Forstenhaeusler, N., Gernaat, 
D., Goodwin, P., Harris, I., He, H., Hope, C., Gonzalex-Colon, F., 
Nicholls, R., Osborn, T., Price, J., Van Vuuren, D. and Wright, R. 
(2018). Risks associated with global warming of 1.5°C or 2°C. 
Briefing Note, Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, 
University of East Anglia. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/publications/briefing_
note_risks_warren_r1-1.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 446 
Watkiss, P. (2015). A review of the economics of adaptation 
and climate-resilient development. Grantham Research Institute 
on Climate Change and the Environment Working Paper No. 
205. Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the 
Environment, London School of Economics, London, United 
Kingdom, 41 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.lse.
ac.uk/granthaminstitute/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Working-
Paper-205-Watkiss.pdf> 
Watkiss, P., Hunt, A., Blyth, W. and Dyszynski, J. (2015a). The 
use of new economic decision support tools for adaptation 
assessment: a review of methods and applications, towards 
guidance on applicability. Climatic Change, 132(3), 401–416. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
014-1250-9> 
Watkiss, P. and Hunt, A. (2013). Method overview: decision 
support methods for adaptation. Briefing Note 1. Summary of 
methods and case study examples from the MEDIATION Project. 
Alterra, Wageningen University and Research, Wageningen, the 
Netherlands. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.sei.
org/mediamanager/documents/Publications/sei-mediation-
briefing1-method-overview.pdf> 
Watkiss, P., Hunt, A. and Savage, M. (2014). Early value for 
money adaptation toolkit: delivering value-for-money adaptation 
with iterative frameworks and low-regret options. UK Department 
for International Development (DFID), London, United Kingdom, 
118 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/media/57a089a9ed915d622c00033b/Early_VfM_
Adaptation_Final_Report.pdf> 
Weaver, C.P., Lempert, R.J., Brown, C., Hall, J.A., Revell, D. and 
Sarewitz, D. (2013). Improving the contribution of climate model 
information to decision making: The value and demands of 
robust decision frameworks. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: 
Climate Change, 4(1), 39–60. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.202> 
Weber, M. and Hauer, G. (2003) A regional analysis of climate 
change impacts on Canadian agriculture. Canadian Public Policy, 
29(2), 163–180. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.2307/3552453> 
Weiland, S. and Tröltzsch, J. (Eds.) (2015). BASE evaluation 
criteria for climate adaptation. Bottom-up Climate Adaptation 
Strategies Towards a Sustainable Europe (BASE Project). 
Ecologic Institute, Berlin, Germany, 134 p. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://base-adaptation.eu/sites/default/files/
BASE_Policy_3_June_2015_0.pdf> 
Weitzman M.L. (2007). A review of the Stern Review on the 
Economics of Climate Change. Journal of Economic Literature, 
45, 703–724. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.
aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jel.45.3.703> 
Weitzman, M.L. (2001). Gamma discounting. American Economic 
Review, 91(1), 261–271. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1257/aer.91.1.260> 
Wilby, R. and Dessai, S. (2010). Robust adaptation to climate 
change. Weather, 65, 180–185. Retrieved December 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/wea.543> 
Wilby, R. (2012). Frameworks for delivering regular assessments 
of the risks and opportunities from climate change. An 
independent review of the first UK Climate Change Risk 
Assessment. Final report to the Committee on Climate Change, 
London, United Kingdom.
Wilson, J., Trenholm, R., Bornemann, J. and Lieske, D. (2012). 
Forecasting economic damages from storm surge flooding: a 
case study in the Tantramar Region of New Brunswick. Report 
prepared for the Atlantic Climate Solutions Association (ACASA) 
by Green Analytics and the Department of Geography and 
Environment. Mount Allison University, Sackville, New Brunswick, 
59 p. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://atlanticadaptation.
ca/en/islandora/object/acasa%253A722> 
Wise, R.M., Fazey, I., Stafford Smith, M., Park, S.E., Eakin, 
H.C., Archer Van Garderen, E.R.M. and Campbell, B. (2014). 
Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as part of 
pathways of change and response. Global Environmental 
Change, 28, 325–336. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.002> 
Withey, P., Lantz, V. and Ochuodho, T. (2016). Economic costs 
and impacts of climate-induced sea-level rise and storm 
surge in Canadian coastal provinces: a CGE approach. Applied 
Economics, 48(1), 59–71. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1080/00036846.2015.1073843> 
Withey, P., Ochuodho, T. and Lantz, V. (2015). The economic 
impact of the mountain pine beetle infestation in British 
Columbia: Provincial estimates from a CGE analysis. Forestry, 
89(1), 100–105. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1093/forestry/cpv042> 
Woodward, M., Gouldby, B., Kapelan, Z., Khu, S-T. and Townend, 
I. (2011). Incorporating real options into flood risk management 
decision-making. HR Wallingford, Wallingford, United Kingdom. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.researchgate.net/
profile/Ian_Townend/publication/279476752_Incorporating_
real_options_into_flood_risk_management_decision_making/
links/55cb0f9508aeb975674a62f9/Incorporating-real-options-
into-flood-risk-management-decision-making.pdf> 
Zhai, F., Lin, T. and Byambadorj, E. (2009). A general equilibrium 
analysis of the impact of climate change on agriculture in 
the People’s Republic of China. Asian Development Review, 
26(1), 206–225. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.
researchgate.net/profile/Fan_Zhai3/publication/227488886_A_
General_Equilibrium_Analysis_of_the_Impact_of_Climate_
Change_on_Agriculture_in_the_People’s_Republic_of_China/
links/547706780cf2778985b0a0a1/A-General-Equilibrium-
Analysis-of-the-Impact-of-Climate-Change-on-Agriculture-in-the-
Peoples-Republic-of-China.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 447 
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. and Kharin, V.V. (2019). 
Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada, Chapter 4 in 
Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 112–193. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/energy/Climate-change/pdf/CCCR_
Chapter4-Temperature%20and%20Precipitation%20Across%20
Canada.pdf>
Zivin, J. and Neidell, M. (2014). Temperature and the allocation 
of time: Implications for climate change. Journal of Labor 
Economics, 32(1), 1–26. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1086/671766>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 448 
6.12 Appendices 
Appendix 6.1: Summary of select national and regional studies of the economic consequences 
of climate change for specific climate-sensitive sectors in Canada
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Forestry
NRTEE (2011)
(national and 
provincial/
territorial)
Mean annual temperature 
change for Canada by 2050 
under low (IPCC SRES B1; 
+3.4°C) and high (IPCC SRES 
A2; +3.6°C) climate change 
scenarios
GDP growth for Canada by 
2050 under slow-growth (+1.3% 
per annum) and rapid-growth 
(+3.0% pa) scenarios
Impacts on timber 
supply from forest fires, 
pests and diseases, 
and changes in forest 
productivity
Changes in projected GDP 
relative to “no climate 
change” baseline (using 
the CGE model)
Range of annual GDP losses 
in undiscounted 2008 $ 
(and % change in GDP) by 
2050 for Canada under a 
low climate change–slow 
growth scenario, and a 
high climate change–rapid 
growth scenario: 
$2.4‒17.4 billion (-0.12% to 
-0.33%) 
Present-value total GDP 
losses1 over 2010‒2080 at a 
3% discount rate: $25‒176 
billion
Range of annual GDP losses in undiscounted 2008 
$ (and % change in GDP) by 2050 for specific 
provinces and territories under a low climate 
change–slow growth scenario, and a high climate 
change–rapid growth scenario: 
•	
AB: $0.2‒1 billion (-0.06% to -0.14%)
•	
Atlantic Canada: $0.1‒0.5 billion (-0.07% 
to -0.21%)
•	
BC: $0.5‒3.1 billion (-0.18% to -0.44%)
•	
MB, SK, NU, NWT and YT: $0.5‒$3.3 billion 
(-0.33% to -0.85%)
•	
ON: $1.0‒7.4 billion (-0.11% to -0.31%)
•	
QC: $0.3‒2.1 billion (-0.08% to -0.23%)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 449 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Ochuodho et 
al. (2012)
(national and 
provincial/
territorial)
Low (IPCC SRES B1; +3.4°C) 
and high (IPCC SRES A2; 
+3.6°C) climate change 
scenarios (NRTEE, 2011)
GDP growth for Canada as per 
NRTEE (2011) through 2080: 
•	
slow-growth = +1.3% 
per annum 
•	
rapid-growth = +3.0% 
per annum
Pessimistic (worst-case) 
and optimistic (best-
case) impacts on timber 
supply from forest fires, 
pests and diseases, 
and changes in forest 
productivity
Changes (relative to “no 
climate change” baseline) 
in projected sector output 
values, GDP and welfare 
(compensating variation) 
using the CGE model
Range in present-value 
total losses for Canada 
for the period 2010‒2080 
under the optimistic low 
climate change–slow 
growth scenario, and the 
pessimistic high climate 
change–rapid growth 
scenario (in 2008 $ at a 3% 
discount rate): 
•	
Sector output: 
$6‒707 billion
•	
GDP: $4‒459 billion 
•	
Welfare: $3‒296 billion 
Range in present-value total losses for specific 
provinces and territories for the period 2010‒2080 
under the optimistic low climate change–slow 
growth scenario, and the pessimistic high climate 
change–rapid growth scenario (in 2008 $ at a 3% 
discount rate):
•	
AB: $1‒21 billion
•	
Atlantic Canada: >$1‒15 billion
•	
BC: $3‒66 billion
•	
ON: -$1‒+$209 billion
•	
QC: -$3 billion‒+$76 billion
•	
Rest of Canada: $4‒72 billion
In some of the above cases, productivity gains 
offset losses from fires and pests.
Hope et al. 
(2015)2
(national and 
provincial/
territorial, 
excluding 
the Atlantic 
Provinces, 
Nunavut and 
national parks)
Change in the 4-month sum 
(May‒August) of the Climate 
Moisture Index (CMI) projected 
by four general circulation 
models (GCMs) under RCP2.6 
and RCP8.5, relative to the 
1961‒1990 climate normal
Static socioeconomic scenario 
(i.e., suppression costs are 
constant in real terms)
Changes in the area 
burned as a function of 
projected changes in the 
CMI
Changes in fixed and 
variable fire suppression 
costs (relative to costs 
incurred in 1980‒2009) 
as a function of projected 
changes in the area 
burned
Total average annual fire 
suppression costs3 (in 2009 
$) by the 2080s, relative to 
the period 1980‒2009:
•	
Under RCP2.6: $625 
million (or +60%)
•	
Under RCP8.5: $640 
million (+119%) 
The two most affected provinces in terms of % 
change in fire suppression costs by the 2080s, 
relative to the period 1980‒2009: 
•	
Under RCP2.6: AB (+141%) and SK (+218%)
•	
Under RCP8.5: AB (+195%) and SK (+265%)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 450 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Corbett et al. 
(2015)
(British 
Columbia)
No emissions scenario 
per se, but a projection of 
Annual Allowable Cut in BC 
with mountain pine beetle 
infestations (32% decline over 
50 years)
Projected economic growth 
of 33% for BC over the period 
2009‒2054
Impact of mountain pine 
beetle infestations on 
timber supply in BC
Changes relative to 
baseline in projected 
welfare (compensating 
variation) and provincial 
macroeconomic 
indicators, using the CGE 
model
Not applicable
Present-value total losses for BC for the period 
2009‒2054 (in current $ at a 4% discount rate): 
•	
GDP: $57 billion (decline of 1.3% per annum)
•	
Welfare: $90 billion
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 451 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Agriculture
Weber and 
Hauer (2003)
(national and 
provincial)
Single model run of the CGCMII 
model (Canadian Centre 
for Climate Modelling and 
Analysis) covering the period 
1950‒2070 (note: specific 
changes in temperature and 
precipitation were not provided)
Ricardian model of agricultural 
land values estimated for the 
period 1995‒1996 (baseline is 
static)
Impacts of monthly 
and quarterly projected 
temperature and 
precipitation anomalies 
(30-year average over 
2021‒2051) on static 
1995‒1996 agricultural 
land values and farmland 
returns using a Ricardian 
model, with fixed prices 
Projected climate-induced 
gains in agricultural land 
values for Canada (average 
over entire country) in 1995 
$ per hectare: $1,485
Equivalent to 16% increase 
in 1995 national agricultural 
GDP of $32 billion (assuming 
returns are annualized at a 
+4.7% discount rate)
Projected climate-induced gains in agricultural 
land values by province in 1995 $ per hectare (and 
% change in provincial agricultural GDP): 
•	
AB: $1,675 (+23%)
•	
BC: $1,145 (+7%)
•	
MB: $1,425 (+17%)
•	
ON: $2,215 (+5%)
•	
QC: $1,460 (+4%)
•	
NB: $1,225 (+6%)
•	
NL: $570 (+1%)
•	
NS: $775 (+5%)
•	
PEI: $800 (>0%) 
•	
SK: $1,555 (+38%)
Reinsborough 
(2003)
(national)
Assumed a mean annual 
temperature increase of 2.8°C 
uniformly across Canada and 
mean annual precipitation 
increases of 8% (relative to the 
1961‒1990 norm)
Ricardian model of farmland 
values estimated for the period 
1995‒1996 (baseline is static)
Impacts of uniform 
increase in temperature 
and precipitation (relative 
to the 1961‒1990 norm) 
on static 1995‒1996 
farmland values, using a 
Ricardian model with fixed 
prices
Projected climate-induced 
gains in farmland values 
for Canada (total for 
entire country) in 1995 $: 
+$0.9‒1.5 million
Negligible compared with the 
1995 national agricultural 
GDP of $32 billion
Not considered
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 452 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Ochuodho and 
Lantz (2015)
(national and 
provincial/
territorial)
Emissions scenario based on 
changes in crop yields and 
agricultural land values for the 
period 2006‒2051, derived 
from Weber and Hauer (2007) 
and Cline (2007)
Baseline scenario of projected 
economic growth (without 
climate change) over the period 
2006‒2051
Impacts of climate 
change on crop yields
Changes (under 
emissions scenario 
relative to baseline 
scenario) in projected 
welfare (compensating 
variation) and provincial/
territorial macroeconomic 
indicators estimated 
using multi-regional CGE 
model, including the USA 
and rest of the world
% change between the 
present value of total GDP 
for Canada over the period 
2006‒2051 and the baseline 
scenario, at a 4% discount 
rate: +1.7%
% change in present value of total provincial/
territorial GDP and welfare, respectively, over the 
period 2006‒2051: 
•	
AB: +2.5%, +1.9%
•	
BC: +6.3%, +5.6%
•	
MB: +1.3%, -0.1%
•	
NL: +2.5%, -0.1%
•	
NS: +1.4%, +1.2%
•	
NB: +1.5%, -0.4%
•	
ON: +1.0%, -0.65
•	
QC: +0.5%, +0.2%
•	
PEI: +0.8%, -1.1%
•	
SK: +0.5%, -0.5%
•	
NWT, NU and YT: +0.4%, -0.1%
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 453 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Zhai et al. 
(2009)
(national)
Emissions scenario based 
on changes in crop yields, 
with and without carbon 
fertilization effects, derived 
from Cline (2007) for the period 
2010‒2080
Baseline scenario of global 
average projected GDP growth 
of +3.1% (2010‒2050) and 
+2.5% (2050‒2080)
Impacts of climate 
change on paddy rice, 
wheat, other grain and 
other crop yields
Changes (under 
emissions scenario 
relative to baseline 
scenario) in projected 
GDP, welfare (equivalent 
variation) and agricultural 
sector output, estimated 
using CGE model of 
global economy
Impact of climate change 
on welfare and select 
macroeconomic indicators 
for Canada, in terms of % 
change between projected 
scenario in 2080 and 
baseline: 
•	
Welfare: +0.2%
•	
GDP: -0.2%
•	
Terms of trade: +0.8%
•	
Sector output (crops): 
+22.1%
•	
Sector output 
(livestock): -15.3%
•	
Sector output 
(processed foods): 
-1.6%
Not applicable
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 454 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Amiraslany 
(2010) 
(Prairie 
provinces)
Assumed mean annual 
temperature increases (relative 
to 1961‒1990 norm) over the 
Prairies of +1.05°C (2020), 
+2.19°C (2050) and +3.26°C 
(2080), and precipitation 
changes (in mm per day) of 
+0.016 (2020), +0.116 (2050) 
and +0.186 (2080)
Ricardian model of farmland 
values estimated from 1991, 
1996 and 2001 data (baseline 
is static)
Impacts of uniform 
increase in temperature 
and precipitation (relative 
to 1961‒1990 norm) on 
static farmland values, 
using a Ricardian model
The model also included 
impacts of projected 
changes in wheat and 
canola prices with climate 
change of +5% by 2020, 
+15% by 2050 and +25% 
by 2080
Not applicable
Average projected climate-induced change in 
farmland values across AB, MB and SK, including 
price and planted area change in 1996 $ per 
hectare (and % change): 
•	
2020: +$145 (+15%)
•	
2050: +$385 (+40%)
•	
2080: +$505 (+50%)
Decreases in land values are projected for areas 
of southeast Alberta in all future time periods
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 455 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Ayouqi and 
Vercammen 
(2014)
(Prairie 
provinces)
Projected temperature and 
precipitation changes based on 
the IPCC SRES A2 emissions 
scenario (from CGCM model 
only): 
•	
Mean annual temperature: 
+1.3°C (2020s), +2.6°C 
(2050s) and +4.1°C (2080s)
•	
Mean annual precipitation: 
+5% (2020s), +12% (2050s) 
and +17% (2080s)
Ricardian model of farmland 
values estimated from 1991, 
1996, 2001, 2006 and 2011 
data (baseline is static)
Impacts of uniform 
increase in temperature 
and precipitation (relative 
to 1971‒2000 norm) on 
static farmland values 
(using a Ricardian model)
The model also included 
impacts of projected 
changes in wheat, canola, 
alfalfa, barley and cattle 
prices with climate 
change: +5% by 2020, 
+15% by 2050 and +25% 
by 2080
Not applicable
Average projected climate-induced change in 
farmland values, including price and planted 
area change, across AB, MB and SK (in 2002 $), 
depending on Ricardian model specification used: 
•	
2020s: +$1.1–1.7 billion per annum
•	
2050s: +$1.9–2.7 billion per annum 
•	
2080s: +$1.9–4.1 billion per annum 
$4.1 billion is equivalent to 35% of the Prairie’s 
agricultural GDP in 2011 ($11.7 billion in 2002 $)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 456 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Coastal areas
National Round 
Table on the 
Environment 
and the 
Economy 
(NRTEE) 
(2011)
(national and 
provincial/
territorial)
Sea-level rise by 2050 under 
low (IPCC SRES B1; +28cm) 
and high (IPCC SRES A2; 
+29cm) climate change 
scenarios
GDP growth for Canada by 
2050 under slow-growth (+1.3% 
per annum) and rapid-growth 
(+3.0% per annum) scenarios
Impacts of permanent 
flooding from sea-level 
rise and temporary 
flooding from storm 
surges relative to “no 
climate change” baseline
Market value of lost 
dwellings and direct 
repair-replacement costs 
of damaged property 
Annual coastal flooding 
costs for Canada 
attributable to climate 
change by 2050 (in 2008 $): 
•	
Low climate change–
slow growth scenario: 
$0.9 billion 
•	
High climate change–
rapid growth scenario: 
$8.1 billion
Present-value total 
flooding costs over the 
period 2011‒2100 (at a 3% 
discount rate): 
$109–379 billion
Range of annual coastal flooding costs 
attributable to climate change by 2050 (in 2008 $) 
for specific provinces and territories, based on the 
two climate change scenarios: 
•	
BC: $840–7,645 million
•	
MB: $0–2 million 
•	
QC: $5–55 million 
•	
NB: $10–225 million
•	
NL: $7–80 million
•	
NS: -$10 to -$110 million
•	
NU: $20–165 million
•	
PEI: $4–55 million
In NS, homes are abandoned and not rebuilt (as in 
the baseline case), hence the cost savings
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 457 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Withey et al. 
(2016)
(national and 
provincial/
territorial)
Impacts in terms of direct 
damages from sea-level rise 
and storm surge for the 2050s, 
under the IPCC SRES B1 and 
A2 climate change scenarios 
(NRTEE, 2011)
Projected economic growth in 
seven coastal regions over the 
period of 2009‒2054
Impacts in terms of 
direct damage of flooding 
on dwellings, and to 
agriculture and forest 
lands from sea-level rise 
and storm surge relative 
to baseline scenario, with 
damages under current 
climate conditions
Changes (relative to 
baseline) in projected 
welfare (compensating 
variation) and provincial/
territorial macroeconomic 
indicators, using a CGE 
model
Present-value total losses 
for 2009‒2054 for Canada 
under the IPCC SRES B1 
and A2 scenarios, relative 
to cumulative losses under 
current climate conditions 
(in 2008 $ and at a 4% 
discount rate): 
•	
GDP: $10–70 billion
•	
Welfare: >$1–25 
billion
Present value total losses to provincial/territorial 
GDP under the same scenarios (in 2008 $, at a 4% 
discount rate): 
•	
BC: $8–60 billion
•	
NB: >$1–2 billion
•	
NL: -$1–2 billion 
•	
NS: $0–1 billion
•	
PEI: $0‒ >$1 billion
•	
QC: >$1–8 billion
•	
NU, NWT and YT: >$1–3 billion
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 458 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Boyer-
Villemaire et 
al., (2016); 
Circé et al., 
(2016a); 
Parnham et al., 
(2016)
(Atlantic 
Canada and 
Quebec)
Sea-level rise scenario for 
2015‒2064 based on RCP8.5; 
the erosion scenario is based 
on linear extrapolation of 
historical erosion rates; and 
the flooding scenario is based 
on projected return periods for 
floods
Static socioeconomic scenario 
(i.e., no growth) and no new 
adaptation actions
Direct impacts of sea-
level rise, storm surge 
and coastal flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
Direct costs from 
damage to infrastructure, 
buildings and land; direct 
losses from business 
interruption and traffic 
disruption; costs of 
response and recovery; 
and range of non-market 
impacts (e.g., loss of 
natural habitats, loss of 
cultural heritage, decline 
in recreational use, etc.)
Not applicable
Present-value total direct costs for 11 case study 
sites, encompassing 46 coastal segments in 
Quebec and Atlantic Canada (in 2012 $, at a 
4% discount rate): $1.2 billion
Range of present-value direct costs per coastal 
segment (across all 46 segments): 
$0‒$705 million
Median present-value direct costs across all 46 
segments: $1 million
Wilson et al. 
(2012)
(Tantramar 
region of 
southeast New 
Brunswick)
Storm surge flooding scenario 
with climate change from 
Daigle (2012)
Static socioeconomic scenario 
(i.e., no growth) and no new 
adaptation actions
Impact of climate change 
on storm surge flooding
Direct damage to 
residential, commercial, 
industrial and public 
buildings and contents; 
direct damage to vehicles; 
and direct losses in terms 
of agricultural output
Not applicable
Expected annual costs4 (in 2000 $): 
•	
2000: $1.5 million
•	
2025: $1.7 million
•	
2055: $2.2 million 
•	
2085: $3.1 million
Present-value total annual costs over the period 
2000‒2100 (in 2000 $, at a 4% discount rate): 
$60 million
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 459 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Health
Larrivée et al. 
(2015) 
(Quebec)
For heat stress: median 
temperature extremes and 
frequencies from ensemble of 
CMIP5 simulations for RCP4.5 
and RCP8.5
For other health outcomes 
considered: biophysical 
impacts informed by literature
Static socioeconomic scenario 
(i.e., no growth), and no new 
adaptation actions
Morbidity and mortality 
health outcomes 
associated with heat 
stress, vector-borne 
disease (Lyme disease) 
and West Nile virus) and 
aeroallergens (pollen)
Government health-
related expenditures, 
payments for days lost 
due to illness, private 
medical costs
Premature mortality 
valued using Value of 
Statistical Life (VSL) = 
$3.6 million
Not applicable
Total present-value costs for Quebec government 
over 2015‒2064 (in 2012 $, discounted at 4%) 
(mean, 10th and 90th percentile): 
•	
Heat stress ($370 million, $245‒515 million)
•	
Lyme disease ($60 million, $40‒95 million)
•	
West Nile virus ($35 million, none)
•	
Pollen ($360 million, $290‒430 million) 
For society, the mean total present-value costs 
are (including cost of premature mortality): 
•	
Heat stress ($33 billion)
•	
Lyme disease ($745 million)
•	
West Nile virus ($835 million)
•	
Pollen ($475 million)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 460 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Water levels (low flow)
Larrivée et al. 
(2016)
(St. Lawrence 
River, Quebec)
Two hydrological scenarios for 
the St. Lawrence River between 
the Quebec-Ontario border 
and Trois-Rivières, QC for the 
period 2015–2064: 1) critical 
annual flows gradually reached 
by 2040s, recovering partially 
thereafter; 2) lower flows than 
reference in summer and 
autumn by 2020
Static socioeconomic scenario 
based on historical data (i.e., no 
growth) and no new adaptation 
actions
Impact of low water 
levels in the St. Lawrence 
River on maritime 
transport; municipal 
water treatment; 
ecological services and 
fishing; recreational 
boating and tourism; 
hydroelectric generation; 
and waterfront property 
values
Not applicable
Total present-value direct costs over the period 
2015‒2064 (in 2012 $, at a 4% discount rate): 
•	
Foregone transport capacity: 
$40–210 million
•	
Foregone water sales:  >$0.1 million
•	
Foregone use value and earnings from 
fishing: $3,220 million
•	
Foregone value of boating days: 
$65–75 million
•	
Foregone hydroelectricity sales: 
$50–90 million
•	
Reduction in value of waterfront properties: 
$70 million
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 461 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Dorling and 
Hanniman 
(2016)
(Lake 
Michigan-
Huron)
Projected average water level 
for the period 2041–2060 from 
the scenario for 2050 projected 
by the Canadian Centre for 
Climate Modelling and Analysis 
(CCCma 2050); values for 
other years over the period 
2015‒2064 based on linear 
interpolation
Static socioeconomic scenario 
based on historical data (i.e., no 
growth) and no new adaptation 
actions
Impact of low water levels 
in Lake Michigan-Huron 
(projected levels relative 
to the annual average for 
the period 1918‒2014) 
on commercial shipping 
and harbours; tourism 
and recreational water 
activities; hydroelectric 
generation; and 
waterfront property 
values
Not applicable
Total present-value direct costs over the period 
2015–2064 (in 2012 $, at a 4% discount rate): 
•	
Additional harbour maintenance costs: 
$90 million
•	
Lost shipping capacity: $1,840 million
•	
Additional dredging costs and lost rental 
income: $7 million
•	
Cost of replacing lost hydroelectric 
generation: $6,200 million
•	
Reduction in value of waterfront properties: 
$535 million
Millerd (2005)
(Great Lakes‒
St. Lawrence 
River system)
Simulation of water depths 
in Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence 
River system from three 2 x CO2 
scenarios (from the Canadian 
Centre for Climate Modelling 
and Analysis); projected water 
levels compared with normal 
average monthly water levels 
over the period 1900‒1989
Static baseline: freight shipping 
data for 2001
Impact of low water 
levels in Great Lakes‒St. 
Lawrence River system 
(projected levels relative 
to annual average for 
the period 1918‒2014) 
on commercial shipping 
(bulk commodities, 
loose goods, petroleum 
products)
Total cost of origin-
destination voyage 
(loading, unloading and 
operating costs)
Not applicable
Increase in annual shipping costs (in 2001 $) with 
climate change (relative to 1900‒1989 annual 
average): $20–75 million (or +8–29%), depending 
on how quickly the CO2 concentrations double
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 462 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Mining
Perrin et al. 
(2015)
(Tibbitt to 
Contwoyto 
Winter Road, 
Northwest 
Territories) 
Projections for specific 
climate variables of interest 
(i.e., freezing degree days and 
melting degree days) under 
RCP8.5 for the 2020s and 
2050s (compared with the 
1981‒2010 norm)
Static baseline: average road 
use (demand) for 2002‒2012
Impact of climate-induced 
change on length of 
operating season (e.g., 
late opening, early closure, 
no opening) for the Tibbitt 
to Contwoyto Winter Road 
(TCWR), a mine access 
road built mainly over 
frozen lakes in NWT
Direct cost of alternative 
transportation modes and 
direct production losses 
at applicable mines
Not applicable
Average annual total direct costs (price basis not 
specified): $215 million (of which $150 million 
are production losses and $65 million are  costs 
related to modal shift), with 60% probability that 
costs could exceed the average
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 463 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Winter recreation – resort skiing
DaSilva et al. 
(2019)
(Mont Orford, 
Mont Sutton 
and Bromont 
Montagne in 
Quebec)
Mean value (and 10–90th 
percentiles) of relevant climate 
variables from 10 emissions 
scenarios covering all four 
RCPs for the period 2020‒2050
Projected visitation at each 
resort (Mont Orford, Mont 
Sutton, Bromont Montagne) 
over the period 2020‒2021 
to 2049‒2050, spanning 30 
seasons (demand equations 
were estimated, including 
variables for weather and snow 
conditions)
Impact of climate change 
on beginning and length 
of ski season, skiable 
area and snow conditions 
for the three ski resorts in 
2050, relative to 2020
Direct operating costs 
(e.g., power, maintenance, 
salaries, etc.) and direct 
changes in revenue from 
change in skier visitation 
(day and season passes, 
catering, etc.)
Not applicable
Change in aggregate direct revenues for all three 
resorts for the period 2045‒2049 relative to 
2020‒2024 (in 2015 $): -$2.1 million (-6.4%)
Change in aggregate direct operating costs: 
-$1 million (-3.4%)
Change in aggregate direct net income: 
-$1.1 million (-29.2%)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 464 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
NATIONAL
REGIONAL
Butsic et al. 
(2011)
(Whistler and 
Fernie, British 
Columbia)
Projections of snowfall 
equivalent to total precipitation 
(or “snowfall intensity”) were 
constructed from (ensemble 
average) temperature and 
precipitation projections for the 
2050s using the IPCC SRES A2 
scenario (vs. the 1971‒2000 
norm)
Static baseline: Hedonic 
property price model estimated 
using housing transaction data 
from the period 1980‒2006
Impact of climate-induced 
change in “snowfall 
intensity” (5-year moving 
average) by the 2050s on 
house prices in Whistler, 
BC and Fernie, BC
Not applicable
Reduction in house prices near ski resorts in BC 
(% change relative to the 1980‒2006 average): 
•	
Whistler: -3.2% for every 1% projected 
decrease in snowfall intensity
•	
Fernie: -1.1% for every 1% projected 
decrease in snowfall intensity
Snowfall intensity projections and total $ 
reductions in house values were not provided for 
BC resorts, only for USA resorts
1 “Present-value total losses” is the discounted sum of the costs incurred each year between, in this instance, 2010 and 2080. See Section 6.6.3.2 and Appendix 6.3 
on the rationale for discounting costs and for the choice of discount rate. 
2 The projected increases to wildfire suppression costs estimated by this study could be interpreted as reactive adaptation expenditures. There is a real opportunity 
cost associated with such additional expenditures, which would not be incurred in the absence of climate change. Hence, this study is included in the table.
3 Average annual costs or losses are the average change per year over a defined period (e.g., 2071–2100). 
4 Use of the term “expected” means that the estimated average annual costs are probability-weighted.
Note: The estimated economic consequences of climate change in this table assume no new planned adaptation, relative to the baseline.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 465 
Appendix 6.2: Summary of select studies of the economic consequences of climate change for 
Canadian municipalities
STUDY
MUNICIPALITY
CLIMATE AND SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
National Round 
Table on the 
Environment 
and the 
Economy 
(NRTEE) (2011)
Toronto, ON; 
Vancouver, BC; 
Calgary, AB; and 
Montreal, QC
Mean annual temperature change 
for Canada by 2075 under low (IPCC 
SRES B1; +4.3°C) and high (IPCC 
SRES A2; +5.3°C) climate change 
scenarios
GDP growth for Canada under two 
scenarios: slow-growth (+1.3% per 
annum) and rapid-growth (+3.0% 
per annum)
Health outcomes associated with 
warmer summers (heat-related 
premature death) and poorer air 
quality (illness and premature 
death)
Healthcare expenditures, welfare 
losses
Premature mortality valued 
using Value of a Statistical Life:  
$6.1 million per death
Present-value total cost1 of premature 
mortality attributable to heat and air quality 
impacts over the period 2010‒2100 under the 
low climate change–slow growth scenario, 
and the high climate change–rapid growth 
scenario (in 2008 $, at a 3% discount rate): 
•	
Calgary: $11–17 billion
•	
Montreal: $52–77 billion
•	
Toronto: $65–96 billion
•	
Vancouver: $36–48 billion
Present-value total healthcare expenditures 
under the same scenarios described above
(in 2008 $, at a 3% discount rate): 
•	
Calgary: $16–54 billion
•	
Montreal: $54–213 billion
•	
Toronto: $72–285 billion
•	
Vancouver: $46–140 billion
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 466 
STUDY
MUNICIPALITY
CLIMATE AND SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
Thistlethwaite 
et al. (2018)
Halifax Regional 
Municipality, NS
Projected 24-hour precipitation 
intensity under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 
for the periods 2015‒2045, 2035-
2065 and 2065‒2095, relative to 
1955‒2009 (historical conditions) 
Static baseline: 54,000 residential 
single dwellings in Halifax Regional 
Municipality
Impacts of rainfall-driven riverine 
flooding of residential property
Insured losses (direct repair-
replacement costs of damaged 
property and contents)
Average annual insured losses2 under current 
climate conditions: $543,000
Average annual insured losses with climate 
change under RCP8.5:
•	
By 2050: $1.3 million (+137%) 
•	
By 2100: $2.2 million (+300%)
Boyd (2018)
Edmonton, AB
Baseline scenario for 2018: annual 
probability of 17 extreme events (at 
a given intensity level) and degree 
days based on 1981‒2010 data
Projections of changes in extreme 
event probabilities (constant 
intensity) and degree days for 
2050s and 2080s under RCP8.5
Baseline socioeconomic conditions 
defined by 2018 data
Projected socioeconomic scenario 
for 2050s and 2080s; driven by 
population and housing forecasts, 
city growth studies, price forecasts, 
and relationships estimated from 
historic data
Market and non-market impacts 
of changes in the probability of 
climate-related extreme events 
and changes in heating and 
cooling degree days under a high-
emissions scenario relative to the 
baseline scenario for 2018
Direct damages (repair-
replacement costs) to residential, 
commercial and industrial 
buildings, home contents, business 
inventories, range of infrastructure 
and the natural environment; direct 
impacts to health & safety; direct 
losses from business interruption; 
and indirect and induced losses 
resulting from direct market 
impacts (estimated using city-level 
input-output multipliers)
Expected annual average net social costs3 
(in 2016 $, undiscounted) attributable to the 
impact of climate change on extreme events 
and heating and cooling demand in:
•	
2055: +$4.7 billion
•	
2085: +$10.3 billion 
Expected annual average net GDP costs in: 
•	
2055: +$1.6 billion (1.6% of projected 
GDP)
•	
2085: +$3.5 billion (1.9% of projected 
GDP)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 467 
STUDY
MUNICIPALITY
CLIMATE AND SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
Insurance 
Bureau of 
Canada (2015)
Halifax, NS; 
Mississauga, ON
Baseline scenario for 2015: intensity 
and return period of storm surge 
flooding and extreme wind events 
(Halifax Regional Municipality), 
and flooding from storm water and 
freezing rain events (Mississauga) 
based on historic data for the last 
20‒50 years
Projections of extreme events for 
2020 and 2040 under “moderate” 
(RCP4.5 or IPCC SRES B1 or B2) 
and “high” (RCP8.5 or IPCC SRES 
A2) emissions scenarios (from 
various sources)
Baseline socioeconomic conditions 
defined by 2015 data
Projected socioeconomic scenario 
for 2020 and 2040; driven by 
population forecasts and land-use 
plans, and by historic GDP growth 
trends
Market-based impacts of climate-
related extreme events under 
moderate and high-emissions 
scenarios relative to baseline 
scenario
Direct damages (repair-
replacement costs) to residential, 
commercial and industrial 
buildings, home contents, power 
lines, plus direct losses from 
business interruption; and indirect 
and induced losses resulting from 
direct impacts (estimated using 
city-level input-output multipliers)
Cumulative expected GDP costs4 attributable 
to climate change over the period 2015‒2040 
for moderate and high-emissions scenarios 
(in 2013 $, undiscounted) for Halifax Regional 
Municipality: 
•	
Storm surge flooding: $25–35 million
•	
Extreme winds: $65–140 million
Cumulative expected GDP costs attributable 
to climate change over the period 2015‒2040 
for the same scenarios as described above (in 
2013 $, undiscounted) for Mississauga: 
•	
Storm water flooding: $30–70 million
•	
Freezing rain: $28–31 million
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 468 
STUDY
MUNICIPALITY
CLIMATE AND SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES
Lantz et al. 
(2012)
Fredericton, NB
Best-case and worst-case flooding 
return frequency scenarios 
constructed from downscaled 
General Circulation Models results 
(for 2020s, 2050s and 2080s) and 
projections of sea-level rise, which 
affects peak flood heights
Projected population growth 
scenario over the next 50 years 
(low: -0.6%; high: +23%)
Impacts of freshwater flooding 
along the Saint John River in 
Fredericton
Direct market costs to government 
(e.g., emergency services, clean-
up and restoration, temporary 
lodging); business (e.g., property 
and inventory damage, additional 
operating costs); and households 
(e.g., property and content 
damage, temporary displacement 
costs, lost work time)
Non-market costs for households 
(e.g., transport disruption, 
mental health, lost leisure time) 
collected via a survey using the 
contingent valuation method 
(minimum “willingness-to-accept” 
compensation)
Expected annual average direct costs due to 
climate change (price basis unknown): 
•	
Worst-case flooding return frequency 
and high population scenario: 
$13.2 million (of which $7.9 million are 
market costs and $5.3 million are non-
market costs)
•	
Worst-case flooding return frequency 
and low population scenario: $5.3 million 
(of which $4 million are market costs 
and $1.3 million are non-market costs)
•	
Best climate and low population 
scenario: -$0.12 million (of which 
-$0.09 million are market costs and 
-$0.03 million are non-market costs
•	
Best climate and high population 
scenario: -$0.32 million (of which 
-$0.18 million are market costs and 
-$0.14 million are non-market costs
1 Present-value total cost is the discounted sum of costs incurred each year between 2010 and 2100. See Section 6.6.3.2 and Appendix 6.3 on the rationale for 
discounting costs and for the choice of discount rate.
2 Average annual loss (or cost) is the average loss (or cost) per year over a defined period (e.g., 2050–2100). 
3 Use of the term “expected” means that the estimated average annual costs are probability weighted. 
4 Cumulative cost in this case means the undiscounted sum of costs incurred each year between 2015 and 2040.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 469 
Appendix 6.3: What is discounting?
The value attached today to receiving one dollar a year from now is expressed as:
Where d is the discount rate. If d were 0.05 (5%), the value of a dollar in one year’s time would be 95 cents 
today. If the discount rate is constant, and one wants to know the value of one dollar two years from now, 
the 95 cents would decline by another 5% in the second year and be worth 91 cents today. The mathematical 
expression for that could be written as:
Extending this over several years would result in a value that declines geometrically.
Hence, if an individual were to invest one dollar today, they would need to obtain a benefit of at least $1.05 in 
one year’s time to consider the investment worthwhile. Likewise, the benefit required in two years would be 
$1.052 = $1.05 × $1.05 = $1.103. In T years the amount required to make the investment worthwhile would 
need to be (1+d )T.
In practice, the benefits of an adaptation investment likely accrue over several years, in which case the 
comparison must be made between the investment now and the sum of these benefits over future years, 
each discounted from the year in which it occurs. This sum is referred to as the present value (PV) and is 
written as:
Where Bt is the adaptation benefit in year t in monetary terms.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 470 
Appendix 6.4: Summary of select economic appraisals of adaptation actions in Canada using a 
cost-benefit analysis tool
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Forestry
National Round 
Table on the 
Environment 
and the 
Economy 
(NRTEE) (2011)
(national and by 
province)
Impacts on timber 
supply from 
forest fires, pests 
and diseases; 
changes in forest 
productivity
1) Enhance forest fire prevention, control 
and suppression
2) Enhance pest control
3) Plant tree species suitable for the 
future climate
Aggregate adaptation costs for all three 
actions (present value for the period 
2010–2080, in 2008 $): 
•	
Low climate change scenario: 
$2.3 billion
•	
High climate change scenario: 
$3.6 billion 
Present-value for 70 
years (2010‒2080)
Constant discount rate: 
3% per annum
In 2008 $ (benefits of 
adaptation measured 
a change in welfare—
compensating variation)
Combined benefit-cost ratio for all three 
adaptation actions: 
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: 9.1
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: 38.1
Present value of total residual damages post-
adaptation (in 2008 $): 
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $4.6 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: $37.1 billion
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 471 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Ochuodho et al. 
(2012)
(national and by 
province)
Pessimistic 
(worst-case) and 
optimistic (best-
case) impacts on 
timber supply from 
forest fires, pests 
and diseases; 
changes in forest 
productivity
1) Increasing pest prevention and control
2) Increasing forest fire prevention, 
control and suppression
3) Planting alternative species that are 
more suitable for future conditions
Aggregate adaptation costs for all three 
actions (present value for the period 
2010–2080, in 2008 $, range reflects best-
case and worst-case scenarios): 
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $1.3–3.4 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: $2–5.3 billion
Net present value for 70 
years (2010–2080)
Constant discount rate: 
3% per annum
In 2008 $
Combined net present value for all three 
adaptation actions (in 2008 $; range reflects 
best-case and worst-case scenarios): 
Low climate change–slow growth scenario: 
$16.6–19.6 billion 
High climate change–rapid growth scenarios: 
$171.2–243.1 billion
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 472 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Health
NRTEE (2011)
(Toronto)
Premature deaths 
associated with 
warmer summers 
and poorer air 
quality
1) Green roofs: reduce the urban heat-
island effect by 1°C through widespread 
adoption of green roofs
2) Improve air quality: install pollution 
control technologies to eliminate ozone-
forming emissions attributable to climate 
change
Present value of adaptation costs 
(in 2008 $): 
1) $7.3 billion (installations over the 
period 2035–2050, maintained through 
2059)
2) $0.7 to $3.1 billion (installations over 
the period 2050–2059 under low and high 
climate change scenarios)
Present value for 10 
years (2050‒2059)
Constant discount rate: 
3% per annum
In 2008 $
Benefit-cost ratio for option 1): 
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: <0.3
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenarios: >0.3
Benefit-cost ratio for option 2):
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: 4.0
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: 1.6
Present value of residual damages post-
adaptation (in 2008 $) for option 1):
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $2.0 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenarios: $4.2 billion
Present value of residual damages post-
adaptation for option 2):
•	
No residual damages since it is assumed 
that the actions fully offset the health 
impacts of climate change
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 473 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Mining
Rodgers and 
Douglas (2015)
(Glencore’s 
Sudbury 
Integrated 
Nickel 
Operation, 
Ontario)
Extreme rainfall 
and flooding; high 
and low water 
levels
Unknown options to manage five 
environmental triggers: 1) high water 
levels; 2) low water levels; 3) intense 
rainfall event; 4) low flood risk; 5) high 
flood risk 
Adaptation costs not specified
Payback over 39-year 
period
Constant discount rate: 
2% per annum
Payback threshold achieved by adaptation 
actions to manage environmental triggers 2), 3) 
and 5)
Perrin et al. 
(2015)
(Tibbitt to 
Contwoyto 
Winter Road, 
Northwest 
Territories)
Impact of changes 
to length of 
operating season 
(late opening, 
early closure, no 
opening) for Tibbitt 
to Contwoyto 
Winter Road, a 
mine access road 
built mainly over 
frozen lakes in 
NWT
1) flexible scheduling (shorter season)
2) increased ice road construction and 
maintenance
3) increased portage construction and 
maintenance
4) increased ramp construction and 
maintenance
Present value of adaptation costs (in $ 
million) (mean, 10th and 90th percentiles) 
for each option:
1) $44, $28 to $59
2) $5.8, $5.2 to $6.4
3) $5.3, $4.7 to $5.8
4) $0.3, $0.2 to $0.4
Present value over 
35 years
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
Price basis not specified
Net present value for the package of actions ($ 
million) (mean, 10th and 90th percentiles): $160, 
-$30 to $305
The above net present values reflect the 
difference in present-value costs between a 
“critical conditions scenario” (including the 
costs of modal shift and production losses at 
mines) and an “adaptive scenario” (with the four 
adaptation actions)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 474 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Water levels
Larrivée et al. 
(2016)
(St. Lawrence 
River, Quebec)
Impact of low 
water levels in 
the St. Lawrence 
River on maritime 
transport; 
municipal water 
treatment; 
ecological services 
and fishing; 
recreational 
boating and 
tourism; 
hydroelectric 
generation; and 
waterfront property 
values
Options related to marine transport:
1) dredging
2) minimizing under-keel clearance
3) a combination of both
Present value of adaptation costs 
(in 2012 $) for each option:
1) $8.8 million
2) $3.2 million
3) $12 million
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Net present value (in 2012 $) and benefit-cost 
ratio in brackets for each option, with the range 
defined by two “what if” hydrological scenarios: 
(a) critical annual flows gradually reached 
by 2040s, recovering partially thereafter, and 
(b) flows in summer and autumn lower than 
reference by 2020: 
1) $37–26.1 million (1.5–1.4)
2) $24.3–20 million (1.9–1.7)
3) $46.4–26.2 million (1.5–1.3) 
Options related to municipal water 
treatment: 
•	
Modifying or replacing existing 
pumps with those capable of 
functioning at lower levels
•	
Increasing or reconfiguring intake 
systems to reduce the risks of head 
loss and hydraulic constraints
Present value of adaptation costs for two 
case study municipal water treatment 
plants (2012 $ million): 
•	
Plant 1: $0.1 million
•	
Plant 2: $2.3 million
Net present value (in 2012 $) and the benefit-
cost ratio in brackets: 
Plant 1: -$0.1 million (<0.1)
Plant 2: -$2.3 million (<0.01)
The above results are only for the hydrological 
“what if” scenario (a).
Benefits only include market value of lost water 
production; they do not include the value of 
disrupted water supply to consumers
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 475 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Larrivée et al. 
(2016)
(St. Lawrence 
River, Quebec)
(continued)
Options related to ecological services and 
fishing: 
•	
Restoration of riparian zones
•	
Restoration of the floodplain
•	
Change in agricultural practices
•	
More efficient wastewater treatment
•	
Protection and restoration of habitat
•	
Education and awareness
Present value of adaptation costs for 
package of actions (in 2012 $): $560 
million (optimistic cost: $345 million, 
pessimistic cost: $1,005 million)
Net present value (in 2012 $) and benefit-cost 
ratio in brackets for the package of actions: 
•	
For hydrological scenario (a) and based 
on pessimistic adaptation costs: 
$225 million (1.2)
•	
For hydrological scenario (b) and based 
on pessimistic adaptation costs: 
$2,265 million (3.3)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 476 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Dorling and 
Hanniman 
(2016)
(Lake Michigan-
Huron)
Impacts of low 
water levels (worst-
case scenario)
1) submerged sills (+21 cm water level)
2) fixed rock-filled dikes (+16 cm)
3) parallel dykes and weirs (+16 cm)
4) inflatable flap gates (+16 cm)
5) hydrokinetic turbines (+19 cm)
Present value adaptation costs (in 2012 
$ US):
1) $40.6 million (no delay, staged 
construction) to $64.3 million (20-year 
delayed, non-stage construction)
2) $55.4 million to $47.4 million
3) $102.6 million to $78.0 million
4) $145.6 million to $83.1 million
5) $215.8 million to $140.4 million
Net present value 
for two construction 
scenarios: construction 
now (2015‒2064) and 
construction delayed 
(2015–2084)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $ US
Range in net present value for each option 
(in 2012 $ US) across the two construction 
scenarios: 
1) $235 million to $50 million
2) $55 million to $45 million
3) $100 million to $80 million
4) $135 million to $5 million
5) $125 million to -$25 million
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 477 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Agriculture
Berry et al. 
(2017)
(Pelly’s Lake, 
Manitoba)
Impact of water 
stress (water 
availability) on 
agricultural crop 
yields (canola, 
wheat, alfalfa, 
barley)
Water storage retention ponds at Pelly’s 
Lake and irrigation system
Costs of retention pond and irrigation 
infrastructure (in 2015 $): $160.00 per 
hectare
Gross income and gross 
margin per hectare 
(undiscounted)
In 2015 $
Average difference in crop gross margins without 
irrigation and with ponds and irrigation (and 
associated costs) for the period 2050–2059 
(in 2015 $ per hectare):
•	
RCP2.6: -148 
•	
RCP4.5: -146 
•	
RCP8.5: -147 
Average difference in crop gross margins without 
irrigation and with ponds and irrigation (and 
associated costs) for the period 2090–2099 
(in 2015 $ per hectare):
•	
RCP2.6: -146 
•	
RCP4.5: -147
•	
RCP8.5: -148
The availability of irrigation water increased crop 
production, but the resultant increase in gross 
income was insufficient to offset the costs of the 
ponds and irrigation system.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 478 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Winter recreation – resort skiing
DaSilva et al. 
(2019)
(Mont Orford, 
Mont Sutton 
and Bromont 
Montagne, 
Québec)
Impact on the start 
of the ski season, 
the length of ski 
season, the skiable 
area and snow 
conditions for 
three ski resorts in 
Quebec
Options for Bromont Montagne:
B1) Increase snow-making capacity
B2) Synthetic ski slope 
B3) Diversify activities for corporate clients
Options for Mont Sutton: 
S1) Increase snow-making capacity
S2) Upgrade infrastructure to enhance 
quality of experience
S3) Develop hosting capacity
S4) Develop mountain biking capacity
Options for Mont Orford: 
O1) Optimize existing snow-making 
capacity 
O2) Increase snow-making capacity
O3) Extend opening hours on portions 
of hill
O4) Increase beginner and intermediate 
slope capacity
O5) Invest in summer activities
O6) Regional coordination of activities 
offered
Net present value over 
the period 2020‒2024 to 
2045‒2049
Constant discount rate: 
4% 
In 2015 $
$ values for estimated net present values were 
not provided; the study only indicated whether 
adaptation actions had a positive or negative net 
present value.
Only snow-making optimization measures at 
Mont Orford (O1) had a positive net present value 
(i.e., passed a cost-benefit test). This result holds 
across all 10 emissions scenarios considered in 
the analysis.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 479 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Coastal areas
NRTEE (2011)
(national and by 
province)
Impacts of 
permanent flooding 
from sea-level rise 
and temporary 
flooding from 
storm surges
1) “Wise development planning”: prevent 
new development in areas that will be at 
risk of flooding
2) Strategic retreat: rebuild homes in 
areas that are not prone to flooding
Adaptation costs assumed to be zero for 
options 1) and 2)
Net present value for 90 
years (2010–2100)
Constant discount rate: 
3% per annum
In 2008 $
Net present value for option 1) (in 2008 $): 
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $4.3 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: $55.1 billion
Net present value for option 2) (in 2008 $): 
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $16.7 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: $173 billion
Present value of residual damages post-
adaptation (2008 $) for option 1):
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $13.2 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: $127 billion 
Present value of residual damages post-
adaptation (2008 $ billion) for option 2):
•	
Low climate change–slow growth 
scenario: $0.9 billion
•	
High climate change–rapid growth 
scenario: $9.1 billion 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 480 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Wilson et al. 
(2012)
(Tantramar 
region of 
Southeast New 
Brunswick)
Impact of storm 
surge flooding
1) Dyke top-up
2) Relocation of infrastructure
3) Dyke top-up and relocation
Present value adaptation costs (in 2000 $) 
for the above options: 
1) $1.3 million
2) $10.3 million (relocation occurs over 
20 years)
3) $11.5 million
Net present value for 
100 years (2000‒2100)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum 
In 2000 $
Net present value (in 2000 $) and benefit-cost 
ratio in brackets for each option: 
1) $40 million (31.0)
2) $20 million (2.9)
3) $35 million (4.0)
Present value of residual damages post-
adaptation for each option (in 2000 $):
1) $19 million
2) $29.3 million
3) $12.7 million
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 481 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Parnham et al. 
(2016)
(Chignecto 
Isthmus, Nova 
Scotia and New 
Brunswick)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding 
1) Raising existing agricultural dykes 
to 10 m
2) Combination of raising dykes to 
10 m, shortening sections and raising 
infrastructure
3) Build new engineered dykes on top of 
existing dykes
4) Build new engineered dykes (shortened 
sections, protect public infrastructure only)
5) Build new engineered dykes (shortened 
sections, protect all infrastructure)
6) Relocate road
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio (no trade impacts case) for 
each option:
1) 0.5
2) 0.6
3) 1.1
4) 0.9
5) 1.5
6) 0.3
Benefit-cost ratio (trade impacts case) for each 
option: 
1) 1.8
2) 1.9
3) 3.9
4) 3.2
5) 5.0
6) 1.0
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 482 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Parnham et al. 
(2016)
(Halifax 
Harbour, Nova 
Scotia)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding
1) Build seawall
2) Raise structures
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio (road and no trade impacts 
case) for each option: 
1) 0.01–0.08
2) 0.01–0.50
Benefit-cost ratio (rail and  trade impacts case) 
for each option: 
1) 1.8–2.6
2) 0.5–4.3
Parnham et al. 
(2016)
(North Cape 
Coastal Drive, 
Kildare, Prince 
Edward Island)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
1) reactive, business as usual
2) planned (minimum level of adaptation: 
shoreline stabilization)
3) planned (medium level of adaptation: 
install a dyke to protect park)
4) planned (maximum level of adaptation: 
use of most appropriate adaptation option 
to maintain current activities)
5) relocate park, seasonal residents stay
6) abandon park, seasonal residents leave
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio for each option: 
1) 0.9
2) 1.0
3) 0.8
4) 0.5
5) 0.6
6) 1.2
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 483 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Parnham et al. 
(2016)
(Tracadie 
Harbour, Prince 
Edward Island)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion 
1) reactive, business as usual
2) planned (medium level of adaptation: 
install a dyke)
3) planned (maximum level of adaptation: 
install a dyke and raise buildings and 
roads)
4) close wharf, protect private property
5) abandon all
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio for each option: 
1) 0.8
2) 0.4
3) 0.6
4) 0.3
5) 0.3
Parnham et al. 
(2016)
(Bay Bulls – 
Witless Bay, 
Newfoundland)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding
Engineered solutions across six sites, 
mainly involving raising or relocating 
infrastructure
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio:
0.01 to 20.6 (depending on site and adaptation)
Parnham et al. 
(2016)
(Marystown, 
Newfoundland)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding
Engineered solutions across six sites, 
mainly involving raising roads, land and 
buildings, and building seawalls
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio:
0.01 to 20.5 (depending on site and adaptation)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 484 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Aubé et al. 
(2016)
(Le Goulet, New 
Brunswick)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, as well as 
erosion
1) Dyke
2) Beach nourishment
3) Beach nourishment with breach
Net present value for 
100 years (2016‒2116)
Constant
Unknown price basis
Benefit-cost ratio for each option:
1) 0.6
2) 1.9
3) 1.6
Aubé et al. 
(2016)
(Sainte-Marie-
Saint-Raphaël, 
Cap-Bateau, 
Pigeon Hill, New 
Brunswick)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, as well as 
erosion
1) Relocation of homes at risk
2) Build erosion controls
Net present value for 
100 years (2016‒2116)
Constant discount rate: 
3% per annum
Unknown price basis
Benefit-cost ratio for each option:
1) 0.3
2) 0.4
Aubé et al. 
(2016)
(Shippagan and 
Pointe-Brûlée, 
New Brunswick)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, as well as 
erosion
1) Change in zoning to establish retreat 
and accommodation zone
2) Change in zoning, assuming no impact 
on property values
Net present value for 
100 years (2016‒2116)
Constant discount rate: 
3% per annum
Unknown price basis
Benefit-cost ratio for each option:
1) 1.6
2) 2.2
Circé et al. 
(2016a)
(Percé, Quebec)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
1) Beach nourishment
2) Planned retreat
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Range of benefit-cost ratios for each option 
across coastal segments:
1) 1.62–68.4
2) 1.0–1.4
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 485 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Circé et al. 
(2016a)
(Maria, Quebec)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
1) Beach nourishment and groynes
2) Planned retreat and raising 
infrastructure
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Range of benefit-cost ratios for each option 
across coastal segments:
1) 1.1*
2) 1.1–3.6
Circé et al. 
(2016a)
(Carleton-sur-
Mer, Quebec)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
1) Beach nourishment
2) Planned retreat
3) Beach nourishment and groynes
4) Raising infrastructure
5) Planned retreat and raising 
infrastructure
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Range of benefit-cost ratios for each option 
across coastal segments:
1) 2.1*
2) 1.3*
3) 1.6*
4) 1.7*
5) 0.3–1.8
Circé et al. 
(2016a)
(Îles-de-la-
Madeleine, 
Quebec)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
1) Beach nourishment
2) Riprap
3) Planned retreat
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Range of benefit-cost ratios for each option 
across coastal segments:
1) 25.8*
2) 1.1–4.6
3) 1.0–1.7
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 486 
STUDY, 
LOCATION
CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS
ADAPTATION OPTIONS
TIME FRAME, 
DISCOUNT RATE AND 
PRICES
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTATIONS
Circé et al. 
(2016a)
(Kamouraska, 
Quebec)
Impact of sea-
level rise, storm 
surge and coastal 
flooding, plus 
coastal erosion
Planned retreat and raising of 
infrastructure
Net present value for 50 
years (2015‒2064)
Constant discount rate: 
4% per annum
In 2012 $
Benefit-cost ratio: 1.4
Note: In the final column, for each identification, numbers in green font indicate that adaptation actions under consideration passed an economic efficiency test 
(i.e., the estimated net present value (NPV) > 0 or the BCR > 1); numbers in red font indicate that adaptation actions under consideration failed an economic 
efficiency test (i.e., the estimated NPV < 0 or the BCR < 1).
*Where only the value is listed, the adaptation option in question was only used in one coastal segment.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 487 
Appendix 6.5: Using equity weights to account for the distribution of 
costs and benefits
If people receiving benefits from an adaptation action or bearing the costs of the action belong to different 
income classes, it is possible to explicitly account for this by applying distributional weights according to their 
relative income levels. The weight attached to a person in group i with annual income Yi is given as wi , where:
And Ῡ is the average income of the chosen reference group (e.g., the third income quintile) and ε is referred 
to as the inequality aversion parameter. Estimates of ε have been made in the literature indicating a central 
estimate in the range of 1.5 [1.0-2.0] (Groom and Maddison, 2018). 
The following example shows how the weights would work. Assume the population of interest has an average 
income of $20,000 per annum. The weights to be attached to benefits accruing to individuals at different 
income levels are shown in the table below:
WEIGHT
INCOME ($)
ε = 1
ε = 2
5,000
4
16
10,000
2
4
20,000
1
1
50,000
0.4
0.16
100,000
0.2
0.04
A reduction in climate-related damages of $1 to a person with an income of $5,000 would be given a value of 
$4 in the economic analysis if ε is assumed to be one and $16 if ε is assumed to be two, and so on for other 
income levels.
CHAPTER 7
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Sector Impacts 
and Adaptation
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 489 
Coordinating lead authors 
Donald S. Lemmen, PhD 
Catherine Lafleur, PhD, Natural Resources Canada
Lead and contributing authors 
Forestry: 
Catherine Lafleur, PhD, Natural Resources Canada
James MacLellan, PhD, University of Toronto
Fisheries: 
Denis Chabot, PhD, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Nancy Shackell, PhD, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Helen Gurney-Smith, PhD, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Jackie King, PhD, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
Agriculture: 
Jamie Hewitt, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
Energy: 
Marco Braun, PhD, Ouranos
Mining: 
Bruno Bussière, PhD, Université du Québec en Abitibi-Témiscamingue 
Émilie Bresson, PhD, Polytechnique Montréal
Transportation: 
Irene Kulcsar, Transport Canada
Elizabeth Smalley, Transport Canada 
Matt Osler, City of Surrey
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 490 
Tourism: 
Daniel Scott, PhD, University of Waterloo
Jackie Dawson, PhD, University of Ottawa
Corporate adaptation: 
Jason Thistlethwaite, PhD, University of Waterloo
Recommended citation 
Lemmen, D., Lafleur, C., Chabot, D., Hewitt, J., Braun, M., Bussière, B., 
Kulcsar, I., Scott, D. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2021): Sector Impacts and 
Adaptation; Chapter 7 in Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues 
Report, (ed.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 491 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
493
7.1 Introduction 
495
7.2 Sustainable forest management is challenged by wildfires and pest outbreaks 
496
7.2.1 Introduction 
496
7.2.2 Impacts of wildfire
497
Case Story 7.1: The 2016 Fort McMurray (Horse River) wildfire 
502
7.2.3 Adaptation
505
7.2.4 Moving forward
506
7.3 Changes to ocean health are affecting fisheries and associated livelihoods 
506
7.3.1 Introduction
506
7.3.2 Water temperature
507
Case Story 7.2: Impacts of the 2013–2015 marine heat wave on Canada’s west coast
507
Case Story 7.3: Response of snow crab to rapid warming in Atlantic Canada
509
7.3.3 Dissolved oxygen 
509
Case Story 7.4: Vulnerability of Greenland halibut in the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence
510
7.3.4 Acidification
512
Case Story 7.5: Lobster production in Atlantic Canada impacted by ocean acidification
512
7.3.5 Moving forward
513
7.4 Climate change brings benefits and threats to the agriculture sector 
514
7.4.1 Introduction 
515
7.4.2 Climate risks and regional adaptation planning
515
7.4.3 Inter-connectivity
517
7.4.4 Moving forward
518
7.5 Climate change brings new environmental challenges for mining 
519
7.5.1 Introduction
519
7.5.2 Tailings containment structures
520
7.5.3 Reclamation of mining sites
521
Case Story 7.6: Reclamation of the Lorraine, QC mine site 
522
7.5.4 Adaptation
524
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 492 
7.5.5 Moving forward
525
7.6 Each link of the energy value chain can be vulnerable to climate change 
526
7.6.1 Introduction
526
7.6.2 Risks to energy production and transmission
527
7.6.3 Adaptation
529
Case Story 7.7: Opportunities for increased hydropower production in Iceland
530
7.6.4 Moving forward
531
7.7 Extreme weather events impact transportation, disrupting supply chains 
532
7.7.1 Introduction 
532
7.7.2 Climate impacts on transportation systems
535
7.7.3 Understanding interdependencies
535
7.7.4 Adaptation
536
Case Story 7.8: Addressing increasing flood risk in Surrey, BC
537
7.7.5 Moving forward
539
7.8 Climate change is leading to transformational changes in tourism 
540
7.8.1 Introduction
540
7.8.2 Winter sports tourism
541
7.8.3. Arctic cruise tourism
542
Case Story 7.9: The costs of increased tourism ship traffic in the Canadian Arctic
543
7.8.4 “Last chance” tourism
544
7.8.5 Moving forward
545
7.9 Increased private sector involvement will accelerate adaptation across sectors 
545
7.9.1 Introduction
546
7.9.2 Corporate adaptation in Canada
546
7.9.3 Adaptation actions
547
Case Story 7.10: Insurance and climate change adaptation in Canada
548
7.9.4 Knowledge gaps
548
7.9.5 Moving forward
549
7.10 Moving forward 
549
7.10.1 Knowledge gaps and emerging issues
549
7.11 Conclusion
551
7.12 References 
553
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 493 
Key messages 
Climate change affects almost every economic sector in Canada
(see Section 7.1)
Virtually every sector of the Canadian economy is affected, directly and/or indirectly, by climate change. 
Assessments of risks and opportunities that consider connections within and between sectors can help 
establish priorities for investments in adaptation actions.
Sustainable forest management is challenged by wildfires and pest 
outbreaks (see Section 7.2)
The forest sector is dealing with a wide range of climate change risks, from pest outbreaks to wildfire and 
long-term species shifts. The impacts of extreme events, such as wildfire, highlight the need for actions that 
build more resilient forests and communities, and that contribute to climate change mitigation. 
Changes to ocean health are affecting fisheries and associated 
livelihoods (see Section 7.3)
Changes in ocean temperature and chemistry are already affecting fish populations. While some future 
impacts will be positive, many will present challenges to harvesters’ economic livelihoods and regulators’ 
responsibility for sustaining ocean health. Effective management depends upon realistic models of the future 
abundance and distribution of commercial species in response to both climatic and non-climatic stressors.
Climate change brings benefits and threats to the agriculture sector 
(see Section 7.4)
Climate change brings both opportunities and challenges to Canada’s agricultural sector. Longer growing 
seasons and the potential to grow crops farther north may benefit agriculture, while changes in water 
availability, extreme weather events, and pests and diseases will present challenges. Adaptation actions that 
enhance climate resilience and consider the linkages between agriculture and interconnected sectors, such 
as water management and transportation, will benefit both local sustainability and global food security. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 494 
Climate change brings new environmental challenges for mining 
(see Section 7.5)
Impacts on the chemical and physical stability of tailings containment and reclamation structures are among 
the greatest climate-related challenges to the Canadian mining industry. Failure of such structures can 
lead to severe environmental contamination and present risks for surrounding communities and ecosystems. 
Considering long-term climate change at the design phase of mining projects is necessary to reduce these risks.
Each link of the energy value chain can be vulnerable to climate 
change  (see Section 7.6)
Changing climate affects energy demand and the full energy value chain, from exploration and production 
through to transmission and distribution. Climate risks can be integrated into current business planning by 
considering co-benefits, no-regret options and incremental approaches. Climate resilience needs to be a key 
consideration in converting to low-carbon energy systems. 
Extreme weather events impact transportation, disrupting supply 
chains (see Section 7.7)
Road, rail, marine and air transportation in Canada are vulnerable to "extreme weather events and slow-onset 
climate change, with major disruptions having significant economic and social impacts. To fully assess these 
impacts, linkages between transportation systems, and between transportation modes and a wide range of 
other economic sectors, need to be accounted for. Coordinating adaptation responses across jurisdictions 
and sectors will benefit transportation asset owners, operators and those dependent on vulnerable supply 
chains and corridors.
Climate change is leading to transformational changes in tourism
(see Section 7.8)
All tourism destinations need to adapt to climate change impacts on tourism assets and altered 
competitiveness within the highly interconnected tourism economy. While Canadian tourism competitiveness 
is expected to increase under climate change, the specific market and regional implications of this change 
for national competitiveness remain under-researched. Winter and northern tourism and recreation are 
particularly sensitive to climate variability, and transformational changes in ski, snowmobile and Arctic cruise 
tourism are expected. 
Increased private sector involvement will accelerate adaptation 
across sectors (see Section 7.9)
Despite growing awareness of climate change impacts, there is no widespread evidence of corporate 
adaptation in Canada. When adaptation does occur, it tends to focus on short-term actions to address 
physical risks, such as disruptions in construction and interruptions in supply chains. Increased involvement 
of the private sector would accelerate adaptation in Canada as a whole.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 495 
7.1 Introduction 
Virtually every sector of the Canadian economy is affected, directly and/or indirectly, by climate change. 
Assessments of risks and opportunities that consider connections within and between sectors can help 
establish priorities for investments in adaptation actions. 
It is increasingly evident that climate change is impacting Canada’s economy as a whole, and that these 
impacts will increase in future (Canadian Council of Academies, 2019). Adaptation will be necessary across 
all sectors to limit climate risks and, in some cases, to benefit from new opportunities. Proactive adaptation 
enables innovation and growth, and can enhance economic competitiveness (Kovacs and Thistlethwaite, 
2014). Very few studies have undertaken quantitative economic analysis of the impacts of specific climate 
scenarios on Canadian business and industry (see Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and 
Adaptation chapter; Eyzaguirre, 2016), but research elsewhere demonstrates that costs accelerate with 
continued warming (IPCC, 2014). Additionally, at higher rates of climate change, adaptation options become 
increasingly limited, presenting critical risks ranging from local economic viability to global food security 
(IPCC, 2019, 2018, 2014).
From a Canadian perspective, most sectoral research on impacts and adaptation has focused on food and 
natural resource sectors where climate change directly affects primary production, such as agriculture, 
fisheries, forestry and hydroelectricity generation (Warren and Lemmen, 2014). The economic significance 
of these sectors is amplified at both the local scale, with many Canadian communities deriving 80% or more 
employment income from these sectors (see Rural and Remote Communities chapter), and on the global 
scale, where Canada is among the world leaders in agriculture, forestry and mineral exports. 
Less attention has been paid to other sectors of Canada’s economy, with the exception of human health 
(Berry et al., 2014). However, there is growing recognition that climate-related health and social impacts on 
communities and workers, as well as climate impacts on supply chains and other infrastructure, represent 
significant material and financial risks throughout the economy (Canadian Council of Academies, 2019). As a 
result, a growing body of literature on these other sectors is emerging (see Climate Disclosure, Litigation and 
Finance chapter).
Previous sectoral assessments conducted in Canada, such as Warren and Lemmen (2014)—particularly 
chapters 4, 5 and 6—highlight:
•	
Vulnerabilities to both extreme weather events and to slow-onset climate changes;
•	
Amplified impacts in northern and remote communities;
•	
Opportunities that climate change presents for many sectors, in addition to the changing nature 
of climate risks;
•	
Increased implementation of climate adaptation measures and expanded engagement of 
industry, governments and civil society; enhancing both social and economic resilience;
•	
Processes that can help advance adaptation actions, including risk disclosure, environmental 
assessment and sustainable management reporting;
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 496 
•	
Interdependencies between sectors, with transportation systems being particularly important; and
•	
A lack of information related to indirect impacts of climate change, including those related to 
consumer demand, supply chains, real estate or other assets, legal liability and government 
regulation. 
This chapter builds on the findings of Warren and Lemmen (2014) and other relevant Canadian assessments 
(e.g., Palko and Lemmen, 2017) by examining key climate change impacts and adaptation in seven sectors 
of Canada’s economy—forestry, agriculture, fisheries, energy, mining, transportation and tourism—as well 
as broad perspectives on corporate adaptation. Issues related to human health are not included in this 
chapter, as they are addressed in a separate assessment report (see Health of Canadians in a Changing 
Climate Report). The authors focused on a limited number of priority issues identified through assessment 
of the breadth of available knowledge. As a result, the subsequent sections of this chapter do not provide a 
comprehensive assessment of climate change impacts and adaptation responses within each sector, but 
rather focus on topics where knowledge has advanced recently and where the assessed knowledge relates 
directly to the ongoing decision-making process.
7.2 Sustainable forest management is challenged 
by wildfires and pest outbreaks 
The forest sector is dealing with a wide range of climate change risks, from pest outbreaks to wildfire and 
long-term species shifts. The impacts of extreme events, such as wildfire, highlight the need for actions 
that build more resilient forests and communities and contribute to climate change mitigation. 
Climate variability and extreme weather events associated with climate change are challenging forest 
management by limiting access to forest resources and increasing operational costs. More frequent wildfires 
and forest pest infestations are constraining local timber supplies and impacting the social and economic 
well-being of forest communities. In addition, the forest sector is facing longer-term climate impacts, such as 
changes in tree species composition, stand structure, productivity and health. In response to these and other 
challenges, such as changing social values and market demand, forest companies are addressing multiple 
environmental, economic and social needs simultaneously. Adaptive, risk-based management approaches that 
apply research, monitoring and evaluation will help inform future management policies to promote healthy, 
resilient forests and enhance carbon storage.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 497 
7.2.1 Introduction 
The Canadian forest sector is sensitive to the impacts of climate on ecosystem goods and services. In 
the short term, projected increases in temperature will likely surpass the potential moderating effects of 
increasing precipitation on fire weather (Zhang et al., 2019), leading to an increased risk of wildland fire and 
drought (Boucher et al., 2018; Boulanger et al., 2017; Flannigan et al., 2009). Climate change is also a critical 
driver of progressive disturbances, such as pest infestations, which influence the likelihood of immediate 
disturbance events, while also affecting long-term forest structure and composition (Sulla-Menashe et al., 
2018; van Lierop et al., 2015; Price et al., 2013; Sturrock et al., 2011; Burton, 2010). The cumulative effects 
of these changes decrease the health and resilience of Canada’s forests, constraining timber supply and 
increasing risks to the forest sector (Boucher et al., 2018; Taylor et al., 2017; McKenney et al., 2016; Gauthier 
et al., 2014; Price et al., 2013; Coulombe et al., 2010; Williamson et al., 2009). Better understanding of these 
projected changes will help the forest sector better prepare for both risks and opportunities.
Past management responses to climate-related impacts in the forestry sector have tended to be reactive, as 
exemplified by responses to the mountain pine beetle outbreak in Western Canada (Jones and Preston, 2011; 
Bentz et al., 2010; Williamson et al., 2009). Recently, forest managers, policy specialists and researchers 
have developed an array of knowledge resources, tools, and protocols to help practitioners and stakeholders 
take a proactive approach to managing the impacts of a changing climate and related environmental and 
socioeconomic stressors. The phases of adaptive management are reviewed in a series of past assessments 
(Gauthier et al., 2014; Lemmen et al., 2014; Price et al., 2013; NRTEE, 2011; Williamson et al., 2009), recognizing 
that no single “road map” exists to guide the implementation of adaptation responses (Samy et al., 2015). This 
section builds upon past assessments by focusing on wildland fire in the context of recent events.
7.2.2 Impacts of wildfire
While forest fires are a natural and essential element of forest ecology, there is growing awareness of the 
dramatic impact that wildfires have on Canadians. As climate changes occur, fire regimes are changing, 
often with increasing frequency, severity and size (Mori and Johnson, 2013; Flannigan et al., 2009). Non-
climate factors, such as forest condition, forest management practices, land cover (Marchal et al., 2017) and 
cumulative disturbances are also important considerations in explaining these increases. The fire season 
is becoming longer, starting earlier in the spring and ending later in the fall (Zhang et al., 2019; Hanes et al., 
2018; Jolly et al., 2015; Flannigan et al., 2013), with more frequent fires (expressed by a shorter fire return 
interval) expected throughout this century (see Figure 7.1).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 498 
a) 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 499 
Figure 7.1: Interactive maps of baseline and projected fire likelihood in Canada, presented in terms of fire return 
interval (years), for two greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions scenarios: a) a low emissions scenario (RCP2.6) and 
b) a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5). Shorter fire return intervals (in brown and light brown) represent a higher 
fire likelihood, and longer cycles (in yellow, light and dark green) represent a low fire likelihood. The maps show 
local fire likelihood (pixels represent a 250 m² resolution) using the homogeneous fire regime zones of Boulanger 
et al. (2014) and display fire selectivity based on vegetation composition and stand age at the pixel level. Source: 
Boulanger et al., 2014.
Ecological impacts following wildfires include changes to forest stand structure, such as age class 
distribution and species composition (Price et al., 2013; Brown and Johnstone, 2012; Lynch, 2004). Shorter 
return intervals, in combination with growing fire severity, increase the risk of regeneration failure (see Figure 
7.2; Whitman et al., 2019), and transitioning of forested areas to non-forested terrain (Boiffin and Munson, 
b) 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 500 
2013; Price et al., 2013; Brown and Johnstone, 2012). Loss of tree cover on the landscape can lead to flooding 
and mass wasting in some areas (Bladon, 2018; Creed et al., 2016). Changes to fire regimes threaten not only 
timber supply (quality, quantity and tree species mix), but also the provision of ecosystem services, such as 
biodiversity, habitat for species at risk, carbon storage, water quality and water quantity (see Ecosystem 
Services chapter; Gauthier et al., 2014; Price et al., 2013). While it is difficult to predict how such changes will 
manifest locally, analysis of past mountain pine beetle infestations suggests that creating more resilient 
forests results in multiple benefits (Dymond et al., 2015).
Figure 7.2: Photo of a post-fire landscape at risk of regeneration failure: a site in the Northwest Territories, one 
year after a 2014 wildfire. This site had previously burned in 2004 and the short (10-year) interval between fires 
has led to a complete lack of tree recruitment. Poor regeneration is attributed to the absence of both seedlings 
and soil organic matter prior to the fire. Photo courtesy of Natural Resources Canada.
There is a growing awareness of the social impacts of wildland fire (McGee et al., 2015; Gill et al., 2013), 
including the numbers of wildfire evacuees (see Figure 7.3). Evacuations cause physical and mental health 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 501 
issues, disrupt the lives of evacuees and create economic stress on individuals and communities (McCaffrey 
et al., 2015; Beverly and Bothwell, 2011; Marshall et al., 2007; Morton et al., 2003). With more wildfires, health 
issues due to smoke are increasing well beyond the immediate vicinity of the fire (Liu et al., 2016; Reid et al., 
2016; Finlay et al., 2012), and visibility issues are impacting transportation (Goodrick et al., 2013). To date, 
these impacts have disproportionately affected small and Indigenous communities: one third of all wildfire 
evacuees are Indigenous and over half of smoke-related evacuations involve Indigenous communities (see 
Rural and Remote Communities chapter; Sankey, 2018; Scharbach and Waldram, 2016; Christianson, 2015).
Figure 7.3: Number of wildfire evacuees in Canada (1980‒2020). Many factors, including fire frequency, size and 
location relative to population density, influence the number of evacuees. British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario 
have had the most evacuations from 1980 to 2020. Data source: Government of Canada, 2020.
Economic impacts associated with wildland fire are far-reaching. Direct costs, which include fire management 
and suppression activities (Rijal et al., 2018; Wotton et al., 2010), have increased from an average of $290 
million per year in the early 1970s to about $1 billion annually in recent years (Natural Resources Canada, 
2019, 2017). These costs are projected to further increase by over 100% by the end of the century under a 
high emissions scenario (Hope et al., 2016). Maintaining current effective levels of fire suppression appears 
to be unsustainable (Wotton et al., 2017; Hope et al., 2016). Climate change impacts and loss of timber supply 
have cascading economic impacts on the forest sector that are difficult to quantify (Ochuodho and Lantz, 
2014). Other sectors also face direct costs from wildfires, including the following: evacuation expenditures; 
damage to infrastructure; shutdown of businesses and industries; insurance costs; and loss of forest 
ecosystem services (McGee et al., 2015; Gauthier et al., 2015; Peter et al., 2006). The increased emphasis on 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 502 
forests in the low-carbon economy highlights the importance of quantifying the costs associated with the 
release of greenhouse gases. There are also health costs associated with smoke and evacuation stress (Reid 
et al., 2016; McCaffrey et al., 2015; Beverly and Bothwell, 2011; Morton et al., 2003).
Catastrophic insurable losses due to extreme events such as wildfire are increasing. The Fort McMurray 
wildfire in 2016 was the largest insurance event in Canada, assessed at almost $4 billion (see Case Story 7.1; 
Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019, 2016; Swiss Re Institute, 2018; Statistics Canada, 2017). This assessment 
vastly underestimates overall costs, given that uninsured costs for repairing and rebuilding for governments 
and homeowners can be three to four times those of private insurance companies (Dixon et al., 2018). The 
link between climate change and extreme events is clear (e.g., IPCC, 2012), with recent attribution analysis 
in Canada indicating that climate change has increased the likelihood of extreme dry conditions, extreme 
wildfire risk and the length of fire seasons (Kirchmeier-Young et al., 2017; Tett et al., 2017). All of these 
factors are relevant to the Fort McMurray wildfire (Zhang et al., 2019).
Case Story 7.1: The 2016 Fort McMurray (Horse River) wildfire 
The Horse River wildfire began on May 1, 2016, seven kilometres outside of Fort McMurray, Alberta. Two days 
later, it entered Fort McMurray, destroying approximately 2,400 homes and displacing an additional 2,000 
residents in three communities within the Wood Buffalo region (see Figure 7.4; MNP, 2017). Before it was 
controlled, the fire spread across northern Alberta into Saskatchewan, threatening First Nations communities, 
impacting Athabasca oil sands operations through lost oil production of approximately 47 million barrels—
costing $1.4 billion in lost revenue (Antunes et al., 2016)—and consuming extensive forests and destroying 
critical infrastructure (MNP, 2017). The Insurance Bureau of Canada estimated insured losses at $3.9 billion, 
making it the costliest disaster in Canadian history and also one of the worst fire disasters internationally 
(Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2019, 2016; Swiss Re Institute, 2018). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 503 
Figure 7.4: a) 2016 Horse River wildfire approach to Fort McMurray, Alberta; b) Maps outlining the growth of the 
2016 Horse River Wildfire from May 2, 2016 to May 17, 2016. Source: Adapted from MNP, 2017.
Estimating the full costs of wildfires presents challenges due to the number of direct and indirect costs, 
ranging from economic damage to homes and infrastructure to the health care costs associated with 
atmospheric pollution from the fire and toxic discharges into watersheds (see Table 7.1). The Horse River 
experience illustrates how the impacts of wildfire can quickly expand beyond the forest sector to include 
numerous other sectors and disciplines, and highlights the importance of collaboration between institutional 
partners in dealing with the full impacts of climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 504 
Table 7.1: Examples of direct and indirect costs associated with the 
Fort McMurray (Horse River) wildfire
DIRECT COSTS (EXAMPLES)
Suppressing and extinguishing wildfire across multiple jurisdictions
Evacuation activities, including the coordination and support of evacuees
Law and order maintenance during the evacuation
Damage to personal property
Damage to business infrastructure
Damage to public infrastructure (gas, power and telephone lines)
Commercial timber losses
INDIRECT COSTS (EXAMPLES)
Loss of oil production
Loss of non-oil industrial production, including retail and other commercial sectors
Unemployment (lost wages and salaries)
Demographic shifts (population decline and loss of productive workforce)
Social service costs, including long-term health care and family related-issues
Greenhouse gas emissions, the release of pollutants, and other impacts on ecosystem services
Insurance rate increases
Source: Based on Subedi et al., 2016.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 505 
7.2.3 Adaptation
Since the risks associated with wildfire and other climate impacts have effects beyond the forest sector, 
implementing adaptation measures requires the involvement of stakeholders across multiple sectors 
(Furness and Nelson, 2016; Nelson et al., 2016). Some adaptation options mentioned below are specific to 
wildfire, while others contribute to increasing the overall resilience of forests and forest communities (see 
Edwards et al., 2015 and Gauthier et al., 2014 for compendiums of adaptation measures). 
Various adaptation options are available to reduce the risk and impacts of forest disturbances such as 
wildfire (Leduc et al., 2015; McGee et al., 2015; Blackwell et al., 2008). For example, fire risk can be reduced 
through active fuel management, involving thinning, debris removal and prescribed burning (Astrup et al., 
2018; Schroeder, 2010; Ohlson et al., 2006; Spittlehouse, 2005), and adjusting harvest schedules to favour 
older and insect-damaged stands (Dymond et al., 2015; Raulier et al., 2014). Regeneration planning could 
include a greater proportion of more fire-tolerant species and deciduous trees (Bernier et al., 2016). 
At the local level, FireSmart activities (Hirsch et al., 2001), such as creating fire breaks around communities, 
building with fire-resistant materials, and cleaning up debris around properties to reduce fuel load, help 
increase resilience to wildland fire (FireSmart Canada, 2019a, 2019b, 2018; Spittlehouse, 2005). Communities 
are actively improving their emergency preparedness by creating plans for culturally-sensitive evacuations 
and hosting of evacuees (Scharbach and Waldram, 2016; Beardy's and Okemasis' Cree Nation, n.d.). 
While a number of adaptation responses have been developed to reduce the costs resulting from the effects 
of wildfire on timber supply (Rijal et al., 2018; Leduc et al., 2015; Raulier et al., 2014; Raulier et al., 2013); 
addressing the broader economic impacts of wildland fires extends far beyond the forest sector (Orwig, 
2016). For example, the insurance sector is examining the impact of wildland fires on mining, forestry, energy, 
agriculture, transportation and utilities, and is collaborating with organizations such as FireSmart (Hirsch et 
al., 2001) to incentivize actions to reduce fire risks around communities and infrastructure.
The status of implementation provides a benchmark for measuring adaptation progress in the forest 
sector. The Canadian Council of Forest Ministers’ Climate Change Task Force produced a series of nine 
interrelated reports (Canadian Council of Forest Ministers, n.d.), including a practical guidebook (Edwards 
et al., 2015), to support mainstreaming of climate change into forest management planning. Early adopters 
are using this guidebook to assess vulnerabilities and rank adaptation options based on current and future 
ability for implementation (Andrews-Key, 2018; Gatin and Johnston, 2017). Guidance documents have also 
been produced to help private woodlot owners adapt to a changing climate (Ontario Woodlot Association, 
2015). National and regional climate change initiatives (e.g., Gatin and Johnston, 2017) include climate 
change strategies and action plans, and updated policies and regulations. Supportive research has placed 
an emphasis on integrated assessment approaches, drawing on expertise from a range of disciplines to 
complement ecological research with socioeconomic analyses. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 506 
7.2.4 Moving forward
Climate change is already affecting the forest sector, especially through extreme events such as wildfire. 
These effects are expected to continue and intensify, requiring greater efforts to implement adaptation 
measures. While no single road map exists to guide adaptation implementation, regional risk assessments 
in Canada have highlighted the need for integration of ecological, social and economic pressures beyond the 
forest sector. Integration and the capture of synergies across sectors can be greatly facilitated by adopting 
common data sources and scenarios (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2018) as well as risk-based 
methods and frameworks (see Section 7.9; Johnston et al., 2020; ISO, 2018; Daniel et al., 2017; Calkin et al., 
2014; Jones and Preston, 2011). Implementation of actions that enhance the climate resilience of forests is 
important for supporting the ecological, social and economic services that forests provide. 
7.3 Changes to ocean health are affecting 
fisheries and associated livelihoods 
Changes in ocean temperature and chemistry are already affecting fish populations. While some future 
impacts will be positive, many will present challenges to harvesters’ economic livelihoods and regulators’ 
responsibility for sustaining ocean health. Effective management depends upon realistic models of the 
future abundance and distribution of commercial species in response to both climatic and non-climatic 
stressors.
Climate change is increasing water temperatures and acidity, decreasing oxygen content and increasing the 
salinity of the world’s oceans. Of these environmental variables, changes in temperature, dissolved oxygen and 
acidification will be responsible for most of the direct impacts on fisheries and aquaculture (farming of fish or 
shellfish) in Canada over the next few decades. These variables are driving, and will continue to drive, changes 
in distribution, productivity, reproduction and timing of seasonal events (e.g., moulting, migration, spawning and 
hatching) for many aquatic species. Extreme events, particularly abrupt warming events lasting many months, 
are also important considerations in aquatic management. Planning of adaptation measures needs to account 
for the complex interactions between various climate stressors, as well as non-climatic stressors such as 
fishing pressures.
7.3.1 Introduction
The critical role and climatic sensitivity of fisheries and aquaculture in food security at the global scale, 
and in local-scale resilience of coastal communities, are well established (Bindoff et al., 2019; Lemmen et 
al., 2016; Porter et al., 2014). An overview of climate change impacts on food production in Canada, and 
related adaptation actions, was presented by Campbell et al. (2014). For the fisheries sector, the researchers 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 507 
concluded that regional impacts from physical habitat changes, invading species, and societal responses will 
determine future patterns of use and overall economic implications. Aquaculture was noted as having the 
greatest scope for adaptation measures, making it less vulnerable and better positioned to take advantage 
of opportunities compared to capture fisheries, while traditional subsistence fisheries were deemed to be 
particularly vulnerable.
This section builds on the findings of Campbell et al. (2014) by focusing on near-term challenges for the 
sustainable management of marine ecosystems arising from physical habitat changes (e.g., warming, 
acidification, and lowering or depletion of dissolved oxygen), and highlights how climate change is being 
incorporated into scientific advice that informs fisheries and aquaculture management decisions. Greater 
details on the physical impacts of changing climate are described in Chapter 7 of Canada’s Changing Climate 
Report (Greenan et al., 2019a). Impacts on freshwater recreational and commercial fishing and aquaculture 
are not discussed here, but it is clear that increased water temperatures and decreased pH and oxygen are 
already impacting many freshwater ecosystems. Additionally, it is noted that anadromous species will be 
subjected to negative impacts during their stay in freshwater, and therefore even marine fisheries will be 
affected by changes in freshwater ecosystems.
7.3.2 Water temperature
With a few exceptions, the internal temperature of fishes and crustaceans closely matches that of the water 
in which they live. As a result, temperature exerts a strong influence on their physiology (e.g., metabolism 
and growth) and aquatic animals are adapted to a species-specific temperature range. When mobile species 
encounter temperatures approaching their upper tolerance limit, they tend to move towards cooler, more 
optimal temperatures. Off the west coast of British Columbia, a persistent warming event from 2013 to 2015 
had several ecosystem impacts (see Case Story 7.2).
Case Story 7.2: Impacts of the 2013–2015 marine heat wave on 
Canada’s west coast
A well-documented warming event that started offshore of the west coast of British Columbia in 2013 was 
evident in coastal waters by the summer of 2015 (see Figure 7.5), with an increase in water temperatures of 
3˚C above normal (Ross, 2016). This warming of coastal waters was accompanied by harmful algal blooms, 
record high levels of large gelatinous zooplankton and invasion by warm-water species (Chandler et al., 2016). 
The event may have had cascading ecosystem consequences, such as the extraordinary bloom of a colonial 
waterborne tunicate (an animal with no backbone that is rarely found north of California) observed along the 
entire west coast of North America in 2017 (Brodeur et al., 2018). While the specific causes are unknown, 
the 2013‒2015 marine heat wave, coupled with favourable conditions for growth and reproduction, could 
have resulted in this unprecedented bloom. The bloom had substantial negative impacts on commercial and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 508 
recreational fishing operations due to fouling of fishing gear (Brodeur et al., 2018), illustrating that anomalous 
events can have unforeseen impacts on coastal fisheries.
Figure 7.5: The left-hand panels show sea-surface temperature anomaly data (National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration), including information from satellites, ships, and moored and drifting buoys. Temperature 
anomalies are the differences between the observed temperature and the long-term average temperature (both 
in °C) for a given location. The green, yellow and red colours represent above-average temperatures, whereas 
the blue and purple colours represent below-average temperatures. The right-hand panels show temperature 
anomalies by depth (in meters) along Line-P, as shown in the left-hand panels and starting near the southwest 
coast of Vancouver Island, BC, leading to the Ocean Station Papa (145°W, 50°N). The colours are demarcated by 
increments of 0.5°C. Source: Adapted from Chandler et al., 2016.
The general warming trends documented for the last century over most of the world’s oceans have already 
resulted in distribution shifts (Mueter and Litzow, 2008). Changes in distribution of commercial species will 
cause changes in the location and success of fishing effort. Eventually, new species may replace old ones 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 509 
in the fisheries. Smaller movements or changes in abundance can also be observed at the regional scale, as 
fishes and crustaceans adjust their distribution to local changes in temperature (see Case Story 7.3).
Case Story 7.3: Response of snow crab to rapid warming in Atlantic 
Canada
Snow crab is a cold-water species with an upper thermal limit of 6‒7°C. It is the second most valuable fishery 
in Atlantic Canada (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2018a). Its distribution has been shown to expand during 
cold periods and shrink in warmer periods (Ernst et al., 2005; Zheng and Kruse, 2000; Tremblay, 1997). An 
extreme warming event documented in the deep waters at the mouth of the Laurentian Channel off Nova 
Scotia, starting in 2012, propagated onto the Scotian Shelf, with temperatures reaching 7‒9°C on the western 
Scotian Shelf (Brickman et al., 2018). This warming was accompanied by pronounced declines in catches 
in this fishing area, suggesting local mortality due to thermal stress in the absence of local colder refugia 
(Zisserson and Cook, 2017). The warming event also propagated into the deep channels of the Gulf of St. 
Lawrence and is still ongoing (Galbraith et al., 2018). In this ecosystem, changes in the distribution and 
abundance of snow crab and other important commercial cold-water species, such as Greenland halibut and 
Northern shrimp, have been partly caused by deep water warming of more than 1°C (Fisheries and Oceans 
Canada, 2018b, c, d).
Attribution of impacts must take into account the multiple climatic and non-climatic factors that affect 
species distributions. For example, fishing pressure, population size and bottom temperature all affect, to 
varying degrees, changes in the distribution of groundfish (Adams et al., 2018). This illustrates the importance 
of examining the joint role of fishing and climate in the distribution of fish stocks in order to provide sound 
scientific advice for management.
7.3.3 Dissolved oxygen 
Fishes and invertebrates require oxygen to live, although they differ in their sensitivity to lack of dissolved 
oxygen (hypoxia). Each species has a minimum level of oxygen required for survival, with severe hypoxia 
resulting in habitat loss and changes in distribution for mobile species, and increased mortality for immobile 
(sessile) species (Breitburg et al., 2018). Moderate hypoxia limits the amount of energy that animals can 
spend (Claireaux and Chabot, 2016), which usually translates into reduced feeding and growth rates for 
individual animals (Hrycik et al., 2017; Townhill et al., 2016), and ultimately reduced productivity for affected 
populations. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 510 
Climate change will exacerbate hypoxia because warming reduces the solubility of oxygen, increases 
biological oxygen consumption, and reduces ventilation in the world’s oceans, which increases residence 
time of deep water. Increased residence time means that fishes, invertebrates and bacteria have more time 
to remove oxygen through respiration, and deoxygenation becomes more pronounced (Breitburg et al., 2018). 
Modelling analysis of the impacts of increasing temperature and hypoxia in the Gulf of St. Lawrence indicates 
significant declines in biomass production (see Case Story 7.4).
Case Story 7.4: Vulnerability of Greenland halibut in the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence
Greenland halibut inhabiting the Gulf of St. Lawrence is the warmest water population of this cold-water 
species. The population faces chronic hypoxia over its entire distribution, with oxygen levels at less than 50% 
of saturation. Hypoxia is most severe (18‒25% saturation) at the head of the main channels, including the 
St. Lawrence Estuary, which is the main nursery for this population. Both laboratory studies (Dupont-Prinet et 
al., 2013) and field sampling (Youcef et al., 2015) show that low oxygen levels reduce the feeding and growth 
rates of juvenile Greenland halibut. A distribution model based on environmental conditions and abundance 
predicts a reduction in the distribution and abundance of this species in the Gulf of St. Lawrence by mid-
century (2046–2065) (see Figure 7.6; Stortini et al., 2017).
 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 511 
Figure 7.6: Results of five simulations for the distribution and abundance of Greenland halibut in the Gulf of St. 
Lawrence. a) Actual biomass data for the period 1990‒2013. b) Scenario involving warming only. The scenarios 
shown in panels c), d) and e) involve the same level of warming as in panel b), but this warming is accompanied 
by different levels of oxygen decline (c = 1% decline, d = 2% decline, and e = 4% decline). f) Scenario with a 4% 
oxygen decline and no warming. The impacts of warming alone (b) and warming accompanied by a 4% saturation 
decline in dissolved oxygen (e) appear similar with the colour coding used, although warming alone reduced high-
density areas by 49%, whereas the two stressors combined caused a 57% reduction. Decline in dissolved oxygen 
without the increase in temperature only reduced biomass by 2%. Source: Adapted from Stortini et al., 2017.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 512 
7.3.4 Acidification
Ocean acidification is caused by higher concentrations of CO2  in the air, increasing the dissolution of CO2 
in the oceans to create carbonic acid and exceeding the ocean’s ability to buffer against the increase in 
acid concentration. One measure of acidity is pH, with lower values representing a higher level of acidity. 
Since the Industrial Revolution, ocean pH has declined globally on average by 0.1 pH units, representing an 
increase of 26% in the number of hydrogen ions, and is predicted to further decrease by 0.4 pH units by 2100 
under a high-emissions scenario (RCP8.5) (Ciais et al., 2013). Many studies have shown that the important 
commercial species of fish, shellfish, crustaceans and gastropods can suffer negative effects when exposed 
to acidified water (Alin et al., 2019; Parker et al., 2013; Kroeker et al., 2010). Ocean acidification has already 
had a massive impact on shellfish, where changes in seawater carbonate chemistry alter  the ways in which 
juvenile (larval) shellfish build their shells, and can cause shell dissolution, deformities, slow growth and even 
death (Waldbusser et al., 2015; Gazeau et al., 2013). Ocean acidification impacts on shellfish aquaculture 
are evident through clear linkages between high CO2 seawater concentrations and poor larval development 
of Pacific oysters in the United States shellfish industry (Barton et al., 2012). Shellfish hatcheries generating 
juvenile oysters for field outplanting were severely affected, with losses of money and jobs (Ekstrom 
et al., 2015). In the Atlantic, research is underway to examine the impacts of ocean acidification on the 
commercially valuable American lobster (see Case Story 7.5). 
Case Story 7.5: Lobster production in Atlantic Canada impacted by 
ocean acidification
Lobster is the most lucrative fishery in Atlantic Canada. Key lobster production areas in the Gulf of Maine, 
Bay of Fundy and Scotian shelf are highly susceptible to ocean acidification due to poor regional buffering 
capacity and coastal nutrient inputs (Gledhill et al., 2015). Ocean acidification studies on both the early larval 
phases (stages I–IV) (Keppel et al., 2012) and early benthic phase juveniles (McLean et al., 2018) found 
slowed growth and an increased time between moults in more acidified seawater conditions. Low pH can 
also cause deformities in lobster larvae (see Figure 7.7). When lobsters are smaller and when they remain 
in the pelagic phase for longer periods, there is an increased likelihood of predation, therefore potentially 
limiting benthic recruitment (Keppel et al., 2012). Delayed growth of benthic juveniles also increases 
predation susceptibility (McLean et al., 2018), and ultimately affects population dynamics. Juvenile benthic 
lobsters in acidified conditions are also more susceptible to shell disease (McLean et al., 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 513 
Figure 7.7: Healthy stage IV American lobster reared in ambient conditions (bottom) and a deformed stage IV 
lobster larvae under acidified conditions (top). The acidified lobster is smaller and claws have been lost due to 
environmental stress. Photos from a recent study at the St. Andrews Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans 
Canada.
Warming will also influence lobster populations in other parts of eastern Canada. Larvae are particularly 
sensitive to warming (Waller et al., 2017). Settled lobsters are more tolerant of warming, which is projected to 
have a neutral or positive impact on lobster in the offshore areas of the Scotian Shelf (Greenan et al., 2019b). 
This is likely to be the case off Newfoundland and in the Gulf of St. Lawrence as well, except in some parts 
of Northumberland Strait where temperatures can exceed 23.5°C, a level that is avoided by lobster (Wilson 
and Swanson, 2005; Crossin et al., 1998). Furthermore, management adaptation is possible; protection of large 
individuals has been suggested as an adaption strategy for reducing the impact of warming (Le Bris et al., 2018). 
7.3.5 Moving forward
Fish stocks are assessed using the best available evidence, produced through basic research and using 
research monitoring programs. The resulting data are used to create physical forecast models that enable 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 514 
a longer-term understanding of climate change. The known associations between species abundance and 
environmental variables can be used to assess species vulnerability to warming (Stortini et al., 2015), to 
project future available habitat, and to facilitate planned adaptation to changes in distribution and productivity 
(Stortini et al., 2017; Marras et al., 2015; Shackell et al., 2014). 
Fisheries management combines scientific advice with social and economic information to make decisions 
about the fishery. Canada has initiated a process to incorporate climate change into science advice on 
fisheries, with initial emphasis on the stock assessment process as part of ecosystem-based management 
(Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2018e). Commercial stocks are assessed and managed within stock area 
units, with borders separating distinct stocks. Climate change adds another layer of complexity to the 
assessment and management process, in that we anticipate changes in distribution/productivity within 
and across borders. Increased understanding of the impact of multiple stressors on fishes and aquatic 
invertebrates will make it possible to develop more realistic models of the future abundance and distribution 
of commercial species, providing a stronger scientific foundation for resource management strategies.
7.4 Climate change brings benefits and threats 
to the agriculture sector 
Climate change brings both opportunities and challenges to Canada’s agricultural sector. Longer growing 
seasons and the potential to grow crops farther north may benefit agriculture, while changes in water 
availability, extreme weather events, and pests and diseases will present challenges. Adaptation actions 
that enhance climate resilience and consider the linkages between agriculture and interconnected sectors, 
such as water management and transportation, will benefit both local sustainability and global food security. 
Agriculture is inherently sensitive to climate. Increasing temperatures, shifting precipitation patterns, and 
changes in the frequency and intensity of some extreme climate events will affect crops and livestock 
operations, by both amplifying existing risks, and bringing new risks and opportunities. The type and degree of 
impacts will vary across agricultural regions and production systems. For example, increasing abundance of 
insect and disease species, and greater risk of new pests and diseases will impact crop and livestock health 
and could increase the risk of trade barriers. Additional risks arise from the sector’s strong dependence on 
transportation systems to maintain access to markets—systems that are themselves vulnerable to climate 
change impacts. Improvements to on-farm management practices―including improved fertilizer management, 
adoption of no-till practices to minimize soil disturbance, and improved water-use efficiency―have enhanced 
the sector’s climate resilience and illustrate a high capacity to adapt.
7.4.1 Introduction 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 515 
While Canada’s agriculture sector is intrinsically adaptive (Campbell et al., 2014), its ability to adapt is being 
challenged by the impacts of climate change, including a northward shift in distribution of many insect and 
disease species and new invasive species. Changes in temperature and precipitation patterns, discussed 
comprehensively in Zhang et al. (2019), will bring shifts in the distribution of crops. Despite the fact that 
precipitation is projected to increase for Canada as a whole, areas such as the southern Prairies and the 
interior of British Columbia are expected to see increased moisture deficits during the growing season (Zhang 
et al., 2019), increasing the importance of irrigation and good water management. 
Canadian agriculture is also highly dependent on reliable transportation networks to ensure that inputs 
(e.g., seed, fuel, fertilizer, pest control products and equipment) are delivered in an efficient, cost-effective and 
timely manner, and to maintain access to domestic and international markets. Flooding and other extreme 
weather events will challenge Canada’s grain handling and transportation system (Phillips and Towns, 2017). 
Improvements over the last twenty-five years have made Canada’s agriculture sector more climate-resilient 
(see Prairie Provinces chapter; Campbell et al., 2014). There has been an increased focus on collaboration 
between producers, researchers, and decision makers within interconnected sectors to assess impacts and 
implement new adaptation measures, and this will contribute to increasing the sector’s sustainability. This 
section examines recent developments in understanding climate change impacts on agriculture in Canada 
and the critical inter-connectivity between agriculture and transportation. A more in-depth discussion of 
agriculture at the regional level can be found in the regional chapters (see Atlantic Provinces, Ontario, Quebec, 
Prairie Provinces and British Columbia chapters). 
7.4.2 Climate risks and regional adaptation planning
Understanding climate risks to agriculture is informed by inputting observed and projected climate data into 
agricultural models (e.g., for crops, livestock, pests and diseases) to identify potential physical and economic 
impacts. Planning and implementation are required at various scales to target and identify actions within 
whole agricultural value chains, to inform on-farm impacts and to identify appropriate adaptation actions. 
Analysis of climate change impacts on agricultural production in Canada, summarized previously by Campbell 
et al. (2014), continues to improve. Under medium-emissions (RCP4.5) and high-emissions (RCP8.5) 
scenarios, production of wheat (Canada’s largest crop and greatest value export) and other spring-seeded 
grains is projected to increase by between 8% and 11% by the 2050s (2041–2070), relative to a 2006–2015 
baseline, across most of Canada’s agricultural regions (Qian et al., 2019; He et al., 2018). Increased heat 
stress could reduce canola yields across the southern Prairies, which will likely lead to a northward shift 
in crop production areas (Qian et al., 2018). Climate impacts on corn and soybean production in Canada 
remain less conclusive, with some studies showing increased suitability in Atlantic and central Canada, and 
opportunity for expansion in the Prairies, provided moisture limitations are not too restrictive (see Prairie 
Provinces chapter; Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2018; He et al., 2018; Schauberger et al., 2017; Sauchyn 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 516 
and Kulshreshtha, 2008). 
Severe moisture deficits by the 2050s are projected for certain areas of Canada under a high-emissions 
scenario (see Figure 7.8), which will particularly affect spring-seeded grain crops, such as wheat and barley. 
Water scarcity would be amplified by increased demand for water by other sectors, especially where irrigation 
and access to water are already important constraints on the sustainability of agriculture. Climate change is 
projected to increase variability in water supply, and to strain irrigation, drainage and flood control systems. 
For example, glacial meltwater, which contributes approximately 10% of summer flow in the Columbia River 
and Bow River, will be reduced to almost zero over the next 50 to 60 years as glaciers disappear (Derksen et 
al., 2019; Fyfe et al., 2017). Glacial water melt is very important for maintaining summer flows in the rivers of 
western Canada, during the key growing period. Increasing irrigation and on-farm water-use efficiency is a key 
adaptation mechanism. Currently, irrigation is practiced on 1.1 million hectares of Canada’s 44 million 
hectares of arable land (2.27%). While there is irrigation in every province, over 90% occurs in Saskatchewan, 
Alberta and British Columbia.
Figure 7.8: Growing season moisture deficit (precipitation minus potential evapotranspiration) across Canada for 
the period 1981‒2010 and for the period 2041‒2070 as projected under a high emissions (RCP8.5) scenario. In 
most areas, increased precipitation is more than offset by increased temperature and associated evaporation, 
leading to greater moisture deficits. Source: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2018.
The risks posed by animal diseases and plant pests are increasing as a result of climate change, with the 
likelihood of new invasive alien species (IAS) being introduced to Canada having significant consequences for 
Canada’s agriculture sector and economy. It is estimated that invasive species currently cause $4.2 billion in 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 517 
annual measurable losses to Canada’s agriculture industry (Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Canadian 
Food Inspection Agency, 2008). These relate to reduced crop yields and revenue, increased IAS control costs, 
loss of access to export or domestic markets, and decreased native biodiversity resulting from competition 
for resources. 
Modelling of pest and disease expansion under a changing climate indicates that the ranges of the striped 
flea beetle, Phyllotreta striolata (Fabricius), and the crucifer flea beetle, P. cruciferae, both IAS to North 
America, are projected to shift and potentially cause economic losses over an expanded area in the future 
(Olfert et al., 2017). Increased winter temperatures have contributed to higher overwinter survival of insect 
pests (Olfert et al., 2016) and some pathogens, including cereal rusts in the Prairie region (Xi et al., 2015; 
Kumar et al., 2013). The linkage between climate change and the rapid north and westward range expansion 
of the deer tick (Ixodes scapularis), which transmits the Lyme disease agent that can infect cattle and other 
livestock, as well as humans, is well documented (Ogden et al., 2014). Bluetongue, a viral disease of ruminants 
transmitted by the biting midge Culicoides sonorensis, extends from the southwestern United States into southern 
British Columbia and Alberta (Lysyk and Dergousoff, 2014), and has recently expanded into southern Ontario 
(Jewiss-Gaines et al. 2017). Species distribution models based on different climate change scenarios indicate that 
the range of C. sonorensis is likely to expand northward in Alberta (Zuliani et al., 2015).
Barriers to adaptation across the agriculture sector broadly (see Figure 1 of Campbell et al., 2014) include a 
lack of knowledge of climate impacts, limited technical capacity to assess agricultural risks at an appropriate 
scale, and uncertainties associated with projected climate impacts and adaptation actions (Agriculture 
Adaptation Working Group, 2016). Recent efforts by the agriculture sector to assess climate risks and 
consider adaptation actions, both regionally and at the farm level, have started to address these barriers. 
Examples include developments in climate risk assessment methodology and agricultural adaptation 
planning in Quebec (Ouranos, 2015), Manitoba (Goertzen, 2018), Nova Scotia (Nova Scotia Federation of 
Agriculture, 2018) and British Columbia (British Columbia Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
Strategy, 2019). Continued work could further improve understanding of risks, the agricultural sector’s 
awareness of climate impacts, and mechanisms to support adaptation action. New knowledge will continue 
to inform initiatives such as the agriculture sector’s Emergency Management Framework (Federal, Provincial 
and Territorial Emergency Management Framework Task Team, 2016), which includes elements to help 
proactively manage the increasing risk of pests and diseases and potential associated trade risk issues.
7.4.3 Inter-connectivity
The success of agricultural production in Canada is highly dependent upon connections with transportation 
networks. A reliable transportation network allows for efficient delivery of necessary input goods (such as 
seeds, fuel, fertilizers and farm equipment), as well as access to export markets. Climate change presents 
a wide range of risks to transportation networks in Canada (see Section 7.7; Palko and Lemmen, 2017), 
including damage to infrastructure from extreme precipitation and flooding, impacts associated with sea-level 
rise and storm surge flooding at terminal ports, increased risk of rail buckling due to extreme heat, cracking of 
roadways as a result of desiccation of clay sub-soils during drought conditions and washouts during flooding. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 518 
All of these impacts can cause transportation delays that negatively impact the agriculture sector value chain 
(e.g., farmers, processors, suppliers, etc.) from local to international scales.
Canada’s grain handling and transportation system is frequently impacted by extreme weather events. For 
example, excessive rainfall in Vancouver between January and March 2011, and severe weather events in 
the railway mountain corridors of British Columbia contributed to long delays in loading grain onto vessels in 
Vancouver ports (Quorum Corporation, 2014). Again in 2013, record totals of harvested crops in the Prairie 
provinces, followed by extreme cold winter conditions, contributed to transportation delays in accessing 
markets. Such delays impact Canada’s reputation as a reliable supplier of agricultural products and result in 
added costs for both grain companies and producers (Gray, 2015; Quorum Corporation, 2015). 
The importance of export markets for the Canadian agricultural sector cannot be overstated, with 
approximately 42% of its annual production being shipped out of the country. In 2013, Canada was the 
world’s fifth-largest exporter of agriculture and agri-food products (Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2016), 
with exports representing 85% of canola and canola products, 85% of flax, 66% of soybeans and soybean 
products, 65% of hogs and pork products, and 48% of cattle and beef products. Over the past 10 years, half 
of all Canadian grain production has been exported, averaging 41 million tonnes per year. Agri-food export 
sales in 2017 totalled $57.7 billion (Canadian Agri-Food Trade Alliance, 2020). While regional climate change 
impacts on agriculture production in Canada will be significant, impacts are expected to be much greater in 
most other major agriculture producing areas of the world (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2017; Ignaciuk 
and Mason-D'Croz, 2014). This represents both an opportunity for Canadian producers (Ignaciuk and Mason-
D'Croz, 2014) and a critical need with respect to global food security (Mbow, 2019).
7.4.4 Moving forward
Mechanisms that support regional capacity to utilize and interpret climate change impacts and adaptation 
information are improving the ability of the sector to proactively plan and implement adaptation actions. 
It is also increasingly important for the sector to collaborate with other appropriate sectors, including 
transportation and water management, on shared adaptation issues. Initiatives such as Drought Watch 
(Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 2019), which provides information on current climate risks and provides 
a mechanism for producers to submit details on impacts experienced at the farm level, are an important step 
forward in enhancing engagement and collaboration.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 519 
7.5 Climate change brings new environmental 
challenges for mining 
Impacts on the chemical and physical stability of tailings containment and reclamation structures are 
among the greatest climate-related challenges to the Canadian mining industry. Failure of such structures 
can lead to severe environmental contamination and present risks for surrounding communities and 
ecosystems. Considering long-term climate change at the design phase of mining projects is necessary to 
reduce these risks. 
Climate change can affect every phase of a mine’s life cycle. While short-term challenges, such as impacts 
on daily operations and disruption of critical supply chains, require adaptive actions, impacts on tailings 
containment and reclamation structures represent key vulnerabilities for the Canadian mining industry. Tailings 
containment and reclamation structures must remain in place for many decades and even centuries, which 
increases their vulnerability to climate change. While current designs of such structures take into account 
both average and extreme historical conditions, this does not adequately capture the full range of likely future 
conditions. Adaptation priorities include incorporating climate change projections into future designs, enhancing 
monitoring of existing structures and developing new methods and tools to improve climate resilience.
7.5.1 Introduction
Mining is a major component of the Canadian economy, with activities occurring in all provinces and 
territories. The effects of climate change on the mining sector are both direct and indirect, with the potential 
to affect every phase of a mine’s life cycle (Bussière et al., 2017; Pearce et al., 2011; Stratos, 2009). In many 
cases, climate change will exacerbate existing climate risks and create new risks, but it will also afford some 
new opportunities (Stratos, 2017, 2009; Bussière et al., 2017; Pearce et al., 2011). For example, during the 
exploration phase, the shorter period of frozen ground will make it difficult to access some exploration sites. 
On the other hand, a longer warm season will allow more time for mapping and the delivery of raw material 
supplies by ship or floatplane. 
An overview of climate change impacts and adaptation in the Canadian mining sector by Lemmen et 
al. (2014) highlighted risks to built infrastructure, transportation, extraction and processing, and daily 
operations. The project phases most affected are the management of mine tailings during operations and 
the reclamation of waste storage areas. These two phases have a long life span, and climate considerations 
are incorporated into their design (Bussière et al., 2017). Lemmen et al. (2014) also noted a lack of proactive 
adaptation planning for climate change in the sector, a conclusion supported by subsequent analysis that 
found little evidence of government or corporate policies having advanced in terms of addressing climate 
change impacts and adaptation (Stratos, 2017).
This section builds on previous Canadian assessments by focusing on what has emerged as a key climate 
vulnerability for the Canadian mining industry—risks to the physical and chemical stability of structures 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 520 
designed to contain tailings during and following mining activities, and risk to the long-term effectiveness of 
reclamation methods (Bussière et al., 2017; Stratos, 2017). 
7.5.2 Tailings containment structures
Mining waste, composed of finely crushed rock and water, is stored in tailings ponds that are generally 
located at surface-level close to the mine (Blight, 2010; Bussière, 2007; Bussière et al., 2005; Aubertin et al., 
2002). The purpose of these ponds is to contain the greatest possible volume of solid waste and permit 
the transfer of any overflow into one or more secondary ponds (called sedimentation and/or polishing 
ponds). These structures are usually created by closing off a natural valley or cordoning off an existing 
area with one or more dykes. They are equipped with drainage systems to allow the water, once solids 
settle, to be reused or processed, with spillways to control effluence during periods of extreme precipitation 
(Blight, 2010; Aubertin et al., 2002). Given the high water content and low density of most mine tailings, the 
physical stability of these structures is difficult to maintain over both the short and long term. Structures are 
frequently modified throughout the extraction stage of a mine (generally a few decades) to adapt to evolving 
operating conditions. 
Current approaches to designing tailings containment structures consider both average and extreme climate 
parameters, such as probable maximum precipitation (PMP) and probable maximum flood (PMF) (Aubertin et 
al., 2015). PMP and PMF are based on frequency analyses of historical climate data, and have a low annual 
probability of recurrence (Canadian Dam Association, 2013; Aubertin et al., 2011; Koutsoyiannis, 1999). The 
use of PMF is recommended in the conversion to permanent structures when a mine is closed, in order to 
avoid breaches and potential environmental, human and material consequences (Centre d'expertise hydrique 
du Québec, 2019; Canadian Dam Association, 2013; Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement 
et des Parcs, 2012; Aubertin et al., 2002, 1997; Vick, 2001). Importantly, there is currently no uniform 
methodological approach to factor climate change into the PMP and PMF calculations. 
The frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation events, as well as average annual precipitation levels, 
are projected to increase in most regions across Canada (Zhang et al., 2019), increasing the risk of physical 
instability of waste containment structures (Bussière et al., 2017; Guthrie et al., 2010; Jakob and Lambert, 
2009). Recovering spilled waste resulting from a dyke breach is difficult and expensive. For example, the 
tailings pond failure at the Aznalcollar mine in Spain in 1998 led to site reclamation costs estimated at about 
US$230 million (Eriksson and Adamek, 2000). In northern Canada, increasing temperatures are leading to 
permafrost degradation and increased depth of the annual thaw (active layer) (Derksen et al., 2019; Arzhanov 
and Mokhov, 2013; Zhang et al., 2008a, b). As a result, the integrity and stability of waste-retaining structures 
may be compromised. Increased thickness of the active layer can create problems in locating suitable 
construction sites for mining infrastructure; it should be noted that technologies for building on permafrost 
do exist and that relevant guidelines are well documented (Mine Environment Neutral Drainage, 2012; Doré 
and Zubeck, 2009; Andersland and Ladanyi, 2003). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 521 
7.5.3 Reclamation of mining sites
Reclamation of mining sites includes preventing contaminants such as acid mine drainage (AMD) from 
escaping into the environment (Blowes et al., 2003). This is possible by maintaining the long-term chemical 
stability of mine waste, as AMD results from the oxidation of sulphide minerals when they come into 
contact with water and atmospheric oxygen. Specific reclamation methods for preventing AMD are strongly 
influenced by climate conditions (see Box 7.1 and Case Story 7.6).
Box 7.1: Primary reclamation methods used in Canada
Reclamation of mine waste sites in Canada often uses covers to prevent acid mine drainage (AMD) (see 
Figure 7.9). In semi-arid to arid climates, such as the southern Prairie provinces and parts of south-central 
British Columbia, where the potential evaporation rate is high and annual rainfall low, reclamation systems 
aim to reduce the infiltration of precipitation into mine tailings that could generate contaminated drainage. 
In humid climates, such as in Ontario and southern Quebec, where the potential evaporation rate is relatively 
low with high annual precipitation, there is the additional task of creating barriers to control the migration 
of oxygen. In Arctic and sub-Arctic climates with continuous permafrost, controlling contaminated mine 
drainage usually consists of maintaining reactive waste at low temperatures by applying insulating covers 
that utilize the material’s hydrothermal properties (applicable for average annual temperatures below -7°C; 
Holubec, 2004). Some techniques used in more temperate climates (e.g., flooding, waterproof covers) can 
also be applied to control AMD in cold regions (see Figure 7.9; Aubertin et al., 2016, 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 522 
Figure 7.9: Primary reclamation methods used in Canada. Methods are designed to address critical issues that 
differ with climate regions. Source: Adapted from Bussière et al., 2017.
Case Story 7.6: Reclamation of the Lorraine, QC mine site 
The Lorraine mine site in western Quebec was operational from 1964 to 1968. The tailings pond at this site 
covers an area of 15.5 hectares and was abandoned for about 30 years. During this period, significant acid 
mine drainage (AMD) was produced. To reduce the environmental impact of AMD, a reclamation project 
was undertaken in the summer of 1998 (Bussière et al., 2009; Nastev and Aubertin, 2000). Various issues 
were considered in selecting the most suitable design, including local climate, geochemical characteristics 
of the tailings, and available unconsolidated materials. The region receives significant annual precipitation 
(900–1,000 mm) and the evaporation rate is low (400–500 mm). In such a humid climate, controlling AMD 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 523 
generation focuses on reducing the migration of oxygen rather than using a water barrier (see Box 7.1). The 
reclamation approach recommended for this site was the construction of a cover with capillary barrier effects 
(CCBE) to limit the migration of oxygen into the reactive waste. 
This site has been monitored since the CCBE construction. Measurements performed on the site show that 
after a transitional period of two years (1999–2000), the CCBE was effective in limiting oxygen migration 
(see Figure 7.10; Bussière et al., 2009; Dagenais et al., 2001). Oxygen fluxes measured are even lower than the 
goal targeted by the design. Numerical modelling incorporating climate change was carried out in order to 
assess recovery performance over the long term. The results show that, in this particular case, climate 
change will not have a significant impact on CCBE performance by 2100 (Hotton et al., 2019).
Figure 7.10: Evolution of the Lorraine, QC mine site reclaimed using a cover with capillary barrier effects. 
a) Before reclamation, b) after the 1998 reclamation and c) the site in 2007. Source: Adapted from Bussière et al., 
2009.
The long-term effectiveness of reclamation systems is affected by many factors (Aubertin et al., 2015, 2002) 
related to the properties of the covering materials, the configuration and location of the containment area to 
be reclaimed, and climate. As the required life of reclamation structures is greater than 100 years, this is the 
stage of the mining cycle most likely to be severely impacted by climate change. 
The main climate change risks during the reclamation of mining sites are reduced effectiveness of insulation 
covers, water infiltration barriers and oxygen barriers, and failure of retaining structures on sites undergoing 
reclamation (see Figure 7.11; Bussière et al., 2017; Lemmen et al., 2014). Direct climate change impacts 
of concern include: 1) higher temperatures that increase the depth of the active layer in sub-Arctic and 
Arctic regions, potentially resulting in the thaw of waste that could generate AMD; 2) an increase in extreme 
precipitation that could lead to the physical failure of dykes or other structures when employing reclamation 
methods such as water cover and elevated water table techniques; and 3) longer or more frequent droughts 
that could compromise the effectiveness of oxygen barriers that need high levels of saturation in the tailings 
and/or covers. Indirect climate change impacts, such as vegetation changes on revegetated sites affecting 
the water balance and the properties of the covering materials, can also positively or negatively impact the 
effectiveness of reclamation in both the short and long terms (Guittonny et al., 2018; Reinecke and Brodie, 2012).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 524 
Figure 7.11: Summary of expected major climate changes and their implications for mine waste containment and 
reclamation structures.
7.5.4 Adaptation
Maintaining the stability of tailing containment structures currently represents a major challenge for the 
mining industry when following conventional containment methods (Aubertin et al., 2011; Azam and Li, 
2010). Climate change will amplify these risks. Adaptation will involve considering approaches that reduce 
reliance on dykes to retain large volumes of water and tailings pulp. Thickened or filter-pressed tailings may 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 525 
be one viable option (Bussière, 2007). Co-disposal approaches of waste rock and tailings could also improve 
the mechanical resistance of containment structures for mine tailings (Aubertin et al., 2016, 2011; Wilson 
et al., 2003). The reuse of mine openings (open pits or underground voids) for the storage of waste rock 
and tailings can also help to reduce the problems of dyke instability (Aubertin et al., 2016, 2015). If mining 
companies choose to use conventional methods for mine waste storage, the effects of climate change must 
be integrated into risk management analysis during the design stage. Approaches with this aim are being 
developed in conjunction with the Mining Association of Canada and the Canadian Dam Association. 
While most governments now require proof that climate change has been considered in the design of any 
reclamation project (e.g., Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement et des Parcs, 2012 for 
Quebec), the lack of specific guidance on how to modify reclamation methods in the context of climate 
change remains a barrier to effective adaptation.
Specific tools and analysis are needed: for example, to inform the design of oxygen barriers, where an 
extended drought could lead to desaturation of the cover, increasing oxygen ingress (Bresson et al., 2018; 
Hotton et al., 2018). While studies in Quebec have simulated a period of approximately two months with 
no water intake (Éthier et al., 2018; Bussière et al., 2003), the choice of this period of time was not based 
on systematic analysis of meteorological data, and the probability of such an event occurring is unknown. 
Tools are needed that quantify the changing risk of extreme drought to be considered in the design of oxygen 
barriers. For sites located in cold climates, where increasing temperatures and precipitation will have a major 
impact on the performance of reclamation methods, the need for adaptation planning tools is particularly urgent.
Enhanced understanding of local impacts is also needed to inform the planting of perennial vegetation at 
reclamation sites. Over time, ecosystem changes driven by changing climate will result in species changes 
at the sites, but the impacts on the long-term effectiveness of reclamation systems are largely unknown 
(Guittonny et al., 2018). Monitoring the performance of such sites, to document whether such changes lead to 
deterioration or enhancement of the reclamation system, would provide important insights.
7.5.5 Moving forward
New approaches and tools that factor climate change into the planning, design, and risk management 
processes of mining activities provide a sound basis for the mining industry and governments to reduce the 
sector’s vulnerability to climate change. While numerous studies have recommended that climate change be 
taken into account in mine waste management (e.g., Rousseau et al., 2014; Stratz and Hossain, 2014; Pearce 
et al., 2009; Aubertin et al., 2002), uncertainty in projecting changes, particularly extreme precipitation events 
(Mailhot et al., 2014), remains a barrier to action. Solutions require collaboration between mining engineers 
and climate services in developing updated or new methods and guidelines for assessing climate impacts 
that can be factored into the design of tailings containment structures and reclamation methods. 
The longevity of tailings containment and reclamation structures increases their vulnerability to climate 
change. The physical and chemical stability of such structures is essential to avoid release of harmful 
contaminants into the environment. Tools and guidance are required to better enable designers to 
accommodate both changes in extreme weather caused by climate change, and slow-onset changes such as 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 526 
permafrost degradation, and to develop climate-resilient reclamation methods. In some cases, it is possible 
that, for a given site, a “best” solution for current climate conditions may not be the optimum solution for 
future conditions. Better designed tailings containment and reclamation structures at active and closed 
mine sites can significantly reduce the risk of environmental contamination over the long term. In the case 
of older infrastructure, it would be advisable to conduct analyses to ensure that these facilities will be able to 
withstand future conditions. If not, remedial measures will have to be implemented to maintain the integrity 
of the structures over the long term.
7.6 Each link of the energy value chain can be 
vulnerable to climate change 
Changing climate affects energy demand and the full energy value chain, from exploration and production 
through to transmission and distribution. Climate risks can be integrated into current business planning by 
considering co-benefits, no-regret options and incremental approaches. Climate resilience needs to be a 
key consideration in converting to low-carbon energy systems. 
Warming climate increases the demand for cooling in summer and decreases the demand for heating in winter. 
Energy supply is sensitive to a wide range of climate impacts, including changes in permafrost, ice cover, 
sea level, wave regimes, precipitation patterns, river flows and extreme weather events, such as hurricanes 
and ice storms. These impacts can all disrupt the energy value chain, with significant economic and social 
consequences. The use of climate risk screening tools can help to embed adaptation within current business 
planning practices and to identify opportunities for introducing adaptation measures at cost-effective times 
(e.g., during maintenance, upgrades and retrofits). As significant investments are made to convert to low-
carbon energy systems over the next few decades, it will be important to ensure that climate resilience is 
considered in infrastructure design. 
7.6.1 Introduction
Energy is an important component of the Canadian economy, accounting for almost 10% of gross domestic 
product (GDP). Energy systems are the backbone of critical services, such as transportation, communication, 
health systems, drinking water and wastewater, as well as businesses and households. As such, their 
reliability is of paramount importance to economic activity and human well-being in Canada. Energy assets 
and operations have always been exposed to highly variable and extreme climate conditions, and were built 
to perform well under these conditions. Nonetheless, they were designed based on historical climate norms, 
which raises concern about their resilience in the face of ongoing changes in climate. Observed and projected 
climate changes that significantly affect the energy sector are described in Bush and Lemmen (2019), 
including changes in temperature and precipitation extremes (Zhang et al., 2019), permafrost, snow and sea 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 527 
ice (Derksen et al., 2019), streamflow (Bonsal et al., 2019) and ocean climate (Greenan et al., 2019a). Energy 
sector vulnerabilities to climate are highlighted by recent extreme events, including the 2016 Fort McMurray 
(Horse River) wildfire that devastated the community and caused substantial reductions in oil sands 
production, with an estimated loss of approximately 47 million barrels, costing producers 1.4 billion dollars in 
lost revenues (see Case Study 7.1; National Energy Board, 2016; Antunes et al., 2016). 
Climate change also has direct and indirect impacts on energy demand. Warmer winters reduce fossil 
fuel and electricity demand for heating (Mantle314, 2019), while the increasing number of hot days in 
summer increase electricity demand for cooling (Ortiz et al., 2018; Jaglom et al., 2014). Indirect impacts 
are associated with societal and government responses to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and these 
responses have differing impacts on renewable and non-renewable energy sources (International Energy 
Agency, 2016a).
Previous assessments of climate change impacts and adaptation highlight the diversity of the Canadian 
energy sector, noting that most available research focuses on hydroelectricity generation and electricity 
distribution (Lemmen et al., 2014). Key risks identified include impacts of extreme weather on critical 
infrastructure, and a potential mismatch between reduced hydroelectricity production and increased 
electricity demand during heat waves. Smart grid technologies and urban design measures that reduce 
heat island effects were noted as examples of adaptation measures (Lemmen et al., 2014). Knowledge 
gaps identified included the limited amount of research on the impacts of climate change on renewable 
energy supplies other than hydroelectricity. Environmental assessment and risk disclosure were identified as 
emerging drivers of adaptation action in the sector (see Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter; 
Lemmen et al., 2014).
7.6.2 Risks to energy production and transmission
The impacts of a changing climate will vary between energy type and region, and may occur at different 
time horizons. The Canadian oil and gas sector fuels most transportation and accounts for 10% of Canada’s 
electricity generation (Natural Resources Canada, 2018). Oil and gas exploration, extraction, production 
and delivery will be affected by climate change (Mantle314, 2019; Cruz and Krausmann, 2013). Pipelines, 
roads and buildings are affected by permafrost degradation, slope failures and flooding. In northern 
regions, thawing permafrost and reduced availability of stable ice roads affect transportation and require 
changes in schedules. River ice breakup will happen earlier in the year and ice jam flooding may occur 
more frequently. Sea-level rise will change flood risks and increase coastal erosion. A large water demand 
for energy production, including for oil sands, may pose a risk as overall water availability declines in some 
areas and droughts may intensify (Bonsal et al., 2019). Offshore activities may benefit from increased access 
to resources in the Arctic due to reduced sea ice, but will still face significant risks from ice in northern 
regions and increased impacts from waves elsewhere (Mantle314, 2019; Stantec Consulting Ltd., 2012). 
While not directly related to production, carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology is critical to the oil 
and gas sector’s transformation to low-carbon systems. Indeed, the World Energy Council stated that “global 
warming is unlikely to be kept under 2°C without introduction and widespread adoption of CCS, and the cost 
of mitigation would be higher in the absence of CCS” (World Energy Council et al., 2014, p. 12). However, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 528 
CCS technologies are water-intensive, using almost double the volume of water compared to non-carbon 
capture and storage plants, making them vulnerable to climate-related changes in fresh water availability 
(International Energy Agency, 2015).
Nuclear and fossil fuel thermal generation facilities depend on sufficient cooling water and may face 
reduced cooling efficiency due to higher water temperatures or contamination of cooling water intake (e.g., 
from algae, zebra mussels or ice particles during freeze/thaw cycles) (Braun and Fournier, 2016; Canadian 
Electricity Association, 2016). Maintenance schedules for nuclear facilities may be impacted by increased 
ambient temperatures, as temperature affects the number of workers allowed in vaults. Extreme impacts are 
exemplified by the shutdown of nuclear power plants in France due to lack of cooling water during the 2003 
heat wave (Kopytko and Perkins, 2011).
Hydropower accounts for 59% of Canada’s electricity generation (Natural Resources Canada, 2018). As this is 
a renewable energy source depending directly on climate conditions, hydropower production is impacted by 
changes in temperature, precipitation and snow cover. Shorter winters will result in earlier spring floods with 
a smaller contribution from melting snow. Winter flows are expected to be higher, and late summer flows may 
be reduced in many parts of Canada (Bonsal et al., 2019). At higher latitudes, where higher precipitation is not 
offset by increased evapotranspiration, generation potential may increase. However, with changes in rainfall 
frequency and intensity, risks to infrastructure may also increase and changes to water management would 
be needed to minimize losses. The high flexibility provided by the storage capacity of hydropower operations 
means that they can play a key role in transitioning to a low-carbon energy system, providing stability 
for electricity grids that integrate more volatile renewables such as wind and solar (International Energy 
Agency, 2018). A review of 200 projects in the energy sector suggests that hydropower is the most advanced 
subsector with respect to climate change adaptation (Braun and Fournier, 2016).
Non-hydro renewable energy, which includes wind, solar and biomass, is becoming increasingly important 
in Canada’s energy mix, a trend that will continue in the future (see Figure 7.12; National Energy Board, 
2018, 2017). Wind generation will generally be reduced from lower density air at higher temperatures. A 5°C 
increase in air temperature leads to a decrease in air density of 1–2%, with a proportionate decline in energy 
density affecting power production (Pryor and Barthelmie, 2010). However, wind generation may benefit from 
more sustained and higher winds. Fast market growth of renewable wind power (see Figure 7.12) reflects 
the influence of a larger share of renewable energy sources being integrated into the economy in response 
to climate change. Solar capacity is increasing even more rapidly than wind, and is expected to triple by 2040 
(see Figure 7.12; National Energy Board, 2018, 2017). While there are concerns that an increase in cloudiness 
due to changing weather patterns and extreme weather events could affect solar energy generation (World 
Energy Council et al., 2014), the significance of these impacts is regionally dependent. More research is 
needed in Canada.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 529 
Figure 7.12: Observed and projected changes in non-hydro renewable energy capacity in Canada between 2005 
and 2040 under the National Energy Board reference case scenario. Higher rates of growth are projected under a 
technology scenario (NEB, 2018). Source: Adapted from National Energy Board, 2018.
The electricity transmission and distribution sector will be affected by many factors, including the following: 
1) increased temperatures, which can increase line resistance by approximately 0.4% per 1°C rise and 
decrease line load capacity by 0.5 to 1% per 1°C rise; 2) thermal expansion of power lines, which affects 
safety line clearances (a 1°C rise can result in 4.5 cm of sag); 3) extreme precipitation events that increase 
the risk of flooding of underground assets; and 4) high winds and gusts that can cause line damage (Asian 
Development Bank, 2013, 2012).
7.6.3 Adaptation
There are several examples of the energy industry adapting to changing climate conditions in Canada and 
around the world. Western Power Distribution in the UK studied the impact of higher ambient temperatures 
on its grid and developed a “low-regret” approach to adapt to an increase of their line rating by 5°C. To 
compensate for projected increased sag of the lines, they have started to gradually replace the poles in the 
course of normal maintenance (Western Power Distribution, 2011). Hydro-Québec has adopted a method 
to improve its energy demand forecasting by applying a climate-model derived adjustment factor to the 
historical temperature record prior to running the forecast model (Braun, 2016). A similar approach to 
improve flow forecasts has been adopted by Iceland’s National Power provider Landsvirkjun, which has 
adjusted its streamflow record based on climate projections (see Case Story 7.7; Fournier, 2016). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 530 
Case Story 7.7: Opportunities for increased hydropower production in 
Iceland
Electricity and heating in Iceland are derived entirely from renewable sources (hydro and geothermal). 
Warming temperatures and increased precipitation result in increased glacier melt, runoff and generation 
capacity. However, the design of the current system in Iceland will only be capable of utilizing 30% of the 
projected additional runoff. Maximizing the opportunities presented by climate change will require new 
investments to increase storage in the system (see Figure 7.13; Sveinsson, 2015). Similar planning 
approaches may be appropriate in northern Canada where runoff is projected to increase as a result of 
climate change (Bonsal et al., 2019).
Figure 7.13: Potential increases in hydropower production in Iceland as a result of climate-induced increases in 
runoff and additional investments in infrastructure. Source: Adapted from Sveinsson, 2015.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 531 
New technologies are a key tool for climate change adaptation in the energy sector. The International Energy 
Agency’s Sixth Forum on the Climate-Energy Security Nexus identified “technology innovation” as a priority 
area to advance energy sector resilience to climate change in North America (International Energy Agency, 
2016b). While decentralized renewable energy technologies have been driven largely by demand for low-
emitting energy sources, they also provide redundancy that can create sub-systems for generating and 
distributing energy in the event that other parts of the grid are disrupted (American Council on Renewable 
Energy, 2018; IISD, 2017; U.S. Department of Energy, 2016; International Energy Agency, 2015). Smart grid 
technologies, including renewable energy generation, smart meters, smart appliances, and automatic power 
production have been proven to improve recovery from extreme weather, such as in the US with Hurricane 
Irene (2011) and Hurricane Sandy (2012) (IISD, 2017; Executive Office of the President, 2013). For thermal 
generation, new dry-cooling technologies are being implemented to reduce the vulnerability to changing 
temperatures and diminish dependency on cooling water sources (Braun and Fournier, 2016).
7.6.4 Moving forward
Increased awareness is a critical first step in developing a climate-resilient energy sector that can ensure 
future energy security and reliable service for Canadians. Detailed case studies of projected impacts and 
actual or proposed business responses are a valuable tool for building such awareness (Braun and Fournier, 
2016). Responses should be feasible, economically sound, and able to be implemented in adequate time 
frames. Cost-effective and beneficial responses can be built into existing business operations―for example, 
by addressing climate change as an integral part of environmental impact assessments, as is required for 
projects undergoing a federal impact assessment (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2020). 
Proactive energy providers in Canada and abroad have established in-house climate expertise and climate 
change committees. These committees collaborate with researchers and climate change centres to 
understand, produce and use climate data for establishing operational thresholds that are sensitive to 
climate. Engaging asset managers can be an important component of a holistic, integrated risk-based 
approach for energy planning, as is strong monitoring and evaluation. Sharing adaptation case studies 
between companies is another way to advance climate resilience in the energy sector.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 532 
7.7 Extreme weather events impact 
transportation, disrupting supply chains 
Road, rail, marine and air transportation in Canada are vulnerable to extreme weather events and slow-
onset climate change, with major disruptions having significant economic and social impacts. To fully 
assess these impacts, linkages between transportation systems, and between transportation modes and 
a wide range of other economic sectors, need to be accounted for. Coordinating adaptation responses 
across jurisdictions and sectors will benefit transportation asset owners, operators and those dependent 
on vulnerable supply chains and corridors.
Canada relies on efficient, safe and reliable transportation infrastructure and operations that enable the 
movement of goods, services and people across the country. Current climate risk assessment and adaptation 
initiatives in the transportation sector tend to focus on individual, direct climate impacts associated with air, 
road, rail or marine infrastructure and other assets. This approach underestimates the potential cascading 
risks and impacts from surrounding assets or networks, and vice versa. Examining how various elements of 
transportation are dependent upon each other, and how transportation is linked to a wide range of other sectors, 
can help to identify opportunities for collaboration and cost efficiencies, and can prevent situations in which actions 
taken to reduce individual or specific risks inadvertently increase the climate vulnerability of others. 
7.7.1 Introduction 
A well-functioning transportation sector connects people and communities, products, resources and services 
to domestic and international markets (Palko, 2017). In Canada, responsibilities for transportation are 
dispersed across various levels of government, with private-sector stakeholders playing an important role as 
owners, operators and managers of infrastructure and assets, including railway infrastructure, vehicles, ships 
and aircraft (Andrey and Palko, 2017). Canada’s transportation infrastructure is concentrated mainly in the 
southern portion of the country, where most of the trade and transportation movements occur (see Figure 
7.14). However, northern transportation systems are particularly sensitive to climate change, and are already 
impacted by thawing permafrost, reduced river, lake and sea ice cover, and increases in coastal erosion and 
storm surge flooding (Palko, 2017; Hori et al., 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 533 
National Airport System
National Highway System
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 534 
Canada Port Authorities
National Railway Network
Figure 7.14: Maps of Canada's national transportation systems, showing the National Airport System, the 
National Highway System, Canada Port Authorities and the National Railway Network. Source: Adapted from 
Transport Canada, 2017.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 535 
A comprehensive, regional-based report of climate change impacts and adaptation actions in Canada was 
released in 2017 (Palko and Lemmen, 2017). Key findings include:
•	
Canada’s transportation infrastructure is vulnerable to damage and disruptions from a changing 
climate and extreme weather, and this can pose risks to other sectors of the economy;
•	
Northern transportation systems are experiencing some of the greatest impacts from warming, 
and temperatures in the North will continue to increase at a faster rate than in any other region of 
Canada; and
•	
While reactive approaches to managing climate risks remain common in Canada’s transportation 
sector, there are examples from all regions and transportation modes of adaptation actions being 
taken in anticipation of future climate conditions. 
This section supplements the report, Climate Risks and Adaptation Practices for the Canadian Transportation 
Sector (2017), by examining the interconnections that exist within intermodal transportation systems and 
across a wide range of sectors. It draws upon Canadian and international literature, and focuses primarily on 
physical infrastructure.
7.7.2 Climate impacts on transportation systems
Impacts of extreme weather events and climate change are already affecting transportation infrastructure, 
operations, systems and services across all modes in all regions of Canada (Palko, 2017); it should be noted 
that climate change has already increased the likelihood of some types of extreme weather events (Zhang et 
al., 2019). In some cases, these impacts have resulted in travel disruptions and unsafe conditions, affecting 
the movement of both freight and people, and leading to increased operating costs, reduced revenues or 
compensation for service disruptions.
Extreme weather events can incur large costs and accelerate the deterioration of transportation 
infrastructure, shortening its lifespan (Boyle et al., 2013). For example, a torrential downpour in Toronto in 
2013 resulted in flooding that caused road closures, flight delays and cancellations, and stranded 1,400 train 
commuters. Damages were estimated to be $999.5 million (Amec Foster Wheeler Environment Infrastructure, 
2017). That same year, flooding in southern Alberta caused $6 billion in damages, washing out 1,000 km 
of roads and destroying several hundred bridges and culverts (Andrey and Palko, 2017). In 2017 and 2018, 
the Churchill rail line was closed for 18 months (CTV, 2018) due to the cumulative effects of flooding and 
permafrost degradation beneath the railway line. Without a viable alternative mode of transportation to bring 
supplies in and ship goods out, living expenses escalated and access to essential services, including medical 
services located in southern communities, were compromised (Globe and Mail, 2018). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 536 
7.7.3 Understanding interdependencies
Infrastructure sectors and systems, including transportation, energy, telecommunications, water supply, 
wastewater treatment, solid waste management, and buildings, are “highly interdependent on each other, 
containing multiple connections, feedback and feed-forward paths and intricate branching” (Sudhalkar et al., 
2017, p. 3).
Examples of critical interdependencies in transportation systems include situations where two sectors 
are essential to one another (e.g., transportation and energy), and where technology serves to strengthen 
connections between infrastructure, such as railway signals and traffic control systems being controlled by 
computer systems that depend on electrical power grids (Sudhalkar et al., 2017). Infrastructure networks 
containing one or more of these features “are at a higher risk of failure from external shocks or stresses, 
including climate hazards” (Sudhalkar et al., 2017, p. 3). Climate change risk assessments that do not address 
such interconnections could lead to the miscalculation of risks (Dawson, 2015).
Within the Canadian transportation sector, transportation modes (e.g., rail, marine, aviation and trucking) are 
often interconnected (intermodal) within supply chains and across transportation gateways and corridors. 
Port infrastructure and facilities, for example, form a central hub for transportation, logistics and supply 
chains, and are key convergence points for marine, rail and road infrastructure to facilitate movements of 
domestic and foreign goods (Becker et al., 2018).
Disruptions and delays in domestic and international supply chains, including those caused by weather 
events, can spread across networks with negative social and economic impacts (Becker et al., 2018; Allen et al., 
2016; Zorn et al., 2016). In this way, vulnerabilities in one mode of transportation or sector can cascade to others. 
7.7.4 Adaptation
Transportation asset owners and operators across Canada are undertaking actions to consider their climate 
risks and strengthen resiliency, often independently (Kwiatkowski, 2017). The distinct mandates, priorities, 
commercial sensitivities and resources of the many players within the sector create governance challenges 
and barriers to action (Sudhalkar et al., 2017). In the absence of holistic adaptation strategies, individual 
investments to address adaptation will be limited in effectiveness and could have unexpected and unintended 
negative consequences on neighbouring or interdependent assets and systems (Kwiatkowski, 2017). For 
example, the City of Toronto undertook a high-level climate risk assessment and interdependencies exercise 
for critical infrastructure and found that stakeholders had insufficient knowledge about the impacts of their 
activities on other interdependent systems, and that there was a need to implement roles and responsibilities 
to tackle joint risks (Sudhalkar et al., 2017).
Challenges for adaptation arise from many sources, including the fact that many transportation assets have 
long life-cycles, requiring lengthy planning and design, whereas technological development and replacement 
in areas such as information and communication technologies occur very quickly, leading to mismatched 
planning horizons and potential timing challenges (Man, 2013; Dewar and Wachs, 2008; Finley and Schuchard, 
nd). Opportunities arise when transportation planning is able to overcome such challenges and facilitate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 537 
broad collaboration and engagement across sectors and jurisdictions. These include the following: early 
identification of multiple benefits and potential solutions (Man, 2013), which can be particularly important in 
areas of shared land use (Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2011); improved understanding 
of interdependencies amongst multiple infrastructure owners; and increased innovation and efficiency across 
the supply chain (Dubois et al., 2011). 
Tools have been developed to help planners consider risks associated with interdependencies. An example 
developed in Australia enables a systems-wide analysis of climate risks to organizations, as well as upstream 
and downstream interdependencies (Cross Dependency Initiative, 2019). Outcomes can demonstrate which 
‘third-party risks” can affect an organization’s system, as well as the consequences of their own failure risks 
to other critical infrastructure, and can facilitate collaborative adaptation measures (Cross Dependency 
Initiative, 2019).
Case Story 7.8 provides an example of how stakeholders have come together to collectively explore 
interdependencies with transportation, as well as climate change risks to infrastructure and operations, in 
Surrey, BC. 
Case Story 7.8: Addressing increasing flood risk in Surrey, BC
Flood controls in Surrey, British Columbia, were initially developed in the late 1800s. Projected sea-level 
rise increases the risks of a major flood event, affecting not only residents of Surrey but also the regional 
and national economy (City of Surrey, 2018). The flood hazards include inundation of a network of regional 
infrastructure (including water and sewer lines, roadways and highways servicing 200,000 daily vehicle trips 
across the floodplain), and green infrastructure delivering critical ecosystem services (such as salt marshes 
and wetlands). The nationally significant economic activities exposed to coastal flood risk include:
•	
Transportation corridors servicing nearly 10 million annual passenger crossings between Canada 
and the USA (Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 2018);
•	
$3 billion in annual goods movement along the Roberts Bank Railway Corridor and the BNSF 
Railway (connecting Port of Vancouver Facilities with Canada and the USA, respectively); and
•	
the primary BC Hydro connection to the Bonneville Power Authority in Washington State.
To manage increasing climate risks, the City of Surrey adopted a bottom-up approach involving multiple asset 
owners across infrastructure sectors to collaboratively assess the shared risk of coastal flooding (Associated 
Engineering Limited, 2018). Conversations between asset owners, operators and emergency responders 
servicing the area flourished as a result of a study tour that allowed participants to see and hear about key 
infrastructure interdependencies. The infrastructure is complex, and the various organizations face different 
operational challenges and balance them with long-term capital upgrades in different ways, based on their 
risk tolerance and available resources.
A shared understanding of climate risk was developed by applying Engineers Canada’s Public Infrastructure 
Engineering Vulnerability Committee Protocol (PIEVC, n.d.). This included a triple-bottom-line assessment 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 538 
to identify the social, environmental and economic drivers that are common amongst the owners. Given the 
distributed benefit of conducting the assessment, funding through the Municipalities for Climate Innovation 
Program was critical to foster early collaboration that might otherwise have been limited if cost sharing 
negotiations were required. Although influences on decision making varied across organizations, positive 
public perception was a key concern for many asset owners (Associated Engineering Limited, 2018).
The next step will be to develop a long-term framework for asset owners to follow to manage the increasing 
risk of coastal flooding due to sea-level rise, and to better coordinate investments through infrastructure 
renewal opportunities and develop win-win-win solutions (Associated Engineering Limited, 2018). Key 
aspects of the framework will be to formalize appropriate pathways for resolving the geographic and physical 
interdependencies of each infrastructure owner, and monitoring progress in managing climate risk over time.
In some cases, only a single asset owner is involved. For example, in the City of Surrey, the Engineering and 
Parks, Recreation and Culture departments are working together to adapt to rising water levels, which are 
impacting a critical transportation route and parkland. Interdependencies provide an opportunity to access 
the federal Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund, whereas addressing individual assets in isolation does 
not meet the federal funding requirements. A cross-departmental adaptation approach has been developed 
that integrates a flood control structure with a bridge replacement and a riverfront park. Coordinating these 
actions will reduce overall capital costs, increase cost sharing, accelerate adaptation and increase public 
support by providing immediate community benefits, in addition to reducing long-term risks.
Asset management and renewal also provide an opportunity to proactively reduce risk exposure. Surrey is 
using standard renewal cycles to adapt key infrastructure to address projected climate impacts over their 
design life. For example, infrastructure in Mud Bay (see Figure 7.15) is serviced by a drainage pump station 
that is nearing the end of its functional life, and the replacement station has been designed to be resilient to 
multiple hazards, including higher water levels, seismic events and ground subsidence. In addition, the flood 
control dyke will be significantly raised. To adapt to sea-level rise, geographic and physical interdependencies 
need to be addressed, including the following (see Figure 7.15):
1.	 A provincial overpass that needs to be raised to maintain the approach grade of the railway and to 
preserve the railway clearance envelope; and
2.	 The class 1, federally regulated American railway that requires raising to accommodate a higher 
dyke crest designed to protect infrastructure and avoid a weak point.
The end result is that adaptations to the transportation system were not simply defined by direct physical 
risks to roads and the railway, but were achieved through a coordinated approach to enhance resilience 
across multiple sectors. This approach enabled actions that meet the needs of each sector as established 
through a participatory and collaborative process.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 539 
Figure 7.15: Interconnected infrastructure in Mud Bay, Surrey, BC highlighting the need for coordinated 
approaches in addressing risks presented by sea-level rise and other hazards. Source: Adapted from the City of 
Surrey, 2018.
7.7.5 Moving forward
Changing climate and extreme weather continue to pose challenges to Canada’s transportation sector. A 
range of interdependencies exists within the sector (between transportation modes) and across sectors. 
Without consideration of interdependencies and interrelated risks, individual investments to improve 
climate resilience will be limited in effectiveness or will result in unexpected or unintended consequences. 
Collaborative approaches can help asset owners and operators better understand the range of potential 
risks and identify adaptation solutions that respond to and cut across multiple risk areas. There are practical 
examples, including the City of Surrey (see Case Story 7.8), that demonstrate the multiple benefits that can be 
produced through such partnerships, trust and more informed planning. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 540 
7.8 Climate change is leading to transformational 
changes in tourism 
All tourism destinations need to adapt to climate change impacts on tourism assets and altered 
competitiveness within the highly interconnected tourism economy. While Canadian tourism 
competitiveness is expected to increase under climate change, the specific market and regional 
implications of this change for national competitiveness remain under-researched. Winter and northern 
tourism and recreation are particularly sensitive to climate variability, and transformational changes in ski, 
snowmobile and Arctic cruise tourism are expected.
Tourism is Canada’s largest service sector. Climate change is influencing Canadian tourism operations, 
investment and travel patterns, requiring adaptation by all tourism destinations. Many risks and some 
opportunities will progressively increase over this century, causing geographical shifts to enable seasonal and 
nature-based tourism markets to thrive. Earliest impacts have been visible in winter tourism markets, where 
declining snow and ice conditions are affecting the viability of multi-billion dollar tourism industries across 
Canada, much of which is concentrated in small and rural communities. The ski industry has invested hundreds 
of millions of dollars in snowmaking, providing substantial capacity to adapt to future warming and reduced 
natural snow fall in some locations. Higher warming scenarios will exceed the technical limits of snowmaking 
adaptation in many locations. The snowmobile industry is highly vulnerable to the same changes because 
snowmaking is not technically or economically viable for thousands of kilometres of trails, and ice crossings 
will become increasingly unsafe. Melting glaciers and reduced sea ice are altering tourist attractions from the 
Rocky Mountain national parks to polar bear and Arctic cruise tourism in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago. 
Tourists, tourism operators and destination communities are adapting to these diverse climate risks and 
opportunities, sometimes with unintended consequences for non-tourism government agencies (e.g., search 
and rescue), communities (e.g., overtourism) and visitor experience.
7.8.1 Introduction
Climate change poses diverse risks and opportunities to domestic and international tourism across Canada 
(Scott et al., 2020; Hewer and Gough, 2018; Scott et al., 2012). Climate change is already influencing tourism 
operations, investment, and travel patterns so that all tourism destinations will need to adapt to impacts on 
local tourism assets, as well as to altered competitiveness within the highly interconnected international 
tourism economy (Scott et al., 2020, 2016). Globally, high emission pathways are widely considered to be 
incompatible with projected tourism growth (Scott et al., 2019; IPCC, 2018). Based on the various analyses of 
the multiple impacts of climate change on the tourism sector, Canada’s international tourism competitiveness 
is expected to improve (Scott et al., 2019; Roson and Sartori, 2016; OECD, 2015). The impacts of changing 
seasonality, landscapes (e.g., beaches, water levels), biodiversity, extreme events (e.g., heat waves, 
forest fires) and transnational markets have far-reaching, yet under-researched, implications for tourism 
development and competitiveness, travel patterns and livelihoods.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 541 
An overview of broad climate impacts and adaptation actions in the Canadian tourism industry was provided 
in Kovacs and Thistlethwaite (2014), including a discussion of implications for the parks system, warm- and 
cold-weather recreation, and nature-based tourism. While noting examples of advanced adaptation planning 
efforts, the overview concluded that the level of preparedness across the tourism sector to deal with climate 
change was low, which is consistent with assessments of the sector’s preparedness globally (Becken et al., 
2020; Scott et al., 2016). Climate change also presents emerging opportunities for some tourism markets, 
who would also need to adapt in order to realize potential economic benefits, sustain tourism assets and 
maintain visitor experience.
This section builds on the findings of Kovacs and Thistlethwaite (2014) by focusing on snow- and ice-
dependent markets like ski, snowmobile and Arctic cruise tourism, because these are where the impacts of 
changing climate are being experienced first and where adaptation by the tourism industry and investors is 
ongoing. Details of observed and projected changes in snow and ice cover (including sea, lake and river ice, 
glaciers and permafrost) are presented in Chapter 5 of Canada’s Changing Climate Report (Derksen et al., 2019).
7.8.2 Winter sports tourism
The ski industry of North America has invested hundreds of millions of dollars in snowmaking over the last 
30 years to reduce its climate sensitivity. While average winter temperatures have continued to rise, the 
length of ski seasons increased throughout the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s in all five regional ski markets in the 
United States (Scott and Steiger, 2013). Only in the 2010s has this trend reversed, suggesting that advanced 
snowmaking capacity may no longer be able to offset winter warming. Recent record warm winters that are 
analogues for normal future winter conditions provide important insight into how the ski industry and ski 
tourists adapt. During the record warm winter of 2011–2012, the Ontario ski market experienced an average 
decrease in the ski season length (-17%) and in skiable terrain (-9%), reduced snow quality (-46% days 
with packed powder), fewer snowmaking days (-18%) and increased early season snowmaking (+300% in 
December), as well as a 10% decrease in overall skier visits, when compared to a climatically normal winter 
for the 1981–2010 period (Rutty et al., 2017). Similar impacts on season length and visitation have been 
observed in the Quebec market, with skier visits reduced by 12.5% in the record warm winter of 2015‒2016 
(Association des Stations de Ski du Québec, 2016).
Differences in exposure to climate change risk among ski destinations have important implications for intra- 
and inter-regional market competitiveness and geographical shifts in ski tourism. A comparison of climate 
change impacts on the ski seasons in ski areas in Ontario, Quebec and the Northeastern United States 
revealed different futures for these regional markets for the 2050s and 2080s (see Figure 7.16). Ski areas in 
Quebec and high-elevation locations in Vermont and New Hampshire are more climate-resilient than those 
in Ontario and lower-elevation/lower-latitude locations in the US Northeast (Scott et al., 2020). Analysis of 
three ski areas in Quebec projected almost identical season losses of 10 to 20 days in the 2050s, and an 
expected 10% reduction in skier visits (Da Silva et al., 2019). Important information gaps remain, such as 
for Canada’s largest ski tourism markets (British Columbia and Alberta) and regarding the implications of 
differential impacts on market dynamics, tourism and community-level employment, development pressures 
and vacation real estate values (Scott et al., 2017; Rutty et al., 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 542 
Figure 7.16: Inter-comparison of changes to ski season length in Ontario, Quebec and New England markets with 
advanced snowmaking capacity under medium emissions (RCP4.5) and high emissions (RCP8.5) scenarios for 
the 2050s and 2080s. Baseline refers to the period 1981‒2010. Source: Adapted from Scott et al., 2020.
Studies of the impact of ongoing and projected reductions in winter season snow on the snowmobile industry 
of North America show that while riders are adapting to changing conditions, continued deterioration of the 
season length will result in loss of this tourism market in many regions of the US and Canada (Perry et al., 
2018; Hatchett and Eisen, 2018; Tercek and Rodman, 2016; McBoyle et al., 2007). Under the high-emissions 
scenario projected for the 2050s, a reliable snowmobiling season will be largely eliminated in regions of 
Ontario and Quebec with the densest network of snowmobile trails (McBoyle et al., 2007). A 20% decline in 
registered snowmobiles in Canada from 1995 to 2015 (International Snowmobile Manufacturers Association 
data) may signify a climate adaptation by individuals that will induce changes in this tourism marketplace. 
Bombardier Recreational Products (2017) advised investors that global climate change might impact future 
snowmobile sales to a greater extent than previously anticipated. A shift to all-terrain vehicles is not thought 
to be a feasible adaptation strategy, as these vehicles tend to be more impactful on trail surfaces, preventing 
shared trail networks and access by other users to parks and farmlands (Perry et al., 2018; McBoyle et al., 2007).
7.8.3. Arctic cruise tourism
Declining summer sea ice cover has allowed greater marine access to the majestic land, seascapes and 
cultures of the Canadian Arctic (see Northern Canada chapter). This has opened up access to areas and 
communities that were previously inaccessible to tourist vessels. Tourism operators and tourists have 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 543 
been quick to adapt to these new opportunities, with strong growth in commercial (cruise ships) and non-
commercial (private yachts) tourism vessel traffic since the late 2000s (Dawson et al., 2018; Johnston et al., 
2017). Although tourism development is considered highly strategic by pan-Arctic governments (Dawson 
et al., 2017), there are concerns related to infrastructure needed for hosting the growing tourist numbers, 
environmental impacts, uneven economic opportunities, negative local social and cultural impacts, and 
limited search and rescue capacity (Dawson et al., 2018; Stewart et al., 2011). Limited hydrographic charts 
and changing ice conditions increase the risk of a high-impact cruise ship incident (Dawson et al., 2016). 
Even relatively minor incidents can be associated with high costs (see Case Story 7.9). Integrated multi-sector 
adaptation is essential to respond to these challenges and support sustainable tourism in the Canadian Arctic.
Case Story 7.9: The costs of increased tourism ship traffic in the 
Canadian Arctic
Unregulated cruise ship and pleasure craft (yacht) tourism traffic has been growing steadily in the Canadian 
Arctic as a result of changing ice conditions (see Figure 7.17; Dawson et al., 2018). This response by tourism 
operators and tourists has raised concerns over the potential for search and rescue capacity to respond to a 
high-risk incident, such as the sinking of a cruise ship. The grounding of the Akademik Ioffe near Kugaaruk, 
Nunavut in August 2018 revealed the high costs of search and rescue for even a minor incident involving 
a tourism vessel. The Canadian Forces spent over $500,000 to provide assistance, while the cost of two 
icebreakers that also responded were not reported by the Canadian Coast Guard (Toth, 2018). Investment in 
improved navigation charts in common shipping routes and insurance requirements to indemnify search and 
rescue costs have been identified as possible adaptation responses to reduce safety and financial risks.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 544 
Figure 7.17: Cruise ship Hanseatic arriving in Pond Inlet, NU, ca. 2005. Photo courtesy of Emma J. Stewart, 
Lincoln University.
7.8.4 “Last chance” tourism
Some evidence supports the emergence of a travel trend of “last chance” tourism. This refers to travel by 
tourists to visit sites before their attractions vanish or are irrevocably degraded, or to witness the impact 
of climate-induced landscape changes, such as rapidly melting glaciers or biodiversity changes (Lemelin 
et al., 2010). Tourist market surveys about Canada’s Rocky Mountain Parks and Churchill, Manitoba, the 
self-declared polar bear capital of the world, reveal last-chance motivations among a segment of travellers, 
suggesting short- to medium-term opportunities for increased visitation, as well as visitor education and 
interpretive activities (Weber et al., 2019; Lemieux et al., 2017; Groulx et al., 2017; Groulx et al., 2016; Dawson 
et al., 2010). There remain important uncertainties associated with longer-term tourist responses to degraded 
tourism assets. For example, while tourists have indicated their motivation and intent to visit the Rocky 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 545 
Mountain Parks or Churchill, the number of tourists would decline if glaciers and polar bear populations 
were significantly impacted, and it is uncertain whether future generations of tourists with no experience or 
expectations of current ecotourism attractions would respond in the same way (Scott et al., 2007). 
7.8.5 Moving forward
Tourism is Canada’s largest service sector and is projected to become more competitive in the global market 
as a result of climate change (Scott et al., 2019; Roson and Sartori, 2016; OECD, 2015). The current literature 
is insufficient to determine the net economic impact of low- and high-emissions scenarios on sub-national 
tourism markets. Most adaptation in the sector is focused on addressing ongoing operational risks and 
emerging market opportunities. A key barrier to longer-term strategic adaptation planning remains the lack of 
integrated sectoral assessments that consider the full range of potentially compounding impacts at national 
and destination scales, and their interactions with other major drivers of tourism. Tourism is not part of 
any major national climate policy documents in Canada, nor is there a climate change response in national 
and most sub-national tourism strategies (Becken et al., 2020). Adaptation that is occurring is often at the 
company scale, with limited examples of coordinated adaptation planning at destination scale (e.g., Resort 
Municipality of Whistler, 2016).

7.9 Increased private sector involvement will 
accelerate adaptation across sectors 
Despite growing awareness of climate change impacts, there is no widespread evidence of corporate 
adaptation in Canada. When adaptation does occur, it tends to focus on short-term actions to address 
physical risks, such as disruptions in construction and interruptions in supply chains. Increased 
involvement of the private sector would accelerate adaptation in Canada as a whole.
There is considerable uncertainty about the role of the private sector in climate change adaptation in Canada. 
While there are several case studies of Canadian businesses adapting to changing climate, particularly in the 
insurance and natural resources sectors, there is no evidence that such actions are broadly representative 
of the business community response to climate change. Actions that have been taken are frequently “low-
hanging fruit” focused on site-specific vulnerabilities to the current climate that would have been implemented 
regardless of increasing risk in the future. Drivers for corporate adaptation include strategic incentives 
associated with physical risk, growing awareness among stakeholders of the need to adapt, and government 
regulation. The lack of available data on corporate adaptation may be influenced by the proprietary protection 
of internal information; however, there are also clear barriers to adaptation related to capacity and the short-
term time horizons of most business operations. Additional effort, including research, could help reduce these 
barriers by identifying the appropriate roles for the private sector in supporting adaptation. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 546 
7.9.1 Introduction
The private sector, which is a key component of all the sectors discussed previously in this chapter, is both a 
source of risk and opportunity in Canada’s approach to climate change adaptation. Research highlights the 
exposure of firms and industries to climate change, particularly how changing environmental conditions 
(e.g., more frequent extreme weather) could limit growth, disrupt operations and devalue investments. At 
the same time, firms and industries are critical actors in supporting the development of expertise, tools and 
knowledge related to adaptation.
Private sector engagement on climate change has historically focused on GHG emissions reduction rather 
than adaptation. However, governments, scholars and other organizations have started to explore the 
potential role of corporate adaptation, given the scale of the investment and resources required to manage 
climate change risks (Dougherty-Choux et al., 2015). The private sector could help to address demands 
for new technologies, expertise in risk management and modelling, capacity to scale up solutions beyond 
individual communities, and financial resources needed to achieve domestic and international adaptation 
objectives (UNFCCC, 2012; UNEP, 2012).
An overview of climate impacts and adaptation actions in Canadian businesses was included in multiple 
chapters of Warren and Lemmen (2014), with Kovacs and Thistlethwaite (2014) noting that corporate 
adaptation had been largely reactive, responding to variations in weather or extreme events, rather than 
involving analysis of long-term projected changes in climate. They further noted that successful adaptation 
can create new opportunities through expanded markets and products. They emphasized the scarcity of 
published research detailing climate impacts and adaptation on Canadian businesses, noting that in some 
cases adaptation actions may be under-reported for strategic reasons.
This section builds on the findings of Kovacs and Thistlethwaite (2014) by focusing on the status of corporate 
adaptation in Canada broadly. It complements the discussion of specific adaptation actions in other sections 
of this chapter, as well as a number of emerging issues of importance to the private sector, which are 
discussed in the Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter of this report. 
7.9.2 Corporate adaptation in Canada
Corporate climate change adaptation is defined as a “process of adjustment by companies to actual or 
expected climate and its effects through changes in business strategies, operations, practices and/or 
investment decisions” (Averchenkova et al., 2016, p. 520). Cases of corporate adaptation in Canada, as 
well as internationally, tend to be limited and difficult to generalize beyond sector and site-specific actions. 
Comprehensive literature reviews on corporate adaptation (Linnenluecke and Smith, 2018; Averchenkova et 
al., 2016) did not identify any recent (post-2011) Canadian studies on corporate adaptation. 
Research findings from other industrialized countries indicate that firms may have extensive experience 
in making management or operational adjustments in response to changing economic or competitive 
environments, but they have generally been unable to translate that experience into making adjustments to 
changing climate (Linnenlueke et al., 2013). As a result, firms often separate climate change adaptation from 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 547 
the main value-driving processes, and instead treat it as a social responsibility issue (Thistlethwaite and 
Wood, 2018; Furrer et al., 2009). 
It is often difficult, and perhaps not particularly useful, to distinguish actions supporting climate change 
adaptation from actions arising from existing risk management processes, given that anticipating and 
identifying external instability that could interrupt services is effective business continuity planning 
(Agrawala et al., 2011). Experts have argued that adaptation can be incorporated into standard enterprise risk 
management strategies by expanding the scope of risk assessment, prioritization and response actions to 
include climate change (Berkhout, 2012). 
7.9.3 Adaptation actions
Risk management represents the main strategy for firms to reduce their exposure to climate change. In 
analyzing private sector adaptation, it is possible to differentiate between firm-level management actions 
to limit operational exposure to climate change, and the production of adaptation tools and services that 
help manage climate vulnerability (Schaer and Kuruppu, 2018). In terms of managing operational exposure, 
adaptation actions can be categorized as either “soft” or “hard” measures. “Soft” adaptations constitute 
“low-regret” measures, as they require limited investment and will yield benefits, although not always direct 
financial returns. They include activities such as climate change risk and opportunity assessment, adjusting 
operational practices, education and awareness programs, stakeholder and political engagement, and 
initiating partnerships with external actors. In contrast, “hard” adaptation measures require a significant 
investment or change in practice and operations, such as building or renovating structural defenses, 
relocating infrastructure or offices, or divesting from climate-exposed property and sectors (Averchenkova 
et al., 2016). Adaptation services represent a response to demand for climate change risk and disaster 
risk management, and include climate risk and opportunity assessments, mapping and communication 
technologies, climate change-resilient agricultural products, and new insurance products (e.g., parametric 
insurance). 
Adaptation is growing in the corporate sector in response to many drivers, including increasing awareness 
of climate change among firms and sectors, strategic incentives associated with addressing physical 
risks, (Williams and Schaefer, 2013) and government regulations (Revell et al., 2009). In Canada, attention 
has focused primarily on the understanding and disclosure of physical risks. These include disruptions in 
construction, interruptions in supply chains, volatile energy costs associated with climate-related changes in 
demand, and closures or relocation in situations where employees or customers are unable to access a firm 
as a result of extreme weather (see Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter; Certified Professional 
Accountants Canada, 2016a; Linnenluecke et al., 2011). Despite this emphasis, most firms struggle to 
measure physical risk that involves a lot of uncertainty and can be perceived as a more long-term concern 
(see Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter; Mazzacurati, 2018). 
Overall, there is limited evidence of clear responses to these drivers in Canada. A 2018 survey focused on 
business responses to climate change found that a majority of businesses are not taking action and one 
quarter of respondents suggest that they plan to engage in adaptation (Earnscliffe Strategy Group, 2018). One 
example is the insurance industry implementing strategies to support climate change adaptation in response 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 548 
to significant increases in water-related property damage (see Case Story 7.10; McBean, 2012). Climate 
change, combined with ageing infrastructure and development in areas where climate risks are high, have 
increased the number and costs of claims for flood damage (Henstra and Thistlethwaite, 2017).
Case Story 7.10: Insurance and climate change adaptation in Canada
The 2013 flood in southern Alberta was the costliest flood in Canada’s history. Unfortunately, damage 
from overland flow of water from the flood did not qualify for property insurance, leaving many victims 
without resources for a full recovery. This gap in coverage led insurers to question whether Canadians had 
sufficient coverage for a changing climate where flood risk is anticipated to increase (Certified Professional 
Accountants Canada, 2016b). In response, insurers expanded their coverage to include overland flood 
damage, which had previously been unavailable in Canada. The availability of flood insurance provides an 
important tool for enhancing climate resilience by assigning premiums that create an incentive for property 
owners, businesses and communities to reduce their own exposure through expansion of coverage, and also 
by sharing the recovery costs from flood impacts when they occur (Thistlethwaite, 2016; IPCC, 2012). This 
engagement has enabled broader utilization of insurance expertise on risk modelling and strategies for risk 
reduction in efforts to promote adaptation (Surminski and Hankinson, 2018). This is particularly important in 
Canada where flood risk awareness and an understanding of insurance coverage are limited throughout the 
country (Thistlethwaite et al., 2017).
7.9.4 Knowledge gaps
Apart from a few examples in the insurance industry and natural resource sectors, there is a paucity 
of available research and data on corporate adaptation in Canada. Knowledge gaps start with the fact 
that corporate adaptation remains poorly defined in practice, which limits our understanding of which 
management, strategic or investment behaviours constitute adaptations. As a consequence, firms might be 
under-reporting adaptation since they are unsure if an action can be defined as such. 
There also remains uncertainty over the motivation for and barriers to corporate adaptation. In Canada, most 
attention has focused on physical risks to business operations, but there is almost no research on the topics 
of firm awareness or regulation. There is also little research on the outcomes of corporate adaptation and its 
impacts on firms or the communities where they are located. Monitoring and evaluation of corporate adaptation 
could improve understanding of these outcomes (Surminski and Hankinson, 2018; Averchenkova et al., 2016). 
Finally, additional research would help to clarify the role of businesses in broader adaptation policies. The 
division of responsibility for adaptation between different stakeholders remains a source of ambiguity. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 549 
These knowledge gaps are particularly concerning for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which 
are more vulnerable to climate risk (Linnenluecke and Smith, 2018). SMEs lack the resources of their larger 
counterparts and may have greater difficulty prioritizing perceived long-term issues like climate change, 
given short-term concerns around sustaining operations. The 2018 survey of Canadian business responses 
to climate change found that SMEs were far less likely to be engaging in actions supporting adaptation 
(Earnscliffe Strategy Group, 2018). This gap is especially concerning since the recovery of a local community 
in the aftermath of a disaster is often contingent on the resiliency of local SMEs. There is evidence that 40% of 
SMEs fail to reopen after a disaster and that many are unable to sustain their business even if they do reopen 
(McKay, 2018). Without these SMEs, the local community may never support the economic growth and quality 
of life enjoyed before the disaster, since many provide critical services such as access to food and medicine. 
7.9.5 Moving forward
While the lack of available data precludes strong conclusions about the status of corporate adaptation 
in Canada, it suggests that firms may lack sufficient adaptive capacity. Most firms face limitations in the 
human and financial resources required to interpret climate change data, assess the costs and benefits of 
actions, and incorporate the flexibility required to adjust strategies as new information emerges (Wedawatta 
and Ingirige, 2016; Downing, 2012). Research also suggests that firms are organizationally biased in favour 
of short-term and local scales, and resistant to acting when faced with temporal and spatial uncertainty 
associated with climate change (Bansal et al., 2017; Slawinski et al., 2017). The lack of adaptive capacity 
and absence of organizational interest in addressing climate change call into question the current ability of 
businesses to have a role in supporting climate change adaptation.
7.10 Moving forward 
7.10.1 Knowledge gaps and emerging issues
It has been noted for more than a decade that, in most situations, existing knowledge is sufficient to 
start taking adaptation action in Canada (Lemmen et al., 2008). Nonetheless, the need to accelerate the 
implementation of adaptation measures has been acknowledged in both scientific and policy analyses at 
the global and national scale (e.g., Canadian Council of the Academies, 2019; IPCC, 2018; Government of 
Canada, 2016; UNFCCC, 2015). Risk and opportunity assessments are frequently a prerequisite to enhancing 
investment in adaptation. A wide range of methodologies are available, with the most appropriate being 
determined by many factors, including the scope and goal of the assessment and available resources 
(e.g., British Columbia Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, 2019). The Canadian Council 
of Academies undertook an assessment to prioritize climate change risks for Canada and the Canadian 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 550 
federal government, based largely upon collective expert judgement (Canadian Council of Academies, 2019). 
Major climate change risk areas included some of the sectors discussed in this chapter as stand-alone 
sections (agriculture, fisheries, forestry) as well as themes woven throughout (e.g., physical infrastructure 
and governance and capacity). Importantly, analysis considered the potential to reduce damages through 
adaptation, in addition to the likelihood and potential consequences associated with each risk. Of the topics 
addressed in this chapter, infrastructure (including transportation) and agriculture were identified as having 
the highest adaptation potential, and fisheries the lowest (Canadian Council of Academies, 2019).
While many factors contribute to the lack of progress on adaptation, uncertainties and gaps in knowledge 
are frequently highlighted as a barrier to action (Eyzaguirre and Warren, 2014). Knowledge gaps specific to 
individual sectors are identified in the preceding sections of this chapter and the publications cited in those 
sections. There are also a number of emerging cross-cutting issues that represent important knowledge gaps 
with respect to economic sectors in Canada. 
The state of adaptation in the private sector
While climate disclosure is emerging as a key instrument for understanding how the private sector is 
assessing and responding to physical climate risk (see Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance chapter; 
TCFD, 2017), such information is largely restricted to large, publicly-traded companies. Very little information 
is available on adaptation actions undertaken by small and medium-sized businesses, even though many 
are highly exposed to climate risks. Benchmark surveys (e.g., Earnscliffe Strategy Group, 2018) provide a 
foundation for future work.
Transnational climate impacts
Also referred to as transboundary or indirect impacts, these refer to climate impacts that occur in one country 
and affect the adaptation measures taken within other countries (Hedlund et al., 2018). These could relate to 
impacts on global supply chains, international competitiveness, financial flows and trade (see International 
Dimensions chapter). For example, flooding in Thailand in 2011 affected global electronics and automotive 
supply chains, with economic implications for many countries and corporations (Shughrue and Seto, 2018). 
The magnitude of such vulnerabilities in Canada is essentially unknown, although research elsewhere 
indicates that open and export-intensive economies are particularly exposed (Hedlund et al., 2018).
Interdependencies
Much of the existing sectoral research examining climate impacts in Canada, and elsewhere, has been 
focused on individual sectors. While the importance of understanding interdependencies between sectors 
is growing (see Section 7.7.3), quantitative analysis of these connections remains limited. Without such 
analysis, there is potential to significantly underestimate the risks associated with climate change (Canadian 
Council of Academies, 2019).
Potential for stranded assets
Understanding of the risk of assets losing significant value as a result of policy changes to address climate 
change is well developed, particularly with respect to the energy sector (e.g., IPCC, 2018; IRENA, 2018). Far 
less attention, particularly in Canada, has been given to stranded assets that could result from the physical 
impacts of climate change (see Circle of Blue, 2018 for examples related to water resources). In Canada, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 551 
closure of the rail link to the Port of Churchill for 18 months as a result of flooding represents temporary 
stranding of the port assets (see Section 7.7.3).
Strengthened economic analysis
A commonly cited barrier to adaptation action is the absence of a strong business case (Eyzaguirre and 
Warren, 2014). While examples of detailed economic analysis, including cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness and 
multi-criteria analyses, exist (e.g., UNFCCC, 2011) there is limited application of these techniques in Canada 
(see Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter). At a national scale, quantitative 
analysis of economic impacts under a range of future climate scenarios is lacking, potentially hindering action 
to enhance climate resilience and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
7.11 Conclusion
Examination of the sector-specific key messages and associated discussions in this chapter reveals several 
integrative conclusions: 
1.	 A tremendous breadth of sector activities are impacted by climate change, which is evident 
despite authors focusing on a limited number of key issues per sector. While research has 
traditionally focused on direct climate impacts on production (e.g., agriculture, forestry, fisheries 
and hydroelectricity) and to a lesser degree on consumer demand (e.g., energy and tourism), it 
is clear that cumulative and cascading impacts of climate change ultimately affect virtually all 
elements of sectoral systems. This breadth emphasizes the value of comprehensive assessments 
of both risks and opportunities to inform adaptation.
2.	 It is important to understand the interconnections within and between multiple sectors (see 
Section 7.7.3). For some sectors, such as transportation, this is particularly evident given its 
critical role in supply chains (see Section 7.7.3). The reliability and resilience of Canada’s freight 
transportation system regarding access to domestic and international markets is a critical issue 
for the sustainability of agriculture in Canada (see Section 7.4.3). The response of the forest 
sector to wildfire has implications for many other sectors, including costs related to evacuations, 
damage to buildings, roads, pipelines and other physical infrastructure, shutdown of businesses 
and industries, and insurance costs (see Section 7.2.2). Emerging tourism in the Arctic is having 
unforeseen social and cultural impacts, and is placing stress on search and rescue capacities (see 
Section 7.8.3). Further modelling studies could help elucidate the nature of these interconnections 
(see Section 7.7.4).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 552 
3.	 Adaptation is occurring within all sectors, but needs to be accelerated. This applies to actions 
that reduce risks and those that take advantage of new opportunities. It is noteworthy that 
successful adaptation not only reduces the vulnerability of sectors and communities within 
Canada, but also enhances global resilience (e.g., food security) (see Sections 7.3.1, 7.4.3). Most 
examples of implemented adaptation action relate to those sectors where the direct impacts of 
climate change are already evident. Evidence of widespread adaptation within the private sector is 
particularly limited, despite the key role that it plays in all the sectors discussed here (see Section 
7.9.2). The need for collaboration using a systems approach that includes producers, asset 
managers, regulators, researchers and relevant stakeholders is a commonly identified need (see 
Sections 7.2.3, 7.4.1, 7.5.5, 7.6.4, 7.7.4). Finally, it is extremely important to monitor and report on 
adaptation measures that have been implemented in order to inform future plans (see Sections 
7.5.4, 7.6.4, 7.10).
4.	 There is urgency associated with accelerating adaptation action. Urgency is most clear where 
current climate risks are not adequately managed and where investment decisions made today 
have implications extending for many decades to come: for example, decisions regarding 
infrastructure (see Sections 7.6, 7.7, 7.8), forest management (see Section 7.2) and mining 
reclamation (see Section 7.5). While proactive adaptation is generally recognized as being more 
effective and cost-efficient than reactive approaches (i.e., responding to impacts as they happen), 
and provides opportunities for innovation and competitive advantage (e.g., Eyzaguirre and Warren, 
2014), it is recognized that investment decisions in both the public and private sectors take 
place within a context of competing priorities and associated opportunity costs. Comprehensive 
assessments of risks and opportunities can be critical in identifying action priorities, particularly 
those that include consideration of adaptation potential (see Sections 7.7.3, 7.8.5, 7.10). There 
is also an urgent need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as the range of viable adaptation 
options decreases under higher rates of climate change, and limits to adaptation can be exceeded 
(IPCC, 2018, 2014).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 553 
7.12 References 
Adams, C.F., Alade, L.A., Legault, C.M., O’Brien, L., Palmer, M.C., 
Sosebee, K.A. and Traver, M.L. (2018). Relative importance of 
population size, fishing pressure and temperature on the spatial 
distribution of nine Northwest Atlantic groundfish stocks; PLoS 
ONE, 13(4), e0196583. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0196583>
Agrawala, S., Carraro, M., Kingsmill, N., Lanzi, E., Mullan, M. 
and Prudent-Richard, G. (2011). Private Sector Engagement in 
Adaptation to Climate Change. OECD Environment Working Papers 
39, OECD Publishing. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1787/5kg221jkf1g7-en>
Agriculture Adaptation Working Group (2016). Barriers to 
Adaptation. Analytic Paper Series Paper #2, Developed under 
Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation Platform. 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2016). An Overview of the 
Canadian Agriculture and Agri-Food System 2016. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/publications/
economic-publications/an-overview-of-the-canadian-agriculture-
and-agri-food-system-2016/?id=1462288050282>
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2018). Climate change scenario 
maps drawn from CMIP5 data -26 GCMs as supplied by PCIC. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.pacificclimate.org/data/
statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios>
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2019). Drought Watch. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/programs-and-
services/drought-watch/?id=1461263317515>
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Canadian Food Inspection 
Agency (2008). Invasive Alien Species (IAS) Backgrounder; 
Agriculture and Agri-Food Portfolio, Environmental Health Research 
Branch, AAFC and Plant Health Division, Policy and Programs 
Branch, CFIA. 
Alin, S., Evans, W., Gao, Z., Gurney-Smith, H., Lee, K. and Tischenko, 
P. (2019). Ocean acidification and deoxygenation in the North 
Pacific Ocean, (Eds.) J. Christian and T. Ono, PICES Special 
Publication 6, 116 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://meetings.
pices.int/publications/special-publications/Special-Report%20
5-Ocean_Acidification.pdf>
Allen, R., Whelen, M. and Khan, A. (2016). Building Resilience to 
Counter the Impact of International Supply Chain Vulnerabilities. 
Canadian Transportation Research Forum, 8 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://ctrf.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/
CTRF2016AllenWhelenKhanLogisticsTrade.pdf>
Amec Foster Wheeler Environment Infrastructure (2017). Canada’s 
Climate Change Adaptation Platform: Infrastructure and Buildings 
Working Group Adaptation State of Play Report, 162 p. 
American Council on Renewable Energy (2018). The role of 
Renewable Energy in National Security. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://acore.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/ACORE_Issue-
Brief_-The-Role-of-Renewable-Energy-in-National-Security.pdf>
Andersland, O.B. and Ladanyi, B. (2003). Frozen ground engineering. 
John Wiley and Sons, 384 p.
Andrews-Key, S.A. (2018). Vulnerability and Adaptation to Climate 
Change in Sustainable Forest Management and the Forest Industry 
in Saskatchewan (PhD Thesis). University of Saskatchewan. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://hdl.handle.net/10388/11671>
Andrey, J. and Palko, K. (2017). Introduction, in Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 2016, 
(Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
2–10. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-1e.
pdf>
Antunes, P., Bernard, M.-C. and Owusu, P. (2016). The Economic 
Impacts of the 2016 Alberta Wildfires. The Conference Board of 
Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.conferenceboard.ca/e-library/abstract.
aspx?did=8420&AspxAutoDetectCookieSupport=1>
Arzhanov, M.M., and Mokhov, I.I. (2013). Temperature trends in 
the permafrost of the Northern Hemisphere: Comparison of model 
calculations with observations. Doklady Earth Sciences, 	
449(1), 319–323. Retrieved June 2020, from <10.1134/
S1028334X1303001X>
Astrup, R., Bernier, P. Y., Genet, H., Lutz, D. A. and Bright, R. M. 
(2018). A sensible climate solution for the boreal forest. Nature 
Climate Change, 8, 11–12. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-017-0043-3>
Asian Development Bank (2012). Climate Risk and Adaptation in the 
Electric Power Sector. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.adb.
org/sites/default/files/publication/29889/climate-risks-adaptation-
power-sector.pdf>
Asian Development Bank (2013). Guidelines for Climate Proofing 
Investment in the Energy Sector. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.adb.org/documents/guidelines-climate-proofing-investment-
energy-sector>
Associated Engineering Limited (2018). Final Report: Improving 
Coastal Flood Adaptation Approaches. FCM MCIP 15274. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.surrey.ca/files/CFAS-ICFAA-
FinalReport-29032018.pdf>
Association des Stations de Ski du Québec (2016). Congrès 2016: 
Le Québec a atteint le 5,125 millions de jours/ski pour la saison 
2015-2016. Tourismexpress. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
tourismexpress.com/nouvelles/congres-assq-2016-le-quebec-a-
atteint-le-5-125-millions-de-jours-ski-pour-la-saison-2015-16>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 554 
Aubertin, M., Bussière, B. and Bernier, L. (2002). Environnement 
et gestion des résidus miniers. Presses Internationales de 
Polytechnique, Corporation de l’École Polytechnique de Montréal, 
Montréal, Canada.
Aubertin, M., Bussière, B., Barbera, J.M., Chapuis, R.P., Monzon, 
M. and Aachib, M. (1997). Construction and instrumentation of 
in situ test plots to evaluate covers built with clean tailings. 4th 
International Conference on Acid Rock Drainage, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada, vol. 2, 715–730.
Aubertin, M., Bussière, B., James, M., Jaouhar, E.M., Martin, V., Pépin, 
N., Mbonimpa, M. and Chapuis, R.P. (2011). Vers une mise à jour des 
critères de stabilité géotechnique pour la conception des ouvrages de 
retenue de résidus miniers. Symposium 2011 sur l’environnement et 
les mines, Rouyn-Noranda, Québec, Canada.
Aubertin, M., Bussière, B., Pabst, T., James, M. and Mbonimpa, M. 
(2016). Review of the reclamation techniques for acid-generating 
mine wastes upon closure of disposal sites. Geo-Chicago 2016, 
343–358. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://ascelibrary.org/
doi/10.1061/9780784480137.034>
Aubertin, M., Pabst, T., Bussière, B., James, M., Mbonimpa, M. 
Benzaazoua and Maqsoud, A. (2015). Revue des meilleures 
pratiques de restauration des sites d’entreposage de rejets miniers 
générateurs de DMA. Symposium 2015 sur l’environnement et les 
mines, Rouyn-Noranda, Québec, Canada.
Averchenkova, A., Crick, F., Kocornik-Mina, A., Leck, H. and 
Surminski, S. (2016). Multinational and large national corporations 
and climate adaptation: Are we asking the right questions? A 
review of current knowledge and a new research perspective. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 7(4), 517–536. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.402>
Azam, S. and Li, Q. (2010). Tailings dam failures: a review of the 
last one hundred years. Geotechnical News, 28(4), 50–54. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/
Tailings-Dam-Failures%3A-A-Review-of-the-Last-One-Azam-Li/
e57ebdac0a801b412cefd42017c2dded29cafd41> 
Bansal, P., Kim, A. and Wood, M.O (2017). Hidden in Plain Sight: The 
Importance of Scale on Organizational Attention to Issues. Academy 
of Management Review, 43(2). January, amr.2014.0238. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.2014.0238>
Barton, A., Hales, B., Waldbusser, G., Langdon, C. and Feely, R.A. 
(2012). The Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas, shows negative 
correlation to naturally elevated carbon dioxide levels: Implications 
for near-term ocean acidification effects. Limnology and 
Oceanography, 57(3), 698–710. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.4319/lo.2012.57.3.0698>
Beardy’s and Okemasis’ Cree Nation (n.d.). Fire. Retrieved January 
2019, from <https://bofn9697.com/tag/fire>
Becken, S., Whittlesea, E., Schliephack, J. and Scott, D. (2020). 
Tourism and climate change: evaluating the extent of policy 
integration. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 25(10), 1–18. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2020.1745217>
Becker, A., Ng, A., McEvoy, D. and Mullett, J. (2018). Implications 
of climate change for shipping: Ports and supply chains. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 9(2). Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.508>   
Bentz, B.J., Régnière, J., Fettig, C.J., Hansen, E.M., Hayes, J.L., Hicke, 
J.A., Kelsey, R.G., Negron, J.F. and Seybold, S.J. (2010). Climate 
change and bark beetles of the western United States and Canada: 
direct and indirect effects. BioScience, 60(8), 602–613. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2010.60.8.6>
Berkhout, F. (2012). Adaptation to Climate Change by Organizations. 
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 3(1), 91–106. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.154>
Bernier, P.Y., Gauthier, S., Jean, P.-O., Manka, F., Boulanger, Y., 
Beaudoin, A. and Guindon, L. (2016). Mapping local effects of forest 
properties on fire risk across Canada. Forests, 7(8), 157. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/f7080157>
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M.D. and Parker, S. (2014). Human health, 
Chapter 7 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives 
on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 191–232. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Chapter7-Human-Health_Eng.
pdf>
Beverly, J.L. and Bothwell, P. (2011). Wildfire evacuations in Canada 
1980–2007. Natural Hazards, 59(1), 571–596. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-011-9777-9>
Bindoff, N.L., Cheung, W.W.L., Kairo, J.G., Arístegui, J., Guinder, V.A., 
Hallberg, R., Hilmi, N., Jiao, N., Karim, M.S., Levin, L., O’Donoghue, 
S., Purca Cuicapusa, S.R., Rinkevich, B., Suga, T., Tagliabue, A. and 
Williamson, P. ( 2019). Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems, and 
Dependent Communities, in IPCC Special Report on the Ocean 
and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. 
Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, 
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, 
N.M. Weyer. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/
chapter/chapter-5/>
Blackwell, B.A., Shrimpton, G., Steele, F., Ohlson, D.W. and Needoba, 
A. (2008). Development of a Wildfire Risk Management System 
for British Columbia Transmission Corporation’s Rights-of-
Way. Environment Concerns in Rights-of-Way Management 8th 
International Symposium, 793–801. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-044453223-7.50085-X>
Bladon, K.D. (2018). Rethinking wildfires and forest watersheds. 
Science, 359(6379), 1001–1002. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.aar8120>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 555 
Blight, G.H. (2010). Geotechnical Engineering for Mine Waste 
Storage Facilities. Taylor and Francis Group, London, United 
Kingdom, CRC Press, 652 p. 
Blowes, D.W., Ptacek, C.J., Jambor, J.L. and Weisener, C.G. (2003). 
The geochemistry of acid mine drainage. Treatise on Geochemistry, 
9, 149–204. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/
B0-08-043751-6/09137-4>
Boiffin, J. and Munson, A.D. (2013). Three large fire years threaten 
resilience of closed crown black spruce forests in eastern Canada. 
Ecosphere, 4(5), 1–20. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1890/ES13-00038.1>
Bombardier Recreational Products (2017). Annual Information Form 
– 23 March 2017 (Fiscal Year Ended 31 January 2017). Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://ir.brp.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=251742&p=irol-
reportsannual>
Bonsal, B.R., Peters, D.L., Seglenieks, F., Rivera, A. and Berg, A. 
(2019). Changes in freshwater availability across Canada, Chapter 
6 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 261–342. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/
chapter/6-0/>
Boucher, D., Boulanger, Y., Aubin, I., Bernier, P.Y., Beaudoin, A., 
Guindon, L. and Gauthier, S. (2018). Current and projected 
cumulative impacts of fire, drought, and insects on timber volumes 
across Canada. Ecological Applications, 285, 1245–1259. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.1724>
Boulanger, Y., Gauthier, S. and Burton, P.J. (2014). A refinement of 
models projecting future Canadian fire regimes using homogeneous 
fire regime zones. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 44(4), 
365–376. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-
2013-0372>
Boulanger, Y., Girardin, M., Bernier, P.Y., Gauthier, S., Beaudoin, A. 
and Guindon, L. (2017). Changes in mean forest age in Canada’s 
forests could limit future increases in area burned but compromise 
potential harvestable conifer volumes. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research, 47(6), 755–764. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/cjfr-2016-0445>
Boyle, J., Cunningham, M. and Dekens, J. (2013). Climate Change 
Adaptation and Canadian Infrastructure: A review of the literature. 
International Institute of Sustainable Development Report, 35 
p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.iisd.org/pdf/2013/
adaptation_can_infrastructure.pdf>
Braun, M. (2016). New Climate Normals for Electricity Demand 
Forecasting, Case Study prepared for Climate Change Impacts 
and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada, 10. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-cientifique/
CaseStudy7_EN_final.pdf> 
Braun, M. and Fournier, E. (2016): Adaptation Case Studies 
in the Energy Sector – Overcoming Barriers to Adaptation, 
Report presented to Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Division, Natural Resources Canada, 114 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/
ReportCaseStudies-EN.pdf>
Breitburg, D., Levin, L.A., Oschlies, A., Grégoire, M., Chavez, F.P., 
Conley, D.J., Garçon, V., Gilbert, D., Gutiérrez, D., Isensee, K., Jacinto, 
G.S., Limburg, K.E., Montes, I., Naqvi, S.W.A., Pitcher, G.C., Rabalais, 
N.N., Roman, M.R., Rose, K.A., Seibel, B.A., Telszewski, M., Yasuhara, 
M. and Zhang, J. (2018). Declining oxygen in the global ocean and 
coastal waters. Science, 359(6371). eaam7240. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aam7240>
Bresson, É., Demers, I., Chavaillaz, Y., Roy, P. and Pabst, T. (2018). 
Effectiveness of oxygen barriers as reclamation methods under 
climate change: definition of a drought index. Proceedings of the 
Tailings and Mine Waste 2018 Conference, Keystone, Colorado, 
USA. Retrieved June 2020, from <ftp://ftp.mern.gouv.qc.ca/Public/
Dc/Conferences_Quebec-Mines-2018/Formation_Nouvelles%20
exigences_changements%20climatiques/Bresson%20et%20al%20
2018.pdf>
Brickman, D., Hebert, D. and Wang, Z. (2018). Mechanism for the 
recent ocean warming events on the Scotian Shelf of Eastern 
Canada. Continental Shelf Research, 156(15), 11–22. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csr.2018.01.001>
British Columbia Ministry of Environment and Climate Change 
Strategy (2019). Preliminary Strategic Climate Risk Assessment 
for British Columbia, Report prepared for the Government of British 
Columbia, Victoria, British Columbia. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/climate-
change/adaptation/risk-assessment> 
Brodeur, R., Perry, I., Boldt, J., Flostrand, L., Galbraith, M., King, 
J., Murphy, J., Sakuma, K. and Thompson, A. (2018). An unusual 
gelatinous plankton event in the NE Pacific: The Great Pyrosome 
Bloom of 2017. PICES Press, 26(1), 22–27. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/322665037_An_
unusual_gelatinous_plankton_event_in_the_NE_Pacific_The_Great_
Pyrosome_Bloom_of_2017> 
Brown, C.D. and Johnstone, J.F. (2012). Once burned, twice shy: 
Repeat fires reduce seed availability and alter substrate constraints 
on Picea mariana regeneration. Forest Ecology and Management, 
266, 34–41. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2011.11.006> 
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (2018). Border Crossing/Entry 
Data. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.bts.gov/content/
border-crossingentry-data> 
Burton, P.J. (2010). Striving for sustainability and resilience in the 
face of unprecedented change: the case of the mountain pine 
beetle outbreak in British Columbia. Sustainability, 2(8), 2403–2423. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/su2082403> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 556 
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
444. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/> 
Bussière, B. (2007). Colloquium 2004: Hydrogeotechnical 
properties of hard rock tailings from metal mines and emerging 
geoenvironmental disposal approaches. Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal, 44(9), 1019–1052. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/T07-040>
Bussière, B., Aubertin, M. and Chapuis, R.P. (2003). The behavior 
of inclined covers used as oxygen barriers. Canadian Geotechnical 
Journal, 40(3), 512–535. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/t03-001> 
Bussière, B., Aubertin, M., Zagury, G. J., Potvin, R. and Benzaazoua, 
M. (2005). Principaux défis et pistes de solution pour la restauration 
des aires d’entreposage de rejets miniers abandonnées. Symposium 
2005 sur l’environnement et les mines. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267855816_
PRINCIPAUX_DEFIS_ET_PISTES_DE_SOLUTION_POUR_LA_
RESTAURATION_DES_AIRES_D’ENTREPOSAGE_DE_REJETS_
MINIERS_ABANDONNEES>
Bussière, B., Potvin, R., Dagenais, A., Aubertin, M., Maqsoud, A. 
and Cyr, J. (2009). Restauration du site minier Lorraine, Latulipe, 
Québec: Résultats de 10 ans de suivi. Déchets – Revue francophone 
d’écologie industrielle, 1–16. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4267/dechets-sciences-techniques.1254> 
Bussière, B., Demers, I., Charron, P., Bossé, B., Roy, P., Jébrak, M. and 
Trépanier, S. (2017). Analyse de risques et de vulnérabilités liés aux 
changements climatiques pour le secteur minier québécois, 331 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://mern.gouv.qc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/analyse-changements-climatiques-secteur-minier.pdf> 
Calkin, D.E., Cohen, J.D., Finney, M.A. and Thompson, M.P. (2014). 
How risk management can prevent future wildfire disasters in the 
wildland-urban interface. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 111(2), 746–751. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1315088111> 
Campbell, I.D., Durant D.G., Hunter, K.L. and Hyatt, K.D. (2014). Food 
production, Chapter 4 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector 
Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and 
D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 99–134. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Chapter4-
Food-Production_Eng.pdf> 
Canadian Agri-Food Trade Alliance (2020). Agri-Food Exports. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://cafta.org/agri-food-exports/>
Canadian Council of Forest Ministers (n.d.). Climate Change. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.ccfm.org/english/
coreproducts-cc.asp>
Canadian Electricity Association (2016). Adapting to Climate 
Change: State of Play and Recommendations for the Electricity 
Sector in Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://electricity.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/The_Canadian_Electricity_
Association_Releases_a_Roadmap_to_Climate_Change_
Adaptation_final.pdf>
Canadian Dam Association (2013). Dam Safety Guidelines. Library 
and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication Data, Ottawa, 
Ontario.
Centre d’expertise hydrique du Québec (2019). Ministère de 
l’Environnement et de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques. 
Retrieved May 2019, from <www.cehq.gouv.qc.ca>
Certified Professional Accountants Canada (2016a). How 
Organizations Can Adapt to Climate Change. Chartered 
Professional Accountants Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.cpacanada.ca/-/media/site/business-and-accounting-
resources/docs/climate-change-mitigation-adaptation-brief-2-
how-organizations-can-adapt-to-climate-change-february-2016.
pdf?la=en&hash=
53D86B64BA875656F49B457BD7CCFB5D4B94859F>
Certified Professional Accountants Canada (2016b). Adaptation 
Case Study #4: The Co-Operators. Chartered Professional 
Accountants Canada. <https://www.cpacanada.ca/-/media/
site/business-and-accounting-resources/docs/climate-change-
adaptation-case-study-4-the-co-operators-october-2015.
pdf?la=en&hash=
6A57F3569EF436E13C7E2BB0DA6184D7BE4EDF6B>
Chandler, P.C., King, S.A. and Perry, R.I. (Eds.) (2016). State of 
the physical, biological and selected fishery resources of Pacific 
Canadian marine ecosystems in 2015. Canadian Technical Report 
on Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 3179, viii + 230 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/365564.
pdf>
Christianson, A. (2015). Social science research on Indigenous 
wildfire management in the 21st century and future research needs. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24(2), 190–200. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1071/WF13048>
Ciais, P., Sabine, C., Bala, G., Bopp, L., Brovkin, V., Canadell, J., 
Chhabra, A., DeFries, R., Galloway, J., Heimann, M., Jones, C., Le 
Quéré, C., Myneni, R.B., Piao, S. and Thornton, P. (2013). Carbon 
and Other Biogeochemical Cycles, in Climate Change 2013: The 
Physical Science Basis (Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. 
Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, New York, USA. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.
ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WG1AR5_Chapter06_FINAL.pdf> 
Circle of Blue (2018). Stranded Assets. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.circleofblue.org/stranded-assets> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 557 
City of Surrey (2018). CFAS Primer Part 1: Coastal Flooding in 
Surrey. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.surrey.ca/files/
CFAS-Primerpart1.pdf>
Claireaux, G. and Chabot, D. (2016). Responses by fishes to 
environmental hypoxia: integration through Fry’s concept of aerobic 
metabolic scope. Journal of Fish Biology, 88, 232–251. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/jfb.12833> 
Coulombe, S., Bernier, P.Y. and Raulier, F. (2010). Uncertainty in 
detecting climate change impact on the projected yield of black 
spruce (Picea mariana). Forest Ecology and Management, 259(4), 
730–738. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2009.06.028> 
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate 
Change Risks. The Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks and 
Adaptation Potential, Council of Canadian Academies, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 70 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://cca-reports.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-climate-change-
risks.pdf> 
Creed, I., Weber, M., Accatino, F. and Kreutzweiser, D. (2016). 
Managing forests for water in the Anthropocene—the best kept 
secret services of forest ecosystems. Forests, 7(3), 60. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/f7030060> 
Cross Dependency Initiative (2019). Building climate resilience 
across critical infrastructure, 4 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://xdi.systems/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/XDI_Sydney-
A3toA4__singlepages.pdf>
Crossin, G.T., Al-Ayoub, S.A., Jury, S.H., Howell, W.H. and Watson III, 
W.H. (1998) Behavioral thermoregulation in the American lobster 
Homarus americanus. Journal of Experimental Biology, 201, 365–
374. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://jeb.biologists.org/content/
jexbio/201/3/365.full.pdf> 
Cruz, A.M. and Krausmann, E. (2013). Vulnerability of the oil and 
gas sector to climate change and extreme weather events. Climatic 
Change, 121(1), 41–53. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://link.
springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-013-0891-4>
CTV (2018). All aboard: First passenger train in 18 months departs 
for Churchill, Man. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
ctvnews.ca/mobile/canada/all-aboard-first-passenger-train-in-18-
months-departs-for-churchill-man-1.4201440>
Da Silva, L., Desrochers, F.-A., Pineault, K., Gosselin, C.-A., Grenier, 
P. and Larose, G. (2019). Analyse économique des mesures 
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques appliquée au secteur 
du ski alpin au Québec. Ouranos, Montréal, 119 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/
RapportDaSilva2019.pdf>
Dagenais, A.-M., Aubertin, M., Bussière, B., Bernier, L. and Cyr, J. 
(2001). Monitoring at the Lorraine Mine Site: A Follow-Up on the 
Remediation Plan. National Association of Abandoned Mine Land 
Programs Annual Conference, August 19–22, Athens, Ohio, 19 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.492.4689&rep=rep1&type=pdf> 
Daniel, C.J., Ter-Mikaelian, M.T., Wotton, B.M., Rayfield, B. and Fortin, 
M.-J. (2017). Incorporating uncertainty into forest management 
planning: Timber harvest, wildfire and climate change in the boreal 
forest. Forest Ecology and Management, 400, 542–554. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2017.06.039>
Dawson, J., Stewart, E.J., Lemelin, R.H. and Scott, D. (2010). The 
carbon cost of polar bear viewing tourism in Churchill, Canada. 
Journal of Sustainable Tourism,18(3), 319–336. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/09669580903215147>
Dawson, J., Stewart, E.J., Johnston, M.E. and Lemieux, C.J. (2016). 
Identifying and evaluating adaptation strategies for cruise tourism in 
Arctic Canada. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 24(10), 1425–1441. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.201
5.1125358>
Dawson, J., Copland, L., Johnston, M.E., Pizzolato, L., Howell, S., 
Pelot, R., Etienne, L., Matthews, L. and Parsons, J. (2017). Climate 
change adaptation strategies and policy options for Arctic shipping, 
Report prepared for Transport Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://ruor.uottawa.ca/handle/10393/36016>
Dawson, J., Pizzolato. L., Howell, S., Copland, L. and Johnston, M. 
(2018). Temporal and spatial patterns of ship traffic in the Canadian 
Arctic from 1990 to 2015. Arctic, 71(1), 15–26. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic4698> 
Dawson, R. (2015). Handling interdependencies in climate change 
risk assessment. Climate, 3(4), 1079–1096. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.3390/cli3041079>
Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (2011). Climate 
Resilient Infrastructure: Preparing for a Changing Climate, 71 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69269/climate-
resilient-infrastructure-full.pdf> 
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., Smith, S., 
Thackeray, C. and Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). Changes in snow, 
ice, and permafrost across Canada, Chapter 5 in Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D. S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 194–260. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/5-0/> 
Dewar, J.A. and Wachs, M. (2008). Transportation planning, climate 
change, and decision making under uncertainty. Transportation 
Research Board, 26 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://onlinepubs.
trb.org/onlinepubs/sr/sr290dewarwachs.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 558 
Dixon, L., Tsang, F. and Fitts, G. (2018). The Impact of Changing 
Wildfire Risk on California’s Residential Insurance Market. The RAND 
Corporation, California, USA, 105 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://climateassessment.ca.gov/techreports/docs/20180827-
Forests_CCCA4-CNRA-2018-008.pdf> 
Doré, G. and Zubeck, H. K. (2009). Cold regions pavement 
engineering. ASCE Press, Reston, Virginia, 403 p. 
Dougherty-Choux, L., Terpstra, P., Kamila, S. and Kurukulasuriya, P. 
(2015). Adapting from the Ground Up. World Resources Institute, 
Washington, DC. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
preventionweb.net/go/47027> 
Downing, T.E. (2012). Views of the frontiers in climate change 
Adaptation economics. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 
Change, 3(2), 161–70. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/wcc.157>
Dubois, A., Hulthen, K. and Pedersen, A. (2011). Interdependence 
Within and Among “Supply Chains”. 21 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Kajsa_
Hulthen/publication/242489338_INTERDEPENDENCE_
WITHIN_AND_AMONG_aposSUPPLY_CHAINSapos/
links/54006e0c0cf24c81027dec7e/INTERDEPENDENCE-WITHIN-
AND-AMONG-aposSUPPLY-CHAINS-apos.pdf>
Dupont-Prinet, A., Vagner, M., Chabot, D. and Audet, C. (2013). 
Impact of hypoxia on the metabolism of Greenland halibut 
(Reinhardtius hippoglossoides). Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences, 70, 461–469. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2012-0327> 
Dymond, C.C., Spittlehouse, D.L., Tedder, S., Hopkins, K., McCallion, 
K. and Sandland, J. (2015). Applying resilience concepts in forest 
management: a retrospective simulation approach. Forests, 6(12), 
4421–4438. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/
f6124377> 
Earnscliffe Strategy Group (2018). National Climate Change 
Adaptation Survey, Report prepared for Climate Change Impacts 
and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa.
Edwards, J.E., Pearce, C., Ogden, A.E. and Williamson, T.B. (2015). 
Climate change and sustainable forest management in Canada: 
a guidebook for assessing vulnerability and mainstreaming 
adaptation into decision making. Canadian Council of Forest 
Ministers, Climate Change Task Force, 172 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.ccfm.org/pdf/Vulnerability%20Guidebook_
June2_EN.pdf>
Ekstrom, J.A., Suatoni, L., Cooley, S.R., Pendelton, L.H., Waldbusser, 
G.G., Cinner, J.E., Ritter, J., Langdon, C., van Hooidonk, R., Gledhill, 
D., Wellman, K., Beck, M.W., Brander, L.M., Rittschof, D., Doherty, C., 
Edwards, P.E.T. and Portela, R. (2015). Vulnerability and adaptation 
of US shellfisheries to ocean acidification. Nature Climate Change, 
5, 207–214. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2508> 
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2018). Canadian Centre 
for Climate Services. Retrieved December 2019, from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-
change/canadian-centre-climate-services.html>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (2020). Strategic 
assessment of climate change (revised October 2020), 20 p.  
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/services/
environment/conservation/assessments/strategic-assessments/
climate-change.html>
Eriksson, N. and Adamek, P. (2000). The tailings pond failure at the 
Aznalcóllar mine, Spain. British Columbia MEND ML/ARD Annual 
Workshop, 8 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://bc-mlard.ca/files/
presentations/2016-19-ERIKSSON-ADAMEK-tailings-pond-failure-
aznalcollar.pdf>
Ernst, B., Orensanz, J.M. and Armstrong, D.A. (2005). Spatial 
dynamics of female snow crab (Chionoecetes opilio) in the eastern 
Bering Sea. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 62, 
250–268. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/f04-
201> 
Ethier, M.P., Bussière, B., Broda, S. and Aubertin, M. (2018). Three-
dimensional hydrogeological modeling to assess the elevated-
water-table technique for controlling acid generation from an 
abandoned tailings site in Quebec, Canada. Hydrogeology Journal, 
26(4), 1201–1219. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10040-017-1713-y> 
Executive Office of the President (2013). Economic benefits of 
increasing electric grid resilience to weather outages. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://energy.gov/ sites/prod/files/2013/08/f2/
Grid%20Resiliency%20 Report_FINAL.pdf>
Eyzaguirre, J. and Warren, F.J. (2014). Adaptation: Linking research 
and practice, Chapter 9 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector 
Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and 
D. S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 253–286. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Chapter9-
Adaptation_Eng.pdf> 
Eyzaguirre, J. (2016). FAQ 11: How do the costs of climate 
change impacts compare to the costs of adaptation?, in Canada’s 
Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) D.S. Lemmen, 
F.J. Warren, T.S. James and C.S.L. Mercer Clarke. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 270‒272. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Coastal_Assessment_Chapter7_
FrequentlyAskedQuestions.pdf> 
Federal, Provincial and Territorial Emergency Management 
Framework Task Team. (2016). Emergency Management 
Framework for Agriculture in Canada; Agriculture and Agri-Food 
Canada, 22 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.agr.gc.ca/
resources/prod/doc/pdf/emf-gu_2016-eng.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 559 
Finlay, S.E., Moffat, A., Gazzard, R., Baker, D. and Murray, 
V. (2012). Health impacts of wildfires. PLoS Currents 
Disasters, Edition 1. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1371/4f959951cce2c> 
Finley, T. and Schuchard, R. (n.d.). Adapting to climate change: 
a guide for the transportation industry. BSR Industry Series, 7 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.bsr.org/reports/BSR_
Climate_Adaptation_Issue_Brief_Transportation.pdf> 
FireSmart Canada (2018). FireSmart Guidebook for the Oil and Gas 
Industry. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.firesmartcanada.
ca/mdocs-posts/firesmart-guidebook-for-the-oil-and-gas-industry> 
FireSmart Canada (2019a). FireSmart Videos. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.firesmartcanada.ca/resources-library/firesmart-
videos> 
FireSmart Canada (2019b). Vegetation Management. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.firesmartcanada.ca/what-is-
firesmart/vegetation-management> 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada (2018a). Seafisheries: 2016 value of 
Atlantic Coast commercial landings, by region. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/stats/commercial/land-debarq/
sea-maritimes/s2016av-eng.htm>
Fisheries and Oceans Canada (2018b). Assessment of the Estuary 
and northern Gulf of St. Lawrence (areas 13 to 17, 12A, 12B, 
12C and 16A) snow crab stocks in 2017. DFO Canadian Science 
Advisory Secretariat Science Advisory Report 2018/047, 30 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/
Library/40738565.pdf> 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada (2018c). Assessment of northern 
shrimp stocks in the Estuary and Gulf of St. Lawrence in 2017. DFO 
Canadian Advisory Secretariat Science Advisory Report 2018/015, 
17 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.
gc.ca/Library/40688495.pdf> 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada (2018d). Assessment of the 
Greenland halibut stock in the Gulf of St. Lawrence (4rst) in 2017. 
DFO Canadian Advisory Secretariat Science Advisory Report 
2018/035, 20 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://waves-vagues.
dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/40714007.pdf> 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada (2018e). Proceedings on the National 
Peer Review on Incorporating environmental and climate change 
considerations into population assessments in DFO’s Science 
advisory process, May 8–9, 2018. DFO Canadian Scientific Advisory 
Secretariat. 
Flannigan, M.D., Krawchuk, M.A., De Groot, W.J., Wotton, B.M. and 
Gowman, L.M. (2009). Implications of changing climate for global 
wildland fire. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 18(5), 483–507. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1071/WF08187> 
Flannigan, M., Cantin, A.S., De Groot, W.J., Wotton, M., Newbery, 
A. and Gowman, L.M. (2013). Global wildland fire season severity 
in the 21st century. Forest Ecology and Management, 294, 
54–61. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2012.10.022> 
Food and Agriculture Organization (2017). The future of food 
and agriculture: Trends and challenges; Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations Rome, 180 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i6583e.pdf> 
Fournier, É. (2016). Fine-Tuning Observations to Better Manage and 
Design Hydroelectricity Assets, Case Study prepared for Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources 
Canada, 9 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/
publication-scientifique/CaseStudy2_EN_final.pdf>
Furness, E. and Nelson, H. (2016). Are human values and 
community participation key to climate adaptation? The case 
of community forest organisations in British Columbia. Climatic 
Change, 135(2), 243–259. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-015-1564-2> 
Furrer, B., Hoffmann, V. and Marion S. (2009). Banking and Climate 
Change: Opportunities and Risks. SAM (Sustainable Asset 
Management), Zurich, 51 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.
sustainabilitycompany.it/img/text/SAM_ETH_Study_Banking.pdf>
Fyfe, J., Derksen, C., Mudryk, L., Flate, G.M., Santer, B.D., Swart, 
N.C., Molotech, N.P., Zhang, X., Wan, H., Arora, V.K., Scinocca, J. and 
Jiao, Y. (2017). Large near-term projected snowpack loss over the 
western United States. Nature Communications, 8. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14996>
Galbraith, P.S., Chassé, J., Caverhill, C., Nicot, P., Gilbert, D., 
Pettigrew, B., Lefaivre, D., Brickman, D., Devine, L., Lafleur, C. (2018). 
Physical oceanographic conditions in the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
during 2017. DFO Canadian Science Advisory Secretariat, Research 
Document 2018/050, v + 79 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/40759702.pdf> 
Gatin, J. and Johnston, M. (2017). State of Play Report: Forestry 
Adaptation Initiatives across Canada. Canadian Forestry Service, 
Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa.
Gauthier, S., Bernier, P. Y., Boulanger, Y., Guo, J., Guindon, L., 
Beaudoin, A. and Boucher, D. (2015). Vulnerability of timber supply 
to projected changes in fire regime in Canada’s managed forests. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 45(11), 1439–1447. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2015-0079>
Gauthier, S., Bernier, P., Burton, P.J., Edwards, J., Isaac, K., Isabel, 
N., Jayen, K., Le Goff, H. and Nelson, E.A. (2014). Climate change 
vulnerability and adaptation in the managed Canadian boreal forest. 
Environmental Reviews, 22(3), 256–285. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2013-0064> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 560 
Gazeau, F., Parker, L.M., Comeau, S., Gattuso, J.-P., O’Connor, W.A., 
Martin, S., Pörtner, H.-O. and Ross, P. (2013). Impacts of ocean 
acidification on marine shelled molluscs. Marine Biology, 160 (8), 
2207–2245. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00227-013-2219-3>
Gill, A.M., Stephens, S.L. and Cary, G.J. (2013). The worldwide 
“wildfire” problem. Ecological Applications, 23(2), 438–454. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1890/10-2213.1> 
Gledhill, D.K., White, M.M., Salisbury, J., Thomas, H., Mlsna, I., 
Liebman, M., Mook, B., Grear, J., Candelmo, A.C., Chambers, R.C., 
Gobler, C.J., Hunt, C.W. King, A.L., Price, N.N., Signorini, S.R., 
Stancioff, E., Stymiest, C., Wahle R.A., Waller, J.D., Rebuck, N.D., 
Wang, Z.A., Capson, T.L., Morrison, J.R., Cooley, S.R. and Doney, S.C. 
(2015). Ocean and Coastal Acidification off New England and Nova 
Scotia. Oceanography, 28(2), 182–197. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2015.41> 
Globe and Mail (2018). “It’s devastating to see”: How a rail line 
crisis is threatening Churchill, Manitoba. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.theglobeandmail.com/politics/article-churchill-man-
residents-angry-and-frustrated-as-solutions-to-rail>
Goertzen, S. (2018). Agricultural Solutions to Climate Change: 
Findings from the Manitoba Agriculture Climate Initiative. 
Keystone Agricultural Producers, 30 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://486d1ae5-bba6-4d54-8d48-301060955887.filesusr.com/
ugd/b43985_b680623ee3504c099fc30c3ccf48d960.pdf>
Goodrick, S.L., Achtemeier, G.L., Larkin, N.K., Liu, Y. and Strand, T.M. 
(2013). Modelling smoke transport from wildland fires: a review. 
International Journal of Wildland Fire, 22(1), 83–94. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1071/WF11116> 
Government of Canada (2016). Pan-Canadian framework on clean 
growth and climate change: Canada’s plan to address climate 
change and grow the economy. 77 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/themes/environment/
documents/weather1/20170125-en.pdf>
Government of Canada (2020) Wildland fire evacuations, Natural 
Resources Canada. Retrieved May 2020 from <https://www.
nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/climate-
change-impacts-forests/forest-change-indicators/wildland-fire-
evacuations/17787> 
Gray, R. (2015). The Economic Impacts of Elevated Export Basis 
Levels on Western Canadian Grain Producers 2012/13, 2013/14, 
and 2014/15, Report submitted to the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Development Commission. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
static1.squarespace.com/static/5c40f31a620b85cf0d073e7b/t/
5cdd901fc9048b0001f4599d/1558024227090/The-Economic-
Impacts-Of-Elevated-Export-Basis-Levels-On-Western-Canadian-
Grain-Producers-2012-2015.pdf>
Greenan, B.J.W., James, T.S., Loder, J.W., Pepin, P., Azetsu-Scott, K., 
Ianson, D., Hamme, R.C., Gilbert, D., Tremblay, J-E., Wang, X.L. and 
Perrie, W. (2019a). Changes in oceans surrounding Canada, Chapter 
7 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) Bush and Lemmen. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 343–423. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/7-0/> 
Greenan, B.J.W., Shackell, N.L., Ferguson, K., Greyson, P., Cogswell, 
A., Brickman, D., Wang, Z., Cook, A., Brennan, C.E. and Saba, V.S. 
(2019b). Climate Change Vulnerability of American Lobster Fishing 
Communities in Atlantic Canada. Frontiers in Marine Science, 6, 
579 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2019.00579> 
Groulx, M., Lemieux, C., Dawson, J., Stewart, E. and Yudina, O. 
(2016). Motivations to engage in last chance tourism in the 
Churchill wildlife management area and Wapusk National Park: The 
role of place identity and nature relatedness. Journal of Sustainable 
Tourism, 24(11), 1523–1540. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2015.1134556> 
Groulx. M., Lemieux, C.J., Lewis, J.L. and Brown, S. (2017). 
Understanding consumer behaviour and adaptation planning 
responses to climate-driven environmental change in Canada’s 
parks and protected areas: a climate futurescapes approach. 
Journal of Environmental Planning and Management, 60(6), 1016–
1035. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/0964056
8.2016.1192024> 
Guittonny, M., Bussière, B., Maqsoud, A., Proteau, A., Ben 
Khouya, T. and Botula, Y.D. (2018). Colonisation racinaire dans 
les recouvrements miniers et impact sur leur fonctionnement. 
Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Mines and the Environment, 
June 2018, Rouyn-Noranda, Canada.
Guthrie, R.H., Mitchell, S.J., Lanquaye-Opoku, N. and Evans, 
S. G. (2010). Extreme weather and landslide initiation in coastal 
British Columbia. Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and 
Hydrogeology, 43(4), 417–428. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1144/1470-9236/08-119> 
Hanes, C., Wang, X., Jain, P., Parisien, M.-A., Little, J. and Flannigan, 
M. (2018). Fire regime changes in Canada over the last half century. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 49(3), 256-269. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2018-0293>
Hatchett, B. and Eisen, H. (2018). Early season snowpack loss and 
implications for over-snow vehicle recreation travel planning. The 
Cryosphere. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.5194/
tc-2018-181> 
He, W., Yang, J.Y., Qian, B., Drury, C.F., Hoogenboom G., He, P., Lapen, 
D. and Zhou, W. (2018). Climate change impacts on crop yield, 
soil water balance and nitrate leaching in the semiarid and humid 
regions of Canada. PLoS ONE, 13(11), e0207370. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0207370>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 561 
Hedlund, J., Fick, S., Carlsen, H. and Benzie, M. (2018). Quantifying 
transnational climate impact exposure: New perspectives on the 
global distribution of climate risk. Global Environmental Change, 
52, 75-85. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2018.04.006>
Henstra, D. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2017). Climate Change, Floods, 
and Municipal Risk Sharing in Canada. IMFG Papers on Municipal 
Finance and Governance, No. 30, Institute on Municipal Finance 
and Governance, Toronto, 48 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
munkschool.utoronto.ca/imfg/uploads/373/1917_imfg_no_30_
online_final.pdf>
Hewer, M. and Gough, W. (2018). Thirty years of assessing the 
impacts of climate change on outdoor recreation and tourism in 
Canada. Tourism Management Perspectives, 26, 179–192. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tmp.2017.07.003>
Hirsch, K., Kafka, V., Tymstra, C., McAlpine, R., Hawkes, B., 
Stegehuis, H., Quintilio, S., Gauthier, S. and Peck, K. (2001). Fire-
smart forest management: a pragmatic approach to sustainable 
forest management in fire-dominated ecosystems. The Forestry 
Chronicle, 77(2), 357–363. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.5558/tfc77357-2> 
Holubec, I. (2004). Covers for Reactive Tailings Located in 
Permafrost Regions Review. MEND Report 1.61. 6., Minerals 
and Metals Sector, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <mend-nedem.org/wp-content/
uploads/1.61.4CoversPermafrostRegions.pdf> 
Hope, E.S., McKenney, D.W., Pedlar, J.H., Stocks, B.J. and Gauthier, 
S. (2016). Wildfire suppression costs for Canada under a changing 
climate. PLoS ONE, 11(8), e0157425. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0157425>
Hotton, G., Bresson, É., Bussière, B., Pabst, T., Demers, I. and Roy, 
P. (2018). Assessment of CCBE performance with climate change: 
case study of the Lorraine mine site. Proceedings of the Tailings 
and Mine Waste 2018 Conference, Keystone, Colorado, USA.
Hotton, G., Bussière, B., Pabst, T., Bresson, E. and Roy, P. 
(2019). Influence of climate change on the ability of a cover with 
capillary barrier effects to control acid generation. Hydrogeology 
Journal. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10040-019-02084-y> 
Hori, Y., Gough, W.A., Butler, K. and Tsuji, L.J.S. (2017). Trends 
in the seasonal length and opening dates of a winter road in the 
western James Bay region, Ontario, Canada. Theoretical and Applied 
Climatology, 129(3), 1309–1320. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10/gbq6gv>
Hrycik, A.R, Almeida, L.Z. and Höök, T.O. (2017). Sub‐lethal effects 
on fish provide insight into a biologically‐relevant threshold of 
hypoxia. Oikos, 126, 307–317. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1111/oik.03678> 
Ignaciuk, A. and Mason-D’Croz, D. (2014). Modelling Adaptation 
to Climate Change in Agriculture. OECD Food, Agriculture and 
Fisheries Papers, No. 70, OECD Publishing, Paris. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1787/5jxrclljnbxq-en>
IISD [International Institute for Sustainable Development] (2017). 
Building a Climate-Resilient City: Electricity and information and 
communication technology infrastructure. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.iisd.org/library/building-climate-resilient-city-electricity-
and-information-and-communication-technology>
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2016). Northern Alberta Wildfire 
Costliest Insured Natural Disaster in Canadian History. Retrieved 
January 2020, from <http://www.ibc.ca/bc/resources/media-centre/
media-releases/northern-alberta-wildfire-costliest-insured-natural-
disaster-in-canadian-history>
Insurance Bureau of Canada (2019). Facts of the Property and 
Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada, 41st edition. Retrieved June 
2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_
Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf> 
International Energy Agency (2015). Making the energy sector more 
resilient to climate change. COP 21 Resilience Brochure. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/
publication/COP21_Resilience_Brochure.pdf>
International Energy Agency (2016a). Key World Energy Statistics 
2016. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.iea.org/publications/
freepublications/publication/key-world-energy-statistics.html>
International Energy Agency (2016b). International Energy Agency 
Workshop Report Sixth Forum on the Climate-Energy Security 
Nexus. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.iea.org/media/
workshops/2016/6thnexusforum/6thNexusForumSummary.pdf>
International Energy Agency (2018). Getting Wind and Sun onto 
the Grid: A Manual for Policy Makers. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.iea.org/publications/insights/insightpublications/
Getting_Wind_and_Sun.pdf>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2012). Managing 
the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate 
Change Adaptation. (A Special Report of Working Groups I and II of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V. 
Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, 
K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen,M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA, 582 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.
ch/report/managing-the-risks-of-extreme-events-and-disasters-to-
advance-climate-change-adaptation/> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 562 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2014). 
Summary for policymakers, in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects 
(Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), (Eds.) C.B. 
Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. 
Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. 
Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, New York, USA, 1–32. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1017/CBO9781107415379.003> 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2018). Summary 
for Policymakers, in Global Warming of 1.5°C (An IPCC Special Report 
on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels 
and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context 
of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, 
sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate poverty), (Eds.) 
V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. 
Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, 
J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, 
M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield. World Meteorological Organization, 
Geneva, Switzerland, 24 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/spm/> 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2019). 
Summary for Policymakers, in Climate Change and Land (An IPCC 
special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, 
sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas 
fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems), (Eds.) P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo 
Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, 
R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. 
Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, 
K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi and J. Malley. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/chapter/summary-for-policymakers/> 
IRENA [International Renewable Energy Agency] (2018). Global 
Energy Transformation: A Roadmap to 2050. 76 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.irena.org/-/media/Files/IRENA/Agency/
Publication/2018/Apr/IRENA_Report_GET_2018.pdf>
ISO [International Standards Organization] (2018). ISO 31000:2018. 
Risk Management. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.
iso.org/cms/render/live/en/sites/isoorg/contents/data/
standard/06/56/65694.html>
Jaglom, W.S., McFarland, J.R., Colley, M.F., Mack, C.B., Venkatesh, B., 
Miller, R.L., Haydel, J., Schultz, P.A., Perkins, B., Casola, J.H., Martinich, 
J.A., Cross, P., Kolian, M.J. and Kayin, S. (2014). Assessment of 
projected temperature impacts from climate change on the U.S. 
electric power sector using the Integrated Planning Model®. 
Energy Policy, 73, 524–539. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enpol.2014.04.032> 
Jakob, M. and Lambert, S. (2009). Climate change effects on 
landslides along the southwest coast of British Columbia. 
Geomorphology, 107(3–4), 275–284. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geomorph.2008.12.009> 
Jewiss-Gaines A, Barelli, L. and Hunter, F.F. (2017). First Records of 
Culicoides sonorensis (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae), a Known Vector of 
Bluetongue Virus, in Southern Ontario. Journal of Medical Entomology, 
54(3), 757–762. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/
jme/tjw215> 
Johnston, L.M., Wang, X., Erni, S., Taylor, S.W., McFayden, C.B., 
Oliver, J.A., Stockdale, C., Christianson, A., Boulanger, Y., Gauthier, 
S., Arseneault, D., Wotton, B.M., Parisien, M.-A. and Flannigan, M.D. 
(2020). Wildland fire risk research in Canada. Environmental Reviews, 
28(2), 164–186. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/
er-2019-0046>  
Johnston, M., Dawson, J., De Souza, E. and Stewart, E.J. (2017). 
Management challenges for the fastest growing marine shipping 
sector in Arctic Canada: Pleasure crafts. Polar Record, 53(1), 
67–78. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0032247416000565>
Jolly, W.M., Cochrane, M.A., Freeborn, P.H., Holden, Z.A., Brown, T.J., 
Williamson, G.J. and Bowman, D.M.J.S. (2015). Climate-induced 
variations in global wildfire danger from 1979 to 2013. Nature 
Communications, 6, 7537. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/ncomms8537>
Jones, R.N. and Preston, B.L. (2011). Adaptation and risk 
management. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 2(2), 
296–308. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.97>
Keppel, E.A., Scrosati, R.A. and Courtenay, S.C. (2012). Ocean 
acidification decreases growth and development in American 
lobster (Homarus americanus) larvae. Journal of Northwest Atlantic 
Fishery Science, 44, 61–66. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.2960/J.v44.m683>
Kirchmeier-Young, M.C., Zwiers, F.W., Gillett, N.P. and Cannon, A.J. 
(2017). Attributing extreme fire risk in Western Canada to human 
emissions. Climatic Change, 144, 365–379. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-2030-0>  
Kopytko, N. and Perkins, J. (2011). Climate change, nuclear power, 
and the adaptation–mitigation dilemma. Energy Policy, 39(1), 
318–333. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
enpol.2010.09.046> 
Koutsoyiannis, D. (1999). A probabilistic view of Hershfield’s method 
for estimating probable maximum precipitation. Water Resources 
Research, 35(4), 1313–1322. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1029/1999WR900002> 
Kovacs, P. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2014). Industry, Chapter 5 in 
Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts 
and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and D. S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 135–158. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Chapter5-Industry_Eng.pdf> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 563 
Kroeker, K.J., Kordas, R., Crim, R. and Singh, G. (2010). Meta-analysis 
reveals negative yet variable effects of ocean acidification on marine 
organisms. Ecology Letters, 13(11), 1419–1434. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461-0248.2010.01518.x> 
Kumar, K., Holtz, M. D., Xi, K. and Turkington, T.K. (2013). 
Overwintering potential of the stripe rust pathogen (Puccinia 
striiformis) in central Alberta. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 
35(3), 304–314. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/
07060661.2013.809385> 
Kwiatkowski, K. (2017). Modeling Climate Change Adaptation 
in Transportation Infrastructure Organizations. Civil Engineering 
Graduate Theses and Dissertations, University of Colorado, 184 
p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://pdfs.semanticscholar.
org/67fa/017e57f7e6009dccbdfabca788a6f2e13c90.pdf>
Le Bris, A., Mills, K.E., Wahle, R.A., Chen, Y., Alexander, M.A., Allyn, 
A.J., Schuetz, J.G., Scott, J.D. and Pershing, A.J. (2018). Climate 
vulnerability and resilience in the most valuable North American 
fishery. Proceedings of the National Acadamies of Sciences USA, 115, 
1831–1836. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1711122115> 
Leduc, A., Bernier, P.Y., Mansuy, N., Raulier, F., Gauthier, S. and 
Bergeron, Y. (2015). Using salvage logging and tolerance to risk 
to reduce the impact of forest fires on timber supply calculations. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 45(4), 480–486. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2014-0434>
Lemelin, R. H., Dawson, J., Stewart, E.J., Maher, P. and Luck, 
M. (2010). Last-chance tourism: The boom, doom, and gloom 
of visiting vanishing destinations. Current Issues in Tourism, 
13(5), 477–493. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1080/13683500903406367> 
Lemieux C. J., Groulx, M., Halpenny, E., Stager, H., Dawson, J., 
Stewart, E.J. and Hvenegaard, G.T. (2017). The End of the Ice 
Age?: Disappearing World Heritage and the Climate Change 
Communication Imperative. Environmental Communication, 12(5), 
653-671. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/175240
32.2017.1400454>
Lemmen, D.S., Johnston, M., Ste-Marie, C. and Pearce, T. (2014). 
Natural resources, Chapter 3 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector 
Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and D.S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 65–98. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.
gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Chapter3-Natural-
Resources_Eng.pdf> 
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S. and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. 
(Eds.) (2016). Canada’s Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 274 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/files/pdf/NRCAN_fullBook%20%20accessible.pdf> 
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J. and Bush E. (Eds.) (2008). 
From Impacts to Adaption: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 448 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/impacts-adaptation-canada-
changing-climate/10253> 
Linnenluecke, M.K., Stathakis, A. and Griffiths, A. (2011). Firm 
relocation as adaptive response to climate change and weather 
extremes. Global Environmental Change, 21(1), 123–33. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.09.010>
Linnenluecke, M. and Smith, T. (2018). Adaptation of MSMEs to 
Climate Change: A Review of the Existing Literature, in Private-Sector 
Action in Adaptation: Perspectives on the Role of Micro, Small 
and Medium Size Enterprises, (Eds.) C. Schaer and N. Kuruppu. 
UNEP DTU Partnership, Copenhagen, 19‒27. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/162053774/MSME_
Adaptation_updated_WEB.pdf>
Linnenlueke, M., Griffiths, A. and Winn, M.I. (2013). Firm and Industry 
Adaptation to Climate Change: A Review of Climate Adaptation 
Studies in the Business and Management Field. Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Climate Change, 4, 397–416. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.214> 
Liu, J.C., Mickley, L.J., Sulprizio, M.P., Dominici, F., Yue, X., Ebisu, 
K., Anderson, G.B., Khan, R.F.A, Bravo, M.A. and Bell, M.L. (2016). 
Particulate air pollution from wildfires in the Western US under 
climate change. Climatic Change, 138(3–4), 655–666. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1762-6> 
Lynch, D.L. (2004). What Do Forest Fires Really Cost? Journal of 
Forestry, 102(6), 42–49. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1093/jof/102.6.42> 
Lysyk, T.J. and Dergousoff, S.J. (2014). Distribution of Culicoides 
sonorensis (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) in Alberta, Canada. Journal 
of Medical Entomology, 51, 560–571. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1603/ME13239> 
Mailhot, A., Panthou, G. and Talbot, G. (2014) Recommandations 
sur les majorations à considérer dans les courbes Intensité-durée-
Fréquence (IDF) aux horizons 2040-2070 et 2070-2100 pour 
l’ensemble du Québec, Phase II. Ministère du Transport du Québec, 
36 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <espace.inrs.ca/id/eprint/2421/1/
R001515.pdf>   
Man, T. (2013). Infrastructure Interdependencies Timelines. The 
Royal Academy of Engineering, United Kingdom, 17 p. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.raeng.org.uk/publications/responses/etf-
infrastructure-interdependencies-report> 
Mantle314 (2019). Climate Adaptation in Canada’s Oil and Gas 
Sector: Planning to Thrive in a Changing World, Report submitted 
to the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural 
Resources Canada.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 564 
Marchal, J., Cumming, S.G. and McIntire, E.J. (2017). Land cover, 
more than monthly fire weather, drives fire-size distribution in 
Southern Quebec forests: Implications for fire risk management. 
PLoS ONE, 12(9), e0185515. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0179294> 
Marras, S, Cucco, A., Antognarelli, F., Azzurro, E., Milazzo, M., Bariche, 
M., Butenschön, M., Kay, S., Di Bitetto, M. and Quattrocchi, G. (2015). 
Predicting future thermal habitat suitability of competing native 
and invasive fish species: from metabolic scope to oceanographic 
modelling. Conservation Physiology, 3, 1–14. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1093/conphys/cou059> 
Marshall, G.N., Schell, T.L., Elliott, M.N., Rayburn, N.R. and Jaycox, 
L.H. (2007). Psychiatric Disorders Among Adults Seeking Emergency 
Disaster Assistance After a Wildland-Urban Interface Fire. Psychiatric 
Services, 58(4), 509–514. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1176/ps.2007.58.4.509>
Mazzacurati, E. (2018). Advancing TCFD Guidance on Physical 
Climate Risks and Opportunities. Four Twenty Seven, Paris, 56 p. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://427mt.com/2018/05/31/report-
advancing-tcfd-guidance-physical-climate-risk-opportunities/>
Mbow, C., Rosenzweig, C., Barioni, L.G., Benton, T.G., Herrero, M., 
Krishnapillai, M., Liwenga, E., Pradhan, P., Rivera-Ferre, M.G., Sapkota, 
T., Tubiello, F.N., and Xu, Y. (2019). Food Security, in Climate Change 
and Land (An IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, 
land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and 
greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems), (Eds.) P.R. Shukla, 
J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. 
Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. 
Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, 
P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/
sites/4/2019/11/08_Chapter-5.pdf> 
McBean, G. (2012). Telling the Weather Story. Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction and Insurance Bureau of Canada. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Studies/
McBean_Report.pdf>
McBoyle, G., Scott, D. and Jones, B. (2007). Climate change and 
the future of snowmobiling in non-mountainous regions of Canada. 
Managing Leisure, 12(4), 237–250. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13606710701546868> 
McCaffrey, S., Rhodes, A. and Stidham, M. (2015). Wildfire 
evacuation and its alternatives: perspectives from four United States’ 
communities. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 24(2), 170–178. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1071/WF13050> 
McGee, T., McFarlane, B. and Tymstra, C. (2015). Wildfire: A Canadian 
perspective, in Wildfire Hazards, Risks and Disasters, (Ed.) D. Paton. 
Elsevier, 35–68.
McKay, J. (2018). Small Businesses Are a Vital Part of Community 
Resiliency but Often Overlook Vulnerabilities. Government 
Technology. Retrieved July 2018, from <https://www.govtech.com/
em/preparedness/Small-Businesses-Are-a-Vital-Part-of-Community-
Resiliency-but-Often-Overlook-Vulnerabilities.html> 
McKenney, D.W., Yemshanov, D., Pedlar, J., Allen, D., Lawrence, K., 
Hope, E., Lu, B. and Eddy, B. (2016). Canada’s Timber Supply: Current 
Status and Future Prospects Under a Changing Climate. Great Lakes 
Forestry Centre, Canadian Forest Service, Natural Resources Canada.
McLean, E.L., Katenka, N.V. and Seibel, B.A. (2018). Decreased 
growth and increased shell disease in early benthic phase Homarus 
americanus in response to elevated CO2. Marine Ecology Progress 
Series, 596, 113–126. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.3354/meps12586> 
Mine Environment Neutral Drainage (2012). Cold Regions Cover 
System Design Technical Guidance Document. Report 1.61.5c, 
Canadian Centre for Mineral and Energy Technology. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://mend-nedem.org/wp-content/
uploads/2013/01/1.61.5c.pdf> 
Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement et des 
Parcs (2012). Directive 019 sur l’industrie minière. 105 p. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <http://www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca/milieu_ind/
directive019/directive019.pdf>   
MNP (2017). A Review of the 2016 Horse River Wildfire: Alberta 
Agriculture and Forestry Preparedness and Response, Report 
prepared for Forestry Division, Alberta Agriculture and Forestry, 
Edmonton, Alberta. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.alberta.
ca/assets/documents/Wildfire-MNP-Report.pdf> 
Mori, A.S. and Johnson, E.A. (2013). Assessing possible shifts 
in wildfire regimes under a changing climate in mountainous 
landscapes. Forest Ecology and Management, 310, 875–886. 
Retrieved June 2020, form <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2013.09.036> 
Morton, D.C., Roessing, M.E., Camp, A.E. and Tyrrell, M.L. (2003). 
Assessing the environmental, social, and economic impacts of 
wildfire. Global Institute of Sustainable Forestry Research Paper 001, 
Yale University, 59 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://gisf.yale.
edu/sites/default/files/files/wildfire_report(1).pdf>
Mueter, F.J. and Litzow, M.A. (2008). Sea ice retreat alters the 
biogeography of the Bering Sea continental shelf. Ecological 
Applications, 18, 309–320. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1890/07-0564.1> 
Nastev, M. and Aubertin, M. (2000). Hydrogeological modelling 
for the reclamation work at the Lorraine mine site Québec. 53rd 
Canadian Geotechnical Conference and 1st joint IAHCNC and CGS 
Groundwater Specialty Conference, Montréal, QC, Canada, 311–318.
National Energy Board (2016). Market Snapshot: Impacts of the 
Fort McMurray wildfires on Canadian crude oil production. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/nrg/ntgrtd/mrkt/
snpsht/2016/05-02frtmcmrr-eng.html>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 565 
National Energy Board (2017). Canada’s Adoption of Renewable 
Power Sources – Energy Market Analysis. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/nrg/sttstc/lctrct/
rprt/2017cnddptnrnwblpwr/index-eng.html>
National Energy Board (2018). Canada’s Energy Future 2018. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/nrg/ntgrtd/
ftr/2018/index-eng.html>
Natural Resources Canada (2017). The State of Canada’s Forests. 
Annual Report 2017. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://cfs.nrcan.
gc.ca/publications?id=38871>
Natural Resources Canada (2018). The Energy Factbook, 2018. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/energy/pdf/energy-factbook-oct2-2018%20(1).pdf>
Natural Resources Canada (2019). Cost of fire protection. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/climate-change/
forest-change/17783>
Nelson, H.W., Williamson, T.B., Macaulay, C. and Mahony, C. (2016). 
Assessing the potential for forest management practitioner 
participation in climate change adaptation. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 360, 388–399. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foreco.2015.09.038>
Nova Scotia Federation of Agriculture (2018). Risk Proofing Nova 
Scotia’s Agriculture: A Risk Assessment System Pilot (AgriRisk). 
Final Report, Bible Hill, Nova Scotia, 3-14. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://nsfa-fane.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Final-Report-for-
AgriRisk-project-English.pdf> 
NRTEE [National Roundtable on the Environment and the Economy] 
(2011). Paying the price: the economic impacts of climate change for 
Canada (Vol. 4). National Round Table on the Environment and the 
Economy, Ottawa, Canada.
Ochuodho, T.O. and Lantz, V.A. (2014). Economic impacts of climate 
change in the forest sector: a comparison of single-region and 
multiregional CGE modeling frameworks. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research, 44(5), 449-464. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/cjfr-2013-0317> 
OECD [Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development]
(2015). The Economic Consequences of Climate Change. OECD 
Publishing, Paris. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264235410-en>
Ogden, N.H., Radojevic, M., Wu, X., Duvvuri, V.R., Leighton, P.A. and 
Wu, J. (2014). Estimated Effects of Projected Climate Change on 
the Basic Reproductive Number of the Lyme Disease Vector Ixodes 
scapularis. Environmental Health Perspectives, 122, 631–638. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1307799> 
Ohlson, D.W., Berry, T.M., Gray, R.W., Blackwell, B.A. and Hawkes, 
B.C. (2006). Multi-attribute evaluation of landscape-level fuel 
management to reduce wildfire risk. Forest Policy and Economics, 
8(8), 824–837. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
forpol.2005.01.001>
Olfert, O., Weiss, R.M. and Elliott, R.H. (2016). Bioclimatic approach 
to assessing the potential impact of climate change on wheat 
midge (Diptera: Cecidomyiidae) in North America. The Canadian 
Entomologist, 148, 52–67. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.4039/tce.2015.40> 
Olfert, O., Weiss, R.M., Elliott, R.H. and Soroka, J.J. (2017). Bioclimatic 
approach to assessing the potential impact of climate change on 
two flea beetle (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) species in Canada. The 
Canadian Entomologist, 149, 616-627. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.4039/tce.2017.39> 
Ontario Woodlot Association. (2015). Managing Your Forest in 
a Changing Climate. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
ontariowoodlot.com/publications-and-links/owa-publications/
landowner-guides/managing-your-forest-in-a-changing-climate-new> 
Ortiz, L., González, J.E. and Lin, W. (2018). Climate change impacts 
on peak building cooling energy demand in a coastal megacity. 
Environmental Research Letters, 13(9). Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aad8d0 >
Orwig, K. (2016). Strategies for funding wildfire mitigation. Risk 
Management, 14+ p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://go.gale.com/psanonymous?id=GALE%7CA454786513&sid
=googleScholar&v=2.1&it=r&linkaccess=abs&issn=00355593&p
=AONE&sw=w> 
Ouranos (2015). Summary of the Synthesis on Climate Change 
Knowledge in Quebec, 2015 Edition. 13 p.
Palko, K. (2017). Synthesis, in Climate risks and adaptation practices 
for the Canadian transportation sector 2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 12–25. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-2e.pdf>
Palko, K. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2017). Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 2016. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, 309 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/ClimatRisk-E-ACCESSIBLE.pdf>
Parker, L.M., Ross, P.M., O’Connor, W.A., Pörtner, H.-O., Scanes, E. 
and Wright, J.M. (2013). Predicting the response of molluscs to the 
impact of ocean acidification. Biology, 2, 651–692. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/biology2020651> 
Pearce, T., Ford, J.D., Prno, J. and Duerden, F. (2009). Climate change 
and Canadian mining: opportunities for adaptation. David Suzuki 
Foundation, 50 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://davidsuzuki.
org/science-learning-centre-article/climate-change-canadian-mining-
opportunities-adaptation/>
Pearce, T.D., Ford, J.D., Prno, J., Duerden, F., Pittman, J., Beaumier, 
M. and Smit, B. (2011). Climate change and mining in Canada. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 16(3), 347 
–368. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-
010-9269-3> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 566 
Perry, E., Manning, R., Xiao, X., Valliere, W. and Reigner, N. (2018). 
Social climate change: The advancing extirpation of snowmobilers in 
Vermont. Journal of Park and Recreation Administration, 36, 31–51. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.18666/JPRA-2018-
V36-I2-8307> 
Peter, B., Wang, S., Mogus, T. and Wilson, B. (2006). Fire risk and 
population trends in Canada’s wildland-urban interface, in Canadian 
Wildland Fire Strategy: Background Synthesis, Analysis, and 
Perspectives, (Eds.) K.G. Hirsch and P. Fuglem, 37–48. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://www.ccfm.org/pdf/cwfs_Analysis_EN_web.pdf> 
Phillips, A. and Towns, W. (2017). The Prairies, in Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 2016, 
(Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
105–137. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-5e.
pdf> 
PIEVC [Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee]
(n.d.). The Protocol. Engineers Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://pievc.ca/protocol>
Porter, J.R., Xie, L., Challinor, A.J., Cochrane, K., Howden, S.M., 
Iqbal, M.M., Lobell, D.B. and Travasso, M.I. (2014). Food security 
and food production systems, in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects 
(Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), (Eds.) C.B. 
Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. 
Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. 
Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea and L.L. White. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, New York, USA, 485–533. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap7_FINAL.
pdf> 
Price, D.T., Alfaro, R.I., Brown, K.J., Flannigan, M.D., Fleming, R.A., 
Hogg, E.H., Girardin, M.P., Lakusta, T., Johnston, M., McKenney, D.W., 
Pedlar, J.H., Stratton, T., Sturrock, R.N., Thompson, I.D., Trofymow, J.A. 
and Venier, L.A. (2013). Anticipating the consequences of climate 
change for Canada’s boreal forest ecosystems. Environmental 
Reviews, 21(4), 322–365. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1139/er-2013-0042> 
Pryor, S.C. and Barthelmie, R.J. (2010). Climate change impacts 
on wind energy: A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 14(1), 430–437. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032109001713>
Qian, B., Jing, Q., Bélanger, G., Shang, J., Huffman, T., Liu, J. and 
Hoogenboom, G. (2018). Simulated canola yield responses to 
climate change and adaptation in Canada. Agronomy Journal, 110(1), 
133–146. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.2134/
agronj2017.02.0076> 
Qian, B., Zhang, X., Smith, W., Grant, B., Jing, Q., Cannon, A.J., Neilsen, 
D., McConkey, B., Li, G., Bonsal, B., Wan, H., Xue, L. and Zhao, J. 
(2019). Climate change impacts on Canadian yields of spring wheat, 
canola and maize for global warming levels of 1.5 °C, 2.0 °C, 2.5 °C 
and 3.0 °C. Environmental Research Letters, 14. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab17fb>
Quorum Corporation (2014). Grain Supply Chain Study. Grain 
Monitoring Program Supplemental Study, 107 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <http://grainmonitor.ca/Downloads/SupplementalReports/
Grain%20Supply%20Chain%20Study%20-%20Report.pdf> 
Quorum Corporation (2015). Annual Report: 2013–2014 Crop Year. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <http://grainmonitor.ca/Downloads/
AnnualReports/AnnualReport201314.pdf>
Raulier, F., Dhital, N., Racine, P., Tittler, R. and Fall, A. (2014). Increasing 
resilience of timber supply: How a variable buffer stock of timber can 
efficiently reduce exposure to shortfalls caused by wildfires. Forest 
Policy and Economics, 46, 47–55. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2014.06.007>
Raulier, F., Le Goff, H., Gauthier, S., Rapanoela, R. and Bergeron, 
Y. (2013). Introducing two indicators for fire risk consideration 
in the management of boreal forests. Ecological Indicators, 
24, 451–461. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecolind.2012.07.023>
Reid, C. E., Brauer, M., Johnston, F.H., Jerrett, M., Balmes, J.R. and 
Elliott, C.T. (2016). Critical review of health impacts of wildfire 
smoke exposure. Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(9), 
1334–1343. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1409277> 
Reinecke, S. and Brodie, J. (2012). Climate Change Impacts on 
Metal Leaching and Acid Rock Drainage at Canadian Mines ‒ Risks 
for Operation and Closure, in Proceedings of the 9th International 
Conference on Acid Rock Drainage (ICARD), Ottawa, 1–12.
Resort Municipality of Whistler (2016). Community Energy and 
Climate Action Plan. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
whistler.ca/sites/default/files/related/cecap.0_final.pdf>
Revell, A., Stokes, D. and Chen, H. (2009). Small businesses and the 
environment: turning over a new leaf? Business Strategy and the 
Environment, 19(5), 273–288. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/bse.628>
Rijal, B., Raulier, F., Martell, D. L. and Gauthier, S. (2018). The 
economic impact of fire management on timber production in the 
boreal forest region of Quebec, Canada. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire, 27(12), 831–844. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1071/WF18041>
Roson, R. and Sartori, M. (2016). Estimation of Climate Change 
Damage Functions for 140 Regions in the GTAP 9 Database. Journal 
of Global Economic Analysis, 1(2), 78-115. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.21642/JGEA.010202AF> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 567 
Ross, T. (2016). La Niña, the Blob and another warmest year, in State 
of the Physical, Biological and Selected Fishery Resources of Pacific 
Canadian Marine Ecosystems in 2015, (Eds.) P.C. Chandler, S.A. King 
and R.I. Perry. Canadian Technical Reports of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Sciences, 3179, viii + 230 p. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/40617944.pdf> 
Rousseau, A.N., Klein, I.M., Freudiger, D., Gagnon, P., Frigon, A. and 
Ratté-Fortin, C. (2014). Development of a methodology to evaluate 
probable maximum precipitation (PMP) under changing climate 
conditions: Application to southern Quebec, Canada. Journal of 
Hydrology, 519, 3094–3109. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2014.10.053> 
Rutty, M., Scott, D., Steiger, R., Johnson, P. and Pons, M. (2015). The 
geography of skier adaptation to adverse conditions in the Ontario ski 
market. The Canadian Geographer, 59(4). Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/cag.12220>
Rutty, M., Scott, D., Johnson, P., Steiger, R., Pons, M. and Vilella, M. 
(2017). Using ski industry response to climatic variability to assess 
climate change risk: An analogue study in Eastern Canada. Tourism 
Management, 58, 196–205. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tourman.2016.10.020> 
Samy, G.M., Samy, C.P. and Ammasaiappan, M. (2015). Integrated 
management systems for better environmental performance and 
sustainable development – a review. Environmental Engineering and 
Management Journal, 14(5), 985–1000. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.13140/rg.2.2.35566.51528> 
Sankey, S. (2018). Blueprint for wildland fire science in Canada 
(2019–2029). Northern Forestry Centre, Canadian Forest Service, 
Natural Resources Canada, Edmonton, 1–27. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pubwarehouse/pdfs/39429.pdf> 
Sauchyn, D. and Kulshreshtha, S. (2008). Prairies, in From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, (Eds.) D.S. Lemmen, 
F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
275‒328. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
impacts-adaptation-canada-changing-climate/10253> 
Schaer, C. and Kuruppu, N. (Eds.) (2018). Private-sector action in 
adaptation: Perspectives on the role of micro, small and medium size 
enterprises. UNEP DTU Partnership, Copenhagen, 203 p. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://backend.orbit.dtu.dk/ws/files/162053774/
MSME_Adaptation_updated_WEB.pdf>
Scharbach, J. and Waldram, J.B. (2016). Asking for a disaster: 
being “at risk” in the emergency evacuation of a northern Canadian 
Aboriginal community. Human Organization, 75(1), 59–70. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.17730/0018-7259-75.1.59> 
Schauberger, B., Archontoulis, S., Arneth, A., Balkovic, J., Ciais, P., 
Deryng, D., Elliott, J., Folberth, C., Khabarov, N., Müller, C., Pugh, 
T.A.M., Rolinski, S., Schaphoff, S., Schmid, E., Wang, X., Schlenker, 
W. and Frieler, K. (2017). Consistent negative response of US crops 
to high temperatures in observations and crop models. Nature 
Communications, 8(13931). Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/ncomms13931> 
Schroeder, D. (2010). Fire behaviour in thinned jack pine: two case 
studies of FireSmart treatments in Canada’s Northwest Territories. 
FPInnovations, Eastern Region, Pointe-Claire, Quebec and Western 
Region, Vancouver, British Columbia. Advantage Report, 12(7), 12.
Scott, D. and Steiger, R. (2013). Vulnerability of the Ski Industry, in 
Climate Vulnerability: Understanding and Addressing Threats to 
Essential Resources, (Ed.) R.A. Pielke. Elsevier Inc., Academic Press, 
305–313.
Scott, D., Hall, C.M. and Gössling, S. (2016). A report on the Paris 
Climate Change Agreement and its implications for tourism: why we 
will always have Paris. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 2(7), 933–948. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2016
.1187623> 
Scott, D., Jones, B. and Konopek, J. (2007). Implications of climate 
and environmental change for nature-based tourism in the Canadian 
Rocky Mountains: A case study of Waterton Lakes National Park. 
Tourism Management, 28(2), 570–579. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2006.04.020> 
Scott, D., Gössling, S. and Hall, C.M. (2012). International Tourism 
and Climate Change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 
3(3), 213–232. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.165> 
Scott, D., Steiger, R., Rutty, M., Pons, M., Johnson, P. and Vilella, M. 
(2017). The differential futures of ski tourism in Ontario (Canada) 
under climate change: the limits of snowmaking adaptation. Current 
Issues in Tourism, 22(11), 1327‒1342. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13683500.2017.1401984>
Scott, D., Hall, C.M. and Gössling, S. (2019). Global Tourism 
Vulnerability to Climate Change. Annals of Tourism Research, 
77, 49-61. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
annals.2019.05.007> 
Scott, D., Steiger, R. Knowles, N. and Fang, Y. (2020). Regional ski 
tourism risk to climate change: An inter-comparison of Eastern 
Canada and US Northeast markets. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 
28(4), 568–586. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/
09669582.2019.1684932> 
Shackell, N.L., Ricard, D. and Stortini, C. (2014). Thermal Habitat 
Index of Many Northwest Atlantic Temperate Species Stays Neutral 
under Warming Projected for 2030 but Changes Radically by 2060. 
PLoS ONE, 9(3), e90662. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0090662>
Shughrue, C. and Seto, K.C. (2018). Systematic vulnerabilities of 
the global urban-industrial network to hazards. Climatic Change, 
151, 173-187. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-018-2293-0> 
Slawinski, N., Pinkse, J., Busch, T. and Banerjee, S.B. (2017). The 
role of short-termism and uncertainty avoidance in organizational 
inaction on climate change: A multi-level framework. Business and 
Society, 56(2), 253–82. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0007650315576136> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 568 
Spittlehouse, D.L. (2005). Integrating climate change adaptation 
into forest management. The Forestry Chronicle, 81(5), 691–695. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.5558/tfc81691-5> 
Stantec Consulting Limited (2012). Preliminary assessment report, 
Canadian Beaufort Sea Region, Report prepared for Aboriginal Affairs 
and Northern Development Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 1–171. 
Statistics Canada (2017). Infographic: Fort McMurray 2016 wildfire – 
economic impact. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.statcan.
gc.ca/pub/11-627-m/11-627-m2017007-eng.htm> 
Stewart, E.J., Dawson, J. and Draper, D. (2011). Cruise tourism and 
residents in Arctic Canada: Development of a resident attitude 
typology. Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Management, 18(1), 
95–106. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1375/
jhtm.18.1.95>
Stortini, C.H, Shackell, N.L., Tyedmers, P. and Beazley, K. (2015). 
Assessing marine species vulnerability to projected warming on the 
Scotian Shelf, Canada. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72, 1731–
1743. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/
fst022>
Stortini, C.H., Chabot, D. and Shackell, N.L. (2017). Marine species 
in ambient low-oxygen regions subject to double jeopardy impacts 
of climate change. Global Change Biology, 23, 2284–2296. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.13534> 
Stratos (2009). Climate change impacts on mining operations and 
infrastructure, Report prepared for the Centre for Excellence in 
Mining Innovation, 2009. Retrieved June 2020, from <http://www.
miningexcellence.ca>
Stratos (2017). Mining State of Play: Climate Change Adaptation in 
the Canadian Mining Sector, Report submitted to Canada’s Climate 
Change Adaptation Platform Mining Working Group, 57 p.
Stratz, S.A. and Hossain, F. (2014). Probable maximum precipitation 
in a changing climate: Implications for dam design. Journal of 
Hydrologic Engineering, 19(12). Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)HE.1943-5584.0001021> 
Sturrock, R.N., Frankel, S.J., Brown, A.V., Hennon, P.E., Kliejunas, J.T., 
Lewis, K.J., Worrall, J.J. and Woods, A.J. (2011). Climate change and 
forest diseases. Plant Pathology, 60(1), 133–149. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-3059.2010.02406.x> 
Subedi, N., Taylor, S. and Peter, B. (2016). Increasing threats of mega-
fires on the WUI communities of Canada. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<http://www.wildlandfire2016.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/
Mega-fire-presentation-Nirmal-Subedi.pdf> 
Sudhalkar, A., Chan, C., Bonham-Carter, C. and Smith, M. (2017). C40 
Infrastructure Interdependencies and Climate Risks Report, 1–26.
Sulla-Menashe, D., Woodcock, C.E. and Friedl, M.A. (2018). Canadian 
boreal forest greening and browning trends: An analysis of 
biogeographic patterns and the relative roles of disturbance versus 
climate drivers. Environmental Research Letters, 13(1). Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa9b88> 
Surminski, S. and Hankinson, J. (2018). MSMEs, climate change 
risks and insurance: reflections on the use of insurance for climate 
adaptation, in Private-sector action in adaptation: Perspectives 
on the role of micro, small and medium size enterprises, (Eds.) 
C. Schaer and N. Kuruppu. UNEP DTU Partnership, Copenhagen, 
65–78. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://unepdtu.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/msme-adaptation-updated-web.pdf>
Sveinsson, O.G.B. (2015). Case study: Influence of climate change 
on hydropower in Iceland, in Resilience of hydropower and dams 
to climate change and natural disasters. International Hydropower 
Association, World Bank Group. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://
www.hydropower.org/sites/default/files/OliSveinssonLandsvirkjun.pdf> 
Swiss Re Institute (2018). Natural catastrophes and man-made 
disasters in 2017: a year of record-breaking losses. SIGMA No 1, 
Zurich. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://reliefweb.int/sites/
reliefweb.int/files/resources/sigma1_2018_en.pdf> 
Taylor, A.R., Boulanger, Y., Price, D.T., Cyr, D., McGarrigle, E., 
Rammer, W. and Kershaw, J.A. (2017). Rapid 21st century climate 
change projected to shift composition and growth of Canada’s 
Acadian Forest Region. Forest Ecology and Management, 405, 
284–294. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2017.07.033> 
Tercek, M. and Rodman, A. (2016). Forecasts of 21st century 
snowpack and implications for snowmobile and snowcoach use in 
Yellowstone National Park. PLoS ONE, 11(7). Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159218> 
Tett, S.F.B., Falk, A., Rogers, M., Spuler, F., Turner, C., Wainwright, 
J., Dimdore-Miles, O., Knight, S., Freychet, N., Mineter, M.J. and 
Lehmann, C.E.R. (2017). Anthropogenic forcings and associated 
changes in fire risk in western North America and Australia during 
2015/16, in Explaining Extreme Events of 2016 from a Climate 
Perspective. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 98, 
S60–S64. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1175/
BAMS-D-17-0096.1> 
TCFD [Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures] (2017). 
Final Report: Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-Related 
Financial Disclosures. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.fsb-
tcfd.org/publications/final-recommendations-report/> 
Thistlethwaite, J. (2016). The Emergence of Flood Insurance in 
Canada: Navigating Institutional Uncertainty. Risk Analysis, 37(4), 
744–755. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
risa.12659>
Thistlethwaite, J. and Wood, M. (2018). Insurance and Climate 
Change Risk Management: Rescaling to Look Beyond the Horizon. 
British Journal of Management, 29(2), 279–298. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12302> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 569 
Thistlethwaite, J., Henstra, D., Peddle, S. and Scott, D. (2017). 
Canadian Voices on Changing Flood Risk: Findings from a National 
Survey. University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://uwaterloo.ca/climate-centre/sites/ca.climate-
centre/files/uploads/files/canadian_voices_on_changing_flood_risk_
fnl.pdf>
Toth, K. (2018). Grounded cruise ship rescue in Nunavut cost 
Canada’s Armed Forces $513K. CBC News. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/rcaf-akademik-ioffe-
expensive-1.4810589> 
Townhill, B.L., Pinnegar, J.K., Righton, D.A. and Metcalfe, J.D. (2016). 
Fisheries, low oxygen and climate change: how much do we really 
know? Journal of Fish Biology, 90, 723–750. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/jfb.13203> 
Transport Canada (2017). Transportation in Canada: Overview report 
2017. Transport Canada, Ottawa, 58 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.tc.gc.ca/media/documents/policy/Transportation_in_
Canada_2017nwe.pdf> 
Tremblay, M.J. (1997). Snow crab (Chionoecetes opilio) distribution 
limits and abundance trends on the Scotian Shelf. Journal of 
Northwest Atlantic Fishery Science, 21, 7–22. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.2960/J.v21.a1> 
UNEP [United Nations Environment Programme] (2012). Business 
and Climate Change Adaptation: Toward Resilient Companies and 
Communities. United Nations Global Compact Office, Geneva, 4‒50. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/
issues_doc/Environment/climate/Business_and_Climate_Change_
Adaptation.pdf> 
UNFCCC [United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change] 
(2011). Assessing the costs and benefits of adaptation options: An 
overview of approaches. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://unfccc.
int/resource/docs/publications/pub_nwp_costs_benefits_adaptation.
pdf>
UNFCCC [United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change] 
(2012). Nairobi Work Programme on Impacts, Vulnerability and 
Adaptation to Climate Change. Retrieved June 2020, from <http:// 
unfccc.int/adaptation/workstreams/nairobi_work_programme/ 
items/6547.php>
UNFCCC [United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change] 
(2015). Paris Agreement. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://unfccc.
int/sites/default/files/english_paris_agreement.pdf>
U.S. Department of Energy (2016). Climate Change and the Electricity 
Sector: Guide for Climate Change Resilience Planning. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2016/10/
f33/Climate%20Change%20and%20the%20Electricity%20Sector%20
Guide%20for%20Climate%20Change%20Resilience%20Planning%20
September%202016_0.pdf> 
van Lierop, P., Lindquist, E., Sathyapala, S. and Franceschini, G. (2015). 
Global forest area disturbance from fire, insect pests, diseases 
and severe weather events. Forest Ecology and Management, 352, 
78–88. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foreco.2015.06.010> 
Vick, S.G. (2001). Stability aspects of long-term closure for sulphide 
tailings, in Seminar on Safe Tailings Dam Constructions, Gallivare, 
20–21.
Waldbusser, G.G., Hales, B., Langdon, C.J., Haley, B.A., Schrader, 
P., Brunner, E.L., Gray, M.W., Miller, C.A. and Gimenez, I. (2015). 
Saturation-state sensitivity of marine bivalve larvae to ocean 
acidification. Nature Climate Change, 5, 273–280. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2479>
Waller, J.D., Wahle, R.A., McVeigh, H. and Fields, D.M. (2017). 
Linking rising pCO2 and temperature to the larval development and 
physiology of the American lobster (Homarus americanus). ICES 
Journal of Marine Science, 74, 1210–1219. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsw154> 
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2014). Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, 286 p. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/
what-adaptation/canada-changing-climate-sector-perspectives-
impacts-and-adaptation/16309> 
Weber, M., Groulx, M., Lemieux, C., Scott, D. and Dawson, J. (2019). 
Balancing the dual mandate of conservation and visitor use at a 
Canadian world heritage site in an era of rapid climate change. 
Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 27(9), 1318‒1337. Retrieved June 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2019.1620754>
World Energy Council, the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability 
Leadership (CISL) and the Cambridge Judge Business School (2014). 
Climate Change: Implications for the Energy Sector, IPCC Climate 
Science Business Briefings. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://www.
cisl.cam.ac.uk/business-action/low-carbon-transformation/ipcc-
climate-science-business-briefings/energy> 
Wedawatta, G. and Ingirige, B. (2016). A conceptual framework 
for understanding resilience of construction SMEs to extreme 
weather events. Built Environment Project and Asset Management, 
6(4), 428–43. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1108/
BEPAM-06-2015-0023>
Western Power Distribution (2011). Western Power Distribution 
Adaptation to Climate Change Report. 23 p. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://www.westernpower.co.uk/downloads/4117> 
Whitman, E., Parisien, M., Thompson, D.K. and Flannigan, M.D. (2019). 
Short-interval wildfire and drought overwhelm boreal forest resilience. 
Scientific Reports, 9, 18796. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-019-55036-7> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 570 
Williams, S. and Schaefer, A. (2013). Small and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises and Sustainability: Managers’ Values and Engagement 
with Environmental and Climate Change Issues. Business Strategy 
and the Environment, 22(3), 173–186. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.1740>
Williamson, T.B., Colombo, S.J., Duinker, P.N., Gray, P.A., Hennessey, 
R.J., Houle, D., Johnston, M., Ogden, A. and Spittlehouse, D.L. 
(2009). Climate change and Canada’s forests: from impacts to 
adaptation. Sustainable Forest Management Network and Northern 
Forest Center, Canadian Forest Service, Natural Resources Canada, 
Edmonton, 58 p.
Wilson, R.E. and Swanson, R.L. (2005). A perspective on bottom 
water temperature anomalies in Long Island Sound during the 1999 
lobster mortality event. Journal of Shellfish Research, 24, 825–830. 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.2983/0730-
8000(2005)24[825:APOBWT]2.0.CO;2> 
Wilson, G.W., Plewes, H.D, Williams, D. and Robertson, J. (2003). 
Concepts for co-mixing of tailings and waste rock. In Proceedings 
of 6th International Conference on Acid Rock Drainage (ICARD), in 
Application and Sustainability of Technologies, Cairns, Australia, 
(Eds.) T. Farrell and G. Taylor. Australian Institute of Mining and 
Metallurgy, Carlton South, Australia, 437–443.
Wotton, B.M., Flannigan, M.D. and Marshall, G.A. (2017). Potential 
climate change impacts on fire intensity and key wildfire suppression 
thresholds in Canada. Environmental Research Letters, 12(9). 
Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/
aa7e6e> 
Wotton, B.M., Nock, C.A. and Flannigan, M.D. (2010). Forest fire 
occurrence and climate change in Canada. International Journal of 
Wildland Fire, 19(3), 253–271. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1071/WF09002> 
Xi, K., Kumar, K., Holtz, M.D., Turkington, T.K. and Chapman, B.P. 
(2015). Understanding the development and management of stripe 
rust in central Alberta. Canadian Journal of Plant Pathology, 37, 
21–39. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/0706066
1.2014.981215> 
Youcef, W.A., Lambert, Y. and Audet, C. (2015). Variations in length 
and growth of Greenland Halibut juveniles in relation to environmental 
conditions. Fisheries Research, 167, 38–47. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2015.01.007> 
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., 
Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. and Kharin, V.V. (2019). Changes 
in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada, Chapter 4 in 
Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. Lemmen. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, 112–193. Retrieved June 2020, from 
<https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/4-0/> 
Zhang, Y., Chen, W.J. and Riseborough, D.W. (2008a). Disequilibrium 
response of permafrost thaw to climate warming in Canada over 
1850–2100. Geophysical Research Letters, 35, L02502. Retrieved 
June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1029/2007GL032117> 
Zhang, Y., Chen, W.J. and Riseborough, D.W. (2008b). Transient 
projections of permafrost distribution in Canada during the 21st 
century under scenarios of climate change. Global and Planetary 
Change, 60(3), 443–456. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2007.05.003> 
Zheng, J. and Kruse, G.H. (2000). Recruitment patterns of 
Alaskan crabs in relation to decadal shifts in climate and 
physical oceanography. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 57(2), 
438–451. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1006/
jmsc.1999.0521> 
Zisserson, B. and Cook, A. (2017). Impact of bottom water 
temperature change on the southernmost snow crab ﬁshery in the 
Atlantic Ocean. Fisheries Research, 195, 12–18. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fishres.2017.06.009> 
Zorn, C., Thacker, S., Pant, R. and Shamseldin, A. (2016). 
The Dependence of National Transportation Infrastructure 
on Electricity. University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New 
Zealand. Retrieved June 2020, from <https://ir.canterbury.
ac.nz/bitstream/handle/10092/12780/POSTER%20-%20Zorn_
DependenceTrnsptInfstructureElect_QCAM_2016.pdf?sequence=1>
Zuliani, A., Massolo, A., Lysyk, T., Johnson, G., Marshall, S., Berger, 
K. and Cork, S.C. (2015). Modelling the Northward Expansion of 
Culicoides sonorensis (Diptera: Ceratopogonidae) under Future 
Climate Scenarios. PLoS ONE, 10(8), e0130294. Retrieved June 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0130294> 
CHAPTER 8
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
Climate 
Disclosure, 
Litigation and 
Finance
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 572 
Coordinating lead author 
Paul Kovacs, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Lead authors 
Gordon Beal, CPA Canada
Maryam Golnaraghi, PhD, The Geneva Association
Patricia Koval, JD, Corporate Director
Gordon McBean, PhD, Western University and Institute for Catastrophic 
Loss Reduction
Bohan Li, PhD, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Recommended citation 
Kovacs, K., Beal, G., Golnaraghi, M., Koval, P., McBean, G. and Li, B. 
(2021): Climate Disclosure, Litigation and Finance; Chapter 8 in Canada 
in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report, (ed.) F.J. Warren and N. 
Lulham; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 573 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
575
8.1 Introduction 
577
8.1.1 International initiatives
577
8.1.2 Canadian initiatives
578
8.2 Climate change risks and opportunities are business issues 
578
8.2.1 Growing awareness of climate change risks and opportunities
579
8.3 Climate-related disclosure drives climate action 
581
8.3.1 Importance of climate-related disclosure
581
8.3.2 Mandatory disclosure in Canada
582
8.3.3 Voluntary disclosure
584
8.3.4 Emerging practices
585
8.3.5 Opportunity for improvement: Data and methodology gaps
586
8.4 Transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy requires significant investments 
587
8.4.1 Co-benefits of financing adaptation and GHG emissions reduction
588
8.4.2 Scope of transition
588
8.4.3 Financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation and GHG emissions reduction
590
8.4.4 Challenges for climate-related investing
592
8.5 Investments in climate risk reduction build resilience 
594
8.5.1 Investments in climate resilience are cost-effective
594
8.5.2 Managing risks of climate-related extremes and related activities in Canada 
597
8.6 Climate litigation is increasing against governments in Canada 
601
8.6.1 Introduction
601
8.6.2 Litigation to compel government action
602
8.6.3 Litigation seeking to change government actions, approvals or decisions
604
8.6.4 Litigation relating to failure to adapt infrastructure
605
8.7 Climate litigation against the private sector is a potential risk 
607
8.7.1 Potential for disclosure liability
607
8.7.2 Potential for litigation related to failure to adapt infrastructure 
609
8.7.3 Litigation alleging corporate responsibility for climate change
609
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 574 
8.8 Moving forward 
611
8.8.1 Knowledge gaps 
611
8.9 Conclusion 
612
8.10 References 
615
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 575 
Key messages 
Climate change risks and opportunities are business issues 
(see Section 8.2)
Most industries and sectors in Canada are exposed to climate-related risks and opportunities, which are 
projected to increase over time. These risks and opportunities are increasingly recognized as a business 
issue, which present incentives for businesses to contribute to the transition to a climate-resilient and low-
carbon economy.
Climate-related disclosure drives climate action (see Section 8.3)
Increased financial disclosure of climate risks and opportunities will inform and enhance action to reduce 
climate change impacts. Guidance for climate-related disclosure is evolving and is increasingly being adopted.
Transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy requires 
significant investments (see Section 8.4)
There is a large financing gap for transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy in Canada. 
Significant public and private capital are required to address this gap, but obstacles limit the opportunities to 
attract the appropriate amount of capital.
Investments in climate risk reduction build resilience (see Section 8.5)
Investments in disaster resilience have demonstrated their effectiveness for reducing exposure to physical 
climate risks. Opportunities exist for governments, businesses and individuals to improve their resilience to 
physical climate risks to break the trend of increasing loss and damage from climate events.
Climate litigation is increasing against governments in Canada 
(see Section 8.6)
Climate change litigation is increasing against governments and their agencies in Canada. There is growing 
litigation seeking to compel or change governmental action, approvals or decisions, as well as lawsuits 
seeking financial compensation related to failure to adapt infrastructure.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 576 
Climate litigation against the private sector is a potential risk 
(see Section 8.7)
While there has been virtually no climate litigation in Canada against private sector companies, Canadian 
companies are increasingly assessing potential climate litigation risks.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 577 
8.1 Introduction 
Climate change is now widely regarded as an environmental and economic issue. Most industries and 
governments are exposed to climate-related risks. This chapter examines the evolving issues of climate 
disclosure, litigation and finance for businesses and governments. Due to the nature of these topics, the 
volume of peer-reviewed literature is limited, particularly as it relates to Canada. Therefore, this chapter draws 
more upon primary information sources and less upon assessment of the academic literature than do other 
chapters in this report.
8.1.1 International initiatives
In 2015, the United Nations Member States adopted three international framework agreements related to 
climate change and climate risk: the Paris Agreement (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change, 2015), the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction (United Nations, 2015) and the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development (Sustainable Development Goals, 2015). These agreements emphasize 
the importance of considering climate change and disaster risk reduction in shaping sustainable and resilient 
development pathways.
While the policy discussion about climate change emphasizes the need to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and adapt to better cope with the impact of extreme events, the business community is 
increasingly focused on managing physical and transition risks, as set out by the Financial Stability Board’s 
industry-led Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD, 2017). These are defined as follows:
•	
Physical risks: Extreme events or long-term shifts in climate patterns that may damage or 
otherwise impact property, infrastructure, supply chains, transport needs, trade and employee 
safety; and
•	
Transition risks: Financial and reputational risks that may result from policy, legal, technology 
and market changes to address GHG emissions reduction and adaptation needs related to climate change.
In addition to these risks, the TCFD identified opportunities for organizations that arise through their efforts 
to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Opportunities could result from resource efficiency and cost 
savings, the adoption of low-emission energy sources, the development of new products and services, access 
to new markets and building resilience along the supply chain. Risks and opportunities vary depending on the 
region, market and industry in which an organization operates (TCFD, 2017).
The TCFD’s final recommendations released in June 2017 (TCFD, 2017) and its subsequent annual status 
reports confirm that climate change “affects nearly all economic sectors,” although to different extents. 
The TFCD emphasizes the need to integrate climate risk and opportunity into organizational governance 
and disclosure of climate change-related information to investors. Managing the risks and opportunities 
associated with climate change could affect a company’s ability to access capital, deliver products and 
services, hire and retain employees, and achieve positive financial performance. For investors, corporate 
disclosure provides data to facilitate informed investment decisions.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 578 
Several countries, including Canada, have begun to realign their financial sector and develop a “sustainable” 
financing framework that supports climate resilience and the transition to a low-carbon economy, including 
a “just transition.” Some examples include initiatives in the United Kingdom (Green Finance Taskforce, 2018) 
and Australia (Australian Sustainable Finance Initiative, 2019). These and other initiatives are complemented 
by global activities in financial and capital markets, the establishment of investor coalitions, changing 
shareholder sentiments and actions by rating agencies to incorporate climate risk in their sovereign, 
municipal and company credit ratings (Golnaraghi, 2019a, b; "The Geneva Association, 2018a).
8.1.2 Canadian initiatives
The Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, released in 2016, sets out a national 
climate change plan for Canada. The Framework provides a strategy to “grow our economy, while reducing 
emissions and building resilience to adapt to a changing climate” (Government of Canada, 2016, p. i). In 2019, 
the Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance issued its recommendations to spur market activities, behaviours 
and structures to support sustainable finance in Canada. These include, among others, recommendations 
to develop authoritative sources of climate information in Canada, encourage greater TCFD implementation 
and embed climate-related risk into the monitoring, regulation and supervision of Canada’s financial system 
(Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2019).
8.2 Climate change risks and opportunities are 
business issues 
Most industries and sectors in Canada are exposed to climate-related risks and opportunities, which are 
projected to increase over time. These risks and opportunities are increasingly recognized as a business 
issue, which present incentives for businesses to contribute to the transition to a climate-resilient and low-
carbon economy.
More frequent and severe extreme weather events, as well as gradual changes in variables such as sea level 
and permafrost, present risks of physical damage to private assets and public infrastructure, which translate to 
material risks with financial implications for businesses. Businesses also need to actively manage the transition 
to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy, which includes changes in consumer demand, technology and 
government policy. In managing these risks and embracing the related opportunities, businesses can help lead 
the effort to adapt to climate change.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 579 
8.2.1 Growing awareness of climate change risks and opportunities
Many businesses are deeply concerned about climate risks (World Economic Forum, 2020), as climate-related 
risks have become increasingly evident for businesses and governments. Climate action failure is ranked as 
the number one risk by likelihood and impact in the 2020 Global Risks Report (see Figure 8.1). Other climate-
related risks, including extreme weather, natural disasters, biodiversity loss and water crises, are also ranked 
prominently.
Figure 8.1: Findings from the World Economic Forum Global Risks Perception Survey (2019–2020), where risks 
were ranked on a scale of 1 to 5 according to perceived likelihood and perceived impact. Environmental risks rank 
among the highest, both in terms of likelihood and impact. Source: Adapted from World Economic Forum, 2020.
The magnitude of the risks associated with climate change is also reflected in other assessment reports. 
Canada’s Changing Climate Report concludes that “the effects of widespread warming are evident in many 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 580 
parts of Canada and are projected to intensify in the future” (Bush and Lemmen, 2019). The Council of 
Canadian Academies (CCA) notes that, in addition to warming temperatures, there have been “more frequent 
heatwaves, changing precipitation patterns, reduced snow and ice cover, thawing permafrost, shrinking 
and thinning Arctic sea ice and changes in streamflow, all of which are leading to widespread impacts on 
natural and human systems. The effects of warming are projected to intensify over time” (CCA, 2019, p. ix). 
Considering these changes, the CCA report identified 12 major areas of climate change risk facing Canada 
that could involve significant losses, damages or disruptions over the next 20 years. The most acute risks 
were for physical infrastructure, coastal communities, northern communities, human health and wellness, 
ecosystems and fisheries.
Businesses in Canada and around the world are working to understand how climate change will affect the 
risk and opportunity landscape for them and their stakeholders (World Economic Forum, 2020; TCFD, 2017). 
Extreme weather events and slower-onset climatic trends present risks for all companies and their supply 
chains, particularly for physical assets and for companies that rely on public or private infrastructure for 
the delivery of raw materials, inputs or finished goods. A changing climate may also present risks to the 
health and safety of employees. Additionally, there may be indirect impacts to businesses, including changes 
in global trade routes, changes in agricultural productivity or in the availability of water and other natural 
resources. The financial impacts of direct and indirect physical impacts on a Canadian business may include 
reduced revenues (e.g., losses arising from business interruptions, reduced asset productivity or reduced 
consumer demand), increased operating costs (e.g., for repairs, increased energy costs for heat waves 
and negative impacts on workforces), increased capital expenditures (e.g., the cost of repairs to damaged 
infrastructure, or temporarily or permanently moving to and equipping new sites), early retirement of assets, 
and the higher cost of and more limited access to capital and insurance.
The insurance industry, for example, has adapted its practices in response to the rising value of severe 
weather damage claims paid, including by making investments in catastrophe risk models for assessing and 
pricing risk, and in a variety of other technologies to enhance its capacity to expedite assessment and claim 
payouts after a disaster. The industry has launched centres of excellence on climate change adaptation and 
is working closely with Canadian universities on adaptation research and actionable guidance for individuals, 
households, businesses and government. Examples include the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
(ICLR) at Western University and the University of Waterloo-based Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation 
(ICCA) and Partners for Action. The industry is also working with governments and businesses in sharing risk 
information, promoting adaptation by businesses, homeowners and governments by putting a price on the 
risk of physical damage, and in providing financial incentives for investments in resilience. For example, in 
partnership with the Government of Canada and provincial governments, through the National Working Group 
on Financial Risk of Flooding, the industry is sharing flood risk maps, providing guidelines for reducing flood 
risks, developing solutions for managing financial risk of flooding and introducing residential flood coverage 
in some regions, with incentives when residents invest in flooding retrofits (Insurance Bureau of Canada 
[IBC], 2019b). However, there are limits to the insurance industry’s ability to respond to climate risks. With 
unmitigated climate change, climate-related physical risks may become uninsurable (Buberl, 2017).
In addition to physical risks, businesses also face transition risks and opportunities as new technologies are 
developed, and as markets and the policy environment respond to climate change and the transition to a low-
carbon future. Significant investments may be required by businesses to complete the transition. These might 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 581 
include renewable sources of energy, low-carbon transportation, energy-efficient buildings, resilient new 
construction and resilience retrofits. As new markets open up, old business models may become less viable. 
These new markets are key considerations for businesses that are determining their strategy and assessing 
the viability of their business model. Companies must consider whether their business models are resilient 
as the world transitions to a lower-carbon economy. Many investors are already advocating for companies to 
change their business models and adopt climate resilience strategies. Climate Action 100+, which includes 
Canadian asset managers, is one organization that is currently engaging with over 160 corporations globally 
to this end (Climate Action 100+, 2019).
8.3 Climate-related disclosure drives climate action 
Increased financial disclosure of climate risks and opportunities will inform and enhance action to reduce 
climate change impacts. Guidance for climate-related disclosure is evolving and is increasingly being adopted.
Climate-related disclosure allows investors to make informed decisions on investing towards a climate-
resilient and low-carbon economy. Through climate-related disclosure, companies and public-sector entities 
like cities, municipalities and Crown corporations are encouraged to analyze, better understand and adopt 
strategies to adapt to climate risks. While Canadian securities laws require publicly-traded companies to 
disclose material climate risks, investors and other stakeholders often demand additional climate-related 
information. To meet this demand, many Canadian companies provide voluntary climate-related disclosure in 
publicly filed sustainability or climate reports. Historically, many climate-related disclosures failed to meet the 
needs of investors, as they did not report financial impacts and were often not comparable across companies. 
Frameworks with the goal of improving climate-related disclosures by publicly-traded companies and public-
sector entities now exist and are being further developed. As investor and other stakeholder expectations 
continue to evolve, these companies and entities may need to enhance their climate-related disclosure to meet 
these expectations.
8.3.1 Importance of climate-related disclosure
Disclosure is the process used by organizations to provide information that enables stakeholders to assess 
an organization and make informed decisions. These decisions include whether or not to invest in, work for, 
buy from or supply to an organization and, in the case of voters, which political leaders to support. Disclosure 
is a key driver of stakeholder decision making and behaviour.
As climate change has become an increasingly important issue for many stakeholders, companies need to 
disclose information on how it affects them. Investors, shareholders, lenders, insurers, regulators, employees, 
consumers and voters increasingly want to know how these entities are managing climate-related risks and 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 582 
opportunities. Governments also need this information to facilitate the development of coherent and credible 
public policy.
Climate-related disclosure has the potential to improve the management of climate risks and opportunities, 
and to encourage informed investments in climate change adaptation and GHG emissions reduction by 
investors, businesses and governments. To support climate-risk management and investment decisions, 
transparency and timely access to information through disclosure are necessary.
A research report by Chartered Professional Accountants (CPA) Canada asked ten institutional investors, who 
hold approximately $1.9 trillion in assets under management, to identify the climate-related information that 
they use in decision making, how they use it and the impact that it has on decisions (CPA Canada, 2019a). 
The investors identified specific disclosures by companies that they considered important to their decision 
making, which included:
•	
the exposure of the organization’s specific physical locations and infrastructure, including supply 
chains, to extreme weather events (e.g., floods, wildfires, ice storms, droughts, early thawing), 
potential impacts and how the organization is managing its exposure;
•	
water information where critical dependencies exist, including potential impacts of water 
deficiencies and the company’s related risk management processes and plans; and
•	
trends and measures to reduce GHG emissions, including targets that are both absolute and 
intensity-based (CPA Canada, 2019a).
Investors also seek information on risks and opportunities associated with the transition to a low-carbon 
economy, as well as analyses of climate risks and opportunities for a company’s medium- and long-term 
strategies. Climate-related financial disclosures are also important for lenders and insurers. Disclosures allow 
financial institutions to assess the resilience of the business models of companies that they serve and of 
their own business models to better manage their exposure to climate risk.
Ultimately, climate-related disclosure allows markets to better assess which entities can manage climate 
risks and seize related opportunities in a low-carbon economy, and to determine which entities are 
strategically resilient to the physical and transition risks associated with climate change. This, in turn, may 
encourage sustainable investment (Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2019). 
8.3.2 Mandatory disclosure in Canada
A publicly-traded company is required by provincial securities laws to disclose information regarding all 
material risks that it faces. Commitments, events, risks or uncertainties that the company reasonably 
believes will materially affect its future performance should be disclosed, as well as the company’s policies 
and procedures related to risk management and oversight. There are no prescriptive reporting requirements 
in Canada pertaining specifically to climate change issues. The requirement to disclose is driven by 
materiality (i.e., the extent to which the risk is deemed material at the time when the disclosure is being 
made). Materiality (see Box 8.1) is assessed by reference to the "reasonable investor" standard. Information is 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 583 
likely to be material if a reasonable investor’s decision about whether or not to buy, sell or hold the company’s 
securities is likely to be influenced or changed if the information is omitted or misstated (Canadian Securities 
Administrators, 2019; 2010).
Box 8.1: Materiality
Some examples of climate-related risks that might be material to a company include:
•	
severe weather events or slow-onset events that might result in damage to assets, personal injury, 
operational disruptions, employee problems, or supply chain or customer distribution disruptions;
•	
climate-related regulations;
•	
reputational issues (including employees’ and investors’ attitudes); and
•	
business model or strategy changes relating, for example, to changes in demands for products or 
services, the availability of renewable energy or the development of energy-efficient products.
Such climate-related risks may result in financial impacts, including asset write-offs, capital expenditures, 
increased costs and reduced revenues (Canadian Securities Administrators, 2019).
For publicly-traded companies, the Canadian Securities Administrators (2019) have published several 
guidance materials, of which the most comprehensive is Staff Notice 51-358: Reporting of Climate Change-
related Risks. This notice contains principles for issuers seeking to make materiality determinations and 
urges companies to err on the side of disclosure when in doubt.
The Canada Business Corporations Act and provincial corporations and securities legislation generally require 
companies to prepare financial statements in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles 
(GAAP). For publicly accountable enterprises in Canada, the International Financial Reporting Standards 
(IFRS) are the accounting standards used that represent GAAP. According to an article by a member of 
the International Accounting Standards Board, reporters under IFRS should take note that climate risk is 
addressed by existing requirements, even if not explicitly referenced (Anderson, 2019). As regulators and 
shareholders increasingly look for such disclosure, reporting entities may need to incorporate these risks into 
their financial statements.
The quality and quantity of climate-related disclosures have improved over time. A study of Canadian 
publicly-traded companies using data from annual reports prior to 2018 (before the release of the TCFD 
recommendations) found significant variation in whether companies made climate-related disclosures, as 
well as in the nature, amount and quality of the disclosures (Canadian Securities Administrators, 2018). This 
study found that climate-related disclosures were inconsistent and difficult to compare. In particular, the 
majority of climate-related disclosures did not include financial metrics or targets. As such, disclosures were 
not comparable across or within industries, and an inconsistent use of terminology contributed to the lack 
of comparability. A more recent study by CPA Canada, using 2018 data, found that TCFD-related disclosures 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 584 
have increased and that the amount and quality of disclosures are increasing, although the quality still varies 
(CPA Canada, 2020).
8.3.3 Voluntary disclosure
Increasingly, Canadian companies are voluntarily disclosing climate change information that they do not 
consider to be material for securities law. Some Canadian cities and municipal governments are also now 
producing voluntary climate-related reports. The practice of disclosing in voluntary reports benefits many 
stakeholders, including investors, employees, customers, suppliers, lenders, insurers, governments and rating 
services.
The framework proposed in the recommendations of the TCFD (see Box 8.2) was arguably the most common 
voluntary reporting framework used in Canada in 2020. It has been endorsed by the Government of Canada 
for Crown corporations, and is a condition for companies receiving COVID-19 financial support (Canada 
Enterprise Emergency Funding Corporation, 2020). The Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance recommended 
that all Canadian companies adopt this reporting framework.
Box 8.2: Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD)
The TCFD recommended disclosures that are intended for voluntary use by organizations of all types in their 
mainstream financial filings (i.e., those filed with securities and/or industry regulators) (see Figure 8.2).
Figure 8.2: Core elements of recommended climate-related financial disclosures. Source: Adapted from Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, 2017.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 585 
The TCFD recommends that all organizations should, irrespective of materiality, disclose the governance and 
risk management elements. In addition, asset owners and asset managers should disclose carbon footprint 
information in reports to clients and beneficiaries, regardless of any assessment of materiality. If this 
information is assessed as material under the same criteria used in their regulatory filings, then organizations 
should also disclose the following elements: strategy, metrics and targets. Scope 1, 2 and 3 greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions and scenario analysis (i.e., the resilience of the organization's strategy under different 
climate change scenarios) are included as part of the metrics and target elements. Organizations omitting 
a recommended disclosure should disclose their rationale for doing so. The TCFD provides supplementary 
disclosure guidance for banks, insurance companies, asset owners and asset managers.
As of September 30, 2020, the TCFD framework was being used by all of the major Canadian banks and 
publicly-traded insurance companies, as well as by some other large Canadian publicly-traded companies. 
Many of these companies made disclosures in all categories, including nascent scenario analysis (CPA 
Canada, 2020). The TCFD framework has been endorsed by major accounting firms, CPA Canada and by 
Canadian pension plans and asset managers.
In its global status update report published in mid-2019, the TCFD (2019) noted that, in its view, while 
important progress in global climate-related disclosure is being made, more clarity is needed on the potential 
financial impacts of climate change. It also noted that disclosure is weak with respect to strategic resilience, 
which is of great interest to most capital providers. It concluded that adoption of the TCFD framework can 
be expected to widen and improve as the private sector refines the emerging good practice in efficient and 
decision-useful climate-related disclosure.
Another vehicle used for voluntary disclosure by companies, cities and regions in Canada and elsewhere is 
CDP (formerly Carbon Disclosure Project), which circulates and collates annual surveys on climate change 
and other issues (CDP, 2020). These surveys incorporate the TCFD disclosure elements and are a significant 
source of information for investors, customers, suppliers and governments. Over 250 Canadian companies 
reported in these surveys in 2019.
Some Canadian companies have also issued reports using the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board 
(SASB) framework, which incorporates climate change within a variety of other environmental, social and 
governance risks (Sustainability Accounting Standards Board, 2018). The SASB creates industry-specific 
sustainability accounting standards that help companies to identify and disclose material information on 
climate risks to investors in their mainstream financial filings. The Canadian Securities Administrators (2019) 
has suggested that Canadian issuers may wish to take note of SASB’s metrics in making decisions with 
respect to climate-related disclosure.
8.3.4 Emerging practices
For federal, provincial and municipal governments, disclosure of climate change-related issues is largely 
dependent on public-sector accounting standards that do little to specifically address climate-related issues. 
Additional disclosure is uncommon and has largely been driven by government leaders who voluntarily decide 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 586 
to provide such information. Fortunately, a number of large Canadian municipalities are demonstrating 
leadership in climate-related disclosure. The cities of Vancouver, Montréal and Toronto are all enhancing their 
disclosure on climate-related matters, and have worked with CPA Canada to develop guidance that can be 
used by municipalities across the country (CPA Canada, 2019d).
In its final report, the Expert Panel endorsed the TCFD framework with respect to both federal and provincial 
Crown corporations, as well as for private sector issuers of all sizes. The Panel recommended a two-phased 
approach to implementation over a five- to seven-year timeframe, depending on issuer size. It further 
recommended the implementation of TCFD, in close partnership with the provinces, under a mandatory 
“comply or explain” regime, which was one of the options that had been considered, but not adopted, by the 
Canadian Securities Administrators in its 2018 Report (Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2019). 
8.3.5 Opportunity for improvement: Data and methodology gaps
Studies on climate-related financial reporting have called for businesses, financial institutions and asset 
managers, along with their boards of directors, management and professional advisors, to become better 
educated with respect to the business risks and opportunities, as well as potential financial impacts of 
climate change (Canadian Securities Administrators, 2018). Multiple initiatives are under way in this regard, 
including training programs. In order for organizations to rigorously assess, manage and disclose their risks, 
there is a need for the development of new tools, models, methodologies and standards for physical and 
transitional climate risk analysis under different emissions scenarios, along with the expertise to use and 
interpret them. For policymakers, scenario analysis and stress-testing will be important for assessing whether 
financing flows are consistent with an orderly transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy, and 
also for determining whether the financial system will be resilient to climate-related shocks.
For organizations conducting physical risk analyses, there are frequent limitations on the availability of 
relevant non-proprietary historical data or climate projection data for all locations of an organization’s assets, 
production, distribution and supply chain. In addition, the cost of employing the expertise to interpret or 
use that data for TCFD purposes can be prohibitive for many companies. Various initiatives at the federal, 
provincial and local levels are under way to provide broadly available access to complete, authoritative and 
decision-useful climate information and advice (Government of Canada, 2020; LAMPS, 2020; Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium, 2020).
The TCFD framework recommends that companies develop and disclose metrics and targets for assessing 
risks and opportunities, but it does not give specific guidance in this area. Companies and their boards of 
directors have struggled to obtain and analyze the information necessary to develop such metrics and targets 
(CPA Canada, 2019b, c). Companies within the same industry have often lacked information about what 
their peer group members are doing in this regard. To help alleviate this situation, the TCFD has committed 
to continuing to work with market participants to refine metrics so that they are consistent, comparable and 
decision-useful (Carney, 2019). Studies have also been published in Canada to provide companies and asset 
managers with industry- and sector-specific metrics to assess and quantify various risks (Feltmate et al., 2020).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 587 
There are significant methodology gaps associated with scenario and stress test analysis. The TCFD 
recommends using scenario and stress test analysis to, for example, create hypothetical constructs that 
yield a series of potential outcomes based on specific assumptions, factors and methodologies, such as 
the assumed global temperature rise, the energy mix, or whether the transition to a low-carbon economy 
happens smoothly or abruptly. Although some publicly available scenario models exist, there are many 
bespoke private models. As of September 30, 2020, there was a lack of guidelines, standards, protocols 
and consistent practices in this area (CPA Canada, 2019b, c). In most cases, organizations needed to seek 
outside expert assistance for this purpose. In 2019, the TCFD indicated that it was continuing to work with 
market participants to create “best practice” examples of scenario and stress test analysis. Furthermore, the 
United Nations Environment Programme Finance Initiative, the Network for Greening the Financial System 
and various organizations for Canadian pension funds, insurance companies, asset managers and financial 
institutions (all of which have Canadian participants) have continued to develop standard methodologies, 
tools and practices in this regard (Network for Greening the Financial System, 2020; UNEP Finance Initiative, 
2019). The Expert Panel’s Final Report recommended that the federal government sponsor a research effort 
to develop two or three base scenarios for climate-related disclosures for issuers and industry groups (Expert 
Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2019). Overall, it will take time for consistent practices to emerge and be 
adopted across all sectors of the Canadian economy.
8.4 Transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-
carbon economy requires significant investments 
There is a large financing gap for transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy in Canada. 
Significant public and private capital are required to address this gap, but obstacles limit the opportunities 
to attract the appropriate amount of capital.
Canada has a large gap for financing the transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy across 
economic sectors and assets owned by government, businesses, communities and individuals. The scale of 
the gap is beyond the capacity of the public sector alone and will require the mobilization of private capital. 
Financing both GHG emissions reduction and climate change adaptation with a more integrated approach 
is critical for transitioning to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy. Reducing emissions is necessary 
to keep the cost of climate change adaptation under control. Climate risks (physical and transitional) and 
opportunities are increasingly being considered by investors in their investment strategies, portfolio planning 
and investments decisions. Financing mechanisms are being developed to address this gap, but they are 
currently limited in scale due to a number of obstacles.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 588 
8.4.1 Co-benefits of financing adaptation and GHG emissions reduction
A climate-resilient and low-carbon framework for policy, planning and implementation can improve the 
cost-effectiveness of responses to climate change (Laukkonen et al., 2009; Yohe and Strzepek, 2007). The 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states with high confidence that, “[a] mix of [climate 
change] adaptation and mitigation options to limit global warming to 1.5°C, implemented in a participatory 
and integrated manner, can enable rapid, systemic transitions” (IPCC, 2019). Not considering adaptation and 
GHG emissions reduction together could be problematic for several reasons (Harford and Raftis, 2019). First, 
if considered separately, each may negatively affect the goal of the other. For example, developing a dense 
urban environment may reduce emissions by reducing the need for commuting, but it can increase the risk 
of urban flooding (Laukkonen et al., 2009). Secondly, there are numerous potential projects that can achieve 
both adaptation and GHG emissions reduction, and that may be overlooked if the goals are not considered 
concurrently. For example, infrastructure and buildings can be designed to have reduced energy requirements 
and be more resilient to weather-related extremes (Harford and Raftis, 2019).
In Canada, adaptation and GHG emissions reduction have traditionally been considered in silos. The Pan-
Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change provides a national framework for transitioning to 
a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy (Government of Canada, 2016), but it does not explicitly state the 
need to consider climate change adaptation and GHG emissions reduction jointly. Efforts are under way in 
Canada to move past the silo approach (Canadian Institute for Climate Choices, 2020).
8.4.2 Scope of transition
Significant investments are required for Canada to transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy. 
A capital plan for implementing the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, including 
an explicit analysis of investments needed in major sectors of the economy, would help to identify the size 
and scope of the market opportunity for financing the transition (Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 
2019). The Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC) has also recommended $5.3 billion of annual investments in 
adaptation measures to reduce exposure to physical climate-related risks (IBC, 2019a).
Globally, both the public and private sectors have been investing in such measures (see Figure 8.3). On 
average, total tracked public and private climate investments rose from $365 billion annually in 2013–2014 
to $579 billion annually in 2017–2018 (Buchner et al., 2019). These investments included financing for 
renewable energy and transport, public financing for adaptation, public financing through development 
finance institutions and international finance flows for energy efficiency, land use and other climate change-
related projects.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 589 
Figure 8.3: Global tracked climate finance flows by private and public actors in billions of USD. a) Two-year 
averages of climate finance contributions by private actors vs. public actors during the period 2013‒2018. 
b) Breakdown of the 2017‒2018 two-year average climate finance by private actors vs. public actors, and by 
sector. Source: Adapted from Buchner et al., 2019.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 590 
8.4.3 Financing mechanisms for climate change adaptation and GHG 
emissions reduction
Beyond general debt and equity instruments, other financing instruments are being developed to raise funds 
for climate resilience and low-carbon projects. Some examples are highlighted below:
Green bonds: The proceeds of green bonds must be used for climate-related projects that reduce GHG 
emissions or improve climate resilience (Climate Bonds Initiative, 2020). Green bonds are increasingly 
used for integrated low-carbon and climate resilience projects. However, less than 5% of pre-2019 global 
green bond proceeds have funded climate change adaptation projects (Climate Bond Initiative, 2019). As of 
September 2020, technical criteria for adaptation-related projects, such as water and sewage infrastructure 
and climate-resilient infrastructure, are being developed for green bond (Climate Bonds Initiative, 2019). 
Several provincial and municipal issuers of green bond list climate change adaptation and resilience as an 
eligible project category in their respective green bond frameworks. Examples include the Province of Ontario 
(n.d.), the Province of Quebec (Ministère des Finances du Québec, n.d.), the City of Vancouver (see Box 8.3; 
2018) and the City of Ottawa (2020). 
Box 8.3: Use of a green bond by the City of Vancouver for adaptation
The City of Vancouver issued its first green bond in September 2018, with a principal amount of $85 million. 
Proceeds from the bond are being used to fund up to seven types of projects: renewable energy, energy 
efficiency, green buildings, clean transportation, pollution prevention, sustainable water and wastewater 
systems, and the restoration, preservation and promotion of natural infrastructure and assets. Approved 
projects include upgrading sewer systems to eliminate sewage overflows, expanding the energy utility of 
the city’s False Creek neighborhood, constructing more than 200 units of affordable housing and converting 
community buildings to net-zero buildings (City of Vancouver, 2018).
Sustainability bonds: Proceeds of sustainability bonds are exclusively applied to finance or re-finance a 
combination of “green” and social projects. In 2019, a number of Canadian financial institutions—including 
Sun Life Financial, the National Bank of Canada and BMO Financial Group—adopted sustainability bonds 
frameworks (Sun Life, 2019a; National Bank of Canada, 2018; Bank of Montreal, 2019a, respectively) and 
issued bonds (Sun Life, 2019b; National Bank of Canada, 2019; Bank of Montreal, 2019b, respectively).
Catastrophe bonds: With the rising impacts of extreme weather events, local, provincial and national 
governments need to manage their budgets to expedite recovery from disasters by covering damages and 
paying for the cost of reconstruction of public assets and infrastructure. Catastrophe bonds are designed to 
transfer these risks to capital markets. Catastrophe bonds serve as an insurance policy for the bond issuer, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 591 
where the principal of the bond is forgiven when a disaster reaches a pre-agreed threshold. As of September 
2018, the global catastrophe bond market stood at $30 billion, following a surge of issuance in 2017 and 
2018 (Ralph, 2018). In Canada, insurance regulation guidelines issued in 2013 allow insurers to hedge risks 
using innovative financial instruments, but require prior approval for the instruments to contribute to capital 
requirements (Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions, 2013).
Forestry carbon offset credits: Several Canadian provincial carbon pricing regimes and standard-setters in 
the voluntary carbon markets have developed carbon offset protocols for Canadian forestry projects, with 
a number of projects in British Columbia. Although their primary goal is to reduce carbon emissions, these 
projects have co-benefits for climate resilience and physical climate risk reduction.
Transition bonds: Transition bonds are designed for carbon-intensive sectors, with proceeds used to finance 
new and/or existing projects for transition towards a reduced environmental impact, such as reduced carbon 
emissions (Takatsuki and Foll, 2019). These bonds are intended for companies and projects that would not 
qualify as “green.” They may be particularly useful for Canadian firms in the mining, materials, and oil and 
gas industries (Riordan, 2020). There is some concern that companies may use these bonds to appear more 
environmentally friendly than they actually are (i.e., greenwashing). In Canada, Corporate Knights and the 
Council for Clean Capitalism released their Clean Transition Bonds Guideline, including the Clean Financing 
for Heavy Industry Taxonomy (Corporate Knights and the Council for Clean Capitalism, 2018).
Financing mechanisms for public assets and infrastructure projects: The Expert Panel on Sustainable 
Finance (2019) identified the need to develop a national Sustainable Infrastructure Plan, including projects 
and capital plans for public‒private co-investment. The Panel emphasized the need for risk-based 
sustainability criteria to guide all new federal infrastructure planning, project selection and financing. It 
stressed that these criteria should include protocols to assess insurability earlier in the development process 
to ensure that infrastructure is sustainably designed and built, and that the risk could be transferred to insurers 
either directly or via insurance pools or capital market parametric structures (e.g., those used in catastrophe 
bonds) to reduce government liability as Canada’s insurer of last resort (The Geneva Association, 2019).
Infrastructure financing mechanisms include:
•	
Asset recycling: Government assets with proven cash flows are sold to private investors to 
finance new projects. For example, the proceeds from the planned sale of the Trans Mountain 
Pipeline are committed to fund clean energy projects (Department of Finance Canada, 2019).
•	
Resilience bonds: A type of catastrophe bond that is designed to incentivize cities and other 
jurisdictions to invest in resilience. These bonds include a resilience rebate that converts avoided 
“measurable” losses from a risk-reduction plan into a revenue stream (Vaijhala and Rhodes, 
2018). The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development issued the world’s first dedicated 
climate resilience bond for $700 million USD (Bennett, 2019).
•	
Private‒public partnerships (PPPs) have assumed a prominent role in infrastructure financing, 
although with continuing controversy over efficiency and costs (IBC, 2015; KPMG, 2015; 
Kunreuther, 2015). As of February 2020, there were roughly 286 active projects with a market 
value of $139 billion in Canada (The Canadian Council for Public-Private Partnerships, 2020).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 592 
•	
The Canada Infrastructure Bank: Established in 2017, the Canada Infrastructure Bank was tasked 
with investing $35 billion from the federal government in infrastructure projects with provincial, 
territorial, municipal and Indigenous partners, and with attracting institutional investors to fund 
new revenue-generating infrastructure projects that provide public benefits (Canada Infrastructure 
Bank, 2020). On October 1, 2020, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and the Minister of Infrastructure 
and Communities announced a $10 billion growth plan over three years in partnership with 
Canada's Infrastructure Bank, targeting renewable energy projects, building retrofits, zero-emission 
busing and charging infrastructure, among other initiatives (Canada Infrastructure Bank, 2020).
8.4.4 Challenges for climate-related investing
Banks, institutional investors, insurers and pension funds are critical sources of investments in both 
adaptation and GHG emissions reduction projects, globally and in Canada. However, they face several obstacles 
to investing at the scale needed to transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy (EU High-Level Expert 
Group on Sustainable Finance, 2018; The Geneva Association, 2018a). Some obstacles include: 
•	
Political and public policy risks associated with the lack of national strategies, clear climate 
change policies, regulatory and legislative processes, and conflicting government subsidies;
•	
Need for a taxonomy and establishing “green” as an asset class to enable the development of a 
robust market and investable-grade, green investment opportunities;
•	
Need for data, tools, methodologies and expertise to assess risks and the quality of investments; and
•	
Regulatory issues related to higher capital charges associated with long-term, higher-risk investments.
Governments, policymakers and a variety of regulatory or standard-setting bodies play a key role in 
addressing some of these obstacles (The Geneva Association, 2018a), and the Expert Panel on Sustainable 
Finance (2019) addressed many of these issues in its recommendations.
A major challenge is presented by public policy and regulatory uncertainty. Investments in adaptation and 
GHG emissions reduction have long time horizons of years or decades, and regulatory uncertainty increases 
the riskiness of these investments (Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2018). As of September 2020, there 
remained considerable international uncertainty concerning global GHG emission-reduction efforts, including 
international market mechanisms for trading emission reductions and carbon pricing. In Canada, the federal 
carbon pricing plan and related legislation endured repeated challenges from many provinces with three 
constitutional provincial reference cases, culminating in Supreme Court of Canada hearings (Rabson, 2020). 
Provincial planning to address climate change and reduce GHG emissions has changed significantly with the 
results of provincial elections.
A green taxonomy would provide common definitions for green, resilient and sustainable activities and 
investment practices. It could enable private capital to be directed towards such long-term activities, while 
preventing false claims and greenwashing. However, adopting an international taxonomy, such as the EU 
Taxonomy on Green Finance (EU Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance, 2020), as an authoritative 
framework can only partially address such obstacles, since international taxonomies may not fully apply to 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 593 
the Canadian economy (Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2019). In 2019, a task group with the Canadian 
Standards Association was formed to develop a “transition” taxonomy for resource-heavy industries in 
Canada (Standards Council of Canada, 2019). This project builds on existing global frameworks and is being 
conducted in two parts, with part one focusing on the transition framework and definitions, and part two on a 
sector-specific transition taxonomy for seven priority sectors (Canadian Standards Authority Group, 2020).
Without accessible decision-relevant data on climate risks and opportunities, investors will not be able 
to assess the viability of their investments in climate change adaptation and GHG emissions reduction 
(Carney, 2019; Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 2018). Efforts to identify data needs and develop 
standard methodologies and tools for conducting climate change risk assessments are still in their infancy 
(Golnaraghi, 2019b). Furthermore, in-house expertise for producing, interpreting and utilizing climate-risk 
information is a challenge for both public and private sectors in Canada.
A significant amount of climate risk-related data is collected by various federal, provincial and municipal 
agencies, academia, centres of excellence, non-governmental agencies and the private sector. As of 
September 2020, this data is not compiled or readily available, and it may remain prohibitively costly for 
an individual company to collect and conduct quality assurance on the necessary data for risk modelling. 
Furthermore, translating this data into decision-relevant risk information for financing decisions requires 
sector-specific information and multidisciplinary expertise (Golnaraghi, 2019a).
Targeted initiatives, such as the Canadian Centre for Climate Information and Analytics (C3IA), recommended 
by the Expert Panel, would help inform data analysis and decision making in this area. Since the 1990s, the 
insurance industry globally has significantly invested in innovative methods to assess, price and manage 
physical climate risks. The industry has been using traditional catastrophe models and is working to enhance 
capacities for modelling the effects of climate change with a forward-looking approach (The Geneva 
Association, 2018b). Catastrophe models are primarily available through commercial risk modelling firms 
and insurance/reinsurance brokers, and some international (re)insurance companies have also developed 
their own internal models. These models could also inform lending and investing decisions for real estate and 
infrastructure portfolios (Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership, 2019a, b).
A complex landscape of specialized private climate risk data start-ups and environmental fintech companies 
(i.e., companies that use technologies to provide financial services) are emerging in the U.S., Europe and 
Canada. These companies provide data and analytics to financial and insurance companies (Golnaraghi, 
2019b). As of September 2020, physical and transition climate risk modelling tools provided by these 
commercial data providers remained fragmented by the type of risk, sector and decision applications. 
International rating agencies, such as Moody’s Financial Services and S&P Global Services, are building internal 
climate risk modelling capabilities for their sovereign, municipal and company credit ratings (Flavelle, 2019).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 594 
8.5 Investments in climate risk reduction build 
resilience 
Investments in disaster resilience have demonstrated their effectiveness for reducing exposure to physical 
climate risks. Opportunities exist for governments, businesses and individuals to improve their resilience 
to physical climate risks and break the trend of increasing loss and damage related to climate events.
Socioeconomic impacts of extreme weather events are on the rise in Canada due to the increasing 
concentration of people and assets in high-risk locations, current approaches to development planning and 
construction practices, and climate change. There is increasing awareness about significant benefits of 
investments in pre-disaster prevention and risk reduction. However, such ex-ante investments represent only a 
small fraction of the costs paid for post-disaster recovery.
8.5.1 Investments in climate resilience are cost-effective
Canada has experienced significant losses due to climate-related disasters. The Insurance Institute of 
Canada finds that, since the 1980s, climate-related damage claims paid by Canada’s insurers have increased 
20-fold after adjustment for inflation, doubling every five to 10 years (Insurance Institute of Canada, 2020). 
Insured losses for climate-related hazards have increased to an average of $1.9 billion per year from 2010 to 
2019 (see Figure 8.4). The largest insured loss events in Canadian history include the 2016 Fort McMurray 
wildfire, the 2013 Calgary flood and the 1998 Quebec winter storm. Rising insured losses are attributed to 
increases in the quantity and value of exposed assets, the frequency and intensity of hazards and insurance 
coverage rates.1
Between 1970 and 2014, more than 76% of Canada’s Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) 
spending was flood-related (Moudrak and Feltmate, 2017). These costs increased from around $100 million 
annually two decades ago to $500 million in 2009‒2010 and reached $2 billion in 2013‒2014.
1 Insured loss figures are provided, despite changes in insurance coverage rates over time, as there is no consensus 
on the methodology for estimating direct economic losses of disasters, which makes these estimates difficult to 
compare.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 595 
Figure 8.4: Annual insured losses related to natural hazards in Canada, in millions of 2018 $. Data source: CatIQ, 
n.d.; Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2020.
The physical effects of climate change are expected to increase losses in many ways. Physical climate risks 
can cause direct and indirect losses for governments, businesses and individuals (see Box 8.4).
Box 8.4: Physical climate risks for governments, businesses and individuals
Governments:
•	
Costs of emergency relief and response
•	
Costs of relocation of affected and at-risk populations
•	
Reconstruction costs
•	
Costs of rehabilitation and recovery
•	
Contingent liabilities for state-owned enterprises and enterprises critical to economic recovery
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 596 
•	
Decreased tax revenues from business interruption
•	
Opportunity cost of diverting funds to reconstruction and recovery efforts
•	
Increased expenditures for social recovery programs
•	
Increased borrowing costs and potential negative impacts on the sovereign credit rating
•	
Migration of populations due to loss of livelihoods
Businesses:
•	
Disruptions to employees
•	
Loss of assets and inventory
•	
Reconstruction of assets
•	
Disruption to critical infrastructure needed for operations
•	
Disruption to supply chains
•	
Spillover effects from business interruptions
•	
Increased borrowing costs
Individuals:
•	
Loss or damage to homes, personal property and other assets
•	
Loss, damage or disruption to essential infrastructure (e.g., schools, hospitals, water and sewage 
management, transportation)
•	
Risks to food security and water safety
•	
Forced relocations and additional living expenses
•	
Mental health complications 
•	
Loss of traditional knowledge due to loss of life and loss of livelihoods linked to Indigenous 
peoples’ relationship with the land
Source: The Geneva Association, 2020
Overall, studies find that ex-ante investments in climate resilience could be cost-effective. The report of the 
Global Commission on Adaptation (2019) finds that investing $1.8 trillion globally from 2020 to 2030 in five 
areas to improve climate resilience could yield $7.1 trillion in net benefits. Studies in the U.S. and Canada 
show that, on average, investments in climate risk reduction can result in about four to twelve dollars saved 
for each dollar invested (Porter and Scawthorn, 2020; Porter et al., 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 597 
8.5.2 Managing risks of climate-related extremes and related activities 
in Canada 
8.5.2.1 Risk information
Investments in climate resilience are more effective if supported by decision-relevant climate risk 
assessment and risk pricing. Development of such information would require access to reliable hazard, 
exposure and vulnerability data, along with methodology and tools for combining this data to produce risk 
information (The Geneva Association, 2018b).
Since the late 1980s, catastrophe risk models have transformed insurance companies’ capacities for pricing 
risks of extreme events such as floods, storms, hail and landslides, and for managing the property insurance 
business. These models are also increasingly being used by planning professionals, the financial sector and 
governments to understand the risk of natural hazards, and to conduct cost-benefit assessments for risk-
reduction projects (The Geneva Association, 2018b). In Canada, the insurance industry subscribes to tools 
offered by commercial catastrophe modelling firms and (re)insurance brokers for major Canadian perils. 
Insurers complement this information by acquiring other data and investing in a variety of technologies (e.g., 
satellites) to enhance the quality of real-time risk information.
A 2014 IBC survey concluded that flood mapping in Canada was outdated and deeply fragmented. Since 
2015, the IBC has been working with a number of commercial catastrophe risk modelling firms to produce 
flood hazard models and flood risk maps for Canada. These maps have been instrumental in supporting 
the National Working Group on Financial Risk of Flooding under the National Advisory Council on Flooding 
(ACF)  with developing financial options for managing the flood-related costs of the highest-risk residential 
properties (IBC, 2019b; Canadian Intergovernmental Conference Secretariat, 2018). In 2015, the Government 
of Canada launched the National Disaster Mitigation Program, which created flood hazard mapping 
guidelines and funded mapping activities that adhered to these guidelines. The program also funded small-
scale activities to reduce municipal flood risk. Increasingly, efforts are being made by various stakeholders, 
such as federal and provincial agencies and conservation authorities, to provide flood hazard mapping.
However, overland flood risk information is difficult for homeowners to obtain, and many flood maps remain 
outdated and fragmented (Adriano, 2019). Furthermore, a study involving five municipalities concluded that 
high-resolution cross-sectoral data would improve the quality of flood hazard maps, and would be needed to 
develop finer-resolution flood risk information to support risk management decisions at the municipal level 
(Canadian Water Network and IBC, 2019).
8.5.2.2 Risk reduction and prevention measures
Various risk-reduction strategies can be undertaken based on risk analysis. Examples include building climate 
resilient infrastructure, improving nature-based infrastructure as a buffer, adopting updated building codes, 
land-use planning and managd retreat away from high-risk areas. As of September 2020, no comprehensive 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 598 
Canadian study of climate resilience measures existed, but smaller-scale studies have found significant 
benefits. Studies consistently identify significant opportunities to reduce disaster risk in a cost-effective 
manner. For example, a study of possible flood abatement strategies in the province of Quebec found “at least one 
adaptation measure is beneficial in comparison with non-intervention (net benefits greater than 0) in 76% of cases” 
(Circé et al., 2016). The ICLR study of the Climate Resilient Buildings and Core Public Infrastructure Initiative found 
that the program will provide $12 in benefits for every dollar invested (Porter and Scawthorn, 2020).
The National Working Group on Financial Risk of Flooding recommended a three-pronged approach to 
address flood risks (IBC, 2019b). This includes the following: elevating consumer and government awareness 
to incentivize active flood-risk reduction; producing or improving public-facing risk maps that allow insurers, 
as well as property owners and governments, to collaborate on identifying, updating and managing risks; 
and reducing the number of Canadians who live in areas at high risk of flooding by implementing flood risk 
reduction measures and strategic retreat from high-risk areas.
Natural infrastructure can be a cost-effective way to reduce financial losses that would otherwise result 
from flooding and to create a buffer for reducing the impacts of storms in coastal regions. For example, 
naturally occurring wetlands provide storm water storage, flood reduction, water quality improvement, carbon 
sequestration and other benefits (see Ecosystem Services chapter; Moudrak et al., 2018).
Updating and proper enforcement of building codes and standards have been highly effective for reducing 
disaster losses (Porter et al., 2018; Czajkowski et al., 2017). It takes time to develop, adopt and implement 
building codes for private and public buildings, homes and infrastructure. Canada’s system includes a 
requirement to demonstrate that new approaches (such as updated codes) would result in savings that 
exceed costs over time. Many homes, buildings and infrastructure in Canada were designed and built based 
on codes established decades ago. While new construction must conform to regulatory requirements for new 
building codes, retrofitting existing structures is voluntary, unless required as part of securing a municipal 
building permit. Furthermore, the costs of retrofitting are often much higher than the cost of including climate 
resilience features in a new home.
In this regard, ICLR and its 120 member insurers provide homeowners with guidance for assessing the risk 
of damage and advice on how to retrofit existing structures to address most climate risks. Furthermore, 
with the increasing flood risks in Canada, efforts are under way through the ICCA to provide guidelines and 
standards for resilient communities (Moudrak and Feltmate, 2019a), commercial buildings (Moudrak and 
Feltmate, 2019b) and residential housing (Evans and Feltmate, 2019). The ICCA has developed formal flood 
protection training programs for home inspectors and insurance brokers to enable and expedite the adoption 
of flood protection measures (ICCA, n.d.). The insurance industry has also begun to offer reduced insurance 
premiums to homeowners who retrofit their homes against floods in some areas (Grzadkowska, 2019). 
Another example is The Atmospheric Fund, a non-profit created by the City of Toronto Council in 1991, which 
finances local initiatives to combat climate change and improve air quality in Toronto through a variety of 
programs, including retrofitting (The Atmospheric Fund, 2020).
Much of Canada’s core public infrastructure is operating beyond its expected lifecycle and needs replacement 
or retrofitting (Canadian Infrastructure Report Card, 2019). The Government of Canada has launched 
initiatives to support investments in climate-resilient infrastructure, such as the Disaster Mitigation and 
Adaptation Fund (2018), a $2 billion program to support infrastructure projects that improve resilience against 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 599 
natural hazards (Infrastructure Canada, 2018). In 2019, the Government of Canada implemented the Climate 
Lens for infrastructure projects in certain programs, which requires project proponents to undertake a GHG 
emissions reduction and/or climate resilience assessment (Infrastructure Canada, 2019). Engineers Canada, 
with support from the Government of Canada, developed the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability 
Committee (PIEVC) protocol, a popular tool that is now managed by the ICLR, the Climate Risk Institute and 
GIZ GmbH. There is a need, however, for more to be done in this area (Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance, 
2019), and significant opportunities exist for improving the climate resilience of Canada’s infrastructure.
Local governments are important leaders in the promotion of climate resilience. ICLR has published 60 case 
studies of local action in Canada consistent with best practices in climate resilience. The Institute’s “Cities 
Adapt: Celebrating Local Leadership” case studies focused on extreme rainfall, extreme heat and extreme 
weather (Kovacs et al., 2018; Guilbault et al., 2016; Kovacs et al., 2014).
8.5.2.3 Reconstruction
Risk-informed land-use planning by local governments is another important tool for reducing risks related to 
climate change. This planning can take the form of re-zoning, banning new construction, home buyouts in 
high-risk zones, incentives to relocate existing assets to lower-risk zones and restoring natural infrastructure.
Reconstruction decisions after extreme events provide an opportunity to rebuild in more resilient ways. This 
includes rebuilding according to updated building codes and other climate resilience standards, and may even 
involve rebuilding in a lower-risk location. For example, following the spring 2019 floods, the Government 
of Canada and the Government of Quebec supported the relocation of homes from high-risk zones in the 
province of Quebec. The government offered building buybacks for residential homes, placed a limit on the 
DFAA payouts and encouraged private insurance markets to play a larger role (Blewett, 2019; Lau, 2019). 
However, some buyback programs have been subject to controversies (CBC News, 2019). Re-zoning could 
also be politically difficult after a disaster.
8.5.2.4 Early warning and emergency preparedness
Early warnings linked to emergency preparedness enable action to minimize injuries and loss of life through 
evacuations, proper sheltering and avoidance of the area at risk. They can also reduce damage to property 
by, for example, moving valuable assets to safer locations. Early warnings can also expedite response to, and 
recovery from, disaster events, activate business continuity plans and speed up insurance claim payments 
(Golnaraghi, 2012).
In Canada, various federal, provincial and territorial agencies are responsible for warnings for different 
hazards. Although the responsibility for early warning may rest with one organization, it is frequently 
supported by information provided by multiple organizations working across jurisdictional domains. This 
model works well only if there is a strong inter-agency coordination mechanism, particularly in relation to 
appropriate data sharing and data analytics platforms (Bednar et al., 2019, 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 600 
Municipal and provincial authorities, in coordination with Public Safety Canada, are responsible for 
implementing emergency preparedness measures on the ground. A number of other stakeholders, such 
as the private sector, the media and community-based non-profit organizations, play a critical role in the 
dissemination of alerts and warning, raising awareness and promoting actions at the community level. 
Overall, there is significant room to enhance preparedness by using scientific advancements that would allow 
for a longer lead-time to anticipate and prepare for events and foster cooperation between agencies (Henstra 
and Thistlethwaite, 2017; Shrubsole et al., 2003).
8.5.2.5 Risk financing and risk transfer (insurance and alternative risk transfer)
A number of financial incentives, including insurance premium discounts and grants for climate resilience 
activities, can also encourage cost-effective investments in risk reduction (Porter et al., 2018; Multihazard 
Mitigation Council and Council on Finance, Insurance and Real Estate, 2015). Beyond incentivizing 
investments in climate resilience, disaster insurance coverage plays an important role in expediting recovery 
efforts to return communities to normalcy. Studies find that countries with lower insurance penetration 
experience larger declines in economic output and greater fiscal strain after a disaster than countries with 
higher insurance penetration (Wolfrom and Yokoi-Arai, 2016; von Peter et al., 2013). On average, disasters 
have no lasting impact on a fully insured economy, but generate a 2.5% cumulated loss in output over 10 
years in uninsured economies (von Peter et al., 2013).
The insurance industry provides specialized risk transfer solutions to build financial resilience to impacts 
of extreme events such as floods, forest fires, severe wind and winter storms, to incentivize reduction of 
GHG emissions and to encourage entrepreneurship for green and clean technologies. In some regions of the 
world outside of Canada, the insurance industry is also providing innovative products to protect government 
budgets following disasters, including regional pools and disaster insurance (The Geneva Association, 2018a).
In Canada, insurance companies are active in a number of areas, including:
•	
Developing and offering a wide range of traditional and specialized products for protecting 
against extreme events such as storms, wildfires and floods; Green Building Restoration 
Insurance; and Green Construction coverage;
•	
Developing methods to improve insurance coverage;
•	
Offering insurance products with incentives for risk reduction and carbon footprint reduction;
•	
Launching centres of excellence on adaptation and investing in bilateral and multilateral research 
on climate change resilience and adaptation (such as the ICLR, the ICCA and Partners for Action);
•	
Sharing actionable guidelines on risk reduction and prevention for government, businesses, 
communities and householders based on their research;
•	
Investing in the latest technologies to enhance their capacities to expedite assessments and 
claim payouts after an event; and
•	
On the asset management side, Canadian life insurers are investing in bonds, which finance GHG 
emissions reduction and adaptation projects.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 601 
In Canada, the insurance industry is also actively engaging with the government at the federal, provincial and 
municipal levels to improve societal resilience to floods and wildfires, as well as exploring opportunities for 
public‒private partnerships to enhance insurability and raise long-term capital for climate-resilient and low-
carbon infrastructure. For example, through the National Working Group on Financial Risk of Flooding, the 
industry is sharing flood risk maps, providing guidelines for reducing flood risks, and developing solutions for 
managing the financial risk of flooding for high-risk residential homes (IBC, 2019b).
8.6 Climate litigation is increasing against 
governments in Canada 
Climate change litigation is increasing against governments and their agencies in Canada. There is 
growing litigation seeking to compel or change governmental action, approvals or decisions, as well as 
lawsuits seeking financial compensation related to failure to adapt infrastructure.
Major court decisions in Canada and elsewhere have accepted the scientific evidence of anthropogenic climate 
change and associated physical risks. Some foreign courts have ruled in favour of climate plaintiffs to direct 
governments to take action on climate change mitigation or adaptation, and governments in Canada are 
facing similar strategic litigation. At the same time, interest groups (and some governments) have challenged 
the validity of climate-related laws, and are increasingly seeking judicial review or appeals of regulatory or 
administrative approvals granted for new projects or proposals that may increase downstream and upstream 
GHG emissions. Canadian plaintiffs have also increasingly sued for damages related to severe weather events 
and infrastructure failure. Governments and their agencies that own and operate infrastructure must manage 
potential liability related to failure to adapt infrastructure to climate change.
8.6.1 Introduction
Climate litigation is litigation in which climate change and its impacts are a key or major contributing 
consideration. It has proliferated globally, as is evident in the databases maintained by the Sabin Center for 
Climate Change Law at Columbia Law School and by the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change 
and the Environment at the London School of Economics (these “Climate Databases” were last accessed on 
September 30, 2020). The majority of global climate litigation involves governments and their agencies as 
defendants, and litigation in Canada is no exception (see Figure 8.5).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 602 
Figure 8.5: Canadian jurisdictions with ongoing climate litigation plaintiffs, as of September 30, 2020. Data 
source: Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, 2020; Sabin Center for Climate 
Change Law, 2020.
8.6.2 Litigation to compel government action
Strategic litigation intended to compel certain government actions has increased worldwide since a Dutch 
interest group won a decision in 2015 ordering the Dutch Government to increase its national emissions 
reduction target to be consistent with the IPCC’s recommendations (Urgenda Foundation v. The State of 
Netherlands). The Dutch Court found that the state had a duty of care to its citizens to take climate change 
mitigation measures based on, among other things, the Dutch Constitution and the European Convention 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 603 
on Human Rights (to which the Netherlands is a signatory). This rights-based reasoning was echoed three 
months later in Pakistan when the Lahore High Court ordered Pakistan to implement the climate change 
adaptation plan that it had developed, ruling that a delay offended basic rights to life, human dignity, property 
and information under its Constitution (Leghari v. Federation of Pakistan).
Urgenda was upheld on appeal in 2018, and ultimately upheld by the Dutch Supreme Court in December 2019 
(Urgenda Foundation v. The State of Netherlands). The Courts found that the Dutch Government owed a duty 
of care to its citizens under the right to life and the right to private and family life provisions of the European 
Convention on Human Rights. They concluded that the Dutch Government had a duty to take reasonable 
concrete actions in the face of the “real threat of dangerous climate change.”
Spurred by these decisions, Canadian plaintiffs had launched four separate rights-based lawsuits as of 
September 30, 2020. Prior to 2018, there were only two Canadian cases in which courts were asked to review 
alleged climate change inaction on the part of the federal government. The first case (Friends of the Earth 
v. Governor General in Council of Canada) was in connection with alleged breaches of the Kyoto Protocol 
Implementation Act, and the second (Turp v. Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada) was related 
to the Government’s decision to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol. In the first case, the Court decided that 
the Kyoto legislation did not allow for substantive judicial review and did not create a mandatory duty to 
regulate. In Turp, the Court deemed that, in the absence of a challenge under the Canadian Charter of Rights 
and Freedoms, a decision made in the exercise of prerogative powers relating to international treaties was 
legislative in nature. Both cases reflected Canadian constitutional law principles whereby the making of 
laws, the exercise of a government’s policy discretion embedded in laws and the repeal of laws are inherently 
political decisions (Hogg, 2007). Such decisions are generally protected from judicial review or from 
negligence claims by the principle of legislative immunity.
In November 2018, an interest group purporting to represent Quebec citizens aged 35 and under filed a class 
action lawsuit in Quebec against the Government of Canada (Environnement Jeunesse c. Procureur général 
du Canada). The claim sought a declaration that the Government’s inaction on climate change had infringed 
their basic rights to “life, liberty and security of person” and to “equality” (“Charter rights”) under both the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the Quebec Charter of Human Rights and Freedoms, and 
infringed their “right to live in a healthful environment in which biodiversity is preserved” under the Quebec 
Charter. The claim also sought punitive damages. In July 2019, the Quebec Supreme Court ruled that the case 
was not properly framed as a class action; at the same time, however, it stated that the alleged violations of 
the Canadian and Quebec Charters were justiciable issues (i.e., not legislative or political).
Subsequently, a claim was brought by 15 youths in October 2019 in Federal Court alleging that the 
Government of Canada has caused, contributed to and allowed an unacceptably high level of GHG emissions; 
adopted, and then failed to meet, unacceptably low GHG emissions reductions targets; and actively facilitated 
industries and activities involving fossil fuels that emit a high level of GHG emissions incompatible with 
a stable climate system (La Rose et. al. v. Her Majesty the Queen). The plaintiffs claim that these alleged 
actions and inactions infringed their Charter rights and that the Government of Canada has a constitutional 
and common law obligation to protect the integrity of common natural resources that are fundamental to 
human life and liberty. The latter alleged obligation, known as the public trust doctrine, has not previously 
been formally applied by Canadian Courts (Burns Bog Conservation Society v. Canada). The plaintiffs are 
seeking that the Government acknowledge its obligations and “implement an enforceable climate recovery 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 604 
plan.” In February 2020, the federal government filed its statement of defence in response to this claim which, 
among other things, cited and accepted the findings of Canada’s Changing Climate Report. The federal 
government argued that the plaintiffs do not have sufficient connection to the issue to bring the claim, that 
the claims are not justiciable and that they do not give rise to valid causes of action under the Constitution or 
Charter rights or pursuant to common law.
An additional claim was brought in November 2019 by seven youths in the Ontario Superior Court. These 
plaintiffs allege that the Government of Ontario violated their Charter rights by abdicating its responsibility 
to address climate change. The plaintiffs are seeking, among other things, declarations that Ontario’s current 
target violates the Charter rights of youth and future generations, and that the Canadian Charter of Rights 
includes the right to a stable climate system and an order requiring Ontario to adopt more aggressive 
emissions reduction targets (Mathur et al v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario). In April 2020, the 
Government of Ontario responded by filing a notice of application to dismiss. The Government of Ontario 
argued that the plaintiffs do not have standing, that the issues raised and relief sought are not justiciable, 
that the Charter does not include the right to a stable climate system and that the allegations of harm are 
incapable of being proven.
In February 2020, two hereditary chiefs of the British Columbia Wet’suwet’en First Nation brought a 
representative action in Federal Court alleging that the Government of Canada’s inaction on climate change, 
including its approval of GHG-emitting infrastructure projects, infringes their constituents’ Charter rights 
and is in breach of the Government’s duty under the Constitution Act to make laws for “peace, order, and 
good government” (Lho’imggin et al. v. Her Majesty the Queen). The plaintiffs are seeking an order requiring 
the Government to amend each of its environmental assessment statutes that apply to extant high GHG-
emitting projects to allow project approval to be cancelled if Canada is unable to meet its Paris Agreement 
commitments or considers climate change to be a national emergency, as well as an order requiring the 
Government to complete an independent annual account of its cumulative GHG emissions in a format that 
allows assessment against its GHG reduction commitments.
8.6.3 Litigation seeking to change government actions, approvals or 
decisions
Canadian governments and their agencies have faced increasing litigation since 2015 related to approvals or 
permits granted for new infrastructure projects or proposals that may increase upstream or downstream GHG 
emissions. In 2015, an interest group challenged two permitting decisions regarding the proposed expansion 
of a coal handling and storage operation in British Columbia (Voters Taking Action on Climate Change v. 
Energy and Mines of British Columbia). The Court held that the group lacked standing. In another high-profile 
situation, some municipalities and interest groups sought judicial review of the 2016 approval of the Trans 
Mountain pipeline expansion, including, in one unsuccessful case, by asking that the National Energy Board 
consider the impacts of climate change in its assessment (Tsleil-Waututh Nation v. Attorney General of 
Canada). After the 2016 approval was quashed on other grounds in 2018 and the pipeline assets were sold to 
the federal government, a new approval was granted in June 2019. A number of groups sought judicial review 
of this decision, making climate change-related arguments, among others, but none of the climate-related 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 605 
claims were permitted to proceed to the Supreme Court of Canada. Climate-related arguments also surfaced 
in the approval process for the Coastal GasLink Project, and, in part, prompted Lho’imggin (Lho’imggin et al. 
v. Her Majesty the Queen). Similar concerns led to an application launched in May 2020 for judicial review of 
a regional assessment on the impacts of exploratory drilling off the coast of Newfoundland and Labrador, 
which was relied on by the Impact Assessment Agency of Canada (Sierra Club Canada Foundation v. Canada 
(Environment and Climate Change Canada)).
In another case seeking to change a government decision, an interest group filed an application alleging that 
the Government of Ontario failed to consult the public under Ontario’s Environmental Bill of Rights when it 
revoked the regulations under Ontario’s cap and trade program in 2018. The Superior Court of Ontario held in 
2019 that the failure to consult was illegal (Greenpeace Canada v. Minister of the Environment, Conservation 
and Parks), but did not mandate remedial action.
Parties that are unhappy with the consequences of new climate-related laws and regulations have also 
brought litigation to challenge them. Syncrude Canada unsuccessfully challenged the validity of the 
Renewable Fuels Regulations under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act (Syncrude Canada Ltd. v. 
Attorney General of Canada). The purpose of the regulations, which prescribed that a certain percentage 
of diesel fuels must be renewable fuel, was to reduce GHG emissions. More recently, certain provinces 
challenged federal climate legislation through constitutional references in relation to the federal carbon 
pricing scheme, including the carbon tax and backstop GHG emissions pricing legislation. There were three 
provincial Court of Appeal decisions. The majority of the Court in both Saskatchewan and Ontario, for slightly 
different reasons, favoured the constitutionality of the legislation. The majority of the Court of Appeal in 
Alberta found to the contrary. Ultimately, the decisions were appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada. All of 
the Appeal Court decisions expressly accepted the serious issue of anthropogenic climate change in Canada, 
physical risk and the need for immediate action to control climate change risk (Reference re Greenhouse Gas 
Pollution Pricing Act, 2019 SKCA 40; Reference re Greenhouse Gas Pollution Pricing Act, 2019 ONCA 544; 
Reference re Greenhouse Gas Pollution Pricing Act, 2019 ABCA 283).
8.6.4 Litigation relating to failure to adapt infrastructure
Litigation is increasingly seen in Canada and elsewhere (Adler, 2018; Gundlach and Klein, 2018; Moran and 
Mihaly, 2018; Mahony, 2020) relating to failure to adapt infrastructure to increasingly foreseeable physical 
risks and impacts of climate change. Flood-related lawsuits against Canadian provinces, municipalities, 
watershed managers (e.g., conservation authorities) and others are on the rise (Moudrak and Feltmate, 
2019a). These include class actions brought against the cities of Thunder Bay and Stratford, ON, alleging 
negligence in connection with the design, construction, inspection, maintenance and repair of storm water 
and sewage facilities, and against the Governments of Manitoba and Ontario, alleging negligence and 
nuisance in connection with water control structure management (Moudrak and Feltmate, 2019a). Class 
action and individual lawsuits were also brought in Quebec against several municipalities and the Government 
of Quebec, alleging negligence in connection with the 2017 and 2019 spring floods in the province (Richard 
Lauzon c. Muncipalité Régionale du Comté (MRC) de Deux-Montagnes, Ville de Sainte-Marthe-sur-le-lac, 
Procureur Général du Québec).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 606 
Lawsuits of these types in Canada and elsewhere are drawing increasingly on advancements in climate 
change attribution science (Burger et al., 2020; Setzer and Vanhala, 2019; Marjanac and Patton, 2018). 
With the changing climate, more frequent and severe weather events in Canada (Zhang, et al. 2019) could 
foreseeably stress or damage infrastructure and shorten its anticipated useful life. An Ontario Court, for 
example, found that the risks of potholes and road washouts were heightened by freeze/thaw cycles and 
heavy rainfall (Bishop v. Regional Municipality of Durham). Impacts from incremental, slow-onset or chronic 
climate-related events may do the same. There may also be cascading and cumulative effects. This creates 
the potential for personal injury, health and property damage. Injured parties who do not have insurance 
coverage or access to disaster relief or special compensatory funds may bring lawsuits seeking financial 
compensation (i.e., damages) under common law principles of negligence or nuisance.
In a negligence claim, the plaintiff must establish, among other things, that the defendant owed the injured 
party a duty of care and committed an act or an omission that breached a reasonable standard of care 
(i.e., that it should have foreseen the effects of climate change with respect to infrastructure and made 
appropriate decisions, but did not do so). A duty of care by a government may be established by a statute, 
and the statute might also create a right to damages for anyone injured. For example, municipal legislation 
in some provinces establishes a duty of care and a statutory right to damages in connection with the 
maintenance of roads. If the statute does not create an express duty of care, the context will be examined 
to see if a prima facie duty of care can be established. If it can, this duty will generally be upheld if the 
government’s decision(s) relating to the infrastructure are operational decisions and not policy decisions, 
which are protected by the legislative immunity principle (Cooper v. Hobart). The line between policy 
decisions and operational decisions is not always clear; in common law, however, obligations to maintain 
infrastructure in a specific manner, to effect repairs or to perform regular inspections may be considered to 
be operational. In contrast, decisions to build new infrastructure as part of adaptation planning—where social, 
economic and political factors are at play—will likely be considered as policy decisions. The line between 
these types of decisions may also be modified by statute (e.g., Crown Liability and Proceedings Act, 2019, 
SO 2019, c 7, Sch 17). A nuisance claim against a government requires the plaintiff to show that owned 
or operated infrastructure (e.g., dams and other water-control structures) caused actual physical damage 
to another party’s land, or substantially and unreasonably interfered with the use of that land (Anderson v. 
Manitoba). If the nuisance affects the public, such as blocking a public highway, it may be termed a public 
nuisance (Linden and Feldthusen, 2007). In a nuisance claim, it is not relevant whether actions or decisions 
with respect to the infrastructure are policy or operational.
A government may have a defence against a negligence or nuisance claim if a relevant statute clearly limits 
or excludes government liability in the circumstances. Some provincial and municipal laws provide such 
defences. For example, legislation in some provinces provides that a municipality cannot be found liable for 
nuisance, generally or for specific types of events that could be classified as nuisance (i.e., flooding) (e.g., 
The Municipal Act, S.O. 2001.c.25, s. 449(1) and the Local Government Act, RSBC 2015, c.1, s. 744). There 
may also be a “statutory authority” defence if the damage causing the claim is the inevitable consequence 
of carrying out an undertaking under statutory authority. Ultimately, where a government wishes to limit its 
liability (and, in the case of a province, that of its municipalities) with respect to common law claims (e.g., 
overland flooding), it can enact or amend legislation to this effect. For example, the Government of Ontario 
amended the Municipal Act (Ontario) to exclude liability for nuisance related to the escape of water or sewage 
from sewage or water works.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 607 
The concept of building climate resilience through infrastructure is nevertheless an important pillar of 
adaptation. Ultimately, litigation risk in this context should be seen as a driver of climate change adaptation.
8.7 Climate litigation against the private sector 
is a potential risk 
While there has been virtually no climate litigation in Canada against private sector companies, Canadian 
companies are increasingly assessing potential climate litigation risks.
Potential litigation risks for the private sector stem from failing to properly disclose climate change-related 
risks, failing to adapt infrastructure in light of physical risks and, in some cases, for allegedly contributing 
to climate change and related damage. Litigation risks of this nature have become well known as a result 
of litigation in the United States and elsewhere. Litigation, even if unsuccessful against a company, may be 
extremely costly to the company and its insurers, may have significant reputational implications and could 
potentially impact the company’s access to capital. Boards and senior management responsible for risk 
management are increasingly considering climate-related litigation as a component of that risk.
8.7.1 Potential for disclosure liability
Publicly traded companies may incur liability under applicable securities laws in relation to the disclosure or 
non-disclosure of material risks, including climate change-related risks (Canadian Securities Administrators, 
2018). These (non-)disclosures may include physical and transition risks, their financial impacts and steps 
taken to mitigate or adapt to them (Canadian Securities Administrators, 2019).
Canadian securities regulators have a wide variety of powers to prosecute companies, their directors and 
responsible officers for disclosure offences. Such offences may include breaches of the rules requiring 
disclosure of material information in continuous disclosure documents (such as management’s discussion 
and analysis, or annual information forms). More broadly, these also include cases where offering documents, 
financial statements or continuous disclosure documents contain statements that are misleading or untrue, 
or do not state a fact that is required to be stated or that is necessary to ensure that the statements are not 
misleading (e.g., Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. S5, as amended, [“OSA”] Part XXII). These statements are 
judged according to the standard of materiality at the time and in light of the circumstances in which the 
statements were made. Securities regulators and Canadian courts usually apply the “reasonable investor 
standard”—information would likely be considered material if a reasonable investor’s decision about whether 
or not to buy, hold or sell securities is likely to be influenced or changed if the information is omitted or 
misstated (e.g., OSA, Form 51-102 F2 at Part (1) e.).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 608 
Issuers and their directors and responsible officers may also be sued by investors for damages under the civil 
liability provisions of provincial securities laws (e.g., OSA, Part XXIII). This may occur if investors purchase 
securities in an offering in which the offering document contains a “misrepresentation.” It may also occur 
where investors buy or sell already issued securities in the secondary market (i.e., through a stock exchange) 
if, at the time of their purchase or sale, either 1) the company has failed to disclose a “material change” 
in its business, operations or capital in compliance with securities laws; or 2) its continuous disclosure 
documents, other documents made generally available to investors (including website disclosures, corporate 
responsibility, climate resilience or sustainability reports) or public oral statements made on behalf of the 
company (i.e., by management or directors) contain a “misrepresentation”. A “misrepresentation” is an untrue 
statement of a “material fact” or an omission to state a “material fact” that is required to be stated or that is 
necessary to ensure that a statement is not misleading in light of the circumstances in which it was made. 
Whether a change or a fact is “material” is measured by a “market impact” test: would that change or fact 
reasonably be expected to have a significant effect on the market price or value of the relevant securities? 
The answer to the legal question regarding what climate change-related information may be material for a 
“reasonable investor” or constitute a “material fact” is likely evolving, and will continue to do so as climate 
change impacts evolve.
As of September 30, 2020, no climate-related disclosure lawsuits had emerged against issuers in Canada, but 
the possibility of such claims was the subject of academic comment (Sarra and Williams, 2018; Williams and 
Routliff, 2017). In their analyses, the authors identified potential types of disclosure claims that might surface 
in Canada: failure to discuss financially material risks of the transition to low-carbon strategies (included 
as required by regulatory and societal factors); material misstatements of the value of a company’s assets 
in light of “stranded assets” (i.e., those too costly to develop or operate) and unburnable carbon; or material 
misstatements relating to the risks of continued extraction and use of a high-carbon product, such as oil, gas 
or coal.
Outside of Canada, lawsuits alleging failure to disclose and misstatements have been brought in Australia 
and the United States. In several lawsuits against Exxon Mobil Corporation in the U.S., for example, it has 
been alleged that Exxon made material misrepresentations in its continuous disclosure documents about 
how it managed the risks of climate change in its investments and operations. The first such high-profile case 
(People of the State of New York v. Exxon Mobil Corporation), which focused on the period 2013‒2016, was 
decided in Exxon’s favour in December 2019. The New York Supreme Court determined, on the specific facts 
before it, that there was no proof of material misrepresentations (determined with respect to the "reasonable 
investor" standard under U.S. securities laws, which is similar to that in Canada) and there was no evidence 
that the impugned disclosure had any market impact. The decision was not appealed. Some actions have 
been brought in connection with disclosure of physical risk: for example, against electrical utility companies 
in California and their underwriters. There, investors alleged misrepresentation of the companies’ exposure to 
wildfires, including the steps taken to improve and maintain infrastructure in light of known climate change 
conditions and related wildfire risks (York County v. Rambo; Barnes v. Edison International).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 609 
8.7.2 Potential for litigation related to failure to adapt infrastructure 
For companies, professional firms and individuals that develop, design, build, own, operate, maintain or repair 
infrastructure, there are climate change-related litigation risks to adapt infrastructure, similar to the risks 
described earlier in this chapter for government infrastructure owners and operators. The risk of negligence 
or nuisance litigation against private sector actors is higher, however, than it is for governments, as there is 
no corresponding immunity principle and there are rarely statutory limitations of liability for the private sector. 
Infrastructure owners and design professionals are increasingly limiting legal and physical risks to their 
facilities by planning for impacts of climate change over the lifetime of their facilities, including by conducting 
climate vulnerability assessments and selecting design features, alternatives, site location and risk reduction 
measures accordingly (Goldstein et al., 2019; Adler, 2018; Gundlach and Klein, 2018).
8.7.3 Litigation alleging corporate responsibility for climate change
For companies operating in energy or resource sectors, an important trend is the increasing number of 
lawsuits worldwide against major carbon producers seeking to hold them liable for their alleged responsibility 
for climate change. This trend began following a study by Richard Heede (2014) that mapped and quantified 
the cumulative emissions of the 90 largest carbon producers from 1854 to 2010—dubbed the “Carbon 
Majors”. The study was developed for lawyers seeking to legally establish a causal link between corporate 
activity and climate change (Setzer and Vanhala, 2019). It was used to launch a seminal case against a 
major German electricity producer in 2015 (Lliuya v. RWE AG), which is ongoing. The cumulative emissions 
results are updated annually (see Figure 8.6; Climate Accountability Institute, 2019), and researchers are 
collaborating with Heede to combine this work with extreme weather event attribution science (Ekwurzel, et 
al. 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 610 
Figure 8.6: a) Annual global CO2 emissions related to fossil fuel use and cement production for the period 
1810–2017 (dark blue) and attributed to 103 major carbon producers (light blue). b) Percentage of global CO2 
emissions for the period 1751–2017 produced by major carbon producers (orange) vs. unattributed emissions 
(light blue). Source: Adapted from Climate Accountability Institute, 2019.
Global CO2 emissions (metric tons)
Emissions from fossil fuel use 
and cement production
Emissions attributed to
103 major carbon producers 
1820
1840
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
2020
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0
a)
Unattributed emissions
Emissions attributed to
90 major carbon producers 
69.8%
30.2%
b)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 611 
In the United States, in particular, a significant number of cases were filed in 2017 and 2018 by major cities, 
counties, one state (Rhode Island) and the largest association of fishermen on the West Coast against a 
long list of oil, natural gas and coal companies (including Canada’s Suncor, Inc.). In 2020, during the period 
up to September 30, the states of Minnesota, Delaware and Connecticut, the county of Maui, and the cities 
of Honolulu, Washington, D.C., Hoboken, NJ, and Charleston, SC, all brought similar complaints. In these 
lawsuits, the plaintiffs are seeking damages to fund adaptation and repairs (i.e., massive infrastructure 
investments) for dealing with present and future damages from climate change. The plaintiffs have brought 
various types of claims under U.S. laws, including nuisance (public and private) and negligence claims, which 
are similar to Canadian laws. In the nuisance claims, climate change is alleged to be the nuisance and GHG 
emissions are alleged contributions to the nuisance. These U.S. lawsuits are being vigorously defended. Most 
raise complicated federal and state jurisdictional and procedural issues. The plaintiffs face significant legal 
issues, including the following: the American political question doctrine (which essentially says that political 
issues are non-justiciable), proof of causation (i.e., the link between the defendants’ behaviour and the alleged 
harm suffered by the plaintiffs) and standing.
In December 2019, the Philippines Human Rights Commission announced the completion of its well-
publicized three-year investigation into whether 47 of the world’s largest fossil fuel firms—all Carbon Majors—
could be held accountable for violating the rights of its citizens because of the damage caused by climate 
change. The Commission concluded that these companies played a clear role in anthropogenic climate 
change and could be held legally liable for its impacts in certain circumstances under Philippines civil law (In 
Re Greenpeace Southeast Asia and Others).
As of September 30, 2020, there were no Canadian lawsuits alleging corporate responsibility for climate 
change. Several municipalities in British Columbia had announced in 2019 that they were considering class 
action litigation against fossil fuel companies (Poggio, 2019), but had not proceeded. The City of Toronto 
indicated in 2019 that it was exploring litigation strategies. If a corporate responsibility case is brought in 
Canada, the analysis of the Philippines Human Rights Commission could be of interest to the court. Similarly, 
if a U.S. case is successful on the basis of legal principles similar to those in Canada, courts in Canada could 
be influenced by that reasoning and analysis.
8.8 Moving forward 
8.8.1 Knowledge gaps 
Climate-related disclosures, litigation and finance are important issues in the Canadian discussion about 
climate change. As of September 2020, a large number of Canadian companies and some municipalities are 
making climate-related disclosures, but the amount and quality may not meet the needs of stakeholders. A 
critical knowledge gap for investors in public companies is the lack of disclosure on the financial impact of 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 612 
climate change on companies and whether their strategies are resilient to climate-related risks. Currently, 
disclosure of material risks is mandatory for these companies, but there are no mandatory prescriptive 
requirements for the disclosure of climate-related risks and opportunities. Research could focus on assessing 
whether investor pressure alone may be insufficient to encourage greater disclosure of these risks and 
opportunities.
There are a number of gaps related to the financing of climate resilience and the transition to a low-carbon 
economy. The report of the Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance (2019) outlines a number of these gaps. 
There is preliminary evidence that some types of “green” finance are effective at encouraging investment in 
“green” projects, and taxonomies and information services are being developed to support such investments. 
However, it is still uncertain what combination of financial instruments and institutional supports will be 
required to significantly increase investments in climate resilience and low-carbon projects. With regard to 
investments in climate resilience specifically, evidence shows that such projects are often cost-effective, but 
it is unclear what measures are needed to encourage homeowners, business owners and owners of critical 
infrastructure to undertake them.
Climate-related litigation is increasingly occurring in Canada. Many important issues have yet to be finally 
decided. It is important that Canadian decision makers remain aware of the possibility of further climate 
litigation on climate-related matters, as virtually any legal issue related to climate change is a possible 
subject for litigation.
8.9 Conclusion 
Climate change and the impact of extreme events are important issues for many decision makers in the 
public and private sector. The public policy conversation is framed around the need to reduce GHG emissions 
and the need to adapt to minimize the adverse impacts of climate change. The conversation in the private 
sector is generally framed around managing physical and transitional climate-related risks. This framing of 
the issue presents climate change as a relevant and urgent concern for a wide range of stakeholders, and 
may encourage both private and public entities to take additional measures to adapt to climate change.
The recommendations of the TFCD have emerged as the key framework for disclosure of climate risks. Their 
adoption by Canadian companies in financial and non-financial sectors, and by governments is growing and 
the recommendations are widely endorsed by stakeholders. Over time, investors and regulators are expected 
to apply increasing pressure on companies and governments in Canada to disclose climate-related physical 
and transition risks, as well as implement other elements of TCFD, a process that will increase information for 
markets and society about specific adaptation actions that they may take.
There has been a significant increase in the Canadian and international conversation about climate finance. 
Insurance companies and governments finance most of the recovery and repair costs of physical damage 
following extreme events. These costs have risen and are projected to continue to rise. Significant funds are 
also required from public and private investors to support the transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 613 
economy. As such, climate-related risks and opportunities are especially relevant for financial institutions. 
Pension funds, banks, governments and other investors are developing their understanding and management 
of the risks and opportunities involved in investing in initiatives related to, and affected by, climate change. 
Furthermore, several obstacles to investing at scale towards a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy 
need to be addressed, including political, policy and regulatory risks, the lack of a green taxonomy and the 
lack of accessible decision-relevant data.
Private investors are developing models and other tools to assess and manage climate-related risks and 
opportunities. This includes physical and transitional risks. The objective is to better manage climate risks 
as a business issue. These tools can be applied to any industry, but the focus of several current efforts is on 
supporting decision makers in financial institutions and regulators. Also, industry-specific tools and practices 
are being developed for major emitters and energy users. Access to relevant data and better organization-
specific information about physical risks is expected to encourage greater action to increase resilience to 
climate extremes.
Investing in climate resilience could be cost-effective, and opportunities exist for governments, businesses 
and individuals to improve their resilience to physical climate risks. This involves scaling up investments and 
fostering stronger cooperation to enhance risk information and awareness, risk reduction and prevention, 
climate-resilient reconstruction, early warning and preparedness, and risk financing and risk transfer 
(including insurance) measures.
Climate-related legal action in Canada has significantly increased, directed primarily at governments. There 
are several legal initiatives seeking to force the federal and provincial governments to act on climate change 
based on alleged constitutional and common law rights. Interest groups and governments themselves 
are increasingly litigating against governments at various levels regarding policies and decisions in the 
planning context related to the transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy. Litigation will 
remain an important tool to effect changes in policies and decisions. Legal action is also increasing against 
governments in connection with infrastructure failure resulting from severe weather events. In the absence 
of insurance coverage or disaster recovery funds for those harmed, and where there are no relevant statutory 
immunity provisions, the number of such claims may increase as severe weather increases.
Legal action is increasingly also being brought against private actors in connection with severe weather 
events and infrastructure damage. Outside of Canada, many lawsuits have been directed at private 
organizations alleging a causal connection between their GHG emissions and climate-related harm. Many 
such cases are ongoing in the United States, and one international proceeding recently found 47 Carbon 
Majors responsible for the consequences of their emissions. It is possible that similar Canadian lawsuits 
could emerge. If international trends are any guide, it is also possible that civil liability actions may arise in 
Canada based on climate-related disclosure issues under provincial securities laws.
Disclosure, the development of sustainable finance and climate litigation have the potential to encourage 
adaptation to climate change. Disclosure helps businesses and governments to better understand their 
climate-related risks and opportunities, and to make business decisions that will ultimately support the 
transition to a climate-resilient and low-carbon economy. Investors can use this information to reward 
companies and regions that act to reduce their risks and take advantage of opportunities. Adaptation 
measures can be highly cost-effective in preventing future losses. Both private and public sources of funding 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 614 
will be required to finance these cost-saving measures. The potential for legal liability for failing to assess 
and disclose climate change-related risks, for failing to adapt or for mismanaging adaptation are concerns for 
governments at all levels and for businesses.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 615 
8.10 References 
Adler, D. (2018). Turning the Tide in Coastal and Riverine Energy 
Infrastructure Adaptation: Can an Emerging Wave of Litigation 
Advance Preparation for Climate Change. Oil & Gas, Natural 
Resources, and Energy Journal, 4(4), 519. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://digitalcommons.law.ou.edu/onej/vol4/iss4/2>
Adriano, L. (2019). Study: Canadian flood mapping information 
is “inadequate, incomplete, hard to locate”. Insurance 
Business Canada. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
insurancebusinessmag.com/ca/news/flood/study-canadian-
flood-mapping-information-is-inadequate-incomplete-hard-to-
locate-160498.aspx>
Anderson, N. (2019). IFRS Standards and climate-related 
disclosures. IFRS. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://cdn.ifrs.
org/-/media/feature/news/2019/november/in-brief-climate-
change-nick-anderson.pdf?la=en>
Anderson v. Manitoba, 2017 MBCA 14, 2017 CarswellMan 31, 
[2017] 4 W.W.R. 702, 275 A.C.W.S. (3d) 38, 35 C.C.L.T. (4th) 205, 
408 D.L.R. (4th) 329, 98 C.P.C. (7th) 222 (Manitoba Court of 
Appeal).
Australian Sustainable Finance Initiative (2019). Developing 
an Australian Sustainable Finance Roadmap: Progress Report. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.sustainablefinance.org.
au/s/ASFI-Progress-Report-Final.pdf>
Bank of Montreal. (2019a). Sustainable Financing Framework. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.bmo.com/ir/files/
F19%20Files/BMOSustainableFinancingFramework.pdf>
Bank of Montreal. (2019b). BMO Issues Inaugural Sustainability 
Bond. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://newsroom.bmo.
com/2019-10-21-BMO-Issues-Inaugural-Sustainability-Bond>
Barnes v. Edison International, 2:18-cv-09690 (C.D. Cal.). 
Retrieved July 2020, from <http://climatecasechart/case/
barnes-v-edison-international>
Bednar, D., Henstra, D., and McBean, G. (2019). The governance 
of climate change adaptation: are networks to blame for the 
implementation deficit? Journal of Environmental Policy & 
Planning, 21(6), 702-717. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1080/1523908X.2019.1670050>
Bednar, D., Raikes, J., and McBean, G. (2018). The governance 
of climate change adaptation in Canada. Toronto: Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://
www.iclr.org/images/CCA_Climate_change_report_2018.pdf>
Bennett, V. (2019). World’s first dedicated climate resilience 
bond, for US$ 700m, is issued by EBRD. European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.ebrd.com/news/2019/worlds-first-dedicated-
climate-resilience-bond-for-us-700m-is-issued-by-ebrd-.html>
Bishop v. Regional Municipality of Durham, 2007 CarswellOnt 
10163 (Ontario Superior Court of Justice).
Blewett, T. (2019, April 27). ‘People will lose a lot:’ Gatineau 
fighting floods alongside other Quebec communities. Ottawa 
Citizen. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://ottawacitizen.com/
news/local-news/people-will-lose-a-lot-gatineau-fighting-floods-
alongside-other-quebec-communities/>
Buberl, T. (2017). Unsustainable business is un-investable and 
uninsurable business. One Planet Summit, Axa CEO Speech. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www-axa-com.cdn.axa-
contento-118412.eu/www-axa-com%2Ff5520897-b5a6-40f3-
90bd-d5b1bf7f271b_climatesummit_ceospeech_va.pdf>
Buchner, B., Clark, A., Falconer, A., Macquarie, R., Meattle, C., 
Tolentino, R. and Wetherbee, C. (2019). Global Landscape 
of Climate Finance 2019. London: Climate Policy Initiative. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://climatepolicyinitiative.org/
publication/global-landscape-of-climate-finance-2019/>
Burger, M., Wentz, J., and Horton, R. (2020). The Law and 
Science of Climate Change Attribution. Columbia Journal of 
Environmental Law, 45(1). Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.7916/cjel.v45i1.4730>
Burns Bog Conservation Society v. Canada, 2012 CarswellNat 
3188, 2012 CarswellNat 4657, 2012 FC 1024, 2012 CF 1024, 
[2012] F.C.J. No. 1110, 221 A.C.W.S. (3d) 356, 417 F.T.R. 98 
(Eng.), 71 C.E.L.R. (3d) 118 (Federal Court).
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D. (Eds.) (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa: Government of Canada. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/>
Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership (2019a). 
Physical risk framework: Understanding the impacts of climate 
change on real estate lending and investment portfolios. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/
resources/publication-pdfs/cisl-climate-wise-physical-risk-
framework-report.pdf>
Cambridge Institute for Sustainability Leadership (2019b). 
Transition risk framework: Managing the impacts of the low 
carbon transition on infrastructure investments. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://www.cisl.cam.ac.uk/resources/publication-
pdfs/cisl-climate-wise-transition-risk-framework-report.pdf>
Canada Enterprise Emergency Funding Corporation (2020). 
Large employer emergency financing facility factsheet. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <https://www.cdev.gc.ca/leeff-factsheet/>
Canada Infrastructure Bank (n.d.). About Us. Retrieved 
September 2020, from <https://cib-bic.ca/en/about-us/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 616 
Canada Infrastructure Bank (2020). Prime Minister announces 
infrastructure plan to create jobs and grow the economy. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://cib-bic.ca/en/the-canada-
infrastructure-bank-announces-a-plan-to-create-jobs-and-grow-
the-economy/>
Canadian Infrastructure Report Card (2019). Monitoring the 
State of Canada’s Core Public Infrastructure: The Canadian 
Infrastructure Report Card 2019. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/downloads/canadian-
infrastructure-report-card-2019.pdf>
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices (2020). Charting Our 
Course: Bringing clarity to Canada’s climate policy choices 
on the journey to 2050. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://
climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/01/FINAL_
Charting-Our-Course.pdf>
Canadian Intergovernmental Conference Secretariat (2018). 
NEWS RELEASE – Federal/Provincial/Territorial Ministers met 
to Discuss Emergency Management. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://scics.ca/en/product-produit/news-release-federal-
provincial-territorial-ministers-met-to-discuss-emergency-
management/>
Canadian Securities Administrators (2010). CSA Staff Notice 
51-333: Environment Reporting Guidance. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://www.osc.gov.on.ca/documents/en/Securities-
Category5/csa_20101027_51-333_environmental-reporting.pdf>
Canadian Securities Administrators (2018). CSA Staff Notice 
51-354: Report on Climate change-related Disclosure Project. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.osc.gov.on.ca/en/
SecuritiesLaw_csa_20180405_51-354_disclosure-project.htm>
Canadian Securities Administrators (2019). CSA Staff Notice 
51-358: Reporting of Climate Change-related Risks. Retrieved 
July 2020 from <https://www.osc.gov.on.ca/documents/en/
Securities-Category5/csa_20190801_51-358_reporting-of-
climate-change-related-risks.pdf>
Canadian Water Network and Insurance Bureau of Canada 
(2019). Improving Flood Risk Evaluation through Cross-Sector 
Sharing of Richer Data. Retrieved July 2020, from <http://cwn-
rce.ca/wp-content/uploads/CWN-IBC-Improving-Flood-Risk-
Evaluation.pdf>
Carney, M. (2019). A New Horizon. Retrieved from Bank of 
England: <https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2019/
mark-carney-speech-at-european-commission-high-level-
conference-brussels>
CatIQ (n.d.). Retrieved September, 2020 from: <www.catiq.com>
CBC News (2019). High River wants to buy flood homes back 
from the province. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.cbc.
ca/news/canada/calgary/high-river-homes-flood-mitigation-buy-
back-1.4972863>
CCA [Council of Canadian Academies] (2019). Canada’s Top 
Climate Change Risks. Ottawa: The Expert Panel on Climate 
Change Risks and Adaptation Potential, Council of Canadian 
Academies. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://cca-reports.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-top-climate-
change-risks.pdf>
CDP (2020). What we do. Retrieved September 2020, from 
<https://www.cdp.net/en/info/about-us/what-we-do>
Circé, M., Da Silva, L., Boyer-Villemaire, U., Duff, G., Desjarlais, 
C. and Morneau, F. (2016). Cost-Benefit Analysis for Adaptation 
Option in Quebec’s Coastal Areas - Synthesis Report. Montréal: 
Ouranos. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.ouranos.ca/
publication-scientifique/Synthesis-Report-Qc.pdf>
City of Ottawa (n.d.). Investor Relations. Retrieved April 2020, 
from <https://ottawa.ca/en/business/doing-business-city/
investor-relations#green-bonds>
City of Vancouver (2018). City of Vancouver - Green Bond 
Program. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://vancouver.ca/your-
government/investor-relations.aspx>
Climate Accountability Institute (2019). Carbon Majors: Update 
of top twenty companies 1965–2017. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<http://climateaccountability.org/pdf/CAI%20PressRelease%20
OA%20Dec19c.pdf>
Climate Action 100+ (2019). 2019 Progress Report. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <https://climateaction100.files.wordpress.
com/2019/10/progressreport2019.pdf>
Climate Bonds Initiative (2019). Green bonds: The state of 
the market 2018. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
climatebonds.net/resources/reports/green-bonds-state-
market-2018>
Climate Bonds Initiative (2020). Explaining Green Bonds. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.climatebonds.net/
market/explaining-green-bonds>
Cooper v. Hobart, Cooper v. Hobart, 2001 CarswellBC 2502, 2001 
CarswellBC 2503, 2001 SCC 79, 2001 CSC 79, [2001] 3 S.C.R. 
537, [2001] B.C.W.L.D. 1084, [2001] S.C.J. No. 76, [2001] B.C.T.C. 
215, [2002] 1 W.W.R. 221, 110 A.C.W.S. (3d) 943, 160 B.C.A.C. 
268, 206 D.L.R. (4th) (Supreme Court of Canada).
Corporate Knights and the Council for Clean Capitalism 
(2018). Clean Financing for Heavy Industry. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://www.corporateknights.com/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/Clean-Transition-Project-Categories-Draft.pdf>
CPA [Chartered Professional Accountants] Canada (2019a). 
Progressive Investors and Corporate Disclosure – The 
Unstoppable Transition to a Resilient, Low Carbon Economy. 
Toronto. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.cpacanada.
ca/-/media/site/operational/rg-research-guidance-and-support/
docs/02097-rg-progressive-investors-corporate-disclosure-
interviews-april-2019.pdf?la=en&hash=C5C6377D4F6DD33EE1
1E07CDEB8778CCB1B4C2F5>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 617 
CPA [Chartered Professional Accountants] (2019b). Climate-
Related Reporting in the Mining Sector. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/business-and-accounting-
resources/financial-and-non-financial-reporting/sustainability-
environmental-and-social-reporting/publications/climate-
related-reporting-in-the-mining-sector>
CPA [Chartered Professional Accountants] (2019c). Climate-
Related Reporting in the Energy Sector. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/business-and-accounting-
resources/financial-and-non-financial-reporting/sustainability-
environmental-and-social-reporting/publications/climate-
related-reporting-in-the-energy-sector>
CPA [Chartered Professional Accountants] (2019d). Enhancing 
Climate-related Disclosure by Cities: A Guide to Adopting 
the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related 
Financial Disclosures (TCFD). Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/business-and-accounting-
resources/financial-and-non-financial-reporting/sustainability-
environmental-and-social-reporting/publications/tcfd-guide-for-
cities>
CPA [Chartered Professional Accountants] (2020). Summary 
Report: Study of Climate-related Disclosure by Canadian Public 
Companies. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.cpacanada.
ca/-/media/site/operational/rg-research-guidance-and-support/
docs/02370-rg-study-climate-related-disclosures-summary-
report-feb-2020.pdf>
Crown Liability and Proceedings Act, 2019, SO 2019, c 7, Sch 17. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/
eng/acts/c-50/>
Canadian Standards Authority Group (2020). Defining Green 
& Transition Finance in Canada. Retrieved March 2020, from 
<https://www.csagroup.org/news/defining-green-transition-
finance-in-canada/>
Czajkowski, J., Simmons, K. M. and Done, J. M. (2017). 
Demonstrating the Intensive Benefit to the Local Implementation 
of a Statewide Building Code. Risk Management and Insurance 
Review, 20(3), 363-390. Retireved July 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/rmir.12086>
Department of Finance Canada (2019). Backgrounder: 
Transition to a Clean Economy. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
department-finance/news/2019/06/backgrounder-transition-to-
a-clean-economy.html>
Ekwurzel, B., Boneham, J., Dalton, M. W., Heede, R., Mera, R. 
J., Allen, M. R. and Frumhoff, P. C. (2017). The rise in global 
atmospheric CO2, surface temperature, and sea level from 
emissions traced to major carbon producers. Climate Change, 
144(4), 579-590. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-017-1978-0>
Environnement Jeunesse c. Procureur général du Canada, 2019 
CarswellQue 6311, 2019 QCCS 2885, 29 C.E.L.R. (4th) 313, 
308 A.C.W.S. (3d) 775, EYB 2019-313892 (Cour supérieure du 
Québec). Retrieved July 2020, from <http://climatecasechart.
com/non-us-case/environnement-jeunesse-v-canadian-
government/> 
EU High-Level Expert Group on Sustainable Finance (2018). 
Final report 2018 by the High-Level Expert Group on Sustainable 
Finance. European Commission. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/180131-sustainable-
finance-report_en>
EU Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance (2020). 
Taxonomy: Final report of the Technical Expert Group on 
Sustainable Finance. European Commission. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://ec.europa.eu/knowledge4policy/publication/
sustainable-finance-teg-final-report-eu-taxonomy_en>
Evans, C. and Feltmate, B. (2019). Water on the Rise: 
Protecting Canadian Homes from the Growing Threat of 
Flooding. University of Waterloo, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/
Home-Flood-Protection-Program-Report-1.pdf>
Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance (2018). Interim Report of 
the Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance. Gatineau: Environment 
and Climate Change Canada. Retrieved July 2020, from <http://
publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.863536&sl=0>
Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance (2019). Final Report of the 
Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance: Mobilizing Finance for 
Sustainable Growth. Gatineau: Environment and Climate Change 
Canada. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/climate-change/expert-
panel-sustainable-finance.html>
Feltmate, B., Moudrak, N., Bakos, K. and Schofield, B. (2020). 
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation. University of 
Waterloo, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2020/03/Factoring-Climate-Risk-into-Financial-
Valuation.pdf>
Flavelle, C. (2019, July 24). Moody’s Buys Climate Data Firm, 
Signaling New Scrutiny of Climate Risks. The New York 
Times. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.nytimes.
com/2019/07/24/climate/moodys-ratings-climate-change-data.
html>
Friends of the Earth v. Governor General in Council of Canada, 
2008 FC 1183, 2008 CF 1183, 2008 CarswellNat 3763, 2008 
CarswellNat 5075, [2008] F.C.J. No. 1464, [2009] 3 F.C.R. 201, 
170 A.C.W.S. (3d) 438, 299 D.L.R. (4th) 583, 336 F.T.R. 117 
(Eng.), 39 C.E.L.R. (3d) 191, 93 Admin. L.R. (4th) 18 (Federal 
Court).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 618 
Global Commission on Adaptation (2019). Adapt Now: a Global 
Call for Leadership on Climate Resilience. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://cdn.gca.org/assets/2019-09/GlobalCommission_
Report_FINAL.pdf>
Goldstein, A., Turner, W., Gladstone, J., and Hole, D. (2019). The 
private sector’s climate change risk and adaptation blind spots. 
Nature Climate Change, 9, 18-25. Retrieved July 2020 from, 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0340-5>
Golnaraghi, M. (Ed.) (2012). Institutional Partnerships in 
Multi-Hazard Early Warning Systems: A Compilation of Seven 
National Good Practices and Guiding Principles. Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-25373-7>
Golnaraghi, M. (2019a). Opinion: From “fragmented” trends to 
new “integrated” business models. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/opinion-from-fragmented-
trends-new-integrated-models-maryam/>
Golnaraghi, M. (2019b). Advancements in Modelling and 
Integration of Physical and Transition Climate Risk Core 
insurance business, asset management and investment 
applications: Background Paper prepared for the Geneva 
Association 2019 Climate Change Forum. Zurich: The 
Geneva Association. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
genevaassociation.org/sites/default/files/background_paper_
for_2019_eecr_forum_final_08.07.2019.pdf>
Government of Canada (2016). Pan-Canadian Framework on 
Clean Growth and Climate Change. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/
climatechange/pan-canadian-framework/climate-change-plan.
html>
Government of Canada (2020). Canadian Climate Data and 
Scenarios. Retrieved September 2020, from <http://climate-
scenarios.canada.ca/?page=main>
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the 
Environment (2020). Climate Change Laws of the World. London 
School of Economics. Retrieved September 2020, from <https://
climate-laws.org/>
Green Finance Taskforce (2018). A report to Government by 
the Green Finance Taskforce: Accelerating Green Finance. 
Prepared for the Government of the United Kingdom. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
accelerating-green-finance-green-finance-taskforce-report>
Greenpeace Canada v. Minister of the Environment, Conservation 
and Parks, 2019 ONSC 5629, 2019 CarswellOnt 16447, 148 O.R. 
(3d) 191, 28 C.E.L.R. (4th) 132, 310 A.C.W.S. (3d) 533, 439 D.L.R. 
(4th) 345 (Ontario Superior Court of Justice).
Greenpeace Southeast Asia and Others (Philippines Commission 
on Human Rights). Retrieved July 2020, from 
<http://climatecasechart.com/non-us-case/in-re-greenpeace-
southeast-asia/>
Grzadkowska, A. (2019). Commercial properties being 
submerged by rising flood risk. Insurance Business Canada. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.insurancebusinessmag.
com/ca/news/catastrophe/commercial-properties-being-
submerged-by-rising-flood-risk-192065.aspx>
Guilbault, S., Kovacs, P., Berry, P. and Richardson, G. R. (Eds.) 
(2016). Cities Adapt to Extreme Heat: Celebrating Local 
Leadership. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/
PDFS/cities-adapt-to-extreme-heat.pdf>
Gundlach, J. and Klein, J. (2018). The Built Environment, 
Chapter 6 in Climate Change, Public Health and the Law, 
(Eds.) M. Burger and J. Gundlach. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1017/9781108278010.007>
Harford, D. and Raftis, C. (2019). Low Carbon Resilience: Best 
Practices for Professionals. Simon Frasier University, Adaptation 
to Climate Change Team. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://
www.weadapt.org/system/files_force/lcr_best_practices_final.pdf>
Heede, R. (2014). Tracing anthropogenic carbon dioxide and 
methane emissions to fossil fuel and cement producers, 1854-
2010. Climatic Change, 122(1–2), 229–241. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-0986-y>
Henstra, D. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2017). Flood Risk 
Management: What Is the Role Ahead for the Government of 
Canada? Centre for International Governance Innovation Policy 
Brief No. 103. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.cigionline.
org/sites/default/files/documents/Policy%20Brief%20No.103_0.pdf>
Hogg, P. (2007). Constitutional Law of Canada, 5th ed. 
Scarborough: Thomson Carswell. 
IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2015). A Primer on Financial 
Risk from Natural Disasters: The Case for Public-Private 
Collaboration. Retrieved July 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/
Documents/Resources/2015_PubPrivPart.pdf>
IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2019a). Investing in Canada’s 
Future: The Cost of Climate Adaptation. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Disaster/The-Cost-of-
Climate-Adaptation-Summary-EN.pdf>
IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2019b). Options for 
Managing Flood Costs of Canada’s Highest Risk Residential 
Properties: A Report of the National Working Group on Financial 
Risk of Flooding. Retrieved July 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.
ca/Documents/Studies/IBC-Flood-Options-Paper-EN.pdf>
IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2020). Canada’s P&C 
insurance industry, all sectors, Section 1 in 2020 Facts of the 
Property and Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20
Book/Facts_Book/2020/IBC-2020-Facts-section-one.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 619 
ICCA [Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation] (n.d.). Flood 
Protection Training. Retrieved April 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/programs/home_flood_
protect/training/>
Infrastructure Canada (2018). Government of Canada launches 
new fund to help reduce the impacts of climate change and 
better protect Canadians against natural disasters. Government 
of Canada. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.canada.ca/
en/office-infrastructure/news/2018/05/government-of-canada-
launches-new-fund-to-help-reduce-the-impacts-of-climate-change-
and-better-protect-canadians-against-natural-disasters.html>
Infrastructure Canada (2019). Climate Lens - General Guidance. 
Government of Canada. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/other-autre/cl-occ-eng.html>
Insurance Institute of Canada (2020). Climate Risks: 
Implications for the Insurance Industry in Canada. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <https://www.insuranceinstitute.ca/-/media/
CIP-Society/2020-Climate-Risks-Report/IIC-2020-ClimateRisks-
Report.pdf?la=en&hash=B84E383B69341AD4C99FC186122AD
789649DA2AF>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2019). 
Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and 
related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context 
of strengthening the global response to the threat of climate 
change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate 
poverty. (Eds.) Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. 
Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. 
Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, 
M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield. 
World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/>
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S., and Sandink, D. (2014). Cities Adapt 
to Extreme Rainfall: Celebrating Local Leadership. Toronto: 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/CITIES_
ADAPT_DIGITAL_VERSION.compressed.pdf>
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S., Darwish, L., and Comella, M. 
(2018). Cities Adapt to Extreme Weather: Celebrating Local 
Leadership. Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/12/cities-adapt-to-extreme-weater-update-
website.pdf>
KPMG (2015). Demystifying the Public Private Partnership 
Paradigm: The Nexus between Insurance, Sustainability and 
Growth. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://home.kpmg/content/
dam/kpmg/pdf/2015/06/public-private-partnerships.pdf>
Kunreuther, H. (2015). The Role of Insurance in Reducing Losses 
from Extreme Events: The Need for Public-Private Partnerships. 
The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance: Issues and Practice, 
40(4), 741‒762. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1057/gpp.2015.14>
La Rose et al. v. Her Majesty the Queen. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <http://climatecasechart.com/non-us-case/la-rose-v-her-
majesty-the-queen/>
LAMPS (2020). Ontario Climate Data Portal. York University. 
Retrieved September 2020, from <http://lamps.math.yorku.ca/
OntarioClimate/>
Lau, R. (2019, November 18). 2019 floods: Quebec wants to 
standardize flood regulations for towns in the Laurentians. CTV 
News. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://montreal.ctvnews.
ca/2019-floods-quebec-wants-to-standardize-flood-regulations-
for-towns-in-the-laurentians-1.4690871>
Laukkonen, J., Kim-Blanco, P., Lenhart, J., Keiner, M., Cavric, B. 
and Njenga, C. (2009). Combining Climate Change Adaptation 
and Mitigation Measures. Habitat International, 33(3), 287–
292. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
habitatint.2008.10.003>
Leghari v. Federation of Pakistan, W.P. No. 25501/2015 (Lahore 
High Court). Retrieved July 2020, from <http://climatecasechart.
com/non-us-case/ashgar-leghari-v-federation-of-pakistan/>
Lho’imggin et al. v. Her Majesty the Queen. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <http://climatecasechart.com/non-us-case/gagnon-et-al-v-
her-majesty-the-queen/>
Linden, A. and Feldthusen, B. (2007). Halsbury’s Laws of Canada: 
Negligence. Markham: LexisNexis.
Lliuya v. RWE AG, 2 O 285/15 (District Court Essen). Retrieved 
July 2020, from <http://climatecasechart.com/non-us-case/
lliuya-v-RWE/>
Local Government Act, RSBC 2015 c.1 (2015).
Mahony, D. (Ed.). (2014). The Law of Climate Change in Canada. 
Toronto: Carswell.
Marjanac, S. and Patton, L. (2018). Extreme weather event 
attribution science and climate change litigation: an essential 
step in the causal chain? Journal of Energy & Natural Resources 
Law, 36(3), 265–298. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.org/
10.1080/02646811.2018.1451020>
Mathur et al. v. Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <http://climatecasechart.com/non-us-
case/mathur-et-al-v-her-majesty-the-queen-in-right-of-ontario/>
Ministère des Finances du Québec (n.d.). Québec Green Bond 
Framework. Retrieved April 2020, from <http://www.finances.
gouv.qc.ca/documents/Autres/en/AUTEN_Green_Bond_
Framework.pdf>
Moran, D. and Mihaly, E. (2018). Climate Adaptation and 
Liabiliity: A Legal Primer and Workshop Summary Report. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.clf.org/wp-content//
uploads/2018/01/GRC_CLF_Report_R8.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 620 
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2017). Preventing Disaster Before 
It Strikes: Developing a Canadian Standard For New Flood-
Resilient Residential Communities. University of Waterloo, 
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<http://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2017/09/Preventing-Disaster-Before-It-Strikes.pdf>
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2019a). Weathering the Storm: 
Developing a Canadian Standard for Flood-Resilient Existing 
Communities. University of Waterloo, Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/
Weathering-the-Storm.pdf>
Moudrak, N. and Feltmate, B. (2019b). Ahead of the Storm: 
Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial 
Real Estate. University of Waterloo, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/
Ahead-of-the-Storm-1.pdf>
Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H., and Osman, H. (2018). 
Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural infrastructure 
is an underutilized option. University of Waterloo, Intact Centre 
on Climate Adaptation, Waterloo (ON). Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/09/IBC_Wetlands-Report-2018_FINAL.pdf>
Multihazard Mitigation Council and Council on Finance, 
Insurance and Real Estate (2015). Developing Pre-Disaster 
Resilience Based on Public and Private Incentivization. National 
Institute of Building Sciences. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.nibs.org/resource/resmgr/
MMC/MMC_ResilienceIncentivesWP.pdf>
National Bank of Canada (2018). Sustainability Bond Framework. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.nbc.ca/content/dam/
bnc/a-propos-de-nous/relations-investisseurs/fonds-propres-et-
dette/nbc-sustainability-bond-framework.pdf>
National Bank of Canada (2019). National Bank of Canada is 
the first North American bank to issue a USD Sustainability 
Bond on the international stage. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.nbc.ca/en/about-us/news/news-room/press-
releases/2019/20191002-Banque-Nationale-annonce-premiere-
emission-obligations-durables-dollars-US-par-une-banque-nord-
americaine-a-international.html>
Network for Greening the Financial System (2020). Annual 
Report 2019. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.ngfs.
net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/ngfs_annual_
report_2019.pdf>
Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions (2013). 
Earthquake Exposure Sound Practices. Government of Canada. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/fi-if/
rg-ro/gdn-ort/gl-ld/Pages/b9.aspx>
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (2020). Plan2Adapt. 
University of Victoria. Retrieved September 2020, from <https://
www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/climate-change/
adaptation/impacts>
People of the State of New York v. Exxon Mobil Corporation, 65 
Misc. 3d 1233(A), 2019 N.Y. Misc. LEXIS 6544, 2019 NY Slip Op 
51990(U), 49 ELR 20199, 2019 WL 6795771 (Supreme Court of 
the State of New York).
Poggio, M. (2019, January 22). Next Climate Liability Suits 
Vs. Big Oil Could Come from Western Canada. Climate 
Liability News. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
climateliabilitynews.org/2019/01/22/climate-liability-western-
canada-vancouver-victoria/>
Porter, K., Scawthorn, C., Huyck, C., Eguchi, R., Hu, Z., Reeder, A. 
and Schneider, P. (2018). Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves: 2018 
Interim Report. Washington, D.C.: National Institute of Building 
Sciences. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://cdn.ymaws.com/
www.nibs.org/resource/resmgr/mmc/NIBS_MSv2-2018_Interim-
Repor.pdf>
Porter, K. and Scawthorn, C. (2020). Estimating the benefits 
of Climate Resilient Buildings and Core Public Infrastructure 
(CRBCPI). Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/
uploads/2020/03/SPA-Climate-resiliency-book.pdf>
Province of Ontario (n.d.). Ontario Green Bond Framework. 
Retrieved April 2020, from <https://www.ofina.on.ca/pdf/green_
bond_framework.pdf>
Rabson, M. (2020, September 23). Supreme Court reserves 
judgment in Canada’s carbon tax cases. Retrieved September 
2020, from <https://globalnews.ca/news/7353756/supreme-
court-canada-carbon-tax/>
Ralph, O. (2018, September 6). Global catastrophe bond market 
size climbs to a record $30bn. Financial Times. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://www.ft.com/content/d62827b2-b1e0-11e8-
99ca-68cf89602132>
Reference re Greenhouse Gas Pollution Pricing Act, 2019 ABCA 
283, 2019 CarswellAlta 1454, [2019] A.W.L.D. 3342, [2019] 
A.W.L.D. 3442, 2019 D.T.C. 5101, 307 A.C.W.S. (3d) 520 (Alberta 
Court of Appeal).
Reference re Greenhouse Gas Pollution Pricing Act, 2019 ONCA 
544, 2019 CarswellOnt 10495, 2019 D.T.C. 5090, 146 O.R. (3d) 
65, 29 C.E.L.R. (4th) 113, 306 A.C.W.S. (3d) 514, 436 D.L.R. (4th) 
1 (Ontario Court of Appeal).
Reference re Greenhouse Gas Pollution Pricing Act, 2019 SKCA 
40, 2019 CarswellSask 204, [2019] 9 W.W.R. 377, 2019 D.T.C. 
5055, 304 A.C.W.S. (3d) 531, 435 C.R.R. (2d) 1, 440 D.L.R. (4th) 
398 (Saskatchewan Court of Appeal).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 621 
Richard Lauzon c. Muncipalité Régionale du Comté (MRC) de 
Deux-Montagnes, Ville de Sainte-Marthe-sur-le-lac, Procureur 
Général du Québec, 2019 QCCS 4650, EYB 2019-326677 (C.S. 
Qué.).
Riordan, R. (2020, March). Transition Bonds. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://smith.queensu.ca/centres/isf/resources/primer-
series/transition-bonds.php>
Sabin Center for Climate Change Law (2020). Climate Change 
Litigation Databases. Columbia University, Columbia Law School 
and Columbia University Earth Institute. Retrieved September 
2020 from <http://climatecasechart.com/>
Sarra, J. and Williams, C. (2018). Directors’ Liability and Climate 
Risk: Canada - Country Paper. Smith School of Enterprise and 
the Environment, Commonwealth Climate and Law Initiative. 
Oxford: University of Oxford. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://
ccli.ouce.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/CCLI-Canada-
Paper-Final.pdf>
Securities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.S5 (1990).
Setzer, J. and Vanhala, L. (2019). Climate change litigation: A 
review of research on courts and litigants in climate governance. 
WIREs Climate Change, 10(3). Retrieved March 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.580>
Sierra Club Canada Foundation v. Canada (Environment and 
Climate Change Canada), 2020 CarswellNat 2170, 2020 
CarswellNat 2171, 2020 FC 663, 2020 CF 663, 320 A.C.W.S. (3d) 
58 (Federal Court).
Shrubsole, D., Brooks, G., Halliday, R., Emdad, H., Kumar, A., 
Lacroix, J. and Simonovic, S. P. (2003). An Assessment of Flood 
Risk Management in Canada. Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic 
Loss Reduction. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.iclr.
org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/an-assessment-of-flood-risk-
management-in-canada.pdf>
Standards Council of Canada (2019). Sustainable Finance-
Defining Green Taxonomy for Canada. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://www.scc.ca/en/standards/notices-of-intent/csa/
sustainable-finance-defining-green-taxonomy-for-canada>
Sun Life (2019a). Sustainability Bond Framework. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://cdn.sunlife.com/static/Global/Investors/
Investor%20briefcase/Sun%20Life%20Sustainability%20
Bond%20Framework_March%202019.pdf>
Sun Life (2019b). Sun Life announces inaugural Sustainability 
Bond Offering. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.sunlife.
com/Global/Investors/Financial+news/Announcement/
Sun+Life+announces+inaugural+Sustainability+Bond+
Offering?vgnLocale=en_CA&id=123278>
Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (2018). Retrieved 
April 2020, from <https://www.sasb.org/>
Sustainable Development Goals (2015). Transforming our world: 
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/
transformingourworld>
Syncrude Canada Ltd. v. Attorney General of Canada, 2016 FCA 
160, 2016 CarswellNat 1870, 100 C.E.L.R. (3d) 179, 266 A.C.W.S. 
(3d) 624, 398 D.L.R. (4th) 91, 483 N.R. 252 (Federal Court of 
Appeal).
Takatsuki, Y. and Foll, J. (2019). Financing brown to green: 
Guidelines for Transition Bonds. AXA Investment Managers. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://realassets.axa-im.com/
content/-/asset_publisher/x7LvZDsY05WX/content/financing-
brown-to-green-guidelines-for-transition-bonds/23818>
TCFD [Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures] 
(2017). Final Report: Recommendations of the Task Force on 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/publications/final-recommendations-
report/>
TCFD [Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures] 
(2019). TCFD: 2019 Status Report (June 2019). Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://www.fsb-tcfd.org/publications/tcfd-2019-
status-report/>
The Atmospheric Fund (2020). TAF Programs. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://taf.ca/programs/>
The Canadian Council for Public-Private Partnerships (n.d.). 
SP3CTRUM. Retrieved February 2020, from <http://www.
p3spectrum.ca/>
The Geneva Association (2018a). Climate Change and the 
Insurance Industry: Taking Action as Risk Managers and 
Investors. Zurich: The Geneva Association. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://www.genevaassociation.org/research-topics/
extreme-events-and-climate-risk/climate-change-and-insurance-
industry-taking-action>
The Geneva Association (2018b). Managing Physical Climate 
Risk: Leveraging Innovations in Catastrophe Risk Modelling. 
Zurich: The Geneva Association. Retrieved July 2020, from 
<https://www.genevaassociation.org/research-topics/
extreme-events-and-climate-risk/managing-physical-climate-
risk%E2%80%94leveraging>
The Geneva Association (2019). Investing in climate-resilient 
decarbonised infrastructure to meet socio-economic and climate 
change goals. Zurich: The Geneva Association. Retrieved July 
2020, from <https://www.genevaassociation.org/sites/default/
files/research-topics-document-type/pdf_public/infrastructure_
investment_gap_4-pager_091219.pdf>
The Geneva Association (2020). Flood Resilience in a Changing 
Climate: A Holistic Multi-Stakeholder Forward-Looking Approach 
to Flood Risk Management.
The Municipal Act, S.O. 2001 c.25 (2001).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 622 
Tsleil-Waututh Nation v. Attorney General of Canada, 2018 CAF 
153, 2018 FCA 153, 2018 CarswellNat 4685, 2018 CarswellNat 
4686, [2018] 3 C.N.L.R. 205, [2018] F.C.J. No. 876, 21 C.E.L.R. 
(4th) 1, 295 A.C.W.S. (3d) 775, 45 Admin. L.R. (6th) 1, EYB 2018-
301376 (Federal Court of Appeal).
Turp v. Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada, 2012 
FC 893, 2012 CF 893, 2012 CarswellNat 2932, 2012 CarswellNat 
2933, 2012 FC 893, 2012 CF 893, [2012] A.C.F. No. 944, [2012] 
F.C.J. No. 944, 219 A.C.W.S. (3d) 730, 415 F.T.R. 192 (Eng.), 72 
C.E.L.R. (3d) 36 (Federal Court).
UNEP Finance Initiative (2019). Changing Course: A 
comprehensive investor guide to scenario-based methods for 
climate risk assessment, in response to the TCFD. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <http://www.unepfi.org/wordpress/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/TCFD-Changing-Course-Oct-19.pdf>
United Nations (2015). Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction 2015‒2030. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.
unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/43291>
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(2015). The Paris Agreement. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://
unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/
pdf/english_paris_agreement.pdf>
Urgenda Foundation v. the State of the Netherlands (2019). 
19/00135 (Supreme Court of the Netherlands), aff’g (2018), 
200.178.245/0 (Hague Court of Appeal), aff’g (2015), 
C/09/456689 / HA ZA 13-1396 (Hague District Court). Retrieved 
July 2020, from <http://climatecasechart.com/non-us-case/
urgenda-foundation-v-kingdom-of-the-netherlands>
Vaijhala, S. and Rhodes, J. (2018). Resilience Bonds: a business-
model for resilient infrastructure. Veolia Institute. Retrieved 
July 2020, from <https://www.institut.veolia.org/sites/g/files/
dvc2551/files/document/2018/12/03-02_Resilience_Bonds_a_
business-model_for_resilient_infrastructure.pdf>
von Peter, G., von Dahlen, S. and Saxena, S. C. (2013). 
Unmitigated Disasters? New Evidence on the Macroeconomic 
Cost of Natural Catastrophes. BIS Working Paper No. 394. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://ssrn.com/abstract=2195975>
Voters Taking Action on Climate Change v. Energy and Mines of 
British Columbia, 2015 BCSC 471, 2015 CarswellBC 805, [2015] 
B.C.W.L.D. 3277, [2015] B.C.W.L.D. 3315, [2015] B.C.W.L.D. 3461, 
252 A.C.W.S. (3d) 352, 94 C.E.L.R. (3d) 35 (British Columbia 
Supreme Court).
Williams, C. and Routliff, J. (2017). Disclosure of Information 
Concerning Climate Change: Liability Risks and Opportunities. 
Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, Commonwealth 
Climate and Law Initiative. Oxford: University of Oxford. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://ccli.ouce.ox.ac.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/Cynthia-Williams_Disclosure-of-
Information-Concerning-Climate-Change.pdf>
Wolfrom, L. and Yokoi-Arai, M. (2016). Financial instruments 
for managing disaster risks related to climate change. OECD 
Journal: Financial Market Trends, 25–47. Retrieved July 2020, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1787/fmt-2015-5jrqdkpxk5d5>
World Economic Forum (2020). The Global Risks Report 2020. 
Retrieved July 2020, from <https://www.weforum.org/reports/
the-global-risks-report-2020>
Yohe, G. and Strzepek, K. (2007). Adaptation and mitigation as 
complementary tools for reducing the risk of climate impacts. 
Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 12(5), 
727‒739. Retrieved July 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11027-007-9096-3>
York County v. Rambo, 3:19-cv-00994 (n.d.). Retrieved July 2020, 
from <http://climatecasechart.com/case/york-county-v-rambo/>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., 
Wang, X. and Kharin, V. (2019). Changes in Temperature and 
Precipitation across Canada. Chapter 4 in Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 112–193. Retrieved February 2020, 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/chapter/4-0/>
CHAPTER 9
N AT I O N A L  I S S U E S  R E P O R T
International
Dimensions
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 624 
Coordinating lead author 
Jimena Eyzaguirre, ESSA Technologies Ltd.
Lead authors 
Cedar Morton, PhD, ESSA Technologies Ltd.
Colette Wabnitz, PhD, University of British Columbia and Stanford 
University
Michael Copage, Environment and Climate Change Canada 
Robert McLeman, PhD, Wilfrid Laurier University
Contributing authors
Danica Lassaline, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Juliano Palacios-Abrantes, PhD, University of British Columbia
Kamleshan Pillay, PhD,, Independent Adaptation Finance Specialist
Recommended citation 
Eyzaguirre, J., Morton, C., Wabnitz, C., Copage, M. and McLeman, R. 
(2021): International Dimensions; Chapter 9 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: National Issues Report, (ed.) F.J. Warren and N. Lulham; 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 625 
Table of contents 
Key messages 
627
9.1 Introduction 
628
9.1.1 Overview of findings from past assessments
630
9.2 Climate change affects Arctic shipping and threatens sovereignty 
631
9.2.1 Introduction 
631
9.2.2 Climate, sea ice and Arctic navigation
631
9.2.3 Climate-related risks to Canada’s control over the Northwest Passage
637
9.2.4 Strategies to adapt to increased shipping activity in the Northwest Passage
640
Case Story 9.1: Adaptation strategies for cruise ship tourism in the Canadian Arctic
643
9.3 Transboundary marine and freshwater agreements generally do not consider climate change 
644
9.3.1 Introduction
645
Case Story 9.2: The Canada–U.S. Pacific Salmon Treaty
646
9.3.2 Marine agreements
648
9.3.3 Freshwater agreements
652
Case Story 9.3: Modernizing the Canada–U.S. Columbia River Treaty to consider climate change
661
9.4 Climate change presents risks and opportunities for international trade 
663
9.4.1 Introduction 
663
9.4.2 Trade and climate change risk
666
9.4.3 Adaptation
683
9.5 Climate-related human migration and displacement will increase demands for immigration to Canada 685
9.5.1 Introduction
686
9.5.2 The climate-migration nexus
686
9.5.3 Current and estimated climate-related migration
691
9.5.4 Future outlook for Canada
693
Case Story 9.4: The role of climate change in conflict and migration in Mali
695
9.6 Increased demand for international assistance is expected 
696
9.6.1 Introduction
696
9.6.2 The climate-security connection
696
9.6.3 Demands on international assistance
698
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 626 
9.6.4 Canada’s response and outlook
699
Case Story 9.5: Researching risk-pooling initiatives in the face of climate change in South Africa
701
9.7 Moving forward 
702
9.7.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs 
702
9.8 Conclusion 
709
9.9 References 
710
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 627 
Key messages 
Climate change affects Arctic shipping and threatens sovereignty 
(see Section 9.2)
Shrinking sea ice resulting from climate change allows for increased marine traffic in the Arctic Ocean, 
including through the Northwest Passage (NWP). Climate change and its impacts underscore the need to 
strengthen rules and capacities for demonstrating Canada’s effective stewardship of the NWP and ensuring 
safe, secure and sustainable navigation as the ice melts.
Transboundary marine and freshwater agreements generally do not 
consider climate change (see Section 9.3)
Canada’s transboundary marine and freshwater agreements were not created with climate change in mind. In 
collaboration with international partners, Canada has an opportunity to show leadership in preserving long-
term cooperation and protecting shared resources by building on adaptive practices recognized as successful.
Climate change presents risks and opportunities for international 
trade (see Section 9.4)
Canada is dependent on international trade and will increasingly experience economic effects from extreme 
weather and climate change impacts and adaptation elsewhere in the world, especially when occurring in 
countries with which Canada has strong trade ties.
Climate-related human migration and displacement will increase 
demands for immigration to Canada (see Section 9.5)
Tropical cyclones, floods, droughts, wildfires and food insecurity displace millions of people each year. 
Climate change will generate growing numbers of migrants by mid- to late century, especially in Least 
Developed Countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean. Canada will come under 
growing internal and external pressure to accept larger numbers of migrants from climate-disrupted regions.
Increased demand for international assistance is expected 
(see Section 9.6)
Climate change can undermine human security in developing countries and increase demands for Canadian 
international assistance. Canada is addressing climate risk to development and humanitarian goals by 
providing financial and technical assistance for adaptation and climate resilience.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 628 
9.1 Introduction 
This chapter assesses the risks and opportunities facing Canada from indirect impacts of climate change 
and discusses action taken to assess and manage them. It focuses on Arctic shipping and sovereignty over 
the Northwest Passage, transboundary resource management, international trade, climate-related human 
migration and displacement, as well as Canada’s role in supporting climate risk reduction and adaptation 
through international assistance. The impacts of climate change and variability do not stop at national 
borders; they interact with social processes, structures and institutions that can amplify, spread or dampen 
risk (Moser and Hart, 2015). These pathways of impact include biophysical flows (e.g., freshwater resource 
sharing), trade and flows of finance and people (Stockholm Environment Institute, 2013). Actions taken 
to adapt to climate change can also have ramifications beyond the areas targeted for implementation 
(Stockholm Environment Institute, 2018). Therefore, it is important to explore vulnerabilities and impacts 
originating outside of Canada’s borders, as well as international dimensions of trends and events occurring in 
Canada, even though they are rarely accounted for in climate change assessments and adaptation planning 
(Challinor et al., 2017; Moser and Hart, 2015).
The scope of international dimensions of climate change and adaptation is vast, including transboundary, 
teleconnected and cascading effects (Benzie and Persson, 2019). Transboundary effects spread between 
neighbouring countries. Teleconnected effects spread through linkages over large distances. Cascading 
effects result from an initial hazard that generates a sequence of interacting impacts and responses. 
Figure 9.1 illustrates some of the indirect climate change impacts for Canada and related policy responses. 
Despite a growing awareness of the risks to a country from the observed and projected impacts of climate 
change globally, particularly in relation to national security (Canadian Forces College, 2018), the potential 
consequences for Canada remain poorly understood.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 629 
Figure 9.1: Examples of Canada’s exposure to indirect impacts of climate change with international dimensions. 
Source: Adapted from Hildén et al., 2020.
This chapter draws from several sources of published literature to explore select indirect climate impacts for 
Canada, representing a mix of transmission mechanisms, scales of impact and opportunities for adaptation. 
The chapter starts by describing the risks to Canada from increased foreign shipping and transportation 
in Canada’s Arctic waterways, focusing on the Northwest Passage and Canada’s sovereign claims thereto. 
It then examines the capacity of transboundary marine and freshwater agreements to adapt to the 
increased uncertainties posed by rapidly changing climate and hydrologic and ocean conditions, contrasting 
agreements in place between countries or governing marine basins with adaptive best practices. For both 
Arctic shipping and sovereignty and transboundary resource management, climate change adaptation 
includes actions to promote environmental stewardship, preserve long-term cooperation and recognize the 
unique roles of Indigenous people. The chapter then explores economic risks and opportunities for Canada 
from climate-related disruptions to supply chains and distribution networks and from shifting patterns 
of global trade in response to climate impacts. Adaptation in this context not only focuses on protecting 
Canada’s economic interests, but also acknowledges the negative effects of long-term adjustments in trade 
for communities beyond Canada’s borders. The final two sections relate to Canada’s capacity and will to 
engage on the global stage in stemming instability and conflict in climate-vulnerable regions of the world. 
After describing the links between climate and human migration, as well as climate and human security, the 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 630 
chapter assesses the implications of climate change on demands for immigration, refugee resettlement and 
international assistance programming in Canada.
The chapter concludes by identifying knowledge gaps and emerging issues that cut across impact areas. 
Further attention on adaptation governance in the context of cross-border risks, as well as Canada’s role in 
strengthening the climate resilience of global food systems are two emerging issues. The need for increased 
use of assessment tools that address the methodological challenges of bounding complex problems, as well 
as improved capacity in economic modelling are also highlighted. Overall, it is evident that Canada has an 
opportunity to show leadership in developing knowledge and tools to prepare for multi-faceted, multi-scale 
climate risks and in strengthening international cooperation to support global stability and the well-being of 
communities in a climate-disrupted world.
9.1.1 Overview of findings from past assessments
Past assessments have covered international dimensions of climate change impacts and adaptation for 
Canada. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate (Lemmen et al., 2008) included a chapter 
on Canada in an international context. This assessment concluded that climate change impacts elsewhere 
in the world and adaptation measures to address them could affect Canadians, the competitiveness of 
some Canadian industries, as well as international assistance, peacekeeping and immigration. It also found 
that Canada has the capacity and obligation under the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change to 
assist developing countries to adapt to climate change. The chapter emphasized that little research had 
been undertaken to understand the policy and business implications of these impacts from a Canadian 
perspective.
Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation (Warren and Lemmen, 2014) 
included two chapters of relevance. The Adaptation chapter included a section on the international status of 
adaptation to provide a context by which to measure Canada’s own progress. Coverage focused on the status 
of adaptation in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries. It concluded 
that adaptation implementation was in the early stages in most, if not all, developed countries, with rare 
instances of legislated mandates for adaptation. It also concluded that national adaptation strategies, 
although useful for signalling political commitment, did not always lead to action (Eyzaguirre and Warren, 
2014). The Industry chapter assessed research on climate change adaptation and international trade (Kovacs 
and Thistlethwaite, 2014). It concluded that the topic remained an emerging field, highlighting evidence of 
exposure to climate change risk through disruptions to supply chains and distribution networks affecting 
Canadian trade markets and of opportunities to export financial risk-transfer tools to vulnerable regions. 
Canadian research was unavailable or not referenced.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 631 
9.2 Climate change affects Arctic shipping and 
threatens sovereignty 
Shrinking sea ice resulting from climate change allows for increased marine traffic in the Arctic Ocean, 
including through the Northwest Passage (NWP). Climate change and its impacts underscore the need 
to strengthen rules and capacities for demonstrating Canada’s effective stewardship of the NWP and 
ensuring safe, secure and sustainable navigation as the ice melts. 
Over the past decades, the extent and thickness of summer sea ice in Canada’s Arctic marine areas have 
steadily decreased. Physical access to Arctic resources and waters allows for increased economic activity and 
sea traffic, including through the Northwest Passage (NWP). The NWP links the Atlantic Ocean (Baffin Bay) and 
Pacific Ocean (Beaufort Sea). The shipping distance between New York and Shanghai through the NWP is about 
20% shorter than that through the Panama Canal. On grounds of environmental protection, the United Nations 
Convention on the Law of the Sea confers coastal Arctic countries like Canada the right to regulate vessel 
traffic in ice-covered waters, even in straits where foreign vessels could otherwise enjoy the right to unimpeded 
transit passage. Although summer sea ice might not disappear entirely for another 30 years, increased warming 
under climate change and reductions in sea ice could pose challenges for Canada’s legal arguments to regulate 
shipping across the channels and straits of the NWP. Sustained foreign use of these Arctic shipping lanes could 
render the NWP an international strait. Gradual physical access to maritime areas adds to the importance 
of bolstering Canada’s ability to proactively exercise stewardship of the NWP to achieve a combination of 
diplomatic, informational, military and socioeconomic objectives, with the protection of the rights of Indigenous 
people cutting across them all.
9.2.1 Introduction 
Canadian and international interest in the future of Arctic navigation increased in the mid-2000s, driven by 
warming temperatures, the rapid retreat of sea ice and a commodity boom that raised expectations about the 
profitability of developing northern energy and mineral resources (Exner-Pirot, 2016; Guy and Lasserre, 2016; 
Harber, 2015; Farré et al., 2014). This section provides information on sea-ice reduction and navigation in the 
Canadian Arctic, then focuses on climate-related risks to Canada’s sovereignty over the Northwest Passage 
(NWP) and discusses the country’s capacity for effective stewardship of the NWP through safe, secure and 
sustainable shipping as climate change intensifies.
9.2.2 Climate, sea ice and Arctic navigation
With the rapid retreat of sea ice in the Arctic Ocean (Derksen et al., 2019) and increased physical access to 
the region and its resources, the Arctic is now on the world stage. The rapid changes underway in the Arctic 
marine environment, including the declining extent, duration and thickness of sea ice and changes in the 
distribution and abundance of fish and other biological resources, fuel competing narratives for the future of 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 632 
the region. Economic narratives centre on the exploitation of, and competition over, natural resources (oil, gas 
and mineral resources, fish stocks), growth of the Arctic tourism industry and improved marine transportation 
(Ash, 2016; Arruda, 2015; Bader et al., 2014; Williams et al., 2011). Military security narratives focus on 
strengthened defence capabilities by northern circumpolar countries (e.g., Åtland, 2014) and potential threats 
from criminal elements (terrorists, smugglers, poachers) (Arctic Domain Awareness Center, 2017; Charron, 
2015; Flake, 2014). Environmental narratives portray the Arctic as a maritime global commons with climate 
change implications for the entire planet (Bennett, 2015), and as a fragile and pristine area potentially 
threatened by resource or shipping disasters (Dodds and Hemmings, 2015). Finally, cultural and rights-based 
narratives portray Arctic lands, sea and ice as a homeland for Inuit peoples whose historic use and 
occupation have bolstered countries’ credibility to sovereignty claims (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2017; Dodds 
and Hemmings, 2015; Arnold, 2012; Inuit Circumpolar Council, 2009). Common across all frames are global 
drivers of change in the region and the ripple effects of these drivers (see Figure 9.2). Climate change 
impacts, their links to new shipping lanes, and related disputes over Arctic waterways and territories are one 
slice of this complex cause-effect pathway.
Figure 9.2: Global drivers of Arctic marine change. Source: Adapted from Williams et al., 2011.
Sea ice patterns shape navigability in Arctic waters, as do strong and variable winds, wave conditions and 
storminess (Ng et al., 2018; Pendakur, 2017). Since the late 1960s, rising air temperatures have contributed 
to declines in the extent, thickness and age of summer sea ice in the Arctic Ocean. The extent of sea ice in 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 633 
the summer has decreased by 5% to 20% per decade in the Canadian Arctic, including areas that span the 
NWP (see Box 9.1; Derksen et al., 2019). Ice in the Canadian Arctic that used to accumulate over multiple 
years without melting is giving way to thinner, seasonal ice, with the greatest drop in multi-year ice seen in 
the Beaufort Sea and the Canadian Arctic Archipelago (Derksen et al., 2019). Under a range of future climate 
scenarios, scientists project continued reductions in seasonal sea ice, with the gradual opening of major 
waterways to ice-free conditions for part of the year (Derksen et al., 2019; Meredith et al., 2019; Ng et al., 
2018). Increasing wave energy and heat released from wave mixing in the upper ocean can further accelerate 
sea ice reductions (Greenan et al., 2019). Predictions on the timing of ice-free conditions differ based on the 
definitions of “ice-free” and global greenhouse gas (GHG) concentration scenarios used. Relative to other 
sea routes in the Arctic Ocean, the Canadian Arctic Archipelago is likely to see continued sea ice further into 
the future, which will be transported southward into the NWP and pose an ongoing ice hazard for shipping 
(Derksen et al., 2019; Ng et al., 2018; Greenert, 2014). Analysis of wind, wave and storm conditions in the 
Arctic is limited by gaps in monitoring data and complex ice‒ocean‒atmosphere interactions (Ng et al., 
2018). Studies indicate opposing trends for wind speed, but wave heights and wave-season duration in the 
Canadian Arctic are projected to increase over this century as sea ice declines (Greenan et al., 2019; Ng et al., 
2018). Observations on sea ice changes by Inuit elders and experienced hunters in communities along the 
Canadian Arctic Archipelago support these scientific findings (Panikkar et al., 2018).
Box 9.1: Arctic sea routes are waterways to navigate through the Arctic 
Ocean 
Three routes connect the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans: the Northwest Passage (NWP), the Northeast Passage 
(NEP) and the Transpolar Sea Route (TPR) (see Figure 9.3; Østreng et al., 2013). The NWP encompasses the 
straits and sounds of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and follows along the northern slope of Alaska; it has 
five recognized passages (Arctic Council, 2009). The NEP follows the Russian and Norwegian coastlines. The 
TPR crosses the Arctic at the North Pole. Two additional waterways are the Northern Sea Route, which is the 
part of the NEP between the Bering Strait and the Kara Sea, and the Arctic Bridge that connects Russia to 
Canada through Hudson Bay.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 634 
Figure 9.3: Map of Arctic sea routes. Source: Dyrcz, 2017.
Arctic navigation is attractive because of the potential to reduce shipping distances and costs, and save fuel 
and time, compared to southern sea routes (see Table 9.1).
Table 9.1: Distances (in kilometres) between major ports using two 
Arctic sea routes compared to standard routes
ORIGIN-DESTINATION
PANAMA 
CANAL
SUEZ AND 
MALACCA
NORTHWEST 
PASSAGE
NORTHEAST 
PASSAGE
London‒Yokoyama
23,300
21,200
14,080
13,841
Rotterdam‒Shanghai
25,588
19,550
16,100
15,793
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 635 
ORIGIN-DESTINATION
PANAMA 
CANAL
SUEZ AND 
MALACCA
NORTHWEST 
PASSAGE
NORTHEAST 
PASSAGE
Hamburg‒Seattle
17,110
29,780
13,410
12,770
Rotterdam‒Vancouver
16,350
28,400
14,330
13,220
Rotterdam‒Los Angeles
14,490
29,750
15,120
15,552
New York‒Shanghai
20,880
22,930
17,030
19,893
New York‒Hong Kong
21,260
21,570
18,140
20,985
New York‒Singapore
23,580
19,320
19,540
23,121
Note: The Northwest Passage route uses the McClure Strait. Grey = shortest distance, blue = within 15%. 
Source: Guy and Lasserre, 2016.
Vessel activity is increasing in Arctic waters and climate change and sea ice reductions are among the 
factors that have contributed to this rise (Guy and Lasserre, 2016; Pizzolato et al., 2016). The types of vessels 
operating in the region include bulk carriers and container ships for transit to southern markets; cruise ships, 
pleasure crafts, tankers, general cargo, and tug and barge as destination and resupply traffic; as well as 
government vessels and icebreakers (Dawson et al., 2018; Beveridge et al., 2016; Guy and Lasserre, 2016; 
Lasserre, 2016). Vessel traffic through Canadian Arctic waterways almost tripled between 1990 and 2015 
(IPCC, 2019; Hildebrand et al., 2018, Guy and Lasserre, 2016; PEW Charitable Trusts, 2016; Charron, 2015). 
Distances travelled per vessel type have also increased (Dawson et al., 2018). Pizzolato et al. (2016) coupled 
spatial datasets on shipping activity and sea ice concentrations in the Canadian Arctic from 1990 to 2015, 
revealing a statistically significant correlation between these two variables in Beaufort Sea, Western Parry 
Channel, Western Baffin Bay and Foxe Basin. In other regions of the Canadian Arctic, sea ice conditions were 
not a predictor of trends in shipping activity (Pizzolato et al., 2016), with non-climatic factors—such as the 
ability to maintain predictable schedules—clearly influencing ship operators’ decisions (Beveridge et al., 2016; 
Lasserre et al., 2016). At present, transit traffic in the NWP remains too low to attract significant commercial 
or military attention (Charron, 2015; Lackenbauer and Lajeunesse, 2014). Between 2000 and 2014 complete 
transits through the NWP ranged from six to 30 per year, with pleasure crafts accounting for the fastest 
growing transits (Beveridge et al., 2016; Guy and Lasserre, 2016; Government of Northwest Territories, 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 636 
Although vessel traffic will almost certainly increase, affordable and safe Arctic shipping will be slow to 
develop, with the NWP unlikely to become the optimal route for international shipping (Lackenbauer and 
Lajeunesse, 2014). Medium-term projections (2030s to 2050s) indicate annual numbers of vessel traffic 
through Arctic sea routes in the hundreds (e.g., Greenert, 2014); over 5% growth in annual shipping activity 
(Williams et al., 2011); expanded navigability for open water and moderately ice-strengthened vessels in 
September (Smith and Stephenson, 2013); and shifts in trade flows (Bekkers et al., 2018). However, the 
potential of Arctic routes as substitutes for conventional southern trade routes is likely overstated (Guy 
and Lasserre, 2016; Farré et al., 2014). Opportunities for expansion in Arctic shipping are tempered by 
continuing challenges to navigation and safety posed by mobile summer sea ice, drifting ice that clogs straits 
and channels, older, thicker ice and other climate elements (Dirksen et al., 2019; Ng et al., 2018; Pendakur, 
2017; Farré et al., 2014). Uncertainties in global markets, commodity prices and technological innovation, 
among other non-climate factors, also limit shipping potential (Johnston et al., 2017; Andrew, 2014). These 
challenges translate into risks and costs to operators: more expensive ship construction related to ice 
strengthening; seasonal scheduling challenges; the need for equipment to spot and cope with ice and crews 
with unique experience; and high insurance premiums (Beveridge et al., 2016; Guy and Lasserre, 2016). The 
economic viability of Arctic shipping, compared with southern routes, is also hampered by technological 
and infrastructure deficiencies, including a lack of modern deep-water ports and other services offered to 
transiting ships, limited search and rescue capabilities, poor charting and mapping of Arctic waters, and 
continued difficulties with seasonal-ice predictions (Melia et al., 2017; Guy and Lasserre, 2016). Within the 
global Arctic, Canada and Russia have adopted different patterns in developing shipping lanes (see Table 
9.2; Guy and Lasserre, 2016). As a result, international shipping through the NWP, with underdeveloped 
infrastructure and services, may be less preferable than shipping through the Northern Sea Route (Beveridge 
et al., 2016; Bonds, 2016; Bennett, 2014; Farré et al., 2014). For example, according to survey research, 
European shipping companies strongly view icebreaker escort and navigational aids as essential Arctic 
navigation services (Lasserre et al., 2016), which are attributes of the Northern Sea Route.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 637 
Table 9.2: Differences in governance of the Northern Sea Route and 
the Northwest Passage for vessel traffic 
RUSSIA AND THE NORTHERN SEA ROUTE
CANADA AND THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE
•	
Special administrative body created to 
manage traffic between the Bering Strait 
and Kara Gate (Northern Sea Route 
Administration)
•	
Applications for transit
•	
Mandatory transit fee in exchange for 
providing piloting, icebreaker escort 
services and the possibility of docking at 
small ports in the event of an emergency
•	
Mandatory pilotage
•	
Encourage ships to be escorted by 
icebreakers
•	
At least nine deep-water ports
•	
Network of search and rescue centres in 
the Arctic
•	
No mandatory transit fees
•	
Mandatory registration of ships carrying 
over 300 tons of gross tonnage, or 
carrying pollutants or dangerous goods
•	
No service provided other than 
navigation aids (seasonal buoys, 
frequent transmission of ice maps)
•	
No deep-water ports
•	
Search and rescue bases are located far 
to the south (Gander, Halifax, Trenton, 
Cold Lake and Comox)
Source: Guy and Lasserre, 2016
9.2.3 Climate-related risks to Canada’s control over the Northwest 
Passage
Although a substantial rise in vessel traffic volumes and international transits through the NWP is unlikely in 
the short term, preparing for long-term growth in navigation and maritime trade through the NWP and related 
environmental, social, economic, cultural and geopolitical risks is prudent (Dawson et al., 2020a; Hauser et 
al., 2018; Cotter, 2017). However, the NWP has been held up as a contested resource and a source of future 
international tension, particularly with increased Asian interest in the Arctic and its natural resources (Levitt, 
2019; Exner-Pirot, 2016; Landriault, 2016; Rothwell, 2015; Wallin and Dallaire, 2011; Huebert, 2010). Climate 
change impacts, including shrinking sea ice, could weaken Canada’s sovereign claim to the NWP. Climate 
change also challenges the capacity of Canadian infrastructure and systems in place (e.g., search and rescue, 
offshore surveillance) to demonstrate effective stewardship of the NWP.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 638 
In legal terms, sovereignty refers to recognized rights of exclusive jurisdiction over a territory (Cox, 2015). 
Canada claims sovereignty over all waters of its Arctic Archipelago and regards the NWP as “internal” waters 
over which Canada has authority to regulate entry and control access to its various routes (see Video 9.1; 
Lalonde, 2019; Lackenbauer and Lalonde, 2017b). Historic occupation and use of Arctic lands, sea and ice by 
Indigenous Peoples, enclosure of the Arctic Archipelago within Canada’s baseline, and enforcement of 
environmental regulations in the NWP as part of the 1970 Arctic Waters Pollution Prevention Act (AWPPA) are 
key components of Canada’s sovereignty claims (Guy and Lasserre, 2016; Cox, 2015; Wright, 2014; Zellen, 
2010; Carnaghan and Goody, 2006). As well, Canada has asserted military control in the North through human 
resource and infrastructure expenditures. This includes the expansion of the Canadian Rangers, a fleet of 
patrol vessels, a Canadian Forces training centre, a deep-water fuelling facility, and increased radar and 
satellite capacity. Maintaining the NWP as internal waters is also a priority for the Canadian Inuit, as the 
passage is part of their Arctic homeland, Inuit Nunangat (see Video 9.2; George, 2019a; Inuit Circumpolar 
Council, 2018). Pollution, oil spills and negative impacts on marine mammals are among the Inuit’s main 
concerns related to increased shipping activity (Dawson et al., 2020a; Arctic Council, 2009).
Video 9.1: Sovereignty: Political science and security scholars’ perspective on Arctic sovereignty and shipping in 
the Northwest Passage. Source: Baldassari, 2017, 2013. https://vimeo.com/104400714
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 639 
Video 9.2: Nilliajut 2: Inuit perspectives on the Northwest Passage, shipping and marine use. Source: Inuit Tapiriit 
Kanatami, 2018. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0EGzKIQo0jY
Perceived threats to Canada’s sovereign claim over the NWP arise from countries’ differing opinions on the 
status of the NWP as internal Canadian waters (Lackenbauer and Lalonde, 2017b). Of the five states with 
Arctic coasts—Canada, Denmark, Norway, Russia and the United States—the United States has long viewed 
the NWP as an international strait where foreign ships and aircraft can freely transit the waters and airspace 
(Lalonde, 2019; U.S. Government, 2013). Non-Arctic nations have weighed in on the NWP controversy. Of note, 
Germany, a country with observer status at the Arctic Council, has campaigned for freedom of navigation 
in the Arctic Ocean (including the NWP) (Federal Foreign Office of Germany, 2013). In its 2018 Arctic Policy, 
China, another Arctic Council observer, invoked the importance of freedom of navigation and the right to 
use Arctic shipping routes (People’s Republic of China, 2018). Despite alarmist concerns (Exner-Pirot, 2016), 
Canada’s claims to the NWP have been largely unchallenged. To date, all maritime disagreements have been 
well managed by established international mechanisms, providing a foundation for future cooperation among 
Arctic states and beyond. Canada’s claims and regulations in the Arctic are typically complied with, and there 
are no current threats to sovereignty (Charron and Fergusson, 2018).
Competing views exist on whether climate change weakens Canada’s position on claims to the NWP (Burke, 
2017; Rothwell, 2015). Critical uncertainties relate to the extent of international traffic in the NWP and the 
interpretation of Article 234 of the United Nations Convention of the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which grants 
coastal states the right to enact laws and regulations to control marine pollution from vessels in “ice-covered” 
waters within its Exclusive Economic Zone (UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982). For the NWP 
to be considered an international strait, it would have to meet geographic and functional requirements: it 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 640 
must connect two bodies of the high seas (as it does) and must be considered “useful” as determined by a 
sufficient number of transits (Carnaghan and Goody, 2006). Legal precedents suggest that the small number 
of current transits and those expected in the medium term would not qualify the NWP as a useful route for 
international maritime traffic. However, if accelerated sea ice melting enabled a substantial rise in commercial 
shipping, perceptions of the NWP as an international strait would intensify (Lackenbauer and Lalonde, 2017a; 
Cox, 2015; Huebert, 2001). The power conferred by UNCLOS Article 234 to regulate shipping in the interest 
of environmental protection of ice-covered areas has served to expand Canada’s jurisdiction in Arctic waters 
(Burke, 2017; Farré et al., 2014). As sea ice retreats and navigation becomes less hazardous, Canada’s ability 
to count on Article 234 for international legitimacy could diminish (Rothwell, 2015; Farré et al., 2014). Russia, 
which also invokes Article 234 to regulate shipping activity in its Exclusive Economic Zone along the Northern 
Sea Route, could also face challenges to its claims as sea ice cover diminishes (Flake, 2014).
Regardless of legal stances over sovereignty in the NWP and the right to control activities of other nations, 
Canada can proactively exercise stewardship of the NWP (Cox, 2015) by focusing on safe, secure and 
sustainable development of shipping routes (Dawson et al., 2020a; Lackenbauer and Lajeunesse, 2014). 
At present, Canada is poorly equipped to enforce environmental protections in Canada’s Arctic waterways 
(Giguère et al., 2017; Cox, 2015; McRae, 2007; Huebert, 2003). Canada remains deficient in infrastructure 
(e.g., charting; navigational, weather and communication support services; ports, harbours and terminals; 
ship repair and waste management for vessels) and emergency response capabilities, including for oil 
spills. Adequate infrastructure and the ability to respond to emergencies are critical for protecting the fragile 
Arctic environment (Hildebrand et al., 2018; Lajeunesse, 2018; Giguère et al., 2017; Arctic Council, 2009). 
Maintaining maritime domain awareness, and monitoring and serving such an expansive, remote and rugged 
region, will remain financially and logistically challenging (Guy and Lasserre, 2016; Dawson et al., 2014). Aside 
from pursuing coordination with Arctic littoral states, a practical focus on the needs of international operators 
serving resupply and destination traffic is one way to manage risk posed by international ships (Lackenbauer 
and Lajeunesse, 2014; Charron, 2005). This strategy also commands respect for Canadian sovereignty over 
the NWP, just as Russia’s approach to providing pilotage and icebreaking services and mandating their use, 
as well as its investments in maritime infrastructure and search and rescue capabilities, support its claim to 
Northern Sea Route waters (Cotter, 2017).
9.2.4 Strategies to adapt to increased shipping activity in the 
Northwest Passage
Managing indirect impacts of climate change, such as increased international vessel traffic in the NWP, 
competition over new shipping lanes and affronts to Canada’s sovereignty, is less about reducing specific 
climate threats and more about enhancing capabilities to meet valued outcomes even as the climate 
changes (Meredith et al., 2019; Stockholm Environmental Institute, 2013). Public opinion in Canada on how 
to assert Arctic sovereignty has shifted over the years, from a marked preference for military capabilities 
and surveillance in 2000–2005 to a mix that also includes diplomacy, attention to the needs of northern 
and Indigenous communities, science and environmental protection in 2011–2014 (Landriault, 2016). The 
following discussion on capabilities to build Canada’s capacity to develop safe, secure and sustainably 
managed Arctic waterways in a rapidly changing environment draws on three frameworks: the Arctic 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 641 
Resilience Action Framework (Arctic Council, 2017); a framework to foster strategic capabilities for climate 
security (Werrell and Femia, 2019); and the Circumpolar Inuit Declaration on Sovereignty in the Arctic (Inuit 
Circumpolar Council, 2009). The multi-faceted strategies to build adaptive capacity comprise diplomatic, 
informational, military and socioeconomic themes, and the protection of the rights of Indigenous people is an 
element of each.
Diplomatic capabilities include international cooperation and actively strengthening international standards 
governing the Arctic. Arctic governance comprises a patchwork of bilateral and multilateral agreements, 
stemming from the Arctic Council and International Maritime Organization, and anchored in UNCLOS (Arruda, 
2015; Borgerson, 2013). Existing instruments have been effective in driving consistent and cooperative action 
to date (House of Commons, 2019; Plouffe, 2011; Byers, 2010; Government of Canada, 2010; Byers and 
Lalonde, 2009), but need to reflect changing conditions—climatic and otherwise (Byers, 2010). For example, 
the mandatory International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters (“Polar Code”) adopted in 2017 clarifies 
shipping and navigation standards related to commercial vessels, operational concerns, search and rescue in 
polar waters, and environmental protection. Monitoring and forecasting of ice conditions will be critical to the 
Code’s effective application (Guy and Lasserre, 2016). The rise in Arctic shipping has led to a higher rate of 
reported accidents per kilometre travelled compared to southern waterways (Council of Canadian Academies, 
2016), noise and air pollution (Marelle et al., 2018; Halliday et al., 2017), as well as disruptions to wildlife 
and cultural activities of community residents (Olsen et al., 2019; Panikkar et al., 2018). These trends lend 
urgency to resolving practical issues among littoral states and, in partnership with Inuit, on management and 
funding of navigation services such as traffic control, navigation aids, environmental protection and clean-
up procedures (Charron, 2005). Climate change adaptation of the rapidly evolving cruise shipping industry is 
one area of active research (see Case Story 9.1), as the cruise ship sector is in need of improved governance 
(Pashkevich et al., 2015).
Informational capabilities refer to collection and dissemination of information on climate change risk 
and responses. Climate change is one among many pressures that shape Arctic shipping and its effects 
on people and ecosystems. Therefore, governments and others are turning to holistic approaches that 
incorporate spatial, analytical and modelling methods to understand past and potential damages and 
opportunities brought by marine vessel activity (Pickard et al., 2019). The Arctic Corridors group, in 
partnership with Northern Voices, has studied and written many reports about climate change and the 
cumulative effects of marine shipping (Carter et al., 2019). A number of data resources and tools exist to 
facilitate the integration of direct climate change impacts (e.g., changing sea-ice patterns, precipitation 
events, strong and variable winds, changing sea levels and wave patterns, permafrost degradation and 
enhanced coastal erosion) into plans and decisions related to marine navigation and to assess the strength 
of management strategies (Debortoli et al., 2019; Pendakur, 2017). For example, efforts to determine safe 
navigation routes are building on data collected to measure the depths of Arctic water as part of Canada’s 
submission to UNCLOS on its extended continental shelf (Global Affairs Canada, 2019b). Consistent with 
its mandate to maintain coastal infrastructure and safe secure waterways, the Department of Fisheries and 
Oceans developed a web-based planning tool to generate estimates of climate variability and change in 
the Beaufort Sea, Davis Strait and the Mackenzie Delta region (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 2018). 
However, trends and projections of socioeconomic variables, including the indirect impacts of climate 
change, are less widely studied. Understanding and evaluating future climate-related risks of international 
vessel traffic in the NWP can be challenging because of the uncertainties involved. Foresight tools, such as 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 642 
scenario building and horizon scanning, can help identify management actions that are robust to a range of 
futures (Fetzek et al., 2017). Used in national security planning (e.g., Pezard et al., 2018) foresight tools also 
aid in climate change adaptation planning and in strengthening emergency response. Of equal importance to 
the creation of climate risk information are institutions charged with translating insights for decision makers 
to take action (Arctic Council, 2017; Fetzek et al., 2017).
Military capabilities correspond to those possessed by the armed forces and national defence agencies. 
As a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which has recognized climate change as 
a threat multiplier, Canada is aware of the potential security threats of climate change. Canada’s Strong, 
Secure, Engaged defence policy commits to increasing enforcement capacity, situational awareness and 
monitoring of Arctic waters, referring to climate change as one of the drivers behind the need for these 
enhanced capabilities (Government of Canada, 2017b). A companion Defence Energy and Environment 
Strategy guides “greening” efforts by Canadian defence (Minister of National Defence, 2017). Both the 
defence policy and greening strategy outline investments and concrete actions to reduce the carbon footprint 
of defence installations and operations, but are far less specific on investments and actions required to 
adapt to climate change. Canada’s military is already stretched to respond to climate-related emergencies 
at home and overseas, with climate change expected to increase the demand for military assistance (Major 
and Shivji, 2019). The integrity of military assets and facilities could be at risk from climate change. While the 
United States has identified its military assets and operations most vulnerable to climate change, as a basis 
for setting priorities (Center for Climate and Security, 2020), Canada has not. Symposia on climate change 
and security, such as those held by the Canadian Forces College in 2018 and 2020 (Canadian Forces College, 
2021), can help raise the profile of these gaps to senior decision makers.
Capabilities in the realm of socioeconomic development centre on capital and infrastructure investments 
and public policies and regulations applicable to Arctic waters that incorporate climate risk. Climate change 
adaptation solutions for vessels and navigation in the Arctic and for maritime infrastructure are increasingly 
documented and include winter-operation risk assessments, ship-specific winterization (including for mixed-
ice environments), and relocation of shore-based resupply infrastructure (Meredith et al., 2019; Pendakur, 
2017). They apply to both private- and public-sector operators. At a strategic and policy level, the Arctic 
Northern Policy Framework, the Oceans Protection Plan’s Cumulative Effects of Marine Shipping initiative, 
the Northern Marine Transportation Corridors (now known as “Low Impact Corridors”) and Strategic 
Environmental Impact Assessments linked to Arctic resource development (e.g., Nunavut Impact Review 
Board, 2019) are initiatives that could support the safe and sustainable development of shipping in the 
NWP (Porta et al., 2017; PEW Charitable Trusts, 2016). The Low Impact Corridors initiative in particular is 
a promising response to increased Arctic shipping activity (Dawson et al., 2020a), as it proposes to install 
the necessary services (e.g., emergency response, navigational support) and infrastructure to ensure 
safer navigation while considering ecological and cultural significance (Levitt, 2019). Inuit communities 
acknowledge the potential benefits of shipping, but urge inclusive and collaborative research to determine 
corridor routes with minimal negative impacts on traditional activities and sensitive ecosystems (Dawson et 
al., 2020a).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 643 
Case Story 9.1: Adaptation strategies for cruise ship tourism in the 
Canadian Arctic
Cruise ship tourism in Canada’s Arctic is increasing, with activity more than doubling between 2005 and 
2013 (Dawson et al., 2016). Increased physical access, the Arctic’s rich cultural and natural heritage, and 
an expanding range of products make the Northwest Passage a popular area to visit for “frontier tourism” 
enthusiasts and a growing base of baby boomers with disposable income. At present, management 
of expedition cruise shipping takes place within the complex, multi-jurisdictional regulatory framework 
applicable to all shipping in the region (Dawson et al., 2014). However, cruise shipping differs from industrial 
shipping in a number of ways, including deviating from main shipping corridors in pursuit of ice, wildlife 
and culture. This involves navigating in sometimes challenging, uncharted waters, seeking access to 
shore locations and interacting with local residents. Researchers, private operators and Canadian Inuit 
organizations see the need to improve governance of the sector. Limiting the size of cruise ships entering 
Arctic waterways, banning the use of heavy oil in Arctic waters, establishing site guidelines for highly 
visited areas, and regulating cruise ship disturbances to wildlife (birds and mammals) and their habitats are 
examples of potential measures (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2017; Kujawinski, 2017; The Maritime Executive, 
2016; Dawson et al., 2014).
Successfully managing climate change-related risks is also critical to the sustainable growth and evolution of 
the Arctic cruise ship industry. Qualitative research led by Dawson et al. (2016) and involving over 300 local 
residents, cruise operators and regional decision makers identified the seven most feasible and desirable 
adaptation strategies for cruise ship tourism in the Canadian Arctic (see Figure 9.4). Bottom-up approaches 
to identifying adaptation needs and priorities in climate change management tend to address current 
vulnerabilities and risks. If genuinely participatory, they also generate results that are consistent with local 
priorities, goals, norms and institutions—a foundation for implementation success.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 644 
Figure 9.4: Summary of the research process used by Dawson et al. (2016) to identify promising adaptation 
options for cruise ship tourism in the Canadian Arctic. The Delphi technique uses iterative and structured expert 
elicitation to generate consensus judgments. Source: Adapted from Dawson et al., 2016.
9.3 Transboundary marine and freshwater 
agreements generally do not consider climate 
change 
Canada’s transboundary marine and freshwater agreements were not created with climate change in mind. 
In collaboration with international partners, Canada has an opportunity to show leadership in preserving 
long-term cooperation and protecting shared resources by building on adaptive practices recognized as 
successful.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 645 
Despite differences in agreements governing sharing of marine and freshwater resources across international 
borders, one commonality is the general assumption that environmental conditions would remain static over 
time. In a changing climate, relying on this assumption risks unsustainable resource use that may destabilize 
existing cooperative relationships. As a significant contributor to international environmental negotiations, 
Canada is well positioned to help modernize transboundary resource management institutions to provide 
more resilient frameworks for coping with uncertainty, promoting environmental stewardship and improving 
representation of affected groups and Indigenous governments.
9.3.1 Introduction
Most of the agreements governing shared marine and fresh waters that cross the Canada–U.S. border were 
negotiated and signed before climate change was a recognized concern. These arrangements face new 
challenges since they assume “stationarity.” Climate change invalidates the assumption that environmental 
conditions can be adequately predicted based on historical information; therefore, continued reliance on 
stationarity threatens sustainable resource use and the stability of cooperative relationships (Sumaila et al., 
2020; Britten et al., 2017; Szuwalski and Hollowed, 2016; Criddle, 2012; Craig, 2010; Hanna, 2008; Milly et 
al., 2008). Physical impacts like changes in the timing and volume of flows or in the frequency and duration 
of floods and droughts will have different economic implications across the border and will likely challenge 
existing allocation mechanisms. Further, because climate-related risks differ in Canada and the United States, 
each country will discount future benefits from shared marine and freshwater ecosystems differently, thereby 
complicating the ability to agree on the value of those benefits (Sumaila et al., 2011; Sumaila, 2005).
Canada’s marine and freshwater systems have different characteristics yet are highly interconnected and 
share climate-related risks. Compared to river basins, marine systems are harder to divide into discrete 
ecological units and associated agreements tend to focus on a single issue (e.g., navigation, pollution, 
invasive species, fisheries and environmental protection). Examples include the Pacific Salmon Treaty, 
the Antarctic Treaty’s Environmental Protocol and the Canada–U.S. Marine Pollution Contingency Plan. 
Freshwater agreements often consider a bundle of shared benefits together, such as hydropower production, 
flood management, agricultural irrigation, navigation, fisheries and water quality management. Examples 
include the Columbia River Treaty, Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement and the Boundary Waters Treaty. 
Despite these differences, there are critical connections between marine and freshwater systems. Both 
are subject to long- and short-term climate variation (e.g., Pacific Decadal Oscillation, El Niño Southern 
Oscillation) and are sensitive to shifts in water temperatures (Di Lorenzo and Mantua, 2016; Pinsky et 
al., 2013; Cheung et al., 2009; Hollowed et al., 2001; Mantua et al., 1997; Wood and McDonald, 1997). 
Anadromous species like salmon that rear in freshwater, migrate to sea, then return to their natal streams to 
spawn, reinforce the need to consider cumulative effects across marine, riverine, and land-based ecosystems. 
Agreements that acknowledge these linkages are better positioned to cope with uncertain climate futures 
(see Case Story 9.2).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 646 
Case Story 9.2: The Canada–U.S. Pacific Salmon Treaty
The Pacific Salmon Treaty (PST) (Pacific Salmon Commission, 2016a) was ratified in 1985 to prevent 
overfishing and improve the management of five salmon stocks shared between Canada and the United 
States (Miller, 1996; Yanagida, 1987). The PST was successfully renegotiated in 1999 using a multi-
stakeholder approach to address conflict over “interceptions” of fish—fish that originate in one country but are 
caught in the other (see Figure 9.5). At that time, the treaty also established a restoration and enhancement 
fund (Pacific Salmon Commission, 2016b) to support healthy salmon populations in both marine and 
freshwater environments. The agreement’s focus on anadromous species illustrates how marine and 
freshwater linkages can be considered in a transboundary agreement. Joint recommendations put forward 
in 2018 for a new 10-year agreement explicitly acknowledge climate change and include provisions for 
long-term monitoring, science-based management, and renewed commitments to support conservation and 
sustainable-use opportunities for Indigenous, commercial and recreational fishers.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 647 
Figure 9.5: a) Migratory patterns of major Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) stock groups. Source: 
Adapted from the National Marine Fisheries Service, 2019. b) Average captures of regional Chinook salmon 
(Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) for the period 2009–2017 under managed fisheries of the Pacific Salmon Treaty. 
The values in the pie charts represent the proportion of each region’s major chinook stock captured by individual 
fishing entities (averaged across regional stocks), and do not include escapement. Data source: Pacific Salmon 
Commission, 2019.
Further reading: McIntosh, 2016; Peterman et al., 2016; Temby et al., 2015; Criddle, 2012; McKinney et al., 
2010; Munro et al., 1997; Miller, 1996; Munro and Stokes, 1989.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 648 
As a significant contributor to international environmental negotiations and global environmental governance 
(Stoett, 2018), Canada is well suited to promote adaptive and inclusive transboundary resource management 
solutions. Most of Canada’s marine and freshwater agreements already observe widely accepted principles, 
such as the duty to cooperate, no-harm and equitable use (Koubrak and VanderZwaag 2020; Paisley, 2002; 
United Nations, 1970). Additionally, access to some of the world’s largest anadromous fish stocks puts 
Canada in a unique position to champion integrated marine and freshwater management in transboundary 
systems. An overarching climate change adaptation goal for transboundary resources is to develop 
management institutions capable of responding to increased variability while still sustaining shared benefits 
in the long term. The following sections introduce challenges that climate change presents to shared 
governance of transboundary marine and freshwater resources and outline opportunities for adaptation.
9.3.2 Marine agreements
Canada is bordered by three oceans whose marine resources provide important ecological, social, economic 
and cultural benefits (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2017; Ommer, 2007; Nuttall, 2005; Fisheries and Oceans 
Canada, 2002). In 2016, British Columbia’s exports of Pacific hake (Merluccius productus), Chinook salmon 
(Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) and Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis) alone—all shared marine 
resources—accounted for $161.6 million (Government of British Columbia, 2017).
Changing ocean conditions due to climate change have led to substantial geographic shifts in marine 
animals, a pattern expected to continue or accelerate in the future. With rising ocean temperatures, marine 
species are already shifting poleward (Palacios-Abrantes et al., 2020a; Pinsky et al., 2018; Poloczanska et al., 
2016; Weatherdon et al., 2016; Cheung et al., 2015; García Molinos et al., 2015; Kintisch, 2015; Peterson et al., 
2015; Pinsky et al., 2013; Poloczanska et al., 2013; Fogarty, 2012) or into deeper water (Dulvy et al., 2008) to 
stay within their preferred temperature range. Movements can be temporary; for example, greater proportions 
of Pacific hake (whiting) migrated northward into Canadian waters during the warm 1998 and 2015 El Niño 
events (Berger et al., 2017). Shifts are also associated with ecological responses and altered food-web 
interactions that increase uncertainty about stock productivity and the vulnerability of fish to pollution and 
exploitation (Cheung, 2018; Cheung et al., 2016; Cheung et al., 2015; Doney et al., 2012; Gruber et al., 2012; 
Ainsworth et al., 2011; Perry et al., 2005).
Because the movement of fish stocks across international borders redistributes shared marine resources 
(see Figure 9.6), it challenges existing cooperative governance structures (see Table 9.3). Uncertainty 
surrounding this redistribution modifies the relatively static management context under which contractual 
and reciprocal rights and responsibilities were originally agreed (Gullestad et al., 2020; Hannesson, 2020; 
Mendehall et al., 2020; Østhagen et al., 2020; Palacios-Abrantes et al., 2020a, b; Bindoff et al., 2019; Wenar, 
2015; Mills et al., 2013; Ringius et al., 2002; United Nations, 1970), potentially accentuating disagreements 
over fisheries allocations (Pinsky et al., 2018; Spijkers and Boonstra, 2017; Berkes, 2010). Uncertainty about 
the magnitude and timing of climate-mediated changes also makes it harder to collaboratively develop and 
implement clear and pragmatic transboundary policies (Engler, 2020; Pecl et al., 2017; Hollowed et al., 2013; 
Polasky et al., 2011; Miller et al., 2010; Brander, 2007; Miller, 2007).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 649 
Table 9.3: Agreements to which Canada is a member that deal with 
transboundary stocks
AGREEMENT
OCEAN
MEMBERS (CURRENT 
NUMBER OF 
MEMBERS)
SPECIES
NUMBER 
OF SPECIES 
/ SPECIES 
GROUPS
Convention for the 
Preservation of the 
Halibut Fishery of 
the Northern Pacific 
Ocean and Bering Sea
Pacific
Canada and the United 
States (2)
Pacific halibut
1
Pacific Salmon Treaty
Pacific
Canada and the United 
States (2)
Pacific salmon: 
chum, chinook, coho, 
pink, and sockeye
5
Pacific Whiting Treaty
Pacific
Canada and the United 
States (2)
Pacific hake
1
Convention on 
Cooperation in the 
Northwest Atlantic 
Fisheries
Atlantic
Iceland, Japan, the 
Republic of Korea, 
Norway, the Russian 
Federation, Ukraine, 
Canada, Cuba, Denmark 
(Faroe Islands and 
Greenland), the 
European Union, 
France (Saint-Pierre 
et Miquelon) and the 
United States (12)
Atlantic cod, redfish, 
American plaice, 
yellowtail flounder, 
witch flounder, white 
hake, capelin, thorny 
skate, Greenland 
halibut, shortfin 
squid, Northern 
shrimp
11*
Convention for the 
Conservation of 
Salmon in the North 
Atlantic Ocean
Atlantic
Canada, Denmark (Faroe 
Islands and Greenland), 
the European Union, 
Norway, the Russian 
Federation and the 
United States (6)
Atlantic salmon
1
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 650 
AGREEMENT
OCEAN
MEMBERS (CURRENT 
NUMBER OF 
MEMBERS)
SPECIES
NUMBER 
OF SPECIES 
/ SPECIES 
GROUPS
Convention for the 
Conservation of 
Anadromous Stocks 
in the North Pacific 
Ocean
Pacific
Canada, Japan, the 
Russian Federation, the 
Republic of Korea and 
the United States (5)
chum salmon, coho 
salmon, pink salmon, 
sockeye salmon, 
chinook salmon, 
cherry salmon and 
steelhead trout
7
*The North Atlantic Fisheries Organization’s Convention on Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries 
applies to most fisheries resources of the Northwest Atlantic, with the exception of salmon, tuna/marlin, 
whales, and sedentary species. However, it officially manages only 11 species (and 19 stocks).
These challenges provide impetus to develop cooperative adaptation strategies for the responsible 
stewardship of shared resources. For example, enhancing collaborative monitoring and integrating multiple 
data streams into seamless transboundary datasets can support more effective and precautionary 
management, and enable better enforcement of transboundary marine agreements (Pinsky et al., 2021, 2018; 
Wendebourg, 2020; Aquorau et al., 2018; Mills et al., 2013; Link et al., 2011; McIlgorm et al., 2010). Greater 
responsiveness in management regimes would facilitate such developments (Bailey et al., 2016; Favaro et 
al., 2012), such as that being implemented by the Transboundary Resources Assessment Committee (TRAC), 
which is conducting and reviewing stock assessments and projections to support management of shared 
Eastern Georges Bank cod, haddock and yellowtail flounder across the Canada–U.S. boundary in the Gulf of 
Maine–Georges Bank region (Palacios Abrantes et al., 2020b).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 651 
Figure 9.6: Map of projected shifts in the distribution of representative commercial transboundary fish species 
targeted by American and Canadian fisheries by 2050 under a high emissions scenario, relative to 2014. The 
coloured scale indicates the projected change in catch shares within the Exclusive Economic Zone (red = decline; 
purple = increase). The arrows on the map represent the direction of the shift in distribution for these five key fish 
species. Source: Adapted from Cheung et al., 2016.
To be effective, agreements also need to respond to shifts in societal norms (Stoett, 2018), such as the 
growing importance of accounting for equity and the unique rights of Indigenous people (Campbell, 2015; 
Dodds and Hemmings, 2015). Various strategies can support the development of transboundary marine 
agreements in ways that meet objectives adaptively while striving for equity. Key tools include fishing permit 
structures that facilitate entry into different/emerging fisheries, sustained monitoring at change-relevant 
scales, and catch limits or schemes that provide for capacity adjustments (e.g., license buy-back or tradable 
quota shares) (Aqorau et al., 2018; Mills et al., 2013). Also critical is meaningful participation of Indigenous 
peoples in negotiations and the inclusion of Indigenous ecological knowledge in the development of more 
adaptive strategies (Ojea et al., 2020; Armitage et al., 2015; Mills et al., 2015; Aswani and Lauer, 2014). 
Increasing the capacity of Indigenous communities and stakeholder groups to independently apply risk-based 
tools is one way to strengthen the role of these groups in transboundary decision-making (Le Bris et al., 2018; 
Payne et al., 2017; Mills et al., 2015).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 652 
9.3.3 Freshwater agreements
As with other Canadian river basins, changes in precipitation and snowpack, shifts in the timing and shape 
of annual hydrographs, water temperature increases, and increased frequency of floods and droughts (see 
Water Resources chapter) present challenges to the management of transboundary waters. These impacts 
will vary across the country (see Figure 9.7) and will test cooperative water relations by increasing the 
need for difficult trade-offs across competing freshwater uses, such as hydropower production, irrigation, 
flood control, recreation, navigation, and species conservation (Cooley et al., 2012; Cooley and Gleick, 2011; 
Hamlet, 2010; Cooley et al., 2009; Bruce et al., 2003). These uses form the basis of shared management 
considerations across the Canada–U.S. border, with climate change affecting Canada‒U.S. hydro-relations 
differently depending on which shared management considerations are under threat (see Table 9.4). In 
addition, the effects of other non-climate stressors like increasing demand for electricity, misaligned domestic 
conservation laws in Canada and the United States, industrial and agricultural pollution, invasive species and 
increased water consumption will be amplified by climate change, further affecting cooperative relations.
Figure 9.7: Projected climate change impacts for major drainage basins that are shared across Canada‒US 
borders. Data sources: Adapted from George, 2019b; International Joint Commission, 2017; World Wildlife Fund-
Canada, 2017; Bartolai et al., 2015; International Joint Commission, 2013; Shrestha et al., 2012; Hamlet, 2010; 
Mantua et al., 2010; International Joint Commission, 2009; Hamlet and Lettenmaier, 2007; Bruce et al., 2003; 
Hamlet and Lettenmaier, 1999.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 653 
Table 9.4: Shared management considerations, related climate change 
stressors and major shared drainage basins affected
SHARED MANAGEMENT 
CONSIDERATIONS
RELATED CLIMATE 
CHANGE STRESSORS
MAJOR SHARED DRAINAGE BASINS 
AFFECTED
Drinking water supply
•	 Fraser
•	 St. Croix
Flood management
•	 Columbia
•	 Fraser
•	 Nelson-Saskatchewan
•	 St. Lawrence
Fish conservation
•	 Columbia
•	 Fraser
•	 Nelson-Saskatchewan
•	 St. Croix
•	 St. Lawrence
•	 Transboundary Headwater
•	 Yukon
Hydropower production
•	  Columbia
•	 Saint John
•	 St. Croix
•	 St. Lawrence
Agricultural irrigation
•	 Columbia
•	 Nelson-Saskatchewan
•	 Mississippi
Shipping and navigation
•	 Columbia
•	 St. Lawrence
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 654 
SHARED MANAGEMENT 
CONSIDERATIONS
RELATED CLIMATE 
CHANGE STRESSORS
MAJOR SHARED DRAINAGE BASINS 
AFFECTED
Recreation 
opportunities
•	 Columbia
•	 St. Lawrence
Water quality 
management
•	 Columbia
•	 Fraser
•	 Nelson-Saskatchewan
•	 Saint John
•	 St. Lawrence
•	 Transboundary Headwaters
Key
Warmer water 
temperatures
Increased flood risk
Increased drought risk
Increase precipitation 
and runoff
Reduced summer 
flow volumes
Snowpack 
reduction and 
glacier melt
Permafrost loss 
and erosion
Temportal shifts in 
flow regime
Increased sediment and 
pollutant loads
Temporal shifts in primary 
productivity
Change in lake and reservoir 
elevations
Increased algal blooms and 
slow flows
Sources: International Joint Commission, 2020; Province of British Columbia and State of Alaska, 2015; 
Canada and U.S.A., 2013; Province of British Columbia and State of Montana, 2010; Norman and Bakker, 
2005; State of Illinois et al., 2005; Great Lakes Commission, 1994; Province of British Columbia and State 
of Washington, 1992; Canada and U.S.A., 1985; Province of Ontario et al., 1985; Canada and U.S.A., 1964; 
Canada and U.S.A., 1954; Canada and U.S.A., 1952; Canada and U.S.A., 1950; Canada and U.S.A., 1932; 
Canada and U.S.A., 1925; Great Britain and U.S.A., 1909.
Freshwater governance across the Canada–U.S. border is defined by numerous transboundary agreements 
at federal and provincial/state levels (see Table 9.5). Several of these agreements were signed before climate 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 655 
change was a recognized issue and remain grounded in assumptions of stationarity (e.g., Boundary Waters 
Treaty, Columbia River Treaty and Convention on Great Lakes Fisheries).
Table 9.5: Transboundary freshwater agreements across the 
Canada–U.S. border with key water bodies indicated
MAJOR DRAINAGE 
BASIN
AGREEMENTS
KEY WATER BODIES
Yukon
•	 Pacific Salmon Treaty 1985 (federal)
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Yukon River
Transboundary 
Headwaters
•	 Pacific Salmon Treaty 1985 (federal)
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 BC-Alaska Memorandum of 
Understanding and Cooperation 2015 
(provincial/state)
•	 Stikine River
•	 Alsek River
•	 Chilkat River
•	 Taku River
•	 Whiting River
•	 Unuk River
Fraser
•	 Pacific Salmon Treaty 1985 (federal)
•	 BC-Washington Environmental 
Cooperation Agreement 1992 
(provincial/state)
•	 Fraser River
•	 Abbotsford-Sumas 
Aquifer
•	 Nooksak River
Skagit
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Skagit River
Columbia
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Columbia River Treaty 1964 (federal)
•	 Flathead Memorandum of 
Understanding and Cooperation on 
Environmental Protection, Climate 
Action and Energy 2010 (provincial/
state)
•	 BC-Washington Environmental 
Cooperation Agreement 1992 
(provincial/state)
•	 Columbia River
•	 Kootenay River
•	 Osoyoos Lake
•	 Flathead River
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 656 
MAJOR DRAINAGE 
BASIN
AGREEMENTS
KEY WATER BODIES
Nelson-Saskatchewan
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Souris River
•	 Red River
Mississippi
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Saint Mary River
•	 Milk River
•	 Poplar River
St. Lawrence
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement 
2012 (federal)
•	 Convention on Great Lakes Fisheries 
1954 (federal)
•	 Lake of the Woods Convention & 
Protocol 1925, 1979 (federal)
•	 Saint Lawrence Seaway Project 
Agreement 1952, 1954 (federal)
•	 Niagara River Water Diversion Treaty 
1950 (federal)
•	 Saint Lawrence Deep Waterway Treaty 
1932 (federal)
•	 Great Lakes Charter 1985 (provincial/
state)
•	 Ecosystems Charter for the Great 
Lakes and Saint Lawrence Basin 1994 
(provincial/state)
•	 Lake Memphremagog Environmental 
Cooperation Agreement 1989, 2003 
(provincial/state)
•	 The Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence River 
Basin Sustainable Water Resource 
Agreement 2005 (provincial/state)
•	 Great Lakes
•	 St. Lawrence River
•	 Lake of the Woods
•	 Rainy River
•	 Lake Champlain
•	 Richelieu River
•	 Lake Memphremagog
•	 Niagara River
Saint John
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 Saint John River
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 657 
MAJOR DRAINAGE 
BASIN
AGREEMENTS
KEY WATER BODIES
St. Croix
•	 Boundary Waters Treaty 1909 (federal)
•	 St. Croix River
Sources: International Joint Commission, 2020; Province of British Columbia and State of Alaska, 2015; 
Canada and U.S.A., 2013; Province of British Columbia and State of Montana, 2010; Norman and Bakker, 
2005; State of Illinois et al., 2005; Great Lakes Commission, 1994; Province of British Columbia and State 
of Washington, 1992; Canada and U.S.A., 1985; Province of Ontario et al., 1985; Canada and U.S.A., 1964; 
Canada and U.S.A., 1954; Canada and U.S.A., 1952; Canada and U.S.A.,1950; Canada and U.S.A., 1932; 
Canada and U.S.A., 1925; Great Britain and U.S.A., 1909.
Other countries can provide useful lessons for updating Canada–U.S. freshwater agreements. In 2015, 
under the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe’s (UNECE) Water Convention, Belarus, Lithuania 
and Russia jointly created one of the first frameworks for climate change adaptation in a transboundary 
river basin—the Strategic Framework for Adaptation to Climate Change in the Neman River Basin (Korneev 
et al., 2015). The Neman Basin’s primary environmental stressor is industrial pollution. Unless adaptation 
measures are put in place, industrial pollutants will become more concentrated as runoff decreases due to 
climate change. The Framework establishes a baseline status for basin-wide water monitoring and includes 
a common set of spatially explicit impact and risk projections. The agreement is closely aligned with the 
principles laid out in the EU Water Framework Directive, with adaptive features including “climate-proof” 
performance measures for monitoring that are capable of responding to non-stationarity (e.g., proportional 
rather than volumetric); a cyclical approach with periodic revisions to accommodate new developments in 
science and technology, address new uncertainties, and permit adjustment as existing uncertainties are 
resolved; the establishment of a river basin commission with multi-stakeholder representation capable of 
responding to shifting interests and priorities of affected parties as the impacts of climate change unfold; 
and consistent policy linkages across local, national and international levels that allow decision makers to be 
more agile, reducing bottlenecks from poor policy harmonization (European Commission, 2009).
Table 9.6 lists adaptive measures implemented in transboundary river basins globally and compares these 
with measures applied in key Canada–U.S. freshwater agreements. Except for the Great Lakes Water Quality 
Agreement (GLWQA), no more than a third of these measures are currently applied in any of Canada’s major 
shared river basins. The Canada–U.S. International Joint Commission (IJC) has developed a high-level 
non-binding framework for its seventeen Boards and Committees, which lays out a process for climate 
change adaptation planning, knowledge sharing, and the use of adaptive management (International Joint 
Commission, 2018; Bernstein et al. 2017). The GLWQA was updated in 2012 and is currently Canada’s most 
climate-ready freshwater treaty. The agreement explicitly includes obligations to apply adaptive management 
principles in response to climate change, but implementation has been slow. There remains no jointly 
developed basin-wide strategy for addressing climate change impacts (International Joint Commission, 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 658 
Table 9.6: Adaptive practices applied in transboundary freshwater 
agreements (globally), compared with current practices under key 
Canada–U.S. freshwater agreements
TRANSBOUNDARY ADAPTIVE PRACTICES 
IN BASINS (GLOBALLY)
BOUNDARY WATERS 
TREATY
IJC* INITIATIVES UNDER 
BOUNDARY WATERS 
TREATY
PACIFIC SALMON 
TREATY
COLUMBIA RIVER 
TREATY
GREAT LAKES WATER 
QUALITY AGREEMENT
CONVENTION OF GREAT 
LAKES FISHERIES
Environmental
Joint habitat quality targets (e.g., ecological flows)
Flexible water quality standards and/or operating rules 
(e.g., proportional not volumetric allocations)
 “Climate-proof” performance measures for joint 
monitoring
Coordinated flood, drought, and/or pollution 
management and early warning systems
Ecological management units (e.g., river basin)
Integrated adaptive management (systems-based, 
including marine systems; test hypotheses to address 
uncertainties)
Coordinated climate change modelling, analyses, and 
research
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 659 
TRANSBOUNDARY ADAPTIVE PRACTICES 
IN BASINS (GLOBALLY)
BOUNDARY WATERS 
TREATY
IJC* INITIATIVES UNDER 
BOUNDARY WATERS 
TREATY
PACIFIC SALMON 
TREATY
COLUMBIA RIVER 
TREATY
GREAT LAKES WATER 
QUALITY AGREEMENT
CONVENTION OF GREAT 
LAKES FISHERIES
Political/Governance
Federal ratification of international policies laws for 
water management (e.g., Water Convention)
Climate change adaptation obligations embedded 
explicitly in agreement
Allowance for supplementary agreements
Dispute resolution mechanisms
Formal river basin organization(s) that include or 
consult with multiple interest groups
Explicit commitment to develop joint climate change 
adaptation management plan/framework 
Policy harmonization across borders and levels of 
government
Frequent (e.g., 10–20 year) periodic review/revision of 
agreement
Open data sharing across multiple interest groups
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 660 
TRANSBOUNDARY ADAPTIVE PRACTICES 
IN BASINS (GLOBALLY)
BOUNDARY WATERS 
TREATY
IJC* INITIATIVES UNDER 
BOUNDARY WATERS 
TREATY
PACIFIC SALMON 
TREATY
COLUMBIA RIVER 
TREATY
GREAT LAKES WATER 
QUALITY AGREEMENT
CONVENTION OF GREAT 
LAKES FISHERIES
Economic
Joint financial commitment to climate change 
adaptation
Equitable sharing of benefits (e.g., payments for 
upstream ecosystem services)
*The International Joint Commission (IJC)
Sources: UN Economic Commission for Europe, 2018; Escribano Francés et al., 2017; Honkonen, 2017; 
International Joint Commission, 2017; Bartolai et al., 2015; Norman, 2015; UN Economic Commission for 
Europe et al., 2015; Abdel-Fattah and Krantzberg, 2014; BC Hydro, 2013; Canada and U.S.A., 2013; Hamlet 
et al., 2013; International Joint Commission, 2013; UN Economic Commission for Europe, 2013; Bankes 
and Cosens, 2012; Cooley et al., 2012; Shrestha et al., 2012; Cooley and Gleick, 2011; UN Development 
Programme - Global Environmental Facility, 2011; Hamlet, 2010; Keskitalo, 2010; Mantua et al., 2010; 
Northwest Power and Conservation Council, 2010; Brown and Crawford, 2009; Cooley et al., 2009; de Loë, 
2009; Huitema et al.. 2009; International Joint Commission, 2009; Pahl-Wostl et al., 2009; Timmerman 
and Bernardini, 2009; UN Economic Commission for Europe, 2009; Krysanova et al., 2008; Draper and 
Kundell, 2007; Hamlet and Lettenmaier, 2007; Ketchum and Barroso, 2006; Sneddon and Fox, 2006; 
Norman and Bakker, 2005; Bruce et al., 2003; Dietz et al., 2003; Muckleston, 2003; Paisley, 2002; Hamlet 
and Lettenmaier, 1999; Johnson, 1999; Wolf, 1998; Lee, 1994; Stoner et al., 1993; Canada and U.S.A., 1985; 
Blumm, 1980; Canada and U.S.A., 1964; Canada and U.S.A., 1954; Great Britain and U.S.A., 1909; Yukon 
River Panel, n.d.
The need for climate change adaptation, therefore, presents opportunities to modernize arrangements 
governing Canada’s shared river basins in order to provide more resilient frameworks for coping with 
uncertainty, protecting environmental values and improving representation of affected groups and Indigenous 
governments. Review and revision of existing arrangements, as is currently occurring for the Columbia River 
Treaty, can aid in addressing adaptation gaps (see Case Story 9.3).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 661 
Case Story 9.3: Modernizing the Canada–U.S. Columbia River Treaty to 
consider climate change
The 1964 Canada–U.S. Columbia River Treaty (CRT) outlines rules for cooperative uses and responsibilities 
over hydropower production and flood management (Canada and U.S.A., 1964). The agreement was once 
an exemplar of international water cooperation due to its observance of the principle of “equitable use” via 
a 50/50 split of hydropower benefits (Paisley, 2002). Adaptive features also include the annual creation of 
two operating plans covering different planning horizons (upcoming year and six years out) and the use of 
sub-agreements. Additional shared values in the basin include recreation, navigation, agricultural irrigation 
and Indigenous cultural heritage (Government of British Columbia, 2013). The agreement is now outdated 
because it makes no explicit mention of these other values, assumes stationarity and lacks mechanisms 
for interested parties to be included in decision-making. Climate change projections show an increasing 
proportional contribution of Columbia River flows to the Canadian part of the basin, which will likely 
increase U.S. demand for Canadian water management (see Figure 9.8; Hamlet et al., 2013; Hamlet, 2010; 
Mantua et al., 2010; Hamlet and Lettenmaier, 2007; Hamlet and Lettenmaier, 1999). With the aim of better 
reflecting modern values, renegotiations of the CRT are currently underway. As part of the negotiations, 
ecosystem functions are being considered, modelled climate change projections are playing a role, and, in an 
unprecedented move for Canadian international negotiations, Indigenous communities have been included as 
observers at the negotiating table (Government of British Columbia, 2019; Government of British Columbia, 
2014; U.S. Entity to the Columbia River Treaty, 2013). The extent to which the CRT will re-establish its status 
as an exemplar by embracing more adaptive principles remains to be seen, but the current policy window is 
an opportunity to re-craft a historic water agreement with an eye towards future climate uncertainty.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 662 
Figure 9.8: Historical and projected future watershed classifications for the Columbia Basin, based on the 
global emissions scenarios (the A1B relatively high emissions scenario and the B1 low emissions scenario) for 
the 2020s, 2040s and 2080s. As climate change progresses, 50% of the total reservoir storage is expected to 
lie in Canada. Canada is also expected to have an increasingly dominant portion of natural water storage as 
snowpack. Source: Adapted from Hamlet et al., 2013.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 663 
9.4 Climate change presents risks and 
opportunities for international trade 
Canada is dependent on international trade and will increasingly experience economic effects from 
extreme weather and climate change impacts and adaptation elsewhere in the world, especially when 
occurring in countries with which Canada has strong trade ties.
Canada’s mixed economy is reliant on trade as a source of wealth and to satisfy consumer needs. The impacts 
of climate change around the world, such as sea-level rise and more intense extreme events, as well as 
actions taken in response to these impacts will alter patterns of global trade, with consequences for Canadian 
businesses, consumers and the economy. Disruptions to supply and distribution networks, changes in the 
availability and price of traded goods, and the creation of global markets for new adaptation solutions are 
among the direct and indirect impacts of climate change. Weather-related disruptions to supply chains and 
short-term price spikes in staples heighten the need for Canadian firms and governments to assess the risks 
and opportunities that climate change impacts on global trade will present, including the negative effects of 
long-term adjustments in trade patterns for communities within and beyond Canada’s borders. Little published 
research exists about these indirect impacts of climate change or assessments of action by Canadian 
businesses and governments to understand and manage resulting risks and opportunities.
9.4.1 Introduction 
Canada relies on trade for economic and social well-being. Over half of the country’s gross domestic product 
(GDP) derives from the export and import of goods and services in the global marketplace (Global Affairs 
Canada, 2019a). In 2018, Canada exported $706 billion and imported $753 billion in goods and services 
(Global Affairs Canada, 2019a), with goods accounting for just over 80% of trade by value. Five trade partners 
received 90% of Canada’s exports and supplied over 85% of its imports in goods, with trade in consumer 
goods, energy and mining commodities particularly prominent, in dollar terms (see Figure 9.9). Although 
Ontario, Alberta and Quebec accounted for almost 80% of goods exported in 2017, exports originated from all 
provinces and territories (Global Affairs Canada, 2018). Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia received over 
80% of imported goods in 2017. Every year, thousands of Canadian firms engage in international trade, with 
small- and medium-sized enterprises accounting for over 90% of trade activity, when measured by number 
of organizations. In dollar terms, large firms (over 500 employees) account for over 50% of trade value 
(Statistics Canada, 2018a, b). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 664 
Figure 9.9: Canada’s trade performance in 2018: a) value of exports (light blue) and imports (green) of goods in 
$ billions, by sector; b) Value of export (light blue) and import (green) of goods in $ billions, by trade partner or 
region. Source: Adapted from Global Affairs Canada, 2019a.
The impacts of climate change felt elsewhere in the world, such as increased temperatures, sea-level rise and 
more intense extreme events, have ripple effects for Canada’s economy and population through international 
trade. As described elsewhere in this assessment, climate change impacts within Canada’s borders shift 
the risks and opportunities faced by Canadian enterprises, with economy-wide consequences (see Costs 
and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter and Sector Impacts and Adaptation 
chapter). Foreign enterprises competing with Canadian producers are exposed to climate change risks 
and opportunities in similar ways. Supply- and demand-side factors come into play, with benefits or costs 
tempered by the adaptive capacity at the enterprise, sector or country level (see Table 9.7).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 665 
Table 9.7: Examples of climate change risks and opportunities on the 
supply and demand sides of business
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
PATHWAY OF EXPOSURE
EXAMPLES OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE-RELATED RISKS AND 
OPPORTUNITIES
Ability to adapt given size, 
resource endowments, 
geographic location, sector, 
policy and regulatory
frameworks, information and 
partnerships
Supply
Infrastructure, 
capital goods and 
inventory
•	 Loss and damage from extreme 
events 
•	 Loss of coastal locations due to 
sea-level rise
•	 Increased costs to pay for 
reconstruction and adaptation
Employees and 
labour productivity
•	 Loss of hours worked due 
to disasters, infrastructure 
disruption, lack of access 
to workplace, temporary or 
permanent displacement
•	 Loss of hours worked (or slower 
work) due to rising heat stress
Supply chains 
and distribution 
networks
•	 Shortages of inputs (e.g., energy, 
water, food and other inputs) 
and disruptions in supply chains
•	 Interruptions in delivery of 
goods and services to markets
Products and 
services
•	 Changes in the cost of 
production and service delivery 
(e.g., increased input costs, 
increased cooling costs, higher 
insurance premiums)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 666 
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
PATHWAY OF EXPOSURE
EXAMPLES OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE-RELATED RISKS AND 
OPPORTUNITIES
Ability to adapt given size, 
resource endowments, 
geographic location, sector, 
policy and regulatory
frameworks, information and 
partnerships
(continued)
Demand
Consumption / 
purchase
•	 Changes in quantity, quality or 
location of demand for goods 
and services
Investment
•	 Changes in capital flows due to 
uncertainty of direct, indirect 
and cascading physical climate 
risks
Sources: Adapted from Batten, 2018; Surminski et al., 2018
In a global marketplace, countries and firms within them can specialize, producing goods and services for 
which they have a lower opportunity cost relative to foreign counterparts, while importing other goods and 
services. This principle—comparative advantage—is a key driver of international trade (Bruce and Haites, 
2008). With the rise of emerging economies, trade flows and geographic centres of trade are expected to 
shift in the next few decades (Dellink et al., 2017). Producers in Atlantic Canada, for example, are forging 
connections with emerging Asian markets through the Suez Canal (Rapaport et al., 2017). Climate change 
stands to alter countries’ comparative advantage (Costinot et al., 2014; Bruce and Haites, 2008) meaning that 
projected evolutions in world trade patterns may go unrealized (Dellink et al., 2017).
This section discusses the risks and opportunities to Canada from climate-induced disruptions to global 
supply chains and from changes in comparative advantage in a global marketplace. It also explores the 
interplay between climate change adaptation and international trade.
9.4.2 Trade and climate change risk
Climate change impacts can result in economic consequences for Canada by disrupting supply and 
distribution networks reliant on vulnerable trade infrastructure. Well-functioning transportation infrastructure 
is essential for trade. Globally, marine shipping and seaport operations account for about 80% of trade 
by volume and 70% by value (UN Conference on Trade and Development, 2018). Canada’s transportation 
system moved $1.107 trillion in traded goods in 2017 (Transport Canada, 2017), with Port Metro Vancouver 
handling upward of 15% of the trade by value, with more than 160 countries (Nyland and Nodelman, 2017). 
International and Canadian Port authorities and operators indicate that weather and extreme climate events 
are already causing shipment delays and physical damage (UN Conference on Trade and Development, 
2017; Ng et al., 2016). Changing climate conditions and extreme weather have numerous implications for 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 667 
seaports and land-based trade infrastructure (see Table 9.8), including disruptions that increase the cost of 
international trade and cause rerouting as firms opt for more reliable alternatives of the same mode or others 
(Dellink et al., 2017). Global food trade is particularly at risk because of a growing reliance on a small number 
of maritime, coastal and inland choke points to move food staples and fertilizers (Bailey and Wellesley, 2017).
Table 9.8: Examples of climate change risks for trade infrastructure
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
TRANSPORT MODE
EXAMPLES OF DIRECT 
IMPACTS
CONSEQUENCES ON 
TRADE INFRASTRUCTURE
Increased 
temperature and 
solar radiation
Road and rail
•	 Rail buckling
•	 Pavement cracking
•	 Loss of water seal 
causing potholing
•	 Reduced life of asphalt
•	 Speed restrictions to 
avoid derailments
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
Aviation
•	 Reduced life of asphalt
•	 Reduced airlift capacity
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
•	 Need to construct 
longer runways to 
make up for reduced 
airlift
Sea-based transport
•	 Reduced refrigeration 
capacity
•	 Opening / expansion of 
Arctic shipping routes 
due to shrinking sea ice
•	 Increased need for 
cooling terminals and 
cargo
•	 Reduced distances 
and time related to 
Arctic navigation, but 
need for additional 
navigation aids
•	 Higher insurance 
costs for Arctic 
navigation
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 668 
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
TRANSPORT MODE
EXAMPLES OF DIRECT 
IMPACTS
CONSEQUENCES ON 
TRADE INFRASTRUCTURE
Increased 
precipitation, 
inland flooding 
and fog intensity/ 
duration
Road and rail
•	 Flooding
•	 Bridge scour
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
•	 Rerouting to avoid 
affected roads and 
bridges
Aviation
•	 Flooding of runways 
and access roads
•	 Damage to facilities
•	 Reduced visibility
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
Sea-based transport
•	 Damage to land 
infrastructure, cargo 
and equipment
•	 Reduced capabilities 
in loading/unloading 
cargo at ports
•	 Increased rates of asset 
deterioration (e.g., 
corrosion)
•	 Reduced visibility in 
ships and by terminal 
operations
•	 Risk of delays
•	 Increased 
construction and 
maintenance costs
Sea-level rise and 
storm surges
Road and rail
•	 Temporary or 
permanent inundation
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
•	 Risk of delays
Aviation
•	 Temporary or 
permanent inundation
•	 Higher maintenance 
and insurance costs
•	 Relocation
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 669 
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
TRANSPORT MODE
EXAMPLES OF DIRECT 
IMPACTS
CONSEQUENCES ON 
TRADE INFRASTRUCTURE
Sea-level rise and 
storm surges
(continued)
Sea-based transport
•	 Lower clearance under 
waterway bridges
•	 Damage to port 
infrastructure
•	 Increased rates of asset 
deterioration (e.g., 
corrosion)
•	 Need for new ship 
design
•	 Need for 
reconfiguration of 
operational areas
•	 Increased 
maintenance costs 
and repair of port 
facilities
Extreme weather 
(e.g., high winds, 
storms)
Road and rail
•	 Disturbance to 
transport electronic 
infrastructure (e.g., 
signalling)
•	 Disruption to 
operations
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
Aviation
•	 Disturbance to 
transport electronic 
infrastructure (e.g., 
signalling)
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
•	 Risk of delays
Sea-based transport
•	 Temporary shutdown of 
ports
•	 Worsened sailing 
conditions
•	 Disturbance to 
transport electronic 
infrastructure (e.g., 
signalling)
•	 Risk of delays
•	 Increased 
maintenance and 
insurance costs
Sources: Dellink et al., 2017; UN Conference on Trade and Development, 2017
Although direct impacts on international trade such as these will occur and potentially intensify with climate 
change, their consequences are uncertain. Statistical analyses of bilateral trade activity at a global level 
show that temperature rise and the occurrence of climate-related disasters reduce trade flows, partly 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 670 
because of increased transportation costs (Dallmann, 2019; Oh, 2017). Distance between trade partners, 
each country’s socioeconomic status and strength of institutions shape vulnerability. One global study shows 
that sea-level rise consistent with a scenario of high global emissions will decrease the performance of sea 
transport worldwide by 2050 in terms of cargo handling capacity, reducing exports and economic welfare 
in all 13 regions modelled (Chatzivasileiadis et al., 2016). Another study suggests that disruptions to trade 
infrastructure due to climate events by 2060 could cause major economic consequences in specific regions, 
but may not be as pronounced as price and production adjustments induced by climate impacts (Dellink et 
al., 2017). Critical uncertainties in assessing the impact of climate change on trade infrastructure include the 
viability of Arctic shipping, the resilience of newly built and existing trade infrastructure and operators’ levels 
of preparedness (The Economist, 2020; Food and Agriculture Organization, 2018; Becker et al., 2017; Dellink 
et al., 2017; Chatzivasileiadis et al., 2016). Canada’s transport infrastructure, including trade infrastructure 
(Great Lakes‒St. Lawrence Seaway, Port Metro Vancouver and Port Saint John), is vulnerable to climate-
related damage and disruptions, with efforts to understand and manage future impacts still in early stages 
(Palko, 2017).
Indirect impacts of climate change on trade include shifts in the availability and prices of food and feedstock, 
timber, metals and other basic goods and services in the global marketplace. International trade comprises an 
increasingly complex, interdependent network of global supply chains, such that climate-induced disruptions 
to production can have economic ripple effects across sectors and geographies over the short and long term 
(Adams et al., 2020; Dellink et al., 2017; Wenz and Leverman, 2016). On the supply side, exposure to climate 
change impacts and the degree of concentration of suppliers are key risk factors (Gledhill et al., n.d.). Canada 
is among the top five global suppliers of wheat, fertilizer, petroleum and metal ores and top ten of corn (Bailey 
and Wellesley, 2017; Gledhill et al., n.d.). On the demand side, dependency and buffering capacity in local 
markets are among the traits that shape vulnerability to shocks (D’Amour et al., 2016; Wenz and Leverman, 
2016). Climate-related disruptions in wheat, corn, rice and soybeans (so-called agricultural commodities or 
food staples) to major suppliers can affect global prices. Supply- and demand-side factors interact in complex 
ways. For example, drought conditions and heat waves in 2010 and 2011 in Russia and other supply regions 
reduced wheat yields and global food production, and, combined with market and policy responses (e.g., 
export bans), contributed to a spike in prices for wheat globally, as well as food insecurity and social unrest 
across the Middle East (see Box 9.2; Challinor et al., 2017; D’Amour et al., 2016; Coulibaly, 2013). In contrast 
to food staples, energy and mining supplies are more diversified and disruptions are more likely to relate to 
non-climate factors, such as resource availability, technological advances and politics (Goldstein et al., 2019; 
Gledhill, n.d.). The global COVID-19 pandemic highlights the vulnerability of Canadian manufacturing sectors 
to disruptions in international supply chains, due to their reliance on foreign suppliers for inputs and foreign 
sales (Global Affairs Canada, 2020).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 671 
Box 9.2: Climate, global spikes in food prices and domestic impacts
The price of food staples or commodities (grains, oilseeds, vegetable oils, meat, seafood, sugar and fruit) 
can rise and fall abruptly. In the past 40 years, five periods of price volatility have occurred. In the aftermath 
of price spikes, markets adjust and prices typically return to within historic levels (Trostle, 2011). However, 
food price spikes—even for a short term—and new price plateaus have social consequences. Price spikes 
in commodities are particularly concerning for developing countries dependent on imported staples for 
nutrition and calories. Countries in Northern Africa and the Middle East, for example, depend strongly on 
imported wheat and consumer diets rely on its steady supply (D’Amour et al., 2016). A drop in global stocks 
of commodities combined with higher prices can outstrip a country’s financial capacity to import the food 
needed to satisfy domestic consumption.
Sharp food price spikes occurred in 2007–2008 and 2010–2011, reflecting a combination of long-term 
factors and short-term shocks (Trostle, 2011). The price of food staples has seen a general rise since 2002 
due to both consumption and production-related factors, including population growth, higher per-capita 
incomes, increased consumption of animal products, exchange rates, rising energy prices, land-use conflicts 
due to a rise in global biofuel production and slower growth in agricultural productivity. Added to these long-
term trends, short-term shocks drove price spikes in 2007–2008 and 2010–2011. Shortfalls in production 
caused by severe weather events, a drop in world stocks of grains and oilseeds and changes in trade policies 
and practices (e.g., export bans and lifting of import levies) were the main short-term factors contributing 
to price spikes in both time periods, although the importance and sequencing of these factors differed (see 
Figure 9.10a). As a major wheat producer, crop losses in Canada due to wet weather in 2010 was one among 
several adverse weather events contributing to global food price spikes (see Figure 9.10b).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 672 
Figure 9.10: Primary factors contributing to increases in global food prices, based on a four-crop price index 
(wheat, rice, corn and soybean). a) Shows the change in crop prices (green line) for the period 2002‒2011, and 
identifies long-term and short-term factors that contributed to price changes over time. Tighter supply-demand 
balances (as depicted by global stock-to-use ratio “S:U ratio”) and economic growth/recession, for example, are 
a backdrop to weather events and trade policies. b) Change in crop prices between May 2010 and April 2011 in 
relation to weather-related events that resulted in supply shortfalls. Both wet and dry conditions, which were not 
isolated to one global region, contributed to a reduction in global crop supply. Source: Adapted from Trostle, 2011.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 673 
As a trading nation, Canada is not immune to the influence of global spikes in food staples. Food prices 
in Canada, as measured by the Consumer Price Index (CPI), increased markedly between 2007 and 2012 
(Rollin, 2013). The CPI measures changes in prices by tracking the cost of a fixed basket of goods and 
services through time, with food as one of eight items captured in the CPI. Between 2007 and 2012, the food 
component of the CPI grew at a faster pace than the all-item CPI, with food prices rising by 19% over the 
period and all-items CPI excluding food rising by 10.7% (Rollin, 2013). Canadian households that allocate 
a greater proportion of their budgets to food are most vulnerable to inflation in food prices. These groups 
include low-income households, households headed by seniors with fixed incomes and households in remote 
areas. Nationally, one in eight Canadian households experienced some level of food insecurity in 2011, as 
measured by an inability to access adequate food due to financial constraints (Tarasuk et al., 2011).
Food prices in local markets show year to year variability, so it is important to consider the interplay among 
macro-level factors, such as climate-related shocks to global food supplies, alongside sectoral and local-
level factors in projecting future changes in food prices and in understanding the role of climate change in 
these shifts. For the past 10 years, researchers from Dalhousie University and the University of Guelph have 
produced a report forecasting potential price changes in eight food categories (“Canada’s Food Price Report”). 
In recent years, this research has included a qualitative risk assessment of twelve supply and demand-side 
variables and their influence on Canadian food prices (see Table 9.9). Geopolitical risks, actions of the food 
processing industry and consumer purchasing power were the top risks in 2019, 2020 and 2021 forecasts at 
the macro, sectoral and domestic level, respectively.
Table 9.9: A range of macro (global), sectoral and domestic factors 
shape food prices Canadians see in local markets
LEVEL
FACTOR
2019
2020
IMPACT
LIKELIHOOD
IMPACT
LIKELIHOOD
Macro-level
Climate change (~)
4
4
5
5
Geopolitical risks (~)
5
5
5
5
Input costs (+)
4
4
4
4
Energy costs (*)
3
4
3
4
Inflation (+)
4
5
3
4
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 674 
LEVEL
FACTOR
2019
2020
IMPACT
LIKELIHOOD
IMPACT
LIKELIHOOD
Macro-level
(continued)
Currencies and trade 
environment (~)
4
5
4
5
Sectoral-level
Food retail and distribution 
landscape (-)
5
4
4
4
Food processing industry (+)
4
5
5
4
Policy context (-)
5
5
3
5
Consumer food awareness and 
trends (-)
4
5
3
4
Domestic-level
Consumer indebtedness (-)
4
5
5
5
Consumer income and income 
distribution (-)
4
5
5
5
Note: This table provides a qualitative forecast of each of these factors for 2019, 2020 and 2021 along two 
dimensions: likelihood of occurrence and impact on food prices should it occur. Likelihood is represented 
on a 5-point scale, with 4 representing “likely” and 5 “very likely.” Impact is represented on a 5-point scale, 
with 3 representing “moderate,” 4 “significant” and 5 “very significant.” Factors can affect prices in several 
ways: they can exert downward (-) or upward (+) pressure on prices, or their effect can be variable (~) or 
negligible (*). 
Source: Authors’ elaboration, based on Dalhousie University and University of Guelph, 2019, 2020, 2021.
Agriculture and food products are particularly climate-sensitive and heavily traded (Dellink et al., 2017), 
consequently, the nexus of international trade, climate change and food security is receiving international 
attention (Mbow et al., 2019; Food and Agriculture Organization, 2018; Mosnier et al., 2014). Studies project a 
drop in global agricultural production, an increase in world food prices, increased bilateral food trade activity 
and a loss in economic welfare resulting from climate change by the 2050s and 2080s (see Table 9.10; Food 
and Agriculture Organization, 2018). Another common thread is the uneven impact among global regions, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 675 
with food-importing tropical countries particularly vulnerable to climate change because of high economic 
sensitivity to yield and terms-of-trade shocks and high exposure to climate hazards (Gouel and Laborde, 
2018; Distefano et al., 2017). In contrast to global projections, these same studies show positive outcomes 
for Canada for some indicators, including an increase in agricultural wages and in economic welfare. 
However, evaluating the bottom line on food security is subject to several sources of uncertainty, including: 
the magnitude of climate change and its diverse local impacts; the climate hazards considered; the future 
productivity and nutritional value assumed for a range of agricultural staples and food items; the interactive 
effects between climate change, domestic production and imports; adaptation by producers and consumers; 
and the responsiveness of trade to price signals. For example, one study modelling climate change impacts 
on global markets for 18 crops to 2050 suggests a change in crop calories available for Canadian consumers 
of between -15% to +4% relative to a pre-climate change baseline (Mosnier et al., 2014), which reflects 
uncertainty in the direction as well as the magnitude of change.
Table 9.10: Summary of selected international studies of climate 
change impacts on agriculture and trade
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA
Costinot et 
al. (2014)
Climate-driven agronomic 
changes for 10 crops by 
the 2080s under a high 
(IPCC SRES A1F1) global 
emissions scenario, 
allowing for plant carbon 
dioxide fertilization
Three counterfactual 
scenarios: full adjustment, 
no production adjustment 
(countries free to trade) 
and no trade adjustment 
(farmers can adjust 
operations)
Impacts on 
agricultural 
productivity for 
10 major crops 
(banana, corn, 
cotton, oil palm, 
rice, soybean, 
sugarcane, tomato, 
wheat, white 
potato) across 50 
countries
Welfare changes 
as a % of GDP 
relative to “pre-
climate change” 
baseline (using 
a computable 
general equilibrium, 
or CGE, model)
Welfare change 
as a % of total 
GDP in the 2080s 
of -0.26% (full 
adjustment); 
-0.78% (no 
production 
adjustment); 
-0.27% (no trade 
adjustment)
Welfare change 
as a % of total 
GDP in the 2080s 
of +0.59% (full 
adjustment); 
+0.47% (no 
production 
adjustment); 
+0.63% (no trade 
adjustment)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 676 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA
Mosnier et 
al. (2014)
Climate-driven agronomic 
changes for 18 crops by 
the 2050s under a high 
global emissions scenario 
(IPCC SRES A2) and 3 
global climate models 
(GCMs)
Assume growth in 
calorie demand driven by 
population and economic 
growth. Counterfactual 
scenarios allow for 
adjustments in production, 
management, trade and 
consumption 
Impacts on 
crop yield for 
18 major crops 
(barley, cassava, 
chickpeas, corn, 
cotton, dry beans, 
groundnut, 
millet, oil palm, 
potato, rapeseed, 
rice, sorghum, 
soybeans, 
sugarcane, 
sunflower, sweet 
potato, wheat)
Changes in 
crop calorie 
availability for 
food consumption 
relative to “pre-
climate change” 
baseline using the 
GLOBIOM partial 
equilibrium model
Change in global 
crop calorie 
availability in the 
2050s between 
+2% and -3% 
depending on the 
GCM
Change in crop 
calorie availability 
in the 2050s 
between -15% to 
+4%
Change in 
domestic 
production (tons) in 
the 2050s between 
-18% to +5%
Change in total 
imports (tons) in 
the 2050s between 
-8% to 0%
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 677 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA
Cui et al. 
(2018)
Climate-driven changes in 
yield of all major food and 
agricultural commodities 
by 2050 under a moderate 
emissions scenario (IPCC 
RCP6.0)
Counterfactual baseline 
scenario assumes GDP, 
population and crop yields 
due to technological 
change grow by 
134.7%, 38.7% and 38%, 
respectively, from 2011 
to 2050. Counterfactual 
trade liberalization scenario 
removes all import tariffs 
and export taxes/subsidies 
for agricultural and food
Impacts on yields 
of major crop, 
livestock and 
processed foods
Changes in 1) 
GDP, 2) food and 
agricultural trade 
and 3) agricultural 
worker wages 
relative to the 
baseline at 2050 
(using a CGE 
model)
Change in global 
GDP in the climate 
change scenario 
in 2050 relative to 
baseline is -0.18%
Change in global 
GDP in the climate 
change + trade 
liberalization 
scenario in 2050 
relative to baseline 
is -0.17%
Change in 
global food and 
agricultural net 
exports (billion 
US$2011) under 
climate change + 
trade liberalization 
in 2050 relative to 
baseline is +$62 
billion, balanced by 
the same amount 
of increase in net 
food imports by 
net food importing 
regions
Change in global 
agricultural wage in 
the climate change 
scenario in 2050 
relative to baseline 
is -0.24%
Change in GDP in 
the climate change 
scenario in 2050 
relative to baseline 
is +0.12%
Change in food 
and agricultural net 
exports (US$2011) 
under climate 
change + trade 
liberalization in 
2050 relative to 
baseline is -$1 
billion 
Change in 
agricultural wage in 
the climate change 
scenario in 2050 
relative to baseline 
is +8.0%
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 678 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA
Gouel and 
Laborde 
(2018)
Climate-driven changes in 
yield of 35 crops, livestock 
and other commodities 
by the 2080s under a high 
emissions scenario (IPCC 
SRES A1F1)
Counterfactual scenarios 
include no adjustments 
in production and trade-
restriction assumptions
Impacts on 
agricultural 
productivity for 35 
crops across 50 
countries 
Welfare changes 
as a % of GDP 
relative to “pre-
climate change” 
baseline (using a 
CGE model)
Welfare change as 
a % of total GDP 
in the 2080s of 
-1.72% relative to 
pre-climate change 
baseline
Welfare change as 
a % of total GDP in 
the 2080s (relative 
to climate change 
scenario) from 
limits to production 
adjustments is 
-3.71%; from limits 
to bilateral import 
shares is -e3.02%; 
from limits to 
export shares is 
-2.18%
Welfare change 
as a % of GDP 
in the 2080s of 
+2.36% (agriculture 
terms of trade) 
and +0.49% 
(productivity 
change), relative to 
pre-climate change 
baseline
Welfare change as 
a % of GDP in the 
2080s (relative to 
climate change 
scenario) from 
limits to production 
adjustments is 
+6.92%; from limits 
to bilateral import 
shares is -0.28%; 
from limits to 
export shares is 
+3.65%
There are few studies that evaluate future climate change impacts and patterns of international trade 
(Dawson et al., 2020b), with results for Canada available in a limited number of them (see Table 9.11). Studies 
employ economic simulation models and introduce climate change impacts—also referred to as damages—
as external shocks to subnational, national and regional economies, examining interactions across sectors, 
geographies, producers, consumers, as well as economy-wide phenomena (see Costs and Benefits of Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation chapter for key definitions). Comparing results across studies is difficult 
due to differences in scope (temporal and spatial), coverage (climate change impact categories, goods 
and sectors), baselines, scenarios (climate, socioeconomic and policy) and simplified assumptions about 
economic systems, among other factors. Even studies focused on a single sector can generate wide-ranging 
projections, since there can be differences in model structures (e.g., single sector versus whole economy, 
regions represented), trade specifications, goods included, price and consumption sensitivities (Food and 
Agriculture Organization, 2018). Canadian studies assessing the economic impacts of climate change on 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 679 
forestry alone and in combination with impacts on agricultural land services illustrate the importance of 
multi-regional and multi-sectoral modelling in improving the accuracy of analysis (Ochuodho et al., 2016; 
Ochuodho and Lantz, 2014).
Table 9.11: Summary of select international studies on the economic 
consequences of climate change impacts on international trade
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA 
OR NORTH 
AMERICA
UNITED 
STATES
Transport 
(global)
Chatzivasileiadis 
et al. (2016)
Climate-driven 
sea-level rise 
(SLR) by 2050 
under a high 
emissions 
scenario (RCP8.5)
“Middle of the 
road” shared 
socioeconomic 
development 
pathway (IPCC 
SSP2) and three 
scenarios of SLR-
induced transport 
disruption
Coastal land and 
capital losses due 
to submergence 
and sea-flood 
damage as well 
as SLR-induced 
transportation 
disruptions
Direct and 
indirect economic 
effects (changes 
in production 
technologies, 
consumption 
patterns and 
international 
trade patterns), 
including changes 
in trade activity, 
terms of trade 
and welfare 
relative to “no-
climate change” 
(using a CGE 
model)
% change in 
global exports 
in 2050 across 
three scenarios 
is 0.51%  
(0.44% to 
0.61%)
Change in 
global terms 
of trade (US$) 
in 2050 across 
three scenarios 
is -$7 million 
(-$4.3 to -$11.4 
million)
Global welfare 
change (US$) 
in 2050 across 
three scenarios 
is $50 billion 
(-$42 to $61 
billion)
% change in 
North American 
exports in 2050 
across three 
scenarios is 
0.49% (0.39% to 
0.53%)
Change in 
terms of trade 
(US$) in 2050 
for North 
America across 
three scenarios 
is +$535 million 
($380 to $630 
million)
Welfare change 
(US$) in 2050 
for North 
America across 
three scenarios 
is -$9.7 billion 
(-$7.8 billion to 
-$12.4 billion)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 680 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA 
OR NORTH 
AMERICA
UNITED 
STATES
Multi-sector 
(global)
OECD (2015)
Average global 
temperature 
change of 2.5˚C 
(likely range of 
1.6˚C to 3.6˚C) 
above pre-
industrial levels by 
2060
“No damage” 
baseline includes 
annual average 
growth in GDP. 
Market-driven 
adaptation 
measures are 
considered
Impact on crop 
yields and fish 
catches; coastal 
zones; human 
health; labour 
productivity; 
energy demand; 
tourism flows and 
damages from 
hurricanes
Direct and 
indirect economic 
effects, including 
% change in 
GDP relative to 
“no-damage” 
baseline by 2060 
from all impact 
categories and 
from agriculture 
impacts alone 
(using a CGE 
model)
% change in 
global GDP 
by 2060 from 
all impact 
categories of 
-1.52% 
% change in 
global GDP 
by 2060 from 
climate impacts 
on agriculture 
of -0.48%
% change in 
Canadian GDP 
by 2060 from 
all impact 
categories of 
+0.88%
% change in 
Canadian GDP 
from climate 
impacts on 
agriculture of 
-0.11%
% change in US 
GDP by 2060 
from all impact 
categories of 
-0.47%
% change in US 
GDP by 2060 
from climate 
impacts on 
agriculture of 
-0.27%
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 681 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA 
OR NORTH 
AMERICA
UNITED 
STATES
Multi-sector 
(global)
Dellink et al. 
(2017)
Average global 
temperature 
change of 2.5˚C 
(likely range of 
1.6˚C to 3.6˚C) 
above pre-
industrial levels by 
2060
“No damage” 
baseline includes 
annual average 
growth in GDP. 
Market-driven 
adaptation 
measures are 
considered
Impact on crop 
yields and fish 
catches; coastal 
zones; human 
health; labour 
productivity; 
energy demand; 
tourism flows and 
damages from 
hurricanes
Direct and indirect 
economic effects, 
including % 
change in trade 
volumes relative 
to “no-damage” 
baseline by 2060 
from all impact 
categories and 
from changes 
in revealed 
comparative 
advantage from 
climate change 
impacts on 
agriculture (using 
a CGE model)
% change in 
global trade 
volumes in 
2060 compared 
to “no damage” 
baseline is 
-1.8% (exports) 
and -1.6% 
(imports)
% change in 
trade volumes 
in 2060 
compared to 
“no damage” 
baseline of 
+0.2% (exports) 
and +0.1% 
(imports)
% change 
in revealed 
comparative 
advantage 
levels for food 
products at 
2060 relative 
to “no damage” 
baseline of 
+0.2%
% change in 
trade volumes 
in 2060 
compared to 
“no damage” 
baseline of 
-0.5% (exports) 
and -1% 
(imports)
% change 
in revealed 
comparative 
advantage 
levels for food 
products at 
2060 relative 
to “no damage” 
baseline for the 
US is +0.6%
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 682 
SECTOR AND 
STUDY
CLIMATE AND 
SOCIOECONOMIC 
SCENARIOS
PHYSICAL AND 
ECONOMIC 
IMPACTS
TRADE-RELATED CONSEQUENCES
GLOBAL
CANADA 
OR NORTH 
AMERICA
UNITED 
STATES
Multi-sector 
(United States)
Zhang et al. 
(2018)
Annual mean 
temperature rise 
in the US on a 
decadal basis 
from 2020 to 2100 
under a moderate 
emissions 
scenario (RCP4.5)
Population and 
economies fixed 
at 2012 values,  
(reference year)
Impact on 
agricultural yield, 
energy demand 
and labour in the 
US
Economic ripple 
effects on the rest 
of the world from 
direct economic 
damage and 
indirect economic 
impact of climate 
change in the 
US (using an 
International 
Ripple Effect 
Input-Output 
model)
Economic 
ripple effects 
on the world 
in 2050 
(annual mean 
temperature 
rise of 1.51°C 
compared 
to 2012) are 
51.5% of 
the direct 
economic 
damage in the 
United States
% change in 
Canadian GDP 
by 2050 from 
the economic 
ripple effects of 
climate change 
impacts in the 
US of -0.4% 
(-0.1% to -0.6%)
% change 
in Canadian 
sectoral GDP 
by 2050 from 
the economic 
ripple effects of 
climate change 
impacts in the 
US of -0.16% 
(mining); 
-0.12% (“other 
services”), 
-0.10% 
(manufacturing)
Because studies are limited and their methods inconsistent, confidence in numerical results is low. However, 
there are some qualitative findings on climate change and trade that are noteworthy. Studies show that 
Canada is among the few global regions with the potential to experience positive GDP impacts, gains in 
terms of trade and a rise in exports by mid-century from climate-induced changes across multiple sectors 
(Dellink et al., 2017; Chatzivasileiadis et al., 2016; OECD, 2015). Relative to other parts of the world, Canada’s 
macro-economy may not be as affected by climate change impacts due to gains (or relatively fewer 
losses) in competitiveness in domestic and international markets (Dellink et al., 2017). Economic benefits 
to Canada relate to increased demand for energy, health services and tourism (OECD, 2015). Trade links 
between different regions can propagate or attenuate risk, so a closer look at the climate sensitivity of major 
trading nations is warranted (Kovacs and Thistlethwaite, 2014). One study modelled the global economic 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 683 
consequences of climate change impacts on crop yields, energy demand and labour productivity in the 
United States to 2100, under a range of temperature-rise scenarios (Zhang et al., 2018). The economic ripple 
effects globally are a sizeable portion of direct damages in the United States and are greater for Canada 
than for other regions modelled, including negative economy-wide and sectoral impacts (e.g., on mining, 
manufacturing and “other services”, in particular) (Zhang et al., 2018). Similarly, researchers in Europe have 
modelled the trade-related effects of climate change impacts occurring outside of the region, showing that 
the worst effects on welfare in the EU stem from impacts in either the Americas or Asia (Szewczyk et al., 
2013). These types of analyses can help provide a more balanced view on the potential distribution of trade-
related impacts of climate change in colder versus warmer regions of the world.
9.4.3 Adaptation
Climate change adaptation in international trade occurs at multiple scales. This includes actions by industry 
and economic actors to manage climate-induced disruptions to trade and take advantage of emerging 
markets for adaptation goods and services. It also includes spontaneous (i.e., market-driven) and planned 
actions to build climate resilience into global trade systems.
Canadian industry recognizes the relationship between climate policy and international competitiveness 
(Canadian Chamber of Commerce, 2019), but there is little evidence of action to assess and manage trade-
related impacts from extreme events and climate variation (Kovacs and Thistlethwaite, 2014). In 2016, the 
Canadian Chamber of Commerce included climate change among the top ten barriers to competitiveness, 
pointing to the need for a national adaptation strategy (Canadian Chamber of Commerce, 2016). Its 2019 
recommendation report on climate policy acknowledges the role of trade in Canada’s low-carbon transition, 
but does not discuss adaptation (Canadian Chamber of Commerce, 2019). The Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture (2017) advocates for tools and financial incentives aimed at supporting adaptation planning 
by Canadian producers to protect farmers’ livelihoods domestically, and to improve food security and the 
stability of global prices for staples in the event of crop failures in other producing regions. Despite some 
recognition of these indirect impacts of climate change as a business issue to be managed, evidence of the 
extent of business action to adapt to related risks and opportunities is patchy. Responses to a voluntary 
disclosure initiative in 2015 concluded that, in comparison with companies in 10 other countries, Canadian 
publicly listed companies underperformed in water risk assessment, a critical aspect of supply chain 
resilience (CDP, 2015). Conversely, case study research highlights some Canadian leadership in identifying 
and acting on climate change risk from overseas assets, suppliers and distribution networks (CPA Canada, 
2015). Strategies to manage supply chains risks resulting from climate change include understanding how 
risks from climate impacts interact with other risks, using scenario planning to inform risk management 
plans and building partnerships to support sustainable sourcing of inputs in the event of resource scarcity 
(Das and Lashkari, 2015; Gledhill et al., n.d.). In managing supply chain risks, adaptation by port and terminal 
planners and operators is key to enhancing climate resilience of critical trade infrastructure, but incentives 
to take action are not always aligned (Ng et al., 2016). Since ports provide benefits at a range of scales, it 
is not always clear who should take the lead and how adaptive measures, including changes in technology, 
engineering, design and maintenance and insurance (Scott et al., 2013), should be financed (Becker et al., 
2017). Experience with the Port of Vancouver—Canada’s largest port in terms of tonnage—illustrates the 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 684 
gap that exists between adaptation planning and implementation (Becker et al., 2017). The Port Authority’s 
strategy has centred on understanding and responding to coastal hazards, with a commitment to monitoring 
the effects of climate change and taking action, where necessary (Port of Vancouver, n.d.).
Adaptation involves taking advantage of potential opportunities resulting from climate change, such as the 
business and employment opportunities created by enhanced trade in climate change adaptation solutions 
(Trabacchi et al., 2020; Conference Board of Canada, 2017). As measured by the thematic focus of Nationally 
Determined Contributions submitted to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, countries in 
Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa and South Asia regard adaptation as a core development priority 
(Trabacchi et al., 2020). Countries that invest in building climate resilience and enabling growth in adaptation 
markets domestically could be at an advantage as global suppliers of adaptation solutions (Deloitte and 
ESSA Technologies Ltd., 2016). At a minimum, firms demonstrating international leadership in key areas of 
climate finance (i.e., funds given by industrialized countries to emerging economies), such as agriculture, 
engineering and construction, water and wastewater solutions, geomatics, professional consulting services, 
and information and communication technologies could benefit from the estimated US$60 billion to US$100 
billion per year in global finance needed for adaptation in developing countries to 2050 (IPCC, 2014). Canada’s 
expertise in forestry and forest products, engineering and coastal infrastructure, ocean technologies, water 
and wastewater and financial risk-transfer tools, among other sectors, could be harnessed to meet the 
growing global demand (Deloitte and ESSA Technologies Ltd., 2016; Kovacs and Thistlethwaite, 2014). Since 
2018, Global Affairs Canada has increased support to Canadian firms’ participation in emerging adaptation 
markets, including establishing a global network of Canadian trade commissioners dedicated to this task and 
providing market intelligence.
Short and long-term adjustments in trade in response to climate variability or extreme weather are essentially 
examples of adaptation, driven by market signals, and so enhancing trade activity could play a role in 
alleviating the future consequences of climate change. Imports and switches in suppliers can reduce pressure 
from year-to-year shocks in production and higher prices (Dellink et al., 2017; Baldos and Hertel, 2015; 
Mosnier et al., 2014; Stephan and Schenker, 2012). In the long term, production can shift to areas that have 
the comparative advantage of climate resilience (Baldos and Hertel, 2015; Stephan and Schenker, 2012). For 
example, a longer growing season in Canada and proactive adaptation by domestic producers could lead 
to agricultural surpluses, soil and water permitting, which could offset production shortfalls in other areas. 
Historical trade patterns illustrate the feasibility of relying on well-functioning trade as insurance against 
climate change risk. Demand-driven shocks to the forest sector over the past century that were transmitted 
through trade led to management responses of the scope and scale envisioned for climate change adaptation 
(Sohngen and Tian, 2016). Conversely, tariff and non-tariff barriers (e.g., export bans) to trade have hindered 
historical adjustments in global food trade in response to economic shocks (Baldos and Hertel, 2015). Studies 
modelling the future economic impact of climate change on global food and agriculture show a potential 
moderating effect of trade liberalization on climate-induced global food insecurity and production decline (Cui 
et al., 2018; Gouel and Laborde, 2018), as well as the important role of farmer-level adaptation in reducing 
economic loss (Costinot et al., 2014). These economic and modelling studies suggest that wealthier countries 
are more likely to capture gains from the adaptive effect of trade than are regions in the Global South, which 
sometimes lack resources and infrastructure for spontaneous adaptation. Financial support for planned 
adaptation, including through international assistance (see Section 9.6), could thus be justified on grounds of 
economic self-interest, alongside fairness and equity (Stephan and Schenker, 2012). Stylized representations 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 685 
of the evolution of international trade under climate change can fail to account for dynamics such as planned 
investment in trade infrastructure and removal of trade policies causing market distortions (e.g., subsidies) 
(Gouel and Laborde, 2018). Adaptation in this context involves, for example, promoting growth in sectors 
and regions to counteract scarcity in other countries as a result of climate change impacts, reducing import 
dependency for staples, diversifying trade partners and addressing weaknesses in trade institutions (Dallman, 
2019; Mbow et al., 2019; Gouel and Laborde, 2018; Kovacs and Thistlethwaite, 2014).
9.5 Climate-related human migration and 
displacement will increase demands for 
immigration to Canada 
Tropical cyclones, floods, droughts, wildfires and food insecurity displace millions of people each year. 
Climate change will generate growing numbers of migrants by mid- to late century, especially in Least 
Developed Countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean. Canada will come 
under growing internal and external pressure to accept larger numbers of migrants from climate-disrupted 
regions.
Human migration and displacement can occur as a direct result of extreme weather and climate events, 
such as tropical cyclones, floods, droughts and wildfires, or as an indirect result of climate impacts on food 
supplies, freshwater availability and livelihoods. Migration responses to climatic risks are mediated by societal 
factors that affect adaptive capacity and by household characteristics. Globally, an average of 21 million 
people are displaced each year by floods, drought, storms, wildfire, extreme heat and other weather-related 
hazards. Climate change will exacerbate the frequency and severity of these events in many regions, and 
have particularly strong impacts on migration and displacement in Least Developed Countries in sub-Saharan 
Africa, South and Southeast Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean. Recent studies project a 50% increase in 
displacement risks with each additional degree Celsius of warming. Sea-level rise is already necessitating the 
relocation of small coastal communities in Alaska, Chesapeake Bay, the Gulf of Mexico, Fiji and Papua New 
Guinea. By 2100, rising seas will force the relocation of tens of millions of people living in coastal plains, river 
deltas and small island states, particularly in the Global South. Poverty and weak governance and institutions 
are root causes of large-scale or sudden displacements. As climate change intensifies, Canada can expect 
increased future demand for immigration from current source countries that are highly exposed to climate risks, 
such as the Philippines, China, India, Pakistan and Syria. The international community may also increasingly 
look to Canada to provide financial assistance and serve as a resettlement destination for people from highly 
vulnerable developing countries with historically few ties to Canada. Many heavily-populated coastal areas 
of the United States are highly exposed to extreme storms and floods, which will be amplified by rising sea 
levels. Most of those displaced will likely resettle within the U.S., but the scale of potential social and economic 
disruption that ensue merit monitoring for potential effects on established migrant networks to Canada.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 686 
9.5.1 Introduction
This section describes the relationship between climate change and human migration, discusses current 
and future estimates and trends of global climate-related migration, and outlines specific future concerns 
for Canada.
9.5.2 The climate-migration nexus
Migration movements are the cumulative result of cultural, economic, political, social and environmental 
drivers that operate at local to global scales (van Hear et al., 2018; Foresight, 2011). Links between climate 
change and migration are context specific and not always obvious, often because climate stressors alone 
rarely determine decisions to migrate (McLeman, 2014). Climatic events may directly stimulate displacement 
and migration, such as from New Orleans following Hurricane Katrina (DeWaard et al., 2016), or have an 
indirect influence, such as through climate-related shocks to food production or prices (Maharatna, 2014). 
International migrants may not disclose environmental motivations to officials, as receiving countries 
typically do not consider these as valid reasons for moving (for examples from Canada, see McLeman et al., 
2017; Mezdour et al., 2015; Veronis and McLeman, 2014).
Current research identifies three sets of links between climate change and migration:
•	
Migration as household-level adaptation to climate risks (referred to hereafter as “adaptive 
migration”);
•	
Displacement or planned relocation of people from areas impacted by, or highly exposed to, 
climate risk; and
•	
Immobility, or the inability to migrate, that traps people in highly exposed locations.
Adaptive migration ranges from temporary or seasonal moves to indefinite relocation; it can be a response 
to adverse climate events or an effort to take advantage of beneficial climate conditions. The most common 
adverse climate events associated with migration and displacement are extreme storms, floods and droughts 
(IDMC, 2020). Climate change can influence local, regional and international migration in multiple ways, 
depending on the specific impacts of climatic events and the mediating effects of societal and household 
characteristics (see Table 9.12). These can include changes in migration destinations, duration or timing, 
direction of net migration flows and migration participation rates (see Table 9.12; Suckall et al., 2017; Gray 
and Wise, 2016; McLeman, 2014; Black et al 2011). 
Migration responses vary by the type of climate event and its characteristics, such as the rate of onset, 
duration and nature of the damage that it causes to infrastructure, property and households’ livelihood assets 
(see Table 9.12). For example, tropical cyclones present three hazards at once: high winds that bring down 
trees and power lines, heavy rains that trigger flash floods and landslides, and storm surges that inundate 
low-lying areas. Such events generate short-term evacuations from affected communities; residents’ 
likelihood to return, rebuild and stay depends on the extent of damage to homes and infrastructure and the 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 687 
ability of governments to assist in reconstruction (Fussell, 2018; Mallick and Vogt, 2012). In the weeks and 
months following the storm, out-migration from the affected area can increase as young workers seek wages 
to send home and assist in rebuilding homes and livelihoods (Loebach, 2016). This occurred, for example, 
in the surge of Puerto Rican workers who moved to the U.S. mainland in the wake of Hurricane Maria 
(Echenique and Melgar, 2018). In contrast, a slow-onset hazard, such as drought, may not stimulate migration 
immediately. A lag occurs as households seek to adapt through other, less disruptive means, with migration 
ensuing only as drought conditions persist and other adaptation options falter (Nawrotzki and DeWaard, 
2016). Because homes or property tend to be intact, some household members can stay behind while, 
commonly, young adults migrate in search of work (Baez et al., 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 688 
Table 9.12: Summary of key climatic drivers of migration, societal and 
household factors that mediate migration and potential outcomes of 
interactions
CLIMATE CHANGE 
STRESSOR
SOCIETAL-LEVEL 
MEDIATING FACTORS
HOUSEHOLD-LEVEL 
MEDIATING FACTORS
POTENTIAL MIGRATION 
OUTCOMES FROM 
INTERACTIONS OF 
FACTORS LISTED IN 
THE OTHER COLUMNS
Changes in the 
frequency, severity and/
or spatial extent of:
Changes to the 
following, associated 
with the above 
stressors:
Environmental
•	 Physical setting (e.g., 
tropical, temperate, 
sub-Arctic, coastal 
versus inland)
•	 Topography, 
watershed 
characteristics, 
groundwater 
resources
•	 Land cover
•	 Baseline 
environmental 
damage (or 
remediation) from 
human activity
Pre-existing 
characteristics
•	 Composition (e.g., 
family structure, 
number of 
members, ages, sex, 
dependents)
•	 Human capital 
(e.g., education, 
employment skills, 
health)
•	 Financial capital 
(e.g., direct & 
indirect sources of 
income, access to 
remittances, asset 
ownership)
•	 Social capital (e.g. 
kinship ties, extended 
family networks, 
membership in 
formal and informal 
community 
organizations)
Migration destinations
•	 Choice between 
short-distance 
destination over 
long-distance 
destinations
•	 Choice of common 
destinations or new 
destinations
Migration duration or 
timing
•	 Temporary or 
seasonal versus 
indefinite migration
•	 Unplanned 
migration, deferral of 
planned migration
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 689 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
STRESSOR
SOCIETAL-LEVEL 
MEDIATING FACTORS
HOUSEHOLD-LEVEL 
MEDIATING FACTORS
POTENTIAL MIGRATION 
OUTCOMES FROM 
INTERACTIONS OF 
FACTORS LISTED IN 
THE OTHER COLUMNS
(continued from 
previous page)
Economic
•	 Structure of the 
economy
•	 Robustness of 
economic sectors 
and labour markets
•	 Economic (in)
equality and wealth 
distribution
•	 Land tenure regimes
Nature of impacts of 
specific climate-related 
events
•	 Injury or loss of life 
among household 
members
•	 Damage to/loss of 
home
•	 Loss of income, 
livelihood 
opportunities, assets
•	 Losses experienced 
by neighbours, 
extended family 
members or local 
community
•	 Temporary versus 
indefinite impacts
Direction of net 
migration flows
•	 Rates of migration 
to specific locations 
may rise or fall
•	 Source locales 
becoming 
destinations and vice 
versa
•	 Climate event 
stimulating return 
migration to assist 
with recovery
Risks related to sea-
level rise
Political
•	 Financial capacity of 
government
•	 Government activity 
and effectiveness
•	 Political stability, 
unrest or conflict
•	 Corruption
•	 Border controls and 
immigration regimes 
of neighbouring 
states
Migration participation 
rates
•	 Rates of migration 
to specific locations 
may rise or fall
•	 Migration rates of 
particular groups 
may change relative 
to others
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 690 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
STRESSOR
SOCIETAL-LEVEL 
MEDIATING FACTORS
HOUSEHOLD-LEVEL 
MEDIATING FACTORS
POTENTIAL MIGRATION 
OUTCOMES FROM 
INTERACTIONS OF 
FACTORS LISTED IN 
THE OTHER COLUMNS
(continued from 
previous page)
Social
•	 Demographic 
structure and 
population trends
•	 Urbanization
•	 Cultural norms 
about mobility and 
migration
•	 Gender norms
•	 Treatment of 
Indigenous groups, 
minorities and 
marginalized 
populations
•	 Social networks and 
linguistic/cultural 
ties (domestic and 
foreign)
Migration readiness
•	 Past migration 
experience 
•	 Transferability of job 
skills
•	 Geographical extent 
of social networks
•	 Ability of household 
to endure prolonged 
absence of individual 
members
•	 Ability to finance 
migration
Organized relocations 
and planned retreats
•	 Institutions actively 
assist the movement 
of individual 
households or 
communities
Immobility
•	 Relocating is the 
preferred response 
but is not feasible 
for households, 
resources are not 
forthcoming from 
institutions
•	 Strong resistance to 
relocation may arise 
from cultural/social 
connections to place 
and/or indigeneity
Key 
Enhanced erosion
Floods
Droughts
Wildfires
Extreme heat 
Food scarcity
Water scarcity
Extreme storms and related flooding
Salinization of groundwater, soil
Inundation of low-lying coastal areas
Enhanced storm surges
Sources: McLeman, 2020; Hauer et al., 2020; Cattaneo et al., 2019; Baez et al., 2017; Suckall et al., 2017; 
Adams, 2016; Gray and Wise, 2016; Hunter et al., 2015; McLeman, 2014; Black et al., 2011.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 691 
Aside from the characteristics of the climate event, the propensity of people to migrate is also a function of 
the adaptation options available to affected households (Black et al., 2011). Household options are influenced 
by a wide range of economic, social, political and cultural processes that operate beyond the control or 
influence of the household, such as labour markets, government programs and safety nets, health care 
accessibility and insurance regimes, to name a few (see Table 9.12). Characteristics of households and their 
members, such as age, health, education, job skills, gender and extended family networks, also influence 
choices between in situ adaptation and migration by some or all household members (see Table 9.12).
9.5.3 Current and estimated climate-related migration
Estimates of global numbers of people displaced or who have migrated for climate-related reasons carry 
significant uncertainty. Global migration data are coarse, and attributing causality within these datasets is 
problematic. Most migration, whether for climatic or other reasons, is internal (within countries), flowing from 
rural to urban areas (Samers, 2010). Estimates of international migration produced by the Population Division 
of the UN’s Department of Economic and Social Affairs are the accepted standard, registering 258 million 
international migrants worldwide in 2017 (UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 2017). These 
estimates are conservative and likely underestimate actual levels since they do not, for example, consider 
return migration (Azose and Raftery, 2019).
The most reliable data on climate-related migration are annual estimates by the International Disaster 
Monitoring Centre (IDMC) of the number of people that are internally displaced by disasters from natural 
hazards. These data include both temporarily and indefinitely displaced people, as well as climate and non-
climate hazards. Since the IMDC began publishing annual statistics in 2008, an average of 21 million people 
have been displaced annually due to weather-related disasters.1 The largest weather-related displacements 
occurred in India, the Philippines, Bangladesh, China, and the United States, with storms (13 million people 
worldwide in 2019) and floods (10 million people worldwide in 2019) as the main causes. IDMC statistics 
underestimate global environmental migration flows as they primarily record people who are involuntarily 
displaced within their home country by large disaster events, and do not count: 1) those displaced by 
smaller or ongoing events; 2) people who move for adaptive reasons beyond the confines of a disaster; or 3) 
international migrants.
Climate-related migration and displacement is commonly seen among subsistence agricultural populations, 
pastoralists and other groups that pursue resource-based livelihoods (e.g., fishers) in Least Developed 
Countries (LDCs), and may take the form of temporary, seasonal and longer-term migration (Afifi et al., 2016; 
Gautier et al., 2016; Gray and Wise, 2016). Many LDCs already have high rural‒urban migration rates for social 
and economic reasons; extreme climate events and conditions amplify these already high rates, placing great 
strain on city services (Ishtiaque and Nazem, 2017). This in turn can reduce the quality of life and human 
security in cities and can lead urban professionals to pursue migration abroad, as has been observed within the 
movement of skilled worker migrants to Canada from Bangladesh, Haiti and several West African countries 
1 Visit http://www.internal-displacement.org/ for latest statistics; at time of writing this chapter, the most recent 
IDMC statistics available were for 2019.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 692 
(see Figure 9.11; McLeman et al., 2017; Mezdour et al., 2015; Veronis and McLeman, 2014). Such migration is 
to the benefit of the receiving country, but represents a loss of human capital for the sending community.
Figure 9.11: Cascading effects of environmentally induced rural to urban migration in Least Developed Countries. 
Source: Adapted from Veronis and McLeman, 2014.
Climate migration does not occur exclusively in LDCs. In the United States, Hurricane Katrina is the most 
infamous example, with the population of New Orleans being 40% smaller today than it was immediately 
before the storm (DeWaard et al., 2016). The U.S. federal government is actively relocating several Indigenous 
communities in Alaska situated in rapidly eroding locations (Marino and Lazrus, 2015), as well as the 
Mississippi delta community of Isle de Jean Charles, Louisiana. Such efforts are costly; the cost of the Isle de 
Jean Charles relocation, for example, is reaching US$43 million (Sack and Schwartz, 2018).
Future levels and patterns of climate migration are difficult to estimate as they depend on the combined 
effect of many factors (Beneviste et al., 2020; McLeman, 2019), chiefly:
•	
Future levels of GHG emissions and consequent impacts on temperatures and precipitation 
patterns;
•	
Future rates of change in frequency and severity of storms, floods, droughts;
•	
Future rates of relative sea-level rise;
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 693 
•	
Future population growth levels in areas highly exposed to climate risks;
•	
Future socioeconomic growth, progress towards the UN Sustainable Development Goals and the 
success of adaptive capacity building in LDCs; and
•	
Future immigration and border control policies of developed countries.
A recent World Bank study (Rigaud et al., 2018) estimated that up to 143 million people could be displaced 
by the impacts of climate change in LDCs by mid-century in the absence of concerted actions to reduce 
global GHG emissions and to accelerate sustainable development. Combining flood displacement data from 
the IMDC with standardized scenarios for GHG emissions, socioeconomic development and population 
growth, it is estimated that each additional degree Celsius of warming increases global displacement risks 
by 50% (Kam et al., 2021). By the year 2060, it is estimated that one billion people will live in low-elevation 
coastal zones (LECZs)—areas less than 10 m above mean sea level—and thus be exposed to sea-level rise 
and accelerated coastal hazards (Neumann et al., 2015). The greatest proportion at risk lives in densely 
populated coastal deltas in Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia and Vietnam, with coastal populations in 
Africa and the United States also growing rapidly (Merkens et al., 2016). For example, southeastern Florida’s 
population is expected to grow to nearly 10 million by the year 2030 (Curtis and Schneider, 2011). A mean 
sea-level rise of 0.8 m by the end of this century would necessitate the relocation of up to 4.2 million people 
in the United States (Hauer et al., 2020, 2016). There is a pressing need for further research and modelling to 
generate statistical projections of future climate-related migration at global and regional scales under a range 
of climate and development scenarios (McLeman, 2019). Uncertainty in these projections is likely to remain 
high, making research on conditions that shape migration choices and on the effectiveness of adaptive 
strategies perhaps even more pressing (McMichael et al., 2020).
9.5.4 Future outlook for Canada
Canada is an attractive destination for international migration, and this will be magnified by adverse climate 
change impacts. Canada’s immigration policies stand in growing contrast with recent trends in Australia, 
the European Union and the United States towards less liberal migration policies, greater levels of border 
enforcement and criminalization of unauthorized migration (de Haas et al., 2019; McLeman, 2019). These 
latter trends are at odds with international development needs in a climate-disrupted future. The 2018 United 
Nations Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, to which Canada is a signatory, provides 
instructive policy guidance and objectives for ensuring that management of climate-related migration 
is done effectively, benefits sending and receiving areas, and protects the rights of migrants and their 
families (McLeman, 2019). Most international migration, including instances of climate-related migration, 
occurs between countries with contiguous borders (Stojanov et al., 2017; Hunter et al., 2013). Canada is 
anomalous in that five of its six largest immigration source countries are in Asia and the Middle East (India, 
the Philippines, China, Syria and Pakistan), with the United States representing the fourth-largest source of 
permanent migrants. Canada’s largest source countries of international migrants are expected to experience 
increased risks of extreme weather events, droughts, water scarcity and sustained heat events by 2050 and 
beyond, and (with the exception of Syria) have large populations residing in low-lying coastal areas (IPCC, 2014).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 694 
Most people seeking to migrate to Canada for climate-related reasons are likely to be people with family or 
social connections in Canada that can facilitate their travel and settlement, and third-country nationals (most 
likely from Latin America and the Caribbean) that enter Canada from the United States, seeking admission as 
refugees or for humanitarian and compassionate reasons. For the latter group, the number of future arrivals 
will be heavily mediated by U.S. immigration and border policies (McLeman, 2019). Most future climate-
related migration and displacement in the U.S. is likely to be internal, but the sheer scale of involuntary 
displacement under high emissions scenarios projected by Hauer et al. (2017) and socioeconomic disruptions 
that would ensue bear monitoring for potential effects on established migration flows between Canada 
and the U.S. Migrants with family connections are unlikely to place excessive demands on Canadian social 
services. The poorest, most vulnerable people in LDCs typically lack the financial wherewithal to undertake 
long-distance migration to Canada or other high-income countries and are more likely to be trapped in their 
home countries (Zickgraf, 2018; Black et al., 2011). International assistance to address the underlying causes 
of involuntary climate-related migration in the near term will help make LDCs more resilient in the long run 
and enhance their chances of meeting the Sustainable Development Goals (Rigaud et al, 2018). Global Affairs 
Canada projects that address water scarcity in rural Ethiopia are a practical example of future development 
programming of this type (Government of Canada, 2017a).
Canadian immigration and refugee programs currently do not take climate change into account when 
determining eligibility, and the UN Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees does not apply to people 
moving for climate-related reasons. Canada should expect increasing pressure in coming decades from the 
international community to accept the relocation of people displaced by climate change in countries that are 
not historically significant migration sources for Canada. Small Island States are obvious candidates, given 
the limited adaptation and internal relocation options that they have with respect to sea-level rise (Kelman, 
2015). A petition made by a Kiribati family to the UN Human Rights Committee fighting deportation from 
New Zealand on the grounds that their home island was no longer viable due to rising sea levels, resulted in a 
decision that receiving countries should not repatriate people whose lives are threatened by climate change 
impacts (UN Human Rights Committee, 2020). Unlike New Zealand, Canada has yet to receive significant 
numbers of humanitarian or refugee claims for permanent residence, but this can be expected to change as 
the impacts of climate change become more pronounced in countries where political instability is ongoing 
(Veronis, 2014).
The potential association between adverse climate conditions, migration and occurrences of violence and 
conflict in LDCs is subject to active investigation (see Section 9.6.2). Climate-related violence between groups 
competing for resources may lead directly or indirectly to internal and international migration in affected 
regions (Abel et al., 2019). Climate-related migration can increase or alternatively decrease the risk of violence 
and conflict within LDCs, depending on local circumstances (Freeman, 2017), but there is no evidence that 
climate-related migration triggers conflict between states. Research from East Africa finds that climate 
migrants are more likely to be victims of violence than perpetrators (Linke et al., 2018). A recurrent conclusion 
in published research is that the relationship between climate change and conflict is not deterministic, with 
numerous points for intervention before violence emerges (Mach et al., 2019; Selby et al., 2017; Brzoska and 
Fröhlich, 2016; Burrows and Kinney 2016). The impacts of climate change in water-scarce and politically 
unstable LDCs in sub-Saharan Africa could conceivably generate future demands for international intervention 
(see Case Story 9.4). 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 695 
Case Story 9.4: The role of climate change in conflict and migration in 
Mali
In August 2018, Canadian Armed Forces personnel were deployed to Mali to support the UN Multidimensional 
Integrated Stabilization Mission for a 12-month mission. Mali is a semi-arid sub-Saharan nation where 
agriculture is the principal livelihood base for the majority of the population. Environmental factors and 
conflicts over land use have been significant factors in the emergence and persistence of conflict in Mali. 
Severe droughts in the late 1980s triggered high levels of rural out-migration (Findley, 1994). Migration 
between rural and urban areas for socioeconomic reasons is common. However, adverse climate events have 
changed the patterns and duration of short-term population movements (Liehr et al., 2016). Drier conditions in 
a changing climate could depress crop yields and fodder for livestock (Butt et al., 2005).
Studies on the conflict in Mali conclude that climate events, such as drought, do not directly cause violence 
and conflict but can contribute to it. For example, in Mali’s Mopti region, four factors led pastoralists to join 
militant jihadist groups that are challenging government authority (Benjaminsen and Ba, 2019; Benjaminsen et 
al; 2012; Benjaminsen, 2008):
•	
Droughts, which led to increased migration of young Tuareg men to Libya, where they were 
radicalized;
•	
Encroachment of crop farming on land traditionally used by pastoralists that constrained the 
mobility of people and livestock;
•	
A lack of sound governance structures and clear land tenure arrangements in rural areas; and
•	
Corruption and predatory rent-seeking in rural areas by government officials, often under the guise 
of measures to combat desertification.
Promoting better governance and adaptive capacity in rural areas is essential for the long-term success of 
international interventions in Mali. This includes land-tenure reforms that recognize rural small holders and 
programming that balances the interests of pastoralists with crop farmers. Emerging research on drought and 
food security in Mali identifies diversified livestock and crop farming as an important development pathway to 
increase the climate resilience of rural Malians (Giannini et al., 2017).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 696 
9.6 Increased demand for international 
assistance is expected 
Climate change can undermine human security in developing countries and increase demands for 
Canadian international assistance. Canada is addressing climate risk to development and humanitarian 
goals by providing financial and technical assistance for adaptation and climate resilience.
Developing countries have less capacity to adapt and are therefore more vulnerable to the impacts of 
climate change than developed countries. Reasons for this include structural challenges that lead to political 
or economic marginalization, weakened institutions, environmental degradation, inadequacies in existing 
infrastructure and different abilities to pay for adaptation. Climate change can undermine human security and 
increase demands on international assistance. Climate change can also act as a multiplier of existing threats 
and pressures unrelated to climate, increasing exposure to harm, social unrest, and the removal of freedoms 
and capacities to live with dignity. Global stability and the welfare of citizens in countries abroad is a long-
standing focus of Canadian foreign policy. As climate change impacts increase and intensify, Canada can 
expect increased future demand for international assistance, including responding to humanitarian crises, 
particularly in countries where Canada is already active. In anticipation of these pressures, Canada is working 
with developing-country partners to address the impacts of climate change through its international assistance 
activities. This includes helping to strengthen vulnerable nations’ capacities to adapt to climate change through 
funding and programs that, among other outcomes, generate, increase access to, and facilitate the use of, 
knowledge, skills, infrastructure and technology needed to build climate resilience.
9.6.1 Introduction
Global stability and the welfare of citizens in countries abroad are tenets of Canadian foreign policy (Seyle, 
2019; Bernard, 2006), as is accounting for local context in working with the international community to deliver 
stability and welfare (Government of Canada, 2017a, b). The impacts of climate change and variability are 
already affecting communities globally, particularly in the Least Developed Countries. This section examines 
the potential impacts of climate change on Canada’s international assistance priorities. It describes the 
relationship between climate change and human security, discusses the implications of climate change on 
demands for international assistance and assesses evidence of Canada’s responses to date.
9.6.2 The climate-security connection
Climate change will impact developing countries more than developed countries due to differences in 
vulnerability and capacities to adapt (Ahmadalipour et al., 2019; King and Harrington, 2018; Adger et al., 
2014), in some cases resulting in human insecurity. Human security is “a condition that exists when the 
vital core of human lives is protected, and when people have the freedom and capacity to live with dignity” 
(Adger et al., 2014, p. 759). Human insecurity, therefore, encompasses threats to health and well-being, 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 697 
economic and political inclusion and threats to culture. The mechanisms by which climate change can lead 
to human insecurity in developing countries are an active area of study in Canada and globally (De Souza et 
al., 2015; Busby et al., 2014; Ericksen et al., 2011). These mechanisms relate to complex and multi-faceted 
trends affecting the capacity of countries to cope with shocks and to adapt in the long term, including, 
structural challenges that lead to political or economic marginalization, weakened institutions, environmental 
degradation, inadequacies in existing infrastructure, varying levels of wealth to offset the costs of adapting to 
climate impacts (Harrington et al., 2016), changing demographics (e.g., growing populations and increased 
rural-to-urban migration) and other important factors (e.g., prior conflict experience).
Research to evaluate the links between climate change and violent conflict in particular has improved over 
the past decades. Security experts generally agree that climate change is a “threat multiplier”, exacerbating 
existing political instability and conflict, or potentially tipping stable countries into instability. Although the 
concept adds complexity to the task of understanding the specific relationships between climate change 
and conflict (Busby, 2020), linking environment and conflict without capturing the underlying mechanisms 
at play can lead to ineffective interventions. Research in the 1990s (Homer-Dixon, 1991) without this lens 
led some researchers and policymakers to assume scarcity directly led to conflict. Another research gap 
was the excessive reliance on a small number of case studies from sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East, 
such as conflicts in Darfur and Syria, to generalize insights (Adams et al., 2018; Hendrix, 2018). A robust 
academic field has now developed, demonstrating that climate is related to armed conflict that takes place 
within countries, but is not the most significant driver of large-scale conflict (Mach et al., 2019; Hsiang and 
Burke, 2013). Research on the connection between climate and conflict increasingly focuses on the important 
roles of governance and institutions, adaptive capacity and cooperative behaviour (Koubi, 2019; Gilmore et 
al., 2018; Gilmore, 2017; Theisen, 2017; Buhaug, 2016; Buhaug, 2015; Rüttinger et al., 2015; Meierding, 2013; 
Gleditsch, 2012).
Current research efforts serve to move beyond the “threat multiplier” concept in order to identify context-
specific interventions that can address climate-related risks of violent conflict (Busby, 2020). Based on 
expert elicitation research, recent work points to low socioeconomic development, diminished state capacity 
and intergroup inequality as factors relating climate with internal armed conflict (Mach et al., 2019). Others 
have found that countries with high rates of political exclusion and high dependence on agricultural labour 
are at risk of prolonged or worsened conflict and humanitarian emergencies when faced with climate-
related hazards like severe droughts (Busby and von Uexkull, 2018). The need to consider local factors when 
assessing how climate change shapes conflict risk is key. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, the impacts of 
drought on crop production and on the availability of water and forage for livestock have a weak association 
with outbreaks of violent conflicts, with intervening political and socioeconomic factors having a more 
direct influence (Ayana et al., 2016; Buhaug, 2015; Buhaug et al., 2014). Climate change mitigation efforts 
associated with land-use change can add to the potential for conflict (Froese and Schilling, 2019), which 
highlights the need for conflict sensitivity in designing initiatives to reduce GHGs or enhance carbon sinks.
The link between conflict and climate-related migration is being increasingly studied in an effort to 
understand this complex relationship (Boas et al., 2019; Brzoska and Fröhlich, 2016) and match humanitarian 
responses to needs (see Section 9.6). An example of where the conflict narrative has been studied and 
challenged among scholars relates to the contribution of water scarcity due to prolonged drought to the 
emergence of the Syrian civil conflict (Ide, 2018; Feitelson and Tubi, 2017; Selby et al., 2017; Kelley et al., 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 698 
2015; Gleick, 2014). Statistical analysis of climatic and non-climatic factors in global patterns of conflict and 
asylum-seeking between 2006 and 2015 found that drought conditions were likely secondary in generating 
conflict and asylum-seeking outmigration from Syria in the years 2010 to 2012, with non-climatic factors 
playing the primary role (Abel et al., 2019). Extreme events and changing climate conditions interact with 
political, economic, social, cultural and other factors and can generate or exacerbate conflicts and forced 
migration, but a conflict and refugee crisis of the scale of Syria is not solely attributable to climate factors.
9.6.3 Demands on international assistance
Heightened demand for international assistance as a result of climate change is foreseeable—even if the 
causal pathways are complex. Climate change may lead to complex humanitarian crises through threats 
to food security, livelihoods, public health, mobility and geopolitical stability (Norwegian Red Cross, 2019). 
Beyond humanitarian assistance and development organizations, a number of national security and other 
international institutions note the potential for climate change to require additional international assistance, 
including the U.S. Department of Defense (U.S. Department of Defense, 2014), the United States Executive 
Office of the President (United States Exec. Order 14008, 2021) and intelligence community (Coats, 2019), 
think tanks (Guy et al., 2020), the United Nations Security Council (UN News, 2019) and the G7 (UNFCCC, 
2015). Canada’s Feminist International Assistance Policy draws attention to the destabilizing effects 
climate change can have on the poorest and most vulnerable communities (Government of Canada, 2017a). 
Similarly, Canada’s Strong, Secure, Engaged defence policy recognizes the potential for climate change to 
exacerbate existing fragilities in some countries, increasing tensions and contributing to humanitarian crises 
(Government of Canada, 2017b).
Many developing countries have made significant progress on climate change adaptation and climate-
related disaster risk reduction to date, with important lessons to be drawn for developed countries (see 
Case Story 9.5). Countries’ progress in defining their adaptation priorities, establishing governance 
structures that facilitate adaptation efforts, implementing adaptation-focused projects and programs, and 
leveraging financing for priority adaptation efforts is highly variable (Parry and Terton, 2016). In some cases, 
community-level action is outpacing action at the national level, so care must be taken to avoid generalizing 
the climate resilience of developing countries based on their national efforts alone.
However, for many developing countries with lower income, including LDCs, building climate resilience and 
adapting to the impacts of climate change is unaffordable without assistance from developed countries as 
partners. Accurate and consistent assessments of the overall economic costs of climate change impacts on 
developing countries are a work in progress. Nevertheless, research and policy communities generally agree 
that the costs will be substantial. The World Bank and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) have estimated adaptation investment needs in developing countries by 2030 in the range of 
US$60 to $100 billion per year (Fankhauser et al., 2016). In addition, there is growing recognition that climate 
change adaptation should be mainstreamed into regular international assistance efforts. There is also the 
potential for climate considerations to compete with investments for ongoing development priorities (e.g., 
healthcare, social welfare and education).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 699 
9.6.4 Canada’s response and outlook
Canada’s response to the increased threats posed by climate change to developing countries over the last 
decade has focused on contributing to global climate finance (see Box 9.3), supporting knowledge generation 
relevant for adaptation in developing countries and identifying priorities for action that address climate risks 
through international assistance activities. Canada’s approach is continuing to evolve, as exemplified in the 
2019 mandate of the Minister of National Defence, which made a commitment to draw on the expertise of the 
Canadian Armed Forces to help other countries at greater risk of disasters due to climate change (Trudeau, 
2020). Because the lines between post-disaster humanitarian work and development interventions to reduce 
poverty are becoming increasingly blurred, improved collaboration between these two communities of 
practice could help address root causes of vulnerability and contribute to long-term adaptation (Marin and 
Naess, 2017).
Box 9.3: Climate finance
Climate finance refers to financial support for mitigation and/or adaptation actions that address climate 
change. It differs from official development assistance in that climate finance is intended to be additional 
to international development commitments. The Paris Agreement calls for financial assistance from Parties 
to the UNFCCC, with more financial resources to less wealthy and more vulnerable Parties. Climate finance 
is an important tool to help build the resilience of countries for which the costs of adaptation could be 
unaffordable. As a Party to the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement, Canada has obligations to provide finance 
to developing countries to support their efforts to adapt to climate change.
Advocacy by governments and non-governmental organizations led developed countries to commit to raising 
US$100 billion annually by 2020 from public and private sources for climate finance in developing countries, 
but progress has been mixed in meeting that target (African Development Bank et al., 2019; OECD, 2019, 
2018a-c, 2016). Progress has been made in total financing made available by developed countries in the 
years between 2013 and 2017 in increasing annual investments (up to US$71.2 billion annually from US$52.2 
billion), but a significant skew remains towards GHG emissions reduction (73%) over adaptation funding 
(19%) as of 2017 (OECD, 2019).
More information is available on the UNFCCC’s website at this link: https://unfccc.int/topics/climate-finance/
the-big-picture/introduction-to-climate-finance.
Canada’s leadership on global climate finance has varied over the years. Most recently, Canada has 
committed to contribute C$2.65 billion between 2016 and 2021 towards global climate finance (Government 
of Canada, 2018). Between 2016 and 2018, Canada ranked 9th among 24 OECD contributors to climate 
finance (Tomlinson, 2020). Canada’s ranking for this period drops to 14th among 24 OECD donors when 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 700 
taking into account the contribution of climate finance relative to countries’ Gross National Income 
(Tomlinson, 2020). Tracking climate finance flows is an inexact science (Furlow et al., 2011), not least 
because it can be impractical to isolate the additional finance destined for climate action—particularly 
when tracking climate finance for adaptation, given the strong linkages between adaptation and broader 
development investments (Church and Hammill, 2019). Transparency in climate finance tracking and 
reporting is a standing focus of work for the UNFCCC and OECD (Clapp et al., 2012).
Canada is taking steps to build the resilience of developing countries through development and assistance 
programming. Over 2017 and 2018, Canada delivered C$1.5 billion to developing countries for climate 
action—of which C$704 million was part of the Government of Canada’s C$2.65 billion climate finance 
commitment; C$246 million was part of the Government of Canada’s regular international assistance projects 
with a climate change component; C$17 million was associated with provincial and municipal support; C$509 
million was provided from Export Development Canada by mobilizing private finance; and US$30 million was 
delivered by FinDev Canada, a newly established development finance institution (Government of Canada, 
2020). Of these investments, C$192 million targeted climate change adaptation, as compared to C$315 
million for GHG emissions reduction initiatives, and C$498 million was dedicated to initiatives that cut across 
adaptation and GHG emissions reduction priorities. This adaptation investment includes Canada’s C$30 
million contribution to the Least Developed Countries Fund, which addresses urgent adaptation needs of the 
least wealthy and most vulnerable countries. Projects funded by Canada include C$100 million in support 
of the expansion of climate risk insurance coverage in climate-vulnerable countries, with the aim of helping 
communities build back better and faster following disasters related to natural hazards such as hurricanes 
and flooding (Government of Canada, 2020). Current top recipients of Canadian official development 
assistance—Haiti, Mali, South Sudan, Syria, and Tanzania—are projected to experience significant climate 
impacts in the years ahead. This underscores the potential for increased demands for climate-related 
development assistance in the years to come. Case Story 9.4 in the previous section illustrates how climate 
change may have played a part in increasing demands for Canada’s assistance by Mali.
In line with the Feminist International Assistance Policy, Canada’s climate finance investments have a 
strong focus on gender equality and on the empowerment of women and girls. Attention to gender equality 
is important as evidence shows females and males differ in their vulnerability to climate change and 
preferences for adaptation solutions, with women and girls continuing to be disproportionately impacted 
by the adverse effects of climate change (Rao et al., 2019; Assan et al., 2018; Vincent et al., 2010). Projects 
that are gender-blind have the potential to increase disparities between the sexes and perpetuate structural 
challenges that limit access to resources and power.
Canada has also contributed to building knowledge and local research capacity on vulnerability to climate 
change impacts and feasible adaptation options in developing countries. One example is the body of research 
produced through the Collaborative Adaptation Research Initiative in Africa and Asia (CARIAA), jointly funded 
by Canada’s International Development Research Centre (IDRC) and the United Kingdom’s Department 
for International Development (International Development Research Centre, 2019). Alongside many other 
initiatives led by the IDRC, this collaborative effort is yielding lessons, good practices and innovations 
applicable to Canada’s future investments in development assistance (see Case Story 9.5). These lessons 
include practical approaches to integrate disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation into project 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 701 
and program designs centred on local contexts to encourage the pursuit of low-carbon benefits and also to 
avoid inducing maladaptation (UN Environment Programme, 2017; Adger et al., 2014).
Case Story 9.5: Researching risk-pooling initiatives in the face of 
climate change in South Africa
Floods are a common and damaging climate-related hazard in South Africa (Zuma et al., 2012). In the 
Western Cape, for example, expected urban damage per year is estimated to be US$66 million (World 
Resources Institute, 2017). South Africa’s Disaster Risk Financing strategy is primarily focused on a form of 
self-insurance. Climate change will test the resilience of this strategy. The use of risk-transfer tools, such 
as risk-pooling, is an option to increase the financial capacity of provincial governments if losses become 
exorbitant. Risk pooling has the potential to extend coverage to those individuals who are not covered by 
commercial insurance, and thereby acts as a safety net.
Funded by Canada’s International Development Research Centre (IDRC), the Municipal Risk Pooling project 
(IDRC, 2020) is examining the feasibility of developing subnational risk pools as a mechanism for managing 
climate risk, with the aim of generating guidance for others. It is led by the University of KwaZulu-Natal, 
endorsed by the Western Cape subnational government and involves a number of partners, including 
SouthSouthNorth and the Munich Climate Insurance Initiative.
Figure 9.12 illustrates the proposed structure for a Municipal Risk Pooling project. A risk-pooling facility 
based at the municipal level would allow South African entities to accrue all benefits from premiums paid, 
with governance and decision-making power retained within South Africa. Under this model, municipalities 
pay premiums towards the risk pool (either from their own budget or supported by donors), determined by the 
type of coverage required (e.g., 1-in-5-year event) and the risk profile of the municipality. Participating in risk 
pools could allow local governments to access insurance on better terms than if they applied as an individual 
entity. The risk pool would grow the capital reserves over time through investments that yield returns, while 
also reducing exposure of the pool by passing on risks to reinsurance and capital markets.
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 702 
Figure 9.12: A proposed structure for the Municipal Risk Pooling Facility project led by the University of KwaZulu-
Natal.
9.7 Moving forward 
9.7.1 Knowledge gaps and research needs 
Research on the risks and opportunities to Canada stemming from climate change impacts, events and 
adaptation that occur or are amplified beyond Canadian borders remains underdeveloped. All of the topics 
discussed here—tensions over Arctic sovereignty as sea ice retreats; the potential for strained relationships 
from climate-induced shifts in freshwater flows and marine resources shared across international boundaries; 
economic impacts to Canada due to changes in global trade exacerbated by extreme events and climate 
change; the potential for increased pressure on Canada’s immigration and resettlement infrastructure; as well 
as demand for Canadian international assistance—are within the top twelve climate risk areas identified for 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 703 
Canada (Council of Canadian Academies, 2019). Defence and foreign policies acknowledge the role of climate 
change in exacerbating existing vulnerabilities in the Arctic and fragilities in some countries as well as the 
need for enhanced capabilities to address increased demands. Climate-related disruptions in global supply 
chains highlight the potential for trade to propagate or dampen economic risk, and widespread adoption 
of climate-related financial disclosure by firms in Canada’s trade sectors may well yield the data needed 
to understand the degree to which product, market, logistics, security and other dynamics interact with 
climate change risk. Agencies managing transboundary resource-sharing agreements are starting to revisit 
assumptions of static environmental conditions, since these risk unsustainable resource use and threaten the 
stability of cooperative relationships. Despite a growing awareness of the international dimensions of climate 
change risk for Canada, the knowledge base is insufficient to reliably assess the extent of current and future 
risk exposure as climate change intensifies. This assessment relied on a number of strands of research and 
evidence; in some cases, there was a continued need to make inferences.
Nevertheless, with the evidence available it is possible to highlight early indicators for decision makers to 
respond to, while academic and practitioner communities continue to address knowledge gaps. Table 9.13 
provides a qualitative account of the likelihood of risk factors described in previous sections of this chapter. 
There is least confidence in risk factors related to international trade.
Table 9.13: Qualitative assessment of risks and opportunities to 
Canada from transboundary impacts of climate change over the next 
30 years
RISK/OPPORTUNITY FACTOR
LIKELIHOOD
CONFIDENCE
Arctic shipping and sovereignty
Decreased extent, thickness and age of summer sea ice in the 
Arctic Ocean and gradual opening up of major waterways to ice-free 
conditions for part of the year
Increased physical access to Canada’s Arctic resources and waters
Increased vessel traffic in Canadian Arctic waterways, including in 
the Northwest Passage
Development of economically competitive and safe Arctic shipping 
and trade routes
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 704 
RISK/OPPORTUNITY FACTOR
LIKELIHOOD
CONFIDENCE
Increased perception of the Northwest Passage as an international 
strait linked to substantial rise in commercial shipping
Diminished Canadian ability to use Article 234 under the UN 
Convention of the Law of the Sea for legitimacy over regulation of 
Northwest Passage waters
Increased pollution, oil spills and negative impacts on marine 
habitats due to shipping in the Northwest Passage
Diminished capacity to enforce environmental protections in 
Canada’s Arctic waterways linked to inadequate infrastructure and 
operations
Transboundary marine and freshwater agreements
Increased migration of marine species poleward or to deeper water, 
resulting in redistribution of marine species across borders
Changes in water quantity and timing of flows, water temperatures, 
and intensity, frequency and/or duration of floods and droughts, 
resulting in spatial and temporal redistribution of freshwater 
resources across borders
Changes in perceived benefits from resource sharing, partly driven 
by regional differences in climate change impacts and vulnerabilities
Increased uncertainty of meeting management objectives under 
existing transboundary cooperative structures
Increased need for difficult trade-offs across competing freshwater 
water uses
Increased application of adaptive measures in most key Canada–
U.S. freshwater agreements (beyond the Great Lakes Water Quality 
Agreement)
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 705 
RISK/OPPORTUNITY FACTOR
LIKELIHOOD
CONFIDENCE
International trade
Increased economic impacts to Canada through disruptions to 
supply chains and distribution networks
Increased resilience of new and existing trade infrastructure 
networks worldwide
Increased global markets for adaptation solutions
Changes in the availability and prices of basic goods, including 
disruptions to the global food system
Increased spread of economic risk to Canada through climate 
change impacts to major trade partners
Increased relative gains to Canada from long-term shift in trade 
patterns
Increased global disparities from the unequal adaptive effect of 
trade
Human migration and displacement
Increased displacement of millions of people each year around the 
world due to tropical cyclones, floods, droughts, wildfires and food 
insecurity, combined with non-climate stressors
Increased future demand for immigration to Canada from countries 
highly exposed to climate risk, especially from Canada’s largest 
source countries of international migrants
Increased skilled worker migration to Canada from climate-disrupted 
regions
Increased pressure to provide financial assistance for refugee 
procedures and serve as a resettlement destination
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 706 
RISK/OPPORTUNITY FACTOR
LIKELIHOOD
CONFIDENCE
Evolution of climate-related migration arrivals into Canada shaped 
by disparate immigration and border policies between Canada and 
the United States
International assistance
Increased future demand for international assistance, including 
responding to humanitarian crises, particularly in countries where 
Canada is already active
Increased need for international assistance to address root causes 
of involuntary climate migration
Increased future demand for intervention in water scarce, politically 
unstable Least Developed Countries
Note: Likelihood is represented on a graduated colour scale: dark green = negligible, light green = unlikely, 
yellow = possible, orange = likely, and red = almost certain. Confidence is represented on a 4-point scale, 
with grey = unclear, green = low, yellow = medium, and red = high. Confidence ratings take into account the 
extent of evidence and relative influence of non-climate drivers. The likelihood and confidence scores were 
based on the expert opinion of the author team.
Based on the assessment in this chapter, four emerging themes stand out as needing further consideration 
as adaptation science and knowledge evolves in Canada.
9.7.1.1 Governance and mainstreaming
Academic and practitioner research recognizes the advantages of advancing adaptation through 
its integration into existing institutions, policy and planning processes (e.g., Lemmen et al., 2008). 
Mainstreaming is a strategy promoted in each of the discussions in this chapter and is a concept tightly 
connected to governance. Each topic addressed in this chapter has its own web of actors and institutions 
already governing the evolution of each system at different scales. International agreements (e.g., 
transboundary river basin treaties) and customary laws (e.g., UNCLOS), multi-lateral institutions (e.g., Arctic 
Council, World Trade Organization, trade agreements), national or subnational policies (e.g., trade, military 
defence, immigration, international assistance), and sectoral or organizational strategies all form part of 
issue governance. Governance is itself dynamic and subject to shifts in societal expectations, politics, social 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 707 
norms and review schedules, among others, such that adaptation mainstreaming can occur within a moving 
target. This can include the need to dismantle or modify existing institutions and create new ones where none 
exist. Options for increasing consideration of indirect, cross-border climate change impacts in adaptation 
governance include: 1) national or bilateral responses that, for example, aim to increase self-sufficiency and 
ensure cooperation among strategic partners; 2) transnational responses characterized by leadership of non-
state actors; and 3) international responses focused on reforming existing institutions, including expanding 
the mandate of the UNFCCC (Benzie and Persson, 2019).
At present, key issues gaining prominence in governance in Canada that also shape adaptation governance 
include reconciliation with Indigenous peoples and the rise of populist politics. The former has fundamental 
implications for resource use and development, among other domains. For example, for Inuit peoples, 
Arctic sovereignty is connected to self-determination, the right to cultural integrity and empowerment 
(Inuit Circumpolar Council, 2009). Addressing these issues requires supporting healthy and sustainable 
communities informed by Inuit needs and knowledge (Gerhardt, 2011) and cooperating with governments in 
setting the rules for Arctic development (Dodds and Hemmings, 2015). Shifts in Canadian public sentiment 
in favour of populism can temper Canada’s role as a destination for migrants from climate-disrupted 
regions and as a source of international development assistance tagged for adaptation and resilience. 
Insular attitudes of the Canadian public may also diminish political will to act on Canada’s commitment to 
multilateralism and step in as a global broker of cooperative solutions. With increased pressure to deliver 
results from public budgets, knowledge about the effectiveness and equity impact of adaptation efforts 
funded by governments is critical. At the same time, coherence among all parts of Canada’s international 
policies with respect to climate, trade, migration, international assistance and security efforts will become 
increasingly important.
9.7.1.2 Global food systems
Combined with other pressures, such as population growth and shifting diets, climate change threatens 
global food systems, with implications for food security. Food security is a multi-dimensional concept 
comprising availability (quantity), access (physical and financial), utilization (nutrition) and stability (Food and 
Agriculture Organization, 2018). Although all dimensions are subject to climate change threats, quantitative 
studies focus on availability and, to a lesser extent, access. Canada’s role in supporting food security outside 
its borders now and in the future, including as a net exporter of fertilizer, grains, fish and seafood, through 
international assistance and through partnered research merits closer consideration. The role can be explored 
from several dimensions, including economic interest, global stability and contributions to meeting the 2030 
United Nations Agenda for Sustainable Development. In examining Canada’s potential contribution to future 
food availability, access and stability, a more balanced view than what is captured in global modelling efforts 
may be needed to estimate the impact of climate change on food production in Canada and what this means 
for exports. For example, Canadian agricultural producers will face a mix of opportunities and challenges (see 
Sector Impacts and Adaptation chapter), and the aggregate functions included in studies such as Dellink et 
al. (2017) can fail to capture realistic impacts on Canada’s agricultural productivity and nutritional content. 
A lack of research on how the impacts of climate change elsewhere in the world could affect food supplies 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 708 
in Canada is an important knowledge gap, since consumer choices could be restricted as food exports from 
tropical countries become less reliable.
9.7.1.3 Assessment tools that accommodate uncertainty and complexity
For many years, Canadian and international research has recognized that climate change vulnerability and 
decisions to adapt are rarely shaped by climate factors alone (IPCC, 2007). This conclusion aptly applies to 
understanding the international dimensions of climate change risk for Canada and how Canadians should 
adapt. Assessment of all issues in this chapter emphasized that climate change and its impacts are rarely 
the sole risk driver or reason for adaptation. For example, resource markets, technology and strategic 
interests are important drivers of shipping in Arctic waterways; disappearing sea ice only enables shipping 
activity. Population migration is the cumulative result of environmental, social, economic and cultural factors. 
Although some climate hazards directly displace people (e.g., hurricanes), the role of climate variability or 
climate change in motivating population movement is not always clear. Because of the complexity in both 
assessing and managing risks (and opportunities) resulting from the interactions of multi-layered cause-
and-effect chains, decision makers may need assistance to define the problem. This can include clarifying 
the outcomes they wish to safeguard, isolating the drivers most likely to threaten or enrich these outcomes, 
implementing and monitoring management actions targeting drivers over which they have some control or 
ability to predict and tracking the evolution of other drivers. Use of foresight tools (e.g., scenario planning 
and horizon scanning) as well as holistic approaches, like systems mapping (e.g., Cradock-Henry et al., 2020) 
and cumulative effects assessment, which combine climate and non-climate drivers and outcomes in one 
framework, will help to bound the range of probable outcomes and management levers worth pursuing. 
Capacity for systems thinking, adaptive leadership and iterative learning are all important qualities of decision 
makers navigating large-scale transformations (Eyzaguirre et al., 2017).
9.7.1.4 Strengthened economic modelling
Aside from improvements in modelling the agriculture and food sector, strengthening the breadth and depth 
of economy-wide modelling efforts in Canada would help improve its overall assessment of economic risk. 
A knowledge gap exists in the analysis of the economic impacts of climate change on patterns of domestic 
production, as it does in the analysis of the projected impacts on the economies of the regions with which 
Canadian producers compete in international markets. Studies such as those carried out by Szewczyk et al. 
(2018), who modelled the spillover effects of climate impacts occurring outside the EU but affecting the EU 
via trade, and by Zhang et al. (2018), who modelled the spillover effects of climate impacts occurring in the 
United States affecting other global regions via trade, provide foundations to build on, as do assessments 
undertaken in Germany and Switzerland (Stockholm Environment Institute, 2018).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 709 
9.8 Conclusion 
This chapter focused on risks and opportunities facing Canada from indirect impacts of climate change 
with international dimensions. For all issues considered, the research remains underdeveloped, particularly 
as it relates to international trade. Indirect impacts of climate change have long been neglected in Canadian 
adaptation research, partly because of the methodological complexities and multiple disciplines involved. 
Although adaptation—planned or proactive—is either not documented or not yet occurring in a consistent way 
across the policy and management issues assessed, there are examples of spontaneous or market-driven 
adaptation. The increase in Arctic shipping, migration decisions in response to climate-related disasters and 
diversification of raw material suppliers are just a few examples. It is challenging to assess the significance 
of excluding these transboundary, teleconnected or cascading effects in measuring Canada’s progress 
in adapting to climate change. Nevertheless, the information presented in this chapter sheds light on the 
potential perils of lagging behind in laying the groundwork for adaptation and in addressing the weaknesses 
in resilience and adaptive capacity that have already been identified (e.g., for Arctic shipping and sovereignty 
as well as transboundary resource management). In any case, without deep cuts in global GHGs to limit 
future climate change, it will become increasingly costly and challenging to sustain Canadians’ well-being in a 
climate-disrupted world (Curtin, 2019).
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 710 
9.9 References 
Abdel-Fattah, S. and Krantzberg, G. (2014). Commentary: Climate 
change adaptive management in the Great Lakes. Journal of 
Great Lakes Research, 40(3), 578–580. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jglr.2014.05.007>
Abel, G.J., Brottrager, M., Cuaresma, J.C. and Muttarak, 
R. (2019). Climate, conflict and forced migration. Global 
Environmental Change, 54, 239–249. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.12.003>
Adams, H. (2016). Why populations persist: mobility, place 
attachment and climate change. Population and Environment, 
37(4), 429–448. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11111-015-0246-3>
Adams, C., Ide, T., Barnett, J. and Detges, A. (2018). Sampling 
bias in climate–conflict research. Nature Climate Change, 
8, 200–203. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-018-0068-2>
Adams, K., Harris, K., Klein, R.J.T., Lager, F. and Benzie, 
M. (2020). Climate-Resilient Trade and Production: The 
Transboundary Effects of Climate Change and Their 
Implications for EU Member States. Adaptation Without 
Borders Policy Brief. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://
adaptationwithoutborders.org/knowledge-base/transnational-
climate-impacts/climate-resilient-trade-and-production>
Adger, W.N., Pulhin, J.M., Barnett, J, Dabelko, G.D., Hovelsrud, 
G.K., Levy, M. and Oswald Spring, Ú. (2014). Human security, in 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, 755–791. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/
WGIIAR5-Chap12_FINAL.pdf>
Afifi, T., Milan, A., Etzold, B., Schraven, B., Rademacher-Schulz, C., 
Sakdapolrak, P., Reif, A., van der Geest, K. and Warner, K. (2016). 
Human mobility in response to rainfall variability: opportunities 
for migration as a successful adaptation strategy in eight case 
studies. Migration and Development, 5(2), 254–274. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/21632324.2015.1
022974>
African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank, 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, European 
Investment Bank, Inter-American Development Bank Group, 
Islamic Development Bank and, World Bank Group (2019). 
2018 Joint Report on Multilateral Development Banks’ 
Climate Finance. Retrieved March 2020, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.18235/0001736>
Ahmadalipour, A., Moradkhani, H. and Kumar, M. (2019). 
Mortality risk from heat stress expected to hit poorest nations 
the hardest. Climatic Change, 152(3), 569–579. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2348-2>
Ainsworth, C.H., Samhouri, J.F., Busch, D.S., Cheung, W.W.L, 
Dunne, J. and Okey, T.A. (2011). Potential impacts of climate 
change on Northeast Pacific marine foodwebs and fisheries, 
ICES Journal of Marine Science, 68(6), 1217–1229. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsr043>
Andrew, R. (2014). Socio-Economic Drivers of Change in the 
Arctic. AMAP Technical Report No. 9. Arctic Monitoring and 
Assessment Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.amap.no/documents/doc/
socio-economic-drivers-of-change-in-the-arctic/1115>
Aqorau, T., Bell, J. and Kittinger, J. N. (2018). Good governance 
for migratory species. Science, 361(6408), 1208–1209. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aav2051>
Arctic Council (2009). Arctic Marine Shipping Assessment 2009 
Report, 39–55. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.
pmel.noaa.gov/arctic-zone/detect/documents/AMSA_2009_
Report_2nd_print.pdf>
Arctic Council (2017). Arctic Resilience Action Framework. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://oaarchive.arctic-council.
org/bitstream/handle/11374/2019/EDOCS-4248-v4-Arctic-
Resilience-Action-Framework-after-New-York-SAO-2017.
pdf?sequence=7&isAllowed=y>
Arctic Domain Awareness Center (2017). Arctic 2030+: 
Projecting Challenges and Capability Gaps “Needs of the North”. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://crrc.unh.edu/sites/crrc.
unh.edu/files/outreach/arctic_2030_report_5_sep_2017.pdf>
Armitage, D., de Loë, R.C., Morris, M., Edwards, T.W.D., Gerlak, 
A.K., Hall, R.I., Huitema D., Ison, R., Livingstone, D., MacDonald, 
G., Mirumachi, N., Plummer, R. and Wolfe B.B. (2015). Science–
policy processes for transboundary water governance. Ambio, 
44, 353–366. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13280-015-0644-x>
Arnold, S. (2012). Constructing an Indigenous Nordicity: The 
“New Partnership” and Canada’s Northern Agenda. International 
Studies Perspectives, 13(1), 105–120. Retrieved October 2020, 
from <http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-3585.2011.00455.x>
Arruda, G.M. (2015). Arctic governance regime: the last frontier 
for hydrocarbons exploitation. International Journal of Law and 
Management, 57(5), 498–521. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLMA-09-2014-0054>
Ash, J. (2016). Cold peace: Arctic conflict in an era of climate 
change. Journal of Intelligence and Terrorism Studies, 1, 1–13. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.22261/
MV5JAC>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 711 
Assan, E., Suvedi, M., Schmitt Olabisi, L. and Allen, A. (2018). 
Coping with and adapting to climate change: A gender 
perspective from smallholder farming in Ghana. Environments, 
5(8), 86. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.3390/environments5080086>
Aswani, S. and Lauer, M. (2014). Indigenous people’s detection 
of rapid ecological change. Conservation Biology, 28(3), 820–
828. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cobi.12250>
Åtland, K. (2014). Interstate relations in the Arctic: an emerging 
security dilemma? Comparative Strategy, 33(2), 145–166. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/014959
33.2014.897121>
Ayana, E.K., Ceccato, P., Fisher, J.R. and DeFries, R. (2016). 
Examining the relationship between environmental factors and 
conflict in pastoralist areas of East Africa. Science of The Total 
Environment, 557, 601–611. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.03.102>
Azose, J.J. and Raftery, A.E. (2019). Estimation of emigration, 
return migration, and transit migration between all pairs of 
countries. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
116(1), 116–122. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.1722334116>
Bader, H., Carlson, C. and Bouffard, T. (2014). “Tale of Two 
Arctics: Impact of Geography Affecting Security and Disaster 
Response Capabilities between North America and Europe.” The 
Homeland Security Review, 8(2), 1‒21. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275657290_
Tale_of_Two_Arctics_Impact_of_Geography_Affecting_Security_
and_Disaster_Response_Capabilities_Between_North_America_
and_Europe>
Baez, J., Caruso, G., Mueller, V. and Niu, C. (2017). Droughts 
augment youth migration in Northern Latin America and the 
Caribbean. Climatic Change, 140, 423–435. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-1863-2>
Bailey, M., Favaro, B., Otto, S.P., Charles, A., Devillers, R., 
Metaxas, A., Tyedmers, P., Ban, N.C., Mason, T., Hoover, C., Duck, 
T.J., Fanning, L., Milley, C., Cisneros-Montemayor, A.M., Pauly, 
D., Cheung, W.W.L., Cullis-suzuki, S., Teh, L. and Sumaila, U.R. 
(2016). Canada at a crossroad: The imperative for realigning 
ocean policy with ocean science. Marine Policy, 63, 53–60. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpol.2015.10.002>
Bailey, R. and Wellesley, L. (2017). Chokepoints and 
Vulnerabilities in Global Food Trade. Chatham House Report, 
Chatham House, The Royal Institute of International Affairs. 
London, United Kingdom; Declaration, G20 Meeting of 
Agriculture Ministers 2018, 27–28 July 2018, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
chathamhouse.org/2017/06/chokepoints-and-vulnerabilities-
global-food-trade>
Baldassari, E. (2017). The Northwest Passage: Myth, 
Environment, and Resources. Environment & Society Portal, 
Virtual Exhibitions 2017, no. 1. Rachel Carson Center for 
Environment and Society. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://
doi.org/10.5282/rcc/6254>
Baldos, U.L.C. and Hertel, T.W. (2015). The role of international 
trade in managing food security risks from climate change. Food 
Security, 7, 275–290. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.
org/10.1007/s12571-015-0435-z>
Bankes, N. and Cosens, B. (2012). The Future of the Columbia 
River Treaty. Toronto, Canada. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://munkschool.utoronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/07/
Bankes_and_Cosens_POWI_2012.pdf>
Bartolai, A.M., He, L., Hurst, A.E., Mortsch, L., Paehkle, R. and 
Scavia, D. (2015). Climate change as a driver of change in the 
Great Lakes St. Lawrence River Basin. Journal of Great Lakes 
Research, 41, 45–58. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jglr.2014.11.012>
Batten, S. (2018). Staff Working Paper No. 706. Climate change 
and the macro-economy: a critical review. Bank of England. 
January 2018. Retrieved December 2020, from <https://www.
bankofengland.co.uk/working-paper/2018/climate-change-and-
the-macro-economy-a-critical-review>
BC Hydro (2013). Columbia River Treaty Review Technical 
Studies. BC Hydro and Power Authority, Burnaby, British 
Columbia. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://engage.gov.
bc.ca/app/uploads/sites/6/2012/07/Columbia-River-Treaty-
Review-Technical-Studies-Report-FINAL.pdf>
Becker, A., Ng, A.K.Y, McEvoy, D. and Mullet, J. (2017). 
Implications of climate change for shipping: Ports and supply 
chains. WIREs Climate Change, 9(2), e508. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.508>
Bekkers, E., Francois, J.F. and Rojas-Romagosa, H. (2018). 
Melting Ice Caps and the Economic Impact of Opening the 
Northern Sea Route. The Economic Journal, 128, 1095–1127. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1111/
ecoj.12460>
Benjaminsen, T.A. (2008). Does Supply-Induced Scarcity 
Drive Violent Conflicts in the African Sahel? The Case of the 
Tuareg Rebellion in Northern Mali. Journal of Peace Research, 
45(6), 819–836. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0022343308096158>
Benjaminsen, T.A., Alinon, K., Buhaug, H. and Buseth, J.T. (2012). 
Does climate change drive land-use conflicts in the Sahel? 
Journal of Peace Research, 49(1), 97–111. Retrieved February 
2021, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0022343311427343>
Benjaminsen, T.A. and Ba, B. (2019). Why do pastoralists in 
Mali join jihadist groups? A political ecological explanation. 
The Journal of Peasant Studies, 46(1), 1–20. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/03066150.2018.1474457>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 712 
Bennett, M.M. (2014). The Maritime Tiger: Exploring South 
Korea’s Interests and Role in the Arctic. Strategic Analysis, 38(6), 
886–903. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1080/
09700161.2014.952935>
Bennett, M.M. (2015). How China Sees the Arctic: Reading 
Between Extraregional and Intraregional Narratives. Geopolitics, 
20(3), 645–668. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10
.1080/14650045.2015.1017757>
Benveniste H, Oppenheimer M. and Fleurbaey M. (2020). 
Effect of border policy on exposure and vulnerability to climate 
change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
117(43), 26692–26702. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.2007597117>
Benzie, M. and Persson, Å. (2019). Governing borderless climate 
risks: moving beyond the territorial framing of adaptation. 
International Environmental Agreements: Politics, Law and 
Economics, 19(4-5), 369–393. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10784-019-09441-y>
Berger, A.M., Grandin, C.J., Taylor, I.G., Edwards, A.M. and Cox, 
C. (2017). Status of the Pacific Hake (whiting) stock in U.S. 
and Canadian waters in 2017. Prepared by the Joint Technical 
Committee of the U.S. and Canada Pacific Hake/Whiting 
Agreement, National Marine Fisheries Service and Fisheries and 
Oceans Canada. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
pcouncil.org/documents/2017/03/i4_sup_att1_hake_assmt_
execsum_mar2017bb.pdf>
Berkes, F. (2010). Linkages and multilevel systems for 
matching governance and ecology: lessons from roving 
bandits. Bulletin of Marine Science, 86(2), 235–250. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.ingentaconnect.com/
content/umrsmas/bullmar/2010/00000086/00000002/
art00007?crawler=true&mimetype=application/pdf>
Bernard, P. (2006). Canada and Human Security: From the 
Axworthy Doctrine to Middle Power Internationalism. American 
Review of Canadian Studies, 36(2), 233–261. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/02722010609481699>
Bernstein, A., Brown, C., Taner, M. and Werick, B. (2017). Climate 
Change Guidance Framework Pilot Project. International Joint 
Commission. Retrieved December 2020, from: <https://www.ijc.
org/sites/default/files/Climate_Change_Guidance_Framework_
Pilot_Project_Report.pdf>
Beveridge, L.M., Fournier, M., Lasserre, F., Huang, L. and Tetu, 
P.L. (2016). Interest of Asian shipping companies in navigating 
the Arctic. Polar Science, 10, 404–414. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polar.2016.04.004>
Bindoff, N.L., W.W.L. Cheung, J.G. Kairo, J. Aristgui, V.A. 
Guinder, R. Hallbert, N. Hilmi, N. Jico, M. S. Karim, L. Levin, S. 
O’Donoghue, S.R. Purca Cuicapuse, B. Rinkevich, T. Suga, A. 
Tagliabue, and P. Williamson. (2019). Changing ocean, marine 
ecosystems, and dependent communities, Chapter 5, in IPCC 
special report on the ocean and cryosphere in a changing 
climate, 447–587, (Eds.) H. O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, V. Masson-
Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, 
A. Alegria, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, and N. M. 
Weyer. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/
srocc/chapter/chapter-5/>
Black, R., Adger, W.N., Arnell, N.W., Dercon, S., Geddes, A. and 
Thomas, D. (2011). The effect of environmental change on 
human migration. Global Environmental Change, 21(S1), S3–
S11. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2011.10.001>
Blumm M.C. (1980). Hydropower vs. salmon: the struggle of the 
Pacific Northwest’s anadromous fish resources for a peaceful 
coexistence with the federal Columbia River power system. 
Environmental Law, 11(2), 211–300. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.jstor.org/stable/43265537>
Boas, I., Farbotki, C., Adams, H., Sterly, H., Bush, S., van der 
Geest, K., Wiegel, H., Ashraf, H., Baldwin, A., Bettini, G., Blondin, 
S., de Brukin, M., Durand-Delacre, D., Frölich, C., Fiolo, G., 
Guiata, L., Hut, E., Jarawura, F.X., Lamers, M., Lietaer, S., Nash, 
S. L., Piguet, E., Rothe, D., Sakdapolrak, P., Smith, L., Furlong, 
B. T., Turhan, E., Warner, J., Zickgraf, C., Black, R. and Hulme, 
M. (2019). Climate Migration Myths. Nature Climate Change, 
9, 901–903. Retrieved February 2010, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-019-0633-3>
Bonds, E. (2016). Losing the Arctic: the U.S. corporate 
community, the national-security state, and climate change. 
Environmental Sociology, 2(1), 5–17. Retrieved October 2020, 
from <http://doi.org/10.1080/23251042.2015.1131600>
Borgerson, S. (2013). The Coming Arctic Boom: As the Ice Melts, 
the Region Heats Up. Foreign Affairs, 92(4), 76–89. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.jstor.org/stable/23526909> 
Brander, K.M. (2007). Global fish production and climate change. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 19709–
19714. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.0702059104>
Britten, G., Dowd, M., Kanary, L. and Worm, B. (2017). Extended 
fisheries recovery timelines in a changing environment. Nature 
Communications, 8(15325). Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms15325>
Brown, O. and Crawford, A. (2009). Rising temperatures, rising 
tensions: climate change and the risk of violent conflict in the 
Middle East. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://inis.iaea.org/
search/search.aspx?orig_q=RN:41064600>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 713 
Bruce, J.P. and Haites, E. (2008). Canada in an International 
Context in From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, (Eds.) D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and 
E. Bush. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 387–424. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/
www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2007/pdf/
ch9_e.pdf>
Bruce, J.P., Martin, H., Colucci, P., McBean, G., McDougall, J., 
Shrubsole, D., Whalley, J., Halliday, R., Alden, M., Mortsch, L. 
and Mills, B. (2003). Climate Change Impacts on Boundary and 
Transboundary Water Management. Natural Resources Canada. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://data.globalchange.gov/
report/natresourcescanada-climchimpacts-2003> 
Brzoska, M. and Fröhlich, C. (2016). Climate change, migration 
and violent conflict: Vulnerabilities, pathways and adaptation 
strategies. Migration and Development, 5(2), 190–210. Retrieved 
October 2020, form <http://doi.org/10.1080/21632324.2015.10
22973>
Buhaug, H. (2015). Climate-conflict research: Some reflections 
on the way forward. WIREs Climate Change, 6(3), 269–275. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/
wcc.336>
Buhaug, H. (2016). Climate Change and Conflict: Taking Stock. 
Peace Economics, Peace Science and Public Policy, 22(4), 331–
338. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/
peps-2016-0034>
Buhaug, H., Nordkvelle, J., Bernauer, T., Böhmelt, T., Brzoska, 
M., Busby, J., Ciccone, A., Fjelde, H., Gartzke, E., Gleditsch, N.P., 
Goldstone, J.A., Hegre, H., Holtermann, H., Koubi, V., Link, J.S.A., 
Link, P.M., Lujala, P., O′Loughlin, J., Raleigh, C., Scheffran, J., 
Schilling, J., Smith, T.G., Theisen, O.M., Tol, R.S.J., Urdal H. and 
von Uexkull, N. (2014). One effect to rule them all? A comment 
on climate and conflict. Climatic Change, 127(3-4), 391–397. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
014-1266-1>
Burke, D.C. (2017). Leading by example: Canada and its Arctic 
stewardship role. International Journal of Public Policy, 13(1-2), 
36–52. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1504/
IJPP.2017.081050>
Burrows, K. and Kinney, P.L. (2016). Exploring the Climate 
Change, Migration and Conflict Nexus. International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 13(4). Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13040443>
Busby, J. (2020). It’s Time We Think Beyond “Threat Multiplier” 
to Address Climate and Security. New Security Beat. Retrieved 
February 2020, from <https://www.newsecuritybeat.org/2020/01/
its-time-threat-multiplier-address-climate-security/>
Busby, J., Cook, K., Vizy, E., Smith, T. and Bekalo, M. (2014). 
Identifying hot spots of security vulnerability associated with 
climate change in Africa. Climatic Change, 124(4), 717–731. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
014-1142-z>
Busby, J. and von Uexkull, N. (2018). Climate Shocks and 
Humanitarian Crises: Which Countries Are Most at Risk? 
Foreign Affairs. Retrieved February 2020, from <https://www.
foreignaffairs.com/articles/world/2018-11-29/climate-shocks-
and-humanitarian-crises>
Butt, T.A., McCarl, B.A., Angerer, J., Dyke, P.T. and Stuth, J.W. 
(2005). The economic and food security implications of climate 
change in Mali. Climatic Change, 68(3), 355–378. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-005-6014-0>
Byers, M. (2010). Cold peace: Arctic cooperation and 
Canadian foreign policy. International Journal, 65(4), 
899–912. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/002070201006500418>
Byers, M. and Lalonde, S. (2009). Who controls the Northwest 
Passage? Vanderbilt Journal of Transnational Law, 42(4), 1133–
1210. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://library.arcticportal.
org/id/eprint/1613>
Campbell, R. (Eds.) (2015). An Introduction to Inuit Rights and 
Arctic Sovereignty. Law Now Magazine. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.lawnow.org/introduction-inuit-rights-
arctic-sovereignty/>
Canada and U.S.A. (1925). Convention and protocol between 
His Britannic Majesty in respect of the Dominion of Canada, 
and the United States, for regulating the level of the Lake of 
the Woods, and of identical letters of reference submitting to 
the International Joint Commission certain questions as to the 
regulation of the levels of Rainy lake and other upper waters. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.lwcb.ca/BoardDesc/
ConventionAndProtocolCanada1925.pdf>
Canada and U.S.A. (1932). Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Deep 
Waterway Treaty: Text of the Treaty between the United States 
and Canada signed at Washington July 18, 1932. Statements 
of the President and the Department of State, and report of the 
Joint Board of Engineers of April 9, 1932. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.
a0010507275&view=1up&seq=3>
Canada and U.S.A. (1950). Treaty Between Canada and the 
United States of America Concerning the Diversion of the 
Niagara River. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
treaty-accord.gc.ca/text-texte.aspx?id=100418>
Canada and U.S.A. (1952). Exchange of Notes Between Canada 
and the United States of America Concerning the Construction 
of the St. Lawrence Seaway. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://www.treaty-accord.gc.ca/text-texte.aspx?id=100431>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 714 
Canada and U.S.A. (1954). Convention on Great Lakes Fisheries 
between The United States of America and Canada. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <http://www.glfc.org/pubs/conv.htm>
Canada and U.S.A. (1964). The Columbia River Treaty Protocol 
and Related Documents. Department of External Affairs and 
Department of Northern Affairs National and Resources. 
Retrieved February 2020, from <https://engage.gov.bc.ca/app/
uploads/sites/6/2017/01/the-crt-and-protocol-april-1964.pdf>
Canada and U.S.A. (1985). Treaty Between the Government of 
Canada and the Government of the United States of America 
Concerning Pacific Salmon. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://www.pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/fm-gp/salmon-saumon/pst-
tsp/index-eng.html>
Canada and U.S.A. (2013) Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.canada.ca/content/
dam/eccc/migration/main/grandslacs-greatlakes/a1c62826-
72be-40db-a545-65ad6fceae92/1094_canada-usa-20glwqa-
20_e.pdf>
Canadian Chamber of Commerce (2016). Canada’s 
Top 10 Barriers to Competitiveness in 2016. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://businessinsurrey.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/03/Canadas_Top_10_Barriers_to_
Competitiveness_in_2016.pdf>
Canadian Chamber of Commerce (2019). A Competitive 
Transition: How Smarter Climate Policy Can help Canada 
Lead the Way to a Low Carbon Economy. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://bellevillechamber.ca/photos/custom/
news/181213ACompetitiveTransition.pdf>
Canadian Federation of Agriculture (2017). Environmental 
Sustainability and Climate Change. Issue Brief: Environment. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.cfa-fca.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2017/07/Env-CC-Issue-Brief.pdf>
Canadian Forces College (2018). Climate Change: A Threat 
Multiplier? A Symposium on Climate Change Impacts on 
National Security. Retrieved February 2021, from: <https://www.
cfc.forces.gc.ca/237/139-eng.html>
Canadian Forces College (2021). CNSS Symposia and 
Workshops. Retrieved February 2021, from: <https://www.cfc.
forces.gc.ca/237/268-eng.html>
Carnaghan, M. and Goody, A. (2006). Canadian Arctic 
Sovereignty. Library of Parliament, PRB 05-61E. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
Collection-R/LoPBdP/PRB-e/PRB0561-e.pdf>
Carter, N.A., Dawson, J., Parker, C., Cary, J., Gordon, H., 
Kochanowicz, Z. and Weber, M. (2019). Arctic Corridors 
and Northern Voices: governing marine transportation in 
the Canadian Arctic. Paulatuk, Inuvialuit Settlement Region, 
Northwest Territories community report. University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://ruor.uottawa.ca/
bitstream/10393/39361/6/UofO_CommReport_ResoluteBay_3_
FINAL_LO.pdf>
Cattaneo, C., Beine, M., Fröhlich, C. J., Kniveton, D., Martinez-
Zarzoso, I., Mastrorillo, M., Millok, K., Piguet, E. and Schraven, 
B. (2019). Human Migration in the Era of Climate Change. 
Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 13(2), 189–206. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/reep/
rez008>
CDP (2015). Supply Chain Sustainability Revealed: A 
Country Comparison. Supply Chain Report 2014–15. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.accenture.
com/t20150523t015757__w__/kr-en/_acnmedia/accenture/
conversion-assets/dotcom/documents/about-accenture/pdf/2/
accenture-cdp-supply-chain-report-2015.pdf>
Center for Climate and Security (2020). The World Climate and 
Security Report 2020. A product of the Expert Group of the 
International Military Council on Climate and Security. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://climateandsecurity.files.wordpress.
com/2020/02/world-climate-security-report-2020_2_13.pdf>
Challinor, A.J., Adger, W.N.  and Benton, T.G. (2017). Climate 
risks across borders and scales. Nature Climate Change, 
7(9), 621–623. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate3380>
Charron, A. (2005) The Northwest Passage Shipping Channel: 
Sovereignty First and Foremost and Sovereignty to the Side. 
(Re)Conceptualizing Arctic Security Selected Articles from the 
Journal of Military and Strategic Studies. Journal of Military and 
Strategic Studies 7(4). Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
jmss.org/article/view/57733/43409>
Charron, A. (2015). Canada, the Arctic, and NORAD: Status quo 
or new ball game? International Journal: Canada’s Journal of 
Global Policy Analysis, 70(2), 215–231. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1177/0020702015572998>
Charron, A. and Fergusson, J. (2018). Arctic Sovereignty: 
Preoccupation vs. Homeland Governance and Defence. 
Canadian Global Affairs Institute. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/cdfai/pages/4039/
attachments/original/1536107606/Arctic_Sovereignty_
Preoccupation_vs_Homeland_Governance_and_Defence.
pdf?1536107606>
Chatzivasileiadis, T.N., Hofkes, M.W., Kuik, O.J. and Tol, 
R.S.J. (2016). Full economic impacts of sea level rise: loss of 
productive resources and transport disruptions. University of 
Sussex Working Paper series N.99-2016. Retrieved February 
2021, from <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/economics/documents/
wps-99-2016.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 715 
Cheung, W.W.L. (2018). The future of fishes and fisheries in 
the changing oceans. Journal of Fish Biology, 92(3), 790–803. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
jfb.13558>
Cheung, W.W.L., Brodeur, R.D., Okey, T.A. and Pauly, D. (2015). 
Projecting future changes in distributions of pelagic fish species 
of Northeast Pacific shelf seas. Progress in Oceanography, 
130, 19–31. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pocean.2014.09.003>
Cheung, W.W.L., Lam, V.W.Y., Sarmiento, J.L., Kearney, K., 
Watson, R. and Pauly, D. (2009). Projecting global marine 
biodiversity impacts under climate change scenarios. Fish 
and Fisheries, 10(3), 235–251. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2008.00315.x>
Cheung, W.W.L., Reygondeau, G. and Frölicher, T.L. (2016). Large 
benefits to marine fisheries of meeting the 1.5°C global warming 
target. Science, 354, 1591–1594. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aag2331>
Church, C. and Hammill, A. (2019). Defining Adaptation – 
and Distinguishing It From Other Development Investments. 
International Institute for Sustainable Development. Retrieved 
March 2020, from <https://www.adaptationcommunity.net/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/IISD_Defining-Adaptation_05.2019.
pdf>
CPA Canada [Chartered Professional Accountants Canada] 
(2015). Adaptation Case Study #3: MEC, Sector: Retail. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.cpacanada.ca/-/media/site/
business-and-accounting-resources/docs/climate-change-
adaptation-case-study-3-mec-september-2015.pdf?la=
en&hash=7CA342A2862AF6DE286E66D558AA2E92402D7F11>
Cisneros-Montemayor, A.M., Cheung, W.W.L., Bodtker, K., Teh, 
L.S.L., Steiner, N., Bailey, M., Hoover, C. and Sumaila, U.R. (2017). 
Towards an integrated database on Canadian ocean resources: 
benefits, current states, and research gaps. Canadian Journal of 
Fisheries and Aquatic Science, 74(1), 65–74. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2015-0573>
Clapp, C., Ellis, J., Benn, J. and Corfee-Morlot, J. (2012). Tracking 
Climate Finance: What and How? OECD. Retrieved October 2020, 
from <https://www.oecd.org/env/cc/50293494.pdf>
Coats, D. (2019). The Worldwide Threat Assessment of the US 
Intelligence Community. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/2019-ATA-SFR---SSCI.pdf>
Conference Board of Canada (2017). Clean Trade. Canada’s 
Global Opportunities in Climate-Friendly Technologies. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.conferenceboard.ca/e-
Library/document.aspx?did=8919>
Cooley, H., Christian-Smith, J., Gleick, P.H., Allen, L. and Cohen, 
M. (2009). Understanding and reducing the risks of climate 
change for transboundary waters. Pacific Institute, Oakland. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://pacinst.org/wp-content/
uploads/2009/12/transboundary_water_and_climate_report3.pdf>
Cooley, H., Christian-Smith, J., Gleick, P.H., Allen, L. and Cohen, 
M.J. (2012). Climate Change and Transboundary Waters, 
Chapter 1 in The World’s Water, Volume 7: The Biennial Report 
on Freshwater Resources, (Ed.) P.H. Gleick. Island Press, 
Washington DC, USA, 1–22.
Cooley, H. and Gleick, P.H. (2011). Climate-proofing 
transboundary water agreements. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 
56(4), 711–718. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/
10.1080/02626667.2011.576651>
Costinot, A., Donaldson, D. and Smith, C. (2014). Evolving 
comparative advantage and the impact of climate change in 
agricultural markets: Evidence from 1.7 million fields around the 
world. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 
Series. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.nber.org/
system/files/working_papers/w20079/w20079.pdf>
Cotter, J. (2017). Developing a Coherent Plan to Deal with 
Canada’s Conundrum in the Northwest Passage in Section 3.3: 
The Northwest Passage. (Re)Conceptualizing Arctic Security 
Selected Articles from the Journal of Military and Strategic 
Studies, (Eds.) P.W. Lackenbauer, R. Dean and R. Huebert. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://jmss.org/article/
view/57651/43320>
Coulibaly, A.L. (2013). The Food Price Increase of 2010-2011: 
Cause and Impacts. Background Paper. Library of Parliament 
Publication No. 2013-02-E. Industry, Infrastructure and 
Resources Division. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://bdp.
parl.ca/staticfiles/PublicWebsite/Home/ResearchPublications/
BackgroundPapers/PDF/2013-02-e.pdf>
Council of Canadian Academies (2016). Commercial Marine 
Shipping Accidents: Understanding the Risks in Canada. Ottawa 
(ON); Workshop Report. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/cca_marine_
shipping_risks_en_fullreport.pdf>
Council of Canadian Academies (2017). The Value of 
Commercial Marine Shipping to Canada. The Expert Panel on 
the Social and Economic Value of Marine Shipping to Canada. 
Retrieved April 2021, from <https://cca-reports.ca/reports/the-
value-of-commercial-marine-shipping-to-canada/>
Council of Canadian Academies (2019). Canada’s Top Climate 
Change Risks. The Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks and 
Adaptation Potential, Ottawa, ON. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-
Canada-top-climate-change-risks.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 716 
Cox, O. (2015). Canada and the Northwest Passage: Intersection 
of National Sovereignty and Environmentalism? (Bachelor’s 
thesis). Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. Retrieved 
February 2021, from: <https://is.cuni.cz/webapps/zzp/
download/130153774>
Cradock-Henry, N.A., Connolly, J., Blackett, P. and Lawrence, 
J. (2020). Elaborating a systems methodology for cascading 
climate change impacts and implications. MethodsX, 7, 100893. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mex.2020.100893>
Craig, R.K. (2010). Stationarity is dead — long live 
transformation: Five principles for climate change adaptation 
law. Harvard Environmental Law Review, 34(1), 9. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://ssrn.com/abstract=1357766>
Criddle, K.R. (2012) Adaptation and maladaptation: factors 
that influence the resilience of four Alaskan fisheries governed 
by durable entitlements. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 
69(7), 1168–1179. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1093/icesjms/fss085>
Cui, H.D., Kuiper, M., van Meijl, H. and Tabeau, A. (2018). Climate 
change and global market integration: Implications for global 
economic activities, agricultural commodities and food security. 
The State of Agricultural Commodity Markets (SOCO) 2018: 
Background paper. Rome, FAO. 42 p. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 
IGO.
Curtin, J. (2019). Climate Change Is Coming for Global Trade. 
Foreign Policy, November 2019. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/11/16/climate-change-disrupt-
global-container-shipping-trade-policymakers-take-note/>
Curtis, K.J. and Schneider, A. (2011). Understanding the 
demographic implications of climate change: estimates of 
localized population predictions under future scenarios of sea-
level rise. Population and Environment, 33(1), 28–54. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-011-0136-
2>
Dalhousie University and University of Guelph (2019). Canada’s 
Food Price Report 2019. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
cdn.dal.ca/content/dam/dalhousie/pdf/management/News/
News%20&%20Events/Canada%20Food%20Price%20Report%20
ENG%202019.pdf>
Dalhousie University and University of Guelph (2020). Canada’s 
Food Price Report 2020. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
cdn.dal.ca/content/dam/dalhousie/pdf/sites/agri-food/
Canada%20Food%20Price%20Report%20Eng%202020.pdf>
Dalhousie University and University of Guelph (2021). 
Canada’s Food Price Report 2021. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <https://cdn.dal.ca/content/dam/dalhousie/pdf/sites/
agri-food/Food%20Price%20Report%202021%20-%20EN%20
(December%208).pdf>
Dallmann, I. (2019). Weather variations and international trade. 
Environmental and Resource Economics, 72(1), 155–206. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-
018-0268-2>
D’Amour, C.B., Wenz, L., Kalkhul, M. Steckel, J.C. and Creutzig, 
F. (2016). Teleconnected food supply shocks. Environmental 
Research Letters, 11(3). Retrieved October 2020, from <http://
doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/3/035007>
Das, K. and Lashkari, R.S. (2015). Risk readiness and resiliency 
planning for a supply chain. International Journal of Production 
Research, 53(22), 6752–6771. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2015.1057624>
Dawson, J., Carter, N., van Luijk, N., Parker, C., Weber, M., Cook, 
A., Grey, K. and Provencher, J. (2020a). Infusing Inuit and 
local knowledge into the low impact shipping corridors: An 
adaptation to increased shipping activity and climate change 
in Arctic Canada. Environmental Science & Policy, 105, 19–36. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2019.11.013>
Dawson, J., Holloway, J., Debortoli, N. and Gilmore, E. (2020b). 
Treatment of International Economic Trade in Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Reports. Current Climate 
Change Reports, 6, 1–11. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s40641-020-00163-x>
Dawson, J., Johnston, M.E. and Stewart, E.J. (2014). Governance 
of Arctic expedition cruise ships in a time of rapid environmental 
and economic change. Ocean & Coastal Management, 89, 
88–99. Retrived February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ocecoaman.2013.12.005>
Dawson, J., Pizzolato, L., Howell, S.E.L., Copland, L. and 
Johnston, M.E. (2018). Temporal and Spatial Patterns of Ship 
Traffic in the Canadian Arctic from 1990 to 2015. ARCTIC, 
71(10), 15–26. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://doi.
org/10.14430/arctic4698>
Dawson, J., Stewart E.J., Johnston, M.E. and Lemieux, C.J. 
(2016) Identifying and evaluating adaptation strategies for 
cruise tourism in Arctic Canada. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 
24(10), 1425–1441. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org
/10.1080/09669582.2015.1125358>
de Haas, H., Czaika, M., Flahaux, M.-L., Mahendra, E., Natter, 
K., Vezzoli, S. and Villares-Varela, M. (2019). International 
Migration: Trends, Determinants, and Policy Effects. Population 
and Development Review, 45(4), 885–922. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/padr.12291>
De Loë, R.C. (2009). Sharing the Waters of the Red River Basin: 
A Review of Options for Transboundary Water Governance. 
International Red River Board, International Joint Commission, 
Guelph. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.
org/publications/Sharing%20the%20Waters%20of%20the%20
Red%20River%20Basin.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 717 
De Souza, K., Kituyi, E., Harvey, B., Leone, M., Murali, K. and Ford, 
J. (2015). Vulnerability to climate change in three hot spots in 
Africa and Asia: key issues for policy-relevant adaptation and 
resilience-building research. Regional Environmental Change, 
15(5), 747–753. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10113-015-0755-8>
Debortoli, N.S., Clark, D.G., Ford, J.D., Sayles, J.S. and 
Diaconescu, E.P. (2019). An integrative climate change 
vulnerability index for Arctic aviation and marine transportation. 
Nature Communications, 10(1), 1–15. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10347-1>
Dellink, R., Hwang, H., Lanzi, E. and Chateau, J. (2017). 
International trade consequences of climate change. OECD 
Trade and Environment Working Papers, 2017/01. OECD 
Publishing, Paris. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.
org/10.1787/9f446180-en>
Deloitte and ESSA Technologies Ltd. (2016). International 
export markets: Canadian climate change adaptation goods and 
services. Prepared for Natural Resources Canada.
Department of Fisheries and Oceans (2018). Impacts Tools for 
Arctic Climate Change in Storm Waves and Storm Surge (iTACS). 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/
science/rp-pr/accasp-psaccma/projects-projets/006-eng.html>
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., 
Smith, S., Thackeray, C. and Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). 
Changes in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada, Chapter 
5 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush and D.S. 
Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 194-260. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://changingclimate.ca/
CCCR2019/chapter/5-0/>
DeWaard, J., Curtis, K.J. and Fussell, E. (2016). Population 
recovery in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina: exploring 
the potential role of stage migration in migration systems. 
Population and Environment, 37(4), 449–463. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-015-0250-7>
Di Lorenzo, E. and Mantua, M. (2016). Multi-year persistence 
of the 2014/15 North Pacific marine heatwave. Nature Climate 
Change, 6, 1042–1047. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3082>
Dietz, T., Ostrom E. and Stern, P.C. (2003). The struggle to 
govern the commons. Science, 302(5652), 1907–1912. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1091015>
Dirkson, A., Merryfield, W.J. and Monahan, A.H. (2019). 
Calibrated probabilistic forecasts of Arctic sea ice 
concentration. Journal of Climate, 32(4), 1251–1271. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-18-0224.1>
Distefano, T., Laio, F., Ridolfi, L. and Schiavo, S. (2017). Shock 
transmission in the international food trade network: a data-
driven analysis in Working Paper Series SEEDS-06/2017. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <http://www.sustainability-seeds.
org/papers/RePec/srt/wpaper/0617.pdf>
Dodds, K. and Hemmings, A.D. (2015). Polar Oceans: 
Sovereignty and the Contestation of Territorial and Resource 
Rights, Chapter 37 in The Earthscan Handbook of Ocean 
Resources and Management, (Eds.) D. Hance, J.L. Smith, S. de 
Vvero and T. Agardy. Routledge, Abingdon.
Doney, S.C., Ruckelshaus, M., Duffy, J.E., Barry, J.P., Chan, F., 
English, C.A., Galindo, H.M., Grebmeier, J.M., Hollowed, A.B., 
Knowlton, N., Polovina, J., Rabalais, N.N., W.J., Sydemand 
and Talley, L.D. (2012). Climate Change Impacts on Marine 
Ecosystems. Annual Review of Marine Science, 4, 11–37. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-marine-041911-111611>
Draper, S.E. and Kundell, J.E. (2007). Impact of climate 
change on transboundary water sharing. Journal of Water 
Resources Planning and Management, 133(5), 405. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9496(2007)133:5(405)>
Dulvy, N.K., Rogers, S.I., Jennings, S., Stelzenmuller, V., Dye, 
S.R. and Skjoldal, H.R. (2008). Climate change and deepening 
of the North Sea fish assemblage: a biotic indicator of 
warming seas. Journal of Applied Ecology, 45(4), 1029–1039. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2664.2008.01488.x>
Dyrcz, C. (2017). Safety of Navigation in the Arctic. Scientific 
Journal of Polish Naval Academy, 4(211). Retrieved October 
2020, from <http://doi.org/10.5604/01.3001.0010.6742>
Echenique, M. and Melgar, L. (2018). Mapping Puerto Rico’s 
Hurricane Migration With Mobile Phone Data. Citylab. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.citylab.com/
environment/2018/05/watch-puerto-ricos-hurricane-migration-
via-mobile-phone-data/559889/>
Engler, C. (2020). Transboundary fisheries, climate change, and 
the ecosystem approach: taking stock of the international law 
and policy seascape. Ecology and Society, 25(4), 43. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11988-
250443> 
Ericksen, P., Thornton, P., Notenbaert, A., Cramer, L., Jones, P. 
and Herrero, M. (2011). Mapping hotspots of climate change 
and food insecurity in the global tropics. Climate Change, 
Agriculture and Food Security, Report No. 5. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://hdl.handle.net/10568/3826>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 718 
Escribano Francés, G., Quevauviller, P., San Martín González, 
E. and Vargas Amelin, E. (2017). Climate change policy and 
water resources in the EU and Spain. A closer look into the 
Water Framework Directive. Environmental Science & Policy, 69, 
1–12. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.12.006>
European Commission (2009). Guidance Document No. 24: 
River Basin Management in a Changing Climate. Common 
Implementation Strategy for the Water Framework Directive 
(2000/60/EC), 1141. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
circabc.europa.eu/sd/a/a88369ef-df4d-43b1-8c8c-
306ac7c2d6e1/Guidance%20document%20n%2024%20-%20
River%20Basin%20Management%20in%20a%20Changing%20
Climate_FINAL.pdf>
Exner-Pirot, H. (2016) Canada’s Arctic Council chairmanship 
(2013–2015): a post-mortem. Canadian Foreign Policy Journal, 
22(1), 8496. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.10
80/11926422.2015.1115772>
Eyzaguirre, J., De La Cueva Bueno, P., Cranmer, C., Morand, A., 
Douglas, A, Robinson, D., Comer, N., Sparling, E., Cheng, V. and 
Lafrenière, C. (2017). Policy Brief: Enabling Transformation 
of Two Farming Systems in Ontario’s Changing Climate. A 
collaboration between the Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts 
and Adaptation Resources, Risk Sciences International, 
ESSA Technologies Ltd. and Université du Québec en Abitibi-
Témiscamingue. Funded in part through the Ontario Ministry of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/p_OCAAF/OCAAF-Polic
yBriefOnTransformingProductionSystems_FINAL.pdf>
Eyzaguirre, J. and Warren, F.J. (2014). Adaptation: Linking 
Research and Practice, Chapter 9 in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
Ontario, 253–286. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-adaptations/
canada-changing-climate-sector-perspectives-impacts-and-
adaptation/16309>
Fankhauser, S., Sahni, A., Savvas, A. and Ward, J. (2016). Where 
are the gaps in climate finance? Climate and Development, 8(3), 
203–206. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.108
0/17565529.2015.1064811>
Farré, A.B., Stephenson, S.R., Chen, L., Czub, M., Dai, Y., 
Demchev, D., Efimov, Y., Graczyk, P., Grythe, H., Keil, K., Kivekas, 
N., Kumar, N., Liu, N., Matelenok, I., Myksvoll, M., O’Leary, D., 
Olsen, J., Pavithran, S.A.P., Peterson, E., Raspotnik, A., Ryzhov, 
I., Solski, J., Suo, L., Troein, C., Valeeva, V., van Rijckevorsel, J. 
and Wighting, J. (2014). Commercial Arctic shipping through 
the Northeast Passage: routes, resources, governance, 
technology, and infrastructure. Polar Geography, 37(4), 298324. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1080/108893
7X.2014.965769>
Favaro, B., Reynolds, J.D. and Côté, I.M. (2012). Canada’s 
weakening aquatic protection. Science, 337(6091), 154. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1225523>
Federal Foreign Office of Germany (2013). Guidelines of 
the Germany Arctic policy: Assume responsibility, seize 
opportunities. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
arctic-office.de/fileadmin/user_upload/www.arctic-office.de/
PDF_uploads/Germanys_Arctic_policy_guidelines.pdf>
Feitelson, E. and Tubi, A. (2017). A main driver or an 
intermediate variable? Climate change, water and security 
in the Middle East. Global Environmental Change, 44, 39–48. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2017.03.001>
Fetzek, S., Mourad, B., Briggs, C. and Lewis, K. (2017). Why 
and how to use foresight tools to manage climate security 
risks. Planetary Security Initiative and The Center for Climate 
and Security. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
planetarysecurityinitiative.org/sites/default/files/2017-04/
PB_Why_and_how_to_use_foresight_tools.pdf>
Findley, S.E. (1994). Does drought increase migration? 
A study of migration from rural Mali during the 
19831985 drought. International Migration Review, 28(3), 
539–553. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/019791839402800306>
Fisheries and Oceans Canada. (2002). Canada’s Ocean Strategy: 
Our Oceans, Our Future. Oceans Directorate, Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.
gc.ca/Library/264675.pdf>
Flake, L.E. (2014). Russia’s Security Intentions in a Melting 
Arctic. Military and Strategic Affairs, 6(1). Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://www.inss.org.il/publication/russias-security-
intentions-in-a-melting-arctic/>
Food and Agriculture Organization (2018). The State of 
Agricultural Commodity Markets 2018. Agricultural trade, 
climate change and food security. Rome. Retrieved October 
2020, from <http://www.fao.org/3/I9542EN/i9542en.pdf>
Foresight (2011). Migration and Global Environmental Change. 
Final Project Report. London. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/287717/11-1116-migration-
and-global-environmental-change.pdf>
Freeman, L. (2017). Environmental Change, Migration, 
and Conflict in Africa: A Critical Examination of the 
Interconnections. The Journal of Environment & Development, 
26(4), 351–374. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1177/1070496517727325>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 719 
Froese, R. and Schilling, J. (2019). The Nexus of Climate Change, 
Land Use, and Conflicts. Current Climate Change Reports, 5(1), 
24–35. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40641-019-00122-1>
Furlow, J., Smith, J.B., Anderson, G., Breed, W. and Padgham, 
J. (2011). Building resilience to climate change through 
development assistance: USAID’s climate adaptation program. 
Climatic Change 108, 411–421. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-011-0127-4>
Fussell, E. (2018). Population displacements and migration 
patterns in response to Hurricane Katrina, Chapter 22 in 
The Routledge Handbook of Environmental Migration and 
Displacement. (1st Ed., 277–288).
García Molinos, J., Halpern, B.S., Shoeman, D.S., Brown, C.J., 
Kiessling, W., Moore, P.J., Pandolfi, J.M., Poloczanska, E.S., 
Rochardson, A.J. and Burrows, M.T. (2015). Climate velocity 
and the future global redistribution of marine biodiversity. 
Nature Climate Change, 6, 83–88. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2769>
Gautier, D., Denis, D. and Locatelli, B. (2016). Impacts of drought 
and responses of rural populations in West Africa: a systematic 
review. WIREs Climate Change, 7(5), 666–681. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.411>
George, J. (2019a). Canadian Inuit challenge U.S. stance on 
Northwest Passage. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
nunatsiaq.com/stories/article/canadian-inuit-challenge-u-s-
stance-on-northwest-passage/>
George, M. (2019b). An ‘Unsettled’ Conversation About St. 
John River Flooding and Climate Change. Huddle, 6 May. 
Retrieved March 2020, from <https://huddle.today/an-unsettled-
conversation-about-st-john-river-flooding-and-climate-change/>
Gerhardt, H. (2011). The Inuit and Sovereignty: The Case of 
the Inuit Circumpolar Conference and Greenland. Politik, 1(1). 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.7146/politik.
v14i1.27469>
Giannini, A., Krishnamurthy, P.K., Cousin, R., Labidi, N. and 
Choularton, R.J. (2017). Climate risk and food security in 
Mali: A historical perspective on adaptation. Earth’s Future, 
5(2), 144–157. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2016EF000404>
Giguère, M.A., Comtois, C. and Slack, B. (2017). Constraints 
on Canadian Arctic maritime connections. Case Studies on 
Transport Policy, 5(2), 355–366. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cstp.2017.03.004>
Gilmore, E.A. (2017). Introduction to Special Issue: Disciplinary 
Perspectives on Climate Change and Conflict. Current Climate 
Change Reports, 3, 193–199. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-017-0081-y>
Gilmore, E.A., Herzer Risi, L., Tennant, E. and Buhaug, H. (2018). 
Bridging Research and Policy on Climate Change and Conflict. 
Current Climate Change Reports, 4, 313–319. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-018-0119-9>
Gledhill, R., Hamza-Goodacre, D. and Ping Low, L. (n.d.). 
Business-not-as-usual: Tackling the impact of climate change on 
supply chain risk. PwC. Reprinted from Resilience: A journal of 
strategy and risk.
Gleditsch, N. (2012). Whither the weather? Climate change and 
conflict. Journal of Peace Research, 49(1), 39. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1177/0022343311431288>
Gleick, P.H. (2014). Water, drought, climate change, and 
conflict in Syria. Weather, Climate, and Society, 6, 331–340. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1175/
WCAS-D-13-00059.1>
Global Affairs Canada (2019a). 2019 Canada’s State of Trade: 
Trade and Investment Update. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://www.international.gc.ca/gac-amc/assets/pdfs/
publications/State-of-Trade-2019_eng.pdf>
Global Affairs Canada (2019b). Evaluation of Canada’s Extended 
Continental Shelf Program. Retrieved March 2021, from <https://
www.international.gc.ca/gac-amc/assets/pdfs/publications/
evaluation/2019/2019-evaluation-ecs-pce-eng.pdf>
Global Affairs Canada (2020). 2020 Canada’s State of Trade: The 
early impacts of COVID-19 on trade. Retrieved January 2021, 
from <https://www.international.gc.ca/gac-amc/assets/pdfs/
publications/State-of-Trade-2020_eng.pdf> 
Goldstein, A., Turner, W.R., Gladstone, J. and Hole, D.G. (2019). 
The private sector’s climate change risk and adaptation blind 
spots. Nature Climate Change, 9, 8–25. Retrieved October 2020, 
from <http://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0340-5>
Gouel, C. and Laborde, D. (2018). The crucial role of international 
trade in adaptation to climate change (No. w25221). National 
Bureau of Economic Research. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w25221/
w25221.pdf>
Government of British Columbia (2013). US Benefits from the 
Columbia River Treaty – Past, Present and Future: A Province 
of British Columbia Perspective. BC Ministry of Energy and 
Mines, Victoria, Canada. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
engage.gov.bc.ca/app/uploads/sites/6/2012/07/US-Benefits-
from-CRT-June-20-13-2.pdf>
Government of British Columbia (2014). Columbia River Treaty 
Review – BC Decision. BC Ministry of Energy and Mines, Victoria, 
Canada. Retrieved August 2019, from <https://engage.gov.
bc.ca/columbiarivertreaty/bc-decision/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 720 
Government of British Columbia (2017). British Columbia 
agrifood and seafood international export highlights. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/
farming-natural-resources-and-industry/agriculture-and-
seafood/statistics/market-analysis-and-trade-statistics/2017_
bc_agrifood_and_seafood_export_highlights.pdf>
Government of British Columbia (2019). Historic agreement 
reached between Columbia River Basin Indigenous Nations, 
Canada, and British Columbia to collaborate on salmon re-
introduction. BC Gov News, BC Ministry of Forests, Lands, 
Natural Resource Operations, and Rural Development, Victoria, 
Canada. Retrieved September 2019, from <https://news.gov.
bc.ca/stories/historic-agreement-reached-between-columbia-
river-basin-indigenous-nations-canada-and-british-columb>
Government of Canada (2010). Statement on Canada’s Arctic 
Foreign Policy. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.
international.gc.ca/world-monde/international_relations-
relations_internationales/arctic-arctique/arctic_policy-canada-
politique_arctique.aspx?lang=eng>  
Government of Canada (2017a). Feminist International 
Assistance Policy, 9 June. Global Affairs Canada, Ottawa. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <www.international.gc.ca/gac-
amc/campaign-campagne/iap-pai/index.aspx?lang=eng>
Government of Canada (2017b). Strong, secure, engaged - 
Canada’s Defence Policy. Department of National Defence. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <http://dgpaapp.forces.gc.ca/en/
canada-defence-policy/docs/canada-defence-policy-report.pdf>
Government of Canada (2018). International Climate Financing. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://climate-change.canada.
ca/finance/>
Government of Canada (2020). Canada’s 4th Biennial Report 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://unfccc.int/
documents/209928>
Government of Northwest Territories (2015). NWT State of 
the Environment Report. Section 7.3 Trends in shipping in 
the Northwest Passage and the Beaufort Sea in Pressures. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/en/
state-environment/73-trends-shipping-northwest-passage-and-
beaufort-sea>
Gray, C. and Wise, E. (2016). Country-specific effects of climate 
variability on human migration. Climatic Change, 135(3), 555–
568. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-015-1592-y>
Great Britain and USA (1909). The Boundary Waters Treaty 
of 1909. International Joint Commission, Washington, DC. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.ijc.org/sites/
default/files/2018-07/Boundary%20Water-ENGFR.pdf>
Great Lakes Commission (1994). Ecosystem Charter for the 
Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Basin. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.glc.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/GLC-
Ecosystem-Charter-Great-Lakes-Basin-1997.pdf>
Greenan, B.J.W., James, T.S., Loder, J.W., Pepin, P., Azetsu-Scott, 
K., Ianson, D., Hamme, R.C., Gilbert, D., Tremblay, J-E., Wang, X.L. 
and Perrie, W. (2019). Changes in oceans surrounding Canada, 
Chapter 7 in Canada’s Changing Climate Report, (Eds.) E. Bush 
and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 
343423. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://changingclimate.
ca/CCCR2019/chapter/7-0/>
Greenert, J. (2014). The United States Navy Arctic Roadmap 
for 2014 to 2030. Office of the Chief of Naval Operations 
Washington DC. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://apps.
dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/a595557.pdf> 
Gruber, N., Hauri, C., Lachkar, Z., Loher, D., Frölicher, T.L. and 
Plattner, G.K. (2012). Rapid Progression of Ocean Acidification 
in the California Current System. Science, 337, 220–223. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1216773>
Gullestad, P., Sundby, S. and Kjesbu, O. S. (2020). Management 
of transboundary and straddling fish stocks in the Northeast 
Atlantic in view of climate‐induced shifts in spatial distribution. 
Fish and Fisheries, 21(5), 1008–1026. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12485>
Guy, E. and Lasserre, F. (2016). Commercial shipping in the 
Arctic: new perspectives, challenges and regulations. Polar 
Record, 52(3), 294–304. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0032247415001011>
Guy, K. et al. (2020). A Security Threat Assessment of Global 
Climate Change: How Likely Warming Scenarios Indicate a 
Catastrophic Security Future. The National Security, Military, and 
Intelligence Panel on Climate Change, The Center for Climate 
and Security, Washington, DC. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://climateandsecurity.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/
a-security-threat-assessment-of-climate-change.pdf>
Halliday, W., Insley, S., Hilliard, R.C., de Jong, T. and Pine, M.K. 
(2017). Potential impacts of shipping noise on marine mammals 
in the western Canadian Arctic. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 123, 
73–82. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
marpolbul.2017.09.027>
Hamlet, A.F. (2010). Assessing water resources adaptive 
capacity to climate change impacts in the Pacific Northwest 
Region of North America (Revisions1). Hydrology and Earth 
System Sciences Discussions, 7, 4437–4471. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.5194/hessd-7-4437-2010> 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 721 
Hamlet, A.F., Elsner, M.M., Mauger, G.S., Lee, S.Y., Tohver, I. 
and Norhiem, R.A. (2013). An Overview of the Columbia Basin 
Climate Change Scenarios Project: Approach, Methods, and 
Summary of Key Results. Atmosphere-Ocean, 51(4), 392–415. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/070559
00.2013.819555>
Hamlet, A.F. and Lettenmaier, D.P. (1999). Effects of Climate 
Change on Hydrology and Water Resources in the Columbia 
River Basin. Journal of the American Water Resources 
Association, 35(6), 1597–1623. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1999.tb04240.x>
Hamlet, A.F. and Lettenmaier, D.P. (2007). Effects of 20th 
century warming and climate variability on flood risk in the 
western US. Water Resource Research, 43(6), 117. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <http://doi.org/10.1029/2006WR005099> 
Hanna, S. (2008). Institutions for Managing Resilient Salmon 
(Oncorhynchus Spp.) Ecosystems: the Role of Incentives and 
Transaction Costs. Ecology and Society, 13(2), 35. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <http://doi.org/10.5751/ES-02606-130235>
Hannesson, R. (2020). The Nash-Cournot approach to 
shared fish stocks: an empirical investigation. Marine Policy, 
118:103978. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.103978>
Harber, B.C. (2015). Climate Change and International 
Competition: The US Army in the Arctic Environment. Monograph 
- School of Advanced Military Studies United States Army 
Command and General Staff College. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://apps.dtic.mil/dtic/tr/fulltext/u2/1001460.pdf>
Harrington, L., Frame, D., Fischer, E., Hawkins, E., Joshi, 
M. and Jones, C. (2016). Poorest countries experience 
earlier anthropogenic emergence of daily temperature 
extremes. Environmental Research Letters, 11(5), 055007. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/1748-9326/11/5/055007/pdf>
Hauer, M.E., Evans, J.M. and Mishra, D.R. (2016). Millions 
projected to be at risk from sea-level rise in the continental 
United States. Nature Climate Change, 6, 691–695. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2961>
Hauer, M.E., Fussell, E., Mueller, V., Burkett, M., Call, M., Abel, 
K., McLeman, R. and Wrathall, D. (2020). Sea-level rise and 
human migration. Nature Reviews Earth & Environment 1, 28–39. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-
019-0002-9> 
Hauser, D.D., Laidre, K.L. and Stern, H.L. (2018). Vulnerability of 
Arctic marine mammals to vessel traffic in the increasingly ice-
free Northwest Passage and Northern Sea Route. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(29), 7617–7622. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1803543115>
Hendrix, C.S. (2018). Searching for climate–conflict links. Nature 
Climate Change, 8, 190–191. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0083-3>
Hildén, M., Lahn, G., Carter, T.R., Klein, R.J.T., Otto, I.M., Pohl, B., 
Reyer, C.P.O. and Tondel, F. (2020). Cascading Climate Impacts: 
A New Factor in European Policy-Making. CASCADES Policy 
Brief. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.sei.org/
publications/cascading-climate-impacts-new-factor/>
Hildebrand, L.P., Brigham, L.W. and Johansson, T.M. (Eds.) 
(2018). Sustainable shipping in a changing Arctic. WMU Studies 
in Maritime Affairs Volume7. Springer International Publishing, 
489 p. 
Hollowed, A.B., Hare, S.R. and Wooster, W.S. (2001). Pacific 
Basin climate variability and patterns of Northeast Pacific 
marine fish production. Progress in Oceanography, 49(1-4), 257–
282. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0079-6611(01)00026-X>
Hollowed, A.B., Ito, S.I., Kim, S., MacKenzie, B.R., Mueter, F.J., 
Okey, T.A., Peck, M.A., Radchenko, V.A., Rice, J.C., Shirripa, M.J., 
Yatsu, A., Barange, M., Yamanaka, Y., King, J.R., Beamish, R.J., 
Brander, K., Cochrane, K., Loeng, H., Drinkwater, K., Foremand, 
M.G.G., Hare, J.A. and Holt, J. (2013). Projected impacts of 
climate change on marine fish and fisheries. ICES Journal of 
Marine Science, 70(5), 1023–1037. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fst081>
Homer-Dixon, T. (1991). On the Threshold: Environmental 
Changes as Causes of Acute Conflict. International Security, 
16(2), 76–116. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.2307/2539061>
Honkonen, T. (2017). Water security and climate change: The 
need for adaptive governance. Potchefstroom Electronic Law 
Journal, 20, 1–26. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://ssrn.
com/abstract=2983026>
House of Commons (2019). Nation-Building at Home, Vigilance 
Beyond: Preparing for the Coming Decades in the Arctic. 
Report of the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and 
International Development. 42nd Parliament, 1st Session. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.ourcommons.ca/
Content/Committee/421/FAAE/Reports/RP10411277/faaerp24/
faaerp24-e.pdf>
Hsiang, S and Burke, M. (2013). Climate, Conflict, and Social 
Stability: What Does the Evidence Say? Climatic Change, 123, 
39–55. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-013-0868-3>
Huebert, R. (2001). Climate change and Canadian sovereignty 
in the Northwest Passage in Canadian Arctic Sovereignty and 
Security: Historical Perspectives, (Eds.) Lackenbauer, P.W. 
Centre for Military and Strategic Studies, University of Calgary, 
383–399. 
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 722 
Huebert, R. (2003). The shipping news part II: how Canada’s 
Arctic sovereignty is on thinning ice. International Journal, 
58(3), 295–308. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.2307/40203861>
Huebert, R. (2010). The Newly Emerging Arctic Security 
Environment. Canadian Defence and Foreign Affairs 
Institute, Ottawa. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/cdfai/pages/41/attachments/
original/1413661956/The_Newly_Emerging_Arctic_Security_
Environment.pdf?1413661956>
Huitema, D., Mostert, E., Egas, W. and Moellenkamp, S. (2009). 
Adaptive water governance: assessing the institutional 
prescriptions of adaptive (co-) management from a governance 
perspective and defining a research agenda. Ecology and 
Society, 14(1), 26. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol14/iss1/art26/>
Hunter, L.M., Luna, J.K. and Norton, R.M. (2015). Environmental 
Dimensions of Migration. Annual Review of Sociology, 41, 377–
397. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-soc-073014-112223>
Hunter, L.M., Murray, S. and Riosmena, F. (2013). Rainfall 
Variation and U.S. Migration from Rural Mexico. International 
Migration Review, 47(4), 874–909. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/imre.12051>
Ide, T. (2018). Climate war in the Middle East? Drought, the 
Syrian civil war and the state of climate-conflict research. 
Current Climate Change Reports, 4, 347–354. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-018-0115-0>
IDMC [Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre] (2020). 
Global report on internal displacement. Norwegian Refugee 
Council. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
internal-displacement.org/sites/default/files/publications/
documents/2020-IDMC-GRID.pdf>
IDRC [International Development Research Centre] (2019). 
Collaborative Adaptation Research Initiative in Africa and Asia. 
IDRC - International Development Research Centre. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://www.idrc.ca/en/initiative/
collaborative-adaptation-research-initiative-africa-and-asia>
IDRC [International Development Research Center] (2020). 
Investigating the feasibility of municipal risk pooling as an 
adaptation finance measure. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://www.idrc.ca/en/project/investigating-feasibility-
municipal-risk-pooling-adaptation-finance-measure>
International Joint Commission (2009). Impacts on Upper Great 
Lakes Water Levels: St. Clair River. International Upper Great 
Lakes Study, International Joint Commission, Washington DC 
and Ottawa. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.ijc.org/
en/impacts-upper-great-lakes-water-levels-st-clair-river-final-
report>
International Joint Commission (2013). International Joint 
Commission’s Advice to Governments on the Recommendations 
of the International Upper Great Lakes Study. A report to the 
Governments of Canada and the United States. International 
Joint Commission, Washington DC, Ottawa, and Windsor. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://legacyfiles.ijc.org/
publications/IUGLS-IJC-Report-Feb-12-2013-15-April-20132.pdf>
International Joint Commission (2017). First Triennial 
Assessment of Progress on Great Lakes Water Quality. 
International Joint Commission, Washington DC and Ottawa. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://ijc.org/sites/default/
files/TAP.pdf>
International Joint Commission (2018). A Climate Change 
Guidance Framework for IJC Boards: A Highlights Report 
2018. International Joint Commission, Washington DC and 
Ottawa. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.ijc.org/
sites/default/files/2019-03/IJC_IWI_Board_Climate_Change_
Highlights_Report_2018.pdf>
International Joint Commission (2020). Transboundary Waters. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://ijc.org/en/transboundary-
waters>
Inuit Circumpolar Council (2009). A Circumpolar Inuit 
Declaration on Sovereignty in the Arctic. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/
Declaration_12x18_Vice-Chairs_Signed.pdf>
Inuit Circumpolar Council (2018). Inuit Circumpolar 
Council Canada Submission to The Standing Committee 
on Foreign Affairs and International Development of the 
House of Commons. October 31, 2018. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.ourcommons.ca/Content/
Committee/421/FAAE/Brief/BR10186520/br-external/
InuitCircumpolarCouncilCanada-e.pdf>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (2017). Nilliajut 2: Inuit Perspectives 
on the Northwest Passage Shipping and Marine Issues. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/01/NilliajutTextPages_Draftv4_english_web.pdf>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (2018). Video: Nilliajut 2: Inuit 
perspectives on the Northwest Passage shipping and marine 
use. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=0EGzKIQo0jY> 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2019). 
Technical Summary in IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and 
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. 
Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, 
K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. 
Rama and N.M. Weyer. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/3/2019/11/04_SROCC_
TS_FINAL.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 723 
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2007). 
Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Core Writing Team 
(Eds.), Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 
104 p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/
assets/uploads/2018/02/ar4_syr.pdf>
IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] (2014). 
Summary for Policymakers, in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, 
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral 
Aspects (Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change), (Eds.) C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, 
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, 
R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P.R. Mastrandrea and L.L. White. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, New York, USA, 32 
p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/
assets/uploads/2018/02/ar5_wgII_spm_en.pdf>
Ishtiaque, A. and Nazem., N.I. (2017). Household-level disaster-
induced losses and rural–urban migration: Experience from 
world’s one of the most disaster-affected countries. Natural 
Hazards 86(1), 315–326. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11069-016-2690-5>
Johnson, B.L. (1999). The Role of Adaptive Management as 
an Operational Approach for Resource Management Agencies. 
Conservation Ecology, 3(2), 8. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<http://doi.org/10.5751/es-00136-030208>
Johnston, M., Dawson, J., De Souza, E. and Stewart, E.J. (2017). 
Management challenges for the fastest growing marine shipping 
sector in Arctic Canada: pleasure crafts. Polar Record, 53(1), 
67–78. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1017/
s0032247416000565>
Kam, P.M., Aznar-Siguan G., Schewe J., Milano L., Ginnetti J., 
Willner S., McCaughey J.W. and Bresch D.N. (2021). Global 
warming and population change both heighten future risk of 
human displacement due to river floods. Environmental Research 
Letters 16, 44026. Retrieved March 2021, from <http://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/abd26c>
Kelley, C.P., Mohtadi, S., Cane, M.A., Seager, R. and Kushnir, Y. 
(2015).Climate change in the Fertile Crescent and implications 
of the recent Syrian drought. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 112(11), 3241–3246. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1421533112> 
Kelman, I. (2015). Difficult decisions: Migration from Small 
Island Developing States under climate change. Earth’s Future, 
3(4), 133–142. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2014EF000278> 
Keskitalo, E.C.H. (2010). Introduction – Adaptation to Climate 
Change in Europe: Theoretical Framework and Study Design, in 
Developing Adaptation Policy and Practice in Europe: Multi-Level 
Governance of Climate Change. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 
1–38.
Ketchum, K. and Barroso, L.A. (2006). The Columbia River 
Treaty - an example of effective cross-border river regulation. 
X Symposium of Specialists in Electric Operational and 
Expansion Planning. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://www.
psr-inc.com/wp-content/uploads/articles/2006_X_SEPOPE-
CRTpaperfinal.pdf>
King, A. and Harrington, L. (2018). The Inequality of Climate 
Change From 1.5 to 2°C of Global Warming. Geophysical 
Research Letters, 45(10), 5030–5033. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL078430>
Kintisch, E. (2015). “The Blob” invades Pacific, flummoxing 
climate experts. Science, 348(6230), 17–18. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://science.sciencemag.org/
content/348/6230/17.full>
Korneev, V.N., Volchak, A.A., Hertman, L.N., Usava, I.P., Anufriev, 
V.N., Pakhomau, A.V., Rusaya, I.A., Bulak, I.A., Bahadziazh, 
E.P., Dubenok, S.A., Zavyalov, S.V., Rachevsky, A.N., Rimkus, E., 
Stonevicius, E., Speikas, A., Buijs, P., Crema, G., Denisov, N.B. 
and Koeppel, S. (2015). Strategic Framework for Adaptation 
to Climate Change in the Neman River Basin. 64 p. United 
Nations Development Programme in Belarus and United Nations 
Economic Commission for Europe. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://unece.org/fileadmin/DAM/env/documents/2016/
wat/04Apr_6-7_Workshop/Strategy_of_Adaptation_to_Climate_
Change_ENG_for_print.pdf>
Koubi, V. (2019). Climate Change and Conflict. Annual Review of 
Political Science, 22, 343–360. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-polisci-050317-070830>
Koubrak, O. and VanderZwaag, D. (2020). Are transboundary 
fisheries management arrangements in the Northwest Atlantic 
and North Pacific seaworthy in a changing ocean? Ecology and 
Society, 25(4), 42. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.5751/ES-11835-250442>
Kovacs, P. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2014). Industry, Chapter 
5 in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on 
Impacts and Adaptation, (Eds.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 135–158. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.
nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/
Chapter5-Industry_Eng.pdf> 
Krysanova, V., Buiteveld, H., Haase, D. and Hattermann, F.F. 
(2008). Practices and lessons learned in coping with climatic 
hazards at the river-basin scale: floods and droughts. Ecology, 
13(2), 32. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://www.
ecologyandsociety.org/vol13/iss2/art32/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 724 
Kujawinski, P. (2017). The complicated relationship between 
cruise ships and the Arctic Inuit. The New Yorker, May 11, 2017. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.newyorker.com/
news/news-desk/the-complicated-relationship-between-cruise-
ships-and-the-arctic-inuit>
Lackenbauer, W. and Lajeunesse, A. (2014). On Uncertain Ice: 
The Future of Arctic Shipping and the Northwest Passage. 
Canadian Defence and Foreign Affairs Institute. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.
net/cdfai/pages/440/attachments/original/1417676137/On_
Uncertain_Ice.pdf?1417676137>
Lackenbauer, P.W. and Lalonde, S. (2017a). Introduction – 
Section 3: The Northwest Passage, in (Re)Conceptualizing 
Arctic Security, (Eds.) P.W. Lackenbauer, R. Dean and R. Huebert. 
Selected articles from the Journal of Military and Security 
Studies.
Lackenbauer, P.W. and Lalonde, S. (2017b). Searching for 
Common Ground in Evolving Canadian and EU Arctic Strategies, 
in The European Union and the Arctic. Brill. Retrieved October 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004349179_007>
Lajeunesse, A. (2018) Canada’s Sovereignty in the Arctic. Brief 
to the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International 
Development. June 2018. St. Francis Xavier University, NS. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.ourcommons.ca/
Content/Committee/421/FAAE/Brief/BR10003044/br-external/
LajeunesseAdam-e.pdf>
Lalonde, S. (2019). Canadian Arctic Maritime Sovereignty During 
the Trudeau Years, in Canada’s Arctic Agenda: Into the Vortex, 
(Eds.) J. Higginbotham and J. Spence. Centre for International 
Governance Innovation, 75–82. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/documents/
Arctic%20Report%202019%20web.pdf>
Landriault, M. (2016). Interest in and public perceptions 
of Canadian Arctic sovereignty: Evidence from editorials, 
2000–2014. International Journal of Canadian Studies, 54, 
5–25. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.3138/
ijcs.54.5>
Lasserre, E.G. (2016). Commercial shipping in the Arctic: 
new perspectives, challenges and regulations. Polar Record, 
52(3), 294–304. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0032247415001011>
Lasserre, F., Beveridge, L., Fournier, M., Têtu, P.L. and Huang, 
L. (2016). Polar seaways? Maritime transport in the Arctic: 
An analysis of shipowners’ intentions II. Journal of Transport 
Geography, 57, 105–114. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2016.10.004>
Le Bris, A., Mills, K.E., Wahle, R.A., Chen, Y., Alexander, M.A., 
Allyn, A.J., Shuetz, J.G., Scott, J.D. and Pershing, A.J. (2018). 
Climate vulnerability and resilience in the most valuable North 
American fishery. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 115(8), 1831–1836. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1711122115>
Lee, K.N. (1994). Compass and Gyroscope: Integrating Science 
And Politics For The Environment. Island Press.
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.) 
(2008). From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007. Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 448 
p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
impacts-adaptation-canada-changing-climate/10253>
Levitt, M. (2019). Nation-Building at Home, Vigilance Beyond: 
Preparing for the Coming Decades in the Arctic. Report of 
the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and International 
Development. House of Commons, 68 p. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.ourcommons.ca/Content/
Committee/421/FAAE/Reports/RP10411277/faaerp24/
faaerp24-e.pdf>
Liehr, S., Drees, L. and Hummel, D. (2016). Migration as Societal 
Response to Climate Change and Land Degradation in Mali and 
Senegal, in Adaptation to Climate Change and Variability in Rural 
West Africa, (Eds.) J.A. Yaro and J. Hesselberg. Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 147–169.
Link, J.S., Nye, J.A. and Hare, J.A. (2011). Guidelines 
for incorporating fish distribution shifts into a fisheries 
management context. Fish and Fisheries, 12(4), 461–469. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1467-2979.2010.00398.x>
Linke, A.M., Witmer, F.D., O’Loughlin, J., McCabe, J.T. and Tir, 
J. (2018). The consequences of relocating in response to 
drought: human mobility and conflict in contemporary Kenya. 
Environmental Research Letters, 13(9). Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aad8cc>
Loebach, P. (2016). Household migration as a livelihood 
adaptation in response to a natural disaster: Nicaragua and 
Hurricane Mitch. Population and Environment, 38, 185–206. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-
016-0256-9>
Mach, K.J., Kraan, C.M., Adger, W.N., Halvard, B., Burke, M., 
Fearon, J.D., Field, C.B., Hendrix, C.S., Maystadt., J., O’Loughlin, 
J., Roessler, P., Scheffran, J., Schultz, J.A. and von Uexkull, 
N. (2019). Climate as a risk factor for armed conflict. Nature, 
571, 193–197. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41586-019-1300-6>
Maharatna, A. (2014). Food Scarcity and Migration: An Overview. 
Social Research, 81(2), 277–298. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/26549616>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 725 
Major, D. and Shivji, S. (2019). Canada’s Military Feeling the 
Strain Responding to Climate Change. CBC News, June 24, 
2019. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/
politics/canada-s-military-adopting-climate-change-1.5186337>
Mallick, B. and Vogt, J. (2012). Cyclone, coastal society and 
migration: empirical evidence from Bangladesh. International 
Development Planning Review, 34(3), 217–240. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.3828/idpr.2012.16>
Mantua, N., Tohver, I. and Hamlet, A.F. (2010). Climate change 
impacts on streamflow extremes and summertime stream 
temperature and their possible consequences for freshwater 
salmon habitat in Washington State. Climate Change, 102 187–
223. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-010-9845-2>
Mantua, N.J., Hare, S.R., Zhang, Y., Wallace, J.M. and Francis, 
R.C. (1997). A Pacific Interdecadal Climate Oscillation with 
Impacts on Salmon Production. Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 78(6), 1069–1080. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-
0477(1997)078<1069:APICOW>2.0.CO;2>
Marelle, L., Raut, J. C., Law, K. S. and Duclaux, O. (2018). Current 
and Future Arctic Aerosols and Ozone From Remote Emissions 
and Emerging Local Sources—Modeled Source Contributions 
and Radiative Effects. Journal of Geophysical Research: 
Atmospheres, 123(22), 12,942–12,963. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JD028863>
Marin, A.F. and Naess, L.O. (2017). Climate Change Adaptation 
Through Humanitarian Aid? Promises, Perils and Potentials 
of the ‘New Humanitarianism’. IDS Bulletin. 48(4). Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://bulletin.ids.ac.uk/index.php/idsbo/
article/view/2884/ONLINE%20ARTICLE>
Marino, E. and Lazrus, H. (2015). Migration or Forced 
Displacement?: The Complex Choices of Climate Change and 
Disaster Migrants in Shishmaref, Alaska and Nanumea, Tuvalu. 
Human Organization, 74(4), 341–350. Retrieved February 2021, 
<https://doi.org/10.17730/0018-7259-74.4.341>
Mbow, C., Rosenzweig, C., Barioni, L.G., Benton, T.G., Herrero, 
M., Krishnapillai, M., Liwenga, E., Pradhan, P., Rivera-Ferre, M.G., 
Sapkota, T., Tubiello, F.N. and Xu, Y. (2019). Food Security, 
Chapter 5 in Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report 
on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable 
land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes 
in terrestrial ecosystems, (Eds.) P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo 
Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, P. 
Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, 
S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. 
Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/chapter/
chapter-5/>
Mcilgorm, A., Hanna, S., Knapp, G., Le Floc`H, P., Millerd, F. 
and Pan, M. (2010). How will climate change alter fishery 
governance? Insights from seven international case studies. 
Marine Policy, 34(1), 170–177. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2009.06.004>
McIntosh, M. (2016). International Agreement Effectiveness: A 
Case Study Using The 1985 Pacific Salmon Treaty. University 
of Oregon. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://hdl.handle.
net/1794/22257>
McKinney, M., Baker, L., Buvel, A.M. and Fischer, A. (2010). 
Managing transboundary natural resources: an assessment 
of the need to revise and update the Columbia River Treaty. 
Hastings West-Northwest Journal of Environmental Law and 
Policy, 16(2), 307. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
repository.uchastings.edu/hastings_environmental_law_journal/
vol16/iss2/2>
McLeman, R. (2014). Climate and human migration: Past 
experiences, future challenges. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 300 p.
McLeman, R. (2019). International migration and climate 
adaptation in an era of hardening borders. Nature Climate 
Change, 9(12), 911–918. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0634-2>
McLeman, R. (2020). How Will International Migration Policy 
and Sustainable Development Affect Future Climate-Related 
Migration? Transatlantic Council on Migration, a project of the 
Migration Policy Institute, Washington DC. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/
publications/tcm-climate-migration-mcleman_final.pdf>
McLeman, R., Moniruzzaman, M. and Akter, N. (2017). 
Environmental influences on skilled worker migration from 
Bangladesh to Canada. The Canadian Geographer, 62(3), 352–
371. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cag.12430>
McMichael, C., Dasgupta, S., Ayeb-Karlsson, S. and Kelman, I. 
(2020). A review of estimating population exposure to sea-level 
rise and the relevance for migration. Environmental Research 
Letters, 15(12), 1–25. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/abb398>
McRae, D. (2007). Arctic Sovereignty? What is at Stake? Behind 
the Headlines, 64(1), 1–26. Canadian Institute of International 
Affairs and Canadian International Council. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://3mea0n49d5363860yn4ri4go-wpengine.
netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/BTH-64-1-2007.
pdf>
Meierding, E. (2013). Climate Change and Conflict: Avoiding 
Small Talk About the Weather. International Studies Review 
15(2), 185–203. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/misr.12030>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 726 
Melia, N., Haines, K. and Day, J.J. (2017). Towards seasonal 
Arctic shipping route predictions. Environmental Research 
Letters, 12(8), 084005. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa7a60>
Mendehall, E., C. Hendrix, E. Nyman, P. M. Roberts, J. Robison 
Hoopes, J. R. Watson, V. W. Y. Lam, and U. R. Sumaila. (2020). 
Climate change increases the risk of fisheries conflict. Marine 
Policy 117:103954. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.103954> 
Meredith, M., Sommerkorn, M., Cassotta, S., Derksen, C., Ekaykin, 
A., Hollowed, A., Kofinas, G., Mackintosh, A., Melbourne-Thomas, 
J., Muelbert, M.M.C., Ottersen, G., Pritchard, H. and Schuur, 
E.A.G. (2019). Polar Regions, Chapter 3 in IPCC Special Report 
on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, (Eds.) H.-O. 
Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. 
Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. 
Petzold, B. Rama and N.M. Weyer. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/chapter/chapter-3-2/>
Merkens, J.-L., Reimann, L., Hinkel, J. and Vafeidis, A.T. (2016). 
Gridded population projections for the coastal zone under 
the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Global and Planetary 
Change, 145, 57–66. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloplacha.2016.08.009>
Mezdour, A., Veronis, L. and McLeman, R. (2015). Environmental 
Influences on Haitian Migration to Canada and Connections to 
Social Inequality: Evidence from Ottawa-Gatineau and Montreal, 
in Environmental Migration and Social Inequality, (Eds.) R. 
McLeman, J. Shade and T. Faist, T. Springer, Dordrecht, 103–116.
Miller, K.A. (1996). Salmon stock variability and the political 
economy of the Pacific Salmon Treaty. Contemporary Economic 
Policy, 14, 112–129. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1465-7287.1996.tb00628.x>
Miller, K.A. (2007). Climate variability and tropical tuna: 
Management challenges for highly migratory fish stocks. Marine 
Policy, 31(1), 56–70. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.marpol.2006.05.006> 
Miller, K., Charles, A., Barange, M., Brander, K., Gallucci, V.F., 
Gasalla, M.A., Khan, A., Munro, G., Murtugudde, R., Ommer, 
R.E. and Perry, R.I. (2010). Climate change, uncertainty, and 
resilient fisheries: Institutional responses through integrative 
science. Progress in Oceanography, 87(1–4), 338–346. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pocean.2010.09.014>
Mills, K., Griffis, R., Haynie, A. and Pecl, G. (2015). Pershing, 
2015 Santos Workshop on “Moving towards climate-ready 
fishery systems: Regional comparisons of climate adaptation in 
marine fisheries.” PICES Press, 23(2), 14–16. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://meetings.pices.int/publications/pices-
press/volume23/issue2/PPJuly2015.pdf>
Mills, K.E., Pershing, A.J., Brown, C.J., Chen, Y., Chiang, 
F.S., Holland, D.S., Lehtua, S., Nye, J.A., Sun, J.C., Thomas, 
A.C. and Wahle, R.A. (2013). Fisheries Management in a 
Changing Climate Lessons from the 2012 Ocean Heat Wave 
in the Northwest Atlantic. Oceanography, 26(2), 191–195. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.5670/
oceanog.2013.27>
Milly, P.C.D., Betancourt, J., Falkenmark, M., Hirsch, R.M., 
Kundzewicz, Z.W., Lettenmaier, D.P. and Stouffer, R.J. (2008). 
Stationarity Is Dead: Whither Water Management? Science, 
319(5863), 573–574. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
science.sciencemag.org/content/sci/319/5863/573.full.pdf>
Minister of National Defence (2017). Defence Energy and 
Environment Strategy, Harnessing energy efficiency and 
sustainability: Defence and the road to the future. Retrieved 
Ferbuary 2021, from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/dnd-
mdn/documents/reports/2017/20171004-dees-en.pdf>
Moser, S.C. and Hart, J.A.F. (2015). The long arm of climate 
change: societal teleconnections and the future of climate 
change impacts studies. Climatic Change, 129(1-2), 13–26. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <http://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-
015-1328-z>
Mosnier, A., Obersteiner, M., Havlik, P., Schmid, E., Khabarov, N., 
Westphal, M., Valin, H., Frank, S. and Albrecht, F. (2014). Global 
food markets, trade and the cost of climate change adaptation. 
Food Security, 6, 29–44. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://
doi.org/10.1007/s12571-013-0319-z>
Muckleston, L. (2003). International management in the 
Columbia River system. Technical documents in hydrology: 
PC-CP series UNESCO, 12, 55 p. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf00001
33292?posInSet=1&queryId=cb29f737-8598-4aa5-9757-
c98a100acc1f%C2%BB>
Munro, G.R. and Stokes, R.L. (1989). The Canada-United States 
Pacific Salmon Treaty, in Canadian Oceans Policy: National 
Strategies and the New Law of the Sea, (Eds.) D.M. McRae and 
G.R. Munro. University of British Columbia Press, 17–35.
Munro, G., McDorman, T.L. and McKelvey, R. (1997). 
Transboundary Fishery Resources and the Canada-United States 
Pacific Salmon Treaty. Canadian-American Center, University of 
Maine, ME, USA. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://journals.
uvic.ca/index.php/capp/article/view/16342/6988>
National Marine Fisheries Service (2019). Endangered Species 
Act, Section 7(a)(2) Biological Opinion and Magnuson-
Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act Essential 
Fish Habitat Response. Consultation on the Delegation of 
Management Authority for Specified Salmon Fisheries to the 
State of Alaska. NMFS Consultation Number: WCR-2018-
10660. Retrieved February 2021, from < https://www.kcaw.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/04/NMFS-Consultation-Number-
WCR-2018-10660.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 727 
Nawrotzki, R. and DeWaard, J. (2016). Climate shocks and the 
timing of migration from Mexico. Population and Environment, 
38(1), 72–100. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11111-016-0255-x>
Neumann, B., Vafeidis, A.T., Zimmermann, J. and Nicholls, R.J. 
(2015). Future Coastal Population Growth and Exposure to Sea-
Level Rise and Coastal Flooding - A Global Assessment. PLoS 
ONE, 10(6), e0131375. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0118571>
Ng, A., Andrews, J., Babb, D., Lin, Y. and Becker, A. (2018). 
Implications of climate change for shipping: Opening the Arctic 
seas. WIREs Climate Change, 9(2), e507. Retrieved October 2020, 
from <http://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.507>
Ng, A.K.Y., Wang, T., Yang, Z., Li, K.X. (2016). How is Business 
Adapting to Climate Change Impacts Appropriately? Insight 
from the Commercial Port Sector. Journal of Business Ethics, 
150, 1029–1047. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-016-3179-6>
Norman, E. (2015). Governing transboundary waters: Canada, 
the United States and Indigenous Communities. Routledge, 
London, 220 p.
Norman, E. and Bakker, K. (2005). Drivers and barriers of 
cooperation in transboundary water governance: A case study 
of Western Canada and the United States. Report to the Walter 
and Duncan Gordon Foundation. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<http://watergovernance.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2010/06/Gordon_
Foundation_Transboundary_Report.pdf>
Northwest Power and Conservation Council (2010). Climate 
Change Issues, Chapter 11 in Sixth Northwest Conservation and 
Electric Power Plan. Northwest Power and Conservation Council, 
1–19.
Norwegian Red Cross (2019). Overlapping vulnerabilities: the 
impacts of climate change on humanitarian needs. Norwegian 
Red Cross, Oslo. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
reliefweb.int/report/world/overlapping-vulnerabilities-impacts-
climate-change-humanitarian-needs>
Nunavut Impact Review Board (2019). Nunavut Impact 
Review Board – Final Report for the Strategic Environmental 
Assessment in Baffin Bay and Davis Strait. NIRB File No. 
17SN034. Volume 3: Analysis of Scenarios, Key Findings and 
Recommendations. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://
www.nirb.ca/publications/Strategic%20Environmental%20
Assessment/first%20row-third%20file-190731-17SN034-
Final%20SEA%20Report-Volume%203-OPAE.pdf>
Nuttall, M. (2005). Protecting the Arctic: Indigenous peoples and 
cultural survival. Routledge, 204 p.
Nyland, D. and Nodelman, J.R. (2017). British Columbia, Chapter 
4 in Climate risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian 
transportation sector 2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. 
Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 66–103.
Ochuodho, T.O. and Lantz, V.A. (2014). Economic impacts of 
climate change in the forest sector: a comparison of single-
region and multiregional CGE modeling frameworks. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 44, 449–464. Retrieved October 
2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2013-0317>
Ochuodho T.O., Lantz, V.A. and Olale, E. (2016). Economic 
impacts of climate change considering individual, additive, 
and simultaneous changes in forest and agriculture sectors in 
Canada: A dynamic, multi-regional CGE model analysis. Forest 
Policy and Economics, 63, 43–51. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forpol.2015.12.005>
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development] (2015). The Economic Consequences of Climate 
Change. OECD Publishing, Paris. Retrieved October 2020, from 
http://doi.org/10.1787/9789264235410-en>
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development] (2019). Climate Finance Provided and 
Mobilised by Developed Countries in 2013-17. OECD 
Publishing, Paris. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1787/39faf4a7-en>
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development] (2016). 2020 Projections of Climate Finance 
Towards the USD 100 Billion Goal, Technical Note. OECD 
Publishing, Paris. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
oecd.org/environment/cc/Projecting%20Climate%20Change%20
2020%20WEB.pdf>
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development] (2018a). Aid (ODA) disbursements to countries 
and regions [DAC2a]: Open Data - Bilateral ODA by recipient 
[DAC2a]. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://stats.oecd.org/
Index.aspx?QueryId=42231&lang=en>
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development] (2018b). Climate finance from developed to 
developing countries: Public flows in 2013–17. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www.oecd.org/environment/cc/
Climate-finance-from-developed-to-developing-countries-Public-
flows-in-2013-17.pdf>
OECD [Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development] (2018c). OECD DAC External Development 
Finance Statistics. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://www.
oecd.org/dac/financing-sustainable-development/development-
finance-topics/Climate-related-development-finance-in-2018.
pdf>
Oh, C.H. (2017). How do natural and man-made disasters affect 
international trade? A country-level and industry-level analysis. 
Journal of Risk Research, 20(2), 195–217. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1080/13669877.2015.1042496>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 728 
Olsen, J., Carter, N.A., Dawson, J. (2019). Community 
perspectives on the environmental impacts of Arctic shipping: 
case studies from Russia, Norway and Canada. Cogent Social 
Sciences, 5 (1), 1–20. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1080/23311886.2019.1609189>
Ommer, R.E. (2007). Coasts under stress: restructuring and 
social-ecological health. McGill-Queen’s Press, 592 p.
Ojea, E., Lester, S. E. and Salgueiro-Otero, D. (2020). Adaptation 
of fishing communities to climate-driven shifts in target species. 
One Earth, 2(6), 544–556. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.05.012>
Østhagen, A., Spijkers, J. and Totland, O.A. (2020). Collapse of 
cooperation? The North-Atlantic mackerel dispute and lessons 
for international cooperation on transboundary fish stocks. 
Maritime Studies, 19,155–165. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s40152-020-00172-4>
Østreng, W., Eger, K.M., Fløistad, B., Jørgensen-Dahl, A., 
Lothe, L., Mejlænder-Larsen, M. and Wergeland, T. (2013). 
Shipping in Arctic Waters: A Comparison of the Northeast, 
Northwest and Trans Polar Passages. Springer. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%
2F978-3-642-16790-4>
Pacific Salmon Commission (2019). Joint Chinook Technical 
Committee Report. 2018 Exploitation Rate Analysis and Model 
Calibration Volume Two: Appendix Supplement, Appendix C. 
144 p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.psc.org/
download/35/chinook-technical-committee/13375/tcchinook-
21-1-v2.pdf>
Pacific Salmon Commission (2016a). The Pacific Salmon Treaty. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.psc.org/about-us/
history-purpose/pacific-salmon-treaty/>
Pacific Salmon Commission (2016b). About the funds. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.psc.org/about-us/structure/
the-endowment-funds/about-the-funds/>
Pahl-Wostl, C., Bergkamp, G. and Cross, K. (2009). Adaptive 
management of upland rivers facing global change: General 
insights and specific considerations for the Rhône, in Rosenberg 
Water Policy Forum (Draft). Institute of Environmental Systems 
Research, University of Osnabrück, Germany. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://lib.icimod.org/api/files/a59f9309-1507-
4085-b57d-3cbda5b8c8ba/567.pdf>
Paisley, R. (2002). Adversaries into partners: international 
water law and the equitable sharing of downstream benefits. 
Melbourne Journal of International Law, 3(2), 280–300. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <http://classic.austlii.edu.au/au/journals/
MelbJIL/2002/13.html>
Palacios-Abrantes, J., Reygondeau, G., Wabnitz, C. C. and 
Cheung, W. W. (2020a). The transboundary nature of the world’s 
exploited marine species. Scientific Reports, 10(1), 1–12. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-
020-74644-2>
Palacios-Abrantes, J., Sumaila, U. R. and Cheung, W. (2020b). 
Challenges to transboundary fisheries management in North 
America under climate change. Ecology and Society, 25(4), 41. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-
11743-250441>
Palko, K. (2017). Synthesis, Chapter 2 in Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 
2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, Ontario, 12–25.
Panikkar, B., Lemmond, B., Else, B. and Murray, M. (2018). Ice 
over troubled waters: navigating the Northwest Passage using 
Inuit knowledge and scientific information. Climate Research, 
75(1), 81–94. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.3354/cr01501>
Parry, J. and Terton, A. (2016). Trends in Adaptation Planning: 
Observations from a recent stock-taking review. International 
Institute for Sustainable Development. Retrieved March 2020, 
from <https://www.iisd.org/library/trends-adaptation-planning-
observations-recent-stock-taking-review>
Pashkevich, A., Dawson, J. and Stewart, E.J. (2015). Governance 
of Expedition Cruise Ship Tourism in the Arctic: A Comparison 
of the Canadian and Russian Arctic. Tourism in Marine 
Environments, 10(3–4), 225–240. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.3727/154427315X14181438892883>
Payne, M.R., Hobday, A.J., MacKenzie, B.R., Tommasi, D., 
Dempsey, D.P., Fässler, S.M.M., Haynie, A.C., Ji, R., Liu, G., 
Lynch, P.D., Matei, D., Miesner, A.K., Mills, K.E., Strand, K.O. and 
Villarino, E. (2017). Lessons from the First Generation of Marine 
Ecological Forecast Products. Frontiers in Marine Science, 
4(289), 1–15. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.3389/fmars.2017.00289>
Pecl, G.T., Araújo, M.B., Bell, J.D., Blanchard, J., Bonebrake, 
T.C., Chen, I.C., Clark, T.D., Colwell, R.K., Danielson, F., Evengård, 
B., Falconi, L., Ferrier, S., Frusher, S., Garcia, R.A., Griffis, R.B., 
Hobday, A.J., Janion-Scheepers, C., Jarzyna, M.A., Jennings, 
S., Lenoir, J., Linnetved, H.I., Martin, V.Y., McCormack, P.C., 
McDonald, J., Mitchell, N.J., Mustonen, T., Pandolfi, J.M., 
Pettorelli, N., Popova, E., Robinson, S.A., Scheffers, B.R., Shaw, 
J.D., Sorte, C.J.B., Strugnell, J.M., Sunday, J.M., Tuanmu, 
M.N., Verges, A., Villaneuva, C., Wernberg, T., Wapstra, E. and 
Williams, S.E. (2017). Biodiversity redistribution under climate 
change: Impacts on ecosystems and human well-being. Science, 
355(6332), 1–9. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aai9214>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 729 
Pendakur, K. (2017). Northern Territories, Chapter 3 in Climate 
risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation 
sector 2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and D.S. Lemmen. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 27–64. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/Chapter-3e.pdf>
People’s Republic of China (2018). China’s Arctic Policy. The 
State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic of 
China. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://english.gov.cn/
archive/white_paper/2018/01/26/content_281476026660336.
htm>
Perry, A.L., Low, P.J., Ellis, J.R. and Reynolds, J.D. (2005). 
Climate change and distribution shifts in marine fishes. Science, 
308(5730), 1912–1915. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1111322>
Peterman, R., Beamesderfer, R. and Bue, B. (2016). Review of 
Methods for Forecasting Chinook Salmon Abundance in the 
Pacific Salmon Treaty Areas. Report to the Pacific Salmon 
Commission, Technical Report No. 35. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://www.psc.org/publications/technical-reports/
technical-report-series>
Peterson, W., Robert, M. and Bond, N. (2015). The warm 
blob-Conditions in the northeastern Pacific Ocean. PICES 
Press, 23(1), 36–38. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
meetings.pices.int/publications/pices-press/volume23/issue1/
PPJanuary2015.pdf#page=36>
PEW Charitable Trusts (2016). The integrated Arctic corridors 
framework: Planning for responsible shipping in Canada’s Arctic 
waters. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://www.pewtrusts.
org/~/media/assets/2016/04/the-integrated-arctic-corridors-
framework.pdf>
Pezard, S., Tingstad, A. and Hall, A. (2018). The Future of Arctic 
Cooperation in a Changing Strategic Environment: Insights from 
a Scenario-Based Exercise Organised by RAND and Hosted by 
NUPI. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://www.rand.org/
pubs/perspectives/PE268.html> 
Pickard, D., de la Cueva Bueno, P., Olson, E. and Semmens, 
C. (2019). Evaluation of Cumulative Effects Assessment 
Methodologies for Marine Shipping. Report prepared for 
Transport Canada by ESSA Technologies Ltd. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://www.tc.gc.ca/en/services/
marine/documents/EVALUATION_OF_CUMULATIVE_EFFECTS_
ASSESSMENT_METHODOLOGIES_FOR_MARINE_SHIPPING_EN-
2019-08-26.pdf>
Pinsky, M.L., Fenichel, E., Fogarty, M., Levin, S., McCay, B., St. 
Martin, K., Selden, R.L. and Young, T. (2020). Fish and fisheries in 
hot water: What is happening and how do we adapt? Population 
Ecology, 63(1), 17–26. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1002/1438-390X.12050>
Pinsky, M.L. and Fogarty, M. (2012). Lagged social-ecological 
responses to climate and range shifts in fisheries. Climate 
Change, 115, 883–891. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0599-x>
Pinsky, M.L., Reygondeau, G., Caddell, R., Palacios-Abrantes, 
J., Spijkers, J. and Cheung, W.W.L. (2018). Preparing ocean 
governance for species on the move. Science, 360(6394), 1189–
1191. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.aat2360>
Pinsky, M.L., Worm, B., Fogarty, M.J., Sarmiento, J.L. and 
Levin, S.A. (2013). Marine Taxa Track Local Climate Velocities. 
Science, 341(6151), 1239–1242. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1239352>
Pizzolato, L., Howell, S.E., Dawson, J., Laliberté, F. and Copland, 
L. (2016). The influence of declining sea ice on shipping activity 
in the Canadian Arctic. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(23), 
12,146–12,154. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2016GL071489>
Plouffe, J. (2011). Canada’s tous azimuts Arctic foreign policy. 
The Northern Review, 33, 69. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://thenorthernreview.ca/index.php/nr/article/view/184>
Polasky, S., Carpenter, S.R., Folke, C. and Keeler, B. (2011). 
Decision-making under great uncertainty: environmental 
management in an era of global change. Trends in Ecology and 
Evolution, 26, 398–404. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.04.007>
Poloczanska, E.S., Brown, C.J., Sydeman, W.J., Kiessling, W., 
Shoeman, D.S., Moore, P.J., Brander, K., Bruno, J.F., Buckey, L.B., 
Burrows, M.T., Duarte, C.M., Halpern, B.S., Holding, J., Kappel, 
C.V., O`Connor, M.I., Pandolfi, J.M., Parmesan, C., Shwing, F., 
Thompson, S.A. and Rochardson, A.J. (2013). Global imprint of 
climate change on marine life. Nature Climate Change, 3, 919–
925. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate1958>
Poloczanska, E.S., Burrows, M.T., Brown, C.J., Garcia Molinos, 
J., Halpern, B.S., Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Kappel, C.V., Moore, 
P.J., Rochardson, A.J., Schoeman, D.S. and Sydemand, W.J. 
(2016). Responses of Marine Organisms to Climate Change 
across Oceans. Frontiers in Marine Science, 3(62), 1–21. 
Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmars.2016.00062>
Port of Vancouver (n.d.) Climate change. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.portvancouver.com/about-us/faq/
addressing-climate-change/>
Porta, L., Abou-Abssi, E., Dawson, J. and Mussells, O. (2017). 
Shipping Corridors as a Framework for Advancing Marine Law 
and Policy in the Canadian Arctic. Ocean and Coastal Law 
Journal, 22(1), 63–84. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://
digitalcommons.mainelaw.maine.edu/oclj/vol22/iss1/6>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 730 
Province of British Columbia and State of Alaska (2015). 
Statement of Cooperation on Protection of Transboundary 
Waters Between The State of Alaska Departments of 
Environmental Conservation, Fish and Game and Natural 
Resources And The Province of British Columbia Ministries of 
Environment, and Energy and Mines. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://news.gov.bc.ca/files/BC_Alaska_Statement_of_
Cooperation_MOU.pdf>
Province of British Columbia and State of Montana (2010). 
Memorandum of Understanding and Cooperation on 
Environmental Protection, Climate Action and Energy between 
the Province of British Columbia and the State of Montana. 
February 18, 2010. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/natural-resource-
stewardship/environmental-assessments/working-with-other-
agencies/bc_montana_mou.pdf>
Province of British Columbia and State of Washington (1992). 
Environmental Cooperation Agreement between The Province 
of British Columbia and The State of Washington. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/
environment/natural-resource-policy-legislation/environmental-
policy/bcwaccord.pdf>
Province of Ontario, Government of Quebec, and Council 
of Great Lakes Governors (1985). The Great Lakes Charter 
– Principles for the Management of Great Lakes Water 
Resources. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
internationalwaterlaw.org/documents/regionaldocs/Local-GW-
Agreements/1985-GL-Charten.pdf>
Rao, N., Lawson., E.T., Raditloaneng, W.N., Solomon, D. and 
Angula, M.N. (2019). Gendered vulnerabilities to climate change: 
insights from the semi-arid regions of Africa and Asia. Climate 
and Development, 11(1), 14–26. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17565529.2017.1372266>
Rapaport, E., Starkman, S., and Towns, W. (2017). Atlantic 
Canada, Chapter 8 in Climate risks and adaptation practices for 
the Canadian transportation sector 2016, (Eds.) K. Palko and 
D.S. Lemmen, Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 218–262. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2016/
Chapter-8e.pdf>
Rigaud, K.K., de Sherbinin, A., Jones, B., Bergmann, J., Clement, 
V., Ober, K., Schewe, J., Adamo, S., McCusker, B., Heuser, S. 
and Midgley, A. (2018). Groundswell: Preparing for Internal 
Climate Migration. World Bank, Washington, DC. Retrieved 
October 2020, from <https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/
handle/10986/29461>
Ringius, L., Torvanger, A. and Underdal, A. (2002). 
Burden Sharing and Fairness Principles in International 
Climate Policy. International Environmental Agreements, 
2, 1–22. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1023/A:1015041613785>
Rollin, A.M. (2013). The increase in food prices between 
2007 and 2012. Statistics Canada, Analytical Studies Branch, 
Economic Analysis Division. Catalogue No. 11-626-X – No. 027.
Rothwell, D.R. (2015). Arctic Sovereignty and its Legal 
Significance for Canada. ANU College of Law Research Paper 
No. 13-19. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://dx.doi.
org/10.2139/ssrn.2360364>
Rüttinger, L., Smith, D., Stang, G., Tänzler, D. and Vivekananda, 
J. (2015). A New Climate for Peace: Taking Action on Climate 
and Fragility Risks. Adelphi, International Alert, Woodrow Wilson 
International Centre for Scholars Studies and the European 
Institute for Security, Berlin. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://www.newclimateforpeace.org/>
Sack, K. and Schwartz, J. (2018, February 24). Left to Lousiana’s 
Tides, A Village Fights for Time. New York Times. New York. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2018/02/24/us/jean-lafitte-floodwaters.html>
Samers, M. (2010). Migration. Routledge, London, 
392 p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.4324/9780203864296>
Scott, H., McEvoy, D., Chhetri, P., Basic, F. and Mullett, J. (2013). 
Climate change adaptation guidelines for ports. Enhancing 
the resilience of seaports to a changing climate report series. 
National Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility, RMIT 
University, Gold Coast.
Selby J., Dahi O.S., Fröhlich C. and Hulme M. (2017). Climate 
change and the Syrian civil war revisited. Political Geography, 
60, 232–234. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.polgeo.2017.05.007>
Seyle, D. (2019). Operationalizing Positive Peace: Canadian 
Approaches to International Security Policy and Practice, in The 
Palgrave Handbook of Global Approaches to Peace, (Eds.) A. 
Kulnazarova and V. Popovski. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham, 193–
213. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-78905-7_10>
Shrestha, R.R., Dibike, Y.B. and Prowse, T.D. (2012). Modelling 
of climate-induced hydrologic changes in the Lake Winnipeg 
watershed. Journal of Great Lakes Research, 38, 83–94. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jglr.2011.02.004>
Smith, L.C. and Stephenson, S.R. (2013). New Trans-Arctic 
shipping routes navigable by midcentury. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 110(13), E1191–E1195. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1214212110>
Sneddon, C. and Fox, C. (2006). Rethinking transboundary 
waters: A critical hydropolitics of the Mekong basin. Political 
Geography, 25(2), 181–202. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polgeo.2005.11.002>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 731 
Sohngen, B. and Tian, X. (2016). Global climate change impacts 
on forests and markets. Forest Policy and Economics, 72, 18–26. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
forpol.2016.06.011>
Spijkers, J. and Boonstra, W.J. (2017). Environmental change 
and social conflict: the northeast Atlantic mackerel dispute. 
Regional Environmental Change, 17, 1835–1851. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-017-1150-
4>
State of Illinois, State of Michigan, State of Minnesota, State of 
New York, State of Ohio, Province of Ontario, Commonwealth of 
Pennsylvania, Government of Quebec, and State of Wisconsin 
(2005). Great Lakes St. Lawrence River Basin Sustainable Water 
Resources Agreement. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://
docs.ontario.ca/documents/2700/200040.pdf>
Statistics Canada (2018a). Trade by importer characteristics: 
Goods, 2017. The Daily, Friday, May 25, 2018. Retrieved 
August 2020, from: <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-
quotidien/180525/dq180525b-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada (2018b). Trade by exporter characteristics: 
Goods, 2017. The Daily, Friday, May 25, 2018. Retrieved 
August 2020 from: <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-
quotidien/180525/dq180525a-eng.htm>
Stephan, G. and Schenker, O. (2012). International Trade and 
the Adaptation to Climate Change and Variability. Centre for 
European Economic Research. Discussion Paper No. 12-008. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.2014657>
Stockholm Environment Institute (2013). Adaptation without 
borders? How understanding indirect impacts could change 
countries’ approach to climate risks. Discussion Brief. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://mediamanager.sei.org/documents/
Publications/Climate/SEI-DB-2013-Adaptation-Without-Borders.
pdf>
Stockholm Environment Institute (2018). Meeting the global 
challenge of adaptation by addressing transboundary climate 
risk. Discussion Brief – April 2018. Retrieved April 2021, from 
<https://adaptationwithoutborders.org/sites/weadapt.org/files/
meetingtheglobalchallengeofadaptation.pdf>
Stoett, P.J. (2018) Substantive but inconsistent: Canada’s role in 
global environmental governance, 1968–2017. Canadian Foreign 
Policy Journal, 24(3), 316–328. Retrieved October 2020, from 
<http://doi.org/10.1080/11926422.2018.1462722>
Stojanov, R., Boas, I., Kelman, I. and Duží, B. (2017). Local 
expert experiences and perceptions of environmentally induced 
migration from Bangladesh to India. Asia Pacific Viewpoint, 
58(3), 347–361. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/apv.12156>
Stoner, J.D., Lorenz, D.L. and Wiche, G.J. (1993). Red River 
of the North Basin, Minnesota, North Dakota, and South 
Dakota. Journal of the American Water Resources Association, 
29(4), 575–615. Retrieved August 2020, from <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1752-1688.1993.tb03229.x>
Suckall, N., Fraser, E. and Forster, P. (2017). Reduced 
migration under climate change: evidence from Malawi using 
an aspirations and capabilities framework. Climate and 
Development, 9(4), 298–312. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/17565529.2016.1149441>
Sumaila, U.R. (2005). Differences in economic perspectives 
and the implementation of ecosystem-based management of 
marine resources. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 300, 279–
282. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.int-res.com/
articles/meps_oa/m300p241.pdf>
Sumaila, U.R., Cheung, W.W.L., Lam, V.W.Y., Pauly, D. and Herrick, 
S. (2011). Climate change impacts on the biophysics and 
economics of world fisheries. Nature Climate Change, 1, 449–
456. Retrieved October 2020, from <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate1301>
Sumaila, U.R., Palacios-Abrantes, J., & Cheung, W. (2020). 
Climate change, shifting threat points, and the management 
of transboundary fish stocks. Ecology and Society, 25(4), 40. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-
11660-250440>
Surminski, S., Di Mauro, M., Baglee, A., Connell, R., Hankinson, 
J., Haworth, A., Ingirige, B. and Proverbs, D. (2018). Assessing 
climate risks across different businesses and industries: an 
investigation of methodological challenges at national scale 
for the UK. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: 
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376(2121). 
Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1098/
rsta.2017.0307>
Szewczyk, W., Ciscar, J.C., Mongelli, I. and Soria, A. (2018). 
JRC PESETA III project: Economic integration and spillover 
analysis. EUR 29456 EN, Publications Office of the European 
Union, Luxembourg. Retrieved October 2020, from <http://doi.
org/10.2760/514048>
Szuwalski, C.S. and Hollowed, A.B. (2016). Climate change and 
non-stationary population processes in fisheries management. 
ICES Journal of Marine Science, 73(5), 1297–1305. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1093/icesjms/fsv229>
Tarasuk, V., Mitchell, A. and Dachner, N. (2011). Household food 
insecurity in Canada, 2011. Toronto: Research to identify policy 
options to reduce food insecurity (PROOF).Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://proof.utoronto.ca/resources/proof-annual-
reports/annual-report/>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 732 
Temby, O., Rastogi, A., Sandall, J., Cooksey, R. and Hickey, 
G.M. (2015). Interagency Trust and Communication in the 
Transboundary Governance of Pacific Salmon Fisheries. Review 
of Policy Research, 32, 79–99. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12108>
The Economist (2020). Stormy waters: Ports are highly exposed 
to climate change and often ill-prepared. Finance & Economics, 
Sep 12th 2020 edition. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2020/09/12/
ports-are-highly-exposed-to-climate-change-and-often-ill-
prepared>
The Maritime Executive (2016). Hurtigruten CEO Calls for Limits 
on Arctic Cruise Ships. The Maritime Executive, August 22, 2016. 
Retrieved August 2020, from: <https://www.maritime-executive.
com/article/hurtigruten-ceo-calls-for-limits-on-arctic-cruise-
ships>
Theisen, O.M. (2017). Climate change and violence: insights 
from political science. Current Climate Change Reports, 
3(4), 210–221. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40641-017-0079-5>
Timmerman, J.G. and Bernardini, F. (2009). Perspectives on 
water and climate change adaptation: Adapting to climate 
change in transboundary water management, 5th World 
Water Forum. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
worldwatercouncil.org/fileadmin/wwc/Library/Publications_
and_reports/Climate_Change/PersPap_06._Transboundary_
Water_Management.pdf>
Tomlinson, B. (2020). The Reality of Canada’s International 
Climate Finance, 2020: Setting the Stage for Canada’s Post-
2020 Climate Finance. AidWatch Canada. Retrieved March 2021, 
from <http://aidwatchcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/
September-2020-The-Reality-of-Canadas-Climate-Finance-1.pdf>
Trabacchi, C., Koh, J., Shi, S. and Guelig, T. (2020). Adaptation 
Solutions Taxonomy. Retrieved February 2021, from <http://
dx.doi.org/10.18235/0002556>
Transport Canada (2017). Transportation in Canada. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/
transportation-canada-2017.html#toc8-2>
Trostle, R. (2011). Why have food commodity prices risen 
again? United States Department of Agriculture, WRS-1103. 
DIANE Publishing, 29 p. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
www.ers.usda.gov/webdocs/outlooks/40481/7392_wrs1103.
pdf?v=5299.5>
Trudeau, J. (2020). Minister of National Defence Mandate 
Letter. December 13, 2019. Office of the Prime Minister. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://pm.gc.ca/en/mandate-
letters/2019/12/13/minister-national-defence-mandate-letter>
UN Conference on Trade and Development (2017). Port Industry 
Survey on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation. UNCTAD 
Research Paper No. 18, UNCTAD/SER.RP/2017/18. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://unctad.org/system/files/official-
document/ser-rp-2017d18_en.pdf>
UN Conference on Trade and Development (2018). Review 
of Maritime Transport 2018. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <https://unctad.org/en/pages/PublicationWebflyer.
aspx?publicationid=2245>
UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982). Retrieved February 
2020, from <https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_
agreements/texts/unclos/unclos_e.pdf>
UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2017). 
International Migration Report 2017: Highlights (ST/
ESA/SER.A/404). Population Division. Retrieved February 
2021, from <https://www.un.org/en/development/desa/
population/migration/publications/migrationreport/docs/
MigrationReport2017_Highlights.pdf>
UN Development Programme and Global Environmental Facility 
(2011). International Waters: Review of Legal and Institutional 
Frameworks. United Nations Development Programme, Global 
Environmental Finance International Waters Project, 1–309. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.undp.org/content/
dam/aplaws/publication/en/publications/environment-energy/
www-ee-library/water-governance/international-waters-review-
of-legal-and-institutional-frameworks/IW_Review_of_Legal_Instl_
Frameworks_Project_Report.pdf>
UN Economic Commission for Europe (2009). Guidance on 
Water and Adaptation to Climate Change. Convention on 
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and 
International Lakes (the “Water Convention”), 1–144. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://unece.org/DAM/env/water/
publications/documents/Guidance_water_climate.pdf>
UN Economic Commission for Europe (2013). Convention on 
the Protection and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and 
International Lakes.
UN Economic Commission for Europe (2018). Progress on 
Transboundary Water Cooperation Under the Water Convention. 
Report on implementation of the Convention on the Protection 
and Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International 
Lakes. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, New 
York and Geneva. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://unece.
org/fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/WAT_51_report_on_
the_Implementation/ece_mp.wat_51_web.pdf>
UN Economic Commission for Europe and International Network 
of Basin Organizations (2015). Water and Climate Change 
Adaptation in Transboundary Basins: Lessons Learned and Good 
Practices. United Nations Economic Commission for Europe 
and the International Network of Basin Organizations, Geneva 
and Paris. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://unece.org/
fileadmin/DAM/env/water/publications/WAT_Good_practices/
ece.mp.wat.45.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 733 
UN Environment Programme (2017). The Adaptation Gap 
Report 2017. The United Nations Environment Programme, 
Nairobi, Kenya. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
unenvironment.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report-2017>
UNFCCC [UN Framework Convention on Climate Change] (2015). 
G7 Communique on Climate and Security: External Statement, 
19 April 2015. Retrieved January 2021, from <https://unfccc.int/
news/g7-communique-on-climate-and-security>
UN Human Rights Committee (2020). Views adopted by 
the Committee under article 5(4) of the Optional Protocol, 
concerning communication No. 2728/2016. International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights. Retrieved January 2020, from 
<https://tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layouts/15/treatybodyexternal/
Download.aspx?symbolno=CCPR%2FC%2F127%
2FD%2F2728%2F2016&Lang=en>
UN News (2019). Climate change recognized as ‘threat 
multiplier’, UN Security Council debates its impact on peace. UN 
News, January 25, 2019. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
news.un.org/en/story/2019/01/1031322>
United Nations (1970). Declaration on principles of international 
law concerning friendly relations and co-operation among 
states in accordance with the charter of the United Nations 
(UN Declaration of Principles), Resolution /2625 adopted by 
the general assembly, 25th Session. New York, USA. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://legal.un.org/avl/ha/dpilfrcscun/
dpilfrcscun.html>
United States, Executive Office of the President (Joseph R. 
Biden Jr.) (2021). EO 14008: Tackling the Climate Crisis at 
Home and Abroad. 27 Jan. 2021. 86 FR 11849, 7619–7633. 
Retrieved March 2021, from <https://www.federalregister.
gov/d/2021-02177>
U.S. Department of Defense (2014). Quadrennial defense review 
2014. U.S. Department of Defense, Arlington, VA. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://archive.defense.gov/pubs/2014_
quadrennial_defense_review.pdf>
U.S. Entity to the Columbia River Treaty (2013). U.S. Entity 
Regional Recommendation for the Future of the Columbia 
River Treaty After 2024. US Entity to the Columbia River Treaty. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.bpa.gov/Projects/
Initiatives/crt/CRT-Regional-Recommendation-eFINAL.pdf>
U.S. Government (2013). National Strategy for the Arctic Region. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://obamawhitehouse.
archives.gov/sites/default/files/docs/nat_arctic_strategy.pdf>
van Hear, N., Bakewell, O. and Long, K. (2018). Push-pull plus: 
reconsidering the drivers of migration. Journal of Ethnic and 
Migration Studies, 44(6), 927–944. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1080/1369183X.2017.1384135>
Veronis, L. (2014). Somali Refugees Show How Conflict, Gender, 
Environmental Scarcity Become Entwined. New Security Beat, 
August 19, 2014. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.
newsecuritybeat.org/2014/08/experience-somali-refugees-
shows-conflict-gender-environmental-scarcity-entwined/>
Veronis, L. and McLeman, R. (2014). Environmental influences 
on African migration to Canada: Focus group findings from 
Ottawa-Gatineau. Population and Environment, 36(2), 234–251. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-
014-0214-3>
Vincent, K., Wanjiru, L., Aubry, A., Mershon, A., Nyandiga, C., Cull, 
T. and Banda, K. (2010). Gender, climate change and community-
based adaptation: a guidebook for designing and implementing 
gender-sensitive community-based adaptation programmes 
and projects. UN Development Programme, New York Retrieved 
August 2020, from <https://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/
home/librarypage/environment-energy/climate_change/gender/
gender-climate-change-and-community-based-adaptation-
guidebook-.html>
Wallin, P. and Dallaire, R. (2011). Sovereignty & Security in 
Canada’s Arctic: Interim Report. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://sencanada.ca/Content/SEN/Committee/403/defe/rep/
rep07mar11-e.pdf>
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.) (2014). Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation; Government of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, 286 p.
Weatherdon, L.V., Ota, Y., Jones, M.C., Close, D.A. and Cheung, 
W.W.L. (2016). Projected Scenarios for Coastal First Nations’ 
Fisheries Catch Potential under Climate Change: Management 
Challenges and Opportunities. PLoS One, 11(1), e0145285. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0145285>
Wenar, L. (2015). Rights, in The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, (Ed.) E.N. Zalta. Retrieved August 2020, from 
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/rights/>
Wendebourg, M.R. (2020). Southern Ocean fishery management 
- Is CCAMLR addressing the challenges posed by climate 
change? Marine Policy 118:103847. Retrieved February 2021, 
from <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2020.103847>
Wenz, L. and Leverman, A. (2016). Enhanced economic 
connectivity to foster heat stress–related losses. Science 
Advances, 2(6), e1501026. Retrieved February 2021, from 
<https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1501026>
Werrell, C. and Femia, F. (2019). The Responsibility to Prepare 
and Prevent: A Climate Security Governance Framework 
for the 21st Century. The Center for Climate and Security. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://climateandsecurity.files.
wordpress.com/2019/10/the-responsibility-to-prepare-and-
prevent_a-climate-security-governance-framework-for-the-21st-
century_2019_10.pdf>
NATIONAL ISSUES REPORT
 734 
Williams, A., Darcy, A.O. and Wilkinson, A. (2011). The future of 
Arctic enterprise: Long-term outlook and implications. Smith 
School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford. 
Retrieved February 2021, from <https://www.smithschool.
ox.ac.uk/publications/reports/ssee-arctic-forecasting-study-
november-2011.pdf>
Wolf, A.T. (1998). Conflict and cooperation along interna­
tional waterways. Water Policy, 1(2), 251–265. Retrieved 
February 2021, from <https://doi.org/10.1016/S1366-
7017(98)00019-1>
Wood, C.M. and McDonald, D.G. (1997). Global Warming: 
Implications for Freshwater and Marine Fish. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK, 425 p. <https://doi.
org/10.1017/CBO9780511983375>
World Resources Institute (2017). Aqueduct: Flood Risk. 
Retrieved December 2018, from <http://floods.wri.org/>
Wright, S. (2014). Our ice is vanishing = Sikuvut Nunguliqtuq : a 
history of Inuit, newcomers, and climate change. McGill-Queen’s 
University Press, Montreal, 398 p.
World Wildlife Fund-Canada (2017). Assessing climate change 
vulnerability in the St. John River. Retrieved August 2020, 
from <http://awsassets.wwf.ca/downloads/sjr_cccva_2017_
summary__final.pdf>
Yanagida, J.A. (1987). The Pacific Salmon Treaty. American 
Journal of International Law, 81, 577–592. Retrieved August 
2020, from <https://doi.org/10.2307/2202013>
Yukon River Panel (n.d.). Yukon River Salmon Agreement. 
Retrieved August 2020, from <https://www.yukonriverpanel.
com/publications/yukon-river-salmon-agreement/>
Zellen, B. (2010). The Inuit, the State, and the Battle for the 
Arctic (Sacred Earth). Georgetown Journal of International 
Affairs, 11(1), 57–64. Retrieved February 2021, from <https://
georgetown.box.com/s/6dtb5c66g0j7rjqwmgnp>
Zhang, Z., Li, N., Xu, H., and Chen, X. (2018). Analysis of the 
economic ripple effect of the United States on the world due 
to future climate change. Earth’s Future, 6, 828–840. Retrieved 
August 2020, from <http://doi.org/10.1029/2018EF000839>
Zickgraf, C. (2018). Immobility, Chapter 5 in Routledge 
Handbook of Environmental Displacement and Migration, (Eds.) 
R. McLeman and F. Gemenne. Routledge, London.
Zuma, B.M., Luyt, C.D., Chirenda, T. and Tandlich, R. (2012). 
Flood Disaster Management in South Africa. Legislative 
Framework and Current Challenges. Conference Proceedings: 
International Conference on Applied Life Sciences, Turkey, 
September 2012.
