2022/23
CIPI
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure
Assessing the financial impacts of 
extreme rainfall, extreme heat and 
freeze-thaw cycles on public 
transportation infrastructure in Ontario
TRANSPORTATION
About this document 
Established by the Financial Accountability Officer Act, 2013, the 
Financial Accountability Office (FAO) provides independent analysis 
on the state of the Province’s finances, trends in the provincial 
economy and related matters important to the Legislative Assembly 
of Ontario. 
This report was prepared by Sabrina Afroz, Nicolas Rhodes, and Jay 
Park under the direction of Edward Crummey. This report benefitted 
from contributions from Christina Rachmadita, Mavis Yang, Katrina 
Talavera, Laura Irish, Paul Lewis and David West. External reviewers 
were provided with earlier drafts of this report for their comments. 
However, the input of external reviewers implies no responsibility for 
this final report, which rests solely with the FAO. 
In keeping with the FAO’s mandate to provide the Legislative 
Assembly of Ontario with independent economic and financial 
analysis, this report makes no policy recommendations. 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario 
2 Bloor Street West, Suite 900 Toronto, Ontario M4W 3E2 
fao-on.org | info@fao-on.org | 416-644-0702 
This document is also available in an accessible format and as a 
downloadable PDF on our website. 
ISSN 2564-3924 
© King’s Printer for Ontario, 2022
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts 
to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat 
and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
1 | Introduction and context 
6 
2 | Summary 
7 
3 | The long-term costs of maintaining public transportation infrastructure 
9 
4 | The cost of key climate hazards to transportation infrastructure 
13 
5 | Adapting public transportation infrastructure to climate hazards 
21 
6 | Comparing different asset management strategies 
30 
7 | Appendix 
34 
8 | References 
50 
 
 
 
4 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Glossary of Terms 
List of Abbreviations 
Term 
Definition 
CIPI 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure (project) 
CRV 
Current Replacement Value 
IDF 
Intensity-Duration-Frequency (Curve) 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
O&M 
Operation and Maintenance 
RCP 
Representative Concentration Pathway 
SME 
Subject-Matter Expert 
USL 
Useful Service Life 
WSP 
WSP Global Inc. 
Definitions 
Current Replacement Value: The current cost of rebuilding an infrastructure asset with the equivalent capacity, 
functionality and performance. 
Operations and Maintenance (O&M): The routine activities performed on an asset that maximize service life 
and minimize service disruptions. 
Rehabilitation: Repairing part or most of an asset to extend its service life, without adding to its capacity, 
functionality or performance.  
Renewal: Replacement of an existing asset, resulting in a new or as-new asset with an equivalent capacity, 
functionality and performance as the original asset. Renewal is different from rehabilitation, as renewal rebuilds 
the entire asset. 
State of Good Repair: A performance standard which helps to maximize the benefits of public infrastructure in a 
cost-effective manner over time, and ensures that infrastructure operates in a condition that is considered 
acceptable from an engineering perspective.  
Stable Climate: A stable climate scenario assumes that climate indicators for extreme rainfall, extreme heat and 
freeze-thaw cycles remain unchanged from their 1975-2005 average levels over the projection to 2100. 
Rest of the Century: Refers to the 79 years from 2022 to 2100. 
Baseline Cost: The operations and maintenance, rehabilitation, and renewal expense that would have been 
required to maintain public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair in a stable climate.  
Acute Hazard: Severe climate hazards that occur rarely (such as the 100-year storm event). 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 5
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Chronic Hazard: Climate hazards that occur often.  
Retrofit: An adaptation made during the asset’s service life. 
Adaptation: Adaptation is modelled as an alteration of an asset’s physical components to prevent more rapid 
deterioration and increased O&M expenses caused by changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and/or freeze-
thaw cycles. Adaptation can be done through retrofit while an asset is still in service or can be done at the time of 
renewal.  
No Adaptation Strategy / Damage Costs: An asset management strategy where public infrastructure assets are 
not adapted to changing climate hazards.  
Reactive Adaptation Strategy: An asset management strategy where public infrastructure assets are only 
adapted at the time of renewal to withstand changing climate conditions.  
Proactive Adaptation Strategy: An asset management strategy where public infrastructure assets are adapted 
at the first available opportunity to withstand changing climate conditions. This occurs either during an asset’s 
next major rehabilitation through a retrofit or at renewal, whichever comes first.  
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
1 | Introduction and context 
In June 2019, a Member of Provincial Parliament asked the FAO to analyze the costs that climate change 
impacts could impose on Ontario’s provincial and municipal infrastructure, and how those costs could impact the 
long-term budget outlook of the province. In response to this request, the FAO launched its Costing Climate 
Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure project (CIPI). 
In the first two phases of the project, the FAO assessed the composition and state of repair of provincial1 and 
municipal2 infrastructure, with findings released in November 2020 and in August 2021. In fall 2021, the FAO 
released three reports: a project backgrounder3 that describes the overall context and methodology of the CIPI 
project, a report prepared by WSP Global4 that describes the detailed engineering impact of climate hazards on 
public infrastructure, and a report detailing how changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles 
will impact the long-term costs of maintaining Ontario’s public buildings and facilities in a state of good repair.5  
This report examines how changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles will impact the long-
term costs of maintaining public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair. 
1 Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2020. 
2 Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021a. 
3 Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021b. 
4 WSP, 2021.  
5 Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021c. 
Figure 1-1 
CIPI project structure and timeline 
Source: FAO. 
 6 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Previously Released
2021
Municipal
Infrastructure
A Review of Ontario's Municipal Infrastructure 
and an Assessment of the State of Repair
2021/22
Costing Climate Change Impacts
to Public Infrastructure
Project Backgrounder and Methodology
2021/22
Costing Climate Change Impacts
to Public Infrastructure
%WWIWWMRKXLIɚRERGMEPMQTEGXWSJI\XVIQIVEMRJEPPI\XVIQILIEX
ERHJVII^IXLE[G]GPIWSRTYFPMGFYMPHMRKWMR3RXEVMS
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE OF ONTARIO 
COSTING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND 
ADAPTATION FOR PROVINCIAL AND MUNICIPAL 
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IN ONTARIO 
DELIVERABLE #10 – FINAL REPORT 
TORONTO, ONTARIO 
WSP REF.: 211-00531-00 
DATE: 29 OCTOBER 2021 
CIPI Project
Backgrounder
and Methodology
Buildings
and Facilities
Provincial
Infrastructure
Municipal
Infrastructure
WSP Report
Current Report
Summary
Report
Public Storm
and
Wastewater
Infrastructure
Upcoming
2022/23
CIPI
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure
Assessing the financial impacts of 
extreme rainfall, extreme heat and 
freeze-thaw cycles on transportation 
infrastructure in Ontario
TRANSPORTATION
Public
Transportation
Infrastructure
 7
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
2 | Summary 
Ontario's provincial and municipal governments manage a large portfolio of transportation infrastructure 
These transportation assets, valued at $330 billion, include roads, bridges, large structural culverts and rail 
tracks. Ontario’s 444 municipalities own 82 per cent of this transportation infrastructure (or $269 billion), while 
the remaining 18 per cent ($61 billion) is owned by the Province (all costs are in 2020 real dollars).  
The cost to maintain the existing portfolio in a state of good repair is substantial, even in a stable climate 
If the climate was stable, it would cost $12.9 billion per year to bring these assets into a state of good repair and 
maintain them. Over the rest of the century, these costs would accumulate to approximately $1 trillion by 2100. 
Changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles are already increasing the costs of 
maintaining Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure 
In the absence of adaptation, these climate hazards are expected to increase the costs of maintaining Ontario’s 
transportation infrastructure by approximately $1.5 billion per year in this decade, above what would have 
occurred in a stable climate. By 2030, these climate-related costs would accumulate to $13.3 billion for 
provincial and municipal governments. 
In the absence of adaptation, climate hazards will continue to increase the costs of maintaining Ontario’s 
public transportation infrastructure throughout the century 
In a medium emissions scenario, where global emissions peak by mid-century, these climate hazards would 
increase infrastructure costs by an average of $2.2 billion per year, totalling $171 billion in additional costs by 
2100. This is a 17 per cent increase in costs relative to a stable climate scenario. In the high emissions 
scenario, where global emissions continue rising throughout the century, transportation infrastructure costs 
would instead increase by $4.1 billion per year on average, totalling $322 billion by 2100. This is a 32 per cent 
increase in costs relative to a stable climate scenario.  
Adapting public transportation infrastructure to withstand these climate hazards will cost less than not 
adapting over the long term 
Depending on the emissions scenario, adapting public transportation infrastructure will add between $110 
billion to $229 billion to infrastructure costs relative to a stable climate scenario by 2100. This represents a cost 
increase between 11 and 23 per cent. While significant, these additional climate-related costs are lower than 
those incurred in the absence of adaptation.  
Costing climate impacts to public infrastructure over the long term is subject to significant uncertainty 
The extent of global climate change will have a direct impact on Ontario’s public infrastructure costs. Climate-
related costs will depend on the future path of global emissions, the vulnerability of infrastructure to changing 
climate hazards, and the pace of adaptation. The FAO’s study presents median cost projections as well as a 
range of possible cost outcomes in each scenario that account for this uncertainty.  
This study focused on three climate hazards but excluded others, such as wildfires and ice storms. Costs to 
governments were estimated, but the broader economic costs to households or businesses from damaged 
transportation infrastructure were not included. These impacts were beyond the scope of this report but are 
likely material. These subjects would benefit from further research. 
 8
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure 2-1 
Adapting Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure will cost Provincial and municipal 
governments less than not adapting in a changing climate
Note: The costs in this chart are based on the median (or 50th percentile) projection under each emissions scenario and are in 
addition to the baseline costs over the same period. For presentation purposes, the uncertainty bands are not shown in this figure.  
Source: FAO. 
$171
$322
$135
$229
$110
$217
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Cumulative climate-related 
infrastructure spending by 2100 (real 
$2020, billions)
No adaptation
Reactive adaptation
Proactive adaptation
 9
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
3 | The long-term costs of maintaining 
public transportation infrastructure 
This chapter presents the scope of public transportation infrastructure considered in this report, discusses the 
costs necessary to maintain these assets in a state of good repair, and estimates the long-term infrastructure 
costs required to maintain infrastructure to 2100 under a stable climate. The purpose of this chapter is to 
establish a baseline projection of infrastructure costs. In later chapters, this baseline is compared to projections 
that account for changes in certain climate hazards. 
There is a large portfolio of public transportation 
infrastructure in Ontario 
This report focuses on transportation infrastructure owned and controlled by provincial and municipal 
governments. The FAO estimates that the current replacement value6 (CRV) of these assets is at least $330 
billion in 2022.7 The public transportation assets included in the scope of this report are roads, bridges, large 
structural culverts as well as transit engineering assets:8  
•
Roads include arterial roads, collector roads, highways, lanes and alleys, local roads, rural highways, and
sidewalks. In this report, road CRV represents the cost of road reconstruction.9
•
Bridges include those located on arterial roads, collector roads, and highways, as well as local bridges
and footbridges. Bridge CRV represents the cost of replacing a bridge with one of equal functionality.
•
Large structural culverts include those greater than three metres in diameter. Culvert CRV represents
the cost of replacing a culvert with one of equal functionality.
•
Transit engineering assets include rail (tracks). Transit CRV represents the cost of replacing existing rail
tracks.
Ontario’s municipal governments own $269 billion of the transportation infrastructure assets in scope (82 per 
cent), while the provincial government owns $61 billion (18 per cent).10 
6 CRV is the current cost of rebuilding an asset with the equivalent capacity, functionality and performance. The CRV of roads 
owned and managed by the Province and Ontario’s municipalities was revised to reflect updated cost estimates contained in 
the Ontario Ministry of Transportation’s Parametric Estimating Guide (2021). See Appendix A for details.  
7 For details on the scope of infrastructure covered in the CIPI project, see Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021b. 
8 For detailed information about the assets covered in this report, see Appendix A.  
9 From Ontario Ministry of Transportation’s Parametric Estimating Guide (2021), Page 8: “…reconstruction can include removal 
of existing full pavement structure, re-compaction of the subgrade, and complete replacement of the pavement structure. It is 
performed substantially along the existing alignment and will normally result in improvements to the geometrics of a road.” 
10 The scope of this report does not include private transportation infrastructure (such as Highway 407 or the Ambassador 
Bridge), machinery and equipment (such as buses or rail cars) or Federal transportation assets (such as ports).  
 10 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Maintaining a large portfolio of public transportation 
infrastructure requires constant spending 
Keeping assets in a state of good repair helps to maximize the benefits of public infrastructure in the most cost-
effective manner over time. To be maintained in a state of good repair, assets require annual operations and 
maintenance (O&M) spending, as well as intermittent capital spending either to rehabilitate11 an asset or renew it at 
the end of its service life.12  
The costs to maintain public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair reflect both the value of assets 
owned, as well as the condition, age and performance standards of each individual asset under management. 
For example, assets in poorer condition require more capital spending to bring them into a state of good repair. 
Likewise, older assets must be renewed sooner than newer assets.  
11 Rehabilitation means repairing part or most of an asset to extend its service life, without adding to its capacity, functionality 
or performance. Rehabilitation is different from maintenance, which is the routine activities performed on an asset that 
maximize service life and minimize service disruptions. Assets are rehabilitated to a benchmarked “state of good repair” 
target and not to a new condition. For more information on the asset management framework used in this report see: 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021b.  
12 Renewal is the replacement of an existing asset, resulting in a new or as-new asset with an equivalent capacity, functionality 
and performance as the original asset. Renewal is different from rehabilitation, as renewal rebuilds the entire asset. 
Figure 3-1 
Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure covered in this report has a current 
replacement value of $330 billion 
Note: CRV estimates are in real 2020 billion dollars. Percentage values refer to a sector’s share of total CRV. 
Source: FAO. 
Bridges, 
$35, 10%
Large Structural Culverts, 
$7, 2%
Roads, 
$221, 67%
Transit Engineering, 
$6, 2%
Bridges, 
$23, 7%
Large Structural Culverts, 
$5, 2%
Roads, 
$19, 6%
Transit Engineering, 
$13, 4%
Provincial 
Municipal 
 11 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
To project the costs of maintaining public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair, the FAO gathered 
and estimated asset-specific information on age, condition and current replacement value, as well as the general 
performance standards used to evaluate if an asset is in a state of good repair. Using an infrastructure 
deterioration model based on modelling techniques developed by the Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure,13 the 
FAO projected the capital and operating expenses necessary to maintain the current portfolio14 of public 
transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair to 2100, in the absence of climate considerations.15  
These long-term O&M, rehabilitation, and renewal spending estimates form the baseline projection against which 
the climate change costing scenarios will be compared. The baseline projection represents the infrastructure costs 
that would have been required to maintain public transportation infrastructure in a stable climate.16 This allows the 
FAO to identify the additional climate-related infrastructure costs that are associated with changing climate 
hazards in later chapters. 
Given the long useful service life of public transportation infrastructure, costs are projected to 2100. The results 
in this report are presented as average annual costs, as well as cumulative total costs over the century. Average 
annual costs are also presented over three time periods. 
•
The short term (2022-2030) shows how changing climate hazards are already impacting public
infrastructure costs in the current decade.
•
The mid-century (2031-2070) captures the period in which projections for the relevant climate variables
begin to diverge in the three global emissions scenarios examined in this report (see Figure 4-3).
•
The late century (2071-2100) captures the period where projections for the relevant climate variables
diverge significantly in the three global emissions scenarios examined in this report.
$12.9 billion per year needed to maintain the current portfolio 
of public transportation infrastructure in a stable climate 
The FAO projects that bringing Ontario’s existing suite of public transportation infrastructure assets into a state 
of good repair and maintaining them until 2100 would have cost an average of $12.9 billion per year in a stable 
climate, which would accumulate to approximately $1 trillion by the end of the century. This cumulative baseline 
cost includes $362 billion ($4.6 billion per year) in O&M expense and $653 billion ($8.3 billion per year) in 
rehabilitation and renewal expense to 2100.  
13 For details, see: Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2020 and Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021a. 
14 This report only examines the existing suite of public transportation infrastructure; it excludes assets that are currently 
under construction, planned for future construction or necessary to meet future infrastructure demand. 
15 The cost estimates presented throughout this report do not incorporate new technologies or practices that may be used or 
required of asset managers in the future.  
16 In this report, a “stable climate” means that all climate indicators for extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles 
remain unchanged from their 1975-2005 average levels over the projection to 2100. 
 12 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
In the short term, provincial and municipal 
governments would need to spend 
approximately $11 billion per year to bring this 
portfolio of public transportation infrastructure 
into a state of good repair and maintain it. 
These average annual costs rise to $13.4 billion 
in the mid-century period, when a significant 
share of Ontario’s public transportation 
infrastructure begins to be replaced. By late 
century, it would take $12.6 billion per year to 
maintain this portfolio of public transportation 
infrastructure in a stable climate. 
All infrastructure cost projections presented in 
this report assume that the funding necessary 
to bring and maintain the current portfolio of 
transportation infrastructure into a state of good 
repair is made available and spent in a timely 
manner. In practice, infrastructure repair 
backlogs exist and maintaining assets in a state 
of good repair is only one aspect of asset management. The baseline cost projection does not include any 
spending associated with assets either currently under construction, planned for future construction or 
necessary to meet future infrastructure demand.17   
17 In addition, the projection does not incorporate any functionality improvements to existing public infrastructure in the future. 
Figure 3-2 
The costs of maintaining Ontario's public transportation infrastructure in a state of good 
repair to 2100 in a stable climate (real 2020 dollars) 
Source: FAO.  
Current Replacement Value
$330 billion 
Total value of Ontario's 
current portfolio of public 
transportation infrastructure in 
2022
Total cost of bringing and 
maintaining this portfolio in a state 
of good repair in a stable climate,
2022-2100
Total Expense
$1 trillion 
($12.9 billion per year)
Operations and Maintenance 
Expense
$362 billion
($4.6 billion per year)
Rehabilitation and Renewal
Expense
$653 billion
($8.3 billion per year)
Figure 3-3 
Maintaining Ontario’s public transportation 
infrastructure in a stable climate would have 
cost $12.9 billion per year 
Source: FAO. 
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$0
$5
$10
$15
Short Term 
(2022-2030)
Mid-century 
(2031-2070)
Late century 
(2071-2100)
2022-2100 
Average
Average annual infrastructure 
spending (real $2020, billions)
Total cost by spending
type, 2022-2100
 
 
 
13 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
 
4 | The cost of key climate hazards to 
transportation infrastructure 
Climate change is associated with many hazards to public infrastructure, which can take the form of extreme 
weather events or long-term chronic impacts. Ontario has been subject to costly floods and ice storms and is 
also prone to droughts, intense rainfall, wildfires, windstorms, heatwaves, and permafrost melt.18 This project 
focuses on only three climate hazards – extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles – as they were 
determined to have broad and financially material impacts to public infrastructure and can be projected with a 
reasonable degree of scientific confidence.19  
 
This chapter summarizes how projected changes in these climate hazards would impact Ontario’s public 
transportation infrastructure in the absence of adaptation measures. It then presents the FAO’s estimates of the 
additional long-term costs these climate hazards would impose on Ontario’s portfolio of public transportation 
infrastructure in medium and high emissions scenarios.   
 
Changing extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw 
cycles will impact transportation infrastructure 
To ensure safety and reliability, infrastructure is designed, built and maintained to withstand a specific range of 
climate conditions typically based on historic climatic loads.20 However, extreme rainfall and extreme heat are 
projected to increase in the future, while freeze-thaw cycles are projected to decrease.21 
 
Changing climate hazards will impact transportation infrastructure assets in different ways. Of all the possible 
hazard–asset type interactions, this report examines six impacts: extreme rainfall and extreme heat on roads, 
extreme rainfall and freeze-thaw cycles on bridges, extreme rainfall on large structural culverts, and extreme 
heat on transit engineering (Figure 4-1). The following section provides an overview of how these climate 
hazards will impact the different asset types.22 
 
 
18 See Warren, F. and Lulham, N., editors, 2021, Section 6.4 for examples. 
19 Numerous potentially significant climate hazards such as wildfires and fluvial flooding were not included. See Financial 
Accountability Office, 2021b and WSP, 2021 for more information. Scientific confidence in climate projections differ by 
variable. In general, temperature projections have high scientific confidence due to a large body of evidence on the causes of 
observed changes and a strong understanding of the climate processes involved. Precipitation projections have medium 
scientific confidence due to inadequate observations for some historical variables and uncertainty associated with a weaker 
observed effect of global warming on precipitation. Other climate variables such as wind pressures and snow load have low 
scientific confidence due to a limited understanding of the climate processes involved. For more information, see Cannon, 
A.J., Jeong, D.I., Zhang, X., and Zwiers, F.W., 2020. 
20 See Canadian Standards Association, 2014, Annex A3.1, for a Table of historical climatic and environmental data used in 
the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code.  
21 While freeze-thaw cycles are projected to decrease in most regions of Ontario in most emissions scenarios, freeze-thaw 
cycles in some northern regions are projected to increase in some scenarios. 
22 This material is drawn from WSP, 2021. 
 14 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Roads 
Extreme rainfall will impact road infrastructure most significantly in acute events (i.e., 100-year storm events23) 
as roads are typically considered resilient to less-intense rainfall events. Washouts and flooding during severe 
rainfall events can overwhelm drainage features and damage pavement. Extreme rainfall can also cause water to 
penetrate the base and sub-base materials, leading to increased deterioration and cracking.  
Extreme heat in the form of ambient temperatures over 30°C creates conditions where heat dissipates less 
efficiently, softening the asphalt pavement. This increases the road’s vulnerability to rutting and cracking, which 
can lead to increased water infiltration, weakening the base/sub-base and causing surface issues such as potholes. 
Freeze-thaw cycles (FTCs) are fluctuations between freezing and non-freezing temperatures that cause water 
to freeze (and expand) or melt (and contract). In contrast to vertical infrastructure (e.g., buildings) where less 
water accumulates due to gravity runoff, horizontal infrastructure like roads have the potential to accumulate 
water that penetrates sub-layers. The melting and re-freezing of accumulated water can then damage road 
surfaces. While the FAO conducted a preliminary analysis of this impact, there was low confidence in the costing 
results due to the lack of research on the combined impacts of moisture and frost conditions on roads. As such, 
the costing results for freeze-thaw cycles on roads were excluded from this report. 
23 See Appendix B for a detailed description of the climate hazards and their projections. 
Figure 4-1 
Scope of interactions between selected climate hazards and public transportation asset types 
Source: WSP and FAO. 
Extreme
rainfall
Extreme
heat
Roads
Bridges
Large Structural Culverts
Transit Engineering
Freeze-thaw
cycles
Not estimated
Included in report
LEGEND:
Estimated but excluded from report
 
 
 
15 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Bridges 
Extreme rainfall will impact bridges as acute events (i.e., 100-year storm events) through runoff and flooding. 
These events will erode embankments and approaches, as well as scour and erode both bridge substructures 
and shallow bridge foundations. Deep bridge foundations will be negligibly impacted.   
 
Freeze-thaw cycles contribute to the weathering of bridge decks and barriers, causing concrete cracking. 
However, the projected decline in the number of annual freeze-thaw cycles will increase the service life of 
vertical concrete. FTCs are not expected to significantly impact other bridge components, including the 
superstructure, substructure, and the layer below the asphalt pavement.24  
 
Large Structural Culverts 
Extreme rainfall will impact large structural culverts as acute events (i.e., 100-year storm events) through 
increased erosion. Channel protection will also be vulnerable to washout and scour damages. 
 
Transit Engineering 
Extreme heat in the form of chronically high ambient temperatures over 30°C can cause stress on steel rail 
tracks and other alignment components such as rail brace, tie plates and insulated joints. Higher temperatures 
also increase friction between train wheels and tracks, potentially resulting in track buckling. Just a few hours of 
above-average heat are enough to cause problems, with buckling probability increasing rapidly once 
temperatures exceed around 35°C.25  
 
 
24 Bridge superstructure and substructure are mostly protected by the bridge deck and are not directly exposed to FTCs, 
while the layer below the asphalt pavement on bridges are typically constructed from impervious material which will not be 
impacted by FTCs. 
25 See Section 3.3.4 and Figure 1 in Chinowsky, P., Helman, J., Gulati, S., Neumann, J., & Martinich, J., 2019, for the 
relationship between buckling probability and temperature. 
 16 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure 4-2 
Examples of climate hazard impacts to key components of public transportation infrastructure 
Note: For more examples of how these climate hazards impact transportation infrastructure, see WSP 2021. 
Source: WSP. 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
LEGEND
Extreme Rainfall
Extreme Heat
Freeze-thaw Cycles
Includes
Pavement surface, 
pavement base and 
sub-base, embankments, 
retention systems, 
drainage systems, 
road finishing.   
Includes
Channel protection, 
culverts, wingwalls and 
headwalls.    
Roads
Extreme rainfall will increase erosion and 
washouts, while extreme heat will increase 
the risk of cracks forming through thermal 
weathering. 
Relevant climate hazards
Includes
Foundations, 
substructure, 
superstructure, decks, 
barriers and ancillary 
structures.    
Bridges
Extreme rainfall will more rapidly erode 
bridge foundations, embankments, and 
approaches, increasing deterioration and 
maintenance costs. Annual FTCs, which 
normally contribute to concrete cracking, 
are declining, benefitting these assets. 
Relevant climate hazards
Includes
Steel rails, tracks, rail 
braces, tie plates, 
insulated joints, 
crossings.  
Transit Engineering
Higher temperature increases friction 
between train wheels and tracks, potentially 
resulting in the buckling of tracks. Extreme 
temperatures also reduce the viscosity of 
asphalt, increasing friction and erosion. 
Relevant climate hazards
Large Structural Culverts
Extreme rainfall will cause erosion, wash outs 
and scour damages to channel protection and 
culverts.   
Relevant climate hazards
 17 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Most climate hazards to public transportation infrastructure 
will increase 
The impacts of changing climate hazards on Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure will depend on the 
path of global greenhouse gas emissions and the extent of global mean temperature increases. The FAO costed 
climate impacts to public transportation infrastructure for three global emissions scenarios:  
•
A low emissions scenario that assumes a major and
immediate turnaround in global climate policies. Emissions
are projected to peak in the early 2020s and decline to zero
by the 2080s. By the end of the century, net emissions are
negative. In this scenario, global mean temperatures are
projected to increase by 1.6°C (0.8 to 2.4°C) by 2100
compared to the pre-industrial average (1850-1900).26 The
key results for this scenario are presented in Appendix F.
•
A medium emissions scenario, where global emissions
peak in the 2040s, then decline rapidly over the following
four decades before stabilizing at the end of the century.
In this scenario, the global mean temperature is projected
to increase by 2.3°C (1.7 to 3.2°C) by 2100 relative to
1850-1900.
•
A high emissions scenario that assumes global emissions
continue to grow for most of the century.27 Global mean
temperatures are projected to increase by 4.2°C (3.2 to 5.4°C)
relative to 1850-1900. Cumulative emissions from 2005 to
2020 most closely match the high emissions scenario.28
Figure 4-3 presents a brief description of the projected changes in the climate indicators used to represent these 
hazards. Appendix B contains a full description of all relevant climate variables to public transportation 
infrastructure, and their trends in all scenarios.  
26 See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013, Table “All.7.5”, for projections of global mean surface temperature 
change. Ranges for the global mean surface temperature represent the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile projections of 
models used. 
27 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s fifth comprehensive assessment (AR5), released in 2013, produced four 
scenarios called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The low emissions scenario corresponds to RCP2.6, the 
medium emissions scenario corresponds to RCP4.5 and the high emissions scenario corresponds to RCP8.5. See the IPCC’s 
Fifth Assessment Synthesis Report. The IPCC’s sixth assessment (AR6), released in 2021, contains five updated scenarios 
called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs), which line up with the RCPs from AR5 in terms of average warming. This 
means that the RCP scenarios from AR5 are still relevant. 
28 See Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, 2021 for a comparison of the high emissions scenario to historical emissions. 
Uncertainty in climate change 
projections 
The FAO partnered with the Canadian 
Centre for Climate Services at 
Environment and Climate Change 
Canada to acquire projections of key 
climate indicators for Ontario. To 
account for uncertainty in climate 
projections and in line with common 
practice in climate science, the median 
(50th percentile) projections of climate 
variables are presented, followed by 
ranges in parentheses. For Ontario 
climate indicators, the ranges indicate 
the 10th and 90th percentile projections 
from the ensemble of 24 climate 
models used by the Canadian Centre 
for Climate Services.  
18 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure 4-3 
Changing climate hazards in Ontario 
Annual number of hot days to increase 
•
Projected changes in Ontario’s annual number of hot days (number
of days with daily maximum temperature above 30°C) differ
significantly in the low and high emissions scenarios. Over the 1976-
2005 period, there were on average 4 hot days every year.
Compared to this baseline, Ontario’s annual number of hot days is
projected to increase by 5 days (2 to 10 days) in the low emissions
scenario and by 34 days (17 to 46 days) in the high emissions
scenario by the 2071-2100 period.
•
There is high confidence in the projected trends and ranges of
temperature variables based on strong scientific evidence in the
causes of observed changes.29
Extreme rainfall to increase 
•
Compared to the 1976-2005 baseline, the intensity of a 24-hour 1-in-
100-year rainfall event in Ontario is projected to increase by 15 per cent
(10 to 23 per cent) in the low emissions scenario and by 53 per cent (38
to 78 per cent) in the high emissions scenario by the 2071-2100 period.
•
Over the 1976-2005 period, the average 1-in-100-year 24-hour
rainfall in Ontario was 103 mm. By the 2071-2100 period, there is
projected to be on average 118 mm (113 to 127 mm) of rain in
the low emissions scenario and 158 mm (142 to 185 mm) of rain
in the high emissions scenario.
•
Confidence in the projected trends and ranges of aggregate
precipitation variables is somewhat lower (medium) than for
temperature variables as there is less confidence in how well
climate models represent the climate processes involved.
Annual freeze-thaw cycles to decline 
•
Annual FTCs are the number of days in a year when the
temperature crosses 0°C. Over the coming decades, the winter
season will shorten due to rising temperatures. Ontario’s annual
FTCs are projected to decline by 5 per cent (0 to 15 per cent) in
the low emissions scenario and by 15 per cent (0 to 25 per cent) in
the high emissions scenario by the 2071-2100 period.
•
Over the 1976-2005 period, there were on average 77 freeze-thaw
cycles every year. Compared to this baseline, Ontario’s annual
number of FTCs is projected to decrease by 4 cycles (-12 to 0
cycles) in the low emissions scenario and by 12 cycles (-19 to 0
cycles) in the high emissions scenario by the 2071-2100 period.
•
There is high confidence in the projections of annual FTCs based
on the amount of evidence for projected trends and ranges of
temperature variables.
Source: Canadian Centre for Climate Services.
29 See Footnote 19. 
0
20
40
60
80
1950
2000
2050
2100
Ontario annual number of hot days
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
100
150
200
2011
-2040
2031
-2060
2051
-2080
2071
-2100
Ontario IDF 24-hour 1:100 (mm)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
1950
2000
2050
2100
Ontario annual number of freeze-thaw cycles
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
19 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Climate hazards are raising the cost of maintaining the 
current portfolio of public transportation infrastructure 
In this section, the FAO presents the cost projections in a no adaptation asset management strategy. In this 
strategy, asset managers do not adapt public transportation infrastructure to withstand changing climate hazards, 
but instead pay higher costs to maintain their assets in a state of good repair in the face of increasing climate 
hazards. While in practice there are many climate change adaptation initiatives under way, the intent of the no 
adaptation strategy is to explore the financial implications of not adapting public transportation infrastructure to 
these climate hazards. 
In the absence of adaptation actions, increasing extreme weather events will shorten the useful service life (USL) 
of public transportation infrastructure, requiring more frequent and additional rehabilitations relative to the 
“stable climate” scenario. Changing climate hazards will also result in higher spending on operations and 
maintenance (O&M). Taken together, these factors will increase the costs of maintaining the current portfolio of 
public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair. These additional infrastructure costs, above what 
would have occurred in a stable climate, are defined as “damage costs.” 
In the medium emissions scenario (median projection), the average annual cost of maintaining the existing 
portfolio of public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair will increase by $2.2 billion per year over 
the century. This represents a 17 per cent increase in costs over what would have occurred in a stable climate. 
These average annual costs fluctuate from $1.4 billion per year this decade, to $2.4 billion in the mid-century 
period as climate hazards continue to moderately deteriorate. By late century, these costs amount to $2.1 billion 
per year as climate hazards stabilize in this period in the medium emissions scenario (see Figure 4-3).  
Figure 4-4 
Changing climate hazards will raise the cost of maintaining the current portfolio of public 
transportation infrastructure in the absence of adaptation  
Note: Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purposes. 
Source: FAO.
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$1.4
$2.4
$2.1
$2.2
$1.6
$3.1
$6.1
$4.1
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
Average annual infrastructure spending 
(real $2020, billions)
 Stable climate
No adaptation strategy, additional climate-related costs
High emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Medium emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 20 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would instead increase 
by $4.1 billion per year over the century, a 32 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable climate scenario. In 
this case, climate-related costs increase from $1.6 billion this decade, to an average of $3.1 billion in the mid-
century period, and continue rising to $6.1 billion by late century. This occurs due to the continued deterioration 
of climate hazards in the high emissions scenario. 
There is uncertainty in the extent of warming 
that will occur in each emissions scenario (see 
Page 17), as well as engineering uncertainty in 
how changing climate hazards will impact 
Ontario’s infrastructure (see Appendix C). The 
full range of average annual climate-related 
costs is presented in Figure 4-5.  
These average annual costs would cumulate 
over the projection. In the short term, changing 
climate hazards are already adding to the cost 
of maintaining public transportation 
infrastructure. Annual climate-related costs 
across the medium and high emissions 
scenarios average $1.5 billion from 2022-
2030, which would accumulate to 
approximately $13.3 billion by 2030 in the 
absence of adaptation.30 This is a 13 per cent increase in provincial and municipal infrastructure costs relative to 
the stable climate projection.  
In the medium emissions scenario (median 
projection), the cumulative cost of maintaining 
the existing portfolio of public transportation 
infrastructure in a state of good repair will 
increase by $171 billion over the century. This 
represents a 17 per cent increase in costs over 
what would have occurred in a stable climate. 
These cumulative costs could range from $89 
billion to $298 billion given the climate and 
engineering uncertainties. 
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), 
the cumulative cost would instead increase by 
$322 billion (a 32 per cent increase), with a 
range of $180 billion to $522 billion. 
30 The $13.3 billion in cumulative climate-related costs by 2030 is the average of the medium and high emissions scenarios’ 
median projections. This cost could range from $7 billion to $20 billion given the climate and engineering uncertainties. 
Figure 4-6 
In the absence of adaptation, climate-related costs 
accumulate to significant sums by 2100 
Source: FAO. 
Figure 4-5 
Uncertainty ranges around annual climate-related 
costs widen over time  
Source: FAO.
$1.4
$2.4
$2.1
$1.6
$3.1
$6.1
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
$12
2022-2030
2031-2070
2071-2100
Average annual climate-related 
costs (real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
$1,015
$1,015
$171
$322
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
$1,400
$1,600
Medium emissions
scenario
High emissions
scenario
Cumulative spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
No adaptation - additional climate related costs
Stable climate projection
$89 
$298 
$522 
$180 
 21 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
5 | Adapting public transportation 
infrastructure to climate hazards 
Chapter 4 described the financial impact of not adapting public transportation infrastructure to the projected 
changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles. In practice, transportation infrastructure can 
be adapted to withstand these impacts – ensuring that assets perform to the same standards for which they were 
initially designed and avoiding accelerated deterioration or higher O&M expenses.  
This chapter discusses different forms of adaptation, defines the scope of adaptation analyzed in this report, and 
estimates a range of costs to adapt Ontario’s portfolio of public transportation infrastructure to withstand the late-
century climate projections for extreme rainfall and extreme heat in the medium and high emissions scenarios.31  
Adapting public transportation infrastructure can help 
prevent the impacts of climate hazards  
Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure 
assets have long useful lives. Of the $330 
billion in infrastructure, nearly 72 per cent 
has a remaining useful life of more than 40 
years. Given the long useful lives of public 
transportation infrastructure assets, late-
century climate conditions are relevant to 
adaptation decisions being made now. 
These decisions will impact public 
infrastructure costs throughout the century. 
However, climate projections depend on 
the trajectory of global emissions, which 
remains uncertain. This raises the difficult 
question of how projected changes in key 
climate hazards should be accounted for 
when public transportation infrastructure is 
designed, built or retrofitted.32 
31 As FTCs are mostly declining, the FAO assumes that adaptation actions are not undertaken to address this climate hazard. 
32 See Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens for a general guidance on different factors to consider when making adaptation 
decisions.  
Figure 5-1 
Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure assets 
have long remaining useful lives 
Source: FAO.  
1
3
24
57
5
10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Beyond
useful life
0-20
years
21-40
years
41-60
years
61-80
years
81-100
years
Share of transportation assets 
by CRV (per cent)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 22 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Adapting transportation infrastructure to changing climate hazards could take many forms. A few examples 
include:  
•
updating infrastructure design parameters to a higher standard, including those detailed in the Canadian
Highway Bridge Design Code;33
•
using Intensity-Duration-Frequency tools that project future rainfall intensities for the design and
replacement of transportation infrastructure;34
•
using pavement mixes for roads with higher heat tolerance;35
•
expanding the drainage capacity of culverts;36
•
using thermosyphons to maintain permafrost stability and improve northern road and highway
performance;37 and
•
changing the way assets are managed, for example, altering the frequency of operations and
maintenance schedules.38
In the FAO’s framework, adaptation is modelled as an alteration of the physical components of transportation 
infrastructure to prevent damage costs caused by changing climate hazards.39 Figure 5-2 presents some 
examples of adaptation measures for transportation infrastructure components.40
33 While the climate data underlying current versions of highway bridge design code is based on historical observations (see 
Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code Annex A3.1), numerous efforts are underway to integrate climate change 
considerations into the management of transportation infrastructure. For example, at the federal level, the Climate-Resilient 
Buildings and Core Public Infrastructure Initiative has supported the development of forward-looking climate data for the 
purposes of updating the Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code.  
34 For example, the Ontario Ministry of Transportation issued a policy in 2016 on the use of future rainfall predictions for the 
design of highway infrastructure. For more information, see Ontario Ministry of Transportation, 2017.  
35 See Warren, F. and Lemmen, D.S., editors, 2014, Chapter 1, Page 9 for more examples of adaptation options in the 
transportation sector. 
36 Ibid. 
37 Thermosyphons are devices that transfer air to cool permafrost and reduce permafrost thaw. See Transport Canada, 2021, 
for a description of the project by the Government of Yukon. 
38 For example, see Asset Management BC’s Climate Change and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer. 
39 Adaptation costs for large structural culverts also reflect the cost to increase culvert capacity to handle increased flow from 
more extreme rainfall.  
40 For a full description of adaptation examples, see WSP, 2021. 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 23 
Assessing the nancial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure 5-2 
Examples of transportation infrastructure adaptations to climate hazards 
Note: For more examples of how transportation infrastructure components can be adapted to climate hazards, see WSP 2021. 
Source: WSP. 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Transit Engineering
Roads
Using a higher temperature grade 
asphalt binder can help reduce the 
risk of permanent deformation from 
extreme heat.
Mitigative measures against warping/ curling 
and 
blow-up due to slab expansion include shortening joint spacing 
and installing high-quality expansion joints. 
Specialized asphalt mixes and higher quality materials can mitigate 
drainage or erosion issues caused by extreme rainfall.  
Bridges
Deeper foundations will be less 
vulnerable to extreme rainfall and its 
anticipated effects of scour and erosion. 
Added rip rap for foundations in watercourses 
will increase erosion protection and runoff control.
Large Structural Culverts
Larger pipes and structures and 
associated excavations are needed 
for increased capacity in anticipation 
of the peak flow volume of projected 
extreme rainfalls. 
Rocks of larger diameters are required for channel protection.
Adequate tie plates and anchors 
are required to accommodate the 
dilatation of rail and increase stability. 
Increase the use of designed materials that 
are tolerant to higher operating temperatures in 
moving components and tracks.
 24 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Adaptation strategy costs vary based on the approach taken 
To estimate adaptation costs, the FAO assumed that public transportation infrastructure is adapted at the time of 
rehabilitation or renewal to withstand the late-century projections41 of each climate hazard.42 Once an asset is 
adapted, the FAO assumes that it no longer faces additional O&M and capital expenses due to changing climate 
hazards.43 However, since adaptation increases the value of an asset, its post-adaptation O&M and capital 
expenses also increase, reflecting its higher value. 
The additional infrastructure costs of an adaptation strategy include: higher capital expenses from increased 
deterioration and higher O&M expenses until adaptation, a one-time adaptation expense (either through a retrofit or 
renewal), and higher O&M and capital expenses required to maintain higher-valued adapted assets. The costs 
presented in this chapter would occur instead of those estimated in the no adaptation strategy presented in Chapter 4. 
The costs of an adaptation strategy would vary based on when the adaptation actions are undertaken. To 
highlight how the costs could vary, the FAO developed two adaptation strategies.  
•
Reactive adaptation strategy: Transportation assets are only adapted at the time of renewal. This
approach results in a gradual increase in the share of adapted assets over the century, with roughly 90
per cent of assets adapted by 2100. The remaining 10 per cent have service lives that extend beyond
2100 and are not renewed or adapted over the projection.
•
Proactive adaptation strategy: Transportation assets are adapted at the first available opportunity. This
occurs either during an asset’s next major rehabilitation through a retrofit44 or at renewal, whichever
comes first. In this approach, all transportation assets are adapted by the 2050s.
41 The 2080s are selected to approximate the changes in climate in the latter half of the 21st century. The decadal adaptation 
costs are presented in Appendix C. However, in practice, assets can be adapted to the projected climate over the service life of 
individual assets. In the FAO’s modelling framework, the cumulative portfolio-wide adaption costs do not materially change when 
assets are adapted to withstand climate projections over their remaining service life.  
42 Assets are only adapted to climate hazards that are projected to drive damage costs in the absence of adaptation. For 
example, a reduction in freeze-thaw cycles will extend the useful service life and reduce the O&M expense of certain assets. 
However, it is assumed to be unlikely that design standards will ease in response. For details, see Page viii WSP, 2021.  
43 Although no additional damage costs are incurred after an asset is adapted, its CRV increases to reflect the addition of climate 
hazard–resilient components, increasing the expenses associated with maintaining adapted assets in a state of good repair. 
44 A retrofit is an adaptation made during the asset’s service life.   
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 25 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Projecting public transportation infrastructure costs in the reactive adaptation strategy 
In the medium emissions scenario (median projection), the average annual cost of maintaining the existing 
portfolio of public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair will increase by $1.7 billion per year over 
the century. This represents a 13 per cent increase in costs over what would have occurred in a stable climate. 
These average annual costs fluctuate from $1.6 billion per year this decade, to $2.4 billion in the mid-century 
period as the share of adapted assets rises from nine per cent in 2030 to 66 per cent in 2070. By late century, 
these costs decline to $0.8 billion per year as adapted public transportation assets avoid damage costs 
associated with late century climate conditions (see Figure 5-3).  
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would instead increase 
by $2.9 billion per year over the century, a 23 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable climate scenario. In 
this case, climate-related costs increase from $2.1 billion this decade, to an average of $3.4 billion in the mid-
century period, then declining to $2.5 billion in the late century period. Costs in this scenario reflect higher 
damage costs from more extreme climate hazards, as well as higher adaptation costs to enable public 
transportation infrastructure to withstand these hazards. 
Figure 5-3 
The reactive adaptation strategy leaves most public transportation assets vulnerable to 
changing climate hazards throughout the mid-century. 
Source: FAO.  
53
100
100
9
66
90
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2022
2028
2034
2040
2046
2052
2058
2064
2070
2076
2082
2088
2094
2100
Proportion of adapted public transportation 
infrastructure by CRV (per cent)
Proactive adaptation
Reactive adaptation
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 26 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Given the uncertain extent of warming that will occur 
in each emissions scenario, as well as the engineering 
uncertainty in costing the array of adaptation options, 
the full range of climate-related costs is presented in 
Figure 5-5. 
These projected annual costs will accumulate over the 
remainder of this century. In the first decade of the 
reactive adaptation strategy, approximately nine per 
cent of public transportation assets are adapted, while 
the remaining assets continue to incur damage costs.  
The FAO projects that these climate-related costs 
would accumulate to approximately $14 billion by 
2030 in the medium emissions scenario (a 15 per cent 
increase in provincial and municipal infrastructure 
costs relative to the stable climate projection), or 
approximately $19 billion by 2030 in the high 
emissions scenario (a 19 per cent increase).45  
45 These costs could range from $8 billion to $23 billion in the medium emissions scenario and from $10 billion to $29 billion 
in the high emissions scenario given the climate and engineering uncertainties. 
Figure 5-4 
Adaptation will raise transportation infrastructure costs, but more so in the high emissions 
scenario  
Note: Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purpose. 
Source: FAO  
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$1.6
$2.4
$0.8
$1.7
$2.1
$3.4
$2.5
$2.9
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
Average annual infrastructure spending 
(real $2020, billions)
 Stable climate
Reactive adaptation strategy, additional climate-related costs
High emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Medium emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Figure 5-5 
Climate-related costs are subject to 
climate and engineering uncertainty 
Source: FAO.
$1.6
$2.4
$0.8
$2.1
$3.4
$2.5
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
$12
2022-2030
2031-2070
2071-2100
Average annual climate-related costs
(real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 27 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
In the medium emissions scenario 
(median projection), the cumulative 
cost of maintaining the existing 
portfolio of public transportation 
infrastructure in a state of good repair 
will increase by $135 billion over the 
century. This represents a 13 per cent 
increase in costs over what would 
have occurred in a stable climate. 
These cumulative costs could range 
from $67 billion to $235 billion given 
the climate and engineering 
uncertainties. 
In the high emissions scenario 
(median projection), the cumulative 
cost would instead increase by $229 
billion (a 23 per cent increase), with a 
range of $129 billion to $374 billion. 
Projecting public transportation infrastructure costs in the proactive adaptation 
strategy  
In the proactive adaptation strategy, transportation assets are adapted at the first available opportunity. It is 
assumed that over 50 per cent of infrastructure assets are adapted by 2030 and 100 per cent are adapted by 
2070 (see Figure 5-3). 
In the medium emissions scenario (median projection), the average annual cost of maintaining the existing 
portfolio of public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair will increase by $1.4 billion per year over 
the century. This represents an 11 per cent increase in costs over what would have occurred in a stable climate. 
These average annual costs decline from $2.9 billion per year this decade (when over half of public 
transportation assets are assumed to be adapted), to $1.4 billion in the mid-century period, and to $1.0 billion per 
year by late century, as adapted public transportation assets avoid damage costs associated with late century 
climate conditions (see Figure 5-7).  
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would instead increase 
by $2.7 billion per year over the century, a 21 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable climate scenario. In 
this case, climate-related costs decline from $5.2 billion per year this decade, to an average of $2.8 billion in the 
mid-century period, then declining to $2.0 billion in the late century period. Costs in this scenario reflect higher 
damage costs from more extreme climate hazards, as well as higher adaptation costs to enable public 
transportation infrastructure to withstand these hazards. 
Figure 5-6 
Cumulative climate-related costs in the reactive 
adaptation strategy to 2100 
Source: FAO.
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
$1,015
$1,015
$135
$229
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
$1,400
$1,600
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Cumulative spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
Reactive adaptation - additional climate related costs
Stable climate projection
$67 
$235 
$129 
$374 
 28 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
However, given the uncertain extent of warming that 
will occur in each emissions scenario, as well as the 
engineering uncertainty in costing the array of 
adaptation options, the full range of annual climate-
related costs is presented in Figure 5-8.  
In the first decade of the proactive adaptation strategy, 
approximately 53 per cent of public transportation 
assets are assumed to be adapted, while the 
remaining assets continue to incur damage costs.  
The FAO projects that these climate-related costs 
would accumulate to approximately $26 billion by 
2030 in the medium emissions scenario (a 26 per cent 
increase in provincial and municipal infrastructure 
costs relative to the stable climate projection), or 
approximately $47 billion by 2030 in the high 
emissions scenario (a 47 per cent increase).46  
46 These costs could range from $11 billion to $46 billion in the medium emissions scenario and from $24 billion to $81 billion 
in the high emissions scenario given the climate and engineering uncertainties. 
Figure 5-7 
Adaptation will raise transportation infrastructure costs, but more so in the high emissions 
scenario   
Note: Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purpose. 
Source: FAO  
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$11.0
$13.4
$12.6
$12.9
$2.9
$1.4
$1.0
$1.4
$5.2
$2.8
$2.0
$2.7
$0
$5
$10
$15
$20
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
Average annual infrastructure spending 
(real $2020, billions)
 Stable climate
Proactive adaptation strategy, additional climate-related costs
High emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Medium emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
Figure 5-8 
Climate-related costs are subject to 
climate and engineering uncertainty 
Source: FAO.
$2.9
$1.4
$1.0
$5.2
$2.8
$2.0
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
$12
2022-2030
2031-2070
2071-2100
Average annual climate-related costs
(real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 29 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
In the medium emissions scenario 
(median projection), the cumulative cost 
of maintaining the existing portfolio of 
public transportation infrastructure in a 
state of good repair will increase by 
$110 billion over the century. This 
represents an 11 per cent increase in 
costs over what would have occurred in 
a stable climate. These cumulative costs 
could range from $46 billion to $210 
billion given the climate and engineering 
uncertainties. 
In the high emissions scenario (median 
projection), the cumulative cost would 
instead increase by $217 billion (a 21 
per cent increase), with a range of $111 
billion to $386 billion. 
Figure 5-9 
Cumulative climate-related costs in the proactive 
adaptation strategy to 2100 
Source: FAO.
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
$1,015
$1,015
$110
$217
$0
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1,000
$1,200
$1,400
$1,600
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Cumulative spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
Proactive adaptation - additional climate related costs
Stable climate projection
$46 
$210 
$111 
$386 
 30 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
6 | Comparing different asset 
management strategies 
Chapters 4 and 5 examined the costs of maintaining public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair 
in the presence of climate change under three asset management strategies: no adaptation, reactive adaptation 
and proactive adaptation. None of the strategies presented in this report are meant to be a precise 
representation of future costs, and the portfolio level costing results are not intended to inform asset-specific 
management decisions. These strategies were designed to estimate the scale of the budgetary impact that 
changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles will impose on the Province and municipalities 
over the rest of the century.  
This chapter compares cost estimates across the three asset management strategies and discusses the 
difference in cost profiles between them. The chapter then discusses the factors that were beyond the scope of 
the FAO’s analysis but are relevant in determining the most cost-effective strategy for managing Ontario's public 
transportation infrastructure in a changing climate.  
Adapting public transportation infrastructure is less 
expensive than not adapting over the long term 
The financial impact of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles will be material to the Province and 
municipalities regardless of which asset management strategy is pursued. However, the FAO estimates that on 
an undiscounted basis, the cumulative costs by the end of the 21st century are the highest under the no 
adaptation strategy and lowest under the proactive adaptation strategy under both emissions scenarios. For a 
discussion of these cost profiles on a discounted basis, see Appendix D. 
Figure 6-1 shows that the future path of global climate change will influence the extent of additional climate-
related infrastructure costs, which are much lower in the medium emissions scenario than in the high emissions 
scenario (median projections) across all asset management strategies. 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 31 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Proactively adapting public transportation infrastructure 
requires higher upfront costs but rapidly reduces climate 
vulnerability 
Figure 6-2 shows how costs accumulate in the medium and high emissions scenarios (median projections) under 
the three asset management strategies.  
Figure 6-1 
Adapting Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure will cost Provincial and municipal 
governments less than not adapting in a changing climate 
Note: The costs in this chart are based on the median (or 50th percentile) projection under each emissions scenario and are in 
addition to the baseline costs over the same period. Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purpose.   
Source: FAO. 
$171
$322
$135
$229
$110
$217
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Cumulative climate-related 
infrastructure spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
No adaptation
Reactive adaptation
Proactive adaptation
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 32 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
In the first half of the century, the cost profiles of the no adaptation strategy and the reactive adaptation strategy 
are similar, as damage costs from worsening climate hazards are incurred in both strategies. These costs profiles 
diverge in the second half of the century as the impact of more frequent and intense climate hazards becomes 
more costly in the no adaptation strategy, whereas these costs are avoided in the reactive adaptation strategy 
since over 66 per cent of public transportation assets are adapted by 2070 (see Figure 5-3). 
The proactive adaptation strategy sees a substantial accumulation in costs over the next four decades as all 
assets are adapted by the 2050s, rapidly reducing the vulnerability of Ontario’s transportation infrastructure to these 
changing climate hazards. The result is a much slower accumulation of costs in the second half of the century, as 
climate damages are avoided. By the end of the century, the proactive adaptation strategy results in the lowest 
cumulative additional costs of the three strategies in real 2020 dollars. 
Costs to households and businesses should be included in 
assessing the cost-effectiveness of adaptation action 
This report accounts for the direct infrastructure costs to government but excludes any costs to households or 
businesses from infrastructure service disruptions. For example, if a municipal road becomes damaged and must 
be repaired, this analysis includes only the cost of those repairs to the municipality, not the costs to households 
and businesses of traffic delays.47  
47 For discussions on the value of indirect benefits of adaptation and the indirect costs of service disruption in the context of 
transportation infrastructure, see Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2020, UNEP, 2021 and Neumann, J.E., Chinowsky, 
P., Helman, J. et al., 2021.  
Figure 6-2 
The three asset management strategies have different cost profiles 
Note: The costs in this chart are based on the median (or 50th percentile) projection under each emissions scenario and are in 
addition to the baseline costs over the same period. Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purpose. 
Source: FAO. 
$12
$171
$14
$135
$26
$110
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
Cumulative climate-related infrastructure 
spending (real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
No adaptation
Reactive adaptation
Proactive adaptation
$14
$322
$19
$229
$47
$217
High emissions scenario
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 33 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Examples of costs to households and businesses include the following: 
•
Traffic congestion occurs during the rehabilitation and renewal of transportation assets, slowing travel
times and impacting productivity. For example, a recent Canadian Climate Institute study of the climate
impacts to public infrastructure states that: “…the costs of delays and travel disruptions on road and rail
systems could be nearly as high as the costs of direct physical damage to the infrastructure itself.”48
•
Beyond the delay costs, climate-related disruptions to transportation networks would impact supply
chains, the labour market and the economy more broadly.49
•
Climate-related disruptions to transportation networks also have non-financial costs, including increased
response times to health and environmental emergencies,50 or higher risks of being cut off from vital
services in rural and remote communities.
Costing these broader societal impacts was beyond the scope of this report. These costs are likely to be material 
and if added, would likely show further benefits of adapting public transportation infrastructure. Estimating these 
impacts would be a useful area of future research. 
Making asset-specific adaptation decisions should consider 
many other factors 
Costing three different asset management strategies at the portfolio level was designed to estimate the scale of 
the budgetary impact that changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles could impose over 
the rest of the century. However, to make asset-specific climate adaptation decisions, many other factors should 
be considered,51 including: 
•
an asset’s individual characteristics (including age, condition and specific climate vulnerabilities);
•
a wider array of climate impacts over the entire useful life of an asset;
•
costs to households and businesses; and
•
non-asset related considerations, including surrounding infrastructure. For example, if a section of
stormwater pipe located underneath a road is being replaced (or adapted), adapting the road may also
be considered.
Incorporating these factors would further enhance the FAO’s methodology and would better support adaptation 
decision-making for individual assets in a changing climate.  
48 Ness, R., Clark, D. G., Bourque, J., Coffman, D., and Beugin, D., 2021. Page 47. 
49 For example, within the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area, the estimated annual costs of traffic congestion to the economy in 
the absence of climate change considerations was $3.3 billion in 2006, forecast to increase to $7.8 billion per year by 2031. See 
Costs of Road Congestion in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area: Impact and Cost Benefit Analysis of the Metrolinx Draft 
Regional Transportation Plan.  
50 Warren, F. and Lulham, N., editors, 2021, Section 3.5. 
51 Several decision-making tools can be used to assist climate change adaptation decisions that captures both financial and 
economic costs and benefits of adaptation. See Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014 and United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2011 for details on different decision tools,  Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development, 2018 for a general discussion on costs and benefits of adaptation, and Government of 
Canada, 2019 for a general guidance on adaptation decisions.  
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 34 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
7 | Appendix 
Appendix A: Scope of transportation sector assets analyzed 
Table A-1: Provincial and municipal transportation infrastructure valued at $330 billion (current replacement value) 
included in the scope of this report 
Level of 
Government 
Sector 
Total CRV 
(2020$ 
billions) 
Description 
Provincial 
Roads 
$19 
•
Roads and highways in Ontario are managed by the
Ministry of Transportation (MTO) in partnership with the
Ministry of Energy, Ministry of Mines, and Ministry of
Northern Development.
•
These assets include the highway and road network
owned by the Province. In total, there are over 40,000
lane kilometres of pavement.
•
Of the 40,000 lane kilometres of pavement, the Northern
Highways Program (Ministry of Mines, and Ministry of
Northern Development as well as MTO) manages about
24,000 lane kilometres in the Northeast and Northwest
regions, and the Southern Highways Program (MTO)
manages about 17,000 lane kilometres.
•
The 40,000 lane kilometres of pavements are also divided
into around 1,900 sections and include four classes of
highways and roads: freeway (28 per cent), collector (12
per cent), arterial (38 per cent) and local (22 per cent).
•
This sector also includes bus rapid transit roadways
owned by Metrolinx.
Bridges 
$23 
•
There are roughly 2,800 provincially owned bridges.
Large 
Structural 
Culverts 
(>3 metres) 
$5 
•
There are roughly 2,000 provincially owned culverts.
Transit 
Engineering 
$13 
•
Ontario’s transit assets are owned by Metrolinx, which
operates primarily in the Greater Golden Horseshoe
Area, and Ontario Northland Transportation Commission
(ONTC), which operates primarily in northeastern
Ontario.
•
Metrolinx owns the GO Transit network, which includes
about 360 route kilometres of owned rail corridor.
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 35 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Table A-1 (Cont.): Provincial and municipal transportation infrastructure valued at $330 billion (current replacement value) 
included in the scope of this report 
Level of 
Government 
Sector 
Total CRV 
(2020$ 
billions) 
Description 
Municipal 
Roads 
$221 
•
Includes arterial roads, collector roads, highways, lanes
and alleys, local roads, rural highways and sidewalks.
Overall, Ontario municipalities own an estimated 365,281
lane kilometres of roads and 44,072 kilometres of
sidewalks.
•
Additionally, includes 141 kilometres of transit-owned
roads.
Bridges 
$35 
•
Includes nearly 12,500 bridges.
•
Nearly 45 per cent of these assets are local bridges,
followed by arterials (25 per cent) and collectors (15 per
cent), with highways, footbridges and rural highways
representing the remaining 15 per cent.
•
Additionally, includes 209 bridges owned by the transit
sector.
Large 
Structural 
Culverts 
(>3 metres) 
$7 
•
Includes nearly 11,246 culverts.
Transit 
Engineering 
$6 
•
Linear engineering transit infrastructure includes an
estimated 408 kilometres of transit-owned tracks.
Note: The age data presented are as of 2020. The CRV of provincial and municipal roads has been revised to incorporate the unit 
costs from the Parametric Estimating Guide (2021) by the MTO. For the detailed methodology used to obtain the CRV of rest of the 
sectors, see Appendix C of the FAO’s Provincial Infrastructure report and Appendix D of the FAO’s Municipal Infrastructure report.  
Source: FAO analysis of municipal data and provincial data as detailed in Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2020 and 2021a.  
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 36 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Appendix B: Scope of climate variables used in costing 
analysis 
The Canadian Centre for Climate Services provided the projections of all climate indicators used in the FAO’s 
costing analysis. Depending on the nature of the hazard’s interaction with specific transportation infrastructure 
components, different climate indicators were used. See WSP’s report for a full description and rationale.52 
Table B-1: Projected change in relevant climate variables from 1976-2005 to 2071-2100, Ontario average 
Climate Hazard 
Variable 
Definition 
Low Emissions 
(RCP2.6) 
Medium Emissions 
(RCP4.5) 
High Emissions 
(RCP8.5) 
Extreme Heat 
Annual 
number of hot 
days 
Annual number of days 
with daily maximum 
temperature above 30°C 
+6 days or
+138.9%
(+2 to 10 days 
or +64.2 to 
223.1%) 
+13 days or +336.5%
(+6 to 18 days or
+167.8 to 422.0%)
+34 days or
+860.7%
(+17 to 46 days or 
+493.8 to
1050.6%)
Extreme Rainfall 
IDF 24-hour 
1:100 
Short duration rainfall 
intensity for a 24-hour 1-in-
100-year event 
+14.6%
(+9.8 to 23.5%) 
+24.9%
(+16.1 to 39.4%) 
+53.0%
(+38.0 to 78.2%) 
Freeze-Thaw 
Cycles 
Annual freeze-
thaw cycles 
Annual number of days 
with daily maximum 
temperature above 0°C 
and daily minimum 
temperature below 0°C 
-5.5%
(-15.2 to 0.0%) 
-12.1%
(-19.2 to 0.0%) 
-15.1%
(-24.9 to 0.0%) 
Note: Numbers are rounded. Median (50th percentile) projections of climate variables are presented, followed by ranges in 
parentheses. Ranges show the 10th and 90th percentile projections.  
Source: Canadian Centre for Climate Services. 
The full suite of climate data used in the CIPI project is available at the CIPI section of the FAO’s website. 
52 See WSP, 2021. 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 37 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Appendix C: The impact of changing climate hazards on key 
transportation infrastructure costs  
This appendix presents the impact of climate hazards on the key infrastructure costs for roads, bridges, large 
structural culverts and transit engineering assets. First, the appendix presents the total impact of the climate 
hazards considered in this study on the useful service life (USL) and operations and maintenance (O&M) 
spending in the absence of adaptation, as well as the costs of retrofit and renewal adaptation to prevent these 
climate damages. Next, the appendix presents a detailed breakdown of the impact of each climate hazard on 
O&M spending and USL by asset type.   
To establish relationships between relevant climate indicators and key infrastructure costs, the FAO worked with 
WSP, a large engineering firm with expertise in all aspects of public sector infrastructure, including asset 
management, public infrastructure construction and operations, and climate change impacts.  
The FAO and WSP first established which of the three climate hazards could have the most significant impact, 
and on which asset type. As each hazard would interact with each asset-type in a different way, it was agreed 
that WSP would focus attention on the “interactions” that could present the greatest financial impact to asset 
managers. For example, while extreme heat may impact bridges, because the impact of extreme rainfall and 
freeze-thaw cycles was deemed more important, only these hazards were examined.  
WSP estimated relationships between changing climate variables and infrastructure costs by surveying relevant 
engineering experts. To account for engineering uncertainty, WSP aggregated its responses and provided 
optimistic, pessimistic and most-likely cost relationships.53 This forms the basis on which the FAO estimated the 
additional costs of climate hazards to public transportation infrastructure in Ontario.54  
While regional climate projections were used to develop the FAO’s infrastructure cost estimates, for simplicity, 
this appendix presents Ontario-average infrastructure cost results by asset type. The results reflect a weighted 
average climate projection based on the proportion of assets (by CRV) located in each region.55 The charts 
below provide three estimates for each infrastructure cost impact in the medium and high emissions scenarios: 
•
The solid lines represent the most likely infrastructure cost impact for the 50th percentile climate
projection.
•
The upper limit of the uncertainty bands represents the pessimistic infrastructure cost impact for the 90th
percentile climate projection.
•
The lower limit of the uncertainty bands represents the optimistic infrastructure cost impacts of the 10th
percentile climate projection.
53 Some of these cost relationships were subsequently revised to align with the professional judgement of external reviewers. 
54 Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021b. 
55 Most of Ontario’s public infrastructure is located in the southern regions. The weighted-average results presented in 
Appendix C largely reflect the climate projections for those regions.  
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 38 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure C-1: Roads – Cumulative impact of extreme rainfall and extreme heat 
In Absence of Adaptation 
Useful Service Life 
•
Trends in extreme rainfall and extreme heat are
projected to reduce the USL of public roads in
Ontario in both emissions scenarios.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the USL is
projected to decline by 12.1 per cent by the end of
the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the USL is projected
to decline by 31.1 per cent by the end of the century.
Operations & Maintenance 
•
Trends in extreme rainfall and extreme heat are
projected to increase the O&M (as a share of CRV) of
public roads in Ontario in both emissions scenario.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 0.6 percentage point of CRV
by the end of the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the O&M is projected
to increase by 1.5 percentage points of CRV by the
end of the century.
Adaptation Costs 
Retrofit Costs 
•
The cost of retrofitting the average public road to
withstand the trends in extreme rainfall and extreme
heat will vary with the extent of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting the average public road is projected to be
10.2 per cent of CRV by 2100.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of retrofitting
the average public road is projected to be 25.9 per
cent of CRV by 2100.
Renewal Costs 
•
The cost of replacing the average public road with one
that can withstand trends in extreme rainfall and extreme
heat will vary with the extent of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
replacing an average road with an adapted one is
projected to be 9.4 per cent of CRV.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of replacing
an average road with an adapted one is projected to
be 23.8 per cent of CRV.
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes in 
each emissions scenario.  
Source: FAO. 
-12.1
-31.1
-60.0
-40.0
-20.0
0.0
Change in USL from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
0.6
1.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Additional O&M from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent of CRV)
10.2
25.9
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
Retrofit adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
9.4
23.8
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
Renewal adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 39 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure C-2: Bridges – Cumulative impact of extreme rainfall and freeze-thaw cycles 
In Absence of Adaptation 
Useful Service Life
•
The USL of public bridges is projected to decline
due to the increase in extreme rainfall, with
significant offsetting impacts of fewer freeze-thaw
cycles.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the USL is
projected to decline by 0.6 per cent by the end of
the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the USL is projected
to decline by 2.6 per cent by the end of the century.
Operations & Maintenance
•
The O&M as a share of CRV of bridges is projected
to increase due to the increase in extreme rainfall.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 0.5 percentage point of
CRV by the end of the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 1.3 percentage points of
CRV by the end of the century.
Adaptation Costs 
Retrofit Costs 
•
The cost of retrofitting the average public bridge to
withstand increases in extreme rainfall will vary with
the extent of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting the average public bridge is projected to
be 3.1 per cent of CRV by 2100.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting the average public bridge is projected to
be 7.5 per cent of CRV by 2100.
Renewal Costs 
•
The cost of replacing the average public bridge with
one that can withstand increases in extreme rainfall
will vary with the extent of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
replacing an average bridge with an adapted one is
projected to be 2.8 per cent of CRV.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of replacing
an average bridge with an adapted one is projected
to be 6.7 per cent of CRV.
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes in 
each emissions scenario.  
Source: FAO 
-0.6
-2.6
-20.0
-10.0
0.0
10.0
20.0
Change in USL from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
0.5
1.3
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Additional O&M from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent of CRV)
3.1
7.5
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
15.0
18.0
Retrofit adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
2.8
6.7
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
15.0
18.0
21.0
24.0
Renewal adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 40 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure C-3: Large structural culverts – Impact of extreme rainfall 
In Absence of Adaptation 
Useful Service Life 
•
Increases in extreme rainfall are projected to
reduce the USL of large structural culverts in
Ontario in both emissions scenarios.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the USL is
projected to decline by 13.1 per cent by the end
of the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the USL is
projected to decline by 31.3 per cent by the end
of the century.
Operations & Maintenance 
•
Increases in extreme rainfall are projected to
increase the O&M (as a share of CRV) of public
culverts in Ontario in both emissions scenarios.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 1.0 percentage point of
CRV by the end of the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 2.5 percentage points of
CRV by the end of the century.
Adaptation Costs 
Retrofit Costs 
•
The cost of retrofitting the average public culvert
to withstand increases in extreme rainfall will vary
with the extent of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting the average public culvert is projected
to be 24.6 per cent of CRV by 2100.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting the average public culvert is projected
to be 58.9 per cent of CRV by 2100.
Renewal Costs 
•
The cost of replacing the average public culvert
with one that can withstand increases in extreme
rainfall will vary with the extent of these
increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
replacing an average culvert with an adapted one
is projected to be 10.5 per cent of CRV.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of
replacing an average culvert with an adapted one
is projected to be 25.1 per cent of CRV.
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes in 
each emissions scenario.  
Source: FAO. 
-13.1
-31.3
-60.0
-50.0
-40.0
-30.0
-20.0
-10.0
0.0
Change in USL from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
1.0
2.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Additional O&M from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent of CRV)
24.6
58.9
0.0
25.0
50.0
75.0
100.0
Retrofit adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
10.5
25.1
0.0
10.0
20.0
30.0
40.0
50.0
Renewal adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 41 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure C-4: Transit engineering – Impact of extreme heat 
In Absence of Adaptation 
Useful Service Life 
•
Increases in extreme heat are projected to reduce
the USL of public transit engineering assets in
Ontario in both emissions scenarios.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the USL is
projected to decline by 2.8 per cent by the end of
the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the USL is projected
to decline by 7.9 per cent by the end of the century.
Operations & Maintenance 
•
Increases in extreme heat are projected to increase the
O&M (as a share of CRV) of public transit engineering
assets in Ontario in both emissions scenarios.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 0.4 percentage point of
CRV by the end of the century.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the O&M is
projected to increase by 1.2 percentage points of
CRV by the end of the century.
Adaptation Costs 
Retrofit Costs 
•
The cost of retrofitting the average public transit
engineering asset to withstand the increases in
extreme heat will vary with the extent of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting an average asset is projected to be 6.4
per cent of CRV by 2100.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of
retrofitting an average asset is projected to be 18.0
per cent of CRV by 2100.
Renewal Costs 
•
The cost of replacing the average public transit
engineering asset with one that can withstand
increases in extreme heat will vary with the extent
of these increases.
•
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of
replacing an average asset with an adapted one is
projected to be 2.2 per cent of CRV.
•
In the high emissions scenario, the cost of replacing
an average asset with an adapted one is projected
to be 6.2 per cent of CRV.
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes in 
each emissions scenario.  
Source: FAO. 
-2.8
-7.9
-12.0
-8.0
-4.0
0.0
Change in USL from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
0.4
1.2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Additional O&M from 
projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent of CRV)
6.4
18.0
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
Retrofit adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
2.2
6.2
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
Renewal adaptation cost as a 
share of CRV (per cent)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 42 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Appendix D: The contribution of individual climate hazards 
to key transportation infrastructure costs in the absence of 
adaptation 
This section provides information on how the individual climate hazards deemed financially relevant by WSP 
contribute to infrastructure costs for asset types that are impacted by more than one climate hazard. Since only 
one climate hazard was assessed for both large structural culverts and transit engineering assets, climate hazard 
breakdowns are not presented for these asset types.  
Roads 
Trends in extreme rainfall and extreme heat are both projected to drive the decline in USL and increase in O&M 
spending of public roads in Ontario. 
Figure D-1 
More intense rainfall and extreme heat will contribute to the decline in USL of public roads 
Source: FAO.
-4.8 -6.2 -7.7 -9.2 -10.2 -10.8 -11.2 -11.7 -12.1
-40.0
-35.0
-30.0
-25.0
-20.0
-15.0
-10.0
-5.0
0.0
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in USL from projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Extreme rainfall
Extreme heat
Cumulative
-5.6 -7.5
-9.9
-13.0
-16.2
-19.9
-23.3
-27.0
-31.1
-40.0
-35.0
-30.0
-25.0
-20.0
-15.0
-10.0
-5.0
0.0
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in USL from projected changes in 
climate hazards (per cent)
High emissions scenario
(Median projection)
 17 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 43 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure D-2 
More intense rainfall and extreme heat will contribute to the increase in O&M of public roads 
Source: FAO. 
Bridges 
Trends in extreme rainfall are projected to drive most of the decline in USL of public bridges in Ontario, while 
fewer freeze-thaw cycles will somewhat offset the negative impacts of extreme rainfall.  
Figure D-3 
More intense rainfall will contribute the most to the decline in USL of public bridges, 
significantly offset by the decline in freeze-thaw cycles 
Source: FAO. 
ß 
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Additional O&M from projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent of CRV)
Medium emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Extreme rainfall
Extreme heat
Cumulative
-0.7
-0.7
-0.8
-0.9
-0.9
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6
-0.6
-10.0
-8.0
-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in USL from projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Extreme rainfall
Freeze-thaw cycles
Cumulative
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.1
1.3
1.5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Additional O&M from projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent of CRV)
High emissions scenario
(Median projection)
-0.7
-0.7
-0.9
-1.0
-1.1
-1.4
-1.7
-2.1
-2.6
-10.0
-8.0
-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in USL from projected changes in climate 
hazards (per cent)
High emissions scenario
(Median projection)
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
 44 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Appendix E: Comparing the present value costs of different 
asset management strategies 
As seen in Chapter 6, each asset management strategy has a different cost profile over time. The proactive 
adaptation strategy sees higher costs earlier in the century, while the no adaptation and reactive adaptation 
strategies see costs rise significantly in the latter part of the century. When evaluating alternative long-term 
financial decisions where the timing of costs varies, a standard approach is to discount real costs into present 
value dollars using a real discount rate. When discounted, costs incurred further in the future carry less weight 
relative to costs incurred sooner.  
The appropriate discount rate for evaluating long-term financial decisions about climate change is subject to 
significant debate.56 In a paper surveying over 200 experts, discount rates recommended ranged from zero to 10 
per cent, with a median value of 2.3 per cent. Despite the wide range of recommended rates, over 90 per cent of 
respondents indicated they were comfortable with a rate between one and three per cent.57  
Figure E-1 shows how the choice of discount rate impacts the present value of the total cost estimates for the 
median climate projections. 
56 For more discussion on discounting, see Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S., editors, 2019. 
57 For more information, see Drupp, M., Freeman, M., Groom, B. and Nesje, F., 2015. 
Figure E-1 
The present value cost of each asset management strategy under different discount rates 
Note: The costs presented use the median (50th percentile) climate projections. Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for 
presentation purpose. 
Source: FAO. 
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
Additional cumulative cost to maintain public 
transportation infrastructure in a state of good 
repair, 2022-2100
($2020, billions present value)
Real discount rate (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario 
No Adaptation
Reactive Adaptation
Proactive Adaptation
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
$350
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
Additional cumulative cost to maintain public 
transportation infrastructure in a state of good 
repair, 2022-2100
($2020, billions present value)
Real discount rate (per cent)
High emissions scenario
 45 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
The proactive adaptation strategy has the lowest total present value costs at discount rates approximately below 
3.0 per cent (medium emissions scenario) and 1.0 per cent (high emissions scenario). The reactive adaptation 
strategy has the lowest present value costs at discount rates between 3.0 to 5.0 per cent (medium emissions 
scenario) and between 1.0 to 4.0 per cent (high emissions scenario). At higher discount rates, the present-value 
costs of the no adaptation strategy and the reactive adaptation strategy are essentially the same, as the cost 
savings from the reactive adaptation strategy are more heavily discounted at higher rates.  
However, comparing the present value costs of the different adaptation strategies as outlined above should be 
treated with caution. This comparison does not incorporate the costs of infrastructure service disruptions to 
households and businesses. For example, if a road becomes damaged and must be repaired, this analysis 
includes the cost of those repairs, but excludes the costs to households and businesses of traffic delays.  
In addition, this comparison only includes the impacts of three climate hazards, and excludes many others (such 
as wildfires and permafrost degradation). Lastly, these results reflect the median projections for the medium and 
high emissions projections, but exclude the other possible outcomes as estimated by the climate and 
engineering uncertainties presented throughout the report. 
 46 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Appendix F: Costing results in the low emissions scenario 
While the report focused on the medium and high emissions scenario, this appendix presents the costing results 
of the three adaptation strategies for all emissions scenarios. The additional climate-related costs in each 
emissions scenario are presented as cumulative summations over the century. 
In the low emissions scenario, a major and immediate turnaround in global climate policies is assumed. 
Emissions are projected to peak in the early 2020s and decline to zero by the 2080s, limiting the rise in global 
mean temperatures to 1.6°C (0.8 to 2.4°C) by 2100 compared to the pre-industrial average.58 Even in the low 
emissions scenario, changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles will still have material 
financial impacts. Taken together, these hazards would raise the costs of maintaining Ontario’s public 
transportation infrastructure assets by $116 billion (11 per cent above baseline) by 2100 in the absence of 
adaptation. 
58 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013, Table All.7.5. Ranges for the global mean surface temperature 
represent the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile projections of models used. 
Figure F-1 
The cost of maintaining the current portfolio of public transportation infrastructure will 
increase by $116 billion in the low emissions scenario in the absence of adaptation  
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes 
in each emissions scenario. The costs presented in this chart are in addition to the projected baseline costs over the same period.  
Source: WSP and FAO.  
$116 billion
(+11%)
$171 billion
(+17%)
$322 billion
(+ 32%)
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
$500
$600
2022
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Additional cumulative cost to maintain 
public transportation infrastructure in a 
state of good repair
(undiscounted real $2020, billions)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
 47 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Figure F-2 
A reactive adaptation strategy, where assets are adapted at the end of their service life to 
withstand the impacts of climate hazards, will add $93 billion in infrastructure costs over the 
century in the low emissions scenario 
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes 
in each emissions scenario. The costs presented in this chart are in addition to the projected baseline costs over the same period.  
Source: WSP and FAO. 
$93 billion
(+ 9%)
$135 billion
(+ 13%)
$229 billion
(+ 23%)
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
2022
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Additional cumulative cost to maintain 
public transportation infrastructure in a 
state of good repair
(undiscounted real $2020, billions)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Figure F-3 
A proactive adaptation strategy, where assets are adapted at the earliest opportunity to 
withstand the impacts of climate hazards, will add $64 billion in infrastructure costs over the 
century in the low emissions scenario 
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes 
in each emissions scenario. The costs presented in this chart are in addition to the projected baseline costs over the same period.  
Source: WSP and FAO.  
$64 billion
(+ 6%)
$110 billion
(+ 11%)
$217 billion
(+ 21%)
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
2022
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Additional cumulative cost to maintain 
public transportation infrastructure in a 
state of good repair
(undiscounted real $2020, billions)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
 48 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Appendix G: Breakdown of cumulative costs under different 
adaptation strategies by asset type 
Table G-1: Roads 
Cumulative Additional Costs (2022-2100) 
Emissions 
Scenario 
Estimate 
Base 
No Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Reactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Proactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Medium 
Low 
$791 
 
$73 
$58 
$46 
(9%) 
(7%) 
(6%) 
Median 
$133 
$106 
$96 
(17%) 
(13%) 
(12%) 
High 
$238 
$184 
$177 
(30%) 
(23%) 
(22%) 
High 
Low 
$152 
$109 
$107 
(19%) 
(14%) 
(14%) 
Median 
$258 
$179 
$191 
(33%) 
(23%) 
(24%) 
High 
$420 
$292 
$331 
(53%) 
(37%) 
(42%) 
Table G-2: Bridges 
Cumulative Additional Costs (2022-2100) 
Emissions 
Scenario 
Estimate 
Base 
No Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Reactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Proactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Medium 
Low 
$110 
 
$8 
$4 
-$4 * 
(7%) 
(4%) 
(-4%) 
Median 
$19 
$15 
$5 
(17%) 
(14%) 
(4%) 
High 
$33 
$30 
$18 
(30%) 
(27%) 
(16%) 
High 
Low 
$15 
$8 
-$6 * 
(13%) 
(8%) 
(-5%) 
Median 
$35 
$28 
$9 
(31%) 
(25%) 
(8%) 
High 
$53 
$47 
$29 
(48%) 
(43%) 
(26%) 
* Costs in the proactive adaptation strategy are below baseline costs, since the cost decrease due to declining freeze-thaw cycles 
more than offsets the increase from extreme rainfall in these scenarios.
 49 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Table G-3: Large structural culverts 
Cumulative Additional Costs (2022-2100) 
Emissions 
Scenario 
Estimate 
Base 
No Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Reactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Proactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Medium 
Low 
$22 
 
$4 
$4 
$3 
(18%) 
(17%) 
(14%) 
Median 
$11 
$9 
$6 
(48%) 
(42%) 
(29%) 
High 
$16 
$14 
$10 
(73%) 
(65%) 
(46%) 
High 
Low 
$7 
$7 
$6 
(34%) 
(32%) 
(27%) 
Median 
$18 
$15 
$11 
(80%) 
(69%) 
(49%) 
High 
$31 
$26 
$17 
(139%) 
(120%) 
(78%) 
Table G-4: Transit engineering 
Cumulative Additional Costs (2022-2100) 
Emissions 
Scenario 
Estimate 
Base 
No Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Reactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Proactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Medium 
Low 
$92 
 
$4 
$1 
$1 
(4%) 
(1%) 
(1%) 
Median 
$8 
$5 
$3 
(8%) 
(5%) 
(3%) 
High 
$11 
$7 
$5 
(12%) 
(7%) 
(5%) 
High 
Low 
$6 
$4 
$4 
(7%) 
(4%) 
(4%) 
Median 
$11 
$7 
$6 
(12%) 
(7%) 
(7%) 
High 
$18 
$9 
$9 
(20%) 
(10%) 
(10%) 
Note: The low estimates indicate the optimistic infrastructure cost impact for the 10th percentile climate projections, and the high 
estimate indicate the pessimistic infrastructure cost impact for the 90th percentile climate projections. 
Source: FAO.  
8 | References 
 51 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Asset Management BC, Climate Change and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer. 
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S., editors, 2019, Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report – Chapter 6: 
Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation, Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON. 
Canadian Standards Association, 2014, Canadian Highway Bridge Design Code. 
Cannon, A.J., Jeong, D.I., Zhang, X., and Zwiers, F.W., 2020, Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core Public 
Infrastructure: An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on Climatic Design Data in Canada, 
Government of Canada. 
Chinowsky, P., Helman, J., Gulati, S., Neumann, J., and Martinich, J., 2019, Impacts of climate change on 
operation of the US rail network. Transport Policy (75), 183-191. 
Drupp, M., Freeman, M., Groom, B., and Nesje, F., 2015, Discounting disentangled: an expert survey on the 
determinants of the long-term social discount rate. Working Paper 172. Grantham Research Institute on 
Climate Change and the Environment, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, 
United Kingdom. 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2020, Investing in Canada’s Future: The Cost of Climate Adaptation at the 
Local Level. 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2020, Provincial Infrastructure. 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021a, Municipal Infrastructure. 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021b, Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: 
Project Backgrounder and Methodology. 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario, 2021c, Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public 
buildings in Ontario.  
Government of Canada, 2019, Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens. 
Government of Canada, 2021, Natural Resources Canada’s Canada’s Climate Change Adaptation Platform. 
Government of Canada, 2022, Infrastructure Canada’s Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core Public Infrastructure 
Initiative 
HDR, 2008, Costs of Road Congestion in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area: Impact and Cost Benefit 
Analysis of the Metrolinx Draft Regional Transportation Plan. Report produced for Metrolinx. 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2020, Estimating the benefits of Climate Resilient Buildings and Core 
Public Infrastructure (CRBCPI). 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2013, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis: Annex II: 
Climate System Scenario Tables. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014, Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and 
Vulnerability, Chapter 17: Economics of Adaptation. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014, AR5 Synthesis Report: Climate Change 2014. 
 52 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: Transportation 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public transportation infrastructure in Ontario 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2021, Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis: 
Summary for Policymakers. 
International Institute of Sustainable Development, 2021, Advancing the Climate Resilience of Canadian 
Infrastructure: A review of literature to inform the way forward. 
Meyer, M.D., Amekudzi, A., and O’Har, J.P., 2010, Transportation asset management systems and climate 
change: adaptive systems management approach. Transportation Research Record, (2160), 12-20. 
Ness, R., Clark, D. G., Bourque, J., Coffman, D., and Beugin, D., 2021, Under Water: The Costs of Climate 
Change for Canada’s Infrastructure, Canadian Climate Institute. 
Neumann, J.E., Chinowsky, P., Helman, J. et al., 2021, Climate effects on US infrastructure: the economics of 
adaptation for rail, roads, and coastal development. Climatic Change (167), 44. 
Ontario Ministry of Transportation, 2017, Addressing Climate Change through Engineering Practice. 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 2018, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure. 
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, 2021, PCIC Science Brief: Should the RCP 8.5 emissions scenario 
represent “business as usual?”. 
Palko, K. and Lemmen, D.S., editors, 2017, Climate risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian 
transportation sector 2016. 
Transport Canada, 2021, Projects funded by the Northern Transportation Adaptation Initiative. 
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), 2021, Buildings and Climate Change Adaptation: A Call to Action. 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2011, Assessing the Costs and Benefits of 
Adaptation Options: An Overview of Approaches. 
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S., editors, 2014, Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts 
and Adaptation, Government of Canada. 
Warren, F.J. and Lulham, N., editors, 2021, Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report, 
Government of Canada. 
WSP, 2021, Costing climate change impacts and adaptation for provincial and municipal public infrastructure in 
Ontario, Deliverable #10 – Final Report, Toronto, Ontario. Report produced for Financial Accountability 
Office of Ontario. 
fao-on.org 
