1
2
3
CITIES ADAPT 
TO EXTREME WILDFIRES

CELEBRATING LOCAL LEADERSHIP
Paul Kovacs, Sophie Guilbault, Esther Lambert and Robin Kovacs
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LESSONS LEARNED
ABOUT ICLR 
SHACKAN INDIAN BAND & XWISTEN 
FIRST NATION, BC 
CALGARY, AB
QUESNEL, BC
ENTERPRISE, NWT
BRUDERHEIM, AB
ROCKY VIEW COUNTY, AB
PENTICTON, BC
CANMORE, AB
THOMPSON, MB
DISTRICT OF NORTH VANCOUVER, BC
NELSON, BC
NAPATAK, SK
SLAVE LAKE, AB
KAMLOOPS, BC
LOGAN LAKE, BC
SWAN HILLS, AB
WADIN BAY, SK
KILLARNEY, ON
BOTWOOD, NL
BEST PRACTICES
ELLIOT LAKE, ON
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
6
14
18
22
36
40
26
32
44
48
54
58
62
66
70
76
80
84
88
92
96
100
108
110
3
CELEBRATING LOCAL
LEADERSHIP
By Paul Kovacs
Wildfires have resulted in extensive and unprecedented damage in recent years, 
including major fires in Alberta, British Columbia, California and Queensland, 
Australia. This report celebrates actions taken by local governments across Canada 
to anticipate and effectively address this peril. The Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction commends local leaders and other collaborators working to reduce the 
risk of wildfire damage. Their actions are recognized and appreciated. 
The value of buildings and other assets located in or near forests is growing and 
our climate is changing. These factors contributed to the increase in wildfire losses 
in Canada over the past 25 years. Nevertheless, actions can reduce or stabilize the 
future risk of loss. The expectation of more fire in Canada’s forests does not need 
to result in increased destruction of assets and other losses if managed effectively. 
A warming climate is expected to bring a longer fire season and greater risk of 
infestations and droughts that erode the health of forests. Forest management and 
fire suppression costs are expected to continue to increase. These growing risks can, 
nevertheless, be offset by change in forest management practices and risk reduction 
action by property owners. The knowledge exists to better cope with this hazard. 
Indeed, twenty communities are recognized in this report for their leadership in 
wildfire management. 
Large fires can be remarkably destructive, burning forests and destroying structures. 
Some lives have been lost. Smoke threatens health. Uncertainty imposes stress 
and mental anguish. Community evacuations disrupt economic activity. Rebuilding 
and rehabilitation require time and funding. Fires can disrupt ecosystems, increase 
the risk of flash floods and affect the quality of water supplies. However, fire is also 
essential to maintain the health of forests and ecosystems. Fire brings renewal and 
regeneration critical for sustainable forests. We must learn to live with fire in the 
wildland. The knowledge exists to better manage the impact of fire. 
Local governments frequently step up to provide leadership when addressing such 
significant challenges for society as wildfires. This may involve assessing local exposure, 
building public awareness of risk, implementing risk reduction actions and overseeing 
recovery from a loss. Local governments are often best suited to manage community 
action to address a shared peril, taking a leading role in community planning, 
development regulation and local fuel management. 
 
4
The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) is Canada’s leading disaster 
research institute. Supported by its 120 member insurers, the Institute is an 
international centre of excellence in disaster risk reduction, affiliated with Western 
University, and a champion for action to reduce the risk of loss from wildfire, flood, 
severe weather and earthquakes. 
Research by the Institute, like this report, is organized around the four priorities for 
action set out by the Government of Canada and established by the United Nations 
in the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction: 
	
•	
Build back better in recovery 
	
•	
Better understand disaster risk 
	
•	
Strengthen disaster risk governance 
	
•	
Invest in disaster risk reduction
We are excited to identify successful local government actions across Canada 
addressing wildfire risk reduction consistent with these priorities. Twenty examples 
are set out in this report and sixty other case studies have been published by the 
Institute dealing with other hazards, including extreme rainfall, extreme heat and 
extreme storms. 
Figure 1: Large fires can be remarkably destructive, burning forests and destroying 
structures. (Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
5
Local leadership frequently involves collaboration, which may include the joint 
efforts of neighboring communities, provincial governments or federal agencies. 
Indigenous communities are often located in areas of risk and may provide unique 
risk management knowledge. Private industry partners are increasingly involved in 
collaborations seeking to reduce the risk. 
These case studies include communities located in Eastern, Western and Northern 
Canada. Some communities are large and several are small. Some are located near 
major population centres with access to considerable support if threatened by fire 
and several are located in remote locations. All of these communities are vulnerable 
to the risk of loss and damage from wildfire and have chosen to take action—
thoughtful and innovative action that we believe has reduced this risk. 
This report celebrates leadership evident in local action that reduces the risk of 
wildfire damage, but it is also a call for more action. Loss and damage continue to 
increase at an alarming rate for wildfires and other hazards. Many, perhaps most, 
losses are preventable through the application of known risk reduction solutions. 
Local leadership is making a positive difference, but more action is urgently needed. 
There continues to be growth in assets located in areas known to be high risk 
without appropriate risk reduction actions. Homeowner adoption of best practice 
protocols, like FireSmart®, must increase significantly. Community leaders across 
the country can learn from the positive examples found in this report to build 
preparedness. These case studies of successful action implemented by communities, 
large and small, should be embraced as setting out a path forward. Actions 
implemented in these communities can and often should be introduced elsewhere. 
6
LESSONS LEARNED
Local actions to address extreme 
wildfires
By Paul Kovacs
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
7
Bob Simpson, Mayor of Quesnel, said, “In my opinion, if you’re an at-risk community 
for fire, nothing is more important than making the decision that you are going to 
own it, identify how to mitigate that risk and be the champion that influences other 
levels of government to do what needs to be done.” 
This report sets out 20 case studies of local governments in Canada showing 
leadership to manage the risk of loss and damage from wildfire. Local action 
consistent with scientific research and best practices are welcome and celebrated. 
Actions implemented in these communities can and should be adopted elsewhere in 
communities that are vulnerable to damage from wildfire. These leaders show a path 
forward that often could be implemented by others. 
The analysis of lessons learned from these case studies is organized around five 
topics: 
  	
•	
The trigger for action 
	
•	
Building back better in recovery 
	
•	
Understanding risk and vulnerability 
	
•	
Strategic partnerships and collaboration 
	
•	
Public awareness, engagement and participation 
	
The trigger for action 

Most communities in this report experienced a wildfire in or near their community. 
Slave Lake, for example, experienced extensive destruction of homes and buildings in 
2011. A fire burning toward Thompson fortunately burned north of the community 
due to shift in the winds. Swan Hills, Napatak, Wadin Bay and Killarney have 
experienced evacuations. Fires have affected communities near Canmore, Kamloops, 
Logan Lake, Nelson, Quesnel, the District of North Vancouver, Elliot Lake and 
Enterprise. 
Most of the communities recognized for taking action have firsthand knowledge of 
the threat and took steps to ensure they will be prepared when the hazard returns. 
Wadin Bay is notable in that regard. After a fire threat in 2006, the community 
implemented a multi-year strategy that was successful in preventing damage when 
a major fire approached in 2015. The actions celebrated in this report have been 
proven to be effective in reducing the risk of fire damage. 
Beyond previous fires, some other factors were identified as triggers that resulted in 
local action. For instance, Calgary is concerned about the impact of wildfires on the 
quality of its drinking water. Kamloops identified community concerns about drought 
and water scarcity as an opportunity to also reduce the risk of damage from wildfire. 
Rocky View County sought to address homeowner resilience to fire and flooding in a 
single program. 
8
Most communities in this report were motivated by experience with fire in or 
near their community and a desire to ensure preparedness for future threats, but 
a number of other factors were also identified. As argued eloquently by Mayor 
Simpson, local leaders seek to own the major issues facing their community and this 
mindset can and should be applied to wildfire. 
Building back better in recovery 
The residents of Swan Hills evacuated the community in 1998 due to the risk 
of fire. Since that time the community has prioritized action to reduce the risk 
of fire damage. The community may have been the first in Canada to introduce 
requirements for fire resistant roofing and protection near buildings for new and 
existing structures. 
Thompson experienced a number of close calls with fire threatening the community, 
including severe threats in 2003 and 2017. The community developed a detailed 
protection plan that included the use of GIS mapping to create sprinkler deployment 
plans to protect people and structures. 
The threat of fire damage in Wadin Bay in 2006 resulted in important risk reduction 
action. The community invested in pumps and hoses that could be applied to 
suppress fires. Sprinklers were installed to protect structures. The community was 
prepared when a major fire approached in 2015, and losses were prevented. 
Figure 2: Several communities invested in hoses, pumps and other firefighting equipment to be 
better prepared for future firefighting needs. (Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
9
Slave Lake experienced significant losses when fire entered the community in 2011. 
The community sought to inform the recovery with knowledge about best practices 
as set out by FireSmart Canada. Research by the Institute finds that homes destroyed 
by fire were rebuilt with fire resistant roofs and most homes that were rebuilt 
implemented vegetation management practices to establish zones of protection as 
layed out by FireSmart. 
These communities were directly threatened by fire and responded with actions, so 
they are now better prepared if or when they are threatened again. Loss events and 
events that almost resulted in significant damage can serve to build public support for 
strong action to reduce the future risk of damage. The prospect for transformative 
action is greatest in communities that develop pre-disaster recovery plans. This 
approach was first developed in the United States and Japan and is beginning to 
emerge in Canada. Community wildfire protection plans can be modified to include 
pre-disaster recovery guidance. 
Understanding risk and vulnerability 
Most of the communities celebrated here began their efforts with a formal and 
independent assessment of the risk of fire in their community and the identification 
of specific risk reduction actions. Development of a community wildfire protection 
plan includes a description of the local area, including an overview of the impact of 
past fires and links to other community plans. It also includes a detailed assessment of 
values at risk, including the state of homes, critical infrastructure and major employers, 
a review of wildfire threat, including an assessment of fire history in the area, a review 
of fuel management and FireSmart activities, and an assessment of fire response 
capacity to suppress fire and protect structures. 
Some recommendations required change in by-laws and community plans. Others 
required funding. Several communities updated their Protection Plan after about 
10 years to assess progress made and reflect change in the community and the 
landscape. 
The availability of provincial funding to support wildfire assessments can provide a 
foundation for local leadership. Botwood, Canmore, Elliot Lake, Enterprise, Killarney, 
Logan Lake, Nelson, the District of North Vancouver, Penticton, Quesnel, Slave Lake, 
Thompson and Wadin Bay each identified that they had completed a community 
assessment. 
It is common for emergency management officials to use a common analytic 
approach when addressing more than one or a broad range of natural and technical 
hazards like winter storms, severe weather and train derailments. A case in point is 
Rocky View County, where fire and flood risk to homes was assessed.  In contrast, 
wildfire management plans typically focus on a single hazard and assessment 
professionals tend to be specialists. 
10
Logan Lake was the first community recognized as a FireSmart community, while 
Botwood was the first in Newfoundland working towards it. Enterprise was the 
first community in the Northwest Territories to receive that acknowledgement. All 
their efforts began with research into the best practices to protect communities. 
Bruderheim found that there are health risks for the community from smoke, and this 
influenced the approach adopted. Research by Calgary determined that the threat 
of wildfires upstream presented a significant threat to the quality of the community’s 
drinking water. An initiative involving the Shackan Indian Band and Xwisten First 
Nation focused on re-instating cultural burning practices. 
A lesson learned from these case studies is the importance and value of taking 
time to understand the factors contributing to the risk of loss and best practices to 
reduce the risk. Effective actions identified in these cases were consistently based on 
thoughtful analysis and sound science. 
Strategic partnerships and collaboration 
Case studies celebrating community leadership to reduce the risk of loss and damage 
consistently identify partners that were critical to achieving success. Collaboration 
is important but is often difficult to initiate and sustain. Participants typically have 
different objectives and focus. These case studies report initiatives that were 
successful in building and managing these coalitions. 
Figure 3: Many communities, such as Wadin Bay, recommended the use of sprinkler kits to 
protect homes. (Source: Denis Renaud, Community of Wadin Bay)
11
Several communities, like Canmore, reflect on the importance of partnership 
between the Fire Agency and the planning department. A driver for increased risk 
of fire in the community may involve new, unguided development in zones of risk. 
Information from a wildfire protection plan can be included in community by-laws 
and planning documents. Many leading communities require specific risk reduction 
practices for new construction, like fire resistant roofing, and some extend this to 
existing structures. Most also focus on vegetation management by the community and 
private property owners. 
In Kamloops the Natural Resources crew worked with the Fire Department 
to create a brochure that combined a list of xeriscape plants with broader 
FireSmart landscaping strategies. Most communities, like Quesnel, report a stronger 
collaboration with provincial, territorial and national fire agencies. Fuel reduction 
solutions may involve thinning programs and controlled burns. 
The Fire Chief in Penticton recognized that established skills in supressing structural 
fires could be strengthened to also ensure operational preparedness for risks 
associated with wildfire. The Chief partnered with the British Columbia Wildfire 
Service and Office of the Fire Commissioner to provide a Wildfire Urban Interface 
Training Symposium for municipal firefighters. 
Calgary’s Source Watershed Risk Characterization Study found that wildfire could 
threaten the quality of the city’s water supply and the vast majority of the area at risk 
is located beyond Calgary’s borders. Partnership and collaboration will be critical to 
achieving the objectives of the City. 
The ‘Resilient Rurals’ partnership formed by Bruderheim sought to formalize 
collaboration with neighboring communities. The District of North Vancouver works 
in collaboration with other communities on the north shore, First Nations, Metro 
Vancouver and BC Hydro. The fire and flood initiative in Rocky View County was 
generously supported by funding from the Canadian Red Cross. Both Wadin Bay and 
Elliot Lake worked with local cottage associations. Killarney partnered with Canadian 
National Railway and Henvey Inlet Wind, which provided financial support to 
implement mitigation measures with regard to vegetation in high-risk areas. 
Public awareness, engagement and participation 
Successful local leadership included action to improve public awareness of fire risk 
and increase participation in risk reduction activities. Nevertheless, available data 
consistently find that most property owners fail to fully implement wildfire risk 
reduction activities. More progress is essential. 
Much of the risk that fire will enter a community and spread is found on private 
property. Communities can and should reduce fire risk in parks and nearby crown 
lands; however, the greatest scope for fuel reduction often involves action by private 
12
property owners. Bruderheim designed a program to inform homeowners about fire 
and flood reduction through lessons taught at school. Children were asked to speak 
with their families about fire and flood protection. Kamloops developed brochures 
for homeowners describing plants best suited for fire resilience and the dry climate, 
including advice about how to locate the plants and the use of mulch to reduce fire 
risk. The City of Nelson worked with local nurseries to share the information with 
homeowners and landscape professionals. 
Canmore, Logan Lake and others offer local homeowners a FireSmart assessment. 
This information supports homeowner participation in wildfire risk reduction. 
Canmore, Nelson, District of North Vancouver, Swan Hills and others established 
local regulations and requirements that new homes be built with a protection zone 
around structures and fire-resistant materials. Swan Hills requires fire risk reduction 
practices for new and existing buildings. 
Several communities participate in FireSmart Wildfire Community Preparedness 
Day to engage volunteers in fuel reduction across the community. Funding for this 
program is provided by the Co-operators Insurance, the Institute for Catastrophic 
Loss Reduction and the National Fire Protection Association. 
13
SECTION 1

BUILD BACK BETTER IN RECOVERY
Build back better in recovery: The growth of disaster risk means there is a need 
to strengthen disaster preparedness for response, take action in anticipation of 
events, and ensure capacities are in place for effective response and recovery 
at all levels. The recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction phase is a critical 
opportunity to build back better, including through integrating disaster risk 
reduction into development measures.

Source: UNDRR- SENDAI Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
14
WADIN BAY
Planning and investing in firefighting 
resources to protect the community
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Denis Renaud - Wadin Bay
15
THE SCIENCE
Small, remote communities located in Canada’s northern forests typically operate 
with few local firefighting resources. They are dependent on provincial support for 
the management of wildfire risks. Nevertheless, some communities demonstrate 
strong, proactive leadership seeking to understand the risk of fire in their community 
and actions that reduce the risk. Partnerships with organizations like FireSmart 
Canada can assist communities that wish to conduct a formal assessment of their 
risk and develop an action plan to mitigate future losses associated with wildfires. 
Modest financial investments coupled with appropriately directed volunteer actions 
are effective in preventing a fire from entering the community and successfully 
avoiding what may have been catastrophic losses. 
THE TRIGGER
The community of Wadin Bay is primarily a cottagers’ community situated in 
Northern Saskatchewan. The resort subdivision is located 30 kilometers North of La 
Ronge and counts approximately 30 permanent residents. The population increases 
to around 230 people in the summer months.  
The community was evacuated due to a wildfire in 2006. Residents had to leave 
the community for a few weeks and were fortunate to come back to undamaged 
homes. The 2006 event, however, triggered a reaction among community members 
who started actively thinking about the environment they live in, the fire risk that 
comes with it and potential actions that could be taken to better protect themselves. 
THE APPROACH
Over the years following the 2006 wildfire, community leaders in Wadin Bay 
approached wildfire risk reduction from many different angles. Firstly, they connected 
with their provincial FireSmart liaison to complete an initial wildfire community risk 
assessment that allowed them to better understand the risks faced by the residents 
of Wadin Bay. The assessment initially revealed that several areas were exposed 
to high fire risks, which prompted the community to seek financial support for 
investments in risk reduction and firefighting resources.  
Following the assessment, the community secured funding from the provincial 
government and Northern Municipal Services in addition to contributions from 
private residents, to invest in building a local fire hall. The first investments were 
water pumps and hoses to facilitate the pumping of water from La Ronge Lake 
during an emergency. Over a period of time, the community kept investing in 
additional fire protection equipment such as rooftop sprinklers and other apparatus 
that could be used by professional firefighters if they were to get deployed to Wadin 
Bay during a wildfire. Professional firefighters are aware of the type of equipment 
that was purchased by the community and where it is located. They were also 
consulted prior to the purchase to ensure the material was compatible with other 
pieces of equipment they are trained to work with.  
16
In addition to the investments made in firefighting resources, Wadin Bay held several 
events to educate the local population about fire risk and prevention measures that 
can be adopted to reduce this risk as part of its wildfire protection plan. For instance, 
Wildfire Community Preparation Day events were held where local residents were 
invited to conduct a community clean-up of vegetation in at-risk areas.   
THE OUTCOME
The dedication of the community to invest in fire protection over several years 
resulted in FireSmart Canada naming Wadin Bay the first FireSmart community in 
Saskatchewan. The time and energy invested by the community proved to be of 
utmost importance in 2015, when the area was threatened by a severe wildfire. 
Thanks to the investments made in wildfire preparedness and firefighting resources, 
the community only suffered small losses. It was estimated that the outcome of this 
event could have been significantly worse for community members and their homes 
if the wildfire protection activities had not taken place. The community’s efforts were 
recognized by Saskatchewan’s Environment Minister who stated that “Wadin Bay, 
named Saskatchewan’s first FireSmart community, developed and implemented a 
protection plan to address its wildfire risks, and that proved to be invaluable to those 
protecting the community this summer when it was threatened by wildfire.”  
Figure 4: A strong sense of community and collaboration between residents was instrumental in 
the success of the various initiatives undertaken in Wadin Bay.  
(Source: Denis Renaud, Community of Wadin Bay)
17
The 2015 FireSmart report produced for Wadin Bay also states that “without 
a doubt, the pre-fire work that occurred, such as thinning of the forest, having 
purchased our own firefighting equipment, setting up a network of sprinklers, having 
a fire plan (escape route, safe places to retreat to, when to leave, who is where, and 
good communication) and most of all having community members committed to 
protecting their community (before, during and after the fires), saved our community.” 
Indeed, the impressive results achieved by the community of Wadin Bay would not 
have been possible without a strong community commitment to the cause. In 2015 
alone, residents of Wadin Bay invested approximately $20,000 and 700 hours of their 
time on FireSmart related activities.  
A WORD FROM WADIN BAY
When asked what advice he would offer to other small communities interested in 
investing in wildfire risk reduction measures, Denis Renaud, President of the Wadin 
Bay Cottage Association, mentioned that Wadin Bay owes a lot of its success to 
its strong core of residents. “We have a group who work well together, who can 
problem solve and gather around one common cause,” said Mr. Renaud. He also 
mentioned that educating residents on the value of the investment in risk reduction 
measures was instrumental in achieving success. Once this communication took place, 
people quickly got on board with various initiatives such as Firesmart clean-ups in 
the spring and the fall. “It is easy to witness a strong sense of community during these 
events when every year, we have about 40 to 50 residents coming up and cleaning 
up not only their area but also the rest of the community. Some people are even 
driving up from their main residences for the sole purpose of contributing to these 
cleaning efforts,” mentioned Mr. Renaud, who also believes that the time and financial 
resources invested by community members into the wildfire risk reduction effort in 
Wadin Bay contributed to making the community more resilient to wildfires.  
18
Source: Town of Swan Hills Facebook Page
SWAN HILLS
Municipal land use by-law and FireSmart 
provisions
By Esther Lambert
19
THE SCIENCE
Many communities include wildfire risk reduction measures in local development 
permit regulations that apply to new construction and they pursue a variety 
of approaches to inform and encourage action by existing property owners. A 
concern is that most existing property owners fail to act. The best outreach and 
awareness programs continue to result in some ongoing community vulnerability 
to fire. Wind can blow embers into the community and the embers may land on 
a vulnerable property, introducing fire into the community. This results in loss for 
existing homes that did not introduce protective measures and also increases the 
risk that fire will damage those that did invest in protection.  
Swan Hills is a pioneer in the application of local by-laws to reduce wildfire risk for 
new and existing homes. Landscaping requirements for new homes also apply to 
existing properties. The greatest attention, as set out by FireSmart, focuses on the 
zone closest to structures. It is important to undertake vegetation management 
within 10 metres of a building to create a fuel-free zone to protect communities 
against wildfires. Progressive communities seek to build on awareness efforts by 
also implementing and enforcing regulations that apply to every property in the 
community. 
THE TRIGGER
Swan Hills has a population of 1,300 people and is located in Northern Alberta in 
Big Lakes County. While its location among boreal and sub-forests makes it home 
to unique flora and fauna, this also puts it in a very high wildfire risk zone. Being 
surrounded by older growth spruce and pine, there have been wildfires in the past. 
In 1998, the town was evacuated because of an encroaching fire. Although the fire 
did not enter the town, it came close enough that evacuation orders were activated. 
Knowledge of this threat prompted Council to add a FireSmart component to the 
land use by-law in 2012, to include requirements that all property owners must 
take simple cost-effective actions to reduce their risk of fire damage. The combined 
action by all property owners enhances the level of protection for the community. 
THE APPROACH
The Town worked with experts from FireSmart to understand what would 
be involved in making a property safer and then it considered what would be 
reasonable to ask existing homeowners to do that would not be too onerous. 
For homeowners geared towards protection of their homes, risk reducing action 
involves reducing flammable vegetation and piling lumber, limiting these to at 
least 10 m away from structures. The 10-metre requirement is recommended 
by FireSmart experts. Also, in the by-law every resident is required to have a 
house number clearly displayed to facilitate fire response to the home. Other 
requirements include removing or replacing flammable fuel, trimming conifer limbs 
to two metres from ground level, restricting grasses to 10 cm or less, and adhering 
to roofing materials restrictions to promote fire-resistant shingles. All required 
20
landscaping must meet FireSmart standards. 
These are requirements for new and existing property owners to reduce the risk of 
fire entering and spreading throughout the community. Through public hearings and 
other engagement efforts, the Town works with communities to educate property 
owners in hopes of effecting behaviour change. The public is made more aware of the 
FireSmart program, why it is important and what role property owners can play. 
Swan Hills works closely with provincial wildfire firefighters, engaging in, not only 
cross-training to learn techniques for dealing with wildland fires, but also in controlled 
burns in Swan Hills. The Town also works with the Alberta Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry with which it has a mutual aid agreement whereby reduction burns are 
conducted together. The Ministry also does educational sessions for the public. 
Futhermore, the Town of Swan Hills applies to the Forest Resource Improvement 
Association of Alberta for grants to carry out FireSmarting projects around the 
community, including thinning out of forest areas and cleaning up brush. These fairly 
large projects are done every year and FireSmart guidelines are followed when 
carrying out these projects. All of these actions support a wildfire mitigation strategy 
that the Town has been working on in conjunction with Agriculture and Forestry 
and with the help of FireSmart experts. The strategy focuses on the seven disciplines 
Figure 5: Swan Hills works closely with provincial wildfire firefighters, engaging in, not only 
cross-training to learn techniques for dealing with wildland fires, but also in controlled burns in 
Swan Hills.  (Source: Town of Swan Hills)
21
recommended by FireSmart: education, emergency planning, vegetation management, 
legislation, development, interagency cooperation and cross-training. 
THE OUTCOME
Research published by the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction found that the 
2012 by-law for Swan Hills was likely the first in Canada to require fire resilient 
roofing for all new and existing buildings in the community. The by-law was also the 
first to require all property owners undertake vegetation management within 10 
metres of a building. This included requirements that flammable forest vegetation 
be removed, conifer limbs be removed to a minimum height of two metres, annual 
grasses be mowed to 10 cm or less and no combustible piles of firewood or lumber 
be allowed. These requirements have been in place for almost 30 years and serve to 
build community awareness that everyone can contribute to reducing the risk of loss 
from wildfire. The community moved beyond encouraging action to introduce public 
safety requirements, an approach that should be of interest to other communities 
concerned about property owners that are failing to act.
A WORD FROM SWAN HILLS
The Chief Administrative Officer of Swan Hills, Bill Lewis, says that one of the 
key channels through which municipalities can achieve success in implementing 
FireSmart requirements in their by-laws is through public education. “Get the public 
to understand why it may be important and put this regulation in your by-law,” he 
advised. For instance, it is important that residents understand why certain building 
materials are necessary. As Mr. Lewis indicated, “We want them to understand that it 
will ultimately benefit them and their neighbours. It’s so much easier to get people’s 
support if they understand why these measures are being implemented.” 
22
THOMPSON
Utilizing geographic information systems 
(GIS) in wildfire mitigation 
By Robin Kovacs
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
23
THE SCIENCE
In an extreme wildfire event, the protection capabilities of any community depend 
on its wildfire preparedness planning, mitigation initiatives and wildfire management 
practices. Utilizing geographic information systems (GIS) in wildfire mitigation 
can significantly increase the effectiveness of the strategies being used in wildfire 
preparedness and response. GIS allows for wildfire pre-response and mitigation 
data, such as values at risk and sprinkler deployment plans, to be conceptualized and 
analyzed through computer-based tools to create plans for wildfire preparedness, 
response and recovery. Implementing GIS with any Community Wildfire Preparedness 
Plan will increase the community’s resilience and chance of survival against wildfires.   
THE TRIGGER
 
The City of Thompson (population 13,678) is located 760 kilometers north of 
Winnipeg along the Burntwood River within Canada’s Boreal forest. This region 
has experienced many human and lightning caused wildfires. Data from Manitoba 
Conservation and Climate and the City of Thompson report over 230 wildfires 
in forest, timber, brush, or grass within an eight-kilometer radius of the community 
between 2007 and 2017. In addition, in May 2003, the City of Thompson experienced 
a near catastrophic event when a fire was started by a train five kilometers east 
of the city and burned approximately 3,200 hectares of boreal spruce. Fortunately, 
winds pushed the fire north, diverting it from the city. In 2017, after numerous similar 
close calls and with the example of the devastating effects of the Fort McMurray 
wildfire, Thompson’s former Deputy Fire Chief and the Province’s Regional Forester 
participated in a Canada Local FireSmart Representative course as part of FireSmart 
Canada’s Community Recognition Program initiative. The course was intended to 
promote, support and recognize local communities taking the initiative in identifying 
local wildfire hazards and risks and in developing a self-organized approach to 
preparedness and mitigation planning. The initiative was the inspiration for many 
Thompson wildfire mitigation and preparedness efforts, including the City’s decision 
to establish a Community Wildfire Protection Plan.   
THE APPROACH
With Thompson’s decision to develop a Plan, specific actions were taken by the City 
of Thompson Fire and Emergency Services, Manitoba Conservation and Climate and 
Manitoba’s Office of the Fire Commissioner to ensure the success and prosperity of 
their wildfire mitigation efforts. Implementing a full and comprehensive Plan, rather 
than simply a pre-response plan, was paramount for the City of Thompson because 
the Plan takes into account not only the roles and responsibilities of first responders 
in wildfire management, but also the needs of the community. This is because the Plan 
is comprised of two sub-plans: 1) The Wildfire Preparedness Plan, which identifies 
the values in the community and guides the first responders; and 2) The Wildfire 
24
Mitigation Strategy Plan, which analyzes the hazards in and around the community and 
develops strategies to help reduce the risk of high hazard areas by using vegetation 
management, structural options and infrastructure. 
One of the many response challenges the City of Thompson wanted to overcome 
with its plan was to increase the efficiency and speed of deploying equipment and 
ensuring clear communications and responsibilities of first responders in the WUI 
environment. A solution was found by using GIS to create sprinkler deployment plans 
that detailed value locations, priorities, water sources, equipment requirements and 
deployment layout. GeoManitoba, a team of GIS specialists that provide support to 
all departments of the Manitoba government, helped in GIS application development, 
management of data and wildfire mapping, mitigation, and preparedness components. 
For example, GeoManitoba designed a unique app in ArcGIS Online (an online 
mapping software) to design sprinkler deployment plans for the community. The 
province was divided into gridded Zones (100kmx100km), Subzones (10kmx10km) 
and Areas (1kmx1km) to organize and coordinate provincial sprinkler deployment 
plans. The City of Thompson used its gridded 1kmx1km Area and the World 
Imagery base map, an extremely accurate view of the Earth’s surface, to draw in 
key features such as hoses, sprinklers and pumps onto the map and to determine 
how much supplementary firefighting equipment would be needed in each area 
if a fire occurred. Pre-response plans, such as sprinkler deployment plans, are 
Figure 6: The City of Thompson was influenced to improve the frequency of municipal risk 
reduction initiatives, including brush removal, pruning and the thinning of trees in high hazard 
areas. (Source: City of Thompson - Facebook Page)
25
proactive planning tools that permit response agencies to effectively and efficiently 
identify equipment requirements and personnel assignments. Digital mapbooks of 
sprinkler deployment plans were created for Thompson’s Protection Plan to ensure 
information is readily accessible and shareable during an incident. 
THE OUTCOME
With the completion of Thompson’s Protection Plan, the city is not only better 
prepared for wildfires but is also able to note numerous additional positive outcomes 
as the result of a more fire-conscious community. The City of Thompson was 
influenced to improve the frequency of municipal risk reduction initiatives, including 
brush removal, pruning and the thinning of trees in high hazard areas. GIS mapping 
software and World Imagery played an important part in improving city-provided fire 
management by indicating to fire officials where the high hazard areas are located. In 
addition, Thompson implemented a “Fuel Wood Program”, which gives participating 
members with permits access to free firewood retrieved from mitigation efforts. The 
City of Thomson is working towards becoming a recognized FireSmart Community, 
while simultaneously pursuing other wildfire mitigation efforts. 
 
A WORD FROM THOMPSON
When asked what advice the City of Thompson would like to share with other 
communities interested in implementing a similar Plan utilizing GIS, Shauna Kortz, 
Fire Control Officer for Manitoba Conservation & Climate, said that “it starts with 
the community wanting to see a change and improvement in wildfire mitigation 
and preparedness. The progress begins when the local fire chiefs, foresters and 
the community come together and take local leadership and initiatives in wildfire 
mitigation and preparedness.” In addition, she mentioned the greatest challenge in 
implementing GIS into any plan is access and funding. Communities are encouraged 
to seek and apply for municipal, provincial/territorial and federal government grants 
that help to address climate change, FireSmart, emergency management and public 
safety issues.
26
SLAVE LAKE
Promoting lot-level risk mitigation by 
homeowners 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Town of Slave Lake
27
THE SCIENCE
The FireSmart program was established to educate Canadians about the various 
initiatives they can pursue to protect their families, communities and properties 
from wildfire risk. The program is spread out over seven key disciplines: vegetation 
management, public education, legislation, development, planning, cross-training, and 
inter-agency cooperation. When a comprehensive wildfire risk reduction effort is 
pursued across all seven disciplines, the wildfire risk faced by communities located in 
the wildland urban interface can be greatly reduced. Partnerships and inter-agency 
collaborations between residents, community associations, local industries, municipal 
governments, municipal fire departments and other groups are also key to efficiently 
deploying a strong FireSmart strategy.  
An important and ongoing focus of the program has been on homeowners. 
Homeowners are encouraged to assess their risk of loss through a formal assessment. 
Proven risk reduction practices are identified to protect individual structures from fire 
damage. These include structural elements, like fire resistant roofing and siding, and 
vegetation management focused on zones of protection around structures.
THE TRIGGER
In the spring of 2011, 52 wildfires were reported in the Slave Lake region of Alberta 
over a four-day period. During this extreme wildfire situation, approximately 23 
wildfires presented an important threat to communities, including the Town of Slave 
Lake. The Flat Top Complex of wildfires was particularly destructive, resulting in a 
total of 484 single-family homes and many other structures destroyed throughout 
the Slave Lake region. At the time, this represented the largest loss of private homes 
from a single natural disaster in Canadian history. The first of the Flat Top Complex of 
wildfires entered the Town of Slave lake. Following this event, the Town developed a 
strategy around FireSmart principles to reduce future wildfire risks for the community. 
THE APPROACH
Prior to the Flat Top Complex wildfires, the Town of Slave Lake used to run one 
or two forestry driven projects focused on fuel management every year to reduce 
wildfire risk. These initiatives were generally taking place far away from homes and 
very little was done to reduce risk within the community. This changed dramatically 
following the 2011 wildfires, which is when the community started pursuing 
FireSmart principles in all seven disciplines in an effort to minimize the risks of a 
similar event reoccurring.  
On the education front, the Fire Department went door to door to offer FireSmart 
assessments of properties at no cost. They also delivered several community hazard 
reduction workshops and developed three courses on wildfire risk reduction aimed 
at the public, contractors and government representatives. In addition to public 
28
education, the community made an investment of $6.8 million over five years in 
vegetation management. A portion of this investment was directed towards live 
and tabletop exercises during which the forestry and fire departments as well as 
community representatives prepared for specific wildfire scenarios.  
On the planning and development front, the community aimed to build back better 
by encouraging homeowners to rebuild with FireSmart principles. While no specific 
legislation was in place at the provincial or municipal level, several homeowners took 
the matter into their own hands and applied FireSmart principles around their homes. 
The success of these collective actions was showcased in a report published by the 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, in which author Alan Westhaver states that 
the degree to which FireSmart guidelines have been adopted around private homes 
was strong in Slave Lake. Westhaver credits the success of public communication 
efforts that followed the 2011 Slave Lake disaster to high uptake rates around 
Figure 7: Many risk reduction initiatives have been taking place in Slave Lake, including 
vegetation and fuel treatment. (Source: Town of Slave Lake)
29
properties. The educational material developed for wildland urban interface residents 
and landscapers around vegetation and fuel treatments that also included concerns 
for environmental, wildlife and aesthetic values certainly helped as residents were 
rebuilding their properties.  
The Town of Slave Lake also invested a lot of resources in emergency planning 
and preparedness. A new regional emergency management plan was created in 
addition to several 72-hour preparedness campaigns and extensive messaging 
through different media. In addition, several cross-training initiatives around wildfire 
risk reduction took place in the four years following the wildfires as a result of 
inter-agency collaborations.
THE OUTCOME
Dedicating resources toward a comprehensive FireSmart strategy allowed the 
Town of Slave Lake to reduce its risk of being severely affected by future wildfires. 
The various initiatives that were developed by the community allowed for a better 
understanding of wildfire risk among residents, which led to stronger actions being 
taken at the property level. In 2015, the Municipal District of Lesser Slave River, which 
includes the Town of Slave Lake, received the FireSmart Community Protection 
Achievement Award, which recognizes Canadian communities dedicated to reducing 
wildfire risk on their landscape through the implementation of FireSmart solutions. 
Moreover, research published by the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
reported that community efforts to reduce the risk of wildfire damage following the 
2011 fire were sustained. 
A WORD FROM SLAVE LAKE
When asked what he thought justified the high uptake rate of FireSmart measures 
among homeowners in Slave Lake, Chief Jamie Coutts, former Fire Chief at Lesser 
Slave Regional Fire Service (2002-2019), emphasized the importance of public 
education. “It is crucial to work with people and make it as easy on them as possible 
to implement specific risk reduction measures. When you provide people with the 
right education, they are in a better position to decide what is best for them without 
being directly told what to do,” said Chief Coutts. He added that “once people 
learned there were straightforward things that they could do around their homes that 
didn’t cost much, such as moving wood piles and cleaning up their yards, they became 
even more keen to take action. There might have been pressure and expectations 
that came from neighbours as well who didn’t want to increase the risk faced by 
their properties.” The case of Slave Lake highlights the power of collective actions for 
managing wildfire risk. 
30
31
SECTION 2

BETTER UNDERSTAND 
DISASTER RISK
Understanding disaster risk: Disaster risk management should be based on 
an understanding of disaster risk in all its dimensions of vulnerability, capacity, 
exposure of persons and assets, hazard characteristics and the environment. 
Such knowledge can be used for risk assessment, prevention, mitigation, 
preparedness and response.

Source: UNDRR - SENDAI Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
Source: Town of Slave Lake
32
Source: Town of Botwood Facebook Page
BOTWOOD
Wildfire community hazard and risk 
assessment 
By Sophie Guilbault
33
THE SCIENCE
Before implementing comprehensive wildfire risk reduction strategies in municipalities, 
it is important to understand the hazard and the areas of vulnerability inside and 
around the community. Conducting a Community Hazard and Risk Assessment helps 
identify specific actions required to improve preparedness and reduce wildfire risks 
faced by the community. An Assessment allows communities to determine the hazard 
level in a specific area by examining the wildland fuel complexes that could support 
combustion. The vulnerability of these wildland fuel complexes is determined through 
the type of vegetation, its arrangement, volume, condition and location. Once this 
portion of the analysis is completed, the overall wildfire risk, which represents the 
likelihood of a wildfire igniting through natural or human causes, can be estimated, 
and would include areas in the community that are particularly vulnerable and could 
benefit from risk mitigation actions. 
THE TRIGGER
Botwood is a town of almost 3,000 people in north-central Newfoundland. It 
is located on a natural deep water harbour. Beginning in 1908, the community 
provided a critical transportation link for the pulp and paper mill located at Grand 
Falls. Botwood is surrounded by water to the North, East, and South, and by a large 
forested area at its western boundary. A number of major wildfires were experienced 
in the region near the community over the past forty years, with most occurring 
during spring and fall, when there is increased activity in close proximity to forested 
areas. In 2018, the Botwood Fire Department invited representatives from FireSmart 
Canada to deliver a public presentation on wildfire assessment, which led to the 
implementation of risk reduction measures.
THE APPROACH
Following the FireSmart presentation, the Town conducted its own self-assessment 
based on the information that was communicated. The Town decided to launch work 
toward FireSmart recognition for the community and invited the organization to 
conduct a thorough Community Hazard and Risk Assessment to identify which areas 
were more vulnerable and required attention. The assessment was completed and 
came to the conclusion that while the community had many low-risk areas, there 
were several opportunities to conduct mitigation measures in higher risk portions of 
the municipality. The highway located along the community’s western boundary serves 
as a fire break by interrupting fuel stands. It also facilitates the work of firefighters by 
providing an access point from which they can engage in fire suppression. The water 
bodies surrounding the rest of Botwood may serve as an abundant water source that 
may be used to suppress potential wildfires. 
Following the Hazard and Risk Assessment, the community, with the support 
of FireSmart Canada, then proceeded to develop a roadmap to complete the 
34
recommended mitigation measures. The major mitigation actions resulting from the 
assessment and roadmap included a combination of vegetation management activities, 
improved operational capacities and public awareness events.
THE OUTCOME

Upon completion of the assessment, the analysis as well as a roadmap to complete 
the recommended mitigation measures and raise awareness about wildfire risk within 
the local population was presented to the Town. Several mitigation measures have 
been completed by the community and more are underway. For instance, roadside 
debris has been and continues to be removed and trees were cut back away from 
the community in areas of high risk. The Town is also working in collaboration with 
the province to reduce wildfire risk along provincial roads in more vulnerable areas.  
In addition to the debris removal and tree cutting, the Town is working on its 
operational preparedness should a wildfire occur. For instance, the municipality has 
gone through the process of evaluating the performance of its fire hydrants and 
is currently working toward replacing them with new ones that can carry higher 
volumes of water to assist with future firefighting. The Town has also established a 
Figure 8: The Town of Botwood invested a lot of time raising community awareness around 
FireSmart strategies that can be used to reduce wildfire risk in the community. 
(Source: Town of Botwood Facebook Page)
35
new street numbering system to ensure streets are numbered in a clear manner to 
facilitate the response process if emergency personnel are brought in from out of 
town.  
A lot of time was invested to raise community awareness around wildfire risk and 
FireSmart strategies that can be used to reduce fire risk around properties. For 
instance, Botwood has started hosting an annual Wildfire Community Preparedness 
Day in partnership with the RCMP, first responders, forest and land civil servants 
and FireSmart Canada representatives, where information about wildfire risk is 
communicated to the public. The municipality also hosted information sessions at 
the public library to engage homeowners in voluntary wildfire mitigation activities by 
teaching them how to conduct self-assessment of their homes. 
In their effort to become a FireSmart community, the town was named a local 
FireSmart champion and a voluntary board of like-minded citizens was created 
to continue the deployment of wildfire mitigation and public education activities. 
Investments in public education, mitigation measures and operational preparedness 
will continue to be made with the objective of becoming the first recognized 
FireSmart community in Newfoundland.
A WORD FROM BOTWOOD
When asked what advice he would give to other communities interested in working 
toward the FireSmart community recognition, Murray Roberts, Chair of Botwood’s 
Public Protection Committee and local FireSmart Champion, highlighted the need to 
first understand which areas of the community are most vulnerable. “The Wildfire 
Community Hazard and Risk Assessment conducted in Botwood divided the 
community in four quadrants and each section was identified as low, medium, and 
high risk. This was very helpful to identify priorities and develop a roadmap moving 
forward,” said Mr. Roberts. He also mentioned the importance of strong public 
education campaigns to provide community members with tools to reduce their 
vulnerability to wildfire. “There are many ways to get the information out—posters, 
seminars, public events, social media – you have to use a variety of tools and continue 
to promote the same message,” said Mr. Roberts. The tools provided by FireSmart 
help residents and homeowners understand their own level of risk and suggest 
practical steps that can be taken to significantly reduce it. 
36
Source: Hamlet of Enterprise
ENTERPRISE
Wildfire community preparedness
By Esther Lambert
37
THE SCIENCE
Community preparedness involving wildfire mitigation requires the joint effort 
of residents, property owners and multiple levels of government. FireSmart 
Canada guidelines for community protection can assist communities in reducing 
the risk of wildfire damage to property and firefighters in protecting homes. Its 
recommendation of a wildfire hazard assessment helps communities to determine 
which actions are needed. For instance, if both wildfire hazard level and risk are low, 
community planning may not be necessary; however, if both are high, both a Wildfire 
Preparedness Guide and Mitigation Strategy are suggested. Varying results for hazard 
level and risk call for different plans of action. Communities can form FireSmart 
Committees to help develop their plans and to work with volunteers to engage in 
risk reducing activities such as clean-ups. Community clean-ups involve the removal 
of potentially hazardous debris and fallen branches, dry grass and needles left on 
the ground. In addition to vegetation management, public education is an essential 
component of any FireSmart plan, through which residents learn about the threat of 
wildfire and how it can be mitigated.
THE TRIGGER
Enterprise is a small community of 120 residents located between Great Slave Lake 
and the Alberta border. While the Hamlet does not have a history of destructive 
wildfires, its close proximity to woodlands makes wildfires a constant threat. One 
wildfire in 2015 spread close to residents’ homes and resulted in the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources and the Government of Northwest Territories 
placing the community on alert status. This sparked an interest in understanding ways 
in which the community could become more proactive in preparing for similar events. 
The Fire Department learned about the assistance that FireSmart Canada had been 
offering communities. Furthermore, the Department was aware of research by the 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction assessing the Fort McMurray fire which 
confirmed that houses that took action consistent with FireSmart were much less 
likely to experience loss and damage.  
THE APPROACH
Two major aspects of Enterprise’s approach to wildfire community preparedness are 
vegetation management and public education. In 2017, a local FireSmart Committee 
was formed in order to carry out a wildfire hazard assessment and develop a 
community plan. FireSmart Canada recommends that this Committee be made up 
of a team lead, wildfire, structural protection and municipal planning specialists and 
municipal and provincial mapping specialists, who can carry out wildfire hazard and 
risk assessments and, in collaboration with other affected stakeholders, develop a 
community plan. The plan provides details on level of risk of ignition, suppression 
constraints and natural and structural features at risk, and recommends risk reducing 
38
strategies including fuel breaks and fuel treatment actions. One of the findings is 
that the risk of ignition is high in areas where roadways and railway lines are located, 
where human activity is usually higher and the chances of fire-causing activities such 
as roadside vehicular accidents and cigarette discarding are highest. A few challenges 
to fire suppression include the limited capacity of Enterprise’s Fire Department, which 
relies on volunteers, and potential limited water supply. In the absence of hydrants, 
water supply would be limited to a cistern at the fire hall and a burrow pit in the 
summer. 
With regard to vegetation management, there is particular focus on clearing brush 
that may fuel flying embers. Former Assistant Fire Chief Blair Porter explained that 
usually, it is the embers that land on the ground that cause the spread of fires. The 
wind carries these hot embers across the community. Although not enforceable by 
law, residents are encouraged to maintain grass at a suitable height. Highly flammable 
fuel types like juniper trees are discouraged. There is also a big drive towards 
educating residents and helping them understand what FireSmarting entails—that it 
is not about cutting down all the trees but, rather, the goal is to manage vegetation 
near structures to minimize the risk of fire. This is challenging, as many homeowners 
want to retain natural features in their surroundings and usually have concerns about 
the impact of wildfire risk reducing activities on the ecosystem. In garnering support 
from homeowners, the fire department often explains that FireSmart homes also 
experience fewer bear intrusions, a concern for residents in Enterprise.  
Figure 9: An important focus of Enterprise’s approach to wildfire risk reduction is around 
vegetation management. (Source: Hamlet of Enterprise)
39
Beyond the FireSmart program, the Hamlet does cross-training with the Ministry of 
Environment and Natural Resources and in the process, learns about the mechanisms 
of wildfire spread through test site displays. The Ministry also provides support 
through a sprinkler system that can be activated in the event the Hamlet’s efforts are 
insufficient. 
THE OUTCOME
In 2017, Enterprise was recognized by FireSmart Canada for its leadership in taking 
steps towards mitigating the risk of losses from wildfires. Though one of the smallest 
communities in the Northwest Territories, Enterprise was the first to receive official 
FireSmart status. The general response from residents has been encouraging and 
this is partly due to the fact that they are being educated about the program and 
engaged. The former Assistant Fire Chief was hopeful that with all the measures being 
taken, Enterprise would manage well if an event was to occur.
A WORD FROM ENTERPRISE
Mr. Porter’s advice to other communities interested in successfully implementing a 
FireSmart Program is that community buy-in is very important, which can be attained 
through public education. “It’s also best for the municipality itself to be educated and 
then share this knowledge. I thought I had an idea what FireSmart was, but I didn’t. 
So, I think education is the biggest thing because people will not do something unless 
it’s relevant to them,” he stressed. He highlighted the fact that people need to first 
understand how they may be at risk to adverse impacts of wildfires. One way to 
accomplish this is by showing them different scenarios of what could happen. He also 
mentioned the importance of understanding that FireSmart is not a cure in and of 
itself, but is a strategy that requires a joint effort and commitment. 
40
BRUDERHEIM
Educating residents about wildfire risk
By Sophie Guilbault & Esther Lambert
Source: Town of Bruderheim
41
THE SCIENCE
Wildfire activity has been increasing in many parts of the country in recent years, 
with longer fire seasons and larger areas burned. Beyond the direct damage caused 
to properties and structures in affected communities, smoke that is generated during 
wildfires can greatly affect the health of populations living in areas sometimes quite 
distant from the flames. The smoke that results from wildfires is composed of a 
mixture of pollutants and can have a major impact on air quality and public health. In 
fact, many Canadian communities that haven’t been directly affected by fire itself have 
suffered from the presence of wildfire-related smoke in their communities. Some 
have started working locally and with neighbouring communities to reduce their 
future risk.   
THE TRIGGER
Bruderheim is a small community of nearly 1,400 inhabitants located north-east of 
Edmonton. While the community is not located in the wildland urban interface per 
se, it is bordered by tall grass on undeveloped lands to the north. Neighbouring 
communities have been affected by wildfires in the past and, as such, these events 
have become a growing concern for the town. Additionally, the smoke caused by 
these events has often reached the community of Bruderheim, causing public health 
concerns for its residents.  
As wildfire risk became a growing concern for Bruderheim, the town was selected 
to become a part of the Climate Resilience Express program through the All 
One Sky Foundation, a not-for-profit organization established to help vulnerable 
populations at the crossroads of energy and climate change. The support provided 
by the Foundation allowed community members to participate in a climate 
adaptation workshop that led to the development of a resilience action plan. The 
initial workshop held through the Climate Resilience Express program confirmed 
original concerns around fire risk stemming from the industrial centre located in close 
proximity to the community. The presence of the oil and gas industry in the area also 
came up as a contributing factor to an enhanced fire risk.
THE APPROACH
Given the growing health concerns associated with neighbouring fires, as well as the 
risk assessment provided through the Climate Resilience Express program, the Town 
started thinking more actively about what could be done to reduce fire risk and 
educate residents on best practices around risk reduction within the community. In 
order to do so, the community of Bruderheim secured a FireSmart grant to develop 
public education programs for local homeowners. 
In order to establish which strategies should be pursued to encourage residents 
to become proactive about wildfire risk, a group of municipal staff and community 
members got together to brainstorm ideas for how key educational initiatives might 
look. With the support of FireSmart Canada, the Town was able to host several 
events, such as barbecues and door-to-door campaigns to disseminate information on 
42
how to best prevent fire damage around private properties. Several events were also 
held during Emergency Preparedness Week. 
An important part of Bruderheim’s strategy around public education was to get 
children of the community involved in risk reduction efforts. In order to do so, 
municipal staff connected with school principals to prepare an activity that would 
familiarize local children with key actions that can be taken around their homes to 
be better protect them. Each participating student was given a FireSmart checklist 
and were asked to take it home and work through the list with their families. Their 
teachers planned various activities associated with the checklist and students came 
back to their classrooms with a completed project around the theme of wildfire risk 
reduction. In order to make this activity more special for the children participating, the 
Town had purchased various prizes that were handed out upon the submission of 
their projects.
THE OUTCOME
The various outreach activities pursued by the Town and its residents contributed 
to heightened awareness around wildfire risk and risk reduction activities that can 
be taken at the private property level for community members. As Bruderheim 
was working locally to promote public education around wildfire risk, municipal 
staff realized that neighbouring communities were faced with similar challenges and 
decided to approach them to partner on developing various resources that could be 
Figure 10: The Resilient Rurals platform aims to provide ressources to assist small and rural 
communities define their path to resilience.  (Source: Town of Bruderheim)
43
helpful in the event of a disaster. Bruderheim now leads a formal partnership with the 
Towns of Gibbons and Lamont, called Resilient Rurals, which is working to define the 
path to resilience for small and rural communities. The partnership currently provides 
resources for community risk assessments, business continuity strategies, as well as 
a communication toolkit to assist small towns in informing their residents of various 
risks and risk reduction actions that can be taken before an emergency occurs. 
There is also a resource hub housed on the Resilient Rurals website that brings 
together relevant data, resources and contacts that would otherwise be difficult for 
communities to find. Other areas of focus include the review of plans, policies and 
bylaws, and development of networking and implementation plans, and a regional 
resilience plan. The latter is set to advance social and business continuity priorities, 
and address climate concerns such as wildfires, flooding, extreme windstorms, and 
extreme heat. Innovative ideas were shared during the creation of Resilient Rurals, 
which will be explored as the partnership progresses. 
A WORD FROM BRUDERHEIM
An important factor that contributed to the success of Bruderheim’s approach, which 
involves educating residents about wildfire risk and possible mitigation actions, was 
the use of various communication activities. When asked about what contributed to 
the success of the public education effort pursued in her community, Sherry Cote, 
Director of Planning and Legislative Services, highlighted the importance of using 
multiple tools to carry a consistent message. “I believe that if one of the strategies you 
use to communicate risk to people makes an impact on them, they are much more 
likely to carry the message with them to others in the community,” said Sherry Cote. 
The more communication tools used, the greater the chances for more heightened 
public awareness.  
44
CALGARY
Reducing wildfire risk to protect Calgary’s 
source water 
By Sophie Guilbault & Esther Lambert
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
45
THE SCIENCE
Wildfires can lead to immediate and long-term impacts on the social, economic and 
ecological systems of communities. More specifically, they can affect the quality of 
drinking water sources, such as rivers, reservoirs and groundwater, and place an added 
financial burden on municipalities to operate water treatment during and following a 
major wildfire. Fires can remove vegetation and reduce the ability of soils to absorb 
water, leading to an increase in runoff that can transport ash, nutrients, sediments, heavy 
metals and toxins into streams, rivers and downstream reservoirs used for drinking 
water supplies. Wildfires can create changes in the water chemistry of nearby streams 
that often lead to higher concentrations of nutrients, sediment, metals, and dissolved 
organic carbon. These impacts can last months to years after a wildfire has been 
contained. While the effect of contaminants tends to diminish over time as the water 
moves downstream, there have been occurrences in southwestern Alberta where 
water quality impacts resulting from burned areas persisted for over eight years. This 
can lead to increased treatment costs. In some cases, emergency response agencies 
may use firefighting foams to control wildfires. These foams may contain perfluorinated 
chemicals, which may pose risks to water quality. The ability to anticipate and prepare 
for potential contamination risks of drinking water from wildfires is an important factor 
to consider for the successful implementation of preparedness plans and mitigation 
measures that ensure safe, reliable drinking water supplies is maintained.  
THE TRIGGER
Calgary is located at the junction of the Bow and Elbow rivers which allows the city 
to get its entire drinking water supply from these two water sources. Less than one 
percent of the Bow and Elbow watersheds are situated within the city boundaries, 
while the rest is located up and downstream from Calgary, reaching all the way up 
to the headwaters in the Rocky Mountains. This watershed traverses different land 
use types including national and provincial parks and wildlands (which cover over 75 
percent of land in the Bow River source watershed alone), First Nations reserves and 
other towns. Calgary is unique in being the first major city along the Bow and Elbow 
and having a large portion of the land upstream beyond the city protected. Hence, the 
water quality in the city is extremely high and Calgary is taking a proactive approach to 
keep it that way. 
To better understand the risks to the city’s source water quality, the City of Calgary 
commissioned a Source Watershed Risk Characterization Study with the objectives 
of mapping vulnerable areas in the source watershed and prioritizing risks. The study 
identified the risk of water contamination in the upper watershed as a result of a 
wildfire as one of two highest risks to source water quality.
THE APPROACH
The study reported that water quality impacts following a wildfire depend on the size 
and severity of the fire, as well as soil, slope, terrain, climate and other characteristics. 
As part of the study, the provincial fire probability map and watershed vulnerability 
map were combined with the general travel time zones to create 
46
Figure 11, which identifies areas where high burn probabilities coincide with high 
watershed vulnerability and shorter travel time distances downstream to Calgary’s 
drinking water intakes. A list of potential water contaminants was also established 
along with a description of their current treatability.
The City developed a Source Water Protection Plan designed to prevent, reduce 
or mitigate key source water quality risks to drinking water. This plan includes a 
commitment to refine the wildfire management strategy with fire agencies in the 
source watersheds. A regional task force was convened to enhance collaboration 
on wildfire risk management and identify 11 wildfire-specific management strategies 
related to land use management, communications and emergency preparedness 
to help mitigate wildfire potential and impacts within high-risk areas. As part of this 
approach, the City has been building partnerships with the Province and Parks Canada 
who are leading wildfire suppression efforts in the area. Discussions with these groups 
ensure that water contamination risk is understood by those responsible for prioritizing 
how to approach forest firefighting. The City is committed to continuing to advance 
the collaborations needed to implement the management strategies and providing 
leadership and resources to advance the critical management strategies outlined in 
the regional task force report. In addition, the municipality is working with firefighting 
agencies operating in the source watershed to consider alternate fire retardants 
that minimize chemicals of concern in firefighting foams. Once this is established, the 
City will promote the results of their study and work collaboratively with the region 
to standardize the type of foams that can be used for fire suppression around the 
watersheds.

Figure 11: Wildfire Risk Visualization in the Bow and Elbow River Watersheds. 
(Source: City of Calgary)
47
THE OUTCOME
The City of Calgary is still in the early stages of its wildfire risk reduction efforts. 
Calgary is committed to investing in wildfire management through its Source Water 
Protection Plan geared towards improving land use planning, promoting innovation in 
stormwater management to protect water quality, involving the community through 
education and research, and leveraging key partnerships for risk mitigation. The 
municipality invested in the creation of strong partnerships regionally and provincially 
to ensure consistent communication around risks for water contamination associated 
with wildfires and ensure successful implementation of the source water management 
strategies.
A WORD FROM CALGARY
When asked about her thoughts on the risk reduction initiatives being established in 
Calgary, Jen Pouliotte, Senior Watershed Planner for the City of Calgary, mentioned 
that Calgary has benefited strongly from its location, having two rivers to pull drinking 
water from. “The quality of our water is very high, but we know we can’t stand on our 
heels and pat ourselves on the back for a job well done. Watersheds and wildfire risks 
are constantly evolving, and it is crucial to better understand our risk and take actions 
to reduce it”, said Jen Pouliotte. The City of Calgary is hoping that the work being 
undertaken internally will benefit others in the region. 
48
Source: First Nations’ Emergency Services Society of BC – FNESS
SHACKAN INDIAN BAND 
AND XWISTEN FIRST NATION
Reinstating cultural burning practices  
By Esther Lambert
49
THE SCIENCE
For thousands of years, First Nations communities across Canada practiced cultural 
burning as an effective forest management approach to care for the land and sustain 
their cultural practices. This practice was passed down for generations. Beginning in 
the 1860s, there was an interruption in the inter-generational transfer of knowledge 
and way of life, due to disease among indigenous peoples and loss of traditional 
customs during the Indian Reserve and Residential School era. Furthermore, from the 
early 1900s, the cultural burning practice was made illegal, leading to the thickening of 
forest layers that left coniferous stands prone to destructive wildfires and infestation.  
Historically, there were at least 70 different uses of fire by First Nations. Cultural 
burns were done at various intensities, at different times of the year and in specific 
locations based on fire keepers’ knowledge. The type, intensity and location promoted 
the growth of certain types of culturally significant plants such as food, medicine, 
grasses for wildlife and woody shrubs for baskets. Revitalizing cultural burning can 
result in the reduction of risk to wildfires, as it reduces fuel loading, while releasing 
nutrients; thereby, enabling effective land restoration. Engaging in a knowledge 
gathering exercise helps the forest management teams understand this historic 
practice, with its objectives and values, so that local and indigenous knowledge may 
be incorporated into community-based burn management plans.
THE TRIGGER
A great majority of First Nations communities in Canada, including the Shackan 
Indian Band, the Xwisten First Nation and the Yunesit’in First Nation, are located 
within wildlands where they intersect with urban development. Indigenous burning 
was widely practiced within these communities, resulting in fire-inclusive forests. 
This practice ended partly due to restrictive forest management legislation. In the 
absence of these checks on fuel stands, forests near these communities became 
more susceptible to wildfires. The First Nations’ Emergency Services Society’s 
(FNESS) Forest Fuel Management Department has been trying to re-engage with the 
communities and the province to reinstate some of those practices and to harmonize 
indigenous and non-indigenous forest management approaches. The Society 
collaborated with the Shackan Indian Band, Xwisten First Nation, Yunesit’in National 
Government and the B.C. Wildfire Service, to support an agreement to investigate 
indigenous burning practices to be incorporated into provincial and federal programs. 
With the guidance and expertise of independent and government researchers, the 
FNESS Forest Fuel Management Department prepared a funding proposal and 
submitted it to the First Nations ADAPT program, funded by Indigenous Services 
Canada. The Canadian Council of Forest Ministers provided more funding to carry 
out the burns. 
THE APPROACH
An Indigenous-informed qualitative data gathering approach was used to collect 
information about the value system underpinning traditional burns and information 
about where, how, when and why traditional burns were conducted in these 
50
communities. The goal was to understand Indigenous cultural burning practices that 
can assist in reducing the risk of loss due to wildfires. Elders and knowledge keepers 
participated in interviews conducted by some of the FNESS staff and researchers 
from Merritt, B.C. The interviews were then transcribed, digitized and summarized. 
This data was used to develop a community-based burn management plan. The plan 
considers climate change risks in wildfire mitigation. The Shackan Indian Band and 
Xwisten First Nation in relationship with FNESS and the B.C. Wildfire Service worked 
together to inform, design and execute the burn plan. Two traditional burns under 
a prescribed burn plan were completed in 2019. From the indigenous perspective, 
the goal was to revive cultural burns, in order to reduce the hazard but to also heal 
the land so that it will produce plants that are culturally significant to the respective 
communities, whether that be food, medicine, or wildlife.    
THE OUTCOME
The research allowed for a re-instatement of the legitimacy of indigenous cultural 
practices and approaches and effective utilization of this knowledge. First Nations 
objectives were incorporated into the plan and these communities participated in 
subsequent prescribed burns. Two burns were implemented, which rekindled past 
practices, and increased awareness and acceptance of the elders and fire keepers’ 
Figure 12: The Shackan Indian Band and Xwisten First Nation, B.C. Wildfire Service and the 
First Nations’ Emergency Services Society of BC worked together to inform, design and execute 
the burn plan. (Source: First Nations’ Emergency Services Society of BC – FNESS)
51
knowledge; thereby, recognizing other valuable aspects of the land besides being a 
source of timber and enabling agriculture. According to members from the Xwisten 
Fire Crew, communities are now more aware of the cultural burns, why they are 
important and how to apply them effectively. The B.C. Wildfire crew also benefited 
from this knowledge transfer, which helps in transitioning the burning culture from 
one of avoiding fires to one of applying fire to accomplish ecosystem restoration. 
Another important outcome was the building of capacity within communities. 
A WORD FROM SHACKAN INDIAN BAND AND XWISTEN 
FIRST NATION
Lennard Joe, professional Forester and Fire Chief from the Shackan Indian Band 
focused on the importance of communicating Indigenous values and ways of knowing 
to Western planners, especially in recent times when more Indigenous land is being 
encroached upon and climate change poses an increased threat: “Today we’re 
really more emersed with the Western society than we have ever been. With the 
relationship that we have now with Western society, it is our responsibility to push 
forward on our knowledge of the land. It is our time to push forward to merge and 
blend our cultural values and put them into a measurable way that Western world 
can understand and buy into.”  
In terms of logistical considerations when preparing for a prescribed burn, the Acting 
Executive Director of FNESS, Jeff Eustache stressed the importance of early planning, 
which entails effective, frequent communication and coordination, so that all project 
partners have a clear understanding of what has to be done within a specific timeline. 
“I think our pilot burn operations worked well, considering the short one-week 
timeline that we had, trying to tie in the availability of the B.C. Wildfire Service crew 
for late March before they go back to their regular jobs, but at the same time trying 
to bring the videographer in. But you can’t plan on a week. You’re probably looking at 
two to four weeks so somebody could monitor the site conditions daily.” 
52
53
SECTION 3

STRENGTHENING DISASTER 
RISK GOVERNANCE
Strengthening disaster risk governance: Disaster risk governance at the 
national, regional and global levels is very important for prevention, mitigation, 
preparedness, response, recovery, and rehabilitation. It fosters collaboration and 
partnership.

Source: UNDRR - SENDAI Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
Source: First Nations’ Emergency Services Society of BC – FNESS
54
QUESNEL
Establishing a comprehensive wildfire 
risk reduction strategy 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: City of Quesnel
55
THE SCIENCE
The mountain pine beetle is an insect that infects lodgepole pine trees and is the 
cause of severe infestations affecting the health of forests in British Columbia and 
Alberta. While mountain pine beetles can cause significant damage to forests, they 
are also increasing wildfire severity. Rapid growth of beetle populations in Western 
Canada has been caused by the changing climate. Temperatures in winter months 
have not been cold enough to prevent the spread of these insects, which has led to 
larger areas being infested. In British Columbia alone, the outbreak of the mountain 
pine beetle has affected over 18 million hectares of forest. This threat required a new 
approach to fire management. 
THE TRIGGER
According to Bob Simpson, Mayor of the City of Quesnel, the mountain pine 
beetle epidemic gave an early indication that wildfire risk faced by municipalities 
like Quesnel was going to become fundamentally different than what had been 
experienced before. Mayor Simpson’s background in forestry made him very well 
aware of the wildfire risk faced by Quesnel when he was elected for his first term in 
2014. He made it a priority to address this growing threat by engaging his municipal 
government in discussions about fire risk management strategies. The Mayor and 
his team convinced members of the municipal council that one of the community’s 
priorities should be to better manage the forests and that this work would have to 
start at the municipal level as there were limited provincial supports at that time. This 
led to the establishment of a think tank process where an overall strategy to reduce 
wildfire risk was developed by the City. 
THE APPROACH
The City of Quesnel had prepared an initial Community Wildfire Protection Plan in 
2007. The Plan was focused on fuel management in at-risk areas of the community 
with an overall intervention target of 2,000 hectares of land. Unfortunately, only 
20 hectares of land was treated. When the time came to renew the plan in 2017, 
local leadership advised council that updating the document would require serious 
decisions about the protection work that needed to be completed. As the Plan was 
updated, severe wildfires in British Columbia combined with changes in provincial 
leadership led to more resources available to municipalities for investments in wildfire 
risk reduction.  
The new Plan revealed that the main areas of concern were located on Crown land 
or private land. The City developed a fuel management intervention strategy around 
two main priorities, which involved direct fuel management in areas on Crown 
land in the city or adjacent to the city, and increased education and engagement 
around FireSmart measures for private property owners. When asked about the fuel 
management strategy adopted by the City of Quesnel, Mayor Simpson mentioned 
that “it was crucial for the community to adopt this two-fold strategy as there was no 
point investing in our vulnerable territory on public lands if our risk around private 
properties remained high.” 
56
When it comes to promoting FireSmart practices around private properties, 
municipal staff quickly sensed resistance among certain property owners who were 
worried that implementing FireSmart measures would completely remove the 
presence of nature around their homes. To address these concerns, the municipality 
set up a demonstration of FireSmart principles on airport land, which included a 
trail system with interpretive signage to demonstrate how specific strategies might 
look. Erin Robinson, the Forestry Initiatives Manager for the City of Quesnel, who 
co-authored the Plan and manages its implementation stated, “it’s important that 
everyone in the community buys into the concept of FireSmart. Over 60 percent of 
our lands in the Plan are private, so we need everyone on the same page.” 
The City of Quesnel also invested in fuel management along the various trails in the 
community. This fuel management effort, which started with pruning trees along the 
edges of the trails, ended up bringing several additional benefits to the community. 
The City has since extended some of the existing trails to facilitate access for 
firefighters in the eventuality of a wildfire. In addition, the development of the trail 
system combined with fuel management along the various paths is now providing 
additional open views that were not accessible before, allowing hikers to enjoy new 
scenery around the community. 
Figure 13: Mayor Bob Simpson (Bottom Row - Centre) and Quesnel’s City Council. 
(Source: City of Quesnel)
57
THE OUTCOME
The City of Quesnel has targeted fuel management from many different angles 
to reduce the community’s vulnerability to wildfires. In addition to the various 
initiatives in place around wildfire risk reduction in Quesnel, the community is also 
working towards the establishment of a community forest. This concept involves 
the municipality, four local First Nation Governments, and the regional district taking 
control of forestry operations in an area-based tenure. The municipality is currently 
hoping the transfer of forestry operations to the community forest partners will 
be approved in the near future as this would allow the community and its partners 
to have greater control over community protection, both from a pest control and 
wildfire risk perspective.  
A WORD FROM QUESNEL
When asked what advice he would offer to other Canadian municipalities keen 
to reduce their wildfire risk, Mayor Simpson highlighted the importance of not 
depending on others. “We live in a different world now where municipalities used 
to be tax collectors and by-law enforcers. We need to be leaders across all domains 
to create resilient communities.” He added that it is crucial for municipalities to own 
the issues that are affecting them. “Once you recognize an issue, if you don’t have the 
internal expertise to tackle it then you must find and hire the expertise. That’s why 
we set up our Forestry Initiatives Program with two full-time City staff. In my opinion, 
if you’re an at-risk community for fire, nothing is more important than making the 
decision that you are going to own it, identify how to mitigate that risk and be the 
champion that influences other levels of government to do what needs to be done.” 
58
ELLIOT LAKE
Protecting vulnerable private properties 
in high-risk wildfire areas 
By Robin Kovacs
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
59
THE SCIENCE
Neighbourhood initiatives are crucial for ensuring the safety of individuals and 
properties located within the wildland urban interface. This includes public education 
and development of a wildfire hazard reduction plan. Research by the Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction and others show that when individual homeowners 
implement FireSmart practices, such as removing flammable vegetation and 
landscaping with fire resistant materials, they drastically increase their property’s 
resilience against the risk of wildfire damage. The responsibility and cost of 
implementing these recommendations, however, usually fall onto individual property 
owners. This can be challenging for vulnerable populations, such as the elderly, ill, and 
fragile, who may have limited capacity to contribute to FireSmart recommendations. 
THE TRIGGER
The City of Elliot Lake, with a population of about 11,000, is located north of 
Lake Huron and 161 kilometers west of Sudbury Ontario. The city suffered an 
economic downturn in the late 1990s as a result of the decline and, ultimately, 
the disappearance of the mining community. Elliot Lake has reinvented itself as 
a community dedicated to retirement living, waterfront cottages and seasonal 
destinations. With the cooperation of the Ministry of Natural Resources, a 
subsequent Lakeshore community arose 20 minutes north of the city itself. The city 
and its adjacent Lakeshore community are surrounded by dense forests, including 
highly flammable coniferous stands. The new Lakeshore properties are at high risk 
of property damage if a fire were to occur, as they are also located at a distance 
from the city’s Fire Department. In 2015, after numerous fires on the waterfront 
and with media coverage of major wildfires across Canada, a group of concerned 
individuals from the Lakeshore community decided to begin implementing FireSmart 
recommendations to protect their properties. They also developed initiatives to 
encourage others to do the same. 
THE APPROACH
A group of property owners in the newly developed Elliot Lake, understanding the 
serious threat posed to their homes and cottages by wildfire, enlisted the help of 
their Provincial Liaison to become a FireSmart Community. The Liaison assessed the 
wildfire hazards around three new Lakeshore houses and designed a specialized 
wildfire hazard reduction plan. Together, they also established the Elliot Lake 
Lakeshore FireSmart Community (ELLFC), whose members include the President of 
the Elliot Lake Waterfront Owners Association (ELWOA). ELLFC’s main function is 
to educate waterfront owners on ways to protect their property by implementing 
FireSmart recommendations and practices. The ELWOA also deemed it important to 
bring the fire safety message not only to its members, but to all waterfront owners. 
The ELLFC began publicizing FireSmart information in ELWOA newsletters, on its 
website, the Association bulletin board and presented the FireSmart program at 
the Association’s annual meetings. In addition, a fire safety section was added to 
the ELWOA website, and an ELLFC introductory letter, along with brochures, was 
added to the handout packages given to all new Waterfront property owners. The 
60
ELLFC also held FireSmart Days, where representatives from the Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Forestry were available to educate and train volunteers on FireSmart 
recommendations and practices. By educating waterfront property owners in best 
practices for the prevention of property damage from wildfires, the community’s 
overall resilience and level of preparedness increased significantly.  
Since Elliot Lake and its adjacent Lakeshore community are home to a high 
proportion of seniors, one of the many challenges that the ELLFC wanted to 
overcome was in assisting the elderly in “FireSmarting” their properties. Through 
advertising on the ELWOA website, newsletter and bulletin board, the ELLFC offered 
seniors an opportunity to request the help of the Ministry-trained volunteers on their 
property. By encouraging these volunteers to bring along friends who would in turn 
be trained on the job, the ELLFC ensures a sufficient supply of workers. These special 
accommodations for vulnerable populations are crucial for securing FireSmart safety 
at the community level
.
THE OUTCOME
With the Lakeshore community’s decision to establish the ELLFC and with its 
volunteer committee for vulnerable populations, the community is not only better 
Figure 14: The City of Elliot Lake and its adjacent Lakeshore community are 
surrounded by dense forests, including highly flammable coniferous stands.  
(Source: Wikimedia Commons)
61
prepared for wildfires but has also developed the necessary knowledge to implement 
risk reduction measures around private properties through the FireSmart program. In 
addition, the volunteers for vulnerable populations were able to apply best practices 
for clearing Zone 1 (up to 10 meters from structures) and Zone 2 (10-30 meters 
from structures). Volunteers found that projects like this function best as a “working 
beehive”, in which one trained volunteer can easily lead and guide a group of 
non-trained volunteers. Furthermore, volunteers found that two hours is a good time 
limit for any one session. They learned the importance of having work gloves, sturdy 
footwear, water, bug spray and sunscreen to protect themselves while completing the 
work; and they learned that simple garden tools, such as hand pruners, loppers and 
pruning saws were all that were needed to make a difference. In 2016, the City of 
Elliot Lake became the first community in Ontario to become a recognized FireSmart 
Canada Community, and they have continued to work on their wildfire resilience. 
A WORD FROM ELLIOT LAKE
When asked what advice the Lakeshore community would like to share with 
other communities interested in implementing similar local initiatives and creating 
a volunteer committee, Jo Anne Matheson, ELLFC volunteer and former President 
of ELWOA, said that “while enlisting the help of Partners in Protection and your 
Provincial FireSmart Liaison is an important first step, it is also about getting 
the community involved as a whole in your FireSmart initiatives, challenges and 
education.” She encourages communities looking for FireSmart solutions to apply 
for grants and/or awards such as the FireSmart Wildfire Community Preparedness 
Day award. The ELLFC was given this award in 2016, 2017, and 2019, which gave 
the Lakeshore community access to a FireSmart event box, including promotional 
materials, volunteer t-shirts and work gloves, in addition to a $500 grant for local 
projects.   
62
PENTICTON
Optimizing operational preparedness 
before a wildfire 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: City of Penticton
63
THE SCIENCE
Operational preparedness is important when planning for hazards faced by 
communities, including wildland urban interface fires. Activities that contribute to 
developing operational capabilities, improving effective disaster response and reducing 
the vulnerability of community members are important when planning for wildfires. 
These activities can take various forms, including the development of standard 
operating procedures for response, training response personnel, and improving access 
to public information and communications systems. 
THE TRIGGER
Penticton is a municipality of approximately 37,000 people located in the Okanagan 
valley in central British Columbia. The community was threatened by a wildfire this 
year and several other communities in the area, like Kelowna, have suffered wildfire 
losses. When asked what motivated the wildfire preparedness efforts he led in 
Penticton, Larry Watkinson, Penticton’s Fire Chief, responded that this is something 
he is truly passionate about. “During my career, I have been deployed to many 
communities that were highly affected by wildfires. As a fire chief, I want to be 
prepared for wildfire events in our community. The last thing I want is to be standing 
on my heels saying I’m sorry I wasn’t prepared as a fire chief,” said Chief Watkinson. 
He also recognized the social and economic impacts a severe wildfire could have on 
the community. The City of Penticton is a popular tourist destination, and a wildfire 
could lead to a catastrophic economic impact on the community. 
THE APPROACH
Several initiatives have been implemented in Penticton to ensure greater operational 
preparedness to respond to future wildfires. In 2016, Chief Watkinson, along with 
some of his provincial counterparts, recognized that responding to wildfires in 
the province was requiring growing involvement of municipal firefighters and fire 
apparatus. While their efforts are instrumental in protecting structures, municipal 
firefighters were not equipped with the same training or experience as wildland 
firefighters. In an effort to optimize wildfire response capabilities, the City of 
Penticton, with the support of the province of British Columbia, B.C. Wildfire 
Service, and Office of the Fire Commissioner, planned a Wildfire Urban Interface 
(WUI) Training symposium for municipal firefighters across the province to provide 
educational material around topics such as wildfire behaviour and wildland urban 
interface firefighting operations. 
Two hundred firefighters from municipalities across British Columbia and the Yukon 
were trained in WUI firefighting at the symposium. The event was such a success 
that the British Columbia Fire Commissioner was invited to audit the program that 
was presented during the 2017 symposium with the hope of turning this training 
into a recognized provincial standard for the training of future municipal structural 
firefighters. Chief Watkinson and his team were then hired to create the official 
curriculum that would be used for structure defence at wildland fire incidents and 
the training material is now considered a provincial training standard. The City of 
64
Penticton was to host the third Wildfire Urban Interface Training Symposium in 
2020 to train an additional 250 firefighters coming from 50 municipalities across the 
province.  
The City of Penticton also increased operational preparedness at the local level by 
developing a wildland urban interface pre-incident plan. The pre-incident planning 
activities involved a detailed assessment and mapping of the community that took 
place over three years. When firefighters were not responding to incidents, they 
were dispatched in the community to gather key information such as variations in 
topography, the various fuel types present in all areas of the municipality, the location 
of water supply, potential safety zones, refuge areas, the type of roads and what 
size of vehicles they can handle, and the location of keys to open specific gates. The 
data collected was then handed to the City’s GIS team, who mapped the entire 
community with this information. These maps were uploaded into an app that can be 
easily accessible during an emergency to facilitate response logistics. Since Penticton is 
likely to rely on outside assistance if a wildfire was to occur, this information will allow 
all respondents to have access to the same high-quality information.   
THE OUTCOME
In addition to the operational preparedness activities, the City of Penticton has also 
invested in several activities to reduce the overall fire risk faced by the community. 
For instance, Penticton has been recognized as a FireSmart city with a number of 
small communities actively engaged in the program. Homeowners are given the 
Figure 15: Penticton offered training to municipal firefighters on wildland firefighting.
(Source: City of Penticton)
65
opportunity to have a professional visit their homes to go through a FireSmart risk 
assessment with them. The City will also be implementing a blue bin system, which 
involves dropping off large disposal containers in various areas of the community 
to allow property owners to dispose of their debris (e.g. pine needles, pine cones, 
other flammable debris located around the property). Finally, the municipality allows 
controlled burns on private properties through a permit process. More specifically, 
Penticton allows residents who have properties in the wildland urban interface 
to burn any debris that could be a fuel threat when a wildfire approaches the 
community. Before any fire takes place, properties are inspected by a firefighter to 
ensure the burn is limited to fuel threats and does not present any risk. “We are 
trying to build resilience against smoke, a little bit of smoke in the spring and the fall 
as opposed to a lot of smoke in the summer,” said Chief Watkinson.   
A WORD FROM PENTICTON
When asked what advice he would give to other communities interested in 
investing in wildfire preparedness, Chief Watkinson mentioned that “It is important 
to look at all aspects of preparedness. Implementing programs such as FireSmart 
in your community is very important, but it is equally important to be prepared 
operationally”. Chief Watkinson also encouraged others to look at partnerships 
that could support the community’s preparedness efforts. Provincial partners and 
representatives from other professional agencies were instrumental in ensuring the 
success of the various initiatives that were developed by the City of Penticton. 
66
ROCKY VIEW COUNTY
Fire and flood home protection 
program 

By Esther Lambert
Source: Rockyview County
67
THE SCIENCE
At the core of fire and flood home protection programs is a deliberate intention 
to reduce the risk of adverse impacts of wildfire and flood events by empowering 
action from homeowners and residents. These programs allow municipalities to 
work directly with homeowners and residents to facilitate building of awareness of 
their vulnerability and provide assistance for carrying out effective risk reduction and 
mitigation measures. This approach engages residents to become active participants 
in reducing their own risk. Implementing such measures as property assessments, 
cleaning of gutters or tree removal can go a long way in protecting property and 
saving lives. The municipality seeks to reduce risk of loss from fire and flooding by 
encouraging risk reduction action by private property owners. 
THE TRIGGER
Rocky View County surrounds the City of Calgary, partially straddling Calgary’s 
western and eastern boundaries and fully tracing its northern boundary. Its population 
of almost 40,000 is the largest among Alberta’s municipal districts. Because of its close 
proximity to the mountains and the Calgary Forest Protection Area, residents live 
with the threat of wildfire. Faced with this threat, and having experienced floods in 
2005, 2009 and 2013, the municipality started forging partnerships with government 
partners and non-government organizations to develop its emergency management 
program centered around disaster prevention and community resilience. Information 
gathered at open houses and stakeholder meetings with the business sector and 
residents also inspired the County’s move towards a comprehensive and sustainable 
approach, with a focus on the hazards of wildfire and flooding. 
With respect to wildfire risk reduction, in 2019 the County implemented a fire 
assessment program that is part of a broader Fire and Flood Home Protection 
Program. This fire assessment program by FireSmart Canada provides a free voluntary 
property assessment that helps residents identify specific actions they can take 
to reduce wildfire risks. Additionally, the County offers corresponding grants to 
individuals who want to undertake risk reduction work on their property. This funding 
was made available for two years through a $1.4 million grant from the Canadian Red 
Cross Society. 
THE APPROACH
The wildfire risk reduction aspect of the Fire and Flood Home Protection Program 
is part of a broader approach to emergency management, dedicated to disaster 
prevention and the building of community capacity and resilience. This program 
involves individual homeowners taking actions to reduce their risk, neighbours 
working together to minimize their combined risk and businesses taking steps 
to lessen disaster threat in the community. The Rocky View County FireSmart 
Assessment is undertaken for homeowners who express interest. Through this 
process, the assessor identifies actions that the homeowner can take to help reduce 
their risk of loss from wildfire. Residents can then apply for up to $1,600 under the 
home fire mitigation grant program. The type of work covered includes tree removal 
68
Figure 16: FireSmart Home Assessment taking place in Rocky View County.
(Source: Rocky View County)
within 10 meters of housing structures. A maximum of $1,500 is available for the 
removal of up to three trees per household for 100 homes and $100 per household 
for conifer tree pruning for 100 homes. 
The partnership with the Canadian Red Cross Society that allowed this funding 
opportunity for residents is an example of the importance that the County places 
on partnership building in confronting the challenges of emergency management and 
planning. The municipality also formed committees and groups to address broader 
issues of economic development and recovery planning, emergency management, 
people and communities, and planning and development. Experience finds that these 
are all important in a comprehensive plan addressing the issue of disaster vulnerability 
as experienced by multiple sectors. Homeowners, businesses and the community at 
large come to understand their role in reducing risk to disasters. 
Public engagement is another important aspect of the County’s approach to reducing 
its risk of losses due to wildfires and other hazards. Stakeholder meetings were held, 
where community groups across the county, including members from the business 
sector, were invited and asked questions about how they perceive their risk, and what 
they think their needs are with regard to building resilience. This information was 
then taken and developed into a report, which will help guide future programs. These 
groups and the community at large will continue to be engaged moving forward. 
69
THE OUTCOME
The wildfire risk reduction component of the Fire and Flood Home Protection 
Program coupled with the County’s broader approach to understanding and reducing 
its risk of losses from wildfires and other hazards has made it more prepared for 
such events. The program is part of a long-term investment. Fire Chief and Director 
of Emergency Management, Mr. Randy Smith comments “We haven’t had a major 
fire in our high hazard area. Hopefully, our efforts will pay off should we have a large 
wildfire.” The County is therefore focused on implementing its preventative approach 
so that it is not caught off-guard.  
A WORD FROM ROCKY VIEW COUNTY
One of the most important factors in ensuring the successful implementation of 
the fire risk assessment and grant program is effective community engagement and 
resident uptake. This requires public awareness events where homeowners and the 
larger community can be made aware of programs in place to assist them in reducing 
their risk and funding opportunities that may be available for home and property 
protection intervention.  As noted by Ms. Carmin Moore, Emergency Management 
Coordinator, “Without the community’s buy in or input, the program will not 
succeed.” It is really a community effort, especially as the inaction of one resident may 
negatively impact the progress made by others. 
Other crucial elements include developing strong partnerships and having patience 
with the process. Municipalities must understand their limits and form partnerships 
that can provide resources and expertise that they might not have. However, building 
relationships takes time, so it is important to also understand that this process may 
unfold over years. And, as Chief Smith says, “Getting a program like the FireSmart 
program is helpful. Stay the course. You won’t get everything the same year. But in the 
end, it pays off.” 
70
KAMLOOPS
Xeriscaping and FireSmart landscaping 
on private properties
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: City of Kamloops Facebook Page
71
THE SCIENCE
Several approaches can and should be used to reduce the risk of ignition at the 
property level during a wildfire. Several opportunities involve the building itself, 
including the importance of using fire-resistant roofing, siding materials and chimney 
spark arresters. It is equally critical to consider landscaping strategies around the 
house to eliminate any plants and trees that could act as fuel during a wildfire. 
Landscaping affects the risk of ignition, can introduce pathways to spread fire and 
may provide fuel to sustain the fire. Xeriscaping and FireSmart landscaping are two 
approaches that can be used to reduce ignition risk and the spread of fire around 
a property. These strategies promote the use of plants that do not require a great 
amount of water to grow and as such tend to do well in dry climates. In addition to 
using less water, a Xeriscape garden requires less maintenance, including less weeding, 
fertilizing, pruning and mowing. Further, as these plants have the ability to conserve 
water, it makes them fire resistant, which contributes to reduce fire risk around a 
property.  
THE TRIGGER
Kamloops is a city of approximately 100,000 inhabitants located in south-central 
British Columbia. A few years ago, the City’s Natural Resources crew started 
examining which landscaping approaches would be optimal for the community 
considering its very dry climate. They turned to Xeriscaping as a way to encourage 
the planting of species that require very little water to grow. As the crew was 
developing the Xeriscape program, they were approached by the fire department, 
which was keen to combine the Xeriscaping approach to a broader FireSmart 
landscaping strategy for the community and to promote both simultaneously. While 
some fire burnings were noted within the Kamloops Fire Centre jurisdiction this 
summer, the City of Kamloops has not been threatened directly by wildfires in recent 
years. Yet, it has been recognized by the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
and others for its thoughtful and innovative leadership by serving as a host city for 
evacuees during the devastating 2017 and 2018 wildfires that affected neighbouring 
communities.  
THE APPROACH
The Natural Resources crew and Fire Department worked together to create a 
brochure that combined a list of xeriscape plants with broader FireSmart landscaping 
strategies. Beyond the recommended types of plants, the document also touches on 
optimal planting locations to create a fuel free area around the home. The brochure 
developed by the City also examines the types of mulch that should be used around 
plants and recommends the use of gravel mulch, rock mulch, or a combination of 
plant mulch and decorative rock mulch to reduce fire risk. The use of fire resilient 
mulch is important to reduce the risk that burning embers blown by the winds during 
a fire may bring fire into the community. 
 
The Xeriscaping and FireSmart landscaping program is now shared between three 
departments in Kamloops (Natural Resources, Fire Rescue and Parks), who all share 
72
the responsibility of the continuous development and marketing of the program. 
In order to promote this initiative, the Kamloops Fire department has built a 
demonstration house that combines Xeriscaping and FireSmart planting strategies 
so residents can see how this approach can lead to aesthetically pleasing results. City 
staff have also been attending various local events including home shows and farmers 
market to share information around the program with residents. 
When asked if the City faced any challenges through the development and 
promotion of the program, Kirsten Wourms, Natural Resources Crew Leader for the 
City of Kamloops, mentioned that while the City considers wildfire risk reduction 
as an important priority, a lot of the actions that can be done to reduce fire risk 
have to take place at the private property level, which is where the City cannot 
do any work beyond promoting best practices. It is with this spirit in mind that the 
campaign “Do your part, be FireSmart” was created to increase the public’s sense of 
ownership when it comes to reducing the overall fire risk faced by the community. 
Beyond the landscaping program, the City has been offering FireSmart assessments 
of individual properties free of charge. They initially started by focusing on three 
high-risk areas where City staff went door to door to share information about 
various FireSmart strategies and how they should be applied in the wildland urban 
interface. Homeowners that wanted to go through the FireSmart assessment of their 
properties were also offered the possibility of having any flammable materials located 
around their homes shipped away at no cost. 
Figure 17: Xeriscaping and FireSmart landscaping are two approaches that can be used to 
reduce ignition risk and the spread of fire around a property. (Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
73
THE OUTCOME
The City of Kamloops has only had the opportunity to conduct 50 FireSmart 
assessments at this point, which makes it challenging to evaluate the uptake rate 
of the Xeriscaping and FireSmart programs promoted by the City. Nevertheless, 
research consistently finds great potential and value in fire risk reduction through 
landscaping action and the municipality remains proactive in the promotion of wildfire 
risk reduction activities. This includes videos, radio advertisement and social media 
campaigns that will be released in the spring to further communicate the benefits of 
individual risk reduction actions at the property level. In addition, City staff continues 
to participate in community events hosted by groups such as community gardens and 
naturalist clubs. 
A WORD FROM KAMLOOPS
When asked what advice she would offer to other communities interested in 
implementing similar programs as the ones in place in Kamloops, Ms. Wourms 
recommended to not reinvent the wheel. “There are some amazing programs and 
communities out there that have successfully implemented and promoted similar 
programs and there is a lot of information that is readily available,” said Ms. Wourms. 
She also emphasized the importance of strong marketing campaigns, which are crucial 
to the implementation of successful programs. “There are communities that have 
very strong advertising campaigns and promoted their programs in successful ways. 
I would recommend reaching out to them and joining a united front. If someone 
comes up with a great way to get the information out to people, there are no 
reasons why it shouldn’t be reproduced,” added Ms. Wourms.   
74
75
SECTION 4

INVESTING IN DISASTER 
RISK REDUCTION
Investing in disaster risk reduction: Public and private investment in disaster 
risk prevention and reduction through structural and non-structural measures 
are essential to enhance the economic, social, health and cultural resilience of 
persons, communities, countries and their assets, as well as the environment.

Source: UNDRR - SENDAI Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction
Source: Denis Renaud - Community of Wadin Bay
76
CANMORE
Comprehensive, sustained wildfire mitigation
By Esther Lambert
Source: Town of Canmore
77
THE SCIENCE
The Town of Canmore has been applying FireSmart mitigation measures for over 15 
years, embracing all seven of the major FireSmart disciplines: education, emergency 
planning, vegetation management, legislation, development, interagency cooperation 
and cross-training. Through the education and heightened awareness of community 
residents and professionals, a grassroots movement can emerge to drive FireSmart 
programs. Because multiple agencies are usually involved, it is important that roles and 
responsibilities are clear and that resources are deployed efficiently. 
Vegetation management involves a number of fuel management options, including 
fuel removal, fuel reduction and species conversion. Maintaining the recommended 
non-combustible zone around homes can go a long way by reducing the chances 
of wildfire spread from wind-blown embers. Incorporating FireSmart requirements 
in legislation tackles the issue from the planning and development angle and 
promotes more consistent implementation throughout municipalities. Ensuring that 
development standards support neighbourhood growth that espouses FireSmart 
design and building materials is important. Interagency cooperation ensures that 
professional wildfire responders are involved in the planning process, but also 
residents, industry and other government and non-government partners. Also, cross-
training allows emergency response teams from different firefighting disciplines to 
share knowledge and expertise and to work together to combat the common threat. 
Wildfires know no jurisdictional boundaries, making collaboration key to successfully 
reducing risk. 
THE TRIGGER
Canmore, located west of Calgary and nestled in Alberta’s Rocky Mountains, is 
a typical wildland urban interface community. It is surrounded by the Municipal 
District of Bighorn and is adjacent to Banff National Park. The Town’s move towards 
developing a wildfire mitigation strategy was fueled by a desire to be proactive in 
tackling the wildfire threat, which became more obvious in 1993 when Partners in 
Protection conducted a hazard assessment. Another major precursor to the Town’s 
Mitigation Strategy was the creation of the Bow Corridor Ecosystem Advisory Group 
in 1998. The Bow Corridor is the Greater Bow Valley Area from Lake Louise to 
Exshaw, Kananaskis, along which the Bow River lies. The advisory group consisted of 
Alberta Agriculture and Forestry Department, Canmore Fire Rescue, Parks Canada 
and MD Bighorn. Following this move was a change in 1999 to the Town’s land use 
by-law, to require the use of fire-rated roofing material on all new construction.  
The Bow Corridor Wildland Urban Interface Plan, with jurisdictional relevance for 
areas from the Banff National Park boundary to Lac Des Arcs within MD Bighorn 
was created. Then, in 2000, the original plan was used to develop a town plan, which 
was updated in 2010 and 2018. 
78
THE APPROACH

In an effort to quantify the wildfire hazard and risk and to start mitigating those 
risks, Stew Walkinshaw, the Town’s consultant, used the seven FireSmart disciplines. 
Implementing the FireSmart program required a collaborative effort that is ongoing. 
Within the town itself, the Fire Department works with Planning and Development, 
the Parks Department, Town Council and Town administration. The town has a lot 
of provincial lands within its boundary, which necessitates work with Agriculture and 
Forestry and Alberta Parks. 
The Fire Department trained its staff in FireSmart home assessment procedures and 
engaged residents in the program. A significant aspect of the mitigation strategy has 
been the engagement of community and homeowners in creating FireSmart zones 
for their protection. This engagement involved public forums, where the public is 
made aware of their level of risk and practical steps that can be taken to reduce it. 
Figure 18: There has been about 350 hectares of vegetation management completed by the 
Town, province and developers around the City. (Source: Town of Canmore)
79
THE OUTCOME
One important outcome has been the reduction in combustible roofing materials 
seen around town. There has been about 350 hectares of vegetation management 
completed by the Town, province and developers in the area. There have also been 
multiple public education campaigns, workshops and forums with the Town of 
Canmore staff and residents. Firesmart home assessments have been offered for two 
years now, free of charge for anyone who contacts the fire department. Residents 
seem well informed and are keen to see FireSmart activities succeed. 
After recommendations came out of the review/updated plan in 2018, Canmore 
built a structure protection unit with hoses, sprinkler systems and pumps needed to 
help protect structures from advancing wildfire. These enable the Town to set up a 
perimeter sprinkler line. Sprinkler line locations are mapped out in the wildfire pre-
plan. The sprinklers can also be used to wet down people’s decks, yards and roofs to 
help mitigate impingement by embers that might land on structures in the community. 
The Town is currently working with Alberta Agriculture and Forestry, Alberta Parks 
and Alberta Wildlife to develop a Bow Valley-wide vegetation management strategy, 
in order to apply a holistic approach to not only decrease wildfire threat but to also 
improve vegetation where wildlife can thrive. 
A WORD FROM CANMORE
According to Canmore’s Deputy Fire Chief Keri Martens, it is important to nurture 
a good relationship with the Planning and Development department within the 
municipality, in order to ensure the success of any wildfire mitigation plan. She further 
explained that maintaining a good relationship with this department will ensure 
that vegetation management and other FireSmart activities are implemented at all 
levels of municipal government and that all departments are of one accord. It is 
also imperative to have the leadership and support from elected officials in Council 
and the administrative team. This unity of purpose has to filter down to other 
departments in the Town. 
Lastly, this case highlights the value in adopting all seven FireSmart disciplines and 
working gradually towards progressing in each area. Of particular importance is the 
education of community residents and homeowners about what FireSmart is about. 
There are mitigative means that do not involve cutting trees. Engaging residents 
encourages municipalities to have a conversation about these risk reducing actions.
80
NAPATAK
Active involvement of community 
volunteers in wildfire risk reduction
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Community of Napatak
81
THE SCIENCE
It is common to find community volunteers at the core of successful disaster risk 
reduction initiatives. Volunteer efforts frequently have a significant direct impact 
on the protection of lives and enhance the safety of properties in the community. 
While community volunteers have always played crucial roles in disaster response 
and recovery, their participation in pre-disaster preparedness is often less frequently 
recognized as crucial to building disaster-resilient communities. Research has shown 
that when communities are empowered to manage the adverse effects of local natural 
hazards, they are more likely to sustainably and effectively address natural disaster risks. 
THE TRIGGER
Napatak is a small community of approximately 150 permanent residents located 
in a mature boreal forest on the southwest shore of La Ronge Lake. It is situated 
approximately 30km South of the Town of La Ronge in Northern Saskatchewan and 
can only be reached through one access road. Napatak has experienced potentially 
threatening wildfire situations several times over the years, including one in 1999 during 
the Mallard Fire and more recently in 2015 when wildfires forced the evacuation of 
13,000 residents in the La Ronge area. Wildfire risk became a growing concern for 
residents of the community who have since showcased great leadership in pursuing 
various wildfire risk reduction initiatives.
THE APPROACH
While residents of Napatak have been aware of the wildfire risk faced by their 
community for many years, the 2015 wildfires acted as a turning point for the 
development of local risk reduction efforts. One of the first initiatives that was 
implemented in the community was the establishment of an Emergency Preparedness 
Team to ensure community safety. One of the mandates of the Team was to look 
at establishing a stronger system to communicate with community members about 
emerging risks and potential evacuations. In order to do so, residents living on each 
block of the community were identified as ‘block captains’ and were tasked with 
the responsibility of notifying their neighbours in the event of an emergency. The 
Emergency Preparedness Team also developed a chart identifying various jobs that 
need to be done in the event of a fire, evacuation, or other emergency. The chart 
identifies community members who are in charge of communicating status updates 
from each of the community’s two divisions. In the event of an evacuation, community 
volunteers have also been tasked to identify which house has been evacuated through 
the use of a symbol displayed in front of each property. This allows local leaders to 
know who is still in the community as the evacuation process takes place. The plan, 
developed by the Emergency Preparedness Team, also identifies which residents 
are in charge of turning on the various pumping stations, filling stationary tanks and 
communicating to wildfire management teams about where the ‘wet’ properties and 
homes with sprinkler systems are located throughout the community. Where possible, 
the community’s Initial Response Team maintains the pumps and tries to assure there is 
continual water being pumped to these properties.  
82
Figure 19: The Emergency Preparedness Team in Napatak identified where the ‘wet’ 
properties and homes with sprinkler systems are located throughout the community. 
(Source: Community of Napatak)
Given the large amount of forested areas that come right at the edge of people’s 
properties in Napatak, the community also invested a lot of time in the establishment 
and maintenance of wildfire defensible buffer zones. Following the Mallard Fire in 1999, 
a fire risk assessment was completed for the community showcasing the importance 
of these zones. However, little had been done between 1999 and 2015 to ensure 
the continuous maintenance of the buffer zones that were established following the 
assessment. With the support of FireSmart Canada, a group of residents organized 
themselves and received approval to clean these spaces in order to reduce the risk of 
fire damage in the community. 
In recent years, the community of Napatak also made significant investments to be able 
to keep the community ‘wet’ when wildfire risk arises. More specifically, approximately 
one third of the homes have installed rooftop sprinklers. A 10,000-gallon water tank 
was installed in one of the higher at-risk areas within the community in order to protect 
83
two entire city blocks in the event of a fire. Finally, several pumps were also purchased 
by residents to be able to access water coming from the lake for firefighting purposes.
THE OUTCOME
The various wildfire risk reduction initiatives led by the community of Napatak 
contributed to making them a FireSmart recognized community in 2016. Pam 
Sanderson, who coordinates the Emergency Preparedness, FireSmart and Fire 
Mitigation Portfolio for the Napatak Community Association Executive Board, has 
been documenting the number of volunteer hours invested by her fellow community 
members in recent years. “I have records from 2015 to 2020 on approximately 25 
percent of what gets done on peoples’ properties and I have already recorded 7,500 
hours of residents’ in-kind resources and volunteer work around wildfire risk reduction 
actions and there is so much more out there,” said Ms. Sanderson.  
In addition to all the local initiatives that have been taking place in the community to 
mitigate the risk of damage from future fires, the community is now looking at investing 
in a new building that would be used to house an emergency command centre, 
firefighting equipment and to host FireSmart events. 
A WORD FROM NAPATAK
When asked what led to the success of Napatak in implementing wildfire risk reduction 
strategies, Pam Sanderson mentioned the importance of a strong sense of community 
when developing community-led efforts around disaster risk reduction. “I think it’s 
important to conduct the work with the idea that your neighbours are important and 
that everyone should be safe and feel secure in their community,” said Ms. Sanderson. 
She also mentioned the importance of partnerships with various government agencies 
such as Northern Municipal Services, Wildfire Management and the La Ronge Fire 
Department when implementing risk reduction initiatives. “Our local emergency 
response team understands that we have a vested interest in where we live and we 
are prepared to partner and work with others to ensure that it’s a safe place to live,” 
added Ms. Sanderson.
84
Source: City of Nelson
NELSON
Wildfire by-laws to regulate new home 
construction and community landscaping 
By Sophie Guilbault
85
THE SCIENCE
One way local governments can play a significant role and provide leadership in 
reducing wildfire risk for communities is through by-laws. Indeed, several municipalities 
have been relying on tools, such as development permits and municipal by-laws, to 
control new developments in the wildland urban interface. Several local governments 
across Canada now include specific requirements to access development permits, 
which can include FireSmart recommendations related to fire resilient building 
materials and the type of landscaping allowed around property. This type of local 
regulation can be used to combine management of zoning, site planning and minor 
variants into a single process.
THE TRIGGER
The City of Nelson has approximately 10,000 residents and is located in the Southern 
Interior of British Columbia in the Selkirk Mountains. Located in the wildland urban 
interface, the city tends to experience hot, dry summers and is situated in a region 
that regularly experiences wildfires. When asked what prompted the municipality to 
take action to reduce wildfire risk in the area, Len MacCharles, Nelson’s Fire Chief. 
mentioned that both the local government and residents of Nelson have been 
aware of the fire risk faced by their community for quite some time. “There has 
been a real step forward at the provincial level in recent years with the Province of 
British Columbia supporting municipalities in their efforts to develop wildfire risk 
reduction strategies,” said Chief MacCharles. With the support of the province, Nelson 
undertook development of its first Community Wildfire Protection Plan in 2009 and 
then again in 2016 to better understand various risk factors and key vulnerabilities. The 
2016 plan allowed the City to identify a number of priorities and develop action plans, 
including working closely with the Regional District of Central Kootenay and British 
Columbia Parks. 
THE APPROACH
The 2016 plan identified a number of things the community could take action on. 
One of the many initiatives that came out of the Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
was the need to update the city’s by-laws that control development in the wildland 
urban interface and regulate landscaping in other parts of the city. More specifically, 
the portion of the by-law focused on new buildings and structures located in the 
interface mandates the use of specific construction features, building materials and 
landscaping practices to reduce the likelihood of ignition from a wildfire. As set out 
in the FireSmart Homeowner’s Manual, the by-law established by Nelson requires no 
combustible material within 10 metres of new homes, reduced combustible materials 
within 10 to 30 metres with trees spaced at least three to six metres apart and 
specific requirements for reduced combustibles 30 to 100 metres from each new 
home. In terms of building materials, the City mandates the use of fire-resilient roofs 
with screened soffits and specific materials for siding such as masonry, stucco, fibre-
cement board or pre-finished metal sheeting. The City also expanded its requirements 
for windows, chimneys and decks in favour of materials known to provide better 
wildfire protection.  
86
While the most vulnerable areas of the City of Nelson are located in the wildland 
urban interface, it became clear to fire officials and planners in Nelson that all areas 
of the city were at risk of loss due to wildfire. Given that most wildfires spread via 
flying embers, there is potential for fire to reach all areas of the community. As such, 
it was determined that specific landscaping requirements would be implemented 
throughout the city to reduce the risk of easily combustible vegetation, such as 
coniferous plants that could ignite from a hot ember being planted right next to 
structures that would transfer fire from the plans to the building.  
Enforcing the landscaping portion of the by-law around existing properties can be 
challenging at times but Nelson’s Fire Department developed several strategies to 
increase awareness of the by-law among residents of the city. For instance, fire officials 
reached out to nurseries and retailers that sell trees to homeowners across the 
Figure 20: An informational brochure on the by-law developed by the City was prepared for 
residents.  (Source: City of Nelson)
87
city and asked that they hand out cards to their customers that provide information 
about the by-law and instructions on appropriate planting locations for the item being 
purchased. In addition, Nelson’s fire department continues to promote education 
around FireSmart strategies that can be easily implemented around homes to 
increase fire-resilience around the city.
THE OUTCOME
The collaboration that took place between Nelson’s Fire and Planning departments 
led to the development and implementation of a by-law that has the potential 
to reduce wildfire risk faced by new properties in the years to come. Since the 
adoption of the by-law for new construction, six new homes have been approved 
with the new building and landscaping requirements. According to Natalie Andrijancic, 
Senior Planner for the City of Nelson, the new approval process has been running 
smoothly so far with no major concerns expressed by property owners and building 
professionals.  
The development by-law mentioned above only represents one element of the 
overall strategy in place to reduce wildfire risk in Nelson. The City’s Fire department 
has also been participating in community events to educate residents about wildfire 
risks and is continuing to develop partnerships with wildfire experts, neighbouring 
property owners, the Regional District and B.C. Parks to develop further risk 
mitigation strategies and opportunities.
A WORD FROM NELSON
When asked what advice he would give to other communities interested in adjusting 
their development by-laws to reduce wildfire risk, Chief MacCharles mentioned 
that what made this initiative a success in Nelson is the strong collaboration that 
took place between the fire and planning departments. “Having open lines of 
communication between our two departments and taking the time to educate 
ourselves on best practices with the support of wildfire experts allowed us to 
develop a meaningful by-law for our community,” said Chief MacCharles. Beyond the 
strong collaboration that took place between the two municipal departments, the 
financial contributions offered by the provincial government to support wildfire risk 
reduction initiatives has made a big difference for the community.  
88
DISTRICT OF NORTH 
VANCOUVER
Community Wildfire Protection Plan: Construction 
practice and materials requirements 
By Esther Lambert
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
89
THE SCIENCE
Community Wildfire Protection Plans enable the execution of preventive strategies 
that reduce the risk of losses from wildfires. One aspect of such plans are special 
requirements for new development in locations referred to as Wildfire Hazard 
Development Permit Areas. These areas are characterized by certain physical features 
such as steep slopes, floodplains and forest cover, and coupled with their exposure 
to extreme weather, Permit Areas are susceptible to hazardous conditions, including 
wildfires. 
Any new development within Permit Areas is managed to minimize the risk of loss 
of life from wildfires, protect the forests and respect environmental considerations. 
Permit Areas provide municipalities with the opportunity to proactively manage the 
conditions that determine fire behaviour, preserve ecosystem services and ecological 
assets of forests for future generations, and minimize adverse impacts of post-fire 
hazards such as landslides and debris flows. By offering guidance for construction 
and materials requirements for new developments, such plans help ensure that 
municipalities build stronger and safer neighbourhoods. 
THE TRIGGER
Situated along the north shore of the Burrard Inlet along the base of the Coastal 
Mountain Range, the District of North Vancouver is approximately 161 square km 
of land area, with a population of more than 85,000 that is perched right at the 
doorstep of wildlands. The threat of wildfires is always present, especially during the 
summer. The District’s Community Wildfire Protection Plan process was initiated after 
Kelowna’s devastating wildfire of 2003, which resulted in extensive social, economic 
and environmental losses. This signalled a need for better risk management with 
regard to wildfires in the wildland urban interface. In 2005, the results of a Fuel and 
Fire Behaviour Analysis Study were incorporated into the District’s Interface Fire 
Hazard Defensive Measures. So, the need for a wildfire protection plan was evident, 
and through a Metro Vancouver application to the Province, the District and other 
municipalities received funding to develop their plans. In 2006, B.A. Blackwell and 
Associates Ltd. were retained to help the District and eight other municipalities within 
the Greater Vancouver Regional District-GVRD develop their plans. 
North Shore Emergency Management (NSEM), an inter-municipal agency in existence 
since 1978, supports the emergency management services for the City of North 
Vancouver, District of North Vancouver and District of West Vancouver. Interface fire 
preparedness falls under this disaster management system. A North Shore Interface 
Fire Working Group was then set up to ensure seamless communication and 
operational protocols are in place. The plan provides extensive detail on requirements 
for construction practice and materials for Wildfire Hazard areas in the district, 
which include areas in the wildland urban interface and some district park areas. 
The Wildfire Hazard permit is required for all new developments that involve home 
construction.
90
THE APPROACH
Development and implementation of the plan required collaboration across Fire, 
Planning, Engineering, Parks and Environment departments and stakeholder agencies 
such as First Nations NSEM, BC Hydro and Metro Vancouver. A major focus of this 
plan has been the adoption of the Permit Areas in 2012, which ensures that new 
residential houses adhere to FireSmart requirements, undertaking the treatment of 
70+ hectares of high-risk fuel types to protect critical infrastructure and high-risk 
communities. Applicants may be required to present an assessment report and new 
structures should be sited as far away as possible from wildfire risk areas. In cases 
where new development is being proposed on a parcel located within a wildfire 
risk area, the applicant is allowed to proceed with the construction far away from 
undeveloped forested areas. There is a comprehensive list of fire resistive materials 
and construction practices required for all new development within the Permit 
Area. These include, but are not limited to, fire retardant materials for roofing, decks, 
exterior walls, tempered windows, and building design that meet wildfire protection 
standards approved by the National Fire Protection Association or similar bodies. 
Figure 21: Early stages of a recent wildfire in the forest surrounding the District of North 
Vancouver. (Source: District of North Vancouver Fire and Rescue Facebook Page)
91
There is also the requirement that any new hydro servicing located within 10 metres 
of a wildfire area should be placed underground, and if this is not possible, poles 
made from non-combustible materials must be used. With regard to landscaping 
around development located in or within 10 metres of a wildfire risk area, there are 
expected landscape and service conditions such as firebreaks, replacement trees 
where they have been removed to reduce wildfire risk and defensible space of at 
least 10 metres, in order to reduce the likelihood of wildfire spread. 
Key to the successful implementation of the construction and building materials 
requirements is public outreach and education, much of which has been made 
possible with partnership funding by the province through the Union of B.C. 
Municipalities. Although the Permit Area pertains to new construction, the Plan 
Update document recommends the creation of incentives to encourage the uptake 
of FireSmart renovations for existing buildings.  
THE OUTCOME
Effective collaboration across District and provincial departments has enabled the 
adoption of progressive requirements for construction and building materials for new 
development that will help keep the community safe from wildfires. Looking ahead, 
the District is preparing to assess tangible outcomes of the development permit 
applications, as well as long-term compliance with its recommendations so that there 
can be ongoing improvements to the development permit process. The leadership 
demonstrated by this municipality has been acknowledged internationally, winning it 
the Sasakawa Award for leadership in disaster risk reduction and gaining recognition 
as a Role Model City with the United Nations’ Resilient Cities campaign.
A WORD FROM THE DISTRICT OF NORTH VANCOUVER
The District’s success in implementing construction practices and materials 
requirements as part of its Community Wildfire Protection Plan can be attributed to 
a collaborative approach to addressing the wildfire threat and an acknowledgement 
that pooling resources from different District and provincial departments is key 
to ensuring the success of such an undertaking. Collaboration is mandatory, 
because wildfires spread across jurisdictional boundaries and, therefore, require a 
multi-jurisdictional approach. The Fire Department is committed to and proud of its 
holistic approach to wildfire readiness and response. 
92
KILLARNEY
Mitigating wildfire risk through multi-level 
public and private partnerships
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: ICLR
93
THE SCIENCE
When a wildfire affects a community, the resulting damage extends beyond private 
properties. In many cases, public and private infrastructure suffer losses as well. As 
such, there is great value for both the public and private sectors to jointly invest in 
risk reduction measures. In fact, the development of public and private partnerships 
can guide the development of complementary risk reduction efforts that will lead 
to greater protection of communities in the wildland urban interface. Management 
of wildfire risk is best advanced through collaboration and partnership. These 
collaborations also contribute to helping communities plan for and manage the 
financial burden associated with wildfire damage risk reduction actions. Partnerships 
also build a sense of community united to proactively address a shared threat. 
THE TRIGGER
The municipality of Killarney is located on the northern shore of the Georgian Bay 
District, approximately 100km southwest of the City of Greater Sudbury. Located 
in the wildland urban interface, the community is home to approximately 385 
year-round inhabitants, in addition to an important proportion of cottagers that drive 
in and out of the community. In July 2018, the Parry Sound 33 forest fire forced the 
evacuation of several communities, including Killarney. Prior to the fire, very little was 
happening in terms of wildfire risk reduction in the community. However, this event 
triggered an increased interest from the community, provincial authorities and private 
sector to start a common focus on strategies to implement to reduce the wildfire 
risk faced by the community in the future. 
THE APPROACH
As part of their risk mitigation effort, the municipality of Killarney connected both 
with the provincial government and the private sector. On the provincial front, it 
reached out to Jim Murphy, FireSmart provincial liaison for Ontario, to assist with the 
development of a strategy that would reduce the risk of an event like Parry Sound 
33 from happening again. The adoption of FireSmart practices quickly became a 
key element in Killarney’s risk mitigation strategy. More specifically, the municipality 
reached out to local cottage associations to promote actions that could reduce 
the risk of wildfire damage around private properties. An initial information session 
was organized, and all were well attended. In many cases, residents that participated 
shared the information communicated by the community to their neighbours that 
were not in attendance. Several additional information sessions are currently planned 
for upcoming years. 
Beyond the actions promoted at the property level, the Town prepared the 
Municipality of Killarney Community Wildfire Protection Plan. The plan provides 
strategies and recommendations to address concerns about the threat to public 
safety, individual properties, critical infrastructure and natural resources, from wildfires 
in the municipality. Seven key objectives were identified, including training key staff of 
the municipality to conduct assessments of wildfire risk around individual residences, 
holding community FireSmart education sessions, conducting hazard mapping at the 
94
community level, and identifying critical infrastructure at risk and associated strategies 
to reduce their vulnerability.  
In addition to the various actions taken at the property and community level, two 
important partnerships were established with the private sector to help with both 
firefighting and recovery efforts. As the fire was evolving, Jim Rook, the Emergency 
Manager for the municipality, contacted the Canadian National Railway to warn 
it of the upcoming risk faced to one of its bridges. The organization instantly sent 
a firefighting crew to the village to protect the structure as well as neighbouring 
properties. Following the event, both Canadian National and Henvey Inlet Wind, the 
local supplier of wind energy, offered $5,000 in financial support to mitigate future 
wildfire risk. This money will be used to support vegetation mitigation efforts in 
high-risk areas. 
THE OUTCOME
Following the publication of the Killarney Community Wildfire Protection Plan, the 
municipality took action to implement several of the recommendations published 
in the plan and is in the process of working towards the remaining ones. Several 
high-risk areas of the community were toured for additional assessment, the Public 
Works Department has been removing fuel loads around municipal property and 
critical infrastructure and the first in a series of residential FireSmart education 
Figure 22: The Community Wildfire Protection Plan provides strategies and recommendations to 
address concerns about the threat to public safety, individual properties, critical infrastructure and 
natural resources, from wildfires in the municipality. (Source: Municipality of Killarney)
95
presentations was held in the Spring of 2019. Education, however, needs to extend 
beyond residents and target businesses, seasonal workers and tourists. While 
communication activities were undertaken to inform permanent residents and 
cottagers of risk reduction actions, it is estimated that more than 140,000 people 
visit Killarney Provincial Park each year, many of whom enjoy hiking and back country 
camping. Considering that a substantial proportion of wildland fires originate from 
human actions, it is very important to provide wildfire risk prevention information to 
those who vacation in the municipality. 
A WORD FROM KILLARNEY
When asked about what recommendations he would offer to other municipalities 
keen to take action to protect their community from wildfires, Jim Rook mentioned 
the importance of continuously sharing clear information about risk reduction 
measures with community members. “We found that showing videos explaining what 
causes wildfires and how they evolve and how embers spread truly helped residents 
to better understand the risk faced by their properties,” said Mr. Rook. While it is 
hard to quantify risk reduction actions around properties, Mr. Rook has noticed a 
great interest from community members and cottagers in protecting their properties. 
“There are key risk reduction strategies that are challenging to mandate at the 
community level because they are not currently part of the building code,” said Mr. 
Rook. However, while there are no official by-laws in place, the emergency manager 
noticed that the last roofs that were updated in the community were all replaced by 
steel roofs, which present a much lower risk of fire damage. This is certainly a strong 
indication that the communication efforts pursued by the municipality have reached 
many across the community. In addition to strong communication strategies, Mr. Rook 
also encouraged communities to reach out to private businesses in the area because 
they also have a lot to lose.
96
LOGAN LAKE
Protecting homes through the installation 
of roof sprinklers 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: District of Logan Lake Facebook Page
97
THE SCIENCE
Communities located in the wildland urban interface may face an even greater 
risk if there are limited firefighting resources available in the area. This problem can 
be exacerbated when local firefighting resources are mobilized to support fire 
suppression efforts in other communities during large-scale events, a concern that 
has been more evident in recent years. In addition, communities located in remote 
or isolated areas can be more difficult to reach if there is only one access road to get 
to the area. Outside assistance may fail to arrive in a timely manner, increasing the 
risk of loss and damage. The unique challenges faced by remote municipalities call for 
innovative wildfire mitigation tools and programs. For example, the District of Logan 
Lake pioneered the approach of a community risk assessment, installation of rooftop 
sprinklers controlled by local fire professionals, and residential assessments maintained 
in a database that informs local fire response. 
THE TRIGGER
The District of Logan Lake is nestled into a forested area in the mountains of 
south-central British Columbia and is a leader in developing and implementing 
programs to reduce wildfire risks. In 2003, the Okanagan Mountain Park Fire forced 
the evacuation of approximately 27,000 residents across the City of Kelowna. The 
District of Logan Lake sent firefighting resources to help out but found themselves 
affected by a few fires while they were operating with reduced resources. The fires 
were controlled by local firefighters, nevertheless this event triggered a reaction from 
the District’s council, who started looking into local wildfire protection options. In 
2003 the District developed the first community wildfire protection plan in British 
Columbia. 
THE APPROACH
The initial phase of the plan was implemented in 2004, before the creation of 
FireSmart Canada. The Community Forest Corporation was created to control 
the community forest in a way that would mitigate wildfire risk. More recently, the 
District started looking at measures that could be implemented to protect individual 
households. Logan Lake implemented the rooftop sprinkler program, an initiative 
partially funded by the municipal government which allows homeowners to purchase 
a rooftop sprinkler at the cost of $47 and have it installed by the fire department 
at no cost. Rooftop sprinklers are devices installed on the roof to wet down the 
building and its immediate surroundings in the event of a wildfire. The building is 
less likely to ignite as a result of flying embers or a nearby fire. While the sprinklers 
are installed on homeowners’ property roofs, they can only be operated by the fire 
department. To ensure that the sprinklers are not used by untrained professionals, 
the fire department stores the hoses associated with each sprinkler and connects 
them should a fire risk arise. In addition, if the sprinklers have to be used, the fire 
department first accesses the property and closes vents and chimneys to reduce the 
risk of water damage.  
 
98
Figure 23: Rooftop sprinkler used in Logan Lake. (Source: District of Logan Lake)
When installing rooftop sprinklers, the fire Department conducts a FireSmart 
assessment of the property they are working on. Following the assessment, they share 
the results of their observations with homeowners along with recommendations 
on how to reduce fire risk for their property. Homeowners have the opportunity 
to implement the recommendations and get reassessed by the fire department if 
they wish to do so. The information gathered during the FireSmart assessment is 
entered into a GIS database by the fire department. Having access to levels of risk at 
the property level allows local firefighters to have a greater understanding of which 
properties might be more vulnerable if a wildfire was to occur in the community.
THE OUTCOME
In 2013 Logan Lake became the first FireSmart community in Canada to be 
recognized. Since the launch of the rooftop sprinkler program, 250 rooftop sprinklers 
have been installed in the community, which represents approximately one third of 
all homes. The fire department also offered a community FireSmart employment 
program for youth for wildfire mitigation on forest land, where participants learn 
99
about mitigation strategies such as tree trimming and debris removal. Once the 
Community Forest Corporation was operating at full capacity, it began to support the 
program along with the Canada Jobs Program. The District of Logan Lake has a strict 
backyard burning policy where residents interested in backyard burning must first 
apply for a permit, which is allocated based on risks and weather conditions.  
Logan Lake recently launched a public emergency smartphone app which provides 
updates to local residents about emergencies such as wildfires, flooding, storms, road 
closures and chemical spills. The intention behind the app is to send out evacuation 
notices in real time. When asked to comment about the app developed by the 
municipality, Dan Leighton, Fire Chief of the District of Logan Lake, responded that 
“During an emergency, it is difficult for residents to get quick information. The app 
developed by Logan Lake sends out notifications in real time, sharing information 
on road closures and alternative routes. In certain situations, these updates could be 
sent every 15 minutes. We are hoping that this resource will become the main source 
of information for residents during emergencies.” 
A WORD FROM LOGAN LAKE
When asked what advice he would provide to other communities interested in 
implementing local wildfire mitigation measures, Chief Leighton noted that “Any 
community facing a wildfire threat should be looking at all available initiatives. The 
rooftop sprinkler program is a small part of the big picture, but it represents a great 
option for rural areas, especially in cases where people don’t have insurance or 
other ways to protect buildings.” Chief Leighton emphasized the need to develop 
a comprehensive approach to reducing wildfire risk that is not limited to rooftop 
sprinklers, but that also includes FireSmart assessments and new technologies that 
may be developed to help communities in the future. “Sometimes it’s the simplest 
things that can help protect people and their homes. This is why it’s important to be 
looking at all the ideas,” said Chief Leighton.  
100
BEST PRACTICES
A comprehensive local plan
By Paul Kovacs and Esther Lambert
Source: City of Nelson
101
Rising loss and damage from wildfires faced by communities across Canada located in 
the wildland-urban interface is of serious concern to homeowners, fire departments, 
government planners, community associations, other disaster response personnel, 
insurers and other stakeholders. Growth in the value of assets located in at-risk areas 
and the changing climate are driving factors contributing to Canada’s growing risk of 
losses from this hazard. Some communities, fortunately, have displayed great creativity, 
foresight and commitment to reducing their risk to wildfires by capitalizing on their 
strengths and forming alliances with internal and external players to build capacity. 
Wildfires like those experienced in Okanagan Mountain Park (2003), Slave Lake 
(2011), Fort McMurray (2016) and the recent devastating wildfires in British Columbia 
confirm the need for strong local leadership in reducing wildfire risk for communities 
located in the wildland urban interface. The case studies in this publication are a 
testament to the progress made by some communities in reducing wildfire risk. 
LOCAL LEADERSHIP
Best practices to reduce community risk of wildfire damage must begin with a 
commitment from local leaders to own and address the risk. Sustained and bold 
action required in most communities requires local leaders who choose to own 
responsibility for addressing the risk. Perseverance will result in a meaningful reduction 
of risk, yet experience demonstrates that progress will take time and many challenges 
will arise during the journey. 
Significant progress requires collaboration. Provincial and Territorial fire agencies and 
Parks Canada are responsible for managing fire on Crown lands. Crown lands account 
for the vast majority of Canada’s forests. Private property owners are responsible for 
most of the land and structures in the community. An effective community wildfire 
protection plan requires collaboration and active participation by Fire Agencies, 
property owners and other stakeholders. Community fire protection is a shared 
responsibility, and it is most effectively implemented with strong local leadership. 
SEVEN DISCIPLINES OF FIRESMART
The gold standard for approaching wildfire risk reduction is set out in the seven 
disciplines established by FireSmart Canada. This framework provides a comprehensive 
approach to understanding and addressing the risk of loss from wildfire. The approach 
was designed in Canada to best address wildfire risk in this country and can be 
adapted to the specific needs of each community. 
The seven disciplines of FireSmart are: 
Education – Empower community action through enhanced risk awareness of wildfire 
and knowledge about proven risk reduction practices. 

102
Vegetation management – It is essential to limit the fuels that may allow fire to enter 
into or spread across the community when burning embers blow in from the forest. 
Legislation and planning – Development planning, building construction requirements 
and enforcement practices established by the community can significantly reduce the 
risk of loss. 
Development considerations – The design of new structures and renovation of 
existing buildings provide opportunities for the community to build wildfire resilience. 
Interagency cooperation – Local fire agencies confronted by fire need to partner 
with provincial agencies and support provided by neighboring communities. 
Cross-training – Wildland/urban interface wildfires require response from wildfire 
and structural firefighters, two disciplines that work best together when supported by 
cross-training. 
Emergency planning – Fires, particular large fires, can be complex and require 
response by fire agencies working with other emergency management professionals. 
COMMUNITY WILDFIRE PROTECTION PLAN
Action to reduce the risk of loss should begin with a formal assessment of wildfire 
risk in the community. This is typically led by an independent advisor and is a major 
undertaking. Ideally the assessment results in a proposed Community Wildfire 
Protection Plan designed to address the seven disciplines set out by FireSmart 
Canada. The Protection Plan template published by the Province of British Columbia 
includes six critical elements: 
Local area description – Clearly set out the area assessed, review past fire impacts 
and identify linkages of the Plan to other community plans and policies.  
Values at risk – Identification of population at risk, assessment of critical 
infrastructure, review of housing stock characteristics and vulnerability of major 
employers.  
Wildfire threat and risk – Analysis of fire threat, review of fire history and 
verification of fuel type and topography, including consideration of climate change.   
Risk management and mitigation factors – Options to apply FireSmart disciplines to 
manage available fuel in or near the community and engage the public.  
Wildfire response resources – A detailed assessment of the capacity to manage fire 
risk in the community, evacuate those at risk and protect structures. 
103
Recommendations – Plans set out specific recommended actions that should be 
implemented by the community and other stakeholders over several years. 
A Community Protection Plan sets out a detailed understanding of the risk and 
provides specific recommendations for wildfire risk reduction actions designed for 
the unique needs of the community. The Plan provides the foundation for strong local 
leadership through its description of the risk and identification of solutions proven to 
reduce the risk. The Plan also provides a platform for community engagement. Risk 
reduction actions by many stakeholders unite in a shared strategy to better protect 
the community. 
PRIORITIES FOR ACTION
The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, the Government of Canada, some 
provincial and local governments endorse the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk 
Reduction. The Framework sets out that meaningful reduction in disaster risk is 
possible through a focus on four priority issues. The Institute focuses on these four 
priorities: 
	
•	
Build back better in recovery 
	
•	
Better understand disaster risk 
	
•	
Strengthen disaster risk governance 
	
•	
Invest in disaster risk reduction 
	
The seven disciplines of FireSmart and the six elements of a Wildfire Community 
Protection Plan are consistent, in our opinion, with the Sendai Framework for 
Disaster Risk Reduction. The Protection Plan provides a rigorous assessment of risk 
in the community and options for risk reduction, the two critical elements involved in 
understanding the risk. Stronger risk governance involves establishing collaborations 
with clear delineation of responsibility and elimination of gaps, core elements of the 
FireSmart disciplines and the process of developing a Community Protection Plan. 
Moreover, FireSmart and Protection Plans are unashamedly focused on promoting 
risk reduction actions and this is consistent with the Sendai priority of investing in 
disaster risk reduction. 
FireSmart and Community Protection Plans have been used to support the building 
of wildfire resilience in recovery from losses in Kelowna, Slave Lake and Fort 
McMurray, although there is scope to do more. Experience in the United States 
and Japan finds scope for transformative increases in resilience following major loss 
events. This requires a commitment to pre-disaster recovery planning, a concept that 
is emerging in Canada. Wildfire Community Protection Plans contain many elements 
required if a community were to develop a pre-disaster recovery plan. 
104
HOMEOWNER PARTICIPATION

An essential element of community protection from wildfire requires the active 
participation of homeowners in risk reduction activities. If some property owners 
do not participate then fire may enter the community and spread to bring harm to 
others. Many years of experience continues to find it difficult to secure widespread 
homeowner participation. 
Most programs focus, as set out by FireSmart, on vegetation management and 
structural issues. Public education, awareness and outreach seeks to empower 
homeowners. These programs are effective in reaching some homeowners and 
have reduced community risk. However, experience in Canada, the United States 
and elsewhere finds that most homeowners fail to participate. Awareness programs 
are a step forward, but time will demonstrate that additional measures will likely be 
required. 
Several communities, including Logan Lake and Canmore, provide a FireSmart 
home assessment at no cost to the homeowner. Homeowners learn about the 
risk of damage to their property and action that can be taken to reduce the risk. 
This practice is encouraged for all communities. Homeowners willing to request 
an assessment are motivated to also take action to reduce their risk if informed. 
However, many homeowners do not request an assessment and additional measures 
are typically needed. 
Many communities across Canada have enacted local regulations for new 
construction in zones with higher risk. This includes requirements for vegetation and 
structures. Several communities report that these safety requirements have typically 
been welcome by builders and new residents. National and provincial wildfire building 
codes would accelerate this progress. However, these improvements frequently apply 
only to new construction. 
Swan Hills was likely the first community in Canada to enact local wildfire safety 
requirements for vegetation and structures that applies to new and existing 
properties. Canmore noted that public awareness efforts help address challenges 
to enforce wildfire safety measures for existing homes. More communities should 
consider wildfire safety requirements that extend to existing properties and 
structures.  
Communities that choose to require that homes maintain a protection zone around 
them and install fire resistant roofing and other structural safety measures also would 
secure increased support from most insurance companies. If a home with insurance 
is destroyed by wildfire it typically would be rebuilt to be similar to what was in place 
before unless there are provincial or community requirements for additional features 
that were not previously present. For example, if a home with an untreated wood 
shake roof is destroyed by fire it will be replaced by a home with a fire-resistant roof 
105
if that is required by provincial or local regulations. Homes will be built back better 
after a fire if these requirements are included in regulations before the fire.  
RISK MANAGEMENT
Wildfire is one of many risks facing communities. Ideally it should be assessed and 
addressed like other risks. Four critical actionable elements that should be included in 
a comprehensive strategy to build a community resilient to damage from wildfires are: 
	
•	
Determine acceptable risk of loss 
	
•	
Assess the risk of loss and damage 
	
•	
Invest in risk reduction 
	
•	
Plan for recovery and reconstruction 
Determine acceptable risk of loss 
The risk of loss from wildfires can be reduced, but not eliminated, so community 
leaders need to determine the level of protection that is acceptable. For example, 
the risk tolerance statement for the District of North Vancouver focuses on the 
maximum acceptable risk of disaster fatalities. The flood risk tolerance statements 
established by provincial governments focus on the likelihood of loss. In private 
industry, risk appetite and tolerance statements often include a focus on the 
maximum dollar value of acceptable loss. Local efforts to champion risk reduction 
investments could include a requirement that each proposal must include an 
assessment of the cost and projected benefits, with an expectation that the benefits 
will exceed the cost. 
Assess the risk of loss and damage
A community wildfire assessment provides an essential foundation for action. It 
assesses the risk of fire entering the community and recommends specific risk 
reduction solutions. Comprehensive plans may include estimates of expected losses 
if no action is taken and project reduced losses if risk reduction measures are 
implemented. Local leaders can contrast this information with available knowledge 
about other risks facing the community to support decisions about the relative 
importance of action to reduce the risk of fire damage. Risk management tools can 
be powerful to support decision makers. 
Invest in risk reduction
The benefits to the community begin immediately when investments in risk 
reduction are implemented. Fuel reduction is needed in the community and near 
the community. This must involve community land, Crown land and private property. 
Structures must be fire resilient. Broad participation is needed across the community 
for these measures to be most effective. Implementation of a community protection 
plan based on the seven disciplines of FireSmart will reduce fire risk.  
106
Plan for recovery and reconstruction 
One of the best opportunities to promote community resilience is during the 
reconstruction that follows a wildfire. There is a 12-to-18-month period after 
a disaster when public support for risk reduction investments is very high. 
Implementation of significant resilience initiatives soon after an event requires 
planning that takes place before the disaster strikes. A wildfire hazard community 
protection plan can be adapted to form a recovery plan that includes a vision to build 
back better. For example, the cost of moving critical infrastructure out of harm’s way 
may be high relative to the expected benefits when the facility is operating, but if the 
facility is destroyed by fire the additional cost of relocation may become trivial when 
funds must be found for reconstruction. The important element of recovery planning 
is to anticipate and evaluate options for reconstruction, options that may not be 
available before a disaster strikes. 
BEST PRACTICES
Proven solutions will reduce the risk of loss and damage for communities located 
in the wildland-urban interface. Committed local leaders willing to own the issue 
can implement measures that are effective in reducing the risk. The 20 communities 
identified in this report demonstrate the progress that is possible. Sustained, bold 
action will result in avoided loss and damage and communities better prepared for 
wildfire. Canada’s national program – FireSmart – can help guide communities. Much 
work remains to be done, but the path forward is known, and several communities 
are moving forward. The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction celebrates local 
governments who are leading the way. 
107
CITIES ADAPT SERIES
108
ABOUT ICLR
Canada’s leading disaster research institute, the Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction (ICLR) was established with funding from the insurance industry in 1997 
as an independent, not-for-profit research and outreach institute to champion 
disaster resilience in Canada. ICLR is an international centre of excellence affiliated 
with Western University. The Institute develops and champions evidence-based 
disaster safety solutions that can be implemented by homeowners, businesses and 
governments to enhance their disaster resilience. 
Vision 
Disaster-resilient Canadians, certain in their capacity to cope with and recover from 
flooding, wildfire, earthquakes, severe wind, hail and other natural hazards. Canadians 
prepared for extreme or catastrophic hazards will be confident in their capability to 
respond to any natural hazard. Their confidence is based on a sound understanding of 
risk, knowledge of effective risk reduction solutions and actions taken to reduce the 
impact of natural hazards. 
Mission 
Demonstrate objective and independent science through leadership by providing 
science and evidence-based disaster risk management knowledge. Support Canadians 
to become aware of actionable solutions that reduce the risk of loss of life, injury 
and property damage caused by flooding, wildfire, earthquakes, severe wind and hail. 
Support sustained actions by homeowners, businesses, governments and others that 
improve society’s capacity to adapt to, anticipate, mitigate, withstand and recover from 
natural hazards. 
109
ICLR’S BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Carol Jardine (Chair) 
Wawanesa Mutual Insurance 
Paul Christoff 
SCOR Canada  
Steve Cohen 
RSA Canada  
Phil Gibson 
Aviva Canada  
Ken Coley 
Western University  
Matt Davison 
Western University 
Louis Gagnon 
Intact Insurance  
Phil Gibson 
Aviva Canada 
Paul Kovacs 
Executive Director, ICLR  
Claus Kroll 
Munich Re Canada  
Monica Ningen 
Swiss Re Canada  
Andy Taylor 
Gore Mutual  
John Taylor 
Ontario Mutual Insurance Association  
Dan Shrubsole 
Western University  
Rob Wesseling 
The Cooperators  
110
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Paul Kovacs
Executive Director, ICLR
Sophie Guilbault
Manager, Partnership Development, ICLR
Esther Lambert
Post-Doctoral Fellow, ICLR

Robin Kovacs
Research Intern, ICLR
Published by
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
20 Richmond Street East, Suite 210
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5C 2R9
This material may be copied for purposes related to the document as long as the 
authors and copyright holder are recognized.
The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the collaborators and not 
necessarily those of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
ISBN: 978-1-927929-31-5
Copyright©2020 Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
111
112
