CITIES ADAPT  
TO EXTREME HEAT
 
CELEBRATING LOCAL LEADERSHIP
Sophie Guilbault, Paul Kovacs,  
Peter Berry and Gregory R.A. Richardson eds. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LESSONS LEARNED
ABOUT ICLR & HEALTH CANADA
LEDUC, AB
GATINEAU, QC
VANCOUVER, BC
WINNIPEG, MB
HAMILTON, ON
MIDDLESEX-LONDON, ON
MONTREAL, QC
FREDERICTON, NB
WINDSOR, ON
ROSEMONT-LA PETITE-PATRIE, QC
OTTAWA, ON
TORONTO, ON
KINGSTON, ON
SURREY, BC
SHERBROOKE, QC
SUDBURY, ON
MELITA, MB
PEEL REGION, ON
OXFORD COUNTY, ON
CITY OF NORTH VANCOUVER, BC
BEST PRACTICES
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
CELEBRATING LOCAL 
LEADERSHIP
By Paul Kovacs 
Canadians are experiencing more frequent and extreme heat events. Temperatures 
sometimes soar to levels that are dangerous to our health. The risk of health impacts 
from extreme heat is expected to continue rising due to climate change.
Most deaths from extreme heat are preventable. Preparing for extreme heat events is 
a critical challenge for local governments and other stakeholders across Canada. The 
warming across the country since the 1970s has occurred two to three times faster 
than the average warming experienced in the rest of the world. 
Climate experts project that warming across Canada will continue for several 
decades, and perhaps much longer. On occasion, Canadians across the country are 
expected to experience summer temperatures unlike anything we have seen before. 
Indeed, record temperatures have been set in many communities in recent years. The 
frequency and severity of extreme heat events is projected to continue to increase 
with time, posing a threat to the health of vulnerable Canadians.
The evidence over the past 20 or 30 years shows that the risk of death or serious 
health issues increases when the temperature rises. In particular, fatalities in many 
urban centres across Canada often start to increase when the temperature is 
above 25°C, and increase significantly when the temperature is above 35°C. Some 
communities have even experienced a few days when the temperature exceeded 
40°C. Over the next 25 years, it is likely that many, and perhaps most Canadians will 
experience high temperatures dangerous to their health.
The risk of heat illness and death is greatest for older adults, infants, young children, 
people with chronic illnesses, those who are physically disabled, people living alone, 
and those who work outside. The risk is greatest when temperatures increase beyond 
rates traditionally experienced, and when these high temperatures are sustained 
through several consecutive extraordinarily warm days and nights.
Fortunately, efforts are underway to address the health risks of extreme heat in 
a number of communities across the country. Public health officials as well as city 
and regional governments are adapting to prepare for changes in the climate and 
developing strategies to protect people’s health during extreme heat events. Local 
and regional efforts to prepare for extreme heat is supported by provincial and 
federal governments, and by a number of other stakeholders taking action now to 
increase the resilience and safety of communities.
4
5
Local and regional governments are in a position to implement many of the critical 
actions to help Canadians better cope with extreme heat. This includes issuing 
targeted warnings, opening cooling centres in public facilities such as libraries, 
community centres and public pools, providing water for those in need, educating the 
public, and planting trees and other actions to cool urban environments and reduce 
urban heat islands.
Local, national, and global action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is essential to 
reduce the pace of warming over the longer term – the next 50 to 100 years and 
beyond. Over the next 25 to 50 years, however, it is essential that we also take action 
to prepare for the inevitable warming that will take place as a result of greenhouse 
gas emissions that have already been released. Greenhouse gas emission reductions 
and adaptation are both essential elements of a comprehensive climate change 
strategy.
Figure 1: There are two broad categories of actions under which communities can prepare 
for extreme heat events.They can develop preventative actions or implement Heat Alert and 
Response Systems. (Source: Health Canada)
Seven experts from the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR) and 
Health Canada authored this report. ICLR has been designated by the International 
Council for Science as an International Centre of Excellence in Integrated Research 
on Disaster Risk. The Institute is based at Western University and is the oldest 
university-based disaster risk reduction research organization in Canada.
Health Canada is the federal department responsible for helping Canadians maintain 
and improve their health. In particular, Health Canada is the leading organization in 
Canada assessing climate health risks, and championing best practices to prepare for 
and mitigate the adverse health impacts of extreme heat.
The 20 case studies presented in this report provide examples of local and regional 
governments across Canada that have adapted to better cope with extreme heat. 
These examples were chosen because they are innovative, and, in our opinion, could 
inform efforts in communities across the country.
Many of the communities identified in this report have a comprehensive strategy 
in place to address the risk of extreme heat events. The case studies present one 
element from the many actions they are implementing to address extreme heat. 
Showcasing key elements from a broad range of actions is offered to help other 
communities build an effective and comprehensive plan to confront the growing 
health risks to Canadians from extreme heat events.
An important message in this report is that leading communities are taking action 
now. The risk to the health of Canadians from extreme heat events is present 
today and will grow over time. We seek to recognize and honour local and regional 
governments taking action now, and it is encouraging to report that many are doing 
so. 
This series of reports is a celebration of the leadership that local governments 
are providing in Canada on a broad range of important issues, including actions 
to address extreme heat. Each case study includes comments from an individual 
working within a local government whose responsibilities include the development 
and implementation of actions to address extreme heat risks. This report helps to 
raise awareness of health risks from extreme heat, offers examples of heat-health 
adaptation that other communities can learn from and is intended to spur action to 
prepare Canadians for the impacts of climate change.
 
6
7
LESSONS LEARNED
Local actions to address extreme heat
By Paul Kovacs
Source: ICLR
For almost one hundred years, the national and international disaster data have 
recorded two clear, but contradictory trends. The bad news is that there has been 
an alarming increase in property damage from most natural hazards including floods, 
tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, winter storms, lightning, and wildfires. The good 
news is the risk of death and injury has declined significantly across a broad range of 
natural hazards. Indeed, the health risks from extreme heat have declined in the last 
15 years since the implementation of Heat Alert and Response Systems. 
Changes in climate are expected to increase the frequency and severity of extreme 
heat events in Canada. Unless we change how we design our communities and how 
we respond to extreme heat events, more people will be at risk of dying as a result of 
extreme heat. While all levels or government have a role, local government leadership 
to address this growing health threat is important to confront this trend and improve 
the safety of Canadians and their communities. The 20 case studies presented in this 
report were selected to provide examples of communities in Canada taking action 
now to address the threat of extreme heat. These are examples of best practices that 
other communities can learn from and could consider implementing. 
Effective Response
The first 10 cases provide examples of communities that have developed a Heat 
Alert and Response System to protect people during extremely hot days. Winnipeg 
created a risk-based response plan with a detailed mapping of cooling facilities. 
Hamilton implemented an innovative mechanism for working with landlords to 
address the special needs of vulnerable populations. Gatineau developed a trigger for 
its heat alert program based on the specific needs of the region. Leduc developed 
a plan to protect the public when large gatherings take place during extreme heat 
events. Vancouver developed a program to protect the homeless and other high-risk 
populations. Middlesex-London demonstrated the value of leveraging existing 
networks to ensure an effective program. Fredericton’s experience demonstrated the 
value of widespread participation in the development of an effective response plan. 
Sherbrooke identified a wide range of cooling alternatives for residents to get away 
from heat. Ottawa invested significantly in stakeholder evaluation of its response plan 
and focused on opportunities for improvement. And Montreal provided an example 
of the importance of a carefully crafted communications strategy. 
A Focus on Prevention
The final 10 case studies provide local examples of preventative actions to reduce 
exposure to heat through actions like community design. These actions can take 
various forms from heat-health risk assessments to community engagement to 
build social capital. Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie and Toronto continue to promote 
cool and green roofs to reduce summer temperatures. Kingston and Peel Region 
demonstrated that local and regional governments are working to reduce the risk 
of extreme heat in urban centres by encouraging the planting of more shade trees. 
Windsor provides an example of the value of carefully assessing heat-health risks 
and the adaptation needs to be addressed by a response plan. Surrey has developed 
8
9
a robust street tree management plan. Sudbury is promoting free and accessible 
transportation to cooling centres. North Vancouver requires the construction of 
energy efficient buildings. Melita and Oxford County are using planning and tabletop 
exercises to build social networks that can be leveraged during extreme heat events. 
Below are seven lessons that can be learned from these 20 case studies:
Lesson 1: Many communities are taking action now
The 20 case studies presented in this report demonstrate that local and regional 
governments have begun to take action to prepare for the threat of extreme heat. 
Local leaders are implementing programs and plans to better prepare Canadians 
for this growing threat. The first 10 case studies provide specific examples of 
communities that have implemented Heat Alert and Response Systems. These 
communities have plans in place setting out when and how they will respond to 
extreme heat events. The remaining 10 cases provide examples of communities that 
are taking preventative actions to prepare for heat waves.  While many of these last 
10 communities also have Heat Alert and Response Systems, the focus in this report 
is on the preventative actions they implemented.The primary lesson learned from 
the 20 case studies is that leading communities are taking action now to address the 
growing threat of extreme heat.
Lesson 2:  A culture of prevention is the trigger for action
Canadian and international studies assessing the triggers that lead decision-makers to 
take action to reduce the risk of disasters often find that plans are made after a major 
event strikes a community. A community that suffers great loss of life and property 
damage from a flood, earthquake, tornado, or wildfire, is more likely to invest in 
Figure 2: Providing shaded areas to rest is extremely important during extreme heat events
(Source: ICLR)
actions to prepare for the next event. An important lesson learned from the 20 case 
studies presented in this report is that most of the communities have taken action 
to prepare for extreme heat events without experiencing major loss of life. Action 
has been triggered by fatalities in other communities, support and direction from 
Health Canada and provincial governments, and extensive academic research on the 
threat. Most importantly, there is a culture of prevention found in the public health 
community that has supported proactive action to prepare for extreme heat events. 
Lesson 3: There is great value in existing networks and partnerships
Many groups have a key role to play when it comes to reducing health risks from 
extreme heat. Individuals need to be educated to make informed decisions. Public 
health officials need to assess the risks of extreme heat and develop a plan to provide 
an alert and implement a response. City officials need to provide cooling centres, 
access to water, swimming pools, support for urban forests, by-laws concerning 
roofing, and more. Planning for and responding to extreme heat events requires 
the participation of partners such as local health authorities, emergency services, 
school boards, community centres, homes for seniors, shopping malls, and movie 
theatres. Response programs can also involve the Red Cross, Salvation Army, St. 
John’s Ambulance, the faith community, and others. The most effective Heat Alert 
and Response Systems make extensive use of existing networks and partnerships to 
design an effective program and to participate in its implementation.
Lesson 4: Evaluation and continuous innovation is essential
Most of the case studies show heat response plans and systems that are evolving. 
Communities test their systems in extreme heat events and through simulated events. 
The results are evaluated and the findings result in improvements that protect health 
during future events. The best systems include an explicit focus on innovation and 
iterative improvements to ensure that the programs evolve based upon emerging 
knowledge about how to prepare for extreme heat events and in a way that 
meets the specific needs of local communities. There is considerable similarity from 
community to community in the major elements found in Heat Alert and Response 
Systems, but there are often important differences in the details. Each community 
is unique and changing, and each presents characteristics that can make them more 
or less vulnerable to extreme heat events.  For instance, the representation of 
different age groups, the prevalence of homelessness or the amount of tree cover in 
a municipality are all factors that can affect the heat vulnerability of a community. The 
case studies provide examples of how this can be managed and embraced.
Lesson 5: Focus preparedness on the most vulnerable
In many communities, the risk of extreme heat fatalities begins to increase when the 
temperature moves above 25°C and increases significantly when the temperature 
exceeds 35°C. The health of some in the community is particularly vulnerable to 
extreme heat, and the case studies demonstrate that programs should focus on 
assessing vulnerability and developing strategies to ensure the safety of populations 
at highest risk. For example, seniors living without access to air conditioning and not 
10
11
participating in active social networks need special support to ensure that they are 
alerted when an event is expected and that they take steps to ensure their safety.
Lesson 6: Invest in prevention to reduce the risk of loss
Many of the case studies showcase how communities are taking actions to reduce the 
threat of extreme heat events. This includes assessments of heat-health vulnerability, 
actions to encourage the planting and care of shade trees, installation of cool and 
green roofs, and requirements promoting passive cooling for the construction of new 
buildings. Consideration of protecting health from extreme heat is being addressed 
in long-term urban planning policies and programs of some local governments. This 
can be done through strategies such as priority planting of trees or programs to 
incentivize or mandate the construction of cool roofs. 
Lesson 7: National and provincial leadership supports local preparedness
Local and regional action to prepare for extreme heat events is often supported by 
the federal and the provincial governments. Support may include funds, information 
about best practices, and examples about actions taken by others. Federal support 
may include actions by Health Canada, Environment and Climate Change Canada, 
Natural Resources Canada, and other agencies. Similarly, provincial support may 
include the department of health, emergency management officials, and those 
responsible for climate change plans. Typically, ultimate responsibility for development 
and implementation of Heat Alert and Response Systems resides with local and 
regional governments, but extensive support is available from federal and provincial 
agencies.
The most important lesson learned from these 20 case studies is that local and 
regional governments are taking action now to address the growing threat of 
extreme heat. The actions taken in these communities provide examples that can 
inform adaptation efforts by local governments across Canada. 
 
Figure 3: Green roofs can contribute to reducing the urban heat island effect.
(Source: City of Toronto)
SECTION 1 
 
HEAT ALERT AND RESPONSE SYSTEMS
Heat Alert and Response Systems are developed to reduce the risk of illnesses 
and fatalities during extremely hot days. They include five core elements: 
community mobilization and engagement, an alert protocol, a community 
response plan, a communication plan, and an evaluation plan. The 10 case 
studies identified in this section were selected for being particularly strong in at 
least one of these five elements.
12
13
WINNIPEG
The importance of region-specific 
triggers
By Nicholas Friedel
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
During extreme heat events, those most vulnerable to health impacts (e.g. seniors, 
young children, and people with cardiovascular diseases or chronic illnesses) often 
require assistance to stay safe and healthy. Community response plans contained 
within Heat Alert and Response Systems include protective measures that can 
reduce health risks for various groups within the population, including the most 
vulnerable. 
Heat Alert and Response Systems are a collaborative effort that relies on the 
participation and outreach capability of stakeholders for both creating and carrying 
out response measures. Shared knowledge from all partners (e.g. public health 
officials, emergency management officials, social services providers, community 
groups) helps to inform response plans so that financial, staffing and volunteer 
resources are most effectively employed to reach vulnerable groups and reduce 
negative health impacts. 
Heat Alert and Response Systems have contributed to the reduction of illnesses 
and fatalities from heat events in Canadian and American communities since they 
were first implemented in the 1980s.  Effective response plans employ measures 
tailored to stakeholder interests and capabilities. For example, publicly accessible, 
air-conditioned and climate-controlled cool rooms can be helpful in situations where 
individuals require cooling options, but do not have access to private air conditioning. 
THE TRIGGER
Public health officials with Manitoba Health, Seniors and Active Living (MHSAL) and 
City of Winnipeg officials have recognized the growing risks to health associated with 
extreme heat events. The health consequences of severe heat waves in Europe and 
the United States, in which hundreds or thousands of people died, prompted health 
officials with the MHSAL Office of Disaster Management to increase preparedness 
of individuals in the City of Winnipeg and the province more broadly. 
MHSAL and the City of Winnipeg collaborated with Health Canada to conduct a 
Winnipeg-based heat-health vulnerability assessment, which evaluated the public’s  
baseline exposure and sensitivity to heat, and the ability to adapt to extreme heat 
events. The assessment found that the general population in Winnipeg is vulnerable 
to extreme heat, with some groups at higher risk due to age, illness, socio-economic 
status and occupation. This assessment also identified opportunities to take actions 
to protect health while adapting to the changing climate. 
THE APPROACH
In 2009, MHSAL’s Office of Disaster Management (ODM) established a Heat Alert 
and Response System Advisory Committee (HARSAC) to engage with stakeholders 
and government departments, and guide the development of the new Heat Alert 
and Response System. The HARSAC identified the need for a Heat Science Group 
(HSG) to review heat science and generate a protocol for classifying and responding 
14
15
to heat events. The HSG developed a four-level heat alert protocol and has been 
working with stakeholders to develop appropriate response actions for each level.   
 
By engaging stakeholders from various backgrounds, the HARSAC gained access to a 
broad range of expertise. In Winnipeg, existing resources were identified that could 
be employed in response to extreme heat events (e.g. volunteer organizations and 
response activities already in place for other issues). 
Winnipeg used results from the heat-health vulnerability assessment to identify 
vulnerable groups that should be the focus of response measures. These measures 
were developed based on four factors: the nature of both the risk and vulnerability, 
capacity to engage the community, availability of resources, and the efficacy of the 
measures available.  
ODM and Public Health officials in MHSAL employ a continuous quality 
improvement approach to the Heat Alert and Response System, using HARSAC 
meetings and ongoing input from stakeholders, public health and disaster 
management officials. This helps to identify any needed changes to the system in 
order to improve preparedness for, and response to, extreme heat events. 
THE OUTCOME
During a response to an extreme heat event in Winnipeg, specific messaging to 
individuals and stakeholders occurs, depending upon the level of alert. In some 
Figure 7: Location of Public Use Facilities in Winnipeg, 2004 
(Source: City of Winnipeg)
circumstances, the level of extreme heat forecast may also result in the Chief 
Provincial Public Health Officer issuing a bulletin in the form of a Heat Advisory, 
which is sent to media outlets through a news release. The Chief Provincial Public 
Health Officer may also share information using other communications services, 
such as websites and tweets. These bulletins notify people in Winnipeg of heat event, 
actions they should take to protect themselves, signs and symptoms of heat illness 
and where they can get more information. 
Targeted messaging may also be sent out to stakeholders, such as health care 
professionals, public sector workers, and social services providers. Heat-related 
communication materials may also be supplied to organizers of outdoor community 
events while heat alerts are in effect. Community partners such as the Red Cross and 
Salvation Army are active in heat response efforts, engaging their own networks and 
reaching out to at-risk populations as the situation warrants. 
The City of Winnipeg’s Emergency Preparedness and Coordination Committee 
works to identify and meet the emerging needs of citizens during extreme heat. The 
city may, for example, extend pool hours or extend the hours of air-conditioned 
City of Winnipeg facilities for people to access. City of Winnipeg departments, 
such as Community Services, Water and Waste, Public Works, the Police Service, 
Transit and Corporate Communications have a list of activities and tasks that may 
be implemented during heat events. Public Works, for example, may arrange for 
additional seating and water supply for people entering cooling areas to escape the 
heat. Figure 7 shows the location of public use facilities in Winnipeg, a number of 
which may help provide respite from extreme heat.  
MHSAL and stakeholders work together where possible to identify and collect 
data on heat-related health impacts (e.g., Emergency Medical Services calls during 
heat events, calls to telehealth phone lines). Service providers also review usage of 
resources, such as cooling locations and bottled water, to help inform and improve 
response plans for future events. Collected data and a post-season review of heat 
events is discussed with members of the HARSAC at the end of each heat season 
and continues to aid in refinement of adaptation strategies to meet the diverse needs 
of Winnipeg residents during extreme heat.
A WORD FROM WINNIPEG
When asked what advice he would give to other municipalities that would like to 
implement a similar program, Randy Hull, Emergency Preparedness Coordinator for 
the City of Winnipeg, indicated that the biggest internal challenge is to determine 
what services can be alerted or extended to provide comfort and relief to citizens. 
“Although a heat alert is primarily a health event, the City of Winnipeg’s role in 
mitigating heat-related events is vital to public well-being. While the City of Winnipeg 
Heat Plan is limited to actions at the local level, support is provided from the 
MHSAL’s Office of Disaster Management and other sources. This helps to transmit 
reliable information that guides the City of Winnipeg’s response,” said Mr. Hull. 
16
17
Source: ICLR
HAMILTON
Engaging landlords to protect health 
from extreme heat
By Anastasia Rogaeva 
THE SCIENCE
Effective communication of heat alerts and measures to reduce health risks is 
a fundamental requirement for a successful Heat Alert and Response System. 
Heat-health communication campaigns aim to increase knowledge of the dangers 
from extreme heat and to influence individuals to adopt protective behaviours. 
Targeted communication needs to be delivered before and during the heat 
season, and especially during extreme heat events. To increase the effectiveness of 
heat-health communication campaigns, collaboration is needed among different 
communities and stakeholders,  as well as public health, emergency management, 
and municipal officials in order to deliver consistent, audience-appropriate and easily 
understood messages.
Many people are unaware of the risks that extreme heat poses and are dependent 
on other people for support that would reduce their health risks from extreme 
heat events. Landlords and caregivers are often in a good position to be first 
responders and provide needed assistance. They can also play a central role in 
building awareness with their tenants about heat-health risks and the importance of 
staying cool and hydrated during an extreme heat event to protect health.
THE TRIGGER
A number of at-risk groups (older adults, people with chronic illnesses, the physically 
impaired, the socially disadvantaged, and newcomers to Canada) live in apartment 
buildings and residential care facilities with no air conditioning. Residential care 
facilities provide care for individuals who need assistance with managing their 
lives. In an effort to address the possible impacts that extreme heat could have 
on residents in these buildings, the City of Hamilton identified the need to build 
awareness among landlords and operators of residential care facilities about 
extreme heat impacts on health and to provide information about feasible actions 
that they could take to protect vulnerable populations. 
THE APPROACH
Recognizing that property owners and managers are in an ideal position to educate 
their residents about the dangers of extreme heat and to implement measures to 
foster heat-resiliency, the city developed targeted messaging for landlords. To ensure 
the uptake of the messages and the feasibility of recommended actions, these 
messages were vetted through an advisory committee that included the target 
audience.
Posters with information about staying cool are now distributed annually in the 
month of May to landlords. The communication materials encourage them to take a 
variety of measures to reduce risks faced by vulnerable residents, such as:
18
19
•	
Provide residents access to a cooler area in the building during a heat event 
for several hours at a time (e.g. a common room with air conditioning or a     
basement area);
•	
Keep windows in hallways slightly open to allow air to circulate;
•	
Provide heat safety information to residents or post the information in common 
areas (e.g. by the elevator, in the lobby);
•	
Have building staff check on vulnerable residents every few hours during 
extreme heat events.
The communication materials are reviewed annually. The content and marketing 
strategies are updated when necessary.
THE OUTCOME
A number of tailored materials have been developed to build heat-health awareness 
among landlords. These resources provide targeted training and engagement on the 
issue for landlords. Through these efforts, landlords:
•	
Are becoming more aware of the health impacts of extreme heat and vulnerable 
populations that are in their care;
Figure 8: Recommendations to landlords and property managers include keeping windows 
slightly open in hallways to allow air to circulate. (Source: Emilie Roy)
•	
Have access to key information that can be used to foster heat-resilience among 
these populations;
•	
Are more aware of possible actions that they could take to assist their residents 
to manage heat risks; 
•	
Can recognize signs and symptoms of heat-related illnesses; 
•	
Know what first aid to administer as well as when to call 9-1-1.
The impacts of these outreach efforts are increasingly evident as many landlords 
are taking actions to set up cool spaces, check in on vulnerable residents, and work 
collaboratively to provide needed respite from the heat for their residents. For 
example, two landlords that own adjacent buildings worked together to develop a 
common area in one of the buildings to provide a cool space where residents of 
both buildings can comfortably escape the heat. Working with landlords can be a 
cost-effective mechanism to reduce heat-vulnerability in the community and build 
awareness about the issue.
A WORD FROM HAMILTON
When asked what advice he would provide to other communities that would like 
to engage landlords on heat and health issues, Matthew Lawson, Manager of the 
Health Hazards Program at the City of Hamilton recommended “engaging landlords 
with taking simple actions, like offering a common room in the building that has air 
conditioning or checking in on residents that may be known as high-risk, and focusing 
on reducing risks to some of the most vulnerable residents within the community. We 
are aware of areas in Hamilton that have populations with increased vulnerability to 
the effects of heat, so buildings in these areas were targeted for communicating with 
landlords regarding steps they can take to help residents within their buildings avoid 
adverse health impacts from hot weather.”
 
20
21
GATINEAU
The importance of region-specific 
triggers
By Anastasia Rogaeva & Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Longer and more severe extreme heat events will impact the health of Canadians 
unless more adaptation efforts are made. It is important that health authorities 
across the country establish alert protocols to prepare for these events as there is a 
correlation between elevated temperatures, increases in mortality, and the incidence 
of disease. This correlation is region-specific and can vary depending on the duration 
and severity of the event. Other factors such as a population’s vulnerability and its 
capacity to adapt to extreme heat can influence how a population will react under 
high temperatures.  Implementing region or community specific triggers contributes 
to better response to the specific needs of a community during extreme heat events.
Heat-alert triggers should take into account how changes in intensity and duration 
of an extreme heat event can impact mortality and morbidity within a specific 
community. Triggers are usually community-specific measures derived from one or 
more meteorological parameters (e.g. temperature, humidity) that are forecasted to 
last for one or more days. 
THE TRIGGER 
Gatineau implemented a plan to address and mitigate health risks in response to the 
increased likelihood of severe extreme heat events in Canada. The plan was based 
on lessons learned from Montreal and guidance from the Province of Quebec. It was 
developed through a partnership between the Province of Quebec and the southern 
region’s Health Agencies, which identified region-specific thresholds when higher 
mortality and morbidity rates were observed. The Health Agencies then used these 
thresholds to set local triggers for the regions of Quebec most likely to be affected 
by a heat wave.
THE APPROACH
The temperature and humidity thresholds associated with different levels of heat alert 
are slightly different from one location to another as flexibility is given to regional 
authorities to adapt their thresholds to the circumstances of their local context. The 
thresholds adopted in Gatineau were determined by Santé Publique du Québec. 
To ensure timely and accurate identification of local weather patterns that reach set 
triggers, seasonal surveillance is in effect from May 1 to September 30. During this 
period, local authorities (with Santé Publique du Québec as the lead) work closely 
with Environment and Climate Change Canada. This partnership allows access to 
timely weather forecasts that are critical to supporting decisions to issue an Alert 
and initiating response measures. In addition, in an effort to provide inter-jurisdictional 
consistency, Santé Publique du Québec worked with Ottawa Public Health and other 
municipalities in the region to ensure timely and consistent communication with the 
public and partners.
Figure 4: Alert protocol and examples of corresponding  
actions for the City of Gatineau
Phase
Indicators
Examples of Response Measures
Seasonal 
Surveillance
May 1st to September 30th
• Prepare heat-health risk 
prevention messaging
• Develop a list of facilities that 
could be made available to the 
public during extreme heat 
events
Active 
Surveillance
Extreme heat warning by 
Environment Canada. Air 
temperature forecast Tmax 
≥30°C and humidex ≥40
• Disseminate heat-health risk 
prevention messages
• Inform municipal workers 
of preventive measures and 
behaviours that should be 
adopted
Alert
Forecast of 2 consecutive 
days where Tmax ≥31°C, 
humidex ≥40 and Tmin ≥ 
18°C
• Inform the public of the location 
of cooling centres
• Remind municipal workers 
of preventive measures and 
behaviours that should be 
adopted 
Intervention
Alert indicators proven, 
watch data shows increases 
in hospital admissions or 
excess deaths
• Open the Municipal Coordination 
Centre
• Prepare the cooling centres that 
could host vulnerable populations
• Keep public pools and splash 
pads open in the evening if 
necessary. 
• Transport vulnerable populations 
that do not have access to other 
modes of transportation to 
cooling centres
• Establish a media and 
communication centre
Recovery
When the threat is 
removed
• Close temporary cooling centres
• Inform the population, the 
operation centre, governmental 
entities and the media about the 
end of operations
22
23
Source: City of Gatineau
When an Extreme Heat Warning is issued by Environment and Climate Change 
Canada or temperatures are forecast to reach ≥30°C and humidex ≥40, Active 
Surveillance is activated and the team is put on standby. During this stage, the 
Emergency Operation Centre members are informed of the change in status 
and must be ready to mobilize at a moment’s notice. If extreme temperatures 
and humidity are forecast to be sustained for at least two consecutive days - with 
maximum temperatures of ≥31°C, humidex ≥40, and minimum temperatures of ≥ 
18°C - an Alert is issued and response measures are implemented on the third day 
to assist the public, particularly for populations at risk. For example, Public Health 
Gatineau disseminates heat-health information to the public and at-risk groups 
in locations such as day cares and seniors’ homes. The Intervention phase of the 
protocol is activated when alert indicators are proven, when the watch data shows 
increased transportation and admission to local hospitals or when excess deaths 
are observed. When the temperature no longer represents a risk to peoples’ health, 
a Recovery phase is activated and lessons learned are used to improve the system 
(figure 4).
THE OUTCOME
The collaboration between Santé publique du Québec, the southern region’s Health 
Agencies and the City of Gatineau led to the identification of triggers that are locally 
focused, based on heat-health relationships, and harmonized across the province and 
inter-jurisdictionally. The alert protocol now takes into consideration factors such as 
the duration of the heat event, maximum and minimum temperatures and humidex. 
The protocol is implemented in multiple stages which are linked to specific response 
measures.
When an alert is issued, Gatineau works in partnership with the Centre intégré de 
santé et de services sociaux and the Direction de santé publique to provide services 
to at-risk groups, issues alerts, and delivers relevant health-protection information to 
people who are at an elevated risk (e.g. older adults). Communicating heat-protection 
information helps to improve awareness about the risks and builds knowledge of 
actions that should be taken to protect health. 
 
A WORD FROM GATINEAU
According to Jacques Rathwell, Emergency Measures Manager for the City of 
Gatineau, “communicating heat-health risks to the elderly and other vulnerable 
individuals represents one of the most challenging tasks that the city had to 
undertake when implementing its alert protocol.” To achieve greater communication, 
Mr. Rathwell recommends “partnering with local health organizations that tend to 
be involved with more vulnerable groups of the population. In Gatineau, the local 
health groups have also proven to be helpful outside of heat alert periods, as they 
disseminate information related to heat-health throughout the year.”
24
25
LEDUC
Preparing for extreme heat before mass 
gatherings
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: City of Leduc
THE SCIENCE
Every year, cities across Canada host numerous events where large numbers of 
people are gathered in one place. These events can take many forms, from music 
festivals to sporting events. Regardless of the type of event, mass gatherings have the 
potential to overwhelm local health care systems and research shows that heat- and 
cold-related health conditions provide the highest number of patient presentations to 
hospitals during and following mass gathering events. 
When mass-gathering events take place in the summer time, they necessitate careful 
planning by the event organizers to reduce heat-health risks among attendees. Indeed, 
conditions such as dehydration and heat stroke can quickly develop during extremely 
hot days. Event planners can implement a variety of preventative actions such as the 
provision of on-site medical care, the promotion of information to avoid heat-related 
illnesses, the availability of cooling stations and adequate access to water stations. 
THE TRIGGER
The City of Leduc was selected to host the Alberta Summer Games in July 2016. 
This would see the city play host to approximately 10,000 people over four days 
of competition. While extreme heat events are considered to only be a moderate 
risk in Leduc because of a typically moderate climate, the city still included specific 
planning actions to mitigate potential heat-health risk when preparing for the Games. 
These actions were integrated into a broader emergency preparedness strategy 
that planned for other weather extremes such as thunderstorm and tornado risk.  
Planning to mitigate heat-health risk for the Alberta Summer Games was also aligned 
with Leduc’s Weather and Climate Readiness Plan, which highlights the importance of 
being prepared for the risks associated with extreme weather events.
THE APPROACH
Specific actions were taken by the planners of the Alberta Summer Games in Leduc 
to ensure that both athletes and their supporters would be protected from a broad 
range of extreme weather events, including heat waves. More specifically, volunteers 
at the Games were trained to recognize symptoms of several health issues, including 
heat-related conditions such as dehydration and heat stroke. When noticing these 
symptoms, volunteers were trained to call on-site health care professionals through 
an emergency line and direct them to the individuals requiring medical attention.  
Planning efforts before the Games also focused on hydration. Water stations were 
located across the site to make sure all attendees could easily access it when needed. 
These water stations allowed attendees to refill existing water bottles or get new 
reusable ones. One of the objectives pursued by the planning committee of the 
Games was to host a disposable water bottle-free event.  As such, the organizing 
committee asked vendors not to sell water but instead to give out free reusable 
bottles.  With careful planning, Leduc was able to meet this sustainability goal without 
sacrificing the health and wellness of the athletes and other attendees.  
26
27
Golf carts were also used to transport five-gallon bottles of water to ensure all 
stations had enough water at all times. These golf carts were also used to support 
medical staff in emergencies by delivering ice and various supplies and to move 
low-risk patients to a medical area at the Recreation Centre. During sporting events 
like the Alberta Summer Games, athletes are particularly at risk of suffering from 
dehydration on hot days. In order to minimize this risk, a few water stations were 
planned and installed specifically for athletes to ensure they could easily access water 
at all times. Information on the importance of hydration was also disseminated to 
athletes prior to the event through the Games handbook.
Finally, people attending the Games always had easy access to the recreation centre 
building to cool off during the event. This is particularly important as spending a few 
hours per day in air conditioned spaces during extremely hot days can significantly 
reduce the risk of heat-related health conditions and heat stress. Cooling shelters 
allow the body to cool off when it is is unable to do so outdoors. 
THE OUTCOME
Although Leduc is not at high risk of being affected by extreme heat events, the 
city still included specific actions that would reduce the likelihood of any attendees 
suffering from heat-related health conditions when planning the Games.  The 
temperature did not exceed 25°C during the Games, which minimized the risk of 
heat-related health conditions affecting attendees. Even though outdoor temperatures 
did not get extremely high, the emergency preparedness plan had to be activated 
Figure 5: Water stations were located across the site of the Alberta Summer Games to make 
sure all attendees could easily access water when needed.  (Source: City of Leduc)
twice during the Games to protect people from severe thunderstorms. The 
recreation centre, which was also the planned cooling station for the Games, was 
then used as a temporary shelter to protect attendees from the storm. 
A WORD FROM LEDUC
Even though Leduc only faces a moderate risk of being affected by extreme heat 
events, the city still included extreme heat planning within its broader emergency 
preparedness strategy for the 2016 Alberta Summer Games. When asked what 
advice she would give to other municipalities that would like to mitigate heat-health 
risks when planning mass gathering events, Pamela Goertzen, Environmental 
Sustainability Assistant for the City of Leduc, noted that there are numerous benefits 
to having the venues in relatively close proximity to each other, particularly when they 
are close to a large indoor air-conditioned facility that can shelter all attendees in the 
event of an emergency. “Having sufficient hydration is also very important and can be 
done without creating the mountain of waste that comes with bottled water,” said Ms. 
Goertzen. After the Alberta Summer Games, Leduc was left with two of the water 
units used for the Games. One of the units will be used for future events and the 
other will be used during future emergencies where people may not have access to 
water in their homes. 
28
29
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
VANCOUVER
Protecting vulnerable populations 
during extreme heat events 
By Peter Berry
THE SCIENCE
Extreme heat events can affect the health of all Canadians, but certain populations 
are at higher risk. People who are more vulnerable include: older adults, infants and 
young children, people with chronic illnesses or who are physically impaired, socially 
disadvantaged individuals, transient populations, certain occupational groups, and the 
physically active.
Although the homeless population is not usually discussed as a separate group in 
the literature, a number of risk factors that increase susceptibility to heat-related 
illness and death are found to be more common in individuals who are homeless. 
Such factors include cognitive impairment, higher rates of chronic diseases, and 
non-adherence to therapy to reduce illness, for example for conditions such as 
diabetes, high cholesterol, and hypertension.  Due to increased exposure, people 
who live in shelters and out of doors are at higher risk of suffering from heat-health 
conditions during extreme heat events.  They often reside in inner urban areas which 
tend to be subject to hotter conditions due to the urban heat island effect. Many of 
these people have limited access to air conditioning, transportation to local shelters, 
and options for hydration. 
To be effective in reducing risks, public health interventions must address the specific 
constraints and barriers faced by each population group when devising strategies to 
protect health. For example, while directing seniors or people with low incomes in 
high-rise buildings to community cooling centres to get respite from the heat may 
seem a reasonable solution, it may not reduce risks to seniors with limited or no 
mobility. Further, it does not address the challenges faced by people with little money 
in their efforts to get to the centres. 
THE TRIGGER
Many communities across Canada are expected to experience an increase in 
the length, frequency, and/or intensity of warm spells or extreme heat events.  In 
Vancouver, the average annual temperature is expected to increase by 1.7°C by the 
2050s and 2.7°C by the 2080s. Similarly, by the 2050s an extreme heat event that 
occurred once every 25 years in the past is expected to occur over three times as 
frequently (City of Vancouver Climate Adaptation Strategy, 2012).  Extreme heat 
currently poses significant risks to health for some populations in British Columbia. In 
2009, an extreme heat event in the lower mainland area of the province contributed 
to 156 deaths.  One study suggests that heat-related mortality in Vancouver is 
predicted to increase to 1.72/100,000 (an increase of 325%) from the baseline of 
0.53/100,000 for the period between 2013 and 2050.
THE APPROACH
In September 2009, Vancouver City Council approved a motion that “staff undertake 
a review of existing extreme weather emergency services offered by the city and 
30
31
make recommendations on the services that would further reduce the risk for street 
homeless and other vulnerable populations, such as homebound senior citizens, 
in the event of extreme heat events.” This led to the development of the city’s 
Extreme Heat Initial Response Guideline. The Initial Response Guideline highlights 
functions that the city’s business units and key external partners agree to undertake 
in response to extreme heat event emergencies. This plan was developed by staff 
from various city departments and was led initially by the Community Services 
Department. The city’s Office of Emergency Management, a key participant from 
the start, took over in Phase II of the planning process,  continuing management of 
extreme heat responses.
Other key external partners supporting the city’s extreme heat response are 
the Environment and Climate Change Canada’s Regional Warning Preparedness 
Meteorologist, the Metro Vancouver Air Quality Division and Vancouver Coastal 
Health (the latter also supported the development of the city’s plan).
THE OUTCOME
During the initial development of the plan, there was a heavy focus on researching 
best practices and lessons learned from other municipalities. Following this research 
phase, the city’s Extreme Heat Planning Committee then focused on developing 
Figure 6: Four types of response activities identified by the City of Vancouver
(Source: ICLR)
response priorities, working with partners such as Vancouver Coastal Health and 
experts from Health Canada, who provided support and shared experiences about 
best practices on heat mitigation. Four types of response activities, all focusing on 
vulnerable populations, were identified by the Committee (see Figure 6).
Increasing access to drinking water includes actions such as the pre-positioning of 
water fountains prior to the beginning of summer, deploying additional portable 
fountains based on risk assessment outcomes and advising staff at Park Board facilities 
to open up kitchens so that clients can fill water bottles. Opening cooling centres 
implies actions like posting “Cooling Centre” signage and posters at community 
centres and libraries when Special Weather Statements or Heat Warnings have 
been issued or are impending and extending hours of operation for cooling centres 
based on risk assessments. Monitoring of outdoor spaces for at-risk populations 
involves actions such as driving by parks and commercial areas to advise vulnerable 
populations about the location of nearby water fountains and increasing park patrols 
by Park Rangers to locate and assist people suffering from heat-related illness. Finally, 
public outreach and information relates to activities like advising the public of heat 
alerts and warnings by using various tools (such as media releases, social media, 3-1-1 
contact centre, etc.) to inform them of available resources to reduce the health 
effects of heat and encouraging residents to look out for each other and obtain 
assistance for people exhibiting signs of heat related illness.
A WORD FROM VANCOUVER
When asked what kind of advice she would give to other communities that would 
like to develop a similar tool, Hersi Hibak, Emergency Planning Coordinator for the 
City of Vancouver, indicated that “the City’s Climate Adaptation Strategy (2012) 
recommends that a study be done to map heat islands and vulnerable populations 
in the city. This information will help identify areas that are most at risk and will 
allow the City of  Vancouver to focus its mitigation efforts (e.g. planting trees and 
locating drinking fountains) in areas where they are most needed.” The city is looking 
at creating extreme heat-related map layers to be accessible from its web-based 
Geographic Information System (VanMap) as an important resource for the Extreme 
Heat Planning Committee during extreme heat response operations. The Committee 
will continue to implement actions identified in the Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategy, such as developing cooling centres within identified hot spots, and exploring 
options for transporting those in need to these cooling centres during heat events.
32
33
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
MIDDLESEX-LONDON
Leveraging the networks of various 
partners to ensure residents’ safety
By Sophie Guilbault
THE SCIENCE
During extreme weather events, the success of a community’s response depends 
highly on the ability to exchange information and coordinate response activities 
between emergency responders and residents.  When an extreme heat event 
happens, the coordination between health authorities, medical services and various 
community groups is instrumental to the success of operations. Similarly, social 
networks and relationships among residents have proven to be extremely useful to 
ensure everyone is looked after within a community during heat waves. 
Regional health units in Canada tend to cover broad geographical areas, which can be 
challenging when the time comes to respond to an extreme heat event. Creating and 
maintaining good relationships with various community partners such as day cares, 
school boards, and community health clinics can significantly facilitate the work of the 
health unit. 
THE TRIGGER
In June 2005, the City of Toronto experienced an extremely warm summer with 18 
days of extreme heat alerts. Following this particularly hot summer, the Government 
of Ontario requested that regional health units and municipalities across the province 
work towards establishing response plans for extremely hot days. This request 
led to the development of the Middlesex-London Health Unit (MLHU) Extreme 
Temperature Alert Protocol. Since its initial development, the plan has been reviewed 
and edited on multiple occasions following its activation during extreme heat events. 
The MLHU has also expanded its network of partners through the county in order 
to better respond to heat waves. 
THE APPROACH
The MLHU is responsible for identifying and addressing heat-health risk for Middlesex 
County. When heat alerts are issued within the MLHU jurisdiction, the health 
unit is responsible for providing heat risk information to specific groups. Other 
responsibilities of the health unit include ensuring cooling centres, shelters, and other 
related services are open to provide residents with a place to stay cool during an 
extreme heat event. 
The geographical area covered by the MLHU encompasses both urban and rural 
regions. As such, when a heat alert is declared, the health unit needs to plan its 
operations based on different levels of resources available in different parts of the 
county. For instance, the City of London offers many options for cooling stations 
and can rely on various sources to ensure the communication of heat warnings. The 
city has the responsibility to open a number of community centres, swimming pools 
and splash pads, and provide access to several libraries within the city that can be 
34
35
transformed into cooling centres. During extreme heat events, the city can count on 
the support of many groups such as the Salvation Army/Men’s Mission to increase 
shelter capacities for homeless people and other vulnerable groups. 
In smaller rural parts of the county, the MLHU relies on the assistance of its 
community partners to ensure heat warnings are properly communicated. For 
instance, it works closely with local day cares, seniors facilities, schools, local churches, 
various religious groups, and community health clinics that act as a point of relay for 
the information coming from the MLHU. These groups also play an important role in 
communicating with the individual residents and making sure they are taken care of. 
THE OUTCOME
Over several years, the MLHU has noticed that leveraging the networks of various 
local partners has proven to be very successful. It has also noted that informal 
arrangements between neighbours in rural parts of the county tend to happen 
frequently because of existing networks. For instance, it is common to see neighbours 
carpooling together to cooling stations if one does not have access to a vehicle, or 
to see local churches picking up parishioners to bring them to a cooler location. In 
addition, the nature of the communication messages sent by the MLHU to rural areas 
emphasizes the need for these types of behaviours by highlighting the importance 
Figure 9: Networks of various local partners have proven to be very successful for the MLHU, 
leading to arrangements such as carpooling between neighbours. 
(Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
of protecting family, friends and neighbours. The MLHU is currently reviewing how it 
could make some of their partnerships with local groups more formal to ensure an 
even stronger communication with rural areas during heat alerts. 
The MLHU is also currently working on the development of a survey that will be 
shared with every partner involved in responding during heat waves to gather their 
impressions and comments on the operations following an extreme heat event. 
A WORD FROM MIDDLESEX-LONDON
When asked for their thoughts on the MLHU Extreme Temperature Alert Protocol’s 
success, David Pavletic, Manager of Food Safety & Healthy Environments and Randy 
Walker, Public Health Inspector for the MLHU, mentioned that its success was directly 
linked to the strong sense of collaboration and community present in Middlesex 
County and within MLHU. “We were able to leverage several of our relationships to 
make this plan successful by engaging many community groups,” said Mr. Walker. 
36
37
FREDERICTON
Participatory approach to developing a 
Heat Alert and Response System
By Jay Storfer
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Stakeholder engagement is a key element in the development and implementation 
of a community-based Heat Alert and Response System. A Heat Alert and Response 
System is most effective when public health organizations, municipal authorities, 
emergency preparedness officials, social services agencies and community outreach 
groups are actively engaged and working together to promote community-wide 
resiliency. 
 
Establishing and maintaining good relationships with all interested partners is needed 
from the earliest stages of project development. Stronger relationships with partners 
over time will ensure that stakeholders play an important role as advocates and will 
ease conflict resolutions if any problems were to arise down the line. Maintaining 
stakeholder interest and contributions during the development of a Heat Alert 
and Response System can be challenging and resource intensive. However, regular 
interaction and face-to-face meetings with stakeholders can create an environment 
where their participatory involvement in the decision-making process ensures buy-in 
to the process and effective use of scarce resources.  
THE TRIGGER
The City of Fredericton (population 56,224) is situated in the west-central portion 
of New Brunswick. This region has historically experienced a higher number of hot 
days than elsewhere in the Maritimes. Climate projections indicate that Fredericton 
can expect the number of hot days to almost double by mid-century, coupled with 
an increase in warmer nights. In spite of these projections, extreme heat as a public 
health risk remains an emerging issue for Fredericton and communities throughout 
Atlantic Canada.
Beginning in 2009, Health Canada partnered with the New Brunswick Department 
of Health to pilot a multi-year initiative to develop a community-based Heat 
Alert and Response System. As part of this initiative, Health Canada conducted 
a temperature-mortality analysis for the City of Fredericton, which found a sharp 
increase in mortality when the daily maximum temperature exceeded 30oC. Without 
further adaptation, heat-related health risks within this region may increase with a 
changing climate. 
THE APPROACH
From the start of the pilot Heat Alert and Response System project, New Brunswick 
Health took a leadership role and quickly moved to develop partnerships with 
municipal authorities and local stakeholders. A program coordinator was identified 
whose responsibility it is to increase public awareness of heat-related health risks 
and behaviours through the production of information materials that promote the 
adoption of protective behaviours before and during an extreme heat event. 
The Heat Alert and Response System Advisory Committee includes representatives 
from 12 organizations representing a broad range of government departments and 
38
39
non-government organizations. The role of this multi-stakeholder advisory committee 
is to increase the support from various agencies and organizations for at-risk 
populations and to identify best practices to communicate and share information 
between agencies at the onset of an extreme heat event.
New Brunswick Health’s approach to building a Heat Alert and Response System 
through stakeholder engagement was two-fold. First, the structure of the advisory 
committee consists of a small core of stakeholders with extensive networking 
capacities. The membership is drawn from respected organizations within the 
community that serve as credible sources of information. Second, the committee has 
built on existing alert and response structures, thus reducing the challenges associated 
with building a new system.  New Brunswick Health’s proactive engagement with 
stakeholders has enabled all partners to draw on their experience in responding to 
other types of emergencies and to apply those lessons to the development of a Heat 
Alert and Response System.
THE OUTCOME
Prior to the Heat Alert and Response System pilot, only a press release from New 
Brunswick Health, derived from Environment Canada weather warnings, was used 
to inform the public of an extreme heat event. This notification system was based 
on a tiered range of Humidex values and used the terms ‘advisory’, ‘warning’, and 
‘alert’ to describe the three levels of severity. During the Heat Alert and Response 
System development phase, New Brunswick Health was able to make refinements 
to the triggers based on key input from stakeholders. This resulted in a new wording 
reflecting the increasing intensity of risk that clarified and simplified the level of alert 
in both English and French. Thus, the triggers were modified from using the varying 
series of adjectives to a plain-language tier of ‘Heat Alert’, ‘High Heat Alert” and 
’Extreme Heat Alert‘. The Heat Alert and Response System also adopted a simple 
corresponding numbering system of level 1, 2 and 3 (see Figure 10).
Figure 10: In Fredericton, the triggers were modified from using a varying series of adjectives to 
a plain-language tier of ‘Heat Alert’, ‘High Heat Alert” and ’Extreme Heat Alert‘.  The Heat Alert 
and Response System also adopted a simple corresponding numbering system of level 1, 2 and 3.
(Source: City of Fredericton)
To support the roll-out of the City of Fredericton Heat Alert and Response System, 
two bilingual websites were launched that were specifically designed and built for 
the heat season. Stakeholders supplemented the awareness campaign by providing 
one-on-one training to their clients about heat-health risks and by distributing 
materials to at-risk populations. The city also included a heat-health information 
brochure in its spring municipal water utility bills. The feedback received during and 
after the first heat season indicated that the numbering system (Level 1, 2 and 3) had 
been easily adopted and used by Heat Alert and Response stakeholders, the media, 
and the public. 
A WORD FROM FREDERICTON
When asked what kind of advice she would give to other communities considering a 
similar approach to the development or improvement of a Heat Alert and Response 
System, Karen White, Director of Healthy Environments Branch, said that “six years 
later, the Heat Alert and Response System program in Fredericton is doing well. The 
pilot program was successful because it started out small and leveraged the already 
established excellent network of community based non-government organizations 
thus avoiding the need to ‘reinvent the wheel’. It drew from existing structures and 
the experience and expertise of staff in departments at both the municipal and 
provincial level. Health Canada provided a wealth of materials and evidence-based 
information that were an immense help in moving the project in the right direction.” 
Although the Heat Alert and Response System pilot was a Fredericton specific 
project, the Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health has used its coordinating 
role to disseminate education and promotional messages to all health regions in 
New Brunswick. By working first at the local level and delivering a proven product, 
the Office of the Chief Medical Officer of Health is exploring avenues to expand the 
Heat Alert and Response System concept to the rest of the province.
40
41
SHERBROOKE
Protecting communities from extreme 
heat by providing various cooling options
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Ensuring the availability and accessibility of cooling options to cope with hot 
temperatures is very important during extreme heat events. Bearing in mind that 
not all members of a community have access to cooling systems in their homes, it is 
important that municipal leaders identify easy-to-access cooling stations that can be 
used by the public during heat waves. These cooling options can take multiple forms 
and cities can benefit from identifying a wide range of alternatives for residents to get 
away from the heat. For instance, public buildings with air-conditioned systems, public 
pools, beaches, and splash pads can be considered as possible cooling options by 
municipalities. 
THE TRIGGER
Sherbrooke is a city located in the Eastern Townships region of Quebec. A study 
conducted in the region a few years ago found that health risks were increasing 
significantly for inhabitants of the region when the temperature reaches or exceeds 
31°C during the day and 18°C at night for at least two days in a row. Following the 
publication of this study, the City of Sherbrooke implemented two main actions. 
First, the city developed urban heat island mapping to identify which areas of the 
city were the most at risk of being affected by extremely hot temperatures. Second, 
Sherbrooke established a Heat Alert and Response System to help protect the public 
during heat waves. 
THE APPROACH
The City of Sherbrooke established a comprehensive Heat Alert and Response Plan 
called the Extreme Heat Intervention Plan (Plan Particulier d’Intervention – Chaleur 
Extrême, 2012). The plan presents a wide variety of actions and initiatives developed 
to ensure the safety of Sherbrooke’s residents during extreme heat events. For 
instance, the city evaluates its capacity to respond to increased electricity demand, 
works with 9-1-1 to evaluate the nature of the calls received, and works with parks 
employees to remind them of measures to take if they were to intervene with 
people suffering from conditions caused by extreme heat. The plan also has a strong 
focus on ensuring the availability of cooling spaces for individuals across the city. When 
a heat alert is issued, a system is in place to check that air conditioning systems are 
fully functioning in municipal buildings. Those buildings with working air-conditioning 
systems become identified by la mission service aux sinistrés as cooling centres when 
possible, and buildings with dangerously high temperatures are temporarily closed for 
safety purposes. The City of Sherbrooke’s plan also highlights the need to ensure that 
cooling systems are functioning properly and makes staff specialized in repairing air 
conditioning systems available on call. Furthermore, the city ensures that vulnerable 
groups of the population have free transportation and paratransit to access cooling 
centres. 
The city also arranges to keep splash pads, pools, and other water bodies accessible 
during extended hours. When the extended opening of these facilities happens, a 
special protocol directed by la mission direction stratégique is also in place to provide 
42
43
temporary lighting equipment for splash pads and pools that need it in order to 
stay open later in the evening. La mission eau potable is responsible for conducting 
additional water quality testing at public pools on extremely hot days and increased 
security is provided around specific parks and swimming pools.  
An organization called mission communication provides information on the location of 
cooling stations through press releases, the city’s website, and social media. In addition, 
the city’s municipal health network communicates with seniors’ homes that do not 
have active cooling systems to inform them of the cooling station locations and transit 
options to get there.
When the City of Sherbrooke developed its emergency plan, staff visited each of 
the city’s parks and noted if they were equipped with water fountains, washrooms, 
showers, benches, tables, covered or shaded areas, splash pads, pools, beaches, and 
air-conditioned spaces. As part of its heat response, the city’s communication group 
promotes the use of these cool spaces during extremely hot days. 
THE OUTCOME
Since its implementation in 1998, the Extreme Heat Intervention Plan has been 
activated once, in 2010. During the alert, a cooling station was opened in one of the 
Figure 11: The public pool at Parc Victoria in Sherbrooke is one of many public pools open to 
the public during heat events. (Source: André Guilbault)
city’s libraries in combination with extended hours at local pools, beaches, and splash 
pads for three consecutive days. Local public transit authorities also assisted with the 
transportation of vulnerable individuals to cooling centres. 
A WORD FROM SHERBROOKE
When asked for his thoughts on the City of Sherbrooke’s Extreme Heat Intervention 
Plan, Stéphane Simoneau, Director of Fire Services at the City of Sherbrooke, 
responded that the city was able to develop and implement a high-quality plan 
because of good cooperation between the regional health authority, Sherbrooke 
public safety and the municipality. “It is important to have constant communication 
and collaboration between these different entities to ensure successful activation of 
the plan during extreme heat events,” said Mr. Simoneau. 
44
45
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
OTTAWA
Evaluating the City’s Heat Alert and 
Response System 
By Peter Berry
THE SCIENCE
To be effective, Heat Alert and Response Systems need to be evaluated with the 
participation of a broad range of community partners. Evaluations can be formal 
or informal and can examine Heat Alert and Response System processes and/or 
outcomes.  Process evaluations analyze the performance of key alert, response and 
communications mechanisms and activities (e.g. sending of alerts, outreach to key 
service providers of vulnerable populations, and the dissemination of heat-health 
messages that underpin the Heat Alert and Response System in a community). 
Outcome evaluations gauge whether the Heat Alert Response System has actually 
resulted in a reduction in morbidity and/or mortality over time. 
Heat-health vulnerability in Canadian communities changes with time and place. 
People may become acclimatized to increased temperatures, access to air 
conditioning may change, there may be changes to the urban environment (e.g. 
greening) that alter levels of exposure, and demographic shifts may increase or 
decrease the numbers of people at higher risk of heat illness and death.  In addition, 
urban environments are often hotter than rural environments due to the urban 
heat island effect. Consequently, Heat Alert and Response System evaluations 
should be conducted regularly to consider changes in these or other factors that 
might necessitate changes to the system.  A number of communities in Canada hold 
pre- and post-heat season meetings with stakeholders to evaluate their Heat Alert 
Response System and plan for future extreme heat events. During these meetings, 
information is exchanged on new vulnerable populations, changes to communications 
approaches and technology, challenges in delivering key Heat Alert and Response 
System activities, and opportunities for making the system more effective. 
THE TRIGGER
In 2002, the City of Ottawa established an Extreme Weather Committee to increase 
public awareness of the health implications of extreme heat and cold, establish 
baseline data on health outcomes related to heat, cold and air pollution for the 
region, and evaluate existing activities and policies in order to plan for the future. The 
Hot Weather Response Plan in Ottawa originated with a Heat and Smog Action Plan 
in 2004. Growing evidence that people living in the city were at increasing risk from 
heat and smog, and that heat mitigation plans being implemented in other Canadian 
and U.S. jurisdictions where successfully protecting health motivated city officials 
to develop a Heat Alert and Response System. The Hot Weather Response Plan 
includes weather, ultraviolet radiation, and air quality monitoring, a communications 
strategy with a major roll-out with the first extreme heat event, coordination of the 
community response with community providers through an Outreach to Vulnerable 
People Strategy and ongoing research and policy development related to the system. 
THE APPROACH
The City of Ottawa undertakes a number of activities toward continual improvement 
of its Hot Weather Response Plan. These have included mapping the extent of the 
46
47
urban heat islands in the city and the location of its most vulnerable populations, 
conducting a hot weather vulnerability assessment workshop with key service 
providers, evaluating the effectiveness of key components of the Response Plan and 
planning a mock heat emergency exercise. In addition, internal and external partners 
meet twice annually to discuss and improve the extreme weather response provided 
to city residents. 
In November 2013, Ottawa Public Health hosted a Heat and Health Vulnerability 
Assessment Workshop with the objectives of (1) Discussing and providing 
information on how Canadian communities are vulnerable to the health impacts from 
extreme heat events and what might be needed to improve adaptive capacity to 
impacts from heat in the City of Ottawa; (2) Identifying vulnerable populations and 
discussing opportunities for collaboration among stakeholders, service providers and 
volunteers to reduce the health risks associated with an extreme heat event; and, (3) 
Introducing available information and tools for addressing these risks. Participants at 
the workshop included officials from groups such as Emergency Preparedness, Social 
and Housing services, municipal childcare centres, the Salvation Army, the Ottawa 
Farm Safety Association, and pharmacy professionals. 
Participants completed a pre-workshop survey and received a workshop handbook 
before the meeting. Facilitated discussions examined the people currently identified as 
being vulnerable to extreme heat in Ottawa, including the subgroups that are most at 
risk and the characteristics that make each group vulnerable to heat. 
Figure 12: In Ottawa, working with community partners is key to evaluating and improving the 
Heat Alert and Response System. (Source: Peter Berry)
THE OUTCOME
The key findings of the Heat and Health Vulnerablity Assessment Workshop revealed 
that:
1) There are strong networks in place in Ottawa that assist identified vulnerable 
populations (i.e. church and social groups for older adults, new parents as well as day 
care and child drop-in centre professionals for young children, and street outreach 
and emergency shelter staff for the homeless). These networks are part of extreme 
weather outreach activities and are efficient and effective at reaching vulnerable 
groups.    
2)  Service providers develop effective strategies to deal with extreme heat events 
as a result of phone calls with their clients. This feedback has resulted in important 
changes to policies and procedures to build organizational capacity.  
3)  Rooming house residents and isolated seniors remain at risk during extreme heat 
events due to social isolation and lack of air conditioning.  There is a need for fans and 
air conditioning for low-income renters.  
4)  Young outdoor workers may need more awareness of heat risk factors so they 
come to work adequately hydrated and protected from the sun and heat.  
5)  Policies, procedures and resources need to be in place and shared within an 
organization well in advance of hot weather events.  The summer is prime vacation 
time and back-up and replacement staff need to know what to do and feel confident 
in adapting programming if they are to be effective.
      
Based on workshop findings, the City of Ottawa Interagency Extreme Weather 
Committee has been working to address these findings by reaching out to service 
providers of newly identified at-risk populations. It also followed up with a tabletop 
exercise (sessions where different stakeholders meet to discuss and define their 
roles during an emergency response) in 2015 with five pre-existing service provider 
networks and is updating the Hot Weather Response Plan. Finally, the Committee is 
offering to assist community agencies with developing and updating extreme weather 
policies.
A WORD FROM OTTAWA
“Every extreme weather event provides the City and our community partners a 
chance to learn and improve. We have gained a deeper understanding of community 
needs and capacity through face-to-face encounters with service providers at events 
such as the Vulnerability Assessment Workshop and tabletop exercises. Start small 
if needed, but get people together if you really want to find out how to build and 
harness community capacity.  Face-to-face meeting are key to building trust and 
meaningful relationships,” said Martha Robinson, Extreme Weather Lead for Ottawa 
Public Health.
48
49
MONTREAL
Adaptating communications to best 
inform vulnerable groups 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE 
Extreme heat events can significantly affect the health of a population. Mitigating 
the adverse effects of these events requires a strong level of preparedness. This 
can be achieved through close collaboration between public health and emergency 
management officials, local authorities, social service providers and individuals. 
Such collaboration is crucial to developing a heat response plan and to properly 
communicating heat risks to more vulnerable groups that can be difficult to reach 
through the use of traditional media.  Within a population, groups such as older 
adults, the chronically ill, and infants and young children are particularly vulnerable to 
extreme heat events. Maintaining relationships with stakeholders that work closely 
with these groups is essential to a good risk communication strategy and to the 
implementation of a successful heat response plan. 
THE TRIGGER
Several events motivated Montreal’s Regional Public Health Department to develop 
a heat response plan. Following the death by heat stroke of a forestry worker in 
1994, the coroner’s report mentioned the importance of raising awareness about 
the effects of heat on the population. Following this recommendation, Environment 
Canada started to issue heat alerts for the population. Around the same time, 
the Montreal Public Health Department started raising awareness of the health 
effects of heat and published simple brochures with preventive measures that could 
be implemented. In 2002, the Montreal Public Health Department developed its 
first structured heat-risk awareness campaign with the help of a comprehensive 
information brochure distributed to the public.  A year later, in 2003, an historic 
heat wave affected 12 European countries, resulting in 39,000 excess deaths over 
a two-week period. Following this event, the Montreal Public Health Department 
collaborated with its local public health units as well as municipal partners to develop 
its first official Heat Response Plan. The plan’s objective was to reduce heat-related 
mortality and morbidity by “identifying and coordinating actions to be undertaken 
under different alert levels by partners at the regional and local public health levels as 
well as municipal partners.”
THE APPROACH
Montreal’s initial heat response plan has evolved over the years following several 
internal evaluations. In 2007, the Montreal Public Health Department reviewed its 
communication strategy to ensure that their heat-risk message was being properly 
conveyed to the public.  Through surveys and focus groups, Montreal Public Health 
was able to adapt its communication tools and make them more specific to its target 
recipients. The department developed communication materials specially designed for 
older adults and for professional workers with infants and young children.  
While these different materials were essentially conveying the same message, the use 
of different illustrations contributed to personalizing the tool and adapting it to the 
needs of specific groups. The evaluation conducted by the Montreal Public Health 
Department contributed to simplifying the information presented on the information 
IT'S REALLY HOT!
PAY ATTENTION TO YOUNG CHILDREN!
Tips to prevent dehydration in infants and children aged 4 and under
• Give the child something to drink more often, even when the child  
is breastfed or bottle-fed 
• Cool the child in a tub of warm water several times a day
• Avoid exposing a child to the sun and taking him or her outdoors during the 
hottest part of the day
• If you have to go out, make sure the child is wearing light clothing and cover 
his or her head with a wide-brimmed hat
• If possible, spend a few hours with the child in an air-conditioned area
Never leave a child alone in a car, even for a few minutes
Signs to watch for in a child
• Wets fewer than 4 diapers in a 24-hour period
• Urinates less often and urine is darker
• Skin, lips and mouth are dry
• Is abnormally agitated or irritable
• Has sunken eyes and dark circles under the eyes
• Sleeps a lot and is hard to awaken
• Has difficulty breathing
• Skin is an abnormal colour, pale or red
• Body temperature is high: 38.5 °C or over (rectal)
• Has headaches, vomiting or diarrhoea
If the child shows any of these signs,  
call Info-Santé at 8-1-1 or consult a doctor
50
51
cards and to prioritizing three main messages: seek out air-conditioned spaces, drink 
a lot of water, and reduce physical activity levels. In addition, Montreal Public Health 
Department made two additional recommendations: ‘Let someone know how you 
are on a regular basis’ and ‘Take cool showers or baths as often as needed or cool 
off using a damp facecloth.”’These last recommendations were perceived as being 
particularly helpful for individuals with mobility issues who might find it challenging to 
get to air-conditioned spaces. 
THE OUTCOME
Following the 2007 evaluation of the heat response plan, the City of Montreal 
experienced a five-day heat wave in July 2010, during which the plan was activated to 
the intervention level, which included supplying air-conditioned shelters for vulnerable 
populations not otherwise having access to air conditioning. Throughout the event, 
both temperature and health indicators were closely monitored by the Montreal 
Public Health Department’s surveillance team. It appears that two specific groups 
were particularly affected by this heat wave: individuals over 70 years of age and 
suffering from cardiovascular disease and individuals suffering from mental illnesses 
or having drug or alcohol dependence. According to the Montreal Public Health 
Department, family, friends and professionals associated with mentally ill individuals 
Figure 13: Montreal Public Health Department now uses brochures directed at specific 
vulnerable groups of the population to inform them of heat-health risk during extreme heat 
events. (Source: © Gouvernement du Québec, 2014)
might have not been fully aware of the increased risk this population faces during 
extreme heat events. 
Following the July 2010 heat wave, it was decided that a specific communication 
campaign targeted at individuals living with mental illnesses would be implemented 
during heat waves. The evaluation of the 2010 heat plan activation also led the public 
health department to plan for additional preparedness work in collaboration with 
local health and social services centres, community organizations, and psychiatric 
hospitals. This decision was made to ensure that vulnerable groups are closely 
monitored during future extreme heat events.
A WORD FROM MONTREAL
When asked what advice he would give to other cities that would like to implement 
a similar heat response plan, Norman King, coordinator of the urban environment 
and health sector of the Montreal Public Health Department, highlighted the 
importance of developing partnerships with various stakeholders as early as possible 
in the process. “You can’t do it alone. Collaborating with the different municipal 
departments, regional stakeholders and neighbouring municipalities is essential to 
this process,” said Mr. King. He also recommended “re-evaluating and adapting a 
heat response plan on multiple occasions over time as public health and municipal 
authorities can adapt their approach according to the results of research and 
previous activation experiences.” According to Mr. King, it is also important to view 
public health departments as leaders in the heat response process. While several 
stakeholders need to be involved to implement a successful plan, it appears that 
most partners and local authorities tend to expect a clear and structured response 
from public health authorities. Finally, the department of public health highlighted 
the importance of knowing a city’s demographic and territorial characteristics when 
implementing a heat response plan. “Being able to respond properly to extreme 
heat events is extremely important but that should be done in parallel with other 
activities. For instance, if certain neighbourhoods have a long-term greening plan, or a 
plan to increase air-conditioned spaces, the impacts of extreme heat events could be 
mitigated over time,” said Mr. King. 
52
53
SECTION 2:  
PREVENTATIVE 
ACTIONS
Preventative Actions are actions that can be taken by communities to mitigate 
the impacts of extreme heat events in the long term. The benefits of these 
actions are optimal when implemented in parallel with Heat Alert and Response 
Systems.
54
55
KINGSTON 
Using the urban forest to mitigate the 
urban heat island effect
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Extreme heat events are expected to become more frequent and severe because 
of climate change. The consequences associated with these events tend to be 
exacerbated by a phenomenon called the urban heat island (UHI) effect. The UHI 
effect happens when an urban area becomes warmer than its rural surroundings. 
As cities develop, the landscape is often transformed from vegetated surfaces to 
higher ratios of buidings and paved surfaces, resulting in greater heat retention. 
These changes tend to increase the temperature of urban areas significantly and 
create an ‘‘island’’ of higher air temperatures estimated to be 1°C to 3°C warmer 
than surrounding areas. In the evening, the difference between urban and rural 
temperatures can be as high as 12°C, as the UHI effect also results in reduced 
night-time cooling. 
There are various ways communities can mitigate the impact of the UHI effect. For 
instance, they might choose to use cool surface materials, such as reflective roofs 
or cool pavement, which help reflect solar energy away from buildings or paved 
surfaces. Another approach that can be taken is to increase tree and vegetative cover. 
Vegetated spaces can increase the comfort of pedestrians by providing shade and can 
contribute to reducing high summer temperatures through evapotranspiration. 
THE TRIGGER
Official community plans contain guiding principles that define and orient the 
development of municipalities. These plans represent the foundation of the planning 
process and are essential tools for managing future urban growth. In 2010, the City 
of Kingston chose to use its official plan as a tool to improve the urban forest and 
green spaces within the city. While the city’s decision to invest in the maintenance of 
an abundant tree cover in urban areas was influenced primarily by the loss of forest 
coverage within the urban boundary, adapting to extreme heat events quickly became 
an added benefit of the initiative. UHI considerations were also integrated into the 
development of Kingston’s Urban Forest Management Plan. “We felt like we needed 
an overarching plan that would address various tree-related issues, including the 
mitigation of urban heat islands,” said Damon Wells, Director of Public Works for the 
City of Kingston. 
THE APPROACH
In 2009, it was estimated that Kingston’s urban forest occupied 21 percent of the 
urban area, which is comparable to many cities in Canada. When the city’s official plan 
was amended in 2010, an urban tree canopy target of 30 percent was included, which 
follows the recommended guidelines set by Environment Canada. Further policies 
were implemented simultaneously into the official plan to support this greening 
initiative. For instance, the official plan states that “community based initiatives such 
as community gardens and other forms of urban agriculture, and reforestation 
projects are permitted in all land use designations, subject to site by site evaluation.” 
In addition, the plan acknowledges the importance of preserving mature trees to the 
greatest extent possible when developing new lands.  
56
57
Prior to the publication of the 2012 Community Official Plan, the City of Kingston 
developed an Urban Forest Management Plan in 2011, which established guidelines 
and actions to ensure the long-term preservation of the city’s urban forest through 
sustainable practices. The Urban Forest Management Plan provides a framework for 
monitoring progress toward established urban forest goals. 
The UHI effect tends to increase tree water requirements as the amount of water 
transpired by trees in urban settings almost always exceeds the quantity contributed 
by rainfall. Therefore, a Drought Protection Strategy was developed by the city to 
help the urban forest become more drought tolerant. During a drought, a Tree 
Watering Alert is activated to solicit the help of residents to ensure that public trees 
are watered and kept healthy.
THE OUTCOME
It is estimated that every tree planted by the City of Kingston provides over $67 in 
net environmental benefits every year by reducing building energy use, improving 
air quality, and storing carbon. It is therefore estimated that the 28,000 trees that 
now form Kingston’s urban forest provide $1.87 million in environmental benefits 
Figure 14: In Kingston, trees were planted to provide shade for people waiting for their bus. 
(Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
annually. While urban trees contribute to moderate the urban heat island effect, they 
also provide other significant co-benefits for the city. The urban forest can provide 
shade for buildings in the summer, filter and reduce the amount of stormwater runoff, 
provide bank stabilization along open watercourses, and create natural wind breaks.
Following the implementation of the Urban Forest Master Plan, Kingston recognized 
the pending threat of the Emerald Ash Borer, an insect that kills ash trees, and 
developed a mitigation strategy to minimize the loss of trees.  As part of this strategy, 
the city developed an urban tree inventory including the GPS location, size and 
condition rating of each municipal urban tree.  This tool became key in addressing 
the Emerald Ash Borer impact but will also assist with further implementation of the 
Urban Forest Master Plan. 
Other initiatives were developed within the city to maximize the potential of the 
urban forest. For example, Royal Bank of Canada and the Kresge Foundation provided 
donations to support tree planting at hot locations along Kingston’s commuter bus 
routes. The shade can be particularly important to transit riders during hot summer 
days. 
A WORD FROM KINGSTON
When asked what advice he would give to other municipalities interested in 
implementing a similar initiative, Damon Wells highlighted the importance of engaging 
the public in the development of greening initiatives. “By doing this, the members of 
the public became more supportive of the program and we were also able to gather 
great ideas from them,” said Mr. Wells. Another thing that contributed to the success 
of Kingston’s Urban Forest Management Plan was the creation of a tree advisory 
board in which various professionals and representatives from the local conservation 
authority and Parks Canada reviewed the various stages of the development of the 
plan. 
58
59
TORONTO
Eco-Roof Incentive Program
By Gregory R.A. Richardson
Source: City of Toronto
THE SCIENCE
There’s a growing movement in North America to improve the environmental 
performance of rooftops by installing cool or green roofs.  Cool roofs are made 
from materials that reflect the sun’s rays. Flat roofs that use cool materials are 
typically made from a white or light coloured membrane that is highly reflective, 
while sloped cool roofs can use shingles with regular colours (e.g. red, brown or 
beige) but that have a higher reflectivity rating. Cool roofs can help reduce urban 
heat islands, minimize indoor overheating and reduce electricity consumption 
through lower air conditioning usage. 
Green roofs refer to a layer of vegetation that partially or fully covers a roof. 
Extensive green roofs, which are lower cost and require less maintenance, have a 
shallow soil base and simple landscaping with drought-resistance species such as 
grasses and plants. Intensive green roofs, which have complex landscaping features 
such as shrubs and trees, have a deeper soil layer, higher costs and require more 
maintenance. While green roofs are generally more expensive than regular roofing 
materials, they can provide multiple environmental benefits including lower peak 
storm water volumes, increased biodiversity and habitat, reduced urban heat islands, 
increased energy conservation, and lower greenhouse gas emissions. Importantly, 
green roofs can provide valuable green space within dense urban environments 
where it otherwise would be limited.
THE TRIGGER
The Eco-Roof Incentive Program emerged out of a green roof movement in 
Toronto in the early 2000s.  Between 2000 and 2003, the City of Toronto 
collaborated with various governmental organizations, local research groups and 
non-profits to initiate three pilot green roof projects; one on Toronto City Hall 
and others at the Computer Science Building at York University and the Eastview 
Neighbourhood Community Centre.  The pilot projects experimented with 
different plant species and planting techniques. Data on energy efficiency, storm 
water retention volumes, plant survival, unit cooling benefits and other variables 
were collected and analyzed.  Based on the success of these pilot projects, in 2005, 
the city commissioned a team at Ryerson University to undertake an analysis of the 
various environmental, social, and economic costs and benefits of green roofs. The 
findings from the Ryerson report, along with extensive stakeholder consultations, 
resulted in the city adopting a Green Roof Strategy in February 2006. The strategy 
included recommendations to encourage widespread adoption of green roofs 
through the city’s development approvals process, education and outreach efforts, 
and, importantly, a financial incentive program. 
THE APPROACH
The development of an Eco-Roof Incentive Program had two main phases:
60
61
1. Pilot Green Roof Incentive Program (2006 – 2008)
Toronto Water – the City Division responsible for drinking water, waste water, and 
storm water – established a two-year $200,000 pilot Green Roofs Incentive Program 
between 2006 and 2008.  The overall goal of the pilot program was to “encourage 
green roof construction in the city, resulting in a number of highly visible projects.”  
Eligible green roofs received a grant of $10 per square metre up to a maximum of 
$20,000. The program was open to all owners of private property in the City of 
Toronto.
2. Eco-Roof Incentive Program (2009 – present)
Due to the success of the Pilot Green Roof Incentive Program, the city in 2009 
made the pilot program permanent and expanded it to incentivize both green 
and cool roofs. The purpose of the expanded Eco-Roof Incentive Program is to 
provide support to owners and operators of industrial, commercial, institutional and 
residential buildings to make roof spaces more environmentally friendly by cooling the 
air, reducing energy use, increasing habitat and biodiversity and managing storm water. 
Property owners with eligible green roofs in Toronto can apply to receive $75 per 
square metre up to a maximum of $100,000. Eligible cool roofs can receive $2 to $5 
per square metre up to a maximum of $50,000. 
An important component of the Eco-Roof Incentive Program is the supportive 
policy and regulatory context.  The Green Roof By-law, which was approved by City 
Figure 16: One of the many roofs built under the Eco-Roof Incentive Program in Toronto 
(Source: City of Toronto)
Council in 2009, is at the heart of the Incentive Program’s success. The Green Roof 
By-law requires that green roofs be installed on all new commercial, institutional, 
and residential development with a roof space larger than 2,000 square metres; 
requirements range from 20% to 60% of available roof spaces being covered with 
green roofs. Developers can opt to make a financial contribution to the city in lieu of 
meeting the above requirements. The payment in lieu from the Green Roof By-law is 
used to provide sustainable ongoing funding for the Eco-Roof Incentive Program.
As part of the by-law, the city implemented a Green Roof Construction Standard 
in 2009 which sets out minimum design and engineering requirements that meet 
the city’s objectives and Ontario Building Code requirements. To be eligible for the 
Eco-Roof incentive Program grants, the design and maintenance of the roof must 
abide by the Green Roof Construction Standard. Furthermore, at the application 
stage, the city requires a five-year maintenance plan for both cool and green roofs to 
ensure their continued environmental performance.
THE OUTCOME
Since 2009, the Eco-Roof Incentive Program has supported 176 projects (44 green 
roofs and 132 cool roofs) with a total combined area of 375,000 square metres 
of roof space; an area equal to about 63 football fields. In addition, these eco-roof 
installations are estimated by the city to have diverted over nine million litres of 
storm water, reduced energy consumption by over 1,000 megawatt hours annually, 
and avoided over 120 tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions.
A WORD FROM TORONTO
When asked what advice she would give to other communities that would like to 
develop a similar incentive program, Annemarie Baynton, a Senior Environmental 
Planner at the City of Toronto mentioned the importance of engaging the roofing 
sector in the design and implementation of the Eco-Roof Incentive Program. When 
the program was launched in 2009, city staff provided program information and 
brochures to the roofing industry, helping them speak with their clients about 
the benefits of different eco-roofing options and the range of incentives available. 
“Recognizing the important role roofing professionals play in increasing program 
uptake, the program was designed with flexibility in the application process, allowing 
contractors to submit applications on behalf of their clients. This approach has led to 
an increased number of applications. In 2013, after further consultation with roofing 
professionals and property owners, the incentive program was expanded to include 
residential buildings.”  One lesson learned from this expansion is that while there 
has been great interest from homeowners in the program, there has been a learning 
curve regarding the technical aspects of installing green roofs and reflective shingles 
on sloping roofs, showing the need for continued engagement with the residential 
roofing sector.
62
63
ROSEMONT- 
LA PETITE-PATRIE
Mandatory cool roofs to mitigate urban 
heat islands
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Arrondissement Rosemont - La Petite-Patrie
THE SCIENCE
The urban heat island (UHI) effect is a phenomenon that makes urban areas warmer 
than their rural surroundings. Within an urban setting, many factors can enhance the 
likelihood of UHIs affecting a specific area. Several of these factors are directly linked 
to human interventions on the environment. For instance, the decrease of the urban 
forest and other green surfaces and the use of construction materials with high heat 
retention properties can contribute to the UHI effect. Cities can implement various 
measures to reduce these higher urban temperatures. For instance, some might 
decide to increase their urban forest coverage while others may choose to transform 
different types of urban surfaces by using alternative types of pavements or roofs. 
The implementation of cool or green roofs helps reduce UHIs by reflecting solar 
radiation away from the roof (i.e. white and reflective roofs) or by cooling the air 
through evapotranspiration (i.e. green roofs). Unlike traditional roofs, cool roofs are 
designed with materials that give them both high reflectance and high emissivity 
allowing for minimal absorption of solar radiation and greater release of outgoing 
radiation. Indeed, cooling roof products are composed of highly reflective and 
emissive materials that can stay more than 10°C cooler than traditional roofs. Cool 
roofs can also help lower indoor temperatures, particularly on the top floors of 
buildings. When used on several buildings within a community, cool roofs can help 
reduce local air temperatures and lower peak electricity demand.
THE TRIGGER
Located east of the downtown core in a central area of the City of Montreal, the 
borough of Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie is highly populated and densely built. In 2009, 
a new mayor was elected for the borough and had committed to work on initiatives 
that would reduce UHIs in the community as part of his electoral promises. In 2010, 
a study looking at various adaptation measures that could mitigate the impacts of 
UHIs in the area was commissioned and later presented to residents of the borough. 
As the area counts a large number of flat roofs with dark surfaces, one of the 
recommendations of the study was to promote the construction of cool roofs in the 
area. The borough therefore decided to revise its zoning by-law to mandate property 
owners to obtain a permit before either building a new roof or retrofitting an existing 
one. This amendment included the addition of new regulatory measures specifying 
that property owners wishing to replace or build a new roof must install a green 
(vegetative) roof, a white roof, a highly reflective roof, or a combination of these 
different types. 
THE APPROACH
Two public consultation meetings were first organized in Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie 
in collaboration with the researchers that led the UHI study. During these meetings, 
the researchers explained the causes of UHI to residents and presented the various 
initiatives that would be implemented in the borough and the reasons behind them. 
While the borough targeted all three adaptation options included in the study 
(increasing the tree canopy, transforming dark impervious pavement to vegetated 
64
65
Figure 15: The image above shows a residential building with a cool roof in Rosemont-La 
Petite-Patrie (Source: Arrondissement Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie)
surfaces, and promoting eco-roofs), the community became the first in Canada to 
develop a comprehensive white and green roof regulation. 
One amendment was made to the cool roof by-law since its implementation. Initially, 
the program allowed all white roofs to use a white gravel to cover the roof surface. 
Later, an amendment required the use of a white polymer membrane instead as they 
are known to be more efficient to reflect solar radiation away from the property. 
The use of white gravel remained permitted for older buildings built prior to 1960 
as the construction style of these roofs made it impossible to use a white polymer 
membrane. 
THE OUTCOME
Approximately 2,000 roofs have been retrofitted since the implementation of the 
by-law, which represents roughly 10 percent of the flat roofs in the borough. While it 
is too early to tell if the roofs themselves had a significant impact on the temperature 
in the area on hot summer days, homeowners who have installed them have 
reported a decrease in temperature inside their homes combined with a reduction in 
energy use. 
 
Some residents were initially worried that the installation of cool roofs would result in 
higher heating demands in wintertime. However, these fears were proven unfounded 
because of several factors. First of all, there are fewer hours of sunlight in winter 
combined with a less direct angle in which sunrays hit buildings’ roofs, which results in 
a very small amount of warming potential for buildings. In addition, if heating was to 
be generated from solar energy through the roof, the hot air would remain at the top 
of a building’s structure and only provide minimal heat savings on rare occasions. 
A WORD FROM ROSEMONT-LA PETITE-PATRIE
According to François Croteau, mayor of the borough of Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie, 
the implementation of the cool roof by-law has been successful due to several 
factors. For instance, “the borough itself was ideal for this type of initiative as it 
is densely built and mostly composed of flat roofs. The cool roof program was 
therefore more likely to be adopted on a higher number of properties and have a 
greater impact on the UHI effect in the area.” Mr. Croteau also believes that “the 
involvement of experts in the public consultation process contributed to both a 
higher acceptance and participation rate among homeowners of the borough.” 
Since the implementation of the program in Rosemont-La Petite-Patrie, four other 
boroughs in the City of Montreal have implemented a similar cool roof by-law. 
66
67
OXFORD COUNTY
Adapting to extreme heat – 
perspectives from rural Southwestern 
Ontario
By Jay Storfer
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
During an extreme heat event, effective communication between local agencies as 
well as with the public is essential. Rural and smaller urban communities are home 
to many heat-vulnerable individuals, including a rapidly growing older population 
and certain occupational groups (e.g. farmers, foresters, fishers, and other labourers 
doing outdoor work). Rural regions can also face unique challenges in developing and 
implementing heat-health preventative actions due to limited resources and expertise, 
proximity and access to health services, a smaller number of community support 
organizations and facilities, limited media for communicating in real time with local 
populations during an event and, finally, a greater likelihood of people being isolated 
or without public transportation compared with those living in urban settings.
At the same time, rural communities have particular characteristics that can support 
the adoption of community-based strategies to minimize heat-health risks and 
enhance response efforts. Identifying and understanding the vulnerabilities that may 
threaten a specific community and the resources that can be leveraged during an 
emergency are key steps in building resiliency. 
Oxford County (population 106,000) is a primarily rural area located in 
Southwestern Ontario that consists of one city, two towns and five townships. 
Historically, Southwestern Ontario has experienced some of the highest recorded 
temperatures and humidex values in the country. Due to climate change, this region is 
expected to experience a doubling of days over 30°C by mid-century. 
THE TRIGGER
An emergency heat event requires the participation of many parts of society 
during the alert, response and recovery phases. A comprehensive risk management 
approach to extreme heat necessitates effective partnerships among different levels 
of government, first responders, the private sector, volunteers, and community-based 
NGOs. In Ontario, a large number of communities have developed different 
thresholds for calling alerts, communication protocols and response mechanisms over 
time. 
By 2012, Oxford County Public Health and Emergency Services had committed to 
understanding and effectively managing the health risks and impacts from extreme 
heat. The County actively engaged neighbouring public health units and participated 
in multi-stakeholder workshops to collect information on key issues such as effective 
heat-health risk communication, interactions between medications and heat and 
methods for assessing community-level vulnerabilities. This information supported the 
development of a county-wide Heat Alert and Response System. 
THE APPROACH
The County used an extreme heat tabletop exercise to identify the best way to 
coordinate a community response to an extreme heat event among the County’s 
departments, area municipalities, local organizations, and healthcare facilities. 
68
69
Recognizing the opportunity to engage a broad range of community partners about 
heat and health, Oxford County held the tabletop exercise in conjunction with the 
County’s annual emergency preparedness, response education, and training event. 
The all-day event began with a series of background presentations on the impacts 
of heat on vulnerable populations, regional climatology, interactions between heat 
and medications, and local services for a response. Participants then worked through 
a series of worsening heat scenarios within a controlled situational environment 
to test a planned heat alert activation and response before shifting to community 
recovery. Participants were asked to consider roles and responsibilities within their 
organization, existing procedures, as well as possible actions and decision-making. The 
scenarios developed emphasized exploration of community response capacity related 
to different possible situations, such as well-water contamination, power outages, 
community isolation and disposal of dead live stock.    
THE OUTCOME
The exercise was a useful tool to raise awareness of this growing public health issue, 
identify gaps in existing risk management processes, and provide an opportunity to 
improve local response capabilities. Using the exercise as an education and training 
session was a highly successful approach to engaging partners and stakeholders. Close 
to 100 participants attended the tabletop exercise and it was one of the largest 
exercises of that nature facilitated by the County. 
Figure 17: The exercise conducted in Oxford County revealed that communication between 
affected agencies, the general public and the emergency operations centre is essential.  (Source: 
Adobe Stock Photo)
The County was able to gain valuable insights about vulnerabilities in their community 
and the measures needed to address them. Four key themes emerged from the 
exercise:
•	
Communication between affected agencies, the general public and the 
emergency operations centre is essential. The exercise provided the first 
opportunity for these units to come together to discuss response communication 
(e.g. who is responsible for issuing a heat alert, who declares an emergency and 
informs the public in a timely manner?). 
•	
Many agencies that participated in the exercise identified the importance of 
reviewing their current policies (if they exist) on extreme heat. 
•	
Informing the public is a delicate balance between being proactive and 
desensitizing the population, especially those most vulnerable to heat. 
•	
There are resource challenges for rural emergency management operations. 
Resource demands were frequently mentioned by participants throughout the 
exercise.
Examining the coordination of efforts to respond to extreme heat in a participatory 
fashion permitted Oxford County to work towards developing a robust Heat Alert 
and Response System for the region. 
A WORD FROM OXFORD COUNTY
When asked what advice he would provide to a rural community looking to develop 
a Heat Alert and Response System, Peter Heywood, Manager, Health Protection 
for Oxford County Public Health and Emergency Services suggested that “during 
a heat emergency, the response to vulnerable populations in rural communities, 
including older adults, requires special consideration and care.” In Oxford County, 
the 55+ population is proportionally larger and increasing at a slightly faster rate 
than the Ontario average. Looking forward, this has implications for Oxford County 
with respect to the accessibility of this population to services, including public 
transportation and cooling centres. It also impacts how heat-related information is 
disseminated to people residing in rural areas. Mr. Heywood recommended that 
“local public health units partner with area municipalities and community agencies 
to conduct a vulnerability assessment.” The assessment can support and guide 
heat-related response activities in rural settings. Oxford County is in the initial stages 
of an assessment and is hopeful that it will allow municipalities and community 
agencies to improve their preparedness, response and recovery activities related to 
extreme heat events, with a particular emphasis on older adults.
70
71
SUDBURY 
Ensuring cooling stations are accessible 
to all residents 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
The way that extremely hot days affects the health of individuals varies depending on 
many elements. Factors such as age, type of housing, underlying health condition and 
ability to access cooling facilities will influence how a person is affected by particularly 
hot days. During a heat wave, temperatures can stay high both during the day and 
at night for days in a row, making it difficult for the human body to cool down. For 
certain individuals, prolonged periods of hot temperatures represent a significant 
threat as they can result in severe health problems or,  in some cases, even death. 
Various groups of the population have been identified as being more prone to 
be affected by extreme heat, such as seniors, children, people with low incomes, 
homeless populations and individuals suffering from pre-existing health conditions. 
When developing a Heat Alert and Response System, it is crucial for municipalities to 
consider these groups as they are the most likely to be affected by heat waves. 
THE TRIGGER
In the early 2000s, the City of Greater Sudbury and its Health Unit determined that 
no plan was in place to respond to extreme heat events to protect the population 
from heat-health risk. At the same time, the province noticed an increase in heat-
related illnesses in Ontario. The creation of the Hot Weather Response Plan therefore 
emerged from a desire for the city and its Health Unit to be in a better position 
to prepare for an extreme heat event. While the plan is intended to protect the 
entirety of the population from the health risks associated with extreme heat events, 
it also has a particularly strong focus on assisting the most vulnerable groups of the 
population. Furthermore, the city differentiates itself by offering free public transit to 
cooling centres to the entire population on days when heat alerts are called.
THE APPROACH
Key objectives of the Hot Weather Response Plan are to ensure that all agencies 
working with vulnerable groups can provide the necessary information on what 
precautions to take during extremely hot days, and that access to cooling centres is 
facilitated for high-risk populations. During an extreme heat event, the Sudbury and 
District Health Unit has the responsibility to notify the City of Greater Sudbury’s 
Emergency Management Department when a heat alert is declared. From there, 
the City’s Emergency Manager informs community heat response partners of the 
alert status through a pre-established communication network. It is then the city’s 
responsibility to inform the public about heat-health risks as well as the location of 
cooling shelters. This is done through the use of various social media platforms, public 
service announcements and the city’s website. The Health Unit also responds to 
health-related media requests and posts important updates on its website. During 
an alert, the city requests that local utilities halt all service cancellations until after 
the heat alert has passed, extending hours of operation and supervision at municipal 
beaches, expanding locations and hours of operation of public swims at city pools, 
and opening cooling centres at public libraries, citizen service centres, and community 
centres.  
72
73
In addition to opening cooling stations and informing the city’s residents of their 
locations through various media, the City of Greater Sudbury took another important 
step by ensuring that access to cooling facilities be possible for all. To accomplish this, 
the city partnered with Greater Sudbury Transit to make all transit routes free during 
extreme heat alerts. In addition, they are planning in the future for para-transit to be 
made accessible at no cost for residents who would need it. 
THE OUTCOME
While the City of Greater Sudbury has issued heat warnings on many occasions, 
it has never had to activate the Hot Weather Response Plan since its inauguration 
in 2007. However the Sudbury Health Unit still reviews annually its educational 
materials outlining general precautions to take during hot weather. The bilingual 
documents produced by the Health Unit are distributed widely among the city’s 
residents and to specific community organizations such as clinics, day cares, long-term 
care facilities, seniors’ residences, food banks, religious institutions, school boards, and 
indigenous groups. 
Figure 18: During extreme heat events, the City of Sudbury opens cooling centres in public 
libraries. (Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
A WORD FROM SUDBURY
According to Melissa Roney, Assistant Deputy Chief, Emergency Management and 
Professional Standards for the City of Greater Sudbury, “ensuring that vulnerable 
people are taken care of during heat waves is crucial to the implementation of a 
successful Heat Weather Response Plan. In the future, the City of Greater Sudbury 
plans on focusing its work on additional efforts to communicate heat risk to specific 
vulnerable groups such as seniors and homeless residents. In addition, we would 
like to keep developing and showcasing our extreme heat transit plan to the city’s 
population.” 
74
75
MELITA
Building on social capital and social 
networks to improve preparedness 
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Canadians living in both urban and rural areas of the country are at risk of being 
affected by extreme heat events. While urban areas may be warmer than their rural 
surroundings on extremely hot days because of the urban heat island effect, high 
temperatures still pose a significant health risk to those living in smaller communities.  
Implementing a Heat Alert and Response System comes with different challenges in 
rural regions. For instance, issuing timely alerts can be challenging in a place where 
the local newspaper is only printed weekly. Similarly, identifying vulnerable populations 
can represent a demanding task in rural communities as less data is available to 
monitor the relationship between temperature, mortality, and morbidity.  Cooling 
options during extreme heat events also differ between urban and rural settings. 
While larger cities are more likely to have more and larger public buildings for use 
as cooling facilities, smaller communities may tend to rely instead on the support of 
social networks to communicate about and identify and access cooling alternatives. In 
general, the implementation of successful Heat Alert and Response Systems in small 
rural communities benefits from strong social capital and the reliance upon solid social 
networks. These important relationships among community members can contribute to 
increased preparedness and response capacity, thereby helping to ensure everyone is 
cared for within a community.
THE TRIGGER
In 2011, Health Canada published a Best Practices Guidebook on Heat Alert and 
Response Systems, which included a chart presenting heat projections for specific 
Canadian cities, including Winnipeg (see Figure 19). The publication became a catalyst 
for the Government of Manitoba, which had not yet ranked extreme heat as a 
significant health risk. Subsequently, a dialogue began between Manitoba, Health Canada 
and other Canadian communities on how to develop local Heat Alert and Response 
Systems. In consultation with various stakeholders, Manitoba Health, Seniors and Active 
Living (MHSAL) decided to develop a plan that was province-wide, incorporating 
both urban areas and more rural/remote parts of the province. Shortly thereafter, two 
regional health authorities partnered with the MSHAL’s Office of Disaster Management 
to conduct vulnerability assessments for both the urban centre of Winnipeg and the 
smaller rural community of Melita (and immediate surroundings), which lies within the 
southwestern corner of the province. Both Winnipeg and Melita consequently became 
the sites of two Heat Alert and Response System case studies in the province of 
Manitoba using the findings of the respective vulnerability assessments. 
THE APPROACH
In order to facilitate the development of a Heat Alert and Response System in 
the region, the town of Melita established a local Heat Alert Response Advisory 
Committee (HARSAC) with the assistance of the local regional health authority (the 
Assiniboine Regional Health Authority at the time of development). This committee 
was composed of local health and regional disaster management partners, as well as 
community members and representatives from the local municipality. Health Canada 
76
77
Figure 19: Heat projections for select Canadians cities (Source: : Health Canada, Heat Alert 
and Response Systems: Best Practices Guidebook, 2011)
supported the completion of a heat vulnerability assessment for Melita and surrounding 
areas, and provided guidance in the design of a rural Heat Alert and Response System 
for the community. The vulnerability assessment was conducted in parallel with a 
table-top exercise, which simulated an extreme heat event. These two activities revealed 
the risks related to extreme heat faced by the small rural community, the characteristics 
of vulnerable groups, and existing capacities and limitations within the community.  The 
Assiniboine Regional Health Authority and the Town of Melita used this information to 
begin development and implementation of a local Heat Alert and Response System for 
the community. 
Following the assessment, the committee asked local Emergency Medical Services to 
include a heat vulnerability assessment of all older adults as part of a general health 
assessment, including, for example, whether or not they had a means by which to cool 
their homes. Information about reducing health risks from extreme heat events has also 
been made available through various sources such as the local newspaper, heat-health 
fact sheets, brochures, and through informal resources such as children’s colouring 
sheets. Information on heat-health risk was distributed to medical clinics, published on 
both the MHSAL and Regional Health Authority websites, and communicated through 
a provincial information line dedicated to providing a wide range of health advice. The 
information was also provided to the community through public health staff, home care 
programs and Emergency Medical Services. The acute care staff at the Melita Health 
Centre and other Assiniboine RHA sites also used Health Canada heat tools in their 
assessments for out-patients in the emergency rooms.
As part of the development of the Heat Alert and Response System, the potential 
locations for cooling options within the Melita area were identified. One of the 
highlighted limitations facing this small community was that potential cooling facilities 
are not large enough to welcome large numbers of people during an extreme heat 
event. Therefore, multiple cooling alternatives had to be identified including the outdoor 
swimming pool, bowling alley, seniors centre, and the library.  A discussion was held 
in relation to local resources that could be used to transport high-risk individuals to 
cooling stations; the local Handi-Van service was one such resource.  In summary, 
the case study highlighted the ability of the community to draw upon strong social 
networks in provision of support to those needing transportation or other assistance 
during extreme heat. 
THE OUTCOME
The Regional Health Authority was able to leverage Melita’s strong social capital 
and social networks to undertake a vulnerability assessment and identify strengths 
and challenges in the implementation of a local Heat Alert and Response System. 
Through this process, volunteers were identified as valuable assets for assisting with 
aspects of the system such as transportation to cooling facilities or water distribution 
during extremely hot days. The engagement of various stakeholders in Heat Alert and 
Response System activities helped reinforce communication and relationships between 
the residents and those providing social support services, and enabled the system to 
be adapted to local conditions. For instance, the participation of Emergency Medical 
Services allowed for a greater understanding of heat-health risks within the community 
and served to simultaneously educate the population about these same risks.
One of the other take-away lessons learned during this study was the importance 
of including air-conditioned or cooling areas in long-term care facilities. Following the 
completion of the assessment, there was a push to provide air-conditioned areas in 
all long-term care facilities located within the boundaries of the Assiniboine Regional 
Health Authority. The first site to receive upgrades was the Melita Personal Care Home. 
Three other capital projects were completed within the next year across the region.
A WORD FROM MELITA
One of the main challenges faced by the Assiniboine Regional Health Authority was 
finding ways to communicate heat risk to the general population in a way that provides 
sufficient time for people to prepare and take necessary precautions to protect their 
health. The Assiniboine Regional Health Authority developed a region-wide Heat 
Response Plan for its staff, facilities and community programs as a result of this study. 
There are still many areas in Manitoba that do not have heat plans, cooling centres 
or effective means to communicate to vulnerable people. Fortunately, the province’s 
HARSAC still continues to engage this challenge and strives to have a provincial plan in 
place for the next heat season.
When asked what advice she would give other rural municipalities that are considering 
implementing a Heat Alert and Response System, Dr. Toni Morris-Oswald, Disaster 
Management Specialist for MHSAL, suggested it is important to work with the local 
community to develop the system as much as possible around pre-established social 
capital and social networks. “In rural communities, councillors may be part-time or even 
volunteers and therefore have limited time and resources available to them; they must 
also plan for a range of potential hazards,” said Dr. Morris-Oswald. She also noted that 
local health authorities can play a key role to encourage and work cooperatively with 
local leaders in addressing a health-related hazard such as heat. Dr. Morris-Oswald 
emphasized “the importance of assisting local leadership to better understand 
heat-health risks so that municipal councillors and community emergency managers 
begin to prioritize adaptation to extreme heat. Encouragement and support to conduct 
a local vulnerability assessment is also an essential step in developing a formal response 
plan or Heat Alert and Response System in a way that reflects local capacities and 
limitations.”  
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
PEEL REGION
Tree priority planting tool 
By Gregory R.A. Richardson
78
79
THE SCIENCE
The Regional Municipality of Peel (population 1.4 million) is located on the shore of 
Lake Ontario just west of the City of Toronto. Peel Region, which consists of three 
local municipalities – the City of Mississauga, the City of Brampton, and the Town of 
Caledon – is one of the fastest-growing municipalities in Canada. 
The urban tree canopy provides a plethora of social, environmental, and ecological 
benefits to communities in Peel Region. Trees help reduce the urban heat island 
effect, reduce peak storm water run-off volumes, increase property values, mitigate 
air pollution, and improve mental health. Despite these benefits, municipalities in Peel 
Region have limited budgets with which to maintain existing tree cover and plant 
new trees. In addition, various pests and diseases such as the Emerald Ash Borer and 
an increase in extreme weather events because of climate change have dramatically 
accelerated the natural rate of tree loss and increased pressure on the urban tree 
canopy locally. The increased threats to the urban forest as well as rapid population 
growth raises some important questions for municipal planners and foresters. How 
can tree planting be encouraged beyond traditional areas like valley lands? Are there 
tools available to help practitioners direct limited resources to most effectively 
manage the urban tree canopy?
THE TRIGGER
Tree planting and maintenance services in Peel Region are primarily provided by 
the cities of Mississauga and Brampton, and the Town of Caledon. Between 2007 
and 2011, the Region of Peel collaborated with these local area municipalities and 
two local conservation authorities (Toronto and Region Conservation and Credit 
Valley Conservation) to develop a comprehensive Peel Region Urban Forest Strategy. 
Following the publication of the Strategy in 2011, city and regional officials began 
discussing how to implement it. Questions arose about how best to direct limited 
resources to maximize the multiple environmental, social, and economic benefits of 
trees to the community. Discussion centred on the need for a rigorous science-based 
mapping tool that could help environmental stewards, planners and urban foresters 
prioritize geographic areas for tree planting based on scientific evidence of their 
multiple benefits. 
THE APPROACH
The purpose of the Peel Tree Planting Prioritization Tool is to have an effective and 
strategic decision-making tool for prioritizing possible tree planting in areas of Peel 
Region to meet multiple environmental, social and economic objectives. The tool was 
developed over a two year period (from 2013 to 2015) with extensive stakeholder 
consultation at all stages of the project. A core project team managed the project 
and consultants were retained to develop the tool. A multi-disciplinary technical 
steering committee – with expertise in parks, forestry, environmental education and 
stewardship, public health, planning, transportation, and human services – was formed 
to provide input and advice at key stages throughout the tool’s development. The 
development of the tool proceeded in three steps: 
Step I: Identification of sustainability themes
The consultants conducted a comprehensive review of the scientific literature on 
the multiple benefits of the urban forest. The project team in consultation with 
stakeholders then grouped the various benefits into eight overall categories under 
three sustainability themes.
Step II: Identification of criteria to apply to the sustainability themes
The project team began this step by identifying potential target benefits and 
reviewing data sets at various scales to spatially define each of the eight categories 
of benefits. In consultation with stakeholders, the categories were screened with the 
data sets and cross-checked with scientific literature to arrive at 12 target benefits, 
along with data sources, spatial extent, and effective weighting. See the example above 
for “mitigating urban heat island effects.” 
Step III: Development of the GIS-based planting priority tool
The consultant used the datasets identified in steps 1 and 2 to develop an integrated 
computer-based mapping tool. Targeted benefit areas were combined with land cover 
mapping of possible planting areas (i.e. areas where there is existing open space such 
as bare earth and grass in which to plant trees) to derive a normalized score to 
prioritize geographic units for planting.
THE OUTCOME
The final tool is a flexible GIS model that can generate maps that illustrate areas 
to prioritize tree planting at different geographic scales; the smallest being census 
dissemination areas. The model and outputs are available to project partners to view 
and combine as necessary to meet specific program needs.
Figure 20: The tool identifies criteria to apply to the sustainability themes (Source: Region of 
Peel)
80
81
Local municipalities and conservation authorities plan to use the tool to guide their 
efforts in managing and growing the urban forest. Credit Valley Conservation, for 
example, intends to use the tool to guide outreach and restoration efforts on public 
and private lands in parts of the watershed that are being developed. The Town of 
Caledon plans to use the tool to identify gaps in the tree canopy on municipal lands 
where planting space is already available and planting activities could be launched 
in the short term. The tool could also be used in future review of development 
applications. The maps could be helpful for identifying existing woodlots and justifying 
management plans and proposed extensions to them. 
A WORD FROM PEEL REGION
When asked what kind of advice she would give to other communities that would 
like to develop a similar tool, Janet Wong, a Planner at the Region of Peel mentioned 
that “developing a priority planting tool and establishing the overall benefits that 
trees could provide to the community is an intensive process that requires extensive 
consultation with people from across various organizations that have a diverse set of 
experiences and interests. In addition, suitable spatial data sources to reasonably and 
scientifically reflect target benefits to establish priorities for a large region need to be 
available to develop and help refine the tool.”
82
83
WINDSOR
Assessing heat-health vulnerabilities to 
inform adaptation
By Peter Berry
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Extreme heat events are a growing threat to the health of Canadians as the climate 
continues to change.  Windsor is the southernmost city in Canada and experiences 
some of the warmest summertime temperatures in the country.  During summer 
months, temperatures are often above 30oC and average humidex values are the 
highest in Canada.  Climate change is expected to significantly increase the number of 
extreme heat days annually in the region. This may exacerbate the risk of heat-related 
illness and deaths, particularly among seniors, people with chronic illnesses and other 
vulnerable groups.
Extreme heat can cause serious illness and even death if people do not take 
protective measures in hot conditions. It can lead to skin rashes, cramps, dehydration, 
syncope (fainting), exhaustion and heat stroke.  In Windsor, there is a strong 
association between excess mortality and temperature; at approximately 29°C, 
excess mortality begins to increase as ambient temperatures increase.   
THE TRIGGER
The City of Windsor and the Windsor-Essex County Health Unit led development 
of a Heat Alert and Response System to protect people in Windsor, particularly the 
most vulnerable, from extreme heat events.  Development of effective community 
alert and response measures depends upon assessment of population and 
community vulnerability. Heat-health vulnerability assessments document baseline 
exposures and take into account population sensitivities as well as how individuals, 
communities, and society respond to extreme heat events and their capacity to adapt 
in the future.  They provide decision makers and the public with knowledge about 
existing vulnerabilities to these events and to future climate change conditions, along 
with the range of responses needed to reduce adverse health impacts.
THE APPROACH
The City of Windsor and Health Canada collaborated to undertake a heat-health 
vulnerability assessment to strengthen the Heat Alert and Response System as well 
as to engage important stakeholders.  The methodology for the assessment was 
drawn from a framework developed by the Pan-American Health Organization 
and the World Health Organization for assessing health vulnerabilities related to 
climate change.  The vulnerability assessment proceeded in five steps:  (1) an initial 
assessment of the scope, objectives, work plan and stakeholders involved; (2) the 
collection and analysis of data, including an examination of the relationship between 
temperature and mortality; (3) the projection of future climate for the Windsor 
region; (4) a literature review to provide background information about the impacts 
of heat on health, vulnerability assessment methods and best adaptation practices; 
and (5) workshops to consult with stakeholders and the community about existing 
vulnerabilities, adaptive capacity and potential adaptation actions.  The vulnerability 
assessment provided information that allowed city officials to develop more effective 
adaptation interventions.
84
85
THE OUTCOME
The final report, Assessment of Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Extreme Heat 
in the City of Windsor (2011), found that people living in Windsor are vulnerable to 
the health impacts of extreme heat events and actions are needed to prepare for 
increasing risks to health.  Examples of key heat-health vulnerability factors included 
the following:
•	
Urban heat islands have been documented along the Toronto–Windsor corridor 
and in the Detroit–Windsor region. Continued urbanization of this region will 
result in an amplification of community exposure to extreme heat events.
•	
Relative to Canadian and Ontario populations, people living in Windsor suffer 
more from a range of chronic diseases (high blood pressure, asthma, diabetes, 
obesity, circulatory disease, cancer) that increase vulnerability to the health 
impacts of extreme heat events.  
•	
Community events in Windsor during the summer season, which often attract 
large numbers of tourists from across the United States border, mean the 
potential exposure of very large numbers of people to extreme heat events.
Figure 21: Association between non-traumatic daily deaths and maximum daily temperatures in 
Windsor from 1986 to 2005 (Source: City of Windsor)
•	
Of the 4,728 community housing units that the city and county manage, the 
vast majority of these do not have air conditioning, increasing the vulnerability 
of residents to heat-related illnesses and deaths. A lack of other cooling facilities, 
such as water fountains in public spaces, may also increase health risks during 
extreme heat events. 
•	
Current awareness and knowledge of risks to health from extreme heat events 
and about protective measures among public and social service agencies is low 
and needs to be increased.
Based on the assessment findings, the City of Windsor is taking a number of 
actions to increase the resiliency of populations to extreme heat events, including 
development of a broad communication strategy with an extended reach through 
a social media campaign, completion of urban heat island mapping to assess urban 
heat island reduction measures, and improvement of the thermal design of city parks 
(including consideration of both natural and artificial shade, water features, and 
consideration of cool surfaces). 
  
A WORD FROM WINDSOR
When asked what kind of advice he would give to other communities that may 
have interest in conducting similar assessments, Dr. Gary M. Kirk, Medical Officer 
of Health and CEO for the Windsor-Essex County Health Unit, indicated that “by 
completing the heat-health vulnerabilities assessment, the health unit has been able to 
develop a comprehensive communication plan with specific tools to target vulnerable 
populations and reach out to community partners to assist in heat-health education. 
Our municipal partner, the City of Windsor, has also been able to use the information 
to develop their Climate Change Adaptation Plan, which identifies actions that should 
be taken to reduce the impacts of extreme heat on local residents.”
 
86
87
SURREY
Mobilizing communities through 
sustainable long-term planning
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
THE SCIENCE
Adequate urban forests in cities can bring significant benefits to communities, such as 
the removal of atmospheric pollutants, noise reduction, microclimate regulation and 
mitigation of urban heat island conditions. In rapidly growing cities, the incorporation 
of an adequate tree cover can be challenging, as new developments are designed 
quickly to respond to a significant population increase. As such, the inclusion of trees 
into new developments is often considered as an afterthought once new roads and 
buildings are already built. In addition, as cities grow, the monitoring and maintenance 
of older trees that provide a great amount of shade also needs to remain a priority 
for municipal leaders in order to control the urban heat island effect. 
The planning of an expansive and healthy urban forest requires the participation 
of several entities within local governments, such as the Parks, Engineering, and 
Planning Departments. The inclusion of other key players such as local residents and 
educational institutions is also important to implement successful greening initiatives 
that will resonate with community members. 
THE TRIGGER
Surrey is a rapidly growing city with approximately 12,000 new residents moving 
within its borders every year. This rapid increase in population has been happening 
for many years now and is one of the main reasons the City of Surrey started looking 
closely at urban tree-related issues in the late 1970s. When development happens 
at such a fast pace, the urban forest cover also decreases quickly as trees are cleared 
to prepare the land for new construction. Approximately 5,000 trees are planted in 
Surrey on public property every year and while most of them are planted in new 
neighbourhoods, the city aims to plant 1,000 trees in older areas annually. Surrey is 
also able to save 3,000 mature trees per year on private property due to its private 
property tree protection by-law, which aims to reduce the number of trees that are 
unnecessarily removed, killed or damaged. The by-law also requires the replanting or 
replacement of trees that have been felled. Without this by-law those trees would not 
be replaced. 
THE APPROACH
Over the last 40 years, Surrey has developed a robust street tree management plan 
that encompasses several programs and promotes participation by residents. As part 
of its greening strategies, the city created a private property tree by-law in 2006 
to protect the entire tree cover located on private property across the city. When 
property owners wish to remove trees on their properties, they need to apply for 
a permit and ensure that the tree to be removed will be replanted or replaced 
elsewhere. In addition, Surrey recently developed the Shade Tree Management Plan 
2016-2036, which guides the planning, design, development, and maintenance of 
Surrey’s public property shade trees. The combination of these two programs means 
that every tree over 30 cm in diameter and above 1.4 meters in height located on 
private property in the city is listed in an inventory and protected by the city. 
88
89
In Surrey, residents are also encouraged to plant more trees through the city’s tree 
voucher program where they can purchase a voucher for $25 and use it to buy a 
tree of a value up to $75. The city also assists residents who purchase vouchers by 
helping them pick the right type of tree species for their property and providing 
recommendations on where to plant the tree on their lot to maximize shading 
potential. 
The city has initiated two volunteer community organizations to promote citizens’ 
involvement in the protection of Surrey’s trees. The first organization composed of 
Surrey’s residents is called the Tree Team and focuses on canvassing neighbourhoods 
to educate residents on the importance of street trees, hosting tree-themed 
information booths at various events in Surrey, and encouraging residents to plant 
backyard trees. The second organization called the Surrey Youth Stewardship Squad 
engages youth in spreading information on the many benefits of trees. The group’s 
initiatives also include planting native trees, cleaning up Surrey’s parks and shorelines, 
and removing invasive plants. Both organizations have been in place for over a decade.
THE OUTCOME
Making trees a priority in Surrey allowed the city to plan for a future under climate 
change where a growing population is expected to face more extremely hot days. 
Figure 22: The private property tree by-law in Surrey protects trees located on private property  
(Source: City of Surrey)
The priority on protecting trees in Surrey means that hard infrastructure sometimes 
needs to be planned differently to protect and maintain the tree cover. In certain 
cases, this means planning wider boulevards to include medium- and large-sized 
trees and in others, it means moving a sidewalk to protect an existing tree that has 
been there for many years. On private property, new house plans are redesigned to 
minimize the removal of trees. 
Surrey recently began exploring the idea of developing guidelines to increase planting 
in the downtown core, as this more urbanized section of the city is more prone 
to the urban heat island effect. City staff is also looking at making changes to soil 
requirements under concrete in order to install structured soil that would provide 
adequate conditions for trees to grow in highly urbanized areas.
A WORD FROM SURREY
When asked what advice he would like to give to other municipalities who would like 
to implement tree-related initiatives in their community, Neal Aven, Urban Forestry 
and Environmental Program Manager for Surrey’s Parks division, emphasized the need 
to get input from the community on greening initiatives. “In order for people to have 
a sense of ownership about a resource like trees, it is important to involve residents 
in an advisory role. Supportive elected officials are also crucial because they have 
their pulse on what the people in the city are interested in and can translate these 
interests into policy development,” said Mr. Aven. Steve Whitton, Tree and Landscape 
Manager for the City of Surrey, added that “it is important to have a well-staffed 
team on these programs as well as a strong private property by-law to overview 
development permits and make sure the approved developments won’t damage the 
tree cover. This allows city staff to look after and manage every single tree of a certain 
size in the city.” Mr. Whitton also emphasized the importance of a strict enforcement 
of tree by-laws in order to maintain high tree cover targets. 
90
91
CITY OF NORTH 
VANCOUVER
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions to 
increase climate resiliency
By Sophie Guilbault
Source: City of North Vancouver
THE SCIENCE
The construction industry has evolved significantly over the last few decades as 
new technologies and new design approaches have emerged to reduce both the 
energy consumption of buildings and their reliance on heating and cooling systems. 
Several of these innovations have been developed to ensure thermal comfort within 
the building envelope while relying on very little energy needs. For instance, passive 
cooling technologies have been developed and implemented in many buildings, 
allowing for better control of heat gain and heat dissipation to improve indoor 
thermal comfort with low- to no-energy consumption. 
THE TRIGGER
As the City of North Vancouver was grappling with the problem of reducing 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and energy use, it examined its main sources of 
emissions and prioritized interventions accordingly. Unlike most urban areas, the 
City of North Vancouver does not attribute most of its emissions to transportation. 
Indeed, the city has approximately equal levels of emissions produced by the building 
and transportation sectors because of transit-oriented planning efforts made in 
the early development of the city. As such, planners in the City of North Vancouver 
decided to place a focus on the building sector to achieve the city’s emissions and 
energy use reduction goals. 
THE APPROACH
The City of North Vancouver developed the Energy Efficient Buildings Working 
Group, to reflect on how best to tackle energy use in buildings and corresponding 
GHG emissions. The group, composed of developers, technical experts on green 
buildings, utilities representatives, architects, engineers, representatives from City 
Council’s advisory bodies, and staff from various departments at the municipal level, 
brainstormed where to begin. Their discussion was influenced by their own analysis 
of the situation but also by research borrowed from other municipalities, including 
the City of Vancouver. Working group discussions resulted in the creation of energy 
efficiency by-laws promoting higher energy performance in all new construction 
and major retrofits. On January 1, 2011, the City of North Vancouver became the 
second municipality in British Columbia (after the City of Vancouver, which has the 
benefit of its own Building Code) to implement a city-wide initiative to reduce energy 
consumption and GHG emissions in buildings of all uses, classes and sizes. This was 
done by incentivizing industry take-up of building energy standards superior to those 
of the British Columbia Building Code. 
The city implemented new zoning requirements obliging all new buildings exceeding 
a low base density threshold to achieve greater energy performance. In other words, 
the city allows for buildings to reach their maximum zoning density only if developers 
and builders can prove they have met higher energy performance targets. As 
achieving higher density is extremely appealing to developers, 97% of all builders have 
decided to construct buildings that meet maximum zoning density and consequently 
have integrated higher energy performance designs and technologies within their 
92
93
Figure 23: The diagram above represents the benefits passive buildings present in terms of lower 
energy consumption. 
(Source: City of North Vancouver)
buildings. To this end, the city established a system of verification and compliance, 
requiring early and detailed energy modeling, integrated design teams, and provision 
of a letter of verification from all accredited professionals confirming that buildings 
were constructed as designed. Prior to construction, the city also requires that 
developers provide an energy performance bond equal to 1% of construction costs, 
an amount that is given back to the developers if the required energy targets are met 
or exceeded. When developers do not reach their pre-defined energy targets, the 
city invests the forfeited bonds into the city’s Carbon Fund, which supports initiatives 
such as the city’s Living City Street Tree Planting Program and the building energy 
retrofit program. 	
The City of North Vancouver is also requiring the construction of either certified 
Passive House buildings or LEED-Gold certified buildings with Platinum-level energy 
conservation targets in the redevelopment of Moodyville, a large infill neighbourhood 
within the city. This neighbourhood represents 1.1 million square feet of buildable 
area. Doubling and in some cases tripling the density of buildable area while raising 
energy performance requirements has ensured the redevelopment of Moodyville for 
new ground-oriented family-friendly housing. It also achieves energy resilience and 
adaptability. City planners are currently estimating that well over half of the homes 
of the new Moodyville neighbourhood will be certified under the Passive House 
Standard. These passive homes are intended to be thermally comfortable indoors 
year-round during both hot and cold days with minimal heating and cooling energy 
use or costs, while virtually all new construction will be built to achieve higher energy 
performance than what is required by the provincial building code. 
THE OUTCOME
Through its strong push toward passive and highly energy-efficient buildings, the 
City of North Vancouver is aiming to significantly reduce the energy consumption of 
buildings in the city. “A lot of our efforts have been around refocusing the behaviour 
of buildings. We highly incentivize Passive House construction and are getting all 
of the builders exposed to this way of designing and building new construction in 
order to increase climate resiliency in our city”, said Emilie Adin, Deputy Director 
of Community Development for the City of North Vancouver.  The construction of 
certified Passive Houses aligns with climate resiliency goals, as these properties can 
be self-sufficient under a wide variety of temperatures. 
A WORD FROM THE CITY OF NORTH VANCOUVER
When asked what advice she would give to municipalities that would like to follow 
the lead of the City of North Vancouver in their energy efficiency initiatives, Ms. 
Adin recommended to always look for win-win situations and examine what can 
be leveraged within your organizational structure. “One of the things we did for the 
zoning by-law was to look for outdated provisions used to promote density, and 
swapped these out with energy efficiency provisions. For instance, we traded out 
an old requirement tying greater density to exponentially higher parking, in order 
to get industry buy-in for new energy requirements and to remove provisions that 
were at odds with the city’s other climate action goals,” said Ms. Adin. This specific 
situation represented a “win-win” as it helped the city achieve its climate action goals 
and removed the parking requirements that developers were made to provide for 
higher density buildings. According to Ms. Adin, it is extremely important to avoid 
overregulation by looking at what requirements can be removed even as you are 
adding more. Finally, she mentioned the importance of getting the right people 
involved from the beginning and keeping everyone on side by understanding each 
stakeholder’s interests and priorities. 
94
95
BEST PRACTICES
A comprehensive local plan
By Paul Kovacs
Source: Adobe Stock Photo
Local and regional health authorities across Canada are taking actions to reduce the 
risks of adverse health impacts from extreme heat events. Leading communities have 
developed and implemented comprehensive plans, which generally include two broad 
strategies to confront the health risks from extreme heat. First, it is critical to enhance 
local preparedness for future heat waves. Many communities have implemented 
Heat Alert and Response Systems, systems that alert the public when there are 
dangerously hot days and put in place a strategy to inform and protect the community 
from health risks associated with extreme heat. These systems may include a plan to 
make cooling centres available, to distribute water to those in need, and to inform 
the most vulnerable when an extreme event strikes. Second, communities are making 
investments in preventative measures to reduce the risk of extreme heat events 
resulting in health issues. Preventative actions may include an expansion of the tree 
cover, promoting green and cool roofs, and efforts to increase social networks among 
vulnerable populations.  The implementation of these actions can have long-term 
benefits within a community. For instance, the expansion of tree cover can mitigate 
the effects of urban heat islands and the implementation of cool roofs can help reduce 
heat absorption by buildings and enhances thermal comfort for their occupants. A 
comprehensive local plan to adapt to extreme heat events combines a strong Heat 
Alert and Response system with preventative actions.
ASSESSING LOCAL RISKS
The foundation for a comprehensive Heat Alert and Response System begins with 
an assessment of heat-health risks in the community. This includes a review of historic 
weather information from Environment and Climate Change Canada. It also consists 
of a review of how often the local temperature has been above the community 
threshold at which adverse health outcomes begin to occur. Communities need to 
look at how often they have experienced several consecutive days of hot weather. 
In addition, it is important to remember that extreme humidity increases the risk 
of adverse health impacts.  As such, Canadian municipalities need to evaluate what 
is the likelihood of high humidity coinciding with extreme heat, and whether or not 
there are any trends in the frequency of high-humidity days. Other factors can also be 
assessed such as air quality and the risk of power failure. 
Environment and Climate Change Canada, Health Canada, and university-based 
climate experts, like the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, can assist with 
the assessment of historic weather data and other factors leading to vulnerability to 
extreme heat. For example, it is important to also assess climate projections of future 
risk of extreme heat events. The climate is changing; temperatures are warming and 
the frequency and severity of extreme heat events is expected to increase across 
the country. Detailed climate projections of future extreme heat events can be used 
at the local level to inform better alerts. Environment and Climate Change Canada 
and a number of provincial, regional and academic organizations (including Ouranos, 
Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions, Prairie Adaptation and Research Collaborative, 
and Ontario Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change) offer local climate 
projections.
An important, but sometimes difficult dimension of assessing local risks is the 
challenge of obtaining historical information about the consequences of extreme heat 
on people’s health. Important questions for local health practitioners include: Can 
local hospitals share information about the impact of extreme heat on admissions 
with cities and local health authorities to help them better prepare for and respond 
to extreme heat events? Is there evidence specific to the community that shows 
the relationship between temperature and the risk of fatality? Is there any local 
information about the impact of air pollution and extreme heat on health?
Efforts to date stress the value of undertaking a high-quality vulnerability assessment 
to better understand local health risks from extreme heat. The information collected 
in vulnerability assessments provides the foundation for action to establish and 
maintain an effective Heat Alert and Response System. A detailed local vulnerability 
assessment is also critical to support investments in prevention as it will allow for 
the identification of priority actions. Importantly, communities that have completed 
heat-health assessments found that extreme heat events result in an increased risk 
of illness and death, and much of this increase is preventable. It is therefore crucial 
to ensure that extreme events are identified, warnings are issued, and appropriate 
response takes place throughout the community.
EXTREME HEAT ALERT AND RESPONSE SYSTEMS
Alert and warning programs can be managed by provincial, regional or local 
governments, with specific aspects of the system managed by different agencies. 
Officials need to ensure that there is no duplication or lack of uniformity in 
the warnings that are provided. Heat Alert and Response Systems need to be 
evidence-based, using clearly defined processes and measures of success. Engagement 
of key stakeholders, like partners in the media and response professionals, is critical 
to an effective program. It is important, for example, to build local awareness about 
the distinction between a ‘heat alert’ and a ‘heat warning’. Determination of an alert 
trigger will benefit from stakeholder engagement. During an extreme heat event, it 
is particularly challenging to ensure that everyone within a community receives the 
appropriate information that will ensure their health and the health of their families is 
protected from particularly high temperatures.
Local and regional leadership is essential for preparedness efforts. Health Canada has 
identified five critical elements in an effective alert and response system:
1. Community mobilization and engagement
Efforts to reduce the risk of adverse health impacts from extreme heat are most 
effective when local and regional health officials engage social service providers, 
voluntary agencies, and other stakeholders in the development and implementation 
of a response plan. This may include emergency response organizations, home care 
providers, homeless services, tourism centres, faith-based groups, and a number of 
municipal agencies.
Community engagement can assist in the assessment of local vulnerability to the 
health impacts of extreme heat. Engaging various stakeholders such as local health 
authorities, community groups, and city officials is useful to assess awareness of health 
issues among individuals in the community. It is also useful to determine which existing 
networks in the community could be used for sharing heat alerts and information 
about protective actions that should be taken when an extreme heat event strikes.
It is important that the engagement effort be as detailed as possible to determine 
the specific heat-health risks faced by individuals living at a specific location in the 
municipality.
2. Alert protocol
Public health authorities need to establish an alert protocol to identify weather 
conditions that could result in increased adverse health conditions for the community. 
There are differences in the details of the protocols and alert triggers presently in 
place across Canada, with no single approach emerging as superior in all respects. 
Protocols are based upon the risk of unusually high temperatures during the day, 
sustained high temperatures through the evenings, the risk that these conditions 
will continue for several days without easing, and complication associated with high 
humidity.
There is value in distinguishing between heat events that are expected to exceed the 
identified thresholds, and very severe heat events that may significantly exceed the 
ability of individuals to cope. The alert protocol identifies different levels of threat and 
makes this information available to the community at risk.
Evidence-based information for when to call an alert provides an important 
foundation for building public awareness about heat-health risks in the community, 
and public confidence about the value of the warnings.
3. Community response plan
An effective response plan relies on the outreach capacity of participating 
government agencies and non-governmental organizations. It needs to be tailored to 
the specific needs of the community and its vulnerable populations.
The response plan needs to take into account heat-vulnerable groups and the specific 
challenges each group faces. For example, the best mechanisms to alert and assist 
older adults may differ from those used to reach tourists, recreational athletes, the 
homeless, people who work outdoors, infants, those with chronic illness, and those 
with low incomes. 
Most response plans include the provision of cooling centres, access to drinking water, 
and information about how to take protective actions. Local cooling facilities may 
include libraries, community centres, city halls, swimming pools, and spray pads. These 
facilities can be supplemented by arrangements with places of worship, shopping 
malls, senior centres, and movie theatres.
Figure 24: Many programs seek to engage the community before heat season begins. 
(Source: Adobe Stock Photo)
98
99
4. Communications plan
Experience in Canada and elsewhere around the world consistently identifies 
communications as a difficult element in Heat Alert and Response Systems. 
Some people remain unaware of the threat despite aggressive alert and warning 
communication and many people fail to act on the advice provided. Many programs 
seek to engage the community before the heat season, during the heat season, and 
during an extreme event with different messages.
Before the heat season, there is scope to build awareness about individual and family 
preparedness, community options for risk reduction, the signs of heat illness, and 
details about where to get more information. The communication plan should strive to 
establish a network of stakeholders able to bring forward consistent information about 
the nature of the threat and the best options to prepare.
In the summer, there is often greater public interest in heat-health issues. During these 
months there is scope to work with partners to raise awareness about the potential 
adverse impacts of extreme heat and focus on identifying actions that should be taken 
when an event occurs. The opportunity also exists to focus on prevention by advising 
people to ensure that their air conditioners are working properly, raising awareness 
about the importance of staying cool and well hydrated, and promoting the planting of 
shade trees to provide shade and cooling.
During an event, the communication goal is to get people to take protective measures. 
The communication plan could include a press release to have the media issue the 
appropriate alert or warning, as well as the sharing of information with established 
partners to implement the agreed strategy to engage the community. 
5. Evaluation plan
A formal evaluation of performance is an important tool to refine and improve Heat 
Alert and Response Systems. Evaluation is a common process for public health and 
many other policy areas, but it is an emerging tool for Heat Alert and Response 
Systems.
Two types of evaluation can be undertaken – process and outcome. A process 
evaluation is used to determine if each component of the Heat Alert and Response 
System operated effectively during an event. An outcome evaluation focuses on 
assessing the impact of the program toward achieving its goals and objectives. Both 
processes can provide specific advice to health authorities concerning scope for 
improvement.
An evaluation that emphasizes collaboration and stakeholder feedback can enhance 
partnerships that strengthen capacity and the effectiveness of future responses. 
The evaluation process can be applied following a major event and can also employ 
use of a tabletop exercise to discuss a simulated emergency situation. A tabletop 
exercise, with a focus on process, can be part of the creation of a new Heat Alert and 
Response System, or evaluation of an existing program.
PREVENTATIVE ACTIONS – REDUCING URBAN HEAT
Long-term investments to keep communities and their residents cool can enhance 
the resilience of a community and prevent heat-health threats. A longer-term plan 
to invest in prevention complements a Heat Alert and Response System where the 
focus is on near-term preparedness. Health Canada has identified seven preventative 
strategies for reducing the risk of adverse heat-health impacts in a community:
1. Reducing urban heat island effects
The air temperature in urban centres may average 1°C to 3°C higher than 
surrounding areas. Urban environments tend to be built with non-reflective and 
impermeable materials that are better at absorbing heat during the day and slower 
to release the heat at night than are surrounding areas. The differences are greatest 
when there is a decrease in natural land cover, particularly mature trees, which 
provide shade and cool the air through evapotranspiration. 
Some measures that reduce urban heat islands include the use of green infrastructure, 
cool roofing, and urban forests. Additional options include the use of permeable 
materials for parking and roads, bio-swales for storm-water management, as well as 
green roofs, tree planting programs, and landscaping guidelines.
2. Promoting healthy communities and individuals
Recreation master plans can promote local actions that increase tree shading in parks, 
increase the area available for recreation, and generally enhance the health of the 
community. Active and healthy people are generally more resilient to extreme heat, 
so general public health promotion efforts also reduce the risk of adverse heat-health 
issues.
3. Modifying transportation policies
The provision of trails for walking, biking, and jogging can also reduce the risk of heat 
illness and death if people take protective measures during heat events. Coupled with 
appropriate lighting and repairs to older infrastructure, these actions can encourage 
healthy transportation alternatives for citizens throughout the community. During 
extreme heat events, it is also extremely valuable to provide transportation to cooling 
centres. 
4. Improving social capital and social networks
Effective Heat Alert and Response Systems work with existing social networks to 
communicate heat-health risk information and organize response during extreme 
heat events. Cultivating strong social networks within a community can result in a 
greater awareness of heat-health risks among residents as well as a greater response 
capacity during extreme heat events. Strong social networks are particularly 
important in smaller and rural communities where municipal resources might be 
more limited.
5. Building climate resiliency
Efforts to address extreme heat are best situated within an overall local climate 
resiliency strategy. Extreme weather and climate change is expected to threaten local 
infrastructure through increased urban flooding, coastal flooding from sea level rise, 
and more local storms and wildfires. Extreme heat is one of many climate threats that 
can be effectively managed by local governments. 
6. Assessing heat-health vulnerability
The initial establishment of a Heat Alert and Response System should include an 
assessment of vulnerability of individuals and of the broader community to extreme 
heat events. A long-term prevention strategy can be informed by an assessment 
of expected trends in vulnerability associated with an aging population, disease 
prevalence, urbanization, and change in the climate.
7. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions
Local governments can replace older vehicles with fuel-efficient models, improve the 
energy efficiency of public buildings, and encourage action by citizens to reduce the 
use of greenhouse gases. Reduced emissions can slow the pace of global warming and 
the rate of increase in extreme heat events. Some measures to reduce greenhouse 
gases can also help people stay cooler during extreme heat events (e.g. insulating 
homes). 
ABOUT ICLR
The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR), established in 1997, is 
a world-class centre for multi-disciplinary disaster prevention research and 
communications. ICLR is an independent, not-for-profit research institute founded by 
the insurance industry and affiliated with Western University. ICLR staff and research 
associates are recognized internationally for their expertise in wind and seismic 
engineering, atmospheric science, risk perception, hydrology, economics, geography, 
health sciences, and public policy, among other disciplines. The International Council 
for Science established ICLR as an International Centre of Excellence in Integrated 
Research on Disaster Risk.
ICLR’s mission is to reduce the loss of life and property damage caused by severe 
weather and earthquakes through the identification and support of sustained actions 
that improve society’s capacity to adapt to, anticipate, mitigate, withstand and recover 
from natural disasters. ICLR is achieving its mission through the development and 
implementation of the following programs: Open for Business, to increase the disaster 
resilience of small business; Designed for Safer Living and Insurers Rebuild Stronger 
Homes, which increase the resilience of homes; and RSVP cities, to increase the 
resilience of communities.
ABOUT HEALTH CANADA
Health Canada is the Federal department responsible for helping Canadians maintain 
and improve their health. Health Canada’s goal is for Canada to be among the 
countries with the healthiest people in the world. The Climate Change and Innovation 
Bureau at Health Canada has the mandate of increasing knowledge of climate 
change impacts on health and supporting the development of measures to adapt 
to protect the health of Canadians. Since 2008, Health Canada has been supporting 
communities across Canada develop resiliency to extreme heat events.
ICLR’s BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Barbara Bellissimo (Chair)
Senior Vice President, Desjardins General Insurance
Bob Anderson 
Dean of Social Science, Western University
Charmaine Dean
Dean of Science, Western University
Joseph El-Sayegh 
President and CEO, SCOR Reinsurance
Louis Gagnon
President & COO, Intact Insurance
Andrew N. Hrymak
Dean of Engineering, Western University
	
  	
Paul Kovacs
Executive Director, Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
Sean Murphy 
President, Lloyd’s Canada
Jonathan Turner 
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Swiss Reinsurance
Philipp Wassenberg 
President and CEO, Munich Re Canada
ICLR’s INSURANCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Jocelyn Laflamme (Co-Chair)
Desjardins Groupe d’Assurance
Kevin Smart (Co-Chair) 
Aviva Canada
Gail Atkinson
Western University
Howard Bogach
Tarion
Julie Campbell 
NBFC
Ian Currie
Wawanesa
Paul Cutbush
AON Benfield
	
  	
Lorenzo DiIorio
Swiss Re
Gina Ferris 
Sirius Group
Ed Forbes 
Dufferin Mutual
Robert Graham 
Guy Carpenter
Don Greer
Ecclesiastical
Balz Grollimund 
Swiss Re
Sophie Guilbault 
ICLR
Horia Hangan
Western University
Pauline Harrison
RBC
Hanping Hong
Western University
Marilyn Horrick
GCNA
	
  	
Don Keefe
Temple
Kunal Joarder 
AIR Worldwide
Greg Kopp 
Western University
Paul Kovacs 
ICLR 
Francois Langevin 
TD Assurance
Gerry Lashley 
Intact
Randy MacFarlane 
Coachman/SGI
Glenn Matheson 
Gore Mutual
Gordon McBean 
Western University
Glenn McGillivray 
ICLR 
Justin Moresco 
RMS
Joe Murison 
The Commonwell
Rocco Neglia 
Economical
Jo-Anne Polidoro 
Chubb
Alison Porter 
SCOR
Dan Sandink 
ICLR
Natalia Silva 
Co-operators
Slobodan Simonovic 
Western University
Barb Villeneuve 
Travelers
Tracy Waddington 
ICLR
Pat White 
Peace Hills
Daryl Wiebe 
Marsh
Kyle Winston 
CRU Adjusters
Doug Woolford 
Western University
Wayne Wyborn 
Portage Mutual
Rich Zamperin 
Assist Plus
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Peter Berry
Senior Policy Analyst - Climate Change and Innovation Bureau, Health Canada 
Nicholas Friedel
Student, University of Ottawa
Sophie Guilbault
Research Coordinator, ICLR
Paul Kovacs
Executive Director, ICLR
Gregory R.A. Richardson
Policy Analyst – Climate Change and Innovation Bureau, Health Canada
Anastasia Rogaeva
Policy Analyst - Workplace Hazardous Materials Bureau, Health Canada
Jay Storfer
Senior Policy Analyst – Immigration, Refugee and Citizenship Canada
Published by
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
20 Richmond Street East, Suite 210 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5C 2R9
This material may be copied for purposes related to the document as long as the 
authors and copyright holder are recognized.
The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the collaborators and not 
necessarily those of the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction.
ISBN: 978-1-927929-05-6 
Copyright©2016 Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction
