Ontario Resource Centre
for Climate Adaptation
orcca-craco.ca
Support Desk
Increase in extreme weather events
 (visitor safety, business interruptions
, Impacts on infrastructure), 
Changing water resources (water
 availability, water quality), 
Decrease in cold weather recreation, 
Changes in tourist perceptions, 
Environmental change (changes in
 biodiversity, changes in wildlif
e production, changes in landsca
pe features) 
CLIMATE-READY TOURISM 
Challenges and Opportunities 
Climate change presents both challenges and opportunities to tourism within Ontario and requires both short-
and long-term planning to ensure environmental, cultural, social, and financial sustainability. As climate
change impacts are increasingly understood and experienced within Ontario’s tourism sector, stakeholders are
looking for ways to build resilience and prepare for a climate-altered future. To date, there is a paucity of
research, knowledge, and resources available to stakeholders looking to take adaptive action to increase
climate-readiness within tourism products and destinations. 
Climate change presents both challenges and opportunities to the tourism sector. We have presented a
few general ideas below - can you think of more that might be pertinent in your region?
Climate Challenges
Extended tourism season,
 
Increased growing season length
 (farm tourism, farmer’s markets), 
Increase in warm weather recreation, 
Potential opportunities in recreational
 fisheries (warm-water fishes), 
“Last Chance” tourism market, 
Destination rebranding 
Adaptive Opportunities
Guiding Question: What are
the most concerning
impacts of climate change
on tourism in your region?  
Fishbone Exercise
Suggested Activity: Start
by listing the overarching
categories of impact, then
move to more specific
examples for your local
context. 
Changes in 
ecosystem
Impacts on  
hunting
Impacts on
 outdoo
r recreation 
Questions to Consider 
What climate change risks, vulnerabilities, and opportunities have you identified for the
tourism sector in your region? 
Could you develop a new product or modify the destination image (“destination
 adaptation”)? 
How might you vary and/or diversify your offerings within the tourism sector? 
Have you considered providing emergency messaging guidance for the tourism
 industry? 
What regulatory barriers could be reduced to promote sustainable fishing and hunting
 opportunities? 
How might you modify tourism-related products, policies, plans, practices, and/or
procedures? 
How can you support   tourism businesses in preparing for disruptions to electrical powe
r disruptions? 
How might you build new or upgrade existing tourism-related infrastructure?  
Could you provide training among tourism stakeholders on how to use weather and
 climate data to understand projected changes in climate that will impact the touris
m sector? 
How can you increase community and visitor awareness and/or public education actions?  
What new relationships can be fostered for successful adaptation to take place?  (E.g., Can
 you strengthen your relationship with your local Public Health Unit to ensure consisten
t messaging about hazards and impacts in the region? How might you support Indigenou
s-led conservation to better protect ecosystem cultural services in your area?) 
Do you have in place the necessary collaborations across all stakeholders for successful
adaptation to take place? 
Ski Resorts in Ontario
and Eastern US
Many large ski resorts in Ontario and the
 Eastern US are expanding to includ
e diverse activities year-round. They a
re adding attractions such as spas, ind
oor water parks, and toboggan runs for k
ids, catering to visitors even when sn
ow is scarce.
Destination BC has created resources for BC’s
 tourism industry to help tourism businesse
s navigate questions, mitigate visitor concern
s, and proactively manage perceptions dur
ing emergencies. Resources include: Emerg
ency Messaging Guidance, Water Conserv
ation Tourism Industry Toolkit, a Tourism Eme
rgency Management Framework, and PreparedBC: Tourism Resources Destination
 BC has created re
sources for BC’s tourism industry to help tourism businesses navigate questions, mitigate visitor concerns, and proactively manage perceptions during emergencies. Resources include: Emergency Messaging Guidance, Water Conservation Tourism Industry Toolkit, a Tourism Emergency Management Framework, and PreparedBC: Tourism Resources 
Destination BC
Tourism Resources
Banff & Lake Louise Tourism, in partnership
 with the Town of Banff and Parks Canada, ha
s developed a 10-year Vision for Tourism for t
he destination. The plan contains valuable in
put from stakeholders, including residents
 who call the park home, and envisions a f
uture where the destination becomes more res
ilient and takes control of its trajectory.
Banff & Lake Louise
Tourism
In 2021, Edmonton pioneered as Western
 Canada's inaugural city to underg
o environmental grading via an internation
al index, aiming to enhance its appeal
 to tourists. By joining the Global Destina
tion Sustainability Index, the city gains ins
ights from peers and advances efforts in
 waste management, biodiversity preservati
on, and carbon emission reduction.
Edmonton Joins
Global Destination
Sustainability Index
The BC Tourism Climate Resiliency Initiative (BCTCRI) launched in Jan 2024 will be investing in Climate adaptation and sustainability planning for tourism businesses, Micro-grants for plan implementation, Data framework development for better decisions and province-wide learning and training. The BC Tourism Climate Resiliency Initiative (BCTCRI) launched in Jan 2024 will be investing in Climate adaptation and sustainability planning for tourism businesses, Micro-grants for plan implementation, Data framework development for better decisions and province-wide learning and training. 
The BC Tourism Climate Resiliency Ini
tiative (BCTCRI) launched in Jan 20
24 will be investing in Climate adaptation and 
sustainability planning for tourism busine
sses, Micro-grants for plan implementation
, Data framework development for better decisions and province-wide learning and training. 
BC Tourism Climate
Resiliency Initiative
Examples
Learn more
Learn more
Learn more
Learn more
Learn more
orcca-craco.ca
Additional Resources
Ontario-specific
Ontario Provincial Climate Change Impact Assessment Technical Report 
Learn about the overview of the impacts of climate change, including the risks and opportunities in Ontario.
Implications of climate change for tourism and recreation in Ontario
Read the findings of an investigation into the possible implications of climatic change for tourism and
recreation in Ontario.
National
Sector Impacts and Adaptation; Chapter 7 in Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report
(Government of Canada)
Discover the impacts of a changing climate on snow- and ice-dependent markets in Canada such as ski
resorts, snowmobile tourism, and Arctic cruise expeditions.
International
Climate-ADAPT- How Europe is Adapting to Climate Change ( European Environment Agency)
Explore 10 European case studies demonstrating measures to enhance resilience to extreme weather and
climate change.
Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation in the Tourism Sector (United Nations Environment
Programme)
Learn how tourism professionals can understand and respond to climate change challenges in their own
communities.
Get the Support You Need
Connect with the ORCCA Support Desk by
email, phone, or by submitting a form.
t. 1 888 820 2533 
e. orcca.craco@iclei.org 
About ORCCA
The Ontario Resource Centre for Climate Adaptation (ORCCA) helps
Great Lakes communities and other Ontario users adapt to climate
change and build local resilience. The Centre provides support to
individuals, leaders, municipalities, and communities in their climate
adaptation endeavours. 
Learn more about us and our services on our website at orcca-craco.ca. 
