Summary for All
Climate Change 2021:
WORKING GROUP I TECHNICAL SUPPORT UNIT
This document has not been subject to formal IPCC review processes.
Version 3 - 12 December 2022
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
3 /
 
Weather, Climate and the IPCC 
No matter where we live, we all experience weather: how the conditions of our atmosphere 
change over minutes, hours, days, weeks. We also all experience climate: the weather of a place 
averaged over several decades. Climate change is when these averaged conditions start to 
change and its causes can be either natural or caused by human activities. Rising temperatures, 
variations in rainfall, increased extreme weather events are all examples of climate changes, but 
there are many others. 
Back in 1990, the first report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded 
that human-caused climate change would soon become apparent but could not yet confirm 
that it was already happening. Now, some 30 years later, the evidence is overwhelming that 
human activities have changed the climate. 
Hundreds of scientists from all over the world come together to produce IPCC reports. They 
base their conclusions on several kinds of scientific evidence, including:
•  Measurements or observations, sometimes spanning more than a century back in time;
•  Paleo (very old) climate evidence from thousands or millions of years ago (for example: tree 
rings, rock or ice cores);
•  Computer models that look at past, current and future changes (see box What are climate 
models? on page 9);
•  Understanding of how the climate works (physical, chemical and biological processes). 
Since the IPCC first started, we now have much more data and better climate models. We 
understand more now about how the atmosphere interacts with the ocean, ice, snow, ecosystems 
and land of the Earth. Computer climate simulations have considerably improved and now 
provide past change and future projections that are much more detailed. Plus, we have now had 
decades more greenhouse gas emissions, making the effects of climate change more apparent 
(see box What are greenhouse gases? on page 6). As a result, the latest IPCC report is able to 
confirm and strengthen the conclusions from previous reports. 
What’s covered in this summary?
•  Climate Change Today: what changes have already occurred and how we know humans are 
responsible;
•  Our Future Climate: what changes could happen in the future depending on the actions 
we take;
•  Limiting Future Climate Change: what is required to stop global temperature from 
continuing to rise.
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
4 /
Climate change today
Global warming has already caused widespread, rapid and intensifying 
changes. Some changes are unprecedented in thousands or even millions 
of years
Climate change is more than simply the world getting hotter; we 
are experiencing widespread changes across the atmosphere, land, 
ocean and ice regions. The list below and Graphic A give an overview 
of climate changes we are observing across the globe. 
Atmosphere
•  The average temperature of the Earth’s surface between 2011 and 
2020 was 1.1ºC (2°F) warmer than the average temperature in the 
late 19th century (before the industrial revolution) and warmer 
than at any time in the last 100,000 years.
•  Each of the last four decades has been warmer than any previous decade since 1850. The world is warming 
faster than at any time in at least the last two thousand years.
•  The levels of greenhouse gases in the air are continuing to rise because of our emissions. Carbon 
dioxide concentrations are at their highest in at least the last 2 million years. Methane and nitrous 
oxide concentrations are at their highest in at least 800,000 years (see box What are greenhouse 
gases? on page 6).
Land
•  Rainfall over the land has increased since the 1950s. In the tropical regions, it is raining more during wet 
seasons and raining less during dry seasons.
•  Many plant species and animal species have moved closer to the poles and to higher elevations, to follow 
the shifts in climate zones.
•  For some Northern Hemisphere plant species, the growing season has become longer (up to 14 days 
longer since the 1950s) and, overall, the surface of the land has become greener since the early 1980s.
Ice
•  Many of the frozen parts of the Earth are rapidly melting or thawing (defrosting). Overall, snowfall is 
decreasing. The widespread retreat of glaciers since 1950 has not been seen in at least 2000 years.
•  The area of the Arctic Ocean covered by sea ice in the summer is now 40% smaller than in the 1980s. 
It is the smallest it has been for at least one thousand years.
•  Snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere has decreased since the late 1970s, and some of the ground 
areas usually frozen all year round have warmed and thawed (defrosted). 
 
If you would like 
to learn more 
about climate 
change, then 
you can read 
the report’s 
Frequently Asked 
Questions here: 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/
resources/frequently-asked-questions/
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
5 /
•  The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are shrinking, as are the vast majority of glaciers worldwide, 
adding huge quantities of water to the oceans. 
Ocean
•  90% of the extra heat associated with global warming has been taken up by the ocean (see box 
What are greenhouse gases? on page 6). The ocean is now warming faster than at any time in at 
least 11,000 years.
•  Sea level has risen globally by about 20 centimetres (approximately 8 inches) since 1900. It is rising 
faster than at any point in at least 3000 years, and this speed is accelerating.
•  By absorbing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, the ocean is becoming more acidic. The surface 
water of the ocean is now unusually acidic compared with the last 2 million years.
 
Graphic A • Global warming has triggered widespread changes across the entire climate system. 
The four main parts of the climate system – the air, the ocean, the land and the ice regions – are all 
experiencing widespread changes. Km = kilometres. Graphic adapted from IPCC AR6 Working Group I FAQ 2.2, Figure 1 in Chapter 2. 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-2/
Air temperature
(in the lowest
few km)
Atmospheric circulation
Water 
vapour
Surface 
temperature
Species 
range shifts
Ocean heat 
content
Sea level
Sea surface 
temperature
Species 
ranges shifts
Ocean 
acidification
Growing 
season length
Global 
greenness
Precipitation
Glaciers
Ice sheets
Snow cover
Permafrost 
extent
Arctic sea ice
What is the evidence for climate change?
Taken together, observed changes in the 
climate system since the late 19th century 
reveal an unequivocally warming world
AIR
LAND
OCEAN
ICE
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
6 /
 
What are greenhouse gases?
Some gases in our atmosphere – such as carbon dioxide, methane 
and nitrous oxide – act like an insulation blanket for the Earth. They 
warm the Earth by making it harder for heat to be released into outer 
space. Much like adding a blanket around your body heats you up 
and keeps you warm, or the walls of a greenhouse help keep the air 
inside warmer than its surroundings. 
This effect is called the greenhouse effect, and these heat-trapping gases are called greenhouse 
gases. The greenhouse effect is a natural process that makes the Earth liveable for humans: 
without the natural greenhouse effect, the global average temperature would be about 33ºC 
(59°F) colder. However, human activities since the 19th century have emitted more and more 
greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, mostly from burning fossil fuels (coal, oil and gas), but 
also from agriculture and cutting down forests. These actions have added to the greenhouse 
effect, causing global warming. 
The excess energy is taken up by different parts of the Earth (Graphic B): 91% is absorbed by 
the oceans, 5% is absorbed by the land, 3% is absorbed by the ice. Only 1% of the extra heat 
is absorbed by the atmosphere. This warming has caused changes in many aspects of climate.
The Earth’s energy budget and climate change
Since at least 1970, there has been a persistent imbalance in the energy flows that has 
led to excess energy being absorbed by different components of the climate system.
Ice
Ocean
Land
3%
91%
Outgoing 
energy
Excess energy accumulating
Less outgoing 
energy due to 
greenhouse gases
Incoming
solar energy
Incoming
solar energy
Stable climate: in balance
Today: imbalanced
Atmosphere 1%
5%
 
Graphic B • The Earth’s energy budget compares the flows of incoming and outgoing energy that are 
relevant for the climate system. Since at least the 1970s, less energy is flowing out than is flowing in, which 
leads to excess energy being absorbed by the ocean, land, ice and atmosphere. 
Graphic adapted from IPCC AR6 Working Group I FAQ 7.1, Figure 1 in Chapter 7.
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-7/
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
7 /
We are certain that humans are warming the climate
All of the observed warming (1.1°C/2°F) we have seen since the pre-industrial 
era is a result of human activities. In fact, greenhouse gas emissions from 
human activities would have warmed the Earth even more, by about 1.5ºC 
(2.7°F) in total, but their warming effect has been partly counteracted by 
emissions of air pollutants called aerosols, which have an overall cooling 
effect. Carbon dioxide is the greenhouse gas that contributes the most to the 
warming, followed by methane and then nitrous oxide.
How do we know global warming is not naturally caused? Natural causes of climate change that 
affect global temperature on short time scales (years to decades) haven’t significantly affected global 
temperatures since the pre-industrial era. A large volcanic eruption is an example of a natural variability, 
which can cool global temperatures for a few years but doesn’t alter temperatures on much longer 
time frames. Graphic C shows how greenhouse gases, air pollutants (aerosols) and natural causes have 
affected global temperatures since 1850. It is only when climate model simulations include human-
caused greenhouse gases that they can recreate temperature observations. This is one of the ways we 
know that humans are responsible for warming the climate. 
 
Graphic C • Humans are responsible for warming the climate. Climate model simulations (coloured shading) can only reproduce 
observed change in global temperature (black) when they include human-caused emissions. This graphic shows how global temperatures 
change when using climate model simulations that include: greenhouse gases only (red band); or aerosols (air pollutants) and other human 
drivers only (blue band); or natural causes only (green band); or when all causes are included (grey band). Combined = natural + aerosols + 
greenhouse gases. Solid/dashed coloured lines show the average of all models and shading shows the uncertainty ranges of the simulations. 
Graphic adapted from IPCC AR6 Working Group I FAQ 3.1, Figure 1 in Chapter 3. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-3/ 
How do we know humans are causing climate change?
Observed warming (1850-2019) is only reproduced in simulations including human influence. 
Observations
Global surface temperature change since 1850 
(°C)
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
1900
1950
2000
2020
1850
Combined
(Human & natural causes)
Greenhouse gases (human)
Aerosols (Human)
Natural causes
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
8 /
Human-caused climate change is making extreme events more frequent 
and severe
All the regions of the world must now deal with extreme 
events (such as heatwaves, droughts and heavy rainfalls) 
that are generally more severe and happening more often. 
Each region experiences different types of extreme events. 
Since the 1950s, all inhabited regions have seen more 
frequent and more intense heatwaves, and fewer and milder 
cold extremes. Many regions have seen heavier and more 
intense rainfall events (which can fuel floods). The soils of 
some regions have become much drier, leading to more 
severe droughts that negatively impact agriculture, people 
and nature. In the tropics, the strongest tropical cyclones 
– also called typhoons or hurricanes – have become more 
intense. Global warming has also caused some extremes to 
reach places where they were not previously common (for 
example, tropical cyclones and extreme heatwaves).
Human-caused climate change has increased the chances 
of seeing multiple extreme weather events occurring at 
the same time or soon after each other; these are called 
compound events. Compound events can have even bigger 
impacts on nature and people than if they happened 
individually. For example, a drought along with extreme 
heat will increase the risk of wildfires, death of livestock, or 
crop failure. With a higher average sea level, a severe storm 
will increase the risk of simultaneous extreme sea level and 
heavy rainfall, and thus coastal flooding.
How does climate change 
affect extreme weather events? 
Larger magnitude
Increased frequency
New locations
Different timing
New combinations (compound)
 
Graphic D • Human-caused climate change can 
affect extreme weather events in multiple ways.
Graphic adapted from IPCC AR6 Working Group I FAQ 11.2, Figure 1 in 
Chapter 11. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-11/
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
9 /
Our future climate
In order to be prepared for the future, we need to understand how climate will continue to change. Our 
future is not set in stone: it will depend on many choices we make now and in the coming years. 
Global warming will continue until at least about 2050 before temperatures 
can stabilize 
Climate models show that, even if we strongly reduce greenhouse gas emissions starting now, warming 
won’t be halted until at least the 2050s. This is because the human activities that cause greenhouse 
gas emissions cannot stop immediately; it takes time to implement actions to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions (even if done ambitiously). Strong reductions in greenhouse gases starting now would slow 
and reduce this amount of warming.
After the 2050s, climate models show very different levels of warming, depending on the actions we 
take in the near future. For example, if we strongly and rapidly reduce carbon dioxide emissions starting 
now and throughout the 21st century, warming would be halted by around the middle of the century, 
reaching around 1.5°C (2.7°F) or 2°C (3.6°F) by the end of the century in these scenarios. On the other 
 
What are climate models?
Climate models are computer tools that scientists use for understanding past, present and 
future climate changes. They are computer programs that simulate the Earth’s climate, based 
on fundamental laws of physics, chemistry and biology of the atmosphere, ocean, ice and land. 
Some models include more processes, complexity and detail than others. So, the resulting 
simulated climates can vary between models. That is why the IPCC always looks at results from 
many climate models to understand which findings we can be more certain about.
Scientists test climate models by comparing their 
results with past observations and paleo (very 
old) evidence. If models accurately simulate the 
changes we have observed on the Earth in the 
past, this gives us confidence that they capture 
the most important climate processes. The models 
can then be used to identify what has caused 
these past changes, and also to explore how the 
climate could change in the future, depending on 
our actions.
Of course, there is no way to know exactly how human-caused emissions of greenhouse gases and 
air pollutants will change in the future. But scientists can explore different possibilities: for example, 
by modelling futures where emissions of greenhouse gas are strongly reduced or, alternatively, 
futures where greenhouse emissions remain high. They can explore how these futures would 
affect things like sea level rise, extreme events and air pollution, among many others.
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
10 /
hand, if emissions remain the same or increase, temperatures will continue to rise. In climate models that 
look at very high levels of greenhouse gas emissions, warming reaches around 4.5°C (8°F) by the end of 
the century. See also the section later in this summary titled Global temperatures will only stabilize when 
we stop adding more carbon dioxide to the atmosphere on page 13.
The world will most likely reach 1.5°C (2.7°F) global warming in the period 2021–2040 (we reached 
1.1°C/2°F already in the last decade). But unless there are rapid, strong and sustained reductions in 
greenhouse gas emissions, limiting warming to 1.5°C (2.7°F) or even 2°C (3.6°F) will be impossible.
Extremes will get worse. The water cycle will intensify and be more variable
Many aspects of climate change will continue to increase as the Earth becomes warmer (see Graphic E). 
Heatwaves, heavy rainfall and droughts will continue to become more severe and more frequent. Rainfall 
over land, including monsoon rainfalls, will become more variable and intense: some areas will get drier, 
others will get wetter. Further warming will also amplify the thawing (defrosting) and melting of many 
frozen parts of the world, such as snow cover, glaciers, frozen ground and Arctic sea ice. For instance, 
it is estimated that the Arctic Ocean will be effectively free of sea ice at its lowest point in summer 
(September) at least once before 2050. Tropical cyclones will get stronger. Graphic E shows how some 
climate changes will become more severe at 1.5°C (2.7°F), 2°C (3.6°F) and 4°C (7.2°F) global warming.
Temperature
Drought
A drought that used to occur 
once in a decade now 
happens x times more
Hottest day in 
a decade (+°C)
Proportion of intense tropical 
cyclones (%)
Snow cover extent
change (%)
What used to be a wettest 
day in a decade now 
happens x times more
Tropical cyclones
Snow
Precipitation
+1.1°C
Today
(+0.7 to 1.5°C)
(x0.7 to 4.1)
x1.7
(x1.2 to1.4)
x1.3
(-3 to 1)
-1%
(+1.8 to 3.1°C)
(x1.6 to 2.0)
(-13 to 2)
(x1.3 to 5.8)
+2.6°C
x2.4
+13%
-9%
x1.7
+2°C
(+4.3 to 5.8°C)
(x2.3 to 3.6)
(-35 to -15)
(x1.7 to 7.2)
+5.1°C
x4.1
+20%
-26%
x2.7
+4°C
+1.2°C
+1.5°C
+1.9°C
(+1.3 to 2.3°C)
(x1.4 to 1.7)
(-7 to 2)
(x1.0 to 5.1)
x2.0
+10%
-5%
x1.5
Changes get larger with every increment of global warming
 
Graphic E • Climate changes become more severe with every increment of global warming. How temperature extremes, droughts, 
heavy rainfall (precipitation) events, snow cover and tropical cyclones change at different levels of global warming compared with the late 
19th Century (1850–1900). Today here is the average over 2011–2020. For example, the hottest day in a decade now is already +1.2°C (2.2°F) 
hotter than compared with the hottest day in a decade before the industrial revolution. By 1.5°C (2.7°F) global warming, it would be around 
+1.9°C (3.4°F) hotter, by 2°C (3.6°F)  global warming it would be around +2.6°C (4.7°F)  hotter and by 4°C (7.2°F)  global warming it would 
be around +5.1°C (9.2°F)  hotter.
Graphic adapted from IPCC AR6 Working Group I Infographic TS.1 in the Technical Summary. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/figures/technical-summary/ts-infographics-figure-1
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
11 /
Climate change and regional patterns
Climate change is not uniform and proportional to the level of global warming.
Precipitation will increase in high latitudes, the tropics 
and monsoon regions and decrease in the subtropics
Warming will be stronger in the Arctic, 
on land and in the Northern Hemisphere
Warmer
Wetter
Drier
+1.5°C
+3.0°C
1°C
3°C
5°C
0%
-40%
-20%
20%
40%
 
Graphic F • All regions of the world will experience further climate changes, and these changes will be different depending 
on where you are. Changes in annual average temperatures and rainfall (precipitation) at global warming of 1.5°C (2.7°F) and 3°C (5.4°F) 
compared with the late 19th Century (1850–1900). The colour scales at the bottom of the graphic show the size of these changes as 
percentages. Some changes may be relatively large in terms of percentage even if the actual change is relatively small. For example, in very 
dry areas like the Sahara, even a small increase in actual precipitation shows as a relatively larger percentage increase.
Graphic adapted from IPCC AR6 Working Group I FAQ 4.3, Figure 1. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/chapter/chapter-4/
All regions of the world will experience further climate changes
Warming will continue to be different around the globe, being stronger over the land compared to over 
the ocean and strongest in the Arctic. Each region is unique and affected by climate change in its own 
way. The greater the warming, the larger and more widespread the climate changes are in each region. 
Graphic F shows how temperature and rainfall will change at 1.5°C (2.7°F) and 3°C (5.4°F) global warming. As 
a result, extreme weather events will more likely occur together, worsening the overall effect. For instance, 
heatwaves and droughts can occur at the same time or shortly after each other. In the IPCC Interactive 
Atlas, you can explore the different climate changes in your region: https://interactive-atlas.ipcc.ch/
Climate will always be affected by natural variability on time frames of 
years to decades
There are natural factors that affect global temperature on relatively short time scales (years to decades, 
see Graphic C). These normal variations in climate, known as natural variability, will continue in the 
future, as they have done in the past. 
When combined with human-caused climate changes, the consequences of natural variability can either 
be larger or smaller than projected. An example of natural variability is a phenomenon found in the 
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
12 /
tropical Pacific called the El Niño–Southern Oscillation, or ENSO. This is a climate pattern that changes 
every two to seven years, and can (among other things) alter the chances of wildfires and heavy rainfall 
in many regions of the world for several months. For those affected regions, ENSO can make the human-
caused changes to rainfall and wildfires a bit larger, or smaller, for that short period of time.
It is important for communities to consider natural variability when preparing for future climate changes 
over short time scales. There’s always a chance that future changes could be a bit stronger (or a bit 
weaker) than projected – but these natural factors will have little effect on long-term trends. 
Many changes will continue for hundreds or thousands of years
The atmosphere warms relatively quickly in response to greenhouse gas emissions, but some elements of 
the climate system react very slowly to a warming world. Changes like deep ocean warming, Greenland 
and Antarctica ice sheet melting, and sea level rise are slow to respond to the atmosphere warming but 
will continue to change for centuries, if not millennia. These changes are called irreversible because they 
would continue to change even if greenhouse gases or global temperatures were brought back down 
again. Taking sea level rise as an example: even if we stabilize global warming to 1.5°C (2.7°F), sea level 
would still rise 2–3 metres (7–10 feet) over the coming 2000 years and 6–7 metres (20–23 feet) over the 
coming 10,000 years. 
Low-likelihood outcomes are climate changes that we think are not likely 
to happen, but we cannot rule them out
There are some climate change events that we think are not likely to happen, 
or their likelihood is hard to know, but we cannot entirely rule them out. If 
they do occur, the consequences would be very serious. Those events are 
called low-likelihood, high impact outcomes and include the collapse of 
the Earth’s ice sheets (causing much larger, faster sea level rise) or massive 
forest dieback (that would release a large amount of carbon dioxide to the 
atmosphere and reduce the amount being removed by nature). Given their 
huge potential consequences, it is important to keep those outcomes in mind 
when planning for the future. 
Nature will remove relatively less of our carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 
in the future compared to the past, unless we reduce our emissions 
The land vegetation and ocean remove roughly half of the carbon dioxide that 
humans emit to the atmosphere. This fraction of carbon dioxide removal 
has not really changed over the past 60 years – human activities have 
emitted more and more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere but the land 
vegetation and ocean have also removed more carbon dioxide. This is 
why the oceans have become more acidic, because when carbon dioxide 
dissolves in water, it reacts to make the seawater more acidic.
However, climate modelling shows that if we carry on emitting more and 
more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, the relative amount being naturally 
removed by the land vegetation and ocean would decline. So, what does this 
mean? The bottom line is that nature helps us less when we emit more carbon dioxide compared to if 
we reduce our emissions. 
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
13 /
Limiting future climate change
This summary only covers how to limit further climate change from a physical science perspective because 
it is based on the IPCC report that looks at the science behind climate change (Working Group I: https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/). The IPCC report on adaptation (Working Group II: https://www.ipcc.ch/
report/ar6/wg2/) describes how climate changes affect humans and other species and the options to 
adapt to these changes. The report on emissions reductions and other mitigation efforts (Working Group 
III: https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg3/) describes our options to limit or reverse future climate change. 
Global temperatures will only stabilize when we stop adding more carbon 
dioxide to the atmosphere 
Carbon dioxide remains in the atmosphere for a very long time – some of it for centuries to millennia. 
Adding more carbon dioxide to the atmosphere will cause further warming (See box What are green-
house gases? on page 6). So, to stop temperatures from increasing even more, we need to either stop 
all carbon dioxide emissions from human activities or reach a point where any remaining emissions of 
carbon dioxide are balanced by activities that remove and store carbon dioxide for a very long time. This 
is called net-zero carbon dioxide emissions. 
If our future emissions of carbon dioxide are very small but still larger than the amount we remove from 
the atmosphere, then the world will still continue to warm, albeit at a slower rate. But if carbon dioxide 
emissions and removals are balanced (i.e., net-zero) then global temperatures will stabilize. 
Of course, carbon dioxide is only one of the human-caused greenhouse gases that cause global warming.
Strong, rapid and sustained reductions in other greenhouse gases like 
methane and nitrous oxide are also needed to limit climate change
If this can be achieved then global temperatures can be stabilized. However, this would not mean that 
global temperatures go back down to previous levels. This is why many of the climate changes that have 
happened already cannot be reversed, only stopped, slowed, or stabilized.
The amount of carbon we can release into the atmosphere and still keep global temperature to around 
1.5°C (2.7°F) global warming is small compared to what we have already released: about 500 GtCO2 
(calculated starting from 2020) compared to the approximately 2500 GtCO2 that we have emitted already 
(1 Gt = 1 gigaton = 1 billion tons). This is roughly equal to only a few years left of current emissions.  
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
14 /
Reducing greenhouse emissions would also improve air quality
Air pollution leads to millions of premature deaths and poorer health worldwide every year. Climate change 
and air quality are closely connected, because many of the human activities that produce greenhouse 
gases also emit air pollutants. Therefore, if we take action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions then we 
often also reduce emissions of other substances (like aerosols) that cause air pollution. So, strong actions 
to reduce climate change would also improve air quality.
With rapid and sustained reductions in greenhouse emissions, we would 
clearly see the effect on global temperature in 20 years 
Immediate and sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions would slow down global warming 
within a decade, but it could take twenty years or so before we would clearly see temperatures stabilize. 
This slowdown of warming would initially be masked by natural variability (see section Climate change 
will always be affected by natural variability on time frames of years to decades on page 11). And, 
because it takes time, the longer we wait to take action, the longer it will be before we see the benefits 
of those actions.
• Climate Change 2021: Summary for All •
15 /
About this summary
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is the United Nations body that produces 
scientific reports on our current understanding of climate change. It contains three main Working Groups 
that cover different topics of climate change: Working Group I looks at the physical climate changes, 
Working Group II looks at the impacts these changes have on people and ecosystems, as well as how we 
can adapt to our changing climate, and Working Group III looks at how climate change can be reduced 
or stopped (mitigation). The Working Groups publish climate change reports about once every 8 years. 
The IPCC doesn’t do its own research but bases its reports on the published scientific evidence (scientific 
literature, datasets, etc).
This document is a plain-language summary of the IPCC Working Group I climate change report released 
in August 2021. It was written by members of the Working Group I Technical Support Unit (WGI TSU) 
and several authors of the report. Additionally, many volunteers offered feedback and guidance along 
the way. It has not undergone the same approval process that official IPCC documents undergo, such as 
the Summary for Policymakers. 
This summary was written and reviewed by: ­Sarah ­Connors (WGI TSU), ­Sophie ­Berger (WGI TSU), 
­Clotilde Péan (WGI TSU), ­Govindasamy ­Bala (Chapter 4 author), ­Nada Caud (WGI TSU), ­Deliang ­Chen 
(Chapter 1 author), ­Tamsin ­Edwards (Chapter 9 author), ­Sandro ­Fuzzi (Chapter 6 author), Thian Yew Gan 
(Chapter 8 author), ­Melissa ­Gomis (WGI TSU), Ed Hawkins (Chapter 1 author), ­Richard Jones (Atlas 
Chapter author), ­Robert Kopp (Chapter 9 author), ­Katherine ­Leitzell (WGI TSU), ­Elisabeth ­Lonnoy (WGI 
TSU), ­Douglas Maraun (Chapter 10 author), ­Valérie Masson-Delmotte (WGI Co-Chair), Tom ­Maycock (WGI 
TSU), ­Anna ­Pirani (WGI TSU), ­Roshanka ­Ranasinghe (Chapter 12 author), ­Joeri ­Rogelj (Chapter 5 author), 
Alex C. ­Ruane (Chapter 12 author), ­Sophie ­Szopa (Chapter 6 author) and ­Panmao Zhai (WGI Co-Chair).
Thank you very much to our external contributors for their comments on this document: ­Dorsaf ben ­Saad 
(University Student), ­Felix Franck (Interpreter), ­Giulia ­Gennari (Programme Assistant), ­Jonathan ­Gregory 
(WGI Fifth Assessment Report Chapter 13 author), ­Suzie Marshall (University Student), ­Ellen ­Pym (Sales and 
Marketing Partner), ­Max ­Paoli (Programme Coordinator), ­Kavya ­Pathak (School Student), ­Alexandrine Péan 
(University Student), ­Eleanor ­Pearce (TV Promotions Executive), ­Nicolle ­Pinson (Retired Translator), 
­Cyrus ­Robert ­Perry ­Tignor (School student) and ­Jessica ­Vial (Climate Educator).
Graphics were created by Nigel Hawtin (Information Designer).
Cartoons were drawn by Katherine Leitzell (WGI TSU).
Front cover artwork was painted by Sarah Connors (WGI TSU).
The template and the layout were made by Clotilde Péan (WGI TSU).
IPCC Graphics are subject to IPCC copyright. Cartoons and cover artwork are sharable under CC-BY-NC licensing.
Thank you to everyone who contributed to this summary.
WORKING GROUP I TECHNICAL SUPPORT UNIT
This document has not been subject to formal IPCC review processes.
