What You Can Do
Climate change will continue to impact our communities; however, there are everyday actions that can reduce 
its effects. While some ideas are easy to tackle on our own, others are easier when we work together with our 
neighbours and larger community. One of the most important things that you can do is to talk to your friends, 
family, and neighbours about climate change and what we can do about it!Graphic showing a street with low-res apartments and single-family homes. The streetscape shows some effects of climate change and some non-ideal practices to mitigate it. The street has few trees, and the trees it does have look unhealthy and some have broken branches from wind. The yards are mostly paved and there are no rain barrels, leading to some flooding and pooling of water on the street. The homes all have cars in the drive-ways, and there are no green bins or recycling bins, just garbage bins. Some homes have air conditioning units in the windows.
What is Climate Change? 
Climate change is the long-term 
change in average weather 
patterns. This includes:
•	warmer temperatures
•	more rain and snow
•	stronger winds
•	more ice storms
•	more dry periods
What are the impacts of climate change in the Greater Toronto Area? 
Some examples include:
•	flooding
•	damaged or falling trees
•	soil, streambank, and shoreline erosion
•	spread of invasive species
•	heat waves
•	out of sync flower bloom times and pollinator emergence
•	stress on groundwater resources
•	spread of vector-borne diseases like Lyme disease and West Nile Virus
CLIMATE CHANGE
in your community
Climate Change Effects
GREENING
Plants help fight climate change by capturing carbon dioxide and other air pollutants. In addition, they reduce the 
effects of a changing climate by providing cooling effects in hot weather, filtering rainwater, and reducing erosion.
Choose native plants
Find out what plants are native to your local area. These species are adapted to the 
historical climate and support native insects and other wildlife.
Plant on your balcony
Plant in small spaces! Wildflowers, grasses, shrubs and even some tree species can 
survive in containers.
Support and enhance 
greenspaces
Protect local greenspaces and increase tree cover by participating in planting 
programs in your community or own backyard.
WATER
Intense rain events (more rain over shorter periods) can overwhelm stormwater systems and cause flooding, soil 
erosion, water pollution, and other challenges. Stormwater landscaping projects help rainwater soak into the 
ground instead of entering the stormwater system.
Use a rain barrel
Collect rainwater from your roof and water your gardens for free! This will also save 
water resources during hotter and drier summers.
Replace lawn, pavement, 
and other hard surfaces
Create soft surfaces that allow rainwater to soak into the ground. Convert your 
lawn into gardens, replace your asphalt driveway with permeable pavement, and 
redesign walkways with flagstone or a groundcover plant.
Create a rain garden
Create a bowl-shaped garden with loose, deep soil that collects and absorbs 
rainwater. It is a beautiful and functional feature that restores groundwater! This 
can replace lawn, an existing garden, or hard surface space.
What You Can Do – Mitigation And Adaptation
TRANSPORTATION
Communities depend on safe, clean and efficient transportation systems to move people and goods. However, 
transportation also accounts for over a quarter of Canada’s greenhouse gas emissions*. On a personal scale, we can 
take action by choosing more clean and sustainable transportation options. 
Commute together
Take public transit or carpool when possible.
Use active transportation
If you are able to, consider walking, biking, or other active methods to get to your 
destination.
Support green 
transportation
Advocate for more bike lanes in your community and replace large, inefficient 
vehicles with an electric or hybrid vehicle.
Fly less often
Air travel is a major source of greenhouse gas. Find alternatives whenever possible 
or explore locally.
Shop locally
Reduce the amount of mileage needed to transport goods by 
supporting local farmers and small businesses.
*https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-change/greenhouse-gas-emissions/sources-sinks-executive-summary-2020.html
WASTE
The trash in our landfills releases methane gas which is one of the greenhouse gases that contributes to climate 
change. However, the production of these products also affects climate. For example, plastics are made using oil 
products which increases our reliance on fossil fuels. Choosing sustainable and reusable products is an important 
step when looking for ways to reduce your carbon footprint. 
Don’t forget—Refuse, Reduce, Reuse, Repurpose and Recycle (in that order!).
Refuse plastics 
where possible
Choose products that are made from alternatives such as glass or plant based 
materials. Actively decline single use plastics. Only purchase what you need.
Choose re-usable
Buy products that can be used more than once such as reusable grocery bags, 
produce bags, water bottles, coffee mugs, diapers, feminine hygiene products, 
and takeout containers.
Reduce food waste
Shop smart! Plan your meals and organize your food in a way that prioritizes eating 
food before it spoils. Reuse leftovers and scraps to create new meals like soup.
Reduce packaging
Choose products with less packaging or packaging that can be reused or composted.
Buy products that will last
Consider all your purchase options and choose products built to last a long time 
or that can be repaired easily. Sometimes this means spending more up front for 
durable, high quality items, but you may find that you save more money in the end.
Resources
•	NASA Climate Change Data: limate.nasa.gov/
•	Canada’s Action on Climate Change: www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/climatechange/climate-action.html
•	Peel Region Climate Change Master Plan: www.peelregion.ca/climate-energy/
•	Toronto Region TransformTO: www.toronto.ca/services-payments/water-environment/environmentally-friendly-city-initiatives/transformto/
•	Durham Region - Climate Change, Energy, and Resilience: www.durham.ca/en/living-here/climateenergyandresilience.aspx?_mid_=32210
•	David Suzuki Foundation - 10 things to do about climate change: davidsuzuki.org/what-you-can-do/top-10-ways-can-stop-climate-change/
For more information please contact:
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority | 5 Shoreham Drive, Downsview, ON  M3N 1S4 | 416.661.6600 | trca.ca/healthy-yardsLogo for Toronto and Region Conservation Authority.
ENERGY
While Ontario gets most of its energy from non-fossil fuel sources*, it is still important for us to reduce the amount 
of energy we use and find sources of energy that are clean and safe.
Switch to energy efficient
LED light bulbs and certified energy efficient appliances use less energy and 
save money. Look for certifications such as Energy Star.
Reduce energy use
A few ideas to save energy include: making sure your home is well 
insulated, using trees to keep your home naturally cool, adjusting your 
thermostat while you are away, turning off lights and electronics when not 
in use, running washing appliances once they are full, and hanging your 
clothes to dry.
Support and choose 
sustainable energy sources
Renewable energy is energy that comes from free, unlimited resources such as 
sunlight, wind, and water. If you are unable to install them at home, support 
the use of these sources throughout your community.
Eat less meat
Make your diet more climate friendly by replacing your meat-sourced protein 
with plant based options. The livestock industry contributes to 14.5% of human 
made greenhouse gas emissions**, consumes significant water and energy 
resources, and converts valuable forest carbon sinks into farmland for livestock 
and their food. Choose products with a lower environmental footprint.
*https://www.ontario.ca/document/2017-long-term-energy-plan-discussion-guide/ontarios-energy-mix-end-2015   |   **https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
