A Climate Adaptation Case Study  
in Canada’s Mining Sector
Climate Change 
Planning at Glencore  
in Sudbury, Ontario
2
As part of their operational and strategic planning, 
mining companies manage various forms of risk. 
The dynamic nature of global mineral markets, 
commodity prices and labour availability or unrest, 
as well as geotechnical or environmental stresses, 
all contribute to future uncertainty for the mining 
sector. These risks challenge a mining company’s 
ability to maintain stable operations, generate 
revenue and extend profit for its shareholders. 
Increasingly, mining companies are recognizing 
and responding to risks associated with changing 
weather and climate, stemming both from 
direct impacts and from regulatory pressures. 
Companies also have to be concerned with how 
and when supply and value chains are affected by 
extreme weather and climate change. 
Climate data shows that average global air 
temperatures are increasing, the average 
precipitation regime is changing and extreme 
weather events, such as rain, wind, ice and 
snowstorms, are increasing in intensity. 
Projections, both at global and regional scales, 
suggest that these trends will continue, possibly 
to a larger extent.1 Impacts stemming from these 
weather and climate changes are significant and 
warrant attention during the course of proper 
planning and operation.
Considering the extensive reach of climate 
change, long-term changes to temperature 
and precipitation, as well as near-term weather 
variability and extreme weather events, pose a 
range of challenges to the mining sector. Tailings 
impoundment design can be affected by long-
term changes to temperature; transportation 
routes can be affected by freeze-thaw cycling 
or permafrost degradation; tailings management 
can be affected by extreme rainfall events; and 
mine site water balance can be affected by both 
short- and long-term changes in hydrology. 
Mine infrastructure, including buildings, bridges, 
culverts and communications towers, is also 
susceptible to extreme weather, while aspects 
of closure planning and perpetual care and 
maintenance likely will be affected by changing 
weather conditions. In addition to these 
operational challenges, there are other business 
risks, including supply chain disruptions, 
increasing insured losses, threats to health and 
safety, heightened legal liability, and project 
financing uncertainty. All warrant attention 
within the context of a changing weather 
regime through design and implementation of 
appropriate adaptation measures.
This case study outlines planning and action 
underway to deal with the current and future 
threats stemming from the impacts of climate 
change at Glencore’s mining operations in 
Sudbury. The case study yields an example of 
one mining company’s efforts to take stock of 
climate risks in various facets of its business and 
the process underway to manage those risks. It 
is designed to provide an example of climate risk 
management in order for other mining companies 
in Canada to consider the changing nature 
of weather and climate, how it will affect their 
business, and ways to adapt.
This case study is made possible through 
funding from Natural Resources Canada’s 
Enhancing Competitiveness in a Changing 
Climate Program. The Program facilitates the 
sharing and development of knowledge, tools 
and practices to assist decision-makers in 
the analysis and implementation of measures 
to deal with current and future climate- and 
weather-related challenges. This case study 
has been prepared by the Fraser Basin 
Council (FBC), a not-for-profit organization 
that facilitates collaborative efforts to advance 
sustainability throughout British Columbia 
and beyond. It was developed in partnership 
with the Mining Innovation, Rehabilitation and 
Applied Research Corporation (MIRARCO) of 
Sudbury and its parent organization, the Ontario 
Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation 
Resources (OCCIAR). 
This case study would not have been possible 
without generous contributions of time and 
knowledge by Marc Butler of Glencore and 
Sean Capstick of Golder Associates. FBC and 
MIRARCO are most grateful for their interest in 
sharing their stories with others and their support 
for this project.
1 • Introduction
Glencore, a multinational mining corporation 
headquartered in Switzerland, has created Sudbury 
Integrated Nickel Operations (SINO) (formerly known as 
Xstrata Nickel). SINO operates two underground mines: 
Nickel Rim South and Fraser Morgan mine, as well as 
the Strathcona mill and Sudbury smelter (Figure 1) in the 
Sudbury basin of Ontario (Figure 2). Although the sites 
primarily produce nickel and copper, other metals such 
as cobalt, gold, silver and platinum are also produced. 
The Nickel Rim South mine is one of the largest nickel 
mining operations in Sudbury and has been in operation 
since 2009. Expansion of the existing Fraser Morgan 
mine has extended the mine’s lifetime to 2025.2 
Figure 1 | Glencore Sudbury Smelter
Figure 2 | Glencore Sudbury Basin Operations
2 • Context
3
Glencore has identified several climate- and weather-related 
risks that have already affected their operations, or could 
affect their operations in the future. The changing nature of 
extreme weather (including precipitation, temperature and 
wind) has the potential to change the current risk to critical 
infrastructure and safety of mine personnel.
The most common climate- and weather-related impact 
for Glencore’s Sudbury operations is the risk of flooding. 
Although flooding is most commonly associated with 
extreme precipitation events, it can also stem from normal 
levels of precipitation combined with other weather 
influences. Early spring warm periods, rain-on-snow events, 
rainfall on frozen ground and heavy rain on saturated soils 
can all lead to serious flood conditions. 
During a rain event in 2012, heavy rain falling on frozen ground 
led to localized flooding. Excess water entered the converter 
aisle in the smelter, necessitating pumping efforts to remove 
the water. Other aspects of critical mine infrastructure can also 
be affected by flooding, including tailings and process water 
impoundments, transportation routes and energy transmission 
and distribution lines (Figure 4).
In addition to being a contributing factor to more 
frequent flooding events, seasonal variability presents 
other challenges for the mines. In recent years, weather 
in all seasons has been less predictable. Spring thaws 
occurring in January, warm summer-like weather 
occurring as early as May, and rain and thunderstorms 
in the winter all challenge the standard ways of dealing 
with weather and climate and make it difficult for the 
mines to plan and/or operate in the context of what was 
previously considered “normal” weather.
Sudbury operations have adjusted standard operating 
procedures to accommodate what appears to be a new 
weather regime. Rule curves that govern water levels for 
tailings areas and water balance equations for mine sites 
have been shifted earlier by 30-60 days, depending on 
the conditions. Warm spells in early spring and resulting 
rapid spring snow melts in recent years have created 
the need for significant pumping to prevent overtopping 
of impoundments and washouts. Rapid snow melt as a 
result of very warm temperatures in the spring have also 
overwhelmed streams and rivers, impacting drainage 
infrastructure and threatening local drinking water quality.
3 • Climate Risk Assessment at Glencore
Driven by the strong desire to better understand local climate risks, Glencore has considered climate 
change impacts and adaptation alongside energy and greenhouse gas emissions. A risk-based 
approach to climate change impacts comprises one of three areas of focus to address energy/climate 
change issues. As noted in Figure 3, responses in each of the three categories were envisioned 
as “buckets of work” that would be undertaken to optimize energy efficiency, reduce emissions of 
greenhouse gases and adapt to current and future climate change impacts.
Figure 3 | Climate Change “Buckets of Work”
CLIMATE CHANGE
• Risk
• Adaptive behaviour 
& Technology
Reporting
ENERGY
• Efficiency
• Costs
• Technology
Reporting
GHGs
• WCI
• Cap & Trade (market)
• Technology
Reporting
4 • Climate and/or Weather-Related Implications 
4
Additionally, an increase in the number of freeze-thaw cycles in 
January and February has affected operations at both the Nickel Rim 
South and Fraser Morgan mines of Glencore. These events have 
led to unsafe conditions on access roads and for brief periods have 
prevented transportation to and from the mines. This impact interferes 
with Glencore’s ability to transport supplies and equipment to the mine 
and limits the mine’s ability to move ore and concentrates.
Over the last three to five years, the company has experienced 
changes in the timing and extent of “curtailment hours” at the smelter 
(i.e., the amount of time that weather conditions require the smelter 
to stop normal production in response to elevated concentrations of 
sulphur dioxide in the local airshed.) Curtailment includes cessation 
of activity in the converter aisle, and may extend to decreasing 
production or shutting down roasters. In the past, production 
curtailments were most likely to occur in April or May. In recent years 
however, unfavourable weather conditions have begun as early 
as January. Along with occurring earlier in the year, the number of 
curtailment hours have been increasing. Despite this change, Glencore 
has been able to increase production levels through improved 
operational practices. 
Finally, extreme heat days contribute to increased temperatures 
underground and threaten worker safety. As surface temperatures rise, 
underground temperatures also rise because of incoming ventilation 
air. Provisions under the Occupational Health and Safety Act in 
Ontario require production be halted when temperatures exceed 31 
degrees Celsius. In recent years, the Glencore mines in Sudbury have 
experienced an increase in the number of days when production has 
been halted due to high temperatures underground.
Nickel Rim South Mine
Waste Rock Management
NRS Mine Water 
Pipe Outlet
Retention Pond
Sludge Settling Pond
October 2013
Figure 4 | Water Management Area
5
5 • Climate Risk 
Assessment Workshop 
With help from Golder Associates, Glencore organized 
an internal risk assessment working session with key 
members of operations, engineering, capital and other 
departments. The session raised awareness of the impacts 
of extreme weather and climate change on operations, 
specifically infrastructure, and solicited measures to cope 
with the impacts. The risk assessment revealed several 
areas that are affected by extreme weather and climate 
change for Glencore’s Sudbury operations, including:
•	 Water management issues, including flooding
•	 Employee safety (especially during extreme events)
•	 Transportation of product during variable weather
•	 Curtailment of production due to weather factors
•	 Energy security
•	 Infrastructure safety and operation; and
•	 Non-compliance with regulations due to changing 
climate trends (for example: higher levels of wastewater 
discharge due to climate change can put companies 
at risk of not meeting their discharge targets under 
provincial or federal regulations).
6 • Adaptation Planning 
To help manage current and future weather- and climate-related challenges, Glencore is developing a two-tiered adaptation 
strategy composed of long-term and short-term adaptation measures. Long-term measures will include the development 
of a climate change adaptation plan within the context of a company-wide sustainable development plan. The plan is 
expected to be in place in 2014. The long-term aspects of the adaptation plan will see weather and climate resilience needs 
mainstreamed into management decisions pertaining to infrastructure planning and design. The plan will make use of both 
historical climate trends and future climate projections that, in turn, are used to model potential future climate scenarios.
In the shorter term, many actions are underway or are being planned to respond to climate change impacts. Measures 
to cope with changing weather patterns, often spawned by significant impacts to local operations, are becoming part of 
standard operating procedures at Glencore. For example, operators have noticed a significant change in the timing and 
volume of the spring freshet. Traditionally, Glencore operations have released water from its retention ponds on a certain 
date each year, regardless of cumulative water levels or precipitation. As weather has become more variable, and melts 
occur earlier in the spring, the company has begun to shift the release dates, and are ensuring that the timing of such action 
is more flexible to match the corresponding conditions. 
One tool to optimize the existing water management practices is Golder’s GoldSim model, which was used to develop a Water 
Management System Hydrological Model. Within the GoldSim environment, Golder developed the GoldSim Climate Generator, a 
stochastic model that generates daily, monthly and annual records based on existing historical climate statistics. Based on current 
climate and future trends identified from Global Climate Change Model output, the Climate Generator provides a range  
of potential future climate data.
The Climate Generator generates a large number of realizations for climate inputs to the site in order to identify potential 
extreme wet and dry events that, while possible, were not recorded in the historical climate data.These projections, in turn, 
can also be used to evaluate the effects of extreme events on the water system. 
The climate change risk assessment working session also allowed 
Glencore to identify and prioritize site-specific challenges, leading to 
adaptation measures that are targeted, efficient and cost-effective. Risk 
results were also easily incorporated into the company’s existing risk 
registry. Driven by internal champions, the risk assessment process 
also helped to engage management teams and technical experts in the 
process of identifying climate risks and proposing adaptive measures. 
6
7 • Overcoming Adaptation Challenges
Efforts to assess and manage weather- and climate-related 
risks at Glencore have revealed nominal technical, operational 
and management challenges. Risk assessment participants 
questioned the accuracy of global-scale projections of 
climate change and the nature and timing of future weather 
extremes. To deal with this, consultants used best practices in 
downscaling weather and climate hazards that would lead to 
damage situations. Scenarios stemming from models helped 
operators envision future changes to the weather regime and 
recognize increasing risk to people and property. Although the 
modelling work provided a clearer picture of expected future 
challenges, areas requiring further clarity and support were 
noted. For example, a clearer regulatory framework within 
which to address climate risks and further guidance through 
enhanced engineering codes and standards were identified as 
means to further enhance adaptation action, both at Glencore 
and in the mining industry as a whole. A stronger adaptation 
cost-benefit analysis for capital-related infrastructure spending 
was also deemed important.
Workshop attendees were at first uncertain of how climate 
change would affect their operations. The workshop was 
useful in overcoming this uncertainty by addressing the 
questions in the context of “how does weather affect your 
work?” and talking about “weather variability.” Climate 
change was often viewed as an event/occurrence that would 
occur in the distant future, well beyond the end of the mine 
life in Sudbury. However, evaluation of data on historical 
trends and recent changes in weather patterns support 
the notion that climate change is already occurring at the 
Sudbury operations. Including climate change in the existing 
“risk vocabulary” encouraged buy-in from project team 
members and advanced the discussion.
The impetus for consideration of climate change impacts and 
adaptation was driven in large part by select internal staff. A 
core group of employees, including one senior manager, led 
the development of information workshops, training sessions 
for employees, and climate change risk assessments. Such 
efforts were supported by the existence of an organizational 
mandate to consider weather and climate risks under the 
company’s sustainable development program.
The Climate Generator first randomly samples an annual value (annual precipitation and mean annual temperature) 
from a distribution based on the distribution of historical annual values. The program then randomly samples 
12 simulated monthly values (monthly precipitation and mean monthly temperature) until the 12 values sum and 
average, respectively, to the observed annual values for both parameters. This process is then repeated at the daily 
level for both precipitation (using a daily precipitation amount and a daily chance of rain) and temperature (using the 
previous day’s temperature and a distribution of day-to-day temperature changes) until the daily values, in turn, sum/
average to the monthly values. The program then goes back to the initial step and generates new annual values for a 
second year, and loops through the various steps until the required record length is reached.
The synthetic climate data sets are used in a calibrated hydrologic model in order to evaluate project design and 
operation based on potential risks. By adjusting its operational strategy to better accommodate a variable climate, 
Glencore is reducing flood risks that stem from over-topping or treatment bypasses during a precipitation event.
Glencore has also enhanced its capacity to respond to intense events using improved short-term weather forecasts. 
Traditionally, weather data was based on historical norms, and year-long forecasts were consulted for planning 
purposes. Updated short-term forecasts (including five-day forecasts) give better lead time to prepare for, and 
respond to, changing weather and potential hazards.
7
References
Adaptation planning at Glencore’s Sudbury operations has 
yielded many lessons to date. For example: 
•	 Management and staff engagement on the topic of climate 
change requires clear examples of context-specific information 
on climate trends, projections and impacts. Language that 
explains climate threats in business terms—such as costs 
stemming from extreme weather or loss of productivity, 
potential liabilities or threats to supply chains/value chains—
can often be more engaging than more theoretical discussions 
about long-term climate change impacts.
•	 Assessing and managing risks is often a well-understood 
and easily recognizable process within mining companies, 
thus providing a suitable context for climate adaptation 
planning and decision-making. Risk assessment also allows 
the company to prioritize actions needed to build resilience 
against current and future climate change threats and provides 
for emerging threats being easily integrated into existing 
company-wide risk registries. 
•	 Methods from other environmental threat action planning 
(e.g., SO2 abatement) may be easily transferrable to the 
context of climate change adaptation planning. Stakeholder 
communications, threat assessments, data collection and 
analysis and response prioritization all constitute components 
of standard environmental risk management.
•	 It is beneficial to incorporate climate change into existing 
organization mandates, procedures and policies. 
Mainstreaming adaptation removes the perception that 
planning for climate change will require a unique and 
significant effort or substantial additional capacity. 
•	 Using available resources and expertise will help contextualize 
climate change impacts for different aspects of mining 
operations (such as energy, transportation, water usage, 
tailings management and closure planning) and convey the 
importance of integrated climate-sensitive planning. 
1. Parry, M.L., O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof and Co-authors 
2007: Technical Summary. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, 
Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. 
Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 23-78.
2. The Sudbury Star. Xstrata Approves Fraser Morgan Project, 
Records Strong Profits. August 2, 2011.  
http://www.thesudburystar.com/2011/08/02/xstrata-approves-
fraser-morgan-project-records-strong-profits 
8 • Advancing Adaptation
Results from the risk assessment will be used 
by Glencore to better prepare the Sudbury 
operations for the impacts of changing weather 
and climate. More specifically, the following 
actions have been initiated by the company:
• Equip the individual sites with temperature, 
precipitation and wind gauges to provide 
real-time weather data to establish local 
climate trends and put operating procedures 
in place to identify pending extreme weather
• Develop a model to more accurately project 
short-term atmospheric conditions that would 
lead to curtailment conditions for the mine
• Continue organization and community 
engagement efforts on climate change 
adaptation, which will be used to assist 
Glencore in implementing new adaptation 
measures
• Update the GoldSim water balance to 
process a range of future climate data to 
replace the observed data and update the 
results of the current water balance
• Complete the Climate Change  
Adaptation Strategy.
9 • Conclusions & Lessons Learned
8
