 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: 
Kim Fram, Cassidy McAuliffe, Chantal Sarrazin-Delay, and David Pearson (Laurentian University) 
 
 
Thanks to: 
Geneva Kejick (Grand Council Treaty #3), Chris Koostachin (Keewaytinook Okimakanak), Roxanne Metlin 
(Mushkegowuk Council), Cristina Ross (Matawa First Nations Management), Erica Tropea (Nokiiwin Tribal 
Council), Vivian Waswa (Shibogama First Nations Council), Barb Duffin (Mushkegowuk Council), Sarah 
Cockerton and Kim Jorgenson (Matawa First Nations Management), Dan Duckert and predecessor Donald 
Meekis (Keewaytinook Okimakanak), Lucas King (Grand Council Treaty #3), Roger Rozon and predecessor 
Tara Ingram (Nokiiwin Tribal Council), and Laura Sayers (Shibogama First Nations Council) 
 
 
© Up North on Climate 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Reproduction of this document is permitted provided that it is not modified or used for commercial 
purposes. For more information, reach out to upnorthonclimate@laurentian.ca 
 
 
Developed with financial support from Natural Resources Canada's Building Regional Adaptation Capacity 
and Expertise (BRACE) Program as part of the co-lead project Building Climate Change Adaptation Capacity of 
First Nations in Far Northern Ontario Through Knowledge-Exchange and Collaboration. 
 
 
 
These Impact and Adaptation Infosheets were created by Up North on Climate (Laurentian University) in collaboration with 
We welcome the use of this document and kindly request it be referenced as follows: 
Up North on Climate. 2021. Climate Change Impact and Adaptation InfoSheets. Laurentian University, Ontario. 
https://www.upnorthonclimate.ca/impact-and-adaptations 
 
Climate change is a reality. Human-caused greenhouse gas emissions are pushing the Earth’s climate 
toward a warmer world at a faster rate than ever before, with temperatures in the north rising at twice 
the rate of other regions. In northern Ontario, climate change will bring warmer temperatures, changes 
in rain and snow, and more storms, many of which will be intense. But the impacts of climate change 
don’t stop with the weather. Forests and plants, lakes and rivers, animals, people, and communities are 
all affected by climate change. For First Nation communities, close traditional ties to the land can make 
these changes even more challenging. 
Reflecting the impacts being seen and felt in northern Ontario First Nation communities, these 2-page 
information sheets (called “Infosheets”) were designed to help build capacity and knowledge about 
climate change, its continued impacts on the land, and the possible ways people and communities can 
adapt and prepare. Infosheets are divided into themes with each infosheet covering a particular topic. 
Explore themes and topics with the list below.
CLIMATE CHANGE 
• 
The Greenhouse Effect 
• 
Global Warming and Climate Change 
• 
Weather and Climate 
• 
Climate Change and Carbon Dioxide 
• 
Ice Cores and Milankovitch Cycles 
• 
Climate Modelling 
• 
Melting Ice 
• 
Rising Sea Level and the Hudson Bay Coast 
• 
Extreme Weather Events 
DROUGHT 
• 
Low Water 
• 
Drinking Water 
• 
Dry and Dusty Land 
• 
Harvesting with More Dry Spells 
• 
Drought Monitoring 
ECOSYSTEMS 
• 
Peatlands and Permafrost 
• 
Forests of Northern Ontario 
• 
Protecting our Dorests 
• 
Climate Change and Invasive Species 
• 
Aquatic Environments 
• 
Protecting our Water 
• 
Warming Water and Cold-water Fish 
FLOODING 
• 
Localized Flooding 
• 
Ice Jams 
• 
Major Flooding from Lakes and Rivers 
FOOD SECURITY 
• 
Geese, Duck and Grouse 
• 
Shifting North: Berries and Plants 
• 
Shifting North: Caribou, Moose and Deer 
• 
Harvesting Fish 
HEALTH 
• 
Mental Health and Well-being 
• 
Diseases Carried by Insects and Animals 
• 
Blacklegged Ticks and Lyme Disease 
• 
Airborne Allergens 
• 
Extreme Heat 
• 
Contaminated Drinking Water 
• 
Foodborne Illness 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
• 
Winter Power Outages 
• 
Water and Wastewater Systems 
• 
Community Roads 
TRANSPORTATION 
• 
Changing Ice 
• 
Reducing Dependence on Winter Roads 
• 
Winter Road Construction 
• 
Summer Travel over Water and Land 
WILDFIRE 
• 
Wildfire: Natural but Risky 
• 
Protecting Infrastructure 
• 
Wildfire and People
INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
Earth’s temperature begins with the Sun. Roughly a third of the sunlight that arrives on Earth is reflected 
back into space by bright surfaces like clouds and ice. Of the remaining two thirds, most is absorbed by 
the land and ocean, and the rest is absorbed by gases and dust in the atmosphere.  
 
As rock, soil, lakes, and oceans are warmed by the Sun, they radiate heat energy back toward the sky 
and into space. From the surface, this energy travels into the atmosphere where most of it is absorbed 
by what we call “greenhouse gases” such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4), and also by water 
vapour (H2O). Greenhouse gases get that name because they keep the Earth warm, similar to the way 
that glass traps heat in a greenhouse and warms the air inside. 
 
When tiny molecules of greenhouse gases and water vapour absorb the energy radiating from Earth’s 
surface, they turn into tiny heaters. Like the rocks around a fire pit, they radiate heat even after the fire 
goes out. They radiate in all directions. The energy that radiates back toward Earth heats both the 
atmosphere and the surface, adding to the heating we get from direct sunlight. We call this the 
“Greenhouse Effect”. 
 
This absorption and radiation of heat by the atmosphere—the natural greenhouse effect—is very 
important for life on Earth. Without the greenhouse effect, the Earth’s average surface temperature 
would be much colder, about -18°C instead of the comfortable +15°C that it is today.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Capturing the Sun’s energy in the atmosphere: 
Earth’s natural “greenhouse effect”  
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 1 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Why do greenhouse gases hold onto heat? 
Although we can’t see the atmosphere in front of us, we know that it contains gases. All gases and all 
materials around us are composed of atoms like oxygen (O), hydrogen (H) and carbon (C). Atoms 
combine to create complex arrangements called molecules, like water (H2O) where 2 hydrogen atoms 
combine to 1 oxygen atom. 
 Earth’s atmosphere contains gases like the oxygen 
(O2) we breathe, and the carbon dioxide (CO2) and 
nitrogen (N2) that plants need. 
 Some gases are considered greenhouse gases like 
carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4) and water 
vapour (H2O). Greenhouse gas molecules have more 
than 2 atoms bonded together. When infrared 
radiation (heat) from the ground hits them, the bonds 
begin to vibrate allowing them to hold on to the heat 
energy. Eventually the bonds stop vibrating and 
the molecule slowly releases the heat. The more 
bonds there are, the more a molecule can retain 
heat. A small molecule like oxygen (O2) only has 1 
bond so it does not retain much heat. Methane 
(CH4) has 4 bonds and can retain 30 times more heat than carbon dioxide (CO2) with only 2 bonds. 
Although CH4 and CO2 are both considered greenhouse gases for their ability to retain heat, there is 
more CO2 in the atmosphere and so this molecule tends to be a bigger driver of the greenhouse effect. 
See animation of the vibrations here: https://www.chemtube3d.com/vibrationsco2/ 
 
Know your greenhouse gases  
Methane (CH4), Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Chlorofluorcarbons (CFCs), Hydrofluorocarbons (HCFCs), Water 
Vapour (H2O), Nitrous Oxide (N2O) and Ozone (O3) are greenhouse gases. https://scied.ucar.edu/carbon-dioxide 
 
Quantities of the most common gases in the atmosphere in parts per 
million. 1 part per million is like one wolf in a herd of one million 
caribou. Trace gases not shown. Data from Haynes, H. M., ed. 
(2016–2017), CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (97th ed.), 
CRC Press 
Methane  
• 
Flammable and used as fuel known as natural gas 
• 
Burning methane releases CO2 and water 
• 
Potent heat absorber (30X more than CO2)  
• 
Rise of 150% since 1750 because of human activity 
• 
Natural sources: wetlands, oceans, termites 
• 
Human sources: rice, landfills, cattle, energy 
Carbon dioxide 
• 
Non-flammable gas, the fizz in your drink 
• 
Heat absorber and an important driver of Earth’s 
temperature 
• 
Rise of 40% since 1750 because of human activity 
• 
Natural sources: volcanos, wildfire, respiration 
• 
Human sources: food, energy, transportation 
Nitrogen
780,840 
Oxygen
209,460 
Water vapor 25,000 
Argon 9,340 
Carbon dioxide
413 
Neon 18 
Helium 5 
Methane 2 
Other
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
The greenhouse effect allows Earth to be a comfortable average temperature of 15°C. However, over 
the past 260 years the temperature of the Earth has been rising at an extremely unusual rate. Despite 
ups and downs from year to year, there is a clear pattern of increasing temperatures. By 2001, Earth’s 
temperature was roughly 0.5 degrees Celsius above the average for 1951–1980.  
 
 
 
 
This increase in temperature coincides with the 
human-caused increase in greenhouse gas in 
the atmosphere, mostly through carbon 
dioxide (CO2) in pollution released into the air 
from industries burning oil, natural gas, and 
coal, and from vehicles. Increasing atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations cause an imbalance in the 
Earth's heat budget: more heat is retained than 
expelled, which in turn generates global 
surface warming.  Cutting down forests has 
also contributed because living trees take 
carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere to build 
into wood. Since 1750, carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere has increased by 45%. Methane, 
another important greenhouse gas, has 
increased by 150%. 
 
Average for 1951 - 1980 
Average Global Surface Temperature 
This graph shows the difference of the average global annual temperature (the pink line) from the 1951-1980 average (the blue 
line) as well as the the running 5-year average. There is a clear increase in temperature since the 1050s-80s. NASA figure 
adapted from Goddard Institute for Space Studies Surface Temperature Analysis 
This graph shows how the rise in global temperature (the red line) 
follows closely with the rise in atmospheric CO2 (the blue and green 
lines). https://skepticalscience.com/The-CO2-Temperature-correlation-
over-the-20th-Century.html 
Global Warming and Climate Change 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 2 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
 
Global Warming 
By looking at data from marine sediment cores, ice cores, and computer simulations covering the last 
eight glacial cycles, we know that in the past, it would take over 1,500 years for an increase of 1°C; we 
have now seen this rise happen in only 100 years.  Global warming is used to describe this unusually 
rapid increase in Earth’s average surface temperature. It has risen by just a little less than 1°C since 1901 
and the rate at which temperature is increasing has nearly doubled since 1975. Never in the last 784,000 
years has there been an increase in temperature that happened so quickly.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate Change 
Climate Change is the phrase used to describe the changes that we are experiencing here on Earth 
because of global warming. The increase in temperature is leading to a variety of changes in Earth’s 
climate like more extreme weather, more storms, more winter rain, and changes in the length of 
seasons. These changes are impacting a variety of Earth’s systems and the people that rely on them. We 
are already observing more intense fires, more flooding, changes on the land, impacts on animals and 
plants, and periods of drought. Human health, food security, infrastructure and transportation are also 
being affected. 
 
 
This graph shows the difference of the global temperature from before the industrial revolution (1850-1900) reconstructed from 
information in marine sediment cores, ice cores, and computer simulations covering the last eight glacial cycles. It also shows the 
Global warming projection to 2100 based on newly calculated paleoclimate sensitivity. https://phys.org/news/2016-11-climate-
sensitive-atmospheric-co2.html 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
It’s easy to confuse the concepts of “weather” and “climate.” Both terms refer to the environment around us 
and both involve measures such as temperature, wind, and precipitation. The difference between weather and 
climate is one of scale.  
What is weather? 
Weather refers to the day-to-day conditions that a given place experiences. When you ask, “How warm is it 
today?” or “Is it raining out?” you’re asking about the weather. Weather fluctuates from day to day, or even 
hour to hour. Take a look at the weather forecast below. In Kitchenuhmaykoosib Inninuwug (KI), over this 7-
day period, the temperature fluctuates by 10°C. Some days are likely to have cloud while others are likely to 
have sun. One day is expected to have snow.  
 
What is climate? 
Climate is the average weather a 
place experiences over a long period 
of time, like decades, or a lifetime, or 
a century. For example, take the 
graph to the right. 
This graph shows the average yearly 
temperature in KI from 1942 through 
to 2015. The single temperature 
value given for a year is an average of 
all the temperature readings from 
the weather station in KI throughout 
all days of the year, from the coldest 
winter nights to the hottest summer 
days. The spikey blue line connects 
these dots and illustrates the 
variations in temperature that can happen from year to year.  
The orange line, on the other hand, is showing us the long-term trend in yearly average temperature in KI over 
the entire 73-year period. It’s taking the temperatures that occurred each year and showing us how those 
temperatures have changed over more than 7 decades. The orange line is showing us a change in the climate. 
This automated weather station, located in Neskantaga, 
Ontario, measures temperature, dew point, humidity, 
wind, precipitation, and snow depth. 
Weather and Climate –                                          
What is the difference and why does it matter? 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 3 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Why is climate important? 
Just like how knowing the weather forecast can help us prepare for our day or our week, knowing how the 
climate is changing can help us plan for our present and our future. How much rain a given place can expect 
throughout the summer, or what temperatures are likely to be seen in January, are based on our knowledge of 
the region’s climate. Climate models, which are used to predict what conditions might be like by the 2050s or 
even the end of the century, can help us determine how we should design communities and buildings, so they 
endure into the future. Monitoring climate can help us see how things are changing. 
How is climate changing? 
All across the globe, temperatures are on the rise. In northern Ontario, the change is expected to be the most 
extreme in winter, with average temperatures increasing by as much as 9°C by the 2050s.  In KI, the average 
temperature for the entire year is predicted to increase from -2°C experienced between 1986-2005 up to +3°C 
in the year 2050.  
 
 
 
What about cold days? 
On November 15, 2019, the temperature in Kitchenuhmaykoosib Inninuwug was -22°C, unusually cold weather 
for a fall day. But just because a given day is cold, it doesn’t mean that the conditions over the last few decades 
(the climate) haven’t gotten warmer. The normal ups and downs in weather can make it harder to see the long-
term trend of the climate. It’s important we remember to take a step back from the weather outside our front 
door and notice the bigger picture. 
Predicted increase in temperature in Ontario by the 2050s relative to the 1986-2005 period, if greenhouse gas emissions continue to 
rise (RCP 8.5, 75th percentile). Map from http://climate-scenarios.canada.ca/?page=cmip5-intro 
Only winter 
Whole year 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a common gas. You encounter it every day. It’s what you breathe out when you exhale, 
and it’s what plants take in and use for photosynthesis. It’s also released into the atmosphere in large amounts 
when we burn fossil fuels, like coal, gasoline, and natural gas. Carbon dioxide is what we call a “greenhouse 
gas”, meaning it absorbs heat energy in the atmosphere and radiates it back towards the Earth, heating the 
land and oceans. Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are climbing higher and higher, and this has big 
implications for the future of our planet. 
How do we know CO2 is causing warming? 
There are multiple lines of evidence that illustrate the 
properties of CO2 as a greenhouse gas and its role in 
Earth’s greenhouse effect (to learn about these look at the 
suggestions for further reading). We can also look at the 
relationship between rising atmospheric CO2 and rising 
global temperature over the last century (the graph on the 
right). Temperature (the red line) and CO2 (the green and 
blue lines) follow the same trend. 
 
What about ice ages? 
Historical shifts into and out of ice ages have been 
triggered by changes in the Earth’s orbit (a combination of 
orbital eccentricity and axis tilt and wobble). But CO2 still 
played a part in historic warming.  Once changes in orbital 
cycles trigger warming, a positive CO2 feedback loop 
occurs: warming oceans release CO2 into the atmosphere, which leads to more warming, which leads to more 
CO2 release, and so on. This CO2 feedback cycle is necessary for the switch between glacial ice ages and 
interglacial phases. 
 
This graph shows the level of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere for the last 800,000 years. Levels of CO2 from the distant past were 
determined by analysing air bubbles from ice cores taken from ice sheets and glaciers. Although levels change over time, CO2 stayed 
within a constant boundary for the vast majority of those 800,000 years. It’s only after 1950 that levels skyrocket. Image from 
https://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/24/graphic-the-relentless-rise-of-carbon-dioxide/ 
This graph shows how temperature (the red line) and CO2 in the 
atmosphere (the blue and green lines) have changed over time. 
Both follow the same trend. Image from 
https://skepticalscience.com/the-co2-temperature-correlation-
over-the-20th-century.html 
Climate change and the rise of Carbon Dioxide 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 4 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
What about other greenhouse 
gases? 
It’s true that carbon dioxide is not the 
only greenhouse gas in the atmosphere, 
but it is arguably the most important to 
global warming. The graph on the right 
shows the amount each of the major 
human-produced greenhouse gases 
contributes to global warming, and the 
impact of CO2 is hard to miss.  
Carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere 
longer than other greenhouse gases, and 
it’s much more abundant. It also absorbs 
types of heat energy that other natural 
greenhouse gases do not.  
 
But CO2 is natural, how do human 
CO2 contributions make any 
difference? 
Before humans began burning coal and other 
fossil fuels at ever increasing rates, the carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere was all part of a 
natural cycle. Some processes, like 
photosynthesis, absorb CO2 and others, like 
respiration, emit it. Without the addition of 
human contributions, the rate of CO2 
absorbed and emitted by the land and 
oceans is roughly balanced, as illustrated by 
the figure to the right. But humans are 
currently adding another 29 billion tons of CO2 
per year into the atmosphere. This is more 
carbon than the natural cycle can absorb, and what can’t be absorbed accumulates in the atmosphere. It is this 
extra carbon that has led to the spike in CO2 levels in the atmosphere that we are seeing today.  
Carbon dioxide from human impact is pushing global temperatures higher, and we’re already starting to feel 
the effects. The level of CO2 in the atmosphere is beyond anything seen in the last 800,000 years. If we hope to 
limit the extent of climate change, cutting our CO2 emissions needs to be part of our plan.   
 
Want to know more? Suggestions for further reading: 
https://skepticalscience.com/empirical-evidence-for-co2-enhanced-greenhouse-effect-basic.htm 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232750246_Anthropogenic_and_natural_warming_inferred_from_changes_in
_Earth's_energy_balance 
There is more than one greenhouse gas contributing to global warming, but 
carbon dioxide is by far the biggest influence on the heating imbalance. The 
combined heating influence of all major greenhouse gases has increased by 
43% since 1990 
Image from https://www.climate.gov/news-features/understanding-
climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-dioxide 
The natural global carbon cycle, without extra human 
emissions, is fairly balanced, with amounts being emitted 
almost equal to amounts being absorbed. 
Humans emit an extra 29 
billion tons of CO2 into 
the atmosphere a year, 
pushing CO2 levels past 
what the natural cycle 
can handle. 
Images from https://skepticalscience.com/human-
co2-smaller-than-natural-emissions-basic.htm 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scientists drill up to 3km into ice sheets and glaciers to collect 
cylinders of ice, called ice cores. Ice cores have layers that 
capture sediments and air, that tell us about the Earth’s past 
climate. Layers were formed from falling snow in the winter 
that lasted through to the next winter. As the snow 
accumulated it became ice under its own weight. This can take 
thousands of years. Each layer is different in chemistry and 
texture providing a treasure trove of information about the 
climate each year. The longest record of Earth’s history is 
contained in cores from the EPICA (European Project for Ice 
Coring in Antarctica) project in Antarctica spanning about 
800,000 years. Careful study of the layers of long cores of ice 
from Greenland show that there have probably been eleven 
very large ice sheets over Canada in the last three million 
years.  
 
 
What causes the ice ages?  
We know from many years of carefully measuring the position of stars in the night sky and the angle of 
the Sun above the horizon during the day, that the Earth’s orbit, or path around the Sun, as well as its 
tilt toward the Sun are always changing, but very, very slowly; we call this the Milankovitch cycles.  
 
The Earth’s journey around the Sun, its orbit, is not a perfect circle. Instead it is 
an oval, like a stretched elastic band, so that the Earth is closer to the Sun at 
one end of its orbit than at the other (Eccentricity). That means that right now 
we are closer to the Sun in January (147 million km) than we are in June (152 
million km). Remembering that January is our winter in the north, it might 
seem wrong that we are closer to the Sun in winter, but the angle of the tilt of 
the Earth causes a larger difference in temperature.   
 
 
The reason lies in the changes in the tilt of the axis of the Earth around which we 
slowly spin like a spinning top. In Ontario, we are warmer in June because in that part 
of our orbit the axis of the Earth is pointing toward the Sun. We see the Sun more face 
on and we enjoy longer days. In the winter, on the other end of the Earth’s orbit, the 
axis is pointed away from the Sun, the north pole is dark all day, we have shorter days 
and face the Sun at a low angle. That’s why January is cooler than July and why our 
seasons are different. The angle of the tilt of the Earth towards the Sun changes by an 
extremely tiny amount every year, taking about 40,000 years to increase from just 
over 22 degrees to 24 ½ degrees and then back again.  
Ice core from the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Divide 
(WAIS Divide); The dark band in this core is a layer of 
volcanic ash that settled on the ice sheet 
approximately 21,000 years ago. — Credit: Heidi 
Roop, NSF https://icecores.org/about-ice-cores 
How do we know what the climate was like before we could measure it? - 
Ice Cores and Milankovitch cycles 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 5 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
To make things more complicated, the axis of the Earth slowly wobbles as it turns like a top 
that is slowing down (Precession). This can mean that it is tilted toward the Sun even more 
than we are used to today.  
 
So, the Earth can be tilted more directly or less directly toward the Sun when it’s either 
close to or far from the Sun. Each of these changes takes thousands of years and there are 
many possible combinations. When the Earth is fully tilted away from the Sun (Obliquity 
and Precession) and farthest from the Sun (Eccentricity) it becomes colder in the north. 
 
Careful calculations of how the very slow changes in the Earth’s position affect the warmth of the Sun 
received in the north have shown that sometimes summer weather could become cool enough to very 
slowly, over hundreds of years, allow winter snow and ice to last all year round as far as the border 
between Canada and the US. When it builds up for thousands of years, it can become an Ice Age ice 
sheet and eventually grow to as much as 2 or even 3 km thick and last 100,000 years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What is going on now? 
We have evidence that when ice last covered Canada, the average temperature of the Earth was about 5 
– 7°C colder than it is today.  Eventually, as the tilt of the Earth and its path around the Sun changed, 
summers in the north became warmer and the ice sheet began to melt. That is what has been 
happening for the last 12,000 years. When we remember that the ice on the Arctic islands and 
Greenland is part of that Ice Age ice sheet, we see that it is still going on. But the memories of Elders, 
the work of scientists, and records from weather stations tell us that what is happening now is different 
from the past. Earth is warming much faster today. 
 
Read more: 
https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/features/Paleoclimatology_IceCores 
An interesting Milankovitch interactive: 
cimss.ssec.wisc.edu/wxfest/Milankovitch/earthorbit.html   
In this graph, we see Eccentricity, Obliquity and Precession together (Milankovitch cycles) as a purple line and the EPICA ice 
core estimated temperatures in green. The Milankovitch cycles affect the amount of heat from the Sun that the Earth 
receives and leads to changes in global temperature. We are currently in a warming phase because the Earth is 
approaching its closest point to the Sun (low eccentricity, more circular orbit) and the north has been tilted toward the Sun 
allowing the Earth to capture more heat energy. From our understanding of the cycles of Earth’s orbit and from looking at 
the ice cores in Antarctica (EPICA), we estimate that a cooling phase should soon begin.  
today 
400,000 years ago 
Global 
temperature 
difference 
from 1961-
1990 
0°C 
 
 
-5°C 
Ice age 
Ice age 
Ice age 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Knowing what conditions we can expect in the future is an important part of climate change adaptation. But how are 
these predictions made?  
How do scientists predict future 
climate? 
By modelling it. Models are used to visualize complex 
things like how a car, or the human body works. They 
are also used to understand and predict events like 
earthquakes and future climate.  
Climate models are created by using what is already 
known about Earth’s climate system, like the exchange 
of energy and material (such as carbon dioxide) between 
the oceans, the land, and the atmosphere. The Earth is 
divided into a grid and each of the thousands of cells is 
represented by a mathematical equation using 
everything that is known about Earth’s systems. These 
complex calculations require super computers that can 
fill an entire school gymnasium. 
 
To "run" a model, scientists input a value that is 
expected to change like levels of carbon dioxide and 
have computers solve the equations for each cell. 
Climate models calculate winds, heat transfer, radiation, 
relative humidity, and surface hydrology within each grid and 
determine how each grid might interact with neighboring 
ones.  
 
How do we know if models work? 
Scientists run their computer model to predict the past climate. If the climate information from their model matches the 
past climate, they run the same equations to predict future climate. Many working models are then averaged to get the 
best climate projections. In Canada, we use the CMIP5 group of models to project future climate and so does the IPCC 
(Intergovernmental Panel in Climate Change).  
 
Adapted from 
https://celebrating200years.noaa.gov/breakthroughs/climate_model/
modeling_schematic.html and https://www.climate.gov/maps-
data/primer/climate-models 
Measured global mean temperature (black 
lines) over the past 200 years with closely 
following CMIP5 multi model (thick red 
line) that is the average modeled 
temperature based on many models (all 
other lines). The temperature anomaly is 
produced by comparing values to the 
reference period of 1961-1990 (yellow 
shading). Adapted from 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2
018/02/WG1AR5_Chapter09_FINAL.pdf 
A look into the future –  
Climate modelling and Representative Concentration Pathways 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 6 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Possible futures: What is a Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) ? 
Exactly how much the climate will change by the middle or the end of the century depends mostly on whether human 
activity will continue to produce as much greenhouse gas emissions. Generally, scientists refer to 4 possible paths when 
predicting the future climate. These are called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCP) and each models a different 
amount of human-caused greenhouse gases like CO2.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Which path will we take? 
The future of our climate depends on the choices 
that people make today. To have any hope of 
limiting global climate change, we need to start 
reducing our greenhouse gas emissions now and 
into the future. Emissions targets, governmental 
regulations, green technologies, and individual 
choices must all be part of the plan when it comes 
to reducing our global emissions. The time to act 
is now, and we must choose our path wisely.  
Earth's average temperature in the past and projected into the future. 
If we cut our greenhouse gas emissions dramatically (RCP2.6), 
warming could be limited to 1°C. If we continue to increase emissions 
(RCP8.5), we will see an increase of 3°C to 5.5°C in global average 
temperature. Adapted from Knutti, R., Sedláček, J. Robustness and 
uncertainties in the new CMIP5 climate model projections. Nature 
Climate Change 3, 369–373 (2013) doi:10.1038/nclimate1716 
What is radiative forcing? 
The number next to the letters “RCP” is the amount of radiative forcing that 
occurs in each path. Radiative forcing is dependant on the amount of 
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. It is the difference between the amount of 
the Sun’s energy that is absorbed by Earth and the amount that gets radiated 
back into space. A radiative forcing above 0 w/m2 means there is more energy 
being absorbed than being released, which will cause the temperature of Earth 
to rise. During ice ages, the radiative forcing is below 0w/m2. 
RCP2.6 
RCP4.5 
RCP8.5 
RCP 2.6 –assumes humans will dramatically lower 
our greenhouse gases emissions now; radiative 
forcing must peak at 3 w/m2 around mid-century 
(the 2050s) and then decline to 2.6 w/m2 by the 
year 2100, the equivalent of 490ppm of CO2; an 
increase of about 1°C is expected. 
RCP 4.5 – assumes that by 2050 human 
greenhouse gas emissions begin to reduce; 
radiative forcing will stabilize at 4.5 w/m2 after 
the year 2100, the equivalent of 650ppm of CO2; 
an increase of around 1.8°C is expected. 
RCP 8.5 –assumes that little to no effort is taken 
to lower our greenhouse gas emissions; 
radiative forcing will hit a maximum of 8.5 w/m2 
by 2100, the equivalent of 1370ppm of CO2; an 
increase of about 3.7°C is expected.  
RCP 6 – assumes that by 2080 human 
greenhouse gas emissions begin to reduce; 
radiative forcing will stabilize at 6 w/m2 after 
the year 2100, the equivalent of 850ppm of CO2; 
an increase of around 2.4°C is expected. 
Projected temperature increases by year 2100 depending on RCP 
http://climate-scenarios.canada.ca/?page=main 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
Ice is melting at accelerated rates in the Arctic, Antarctica, Greenland, and across the globe due to 
human caused climate change. 
 
Glaciers, Ice Sheets & Sea Ice – What’s the difference? 
Glaciers are the accumulation of snowfall over many years that turns to ice 
under its own weight. Glaciers move over time as a result of gravity 
causing erosion of the rock beneath it and are found at the poles and 
mountains of every continent except Australia. Glaciers are sensitive to 
temperature changes and long-term trends show that about 90% of 
glaciers are shrinking worldwide.  
 
Ice sheets are a type of glacier. They are a thick layer of ice covering 
a large area of land for a long period of time. Ice sheets form when 
falling snow does not melt completely in the summer and 
accumulates over the years because of colder temperatures. The 
only ice sheets on Earth are in Antarctica and Greenland, and they 
are shrinking. 
 
 
Sea ice is any form of ice found at sea that has come from the 
freezing of seawater. Sea ice can be chunks that move on the ocean 
surface by wind and currents, or a motionless sheet attached to the 
coast. Sea ice is mainly found in the North Pole between Canada and 
Russia and at the South Poles surrounding Antarctica. Sea ice less 
than one year old is called first-year ice, and sea ice that has survived 
at least one summer melt season is called multi-year ice. 
 
 
 
Melting Ice 
Sea ice 
Ice sheet 
Mountain 
glaciers 
Greenland ice sheet mass variation in billions of tons, 
source: https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/ice-sheets/ 
Left image: Ice cover including sea ice, ice sheets and glaciers 
on Sept 18, 2019, the day of minimum amount of ice for the 
year. The average extent of sea ice for 1981-2000 is indicated as 
an orange line. https://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/ 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 7 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Northern Arctic Sea Ice Visualization: https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/4750 
In this visualization of the North, sea ice less than one-year old is shown in a dark shade of blue, and sea 
ice that is four years old or older is shown in white. In recent years, there has been a rapid decline in 
multi-year ice, which is the portion of sea ice that survives the summer melt season. Multi-year ice may 
have a lifespan of nine years or more and represents the thickest component of the sea ice; it can grow 
up to four metres thick! 
 
Ice is melting, so what? 
• 
Glaciers are an important natural resource; they hold the largest reservoir of fresh water on the 
surface of the planet and many people all over the world rely on the meltwater for drinking. 
• 
As sea ice melts, darker patches of the ocean start showing which absorb more heat instead of 
reflecting it like the white snow and ice. Changing ocean temperatures and warmer air 
temperatures disrupt normal patterns of ocean circulation and the jet stream. Watch this 
illustrative video to learn more: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TuHdPvnu3Ds 
• 
Melting ice sheets contribute to rising sea levels that can lead to coastal flooding. Hudson and 
James Bay coasts may not experience flooding because glacial rebound is happening more 
quickly than sea level rise. Sea level rise can also increase coastal erosion and elevates storm 
surge as warming air and ocean temperatures create more frequent and intense coastal storms. 
Melting ice sheets also add freshwater to the ocean and can change ocean currents impacting 
weather patterns worldwide. This will impact fisheries, coastal communities and animals that 
depend on sea ice.  
• 
Far north communities may experience more polar bear encounters as they wander into 
communities looking for food due to lack of ice for hunting. 
 
What can we do? 
Number one, we can prepare for the changes that will come with melting ice, and number two, we need 
to cut our greenhouse gas emissions. Individually we can make changes that will reduce our emissions, 
but even more important, we need to demand action from local, provincial and federal governments to 
cut greenhouse gas emissions. 
Global Ice Viewer: Try this interactive tool to learn more about how climate change is affecting glaciers, 
ice sheets and sea ice worldwide: https://climate.nasa.gov/interactives/global-ice-viewer/#/.  
Read more here: https://skepticalscience.com/melting-ice-global-warming-intermediate.htm 
Weekly Arctic Sea Ice Age, Sept 1984 and 2019, source: https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/4750 
Sept 1984 
Sept 2019 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
Sadly, there are many examples of how climate change is already impacting our planet. Rising ocean levels, 
often called sea level, is one such example. Exactly how rising sea levels will affect you will depend on where 
you are.  
How is sea level impacted by climate change? 
Rising global temperatures lead to sea level rise in two major ways: melting ice and thermal expansion. 
Melting Ice 
About 10% of land on Earth is covered by glacial 
ice, and that ice stores a lot of water. As 
temperatures have risen, these glaciers have 
started to break and melt. About two thirds of the 
sea level rise we have experienced has come from 
melting glaciers.   
Thermal Expansion 
Simply put, warm water takes up more space than 
cold water. This means that, as the greenhouse 
effect warms the oceans, the water expands to a 
greater volume and takes up more space. This 
phenomenon is responsible for one third of the sea 
level rise seen to date. 
What is happening with global sea 
level? 
For the last 2,000 years or so, global sea level stayed relatively constant. It wasn’t until the late 1800s, when 
humans started burning coal and other fossil fuels at increasingly higher rates, that sea level started to rise. 
Today, sea level is 13 to 20 
centimeters (5 to 8 inches) 
higher than it was in 1900.  
Not only is sea level 
increasing, but the rate at 
which it’s increasing has 
become faster. Before 1990, 
the rate of sea level rise was 
about 1.5 millimeters per 
year. By the year 2000, that 
rate had increased to 3.2 
millimeters per year. As of 
June, 2019, NASA has 
calculated the rate of sea 
level rise to be 3.3 millimeters 
per year.  
This NASA image from July 2012 shows a large chunk of ice that has 
broken from the Petermann Glacier in Greenland. 
https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/images/78648/closeup-of-the-ice-
island-from-petermann-glacier 
Graph of sea level change since 1993 as tracked by satellites. As of June, 2019, the rate of 
change is 3.3 millimeters per year. Source: climate.nasa.gov 
Petermann Glacier 
Climate change, rising sea level, and what it means 
for the Hudson Bay coast 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 8 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Sea level on the Hudson and James Bay Coast 
The surface of the Earth is not the same everywhere, and neither is the surface of the ocean. As such, different 
places will experience sea level rise differently, with some locations seeing more rising than the global average 
and some seeing less. Presently, the Hudson and James Bay coasts are seeing a decrease in sea level due to a 
process called “isostatic rebound”. 
During the last ice age, most of what we now consider 
Canada was covered by a massive sheet of ice. The ice was so 
heavy that it squeezed the land beneath it, as illustrated in 
the drawing to the left. 
As the ice began to melt, and the weight of the glacier 
disappeared, the land underneath began to rise up, or 
rebound, back to its original shape. This is the process we call 
isostatic rebound, and it’s still occurring in Ontario today.  
 
 
Currently, the land on the Hudson Bay coast is rising at a rate between 8 and 13 millimeters per year (or, to put 
it another way, 80 centimeters to 1.3 meters in about 100 years). You can see evidence of the land that was 
gained because of rebound when you fly near the Bay as beach ridges of high ground where the shoreline of 
the Bay was years ago.  
 
This rise from rebound of 80cm to 1.3m far exceeds the 
current average rise in sea level of 33 centimeters in 100 
years and likely will exceed even the most extreme 
projections of a global increase in sea levels of 1m by the 
year 2100. Sea level rise is expected to impact coastal 
communities all over the world. The water level of Hudson 
and James Bay coasts, however, is not expected to rise 
because of the effect of glacial rebound. In fact, the sea 
level along the bays has been and will continue to 
decrease.  
For further information on sea level rise and rebound, check these out: 
https://ocean.si.edu/through-time/ancient-seas/sea-level-rise 
https://www.ontariobeneathourfeet.com/sea-level-rise-james-hudson-bay 
http://pubs.aina.ucalgary.ca/arctic/Arctic62-4-458.pdf 
The weight of an ice sheet squeezes the ground beneath it. When the ice melts, the ground slowly rebounds. Images from 
http://www.antarcticglaciers.org/glaciers-and-climate/sea-level-rise-2/recovering-from-an-ice-age/ 
The land in Ontario is rising due to 
rebound following the past 
glaciation. The rate of land uplift on 
the Hudson Bay coast is between 8 
and 13 millimeters per year, 
depending on location. Map from 
Henton et. al. Crustal Motion and 
Deformation Monitoring of the 
Canadian Landmass. Geomatica 
60(2):173-191 (2006). 
Shrub covered ridges of beach sand 
running parallel to the shore of Hudson 
Bay seen as white ice in the background. 
The raised beaches mark the location of 
the former bay shoreline. The valley of 
the Severn River is visible in the 
foreground underneath the plane.   
Photo taken March 21, 2012. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
Extreme weather events have always happened, but the frequency and intensity are changing.  
Although it’s not possible to say if a specific event was caused by global warming, there is strong 
evidence that a warming planet will make extreme events more frequent and/or intense. It’s like playing 
a card game with extra jokers, by increasing global average temperature, you increase the chance of 
extreme weather events. 
 
What are some examples of extreme weather events? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
Why can’t we directly link extreme weather events to global warming? 
Extreme weather events are unusual highs or lows based on the historical records of weather in a 
particular region. Detecting these trends takes time and is particularly difficult when observational 
records are rare in certain regions like northern Ontario. Community members, especially Elders, speak 
of more storms, more rain in the winter, and say that the weather is now more unpredictable. Although 
scientists can’t tie global warming to a specific event, they are getting better at determining whether a 
warming planet made the event more severe or more likely to happen. 
Heat waves 
Thunderstorms 
Wildfires 
Snowstorms 
Ice storms 
Hailstorms 
Windstorms
Rainstorms 
Flooding 
Extreme Weather Events 
CLIMATE CHANGE: ISSUE 9 OF 9 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How does global warming make extreme weather events more frequent and/or 
intense?  
 
Rising temperatures can increase the rate of 
evapotranspiration, which is the total evaporation of 
water from soil, plants and water bodies. This can 
have a direct effect on the frequency and intensity of 
droughts and make forests and fields more prone to 
catching fire, plus extend the fire season. 
 
 
 
Rising temperatures mean a warmer 
atmosphere. A warmer atmosphere can hold 
more water vapour, and water vapour increases 
the risk of extreme rainfall and snowstorm 
events. 
 
 
 
 
 
Rising temperatures change sea-surface temperature which then 
brings changes in atmospheric circulation and precipitation. This 
can cause more severe hurricanes and intensify droughts and 
floods. 
 
 
 
Why is this important? 
Understanding how global warming impacts extreme weather will help communities and individuals 
make informed decisions, such as where and how to build, to reduce their vulnerability to climate 
change. By being prepared for more frequent and intense extreme weather, we can keep our 
communities safe. 
 
 
 
Contact us if you’d like to learn more about extreme weather and global warming.  
We can provide access to this report: https://www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1452. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
More hot and dry weather is expected because of climate change. Drought and periods of dry weather 
in the north can lead to lower water levels in lakes, rivers, and wetlands. What do lower water levels 
mean for people and for the environment? 
How will climate change impact drought and low water? 
As climate change brings hotter temperatures to the north, we can expect lakes, rivers, and wetlands to 
lose more water to evaporation. This means that water levels can lower even if the amount of rain an 
area gets stays the same. In northern Ontario, the summer months are predicted to see only small gains 
in rain, which may not be enough to offset how much water is lost to evaporation. It’s possible that low 
water levels will happen more often as climate change continues.  
What are the impacts of low water levels? 
Wetlands 
Wetlands are important ecosystems. Wetlands provide 
habitat for plants and animals, act as natural flood control 
by absorbing and holding rain and melt water, trap 
sediments and other contaminants to make water cleaner, 
and even store carbon. When wetlands shrink or dry 
completely, these important functions can be reduced or 
even lost entirely.  
Lakes and rivers 
Low water in lakes and rivers can take away or limit 
important fish habitat like spawning areas, migration 
routes, and cold-water refuges. Low water can also make it 
harder for people to travel by boat and impact long-
standing traditional travel routes. 
Drinking water 
When water levels get low in lakes and rivers that supply 
drinking water, drinking water quality can be put at risk. 
Lower water levels can mean a higher concentration of 
contaminants, issues with drinking water intakes, and a 
greater chance for algae and pathogen growth.     
What have people noticed? 
Already, people in First Nation communities across the north have seen the impacts of low water. Some 
say traditional water routes are harder to travel in summer and can impact hunting and fishing even into 
the fall. Ponds, swamps, and small lakes in some areas have gotten drier. In some cases, the loss of 
swamps can mean the loss of traditionally harvested plants. Many people also feel that periods of 
drought or dry weather are happening more often now than they used to in the past. 
Low water in a changing climate 
DROUGHT: ISSUE 1 OF 5 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Protect habitat 
Take steps to protect the wetlands, lakes, and rivers in your 
area. You can: 
• 
Limit water removal or diversions of water in systems 
where low water is an issue.  
• 
Make sure streams and tributaries that supply water to 
larger systems aren’t blocked from flowing. 
• 
Keep wetlands as part of your community. Avoid 
destroying wetlands when building or creating 
infrastructure. 
• 
Monitor and protect fish habitat that may be sensitive to 
water level changes like spawning grounds, migration 
routes, and cold-water refuges. 
Adapt how you travel 
Low water levels might make it necessary for people to change 
the way they travel. Changes could include: 
• 
Finding new water routes 
• 
Creating portage trails around areas of low water 
• 
Using motors made for shallow water 
• 
Carrying lighter loads in boats 
• 
Traveling over land 
Protect drinking water 
Since low water can affect drinking water quality, it is 
important that drinking water systems be assessed for their 
vulnerability to low water conditions. An effective drinking 
water monitoring program should also be in place to ensure 
water continues to be safe to drink in times of low water. 
Rivers and lakes that are drinking water sources, including the 
land that drains into those systems, should be protected from 
potential contamination. 
Clean, safe drinking water is already an issue for many First Nation communities. Communities should 
continue to push for safe drinking water. 
Want to know more? 
Lakehead Region Conservation Authority Low Water Response 
https://lakeheadca.com/flood-protection/low-water-response 
Revitalize a wetland 
https://cwf-fcf.org/en/resources/for-educators/resource-sheets/revitalize-a-wetland.html 
Common outboard motors can be damaged 
when used in shallow water. Mud motors or 
jet motors may be better options. 
Water treatment plant in Attawapiskat. 
Wetlands are important and diverse 
ecosystems. Keep wetlands as part of your 
community. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
More extremes in weather are expected with climate change. When the weather gets hot and dry, 
water levels in lakes and rivers can get low. What does this mean for the drinking water that 
communities need? 
What does climate change mean for drought and dry periods in the north? 
As temperatures continue to rise in the north, evaporation from the land and water will increase, 
leading to drier land and lower water levels in lakes and rivers, both of which can affect drinking water 
quality. While climate change is predicted to make northern Ontario wetter, the summer months will 
see only modest gains in rain, which may not be enough to offset the water lost to evaporation. Rain 
might also fall as heavy rain more often with long periods of little to no rain, leading to drought 
conditions. 
How do drought and dry periods impact drinking water? 
When the weather is abnormally dry for a period of time, water resources can be put under stress. In 
dry periods surface water can get warmer, water levels in lakes and rivers can lower, and water flow 
through streams and rivers can be reduced. Ground water can also be affected. These sorts of changes 
can impact the quality and quantity of drinking water. For 
example: 
• 
Lower water levels may lead to problems with drinking water 
intakes 
• 
Lower water levels can increase the concentration of 
contaminants 
• 
When water gets lower, warmer, and has less flow, 
waterborne pathogens may be more likely to survive and grow 
• 
When water gets lower, warmer, and has less flow, there may 
be an increase in algae blooms 
• 
Lower ground water may lead wells to go dry 
• 
Water treatment plants may experience loss of pressure, 
increasing the risk of contamination and requiring more 
intensive water treatment 
 
Drought and dry weather can also impact the land, drying out soil 
and making it pack together more tightly. When heavy rain hits this dry, compacted soil, the water is less 
likely to absorb into the ground and instead runs over the land washing soils and contaminants into 
lakes and rivers that may be drinking water sources. 
What have people noticed? 
Low water levels in lakes, rivers, streams, and creeks are already being mentioned by people in First 
Nation communities throughout the north. Some people also say the water seems warmer than it used 
to be, and many have noticed more algae. Wells in some areas are said to have low water levels or even 
dry entirely in summer.   
 
 
Drinking water in a changing climate  
DROUGHT: ISSUE 2 OF 5 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Vulnerability assessment 
Clean, safe drinking water is already an issue for many First Nation communities. Drinking water 
infrastructure in all communities should be assessed to make sure it can function well now and under 
future climate conditions, including the potential for drought and low water levels. This type of 
assessment and upgrade planning may require the help of outside consultants. Communities should 
continue to push for safe drinking water. 
Monitoring 
Communities may wish to monitor for potential 
drought events by tracking weather, water levels, and 
moisture levels in the soil near a drinking water source. 
Since 2002, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada has been 
sharing data online about drought conditions, soil 
moisture, and other parameters. The data is posted at 
the end of every month.  
In communities that currently have drinkable tap water 
it is important to make sure the water continues to be 
safe to drink during drought events. An effective 
drinking water monitoring program needs to be in 
place. If the water is not safe to drink, communities 
should have an alerting system to notify members and 
have alternative water sources available (bottled water, 
boiled water, different water sources, etc.). 
Source water protection 
Keep the lakes and rivers that supply drinking water healthy by preventing pollution. An effective 
community drainage plan can help limit the amount of surface runoff reaching source water lakes and 
rivers. Limiting development around source water and protecting the natural landscape can also help 
keep contaminants from entering these systems. Communities might also want to create an “intake 
protection zone” around their drinking water intake where boat traffic and other potential sources of 
contaminants are restricted. 
Water conservation 
Water conservation should be encouraged; provide water 
conservation tips to community members. Water conservation is 
always a good idea, but will be especially important in times of 
drought. Inform the community of drought conditions and of any 
water-use restrictions that may need to be put in place. 
Want to know more? 
What is an Intake Protection Zone?  
http://trentsourceprotection.on.ca/protect-your-water/what-is-an-intake-protection-zone 
Drought-Ready Communities – A guide to community drought preparedness 
https://drought.unl.edu/archive/Documents/NDMC/Planning/DRC_Guide.pdf 
The Canadian Drought Monitor from Agriculture Canada tracks 
the extent and intensity of drought. Image for May 2020 
https://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/agriculture-and-the-
environment/drought-watch/canadian-drought-
monitor/?id=1463575104513
Save water in your home by: 
• 
Taking quick showers  
• 
Fixing leaky taps or toilets 
• 
Running washing appliances 
with full loads  
• 
Collecting rainwater for 
watering gardens 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
As climate change makes summer temperatures warmer, the land in the north will get drier impacting 
plants, animals, and people.  
How will climate change impact drought? 
Hotter summer temperatures that are expected with climate change draw 
more moisture out of plants and soils (an effect called evapotranspiration). 
Even though climate change will likely also bring more rain to Ontario, the 
land is expected to become drier in future conditions. Predicting where 
droughts will occur and how long they will last is difficult but it is thought that 
North America is likely to experience longer and more intense dry periods as 
climate changes.  
How does drought impact the land? 
Erosion and sedimentation 
Have you ever tried watering a house plant when the soil is very dry? If 
you give it too much water at once, it goes straight through the soil and 
into the plant saucer or the water sits on top for a while before absorbing. 
The same thing happens when the land goes through an abnormally dry 
period called a drought. Dry soils take longer to absorb water and so 
rainwater runs downs slopes into lakes and rivers. The soil that gets 
carried with the rain runoff, called sediments, can impact water quality. 
Wind can send dry soil particles into the air and into waterways.  
Soil quality & shifting ecosystems 
Soils that lack moisture can become compacted making it difficult for 
plants to grow. Low soil quality can result is loss of wildlife habitat as 
plants and trees are unable to survive in these conditions. Trees may start 
to die off and be replaced by grasslands that are able to withstand dry 
conditions. Community members may need to travel further in order to 
harvest and hunt and community gardens may be impacted.  
Wildfires 
Although forest fires are natural part of the boreal forest, drought can increase the number and 
intensity of wildfires. Dry land can ignite and spread fire more easily and put people and communities at 
risk. Forest fire smoke can travel great distances and impact community members, especially elders, 
youth, those who work outside, and those who have respiratory issues.  
Dust and respiratory issues 
Dry conditions can lead to an increase in dust, pollen and allergens in the 
air, especially on a windy day. Dusty conditions can lower air quality and 
can impact breathing. Community members that have respiratory 
conditions like asthma, are at greater risk during these times. Dust can also 
cover plants and make it difficult for them to absorb sunlight to survive.  
 
 
Dry and Dusty Land in a changing climate 
Drought-induced damage to trees. 
Drought can create dusty 
conditions that impact your health. 
Evapotranspiration: Drawing 
moisture out of plants and soils. 
Dry soil absorbs water slowly 
DROUGHT: ISSUE 3 OF 5 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Monitor 
Communities should monitor for potential drought 
events. It may be valuable to measure soil moisture and 
water levels and to keep record of any areas with large 
tree die-offs. Seeing changes in these measurements 
could give an early warning of coming drought. Knowing 
how drought conditions have been observed in the past 
can give direction on what areas to monitor. 
Incorporating traditional knowledge of landscape and 
weather can help. Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada 
shares data on drought conditions, soil moisture, and 
other parameters, on a monthly basis.  
Protect natural habitats 
Plants and trees help hold the soil together and prevent 
sediments from entering waterways that are important 
to fish and as drinking water sources. Protecting the 
land and wetlands will reduce impacts from climate 
change especially during periods of drought. 
Prevent human-caused fires 
Fire safety is always important, but as the land gets drier 
fires will more easily ignite and spread and so preventing 
human-caused fires will become even more critical.  
• 
Monitor the fire hazard risk in your area. When fire 
risk is high, communities may want to restrict or ban 
outdoor burning. 
• 
Promote safe fire practices in your community 
(campfire safety, guidelines for burning outdoors 
• 
Promote safe fire practices when on the land (caution 
with potential causes of accidental fires (sparks, cigarette) 
Health, education and outreach 
Drought can mean more breathing problems from dust, smoke, and pollen so it is important that people 
with asthma have the necessary medication and avoid being outdoors when air quality is poor. To 
reduce dust in the community, adding water to dirt and gravel roads and enforcing lower driving speeds 
could help. Provide information to community members about the potential of drought occurring and 
the impact it can have. This might include drought awareness education, water conservation strategies, 
or involving the community in drought-action planning. 
Resources 
Handbook of Drought Indicators and Indices: 
www.droughtmanagement.info/literature/GWP_Handbook_of_Drought_Indicators_and_Indices_2016.pdf 
Drought Ready Communities: A Guide to Community Drought Preparedness 
https://drought.unl.edu/archive/Documents/NDMC/Planning/DRC_Guide.pdf 
The Canadian Wildland Fire Information System 
(https://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/home) can help 
communities monitor their fire hazard risk. 
The Canadian Drought Monitor from Agriculture Canada  
https://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/agriculture-and-the-
environment/drought-watch/canadian-drought-
monitor/?id=1463575104513 
can help communities monitor drought. Image for May 2020. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
With climate change will come more dry spells and drought. When an area gets drier than usual, it can 
push plants and animals beyond their limit of adapting and impact the communities that rely on them.  
How will climate change impact drought? 
In northern Ontario, the summer months are predicted to see only small 
gains in rain, which may not be enough to offset the amount of moisture 
drawn out of plants and soils due to hotter temperatures. However, 
predicting where drought and dry spells might occur and how long they 
could last is difficult. It is thought that North America will likely experience 
more intense and longer lasting dry periods due to climate change. 
How does drought impact harvesting? 
Fishing 
Low water can take away or limit important fish habitat like spawning areas, migration routes, and cold-
water refuges. It can also make it difficult to travel traditional routes by boat. No longer being able to 
travel long-standing traditional routes can impact mental health and well-being. 
Plants 
Extreme droughts can greatly impact important traditional and 
medicinal plants as well as berries. For example, wetland plants like 
wild rice, cedar, cranberries, cloudberries and labrador tea will be 
impacted by changing water levels. In some instances, climate 
change may benefit key berry producing plants or expand the types of 
berries and plants that can be grown  in northern regions. 
Community gardens may also experience plant loss and require 
additional watering during drought periods.  
Shifting habitat, shifting wildlife 
Plants and animals are well adapted for the environments 
that they live in, but droughts can stress these environments 
and make survial more difficult. Drought can dry out soils 
and make it difficult for plants to grow. Vegetation ranges may 
begin to shift in order for plants to survive. As plants shift and 
habitat changes, so will the wildlife that relies on it. 
Community members may need to travel further in order to 
harvest and hunt which increases time, effort and travel costs. 
Gathering wood could also be impacted because dry forest 
conditions can make trees and plants more susceptible to 
disease and insect attacks and can, in extreme cases, cause 
their death. 
What are people noticing? 
Drought and shifting habitats are already affecting communities across the north. People on the James 
and Hudson Bay coasts are reporting that willows are growing more than ever before and communities 
across the north are noticing dryer conditions in the bush, which is leading to fewer berries for 
harvesting. 
Harvesting with More Dry Spells 
Wetland plants like Labrador tea and wild 
rice are sensitive to changing water levels. 
Berry plant ranges are shifting northward.  
More here: http://www.planthardiness.gc.ca/?m=2b 
Evapotranspiration: Drawing 
moisture out of plants and soils. 
DROUGHT: ISSUE 4 OF 5 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Assessing and reducing risk 
The impact of drought on a community will depend on a region’s 
exposure to drought and its ability to react and recover. Knutson et al. 
(1998) outlines a 6-step process to assess and potentially reduce the risk 
of drought events in communities, see the box for a summary. 
Monitor 
Monitoring allows us to gather information about the environment and 
the changes that are occurring. A community-based monitoring approach 
can involve hunters, trappers, gatherers, and other land users in data 
collection and may include the following steps: 
• 
Identify important species in your community (e.g. sources of food, 
has traditional value, are part of the economy) and how drought 
might impact them. 
• 
Use traditional knowledge to learn how drought conditions have been 
observed in the past to create a community baseline. 
• 
Collect data while out on the land and monitor changes (location, 
abundance, health, etc.). 
• 
Protect important habitat in the community. Protect habitat as it 
shifts over time. 
Communities may also consider collaborations with universities, 
governments or other groups to merge traditional knowledge with 
scientific study and/or consider using an online science app. 
Adjusting harvesting practices and 
community initiatives 
Many harvesters are already saying they 
have had to adjust their time and 
methods to access traditional areas. 
Sharing harvested resources within the 
community can help ensure food security 
for those without the resources to 
harvest berries or plants. Communities 
should provide information to 
community members about the potential 
of drought in their area and how drought can impact them. 
Resources 
Knutson et al. (1998). How to reduce drought risk: 
https://drought.unl.edu/archive/Documents/NDMC/Planning/risk.pdf 
Online citizen science apps: https://siku.org/#/about & www.inaturalist.org 
‘How to Reduce Drought Risk’ 
By Knutson et al. (1998) 
 
Step 1: Assemble a group of 
people (community leaders, 
community members, & 
researchers/consultant if 
necessary) to conduct the 
drought impact assessment & 
gather info. 
 
Step 2: Identify consequences of 
drought relevant to your 
community (ex. Impacts on 
traditional food sources etc.) 
 
Step 3: Rank consequences by 
level of priority. 
 
Step 4: Consider the underlying 
causes for the impacts and 
determine if it is possible to 
mitigate those causes. 
 
Step 5/6: Identify & prioritize 
realistic and cost-effective 
actions that can be taken to 
address the issues. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
  
 
Periods of drought can happen in the north and climate change could make them happen more often. 
Monitoring for drought events is one way that communities can be prepared for drought and its impacts. 
How will climate change impact drought? 
Climate change could mean that drought events and dry periods will happen more often than they did in the 
past especially in summer and fall1. Warmer temperatures brought on by climate change will increase 
evaporation from the land and water, leading to drier land and lower water levels. Already, many people in 
First Nation communities in the north say that periods of dry weather are happening more often. 
What are the impacts of drought? 
Drought and dry conditions can impact people, communities, and the land. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
How can drought monitoring help? 
Drought and dry conditions come about slowly. The drying of the land and lower water levels in lakes and 
rivers happen gradually over time. This slow onset means that it is important to monitor to provide an early 
warning system of climate, as well as land and water conditions that can lead to drought. Ideally, early warning 
systems have both a monitoring component and a forecasting component (weather, for example). 
Drought monitoring is most effective if it is paired with a community drought response plan that is triggered 
when drought indicators reach a certain threshold. A drought response plan would outline actions the 
community could take like water conservation or fire restrictions. Monitoring is especially important in a slow- 
onset hazard like drought to reduce impacts. 
What are some ways to create a monitoring program? 
Community-based monitoring 
Knowing how drought conditions have been observed in the past could help communities know what areas to 
monitor for future drought. Traditional Knowledge might also provide traditional indicators for drought in the 
area, like water levels in local lakes or rivers, the loss of certain plants, or dry conditions on the land. 
A community-based monitoring program begins with choosing what to monitor. There isn’t one “right way” to 
monitor for drought. Different drought indicators measure drought in different ways, and which indicators are 
most appropriate to use will vary. Deciding which indicators work best in your area will take time and possibly 
some trial and error. Some things to consider when choosing indicators could include: 
- 
How easy is the indicator to measure? 
- 
Is historical data available for this indicator? 
- 
Is the indicator sensitive enough to detect when drought starts or stops? 
- 
Will the same indicator(s) be used to detect moving into drought AND moving out of drought? 
Communities may choose to measure indicators like rain or snow amounts, temperature, water flow in 
streams, soil moisture, or snowpack. Measuring these indicators over time should allow communities to see 
trends and prepare when a drought is coming. These indicators are sometimes also measured by Environment 
Canada with data available online. 
 
Drought Monitoring  
1Tam, B. Y. et al. CMIP5 drought projections in Canada based on the Standardized Precipitation Evapotranspiration Index. Can. Water Resour. J. 44, 90–107 (2019) 
DROUGHT: ISSUE 5 OF 5 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Drought indicators are sometimes used to create drought indices. The Handbook of Drought Indicators and 
Indices has complied information on drought indicators and indices in use around the world and could be a 
useful resource. The handbook classifies drought indicators by type (meteorological, hydrological, etc.) and 
gives an idea of how easy or difficult each indicator or indice might be to use. 
https://www.droughtmanagement.info/literature/GWP_Handbook_of_Drought_Indicators_and_Indices_2016.pdf 
Drought indicators or drought indices are often used to track drought 
Drought Indicators are the measurements used to see if drought is occurring and describe drought conditions 
Drought Indices use calculations to examine one or more measured indicators as well as modeling to assess 
drought severity and probability to anticipate drought-related impacts 
Examples of Drought Indicators 
Examples of Drought Indices 
- 
Rain or snow amounts 
- 
Temperature 
- 
Water flow in streams 
- 
Soil moisture 
- 
Snowpack 
- 
Standardized Precipitation Index (SPI) - based on precipitation 
- 
Aridity index (AI) -based on precipitation and temperature 
- 
Vegetation Drought Response Index (VegDRI) - based on 
Satellite imagery, precipitation, temperature, available water 
content, land cover, ecoregion) 
 
Online drought monitoring tools 
Your community drought monitoring program can be supplemented with some online tools. Agriculture and 
Agri-Food Canada hosts the Canadian Drought Monitor (CDM) which combines data from federal, provincial, 
and regional sources and looks at a number of drought indicators and indices including temperature and 
precipitation, vegetation indices, stream flow values, and the Palmer Drought Index. Agriculture and Agri-Food 
Canada also shares data on other drought parameters including Satellite Soil Moisture (SSM) levels. CDM and 
SSM are available online at www.agr.gc.ca/eng/agriculture-and-climate/drought-watch/ . 
 
 
 
Online tools for surface water are also available. Real-time water levels for a number of stations can be found 
at EC’s Water Office https://wateroffice.ec.gc.ca/google_map/google_map_e.html?map_type=real_time. The 
Surface Water Monitoring Centre also provides information on low water levels and average precipitation for 
Ontario. Data is gathered from a number of stream gauge stations maintained throughout the province and 
can be found online at www.ontario.ca/page/surface-water-monitoring-centre#. 
Real-Time Graph for WINISK 
RIVER BELOW ASHEWEIG 
RIVER TRIBUTARY (04DC001) 
Ontario Surface Water 
Monitoring August, 2018 
Water Office clickable 
water station map 
 
Canadian 
Drought 
Monitor map, 
Aug 31, 2018 
Satellite Soil 
Moisture Map, 
May 25, 2020 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Hudson Bay Lowlands is the largest peatland in North 
America 
Permafrost in Ontario with bands that represent the 
percentage of land that has permafrost  
Positive feedback loop of warming, thawing, 
decomposing and release of greenhouse gases 
The Hudson Bay Lowlands is the largest peatland         
in North America 
 
The far north of Ontario has a unique and beautiful landscape. It 
is home to the Hudson Bay Lowlands, the largest peatland in 
North America, and boasts some of the southern-most lowland 
permafrost in the northern hemisphere. Climate warming is 
happening everywhere, but temperatures in the north are rising 
at twice the rate of other areas. What does this mean for 
Ontario’s peatlands and permafrost?  
What are peatlands? 
Peatlands are wetlands where the soil is made almost entirely 
from dead and decaying plants. In these constantly wet areas, 
decomposition happens slowly and dead plants accumulate, 
storing a lot of carbon. Peatlands also play an important role in 
regulating water flow (since they retain water like a sponge), and 
water filtration (by trapping pollutants and storing materials).  
What is permafrost? 
Permafrost is ground that stays frozen for two years or more. Due 
to the cooling effect of Hudson Bay, permafrost in Ontario 
extends further south than in other areas of Canada. In the 
Hudson Bay Lowlands, permafrost contains peat and has stored 
carbon for thousands of years. 
How will climate change impact peatlands and permafrost?  
The north and its peatlands are predicted to warm which will 
cause decomposition to speed up.  Climate change will be 
made worst by the fact that once you start to warm the 
peatlands, a positive feedback loop begins. Warming 
temperatures can cause the dead vegetation that makes up 
the peatland to decompose, releasing the stored carbon as 
greenhouse gases (carbon dioxide and methane) which 
causes more warming, which leads to more decomposition, 
and so on. Any permafrost within the peatland that thaws will 
increase this effect. A warming world means thawing 
permafrost which can affect the stability of the land. For 
instance, the land surface may sink, dry areas may become 
wet, bank erosion can accelerate, and slumping can occur.   
All of this affects plants and animals, complicates overland travel, and threatens infrastructure. 
What have people noticed? 
Changes in the land are already being noticed by people across the north. In places like Peawanuk and Fort 
Severn, thawing permafrost is said to be changing the landscape as palsas disappear and riverbanks erode. 
Along the coast of James Bay, people say the wetlands are now growing more shrubs, like willows. In 
communities across the northwest of Ontario, people say swamps and muskeg are drying up. 
Permafrost in Ontario  
Peatlands and Permafrost in a Changing Climate 
Sandy Lake 
Fort Severn 
Peawanuck 
Attawapiskat 
Ogoki 
Webequie 
Landsdowne House 
Kasabonica 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 1 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Identify and Protect Important Areas 
Peatlands and the underlying permafrost are vulnerable to disturbance like 
ATV travel, deforestation, pollution and changes in water level. Removing 
shade-providing trees and disturbing insulating mosses can lead to 
permafrost loss and damage the ecosystem for years. Peatlands that are well 
connected to aquatic systems, those that house important wildlife or plants, 
or peatlands that may be especially sensitive to climate change are examples 
of areas that should be identified and offered extra protection. Protection 
may mean limiting logging, industrial activities, road development, and 
restricting ATV travel to roads and well used trails. Increasing public awareness 
of the significance of peatlands is also an important step in protecting these 
sensitive ecosystems. 
Monitor 
Monitor the land for signs of changes. In 
peatlands, features such as height of the water 
table, dryness, and which plants, animals or 
insects are found there can be important in 
assessing the health of these systems.  
Changes in the landscape can indicate 
permafrost loss. Palsas (frost heaves with an 
underlying ice lens) may collapse and leave an 
area wetter. Along slopes and hillsides, thawing 
permafrost can lead to landslides and thaw 
slumps. On flatter areas, the ground may 
become uneven and wetter. Roads can become 
wavy and houses can shift and crack when the 
permafrost underneath them thaws. 
Fire and Contaminant Prevention 
Taking extra precautions to prevent burning of peatlands is an important mitigation effort. Peatlands are very 
sensitive ecosystems, and many plants found in peatlands can’t survive fires. Burning decreases the cover of 
mosses and affects the ability of the peatland to recover, which leaves underlying permafrost at risk of faster 
thawing. 
Many species found in peatlands are sensitive to contamination and pollutants. Prevent contaminants from 
entering peatlands ecosystem by keeping garbage and other waste away from these areas.   
Proper Engineering 
Living and building on permafrost can be challenging. Properly engineering buildings and roads can prevent the 
thaw of permafrost and keep infrastructure from being damaged. 
 
Peatland and the underlying permafrost are important to the well being of plants, animals and people. These 
sensitive areas are under threat of climate change and monitoring and protection are necessary. 
Possible indications of permafrost loss. 
Sphagnum mosses are a common 
feature of healthy peatlands in 
northern areas. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Forests are home to an abundance of plants, animals and insects, providing traditional food, medicine, and 
resources like black spruce for canoes, roots, moss, and firewood. Forests are also an important part of the 
economy in many regions. How will climate change impact the forests of northern Ontario? And what effects 
are people already seeing? 
Drier forests 
Even though climate change will likely bring more rain 
to Ontario, forests are predicted to become drier under 
future conditions. This is because hotter temperatures 
are also predicted. Heat draws moisture out of plants 
and soils, an effect called evapotranspiration. The 
hotter it is, the more the plants and soil will dry. 
Changing climate is also predicted to bring more days of 
heavy rain. When a lot of rain falls in a short period of 
time, the land can’t absorb it all, and much runs off into 
lakes, rivers, and wetlands. One study of Canadian 
forests suggests that for every 1°C of warming that 
occurs, as much as 15% more precipitation is needed to 
maintain the moisture levels in forest fire fuels (dead 
leaves, sticks etc.)1. According to the Canadian Climate 
Atlas, Fort Hope, for example, can expect average 
summer temperatures to rise by about 2°C by the 
2050s, while summer rain is only predicted to rise by 
3%. Not only do drier forest conditions increase the risk of wildfire, but drought stress can also make trees and 
plants more susceptible to disease and insect attacks and can in extreme cases cause their death.  
Range Shifts 
Plants and animals are well adapted 
for the environments that they live 
in. But as climate changes, the areas 
where species can live (their habitat 
range) is also going to change. Many 
species, like the white spruce, are 
predicted to shift north because the 
new conditions in the south will 
mean that they simply won’t survive 
there anymore. This northward shift 
in the range of plants could lead to a 
forest that looks quite different to 
the boreal forest in northern Ontario 
of today with less spruce, pine and fir 
and more oaks, ash, and maples.   
 
 
Forests of northern Ontario and climate change  
Core range (species is abundant) and range (species is found) of white spruce and 
red maple in the recent past (1970-2000) and projected to the year 2050. 
Maps from www.planthardiness.gc.ca  
Current 
2050 
Current 
2050 
1Flannigan, M. D. et al. Fuel moisture sensitivity to temperature and precipitation: climate change implications. Clim. Change 134, 59–71 (2016). 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 2 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Change in timing of events  
Many biological processes in both plants and animals are driven by environmental cues. These cues, like 
temperature, amount of daylight, and precipitation, influence the timing of events like bud burst and leaf out, 
flowering, migration, breaking hibernation, and breeding. But a changing climate may alter some of these cues, 
like temperature and precipitation, and events could occur at different times than they have in the past. This 
could mean that species won’t emerge at the same time as their food sources, or that conditions won’t be 
right at breeding time. Changes like these can have big impacts on the health and survival of forest species.  
Changes in tree disease and insect pests 
The relationship between tree species and the diseases and insects that prey on them is complex. Changing 
climate will very likely have an impact on these interactions, but exactly how is hard to predict. Most 
important tree diseases in Ontario, like root rot, are predicted to increase with climate change2.  Warmer 
winter temperatures may allow the survival of pathogens, like stem canker fungi, and forest pests that are 
usually killed by the cold. Changing conditions could also mean new insects and diseases entering northern 
forests from the south.  
Economic Impacts 
Many communities in northern Ontario rely on the forestry industry but shifting habitat ranges may mean that 
species currently harvested for profit won’t grow in the same areas that they do now. This could mean job and 
economic losses for some communities. On the other hand, warm weather could be a boost for the tourism 
industry with more opportunities for outdoor 
recreation.   
What are people noticing? 
Climate change is already affecting the forests of the 
north. Plants like Canada thistle are being seen in new 
areas. People on the James and Hudson Bay coasts are 
reporting that willows are growing more than ever 
before. And people in First Nation communities across 
the province are noticing dryer conditions in the bush, 
which is leading to fewer berries for harvesting.  
Forests are changing in northern Ontario and that will impact the plants and animals that live there and the 
people that rely on the land. Read more  
About forests: http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/276928.pdf 
About pollinators: https://www.neefusa.org/nature/plants-and-animals/buzz-changing-climate 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982212000103#bib8 
About caribou https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2015/09/arctic-mosquitoes-and-the-chaos-of-climate-
change/405322/ 
https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/full/10.1098/rspb.2015.1549 
 
Plants and insects have an important 
relationship. Flowers provide nectar 
to insects and while gathering the 
nectar, pollen sticks to insect bodies 
and gets transferred from one flower 
to another. As warmer springs push 
flowering earlier, the insects that 
pollinate them will need to keep up.  
The caribou breeding cycle is timed by 
the sun and occurs steadily at the 
same time each year before the 
spring thaw. But as the north warms 
and ponds are thawing earlier, pests 
like mosquitos can emerge at the 
same time as the calves are born, 
stressing both mothers and calves.  
2Colombo, S. J. Ontario’s forests and forestry in a changing climate. Climate Change Research Report CCRR-12. (2008).
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
The boreal forests of the north are an important and iconic part of our landscape. These forests are 
home to thousands of species of plants, animals and insects, and provide food, medicines, and materials 
for the people of the region. Climate change will have an impact on forest ecosystems, but there are 
actions we can take to help protect these places and the resources we rely on. 
Identify Important Species and Important Areas 
When deciding where adaptation efforts should go, 
communities may want to look at what species are most 
important to them and which might be the most at risk. 
Species might be considered important if they are a source 
of food, have traditional value or are part of the economy. 
At risk species could be ones that are already struggling, or 
those that are least able to withstand changing conditions. 
Important forest areas, like breeding grounds, important 
species habitat, economic areas, or traditional grounds, 
could be good places to create habitat protection plans or to update any measures that already exist. If 
forest fire is a threat to important areas, consider a FireSmart plan www.firesmartcanada.ca. 
Monitor 
Monitoring allows us to gather information about the environment 
and the changes that are occurring. Monitoring activities can take 
many forms and can be directed at any aspect of the environment. It 
can be done by environmental stewards, researchers, and 
community members. Community-based monitoring is when a 
community decides what to monitor and implements a monitoring 
program with or without a researcher as a partner. When 
community members gather information on their own it is 
sometimes termed “citizen science”. Citizen science is a growing 
field thanks in part to the availability of apps and websites that make 
it easy to collect and share data. Citizen science is also a good way to engage people in environmental 
issues and encourage good stewardship. iNaturalist.ca is a good site that people in your community can 
use to share information as well as see what others 
have observed. 
Protect and Improve Habitat 
Healthy forests help support all species. Encourage 
good stewardship of forest areas and make sure 
that species have the habitat they need to live and 
thrive. Installing bird houses and bat boxes, or 
planting milkweed for monarch butterflies are 
common examples of how habitat can be improved 
for some species.  
Forest area near Eabametoong First Nation 
These bat boxes were assembled by Mushkegowuk youth at 
Camp Chikepak to be brought back and used in their community 
Protecting our forests – actions for climate change 
Examples of what to monitor: 
• 
species at risk 
• 
leaf out/flowering times 
• 
species abundance 
• 
frog/bird songs 
• 
tree diseases and insect 
outbreaks 
• 
new/invasive species 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 3 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Keep Forests Connected 
As climate change alters the landscape, some species will 
have to move to new areas where the habitat meets 
their needs. A fragmented landscape (where patches of 
forest are disconnected from each other) makes it 
difficult for species to move into new places. Keeping 
forests continuous or maintaining corridors between 
forest landscapes can help species that need to move to 
new areas. Make land use planning decisions that keep 
forests connected. Since forests can span large areas and 
cross regional boundaries, decisions to keep them 
protected and connected may require cooperation 
between communities, industries, and governments.  
Prevent Invasive Species 
Climate change is allowing forest pests to live in areas 
that they couldn’t live in before. The first line of defense 
against invasive species is always prevention. People can 
take actions to prevent invasive species like not moving 
firewood (which could contain insect hitchhikers) from 
one area to another or planting native plants instead of 
the plants that are sold in greenhouses. Communities can 
also monitor for potential invaders in their area and have 
a control plan in place in case they arrive. 
Assisted Migration 
Climate change is happening quickly, so quickly in fact that not all species will be able to keep up. Trees 
may be especially vulnerable to rapid change since they are long-lived and their seeds land and 
germinate quite close to the parent tree. Programs where humans help species move to new areas in 
response to climate change is called ‘assisted migration’. Assisted migration could mean: moving a 
species within its current range (like planting tree seedlings in the northern end of their range), moving a 
species to an area just outside its current range, or moving a species far outside its current range. 
The movement of any species into a new location is not without risks. Species could become invasive or introduce 
pests and diseases. All risks need to be weighed carefully before using assisted migration.  
Forest are changing! Let’s help them out: identify, monitor and protect important species and places, 
keep forests connected, prevent invasive species and assist vulnerable plants with assisted migration. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
What are invasive species? 
An invasive species is a plant, insect, or animal that is not native to a particular area (in other words, it hasn’t 
lived there in the past). Invasive species have the potential to change the natural balance of an area.  
How do invasive species get to new areas? 
All species move around; animals and insects walk, fly or swim 
in search of suitable habitats; plant species expand their range 
by releasing seeds that float in the wind or attach to animals. 
This sort of movement tends to happen slowly over time and 
species will only establish themselves in areas of suitable 
habitat (temperature, moisture, nutrients, etc.). As the north 
becomes warmer due to climate change, the area where new 
species can survive is expanding. In addition, people are 
moving plants, animals and insects, knowingly or unknowingly, 
much farther and faster than natural movements.  
Are invasive species always a concern? 
Not every new species that enters an area is going to have the same impact on the local environment. Some 
may cause little disruption, while others will have big impacts. Some invasive species are concerning because 
they drive out the native species in the region; others because they can impact local industries, like forestry. 
Some invasive species are concerning because they can impact human health. 
How is climate change impacting invasive species?                                    
As temperatures rise, plants and animals can move farther north; they may 
even be pushed out of more southern parts of their habitat ranges as 
temperatures there become too hot. Warmer winters mean that species who 
could not survive winters in the north before may be able to survive them now 
and establish populations. Fewer frost days in spring and fall are increasing the 
growing season and allowing plants to thrive in new areas.  
 
 
Mountain Pine Beetle; 
native to western North 
America but has been 
expanding its range. 
These insects bore into 
trees and, in large 
numbers, can lead to 
massive tree loss. 
 
Zebra Mussels, native to 
Russia, introduced 
through ship ballast 
water; they can create 
colonies so large that 
they take over fish 
spawning areas and 
beaches and can clog 
water intakes. 
 
 
Asian Longhorned Tick, 
native to Asia, arrived in 
the US through animal 
importation; it is 
predicted to be able to 
survive as far north as 
Ottawa and beyond with 
a changing climate. 
 
Giant Hogweed; native 
to Eurasia, introduced as 
a garden plant; has sap 
that can cause burns. It 
can be 2-5.5 m tall and 
resembles smaller native 
species like Angelica and 
Cow Parsnip. 
People spread invasive species by: 
• 
Moving boats and motors between 
lakes without cleaning them 
• 
Releasing bait fish into local 
waterways 
• 
Moving wood that could be carrying 
forest pests 
• 
Planting non-native species 
• 
Releasing unwanted pets 
• 
Carrying them on your clothes, shoes, 
or wheels 
Climate Change and Invasive Species 
What new species are 
people seeing in the north? 
• 
Turkey vultures 
• 
Pelicans 
• 
Cormorants 
• 
Bass 
• 
Blacklegged (deer) ticks 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 4 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Prevention is key 
People can do their part to prevent the spread of invasive species by:  
• 
Cleaning boats and gear before bringing them from one waterway to another 
• 
Disposing of baitfish on land 
• 
Using local wood 
• 
Planting native plants in gardens 
• 
Cleaning mud and seeds off shoes and tires  
Public education campaigns can help raise awareness of how our actions can contribute to the spread of 
invasive species and what can be done to prevent it. Ways to spread information can include signage at boat 
launches and other vulnerable locations, posters and brochures in public areas, education in schools, and radio 
and television campaigns.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monitor 
Know what is new to your area and what has the 
potential to come into your area. Some invasive species 
are monitored by provincial, federal, or community 
programs, but monitoring for new species is really a 
group effort. Within these programs and outside of 
them, citizen science (when area residents record or 
report environmental information) is an important 
component. 
Control measures 
When a new species causes or has the potential to cause major damage or disruption to the ecosystem, control 
measures may be needed. Control measures can be simple (like pulling and disposing of invasive plants found 
growing on your property) or extensive (like the sea lamprey protocol in the Great Lakes basin). How your 
community might deal with an invasive species can be discussed and decided before a species enters the area. 
That way, if a destructive invasive species does enter the region, response can be quick and, hopefully, 
effective. 
Want to know more? 
Check out http://www.invadingspecies.com/ and https://www.invasivespeciescentre.ca/ 
Report invasive species in your area: 
• 
Invading Species Hotline 
1-800-563-7711 www.invadingspecies.com 
• 
Early Detection and Distribution Mapping 
System for Ontario (EDDMapS) 
www.eddmaps.org/ontario or as an app 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
Aquatic environments like lakes, rivers, and wetlands, are important for animals and humans alike. The impact 
of climate change on these systems is already being noticed in the north, a trend that will likely continue. 
Knowing how climate influences these systems can be a helpful step in determining adaptation approaches 
moving forward. 
The impacts of higher temperature 
Climate change is expected to 
bring higher temperatures in 
all seasons, with northern 
areas often seeing the biggest 
increases. As the air warms, 
so does the water. As such, 
we can expect to see 
increases in water 
temperature in lakes, rivers, 
and wetlands across the 
north. 
 
In aquatic systems, water temperature is a major determinant of habitat 
suitability (where plants and animals can live). Fish are a good example of 
this. Being cold-blooded (meaning their body is the same temperature as 
their environment), fish are very dependant on the temperature of the 
water around them and will seek out areas with the right water 
temperature. This means that where fish species can live and thrive is 
likely to change as the climate warms. This is especially an issue for 
coldwater species, like trout, that may find it difficult to find cold water. 
Water temperature can also impact ecological processes like nutrient 
cycling (how elements like carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen move through the 
environment). Warmer temperatures increase how quickly algae and 
aquatic plants grow and as they go 
through their life cycle they increase the 
cycling of nutrients. In some lakes, this 
sort of increase could lead to 
eutrophication (an increase of nutrients 
in a lake) which can lead to algal blooms 
When these algae decompose under the ice in winter, oxygen is used up and 
lead to fish kill in winter.   
Warmer conditions may also open the door to invasive species who can take advantage of this new 
environment. For example, plants like Eurasian milfoil will grow quickly and shade other plants preventing 
them from growing.  
 
Winter 
Spring 
Fall 
Summer 
Projected temperatures increase (in °C) for 2050 compared to the average for 1986-2005 
assuming little to no reduction in carbon emissions (RCP 8.5, 75th percentile). From 
http://climate-scenarios.canada.ca/?page=download-cmip5 
Chart of relative water temperature 
preferences for fish found in Ontario 
In Hot Water –  
How climate change impacts our aquatic environments 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 5 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
The impacts of water level changes 
Water levels in lakes, rivers, and wetlands are influenced by factors like 
precipitation, inflow, and evaporation, all of which can be impacted by climate 
change. Warmer air is an important factor increasing the rate of evaporation. 
As lakes, rivers, and wetlands lose water to the atmosphere, their water levels 
can decrease. How much precipitation falls, when it falls, the intensity of the 
event, and whether the precipitation comes as rain or snow, all impact water 
levels as well. In general, Ontario is predicted to get wetter but exactly how 
and where that precipitation will fall is harder to predict. Current research 
suggests that intense rain falls could become more frequent. Winter snow 
depth is also predicted to decrease, which can impact water levels even in 
subsequent seasons. Water level can have a big impact on aquatic systems, 
influencing water temperature, light penetration, contaminant levels, and 
access to habitat for animals. 
The impacts of less ice 
Climate change is already leading to shorter ice-on seasons in the north. For lakes, decreased periods of ice and 
longer periods of open water mean an increase in evaporation, affecting water levels. Lake ice cover also 
serves to protect shorelines from erosion in shoulder periods (late fall and early spring) when strong winds can 
increase wave action. However, shorter ice cover can also have positive effects on lake and river systems by 
allowing more oxygen into the water in shoulder seasons and reducing the chance of winterkill of fish.  
The impacts of wind 
Wind is an important factor in lake ecosystems. Increases in wind have the 
potential to increase evaporation, speed ice-out, deepen thermocline (the 
transition between the hot water layer at the top and the cold water layer near 
the bottom of lakes in summer), and increase sediment deposition. In summer, 
near surface wind speeds are predicted to decrease by up to 10% across most of 
Ontario while increasing by up to 10% the rest of the year. 
Higher temperatures are impacting aquatic systems and the animals and plants that live there.                               
Read more: A Summary of the Effects of Climate Change on Ontario’s Aquatic Ecosystems, MNRF-CCRR11 
https://files.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/aquatics-climate/stdprod_088243.pdf 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
Aquatic systems, like lakes, rivers and wetlands, are vital resources. Not only are these rich environments home 
to many important species, they also provide freshwater, food, and other resources. Changes in climate are 
already making a mark of these ecosystems, with more change predicted to come. But there are actions we can 
take to help protect these important places and, hopefully, lessen the impact of climate related changes. 
Monitoring 
Monitoring allows us to gather information about the environment and the changes that are occurring. 
Monitoring activities can take many forms and be driven by community needs (community-based monitoring) 
with the work being done by various groups of people including environmental stewards, community 
members, citizen scientists and researchers. In aquatic systems, monitoring could include: 
Water quality parameters 
There is a lot that water can tell us about an aquatic system. Some qualities, 
like temperature, can be measured quite easily on site with a simple 
thermometer. Other properties, like pH, oxygen levels, and conductivity, can 
be measured on site with the help of a scientific instrument like a 
multiprobe. Other parameters, like amounts of metals, nutrients, and other 
components can be determined from water samples sent to qualified labs. 
 
Systems trends 
Water levels, freeze-up and break-up dates, and migration or spawning 
times are all examples of trends in aquatic systems that are likely to be 
impacted by climate change. Communities can decide what trends to 
monitor based on their specific interests and needs.  
 
Species monitoring 
There are many reasons you may want to monitor species in aquatic 
environments, and many different kinds of species that may be of interest. 
You may want to monitor because of an impact, like mining, or a concern 
about overfishing, or simply to get an idea of the current status of species.  
Monitoring might be aimed at fish, benthic invertebrates (bugs in the 
sediments), species at risk, or invasive species. Communities can decide 
what species to monitor based on their specific interests and concerns. 
 
Identify Important Areas 
Areas that are ecologically important or vulnerable to change are a good 
place to use your resources.  These might include: wetlands, spawning 
grounds, cold water refuges for fish, migration routes, or habitat for 
vulnerable species. Plans of action for these areas might include restoration, 
enhancement, protection, or increased monitoring.   
These probes can be used to measure 
water parameters like pH, 
oxygenation, and conductivity. 
 
 
Manitoulin Streams Improvement 
Association is a grass-routes 
organization dedicated to the 
rehabilitation of important fish 
habitat that has been damaged 
due to human activity. Learn more 
about their work at 
www.manitoulinstreams.com 
 
Protecting our Water: 
Adaptations for aquatic ecosystems 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 6 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Improve System Health 
A system that is already stressed or degraded may be more vulnerable 
to the impacts of climate change. It is important to protect the land as 
well as the water habitats. This, in turn, will protect water quality and 
the plants and animals that live there. Improve or rehabilitate habitats 
that have been damaged and decrease non-climate stressors on aquatic 
systems such as: pollution, deforestation, water extractions, over 
harvesting, and wetland destruction. Proper storm water drainage can 
help improve the quality of water entering aquatic systems. Adequately sized culverts, drainage ditches, and 
natural buffers help limit pollutants, nutrients, and sediments entering aquatic systems from surface water 
runoff. 
Establish or increase vegetation in riparian zones 
Riparian zones are the areas along the banks of waterbodies. The 
health of the water system greatly depends on this area. A well 
vegetated riparian zone with native trees, shrubs and grasses can 
greatly benefit aquatic environments by cooling water, limiting 
erosion, and providing important nutrients to the aquatic 
ecosystem in the form of leaves. Riparian areas that help protect 
a waterway from nearby land uses is sometimes called a buffer 
zone. Buffer zones help waterways by filtering surface runoff 
water and capturing sediment, nutrients, and pollutants.  
 
Education and Outreach  
Engage the community on water-related 
issues. Inform them of the challenges facing 
aquatic systems and encourage good 
stewardship. This is especially important for 
youth. 
 
 
Our lakes, rivers and wetlands are facing important challenges. Help them by protecting them and the land 
around them, monitoring them and advocating for them. 
Youth learning about Aquatic environments in Fort Severn and Attawapiskat  
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Many fish species that are harvested across the north need cool or cold water to live and thrive. What does a 
warming climate mean for these fish? And how can people prepare? 
Why is water temperature important to fish? 
Water temperature is important to fish because they are cold-
blooded animals, meaning their body temperature depends on 
the temperature of the water surrounding them.  Temperature 
influences many of their biological processes, like spawning and 
growth. Exactly what water temperature a fish prefers varies 
from species to species but, in general, fish in this region are 
categorized as either warm-water fish, cool-water fish, or cold-
water fish.  
What does climate change mean for cold-water fish?  
Climate change is predicted to bring warmer temperatures 
across Ontario.  This means that there will likely be fewer places 
where cold-water fish (like brook trout, cisco, and lake whitefish) 
can live, and they will be found less in the south as they thrive 
more in the north where cold water will remain. Cool-water fish 
(like walleye and northern pike) will be affected in the same way.  
Warm-water fish (like smallmouth bass and rock bass) on the 
other hand, will likely be able to live in more Ontario lakes than 
they do now, and will be able to survive further north than they 
have before. 
 
The maps show how the habitat range of 
walleye is predicted to shift as climate 
changes. These cool-water fish will survive 
better further north as water temperatures 
rise in the areas where they were found in 
the past.  
What have people noticed? In First Nation communities across northern Ontario, people are already 
noticing warmer water in lakes and rivers. In northeastern Ontario, many communities say they’ve seen more 
bass, with bass being reported as far north as the James Bay coast. 
 
 
*Maps modified from: Van Zuiden, T.M., et al. (2016). Projected impacts of climate change on three freshwater fishes and 
potential novel competitive interactions. Diversity and Distributions, 22(5), 603-614 
Walleye in 2050 
Most likely 
found here 
Mostly found 
in these areas 
Walleye 1957-2012  
Highly 
unlikely  
Very 
likely  
Warming Water and Cold-Water Fish 
Data from MNRF CCRR-17               
Images from Guide to eating Ontario fish 
SHIFTING ECOSYSTEMS: ISSUE 7 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Identify and protect cold 
water refuges 
When temperatures get too 
hot, cool-water fish and 
cold-water fish will seek out 
cooler water. In lakes, this 
can mean going deeper. In 
streams, it can mean 
finding spots called cold 
water refuges. Cold water 
refuges can occur in shaded 
or deeper spots, or where 
cooler water is coming into the main channel through smaller streams or groundwater sources. Looking at 
maps or traveling the land can be useful for scouting areas where cold water refuges may be located. Local 
traditional knowledge might also give insight about where cooler water can be found. High tech methods, like 
remote sensing (using satellite, aerial, or thermal images to get information about the land) could also be used.  
Once cold-water refuges are identified, they should be protected. Avoid taking water out of these systems, 
keep the trees and other vegetation that provide shade, limit development, and make sure tributaries and 
groundwater sources aren’t blocked from entering the main channel. It’s also important to keep nutrients, like 
those that come from fertilizer, septic systems, and household detergents, out of deep water lakes. These 
nutrients promote the growth of plants like algae that use up lake oxygen when they decompose, making less 
oxygen available for fish especially in winter. Some in-stream structures, like weirs, deflectors, and pools, may 
also be able to offer some temperature-related benefits to a stream or river. 
Create or improve riparian areas  
Shoreline vegetation (called riparian 
vegetation) provides shade allowing for 
cooler water. Riparian vegetation can be 
especially effective on smaller streams, 
like tributaries and side channels, because 
shading can cover a larger proportion of 
the water. The plants and trees of riparian 
areas should be protected. If there are 
few trees, consider planting some. 
Protect migration routes 
Whether it’s for finding a cold water refuge, for spawning, or for moving northward as habitats change, fish 
have to be able to get from one spot to another. Protect fish migration routes and the waterways that connect 
lakes and rivers. Low water in rivers, streams, and creeks can also make it harder for fish to move between and 
within river systems. Avoid taking water out of these systems. In some cases, water control structures, like 
dams, could be useful in controlling water levels but fish ladders must be provided to allow fish movement. 
Cool and cold water fish will be challenged by the increasing temperatures predicted with climate change. Help 
them by protecting their habitat especially cold water refuges, riparian areas, and migration routes. 
Read more https://files.ontario.ca/environment-and-energy/aquatics-climate/stdprod_088243.pdf 
Areas of differing temperatures within a stream. I with cooler water shown as a darker colour. 
Graphic modified from Kurylyk, B.L. et al. (2014). Preserving, augmenting, and creating cold-water 
thermal refugia in rivers: concepts derived from research on the Miramichi River, New Brunswick 
(Canada). Ecohydrology, 8(6), 1095-1108. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
After the chill of winter, many people look forward to the arrival of spring. But snowmelt and spring rain can 
cause troublesome flooding in some communities. In some areas, climate change may worsen localized flooding 
in winter and spring.  
What is localized flooding? 
Localized flooding refers to flooding in a particular area that happens 
because of a specific event, like snow melt or heavy rain. Often, this 
sort of flooding occurs because the infrastructure that is supposed to 
move water away from the community (like ditches) gets 
overwhelmed and water stays in the community, pooling in low-lying 
areas. Localized flooding can cause damage to buildings (through 
flooded basements or sewer backups), roads (causing washouts), and 
other infrastructure. Any low-lying area in a community is at risk of 
localized flooding.  
Why does localized flooding happen in spring? 
As temperatures warm, melting snow can mean a lot of water on the 
landscape. If the ground or local waterways are still frozen, this can 
mean that there is nowhere for that water to go and, instead of 
draining away, it pools, causing flooding. This can be a bigger problem 
if snow melts very quickly. Spring rains can also cause localized 
flooding because the rain can’t seep into the frozen ground and stays 
on the surface. The same problem can happen when rain events 
happen in the winter. 
What have people noticed?  
Already, many people feel that spring is warmer than it used to be, and that rain arrives earlier. The weather 
station in Kitchenuhmaykoosib Inninuwug (Big Trout Lake) has also recorded warmer spring and winter 
temperatures. People in the north also speak of experiencing more rain in the winter than they used to. 
Will localized flooding change because of climate change? 
Climate change is expected to bring warmer winter temperatures and more snowfall meaning that there will be 
thinner layer of dense snow on the ground (that holds more water). This can lead to faster surge of melt in 
spring. More rain is also expected in winter and spring which can increase the chance of localized flooding.  
 
 
 
The runoff from spring snow melt pools 
around homes in Fort Hope. 
This road in Northern Ontario floods every 
spring, leading to closure. Photo from 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/sudbury/h
wy-537-mto-rehabilitation-1.4573211 
Northern Ontario will see an increase in winter 
temperature (°C) and precipitation (%) as well 
as a decrease in snow on the ground (%) by 
the 2050s compared to the average from 
1986-2015 (CMIP5, RCP8.5, 75th percentile).  
http://climate-
scenarios.canada.ca/?page=download-cmip5 
When the Snow Melts:  
Preparing for Localized Flooding 
Temperature (°C) 
Precipitation (%)
Snow on the ground 
FLOODING: ISSUE 1 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Improve community drainage 
Flooded buildings and roads, as well as pools of standing water are all 
indications that a community drainage system isn’t working as well as 
it should. Make sure ditches and culverts are clear from blockages and 
are big enough to handle the amount of water that comes with spring 
melt. Drainage systems should follow the natural slope of the land, so 
gravity can help take the water away from buildings and roads. A good 
drainage plan should also include water storage areas, like wetlands.  
Drain water away from buildings 
Keep water from making its way into homes and buildings by sloping 
the ground around a foundation so water flows away. If the ground 
around a home or building is level, consider trenching or grading the 
property to manage melt water and rain. Homes and community 
buildings can also have their own drainage systems which can include 
weeping tile, a sump pump, and eavestrough with drain pipes, all to 
promote drainage away from the house. 
Manage snow  
When clearing snow from driveways and parking lots, keep snow melt 
in mind. Make sure snow is piled away from buildings, preferably in an 
area where melt water can drain away safely. In some cases, this may 
mean moving the snow to another location.  Snow can also be removed 
from roadside ditches before the spring melt begins. This allows the 
ditches to more effectively carry water away from the community, 
promoting drainage and, hopefully, reducing flooding.  
Wetlands and greenspace 
Natural areas in communities can help absorb the water from spring 
rain and snowmelt. Surfaces like packed gravel, pavement, and 
concrete don’t allow water to absorb; water that hits those surfaces 
either pools on top or runs off following the slope of the land. Natural 
areas on the other hand, like lawns, parks, or forest, absorb water and 
keep it from causing flooding. Wetlands can be especially good at this 
and can provide natural flood mitigation by storing the water from 
rain and melt events and releasing it slowly.  
 
Climate change will likely continue to bring warmer springs with fast snowmelt and more rain on frozen ground. 
Communities need to prepare by sloping the ground away from buildings, making sure drainage systems work 
well, managing snow and preserving natural areas like wetlands. 
 
Want to know more? 
The Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative can be a good resource www.scc.ca/en/nisi 
Damaged or blocked culverts and ditches 
can’t carry water away like they should. 
Sloping the ground around houses helps water 
drains away from the foundation into the ditch. 
Wetlands act as natural sponges that trap and 
slowly release water, helping prevent flooding. 
Taking snow out of ditches allows water to flow 
away in spring Photo from www.plowsite.com 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
What is an ice jam and how does it cause flooding? 
Ice jams are caused when pieces of river 
ice that are moving downstream with the 
current build up against an obstruction, 
like a more solid sheet of ice. That ice 
builds up then grows or thickens enough to 
slow the flow of water. As a result, water 
levels upstream of the jam increase.  
These events, which can occur during 
freeze up, break up, or mid-winter thaws, 
can lead to major flooding, either through 
the rise of water upstream of the jam, or 
from the surge of water when the jam lets 
go. Ice jam floods can be particularity 
dangerous since water levels can rise 
quickly and large pieces of ice can cause 
additional damage. 
How will climate change impact ice 
jam flooding? 
The formation of an ice jam depends on a 
number of factors, including the thickness 
of the ice, the flow of the water, and the 
shape of the river channel. Because these 
factors are site-specific, it’s difficult to 
make a single statement about how the 
frequency of ice jams will change with 
climate. Scientists do know that climate 
factors, such as temperature, amount of 
precipitation, and type of precipitation 
(whether it falls as rain or snow) are a big 
influence on ice break up and jam formation.  
The impact of climate change on ice jam 
formation will likely vary depending on 
where you are, and from season to season. For example, warmer regions might have thinner ice and more mid-
winter break ups. In more northern areas, temperatures and ice thickness might allow for only small mid-
winter thaws, but these small thaws could cause broken ice to be swept downstream against patches of thicker 
ice which can then freeze together, thickening the ice  increase the risk of jams in the spring. This is especially 
true of the large rivers that begin in the south and drain into Hudson and James Bay. 
Image from https://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/science/winter-
flooding-risk-in-canada-expected-to-increase-as-climate-
warms/article38078061/ 
Ice Jams: How will they change?  
And how can we prepare? 
FLOODING: ISSUE 2 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Monitor 
Monitor river conditions, especially during break up. This could be particularly important for rivers that have 
had ice jams in the past. Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) could be an important component for 
determining if ice jams have happened in the area and where they might have occurred.  
Land use planning 
Knowledge of flood plains and past high-water levels can help identify areas of communities that may be 
vulnerable to flooding. These areas should be avoided when new development is considered. In some cases, 
communities may want to consider relocating structures built in areas prone to flooding.  
It should be noted that ice jam flooding can result in even higher water levels than other open-water flooding 
events. Knowledge of past ice jam flooding from TEK or local memory can be helpful in determining the extent 
of flooding that could be expected. 
Promote ice decay 
In areas where jams are common, reducing the quality of the ice to 
promote melting can prevent a jam or reduce its severity. Some 
examples of this include ice cutting (slots cut into large sections of ice), 
hole drilling (drilling holes into the ice at equal intervals) and ice 
dusting (spreading dark material across the ice to absorb sunlight). On 
some rivers, like the Red River in Manitoba, ice-breaking vessels are 
deployed to reduce the chance of large ice pieces causing jams. 
Fixed structures 
Structures for ice jam prevention can be quite effective but are also 
more expensive and not always feasible for remote areas. Structures 
can include dykes (for holding back flood water), ice booms (man-made 
barriers with floating sections installed across the channel to control the 
movement of ice), and ice-retention structures (such as rows of 
concrete piers to stop the downstream movement of ice). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although it is difficult to predict if ice jams will happen more often because of climate change, we know that 
the climate will change. Northern rivers may be at higher risk of ice jams because they begin in the south 
where ice melts more quickly than it does where communities are located along the Hudson and James bays. 
 
Want to know more?  
Read this paper: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165232X07001796                                      
You can contact UpNorthOnClimate@laurentian.ca to get a copy  
Erindale Park ice retention 
structure on the Lower Credit River2 
Ice boom on the Rupert River, 
James Bay region 1 
Dyke along the Albany River,  
South Channel 1 
Amphibex machines (icebreakers) on the Red 
River in Manitoba, March 2019. Image from 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/
amphibex-ice-breaker-manitoba-flood-
1.5072933 
Ice dusting can promote melting. Snow was 
covered with sticks and has melted about 
30cm below the surrounding snow. 
1 Abdelnour, R. Albany River 2008 Ice breakup: forecasting the Flood Event, Observations of the River during the Spring breakup and the Potential for mitigating the Flooding Risk of the Kashechewan and 
Fort Albany First Nation. Proc. 17th Work. River Ice 16 pages (2013).   2 https://cvc.ca/news/story/cvc-clears-debris-in-river-to-help-prevent-future-flooding/ 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
When lakes and rivers overflow their banks, homes, roads, and communities can be flooded. This major flooding 
can have big impacts infrastructure in communities and the safety of people who live there. Major flooding 
could get worse with climate change. How can communities prepare? 
What causes major flooding? 
Major flooding from waterbodies like lakes and 
rivers happens when there is more water 
flowing into the system than there is flowing 
out. This extra water can overflow the banks of 
the lake or river and flood the surrounding 
land. Large amounts of rain, runoff from snow 
and ice melt, or a blockage in the system (like 
an ice jam) can all cause major flooding. In 
coastal communities, storm surges can also 
lead to major flooding. Storm surges happen 
when windy conditions push ocean water past 
the shoreline and onto the land.  
How will climate change impact major 
flooding?   
Across Ontario, climate change is likely to make major flooding events occur more often. With climate change, 
Ontario is expecting more rain and snow, with heavy rain events (50-150 millimetres of rain falling in 24 hours) 
predicted to happen more often. Less snow on the ground and warmer spring temperatures could mean a 
quicker spring melt, which can also overflow lakes and rivers. An increase in storm severity could make storm 
surges more likely to happen, increasing the risk of flooding in coastal communities.  
What are people noticing? 
Many First Nation communities have been 
established near lakes and rivers. Lakes and 
rivers provide drinking water, food, and 
transportation corridors but building near 
water can make communities vulnerable to 
major flooding events. Already, flooding is a 
problem for some First Nations communities. 
On the James Bay coast, Kashechewan First 
Nation is evacuated on an almost yearly basis 
because of the threat of flooding. In other 
communities, lake levels have gone up higher 
than in the past. 
 
The threat of flooding in Kashechewan has recently led to yearly 
evacuations of community members. Photo from 
https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/we-cannot-continue-to-live-this-
way-flood-risk-forces-kashechewan-evacuation-for-fourth-year-in-a-row 
Low-lying Kashechewan First Nation often floods in the spring because of 
melting upstream on the Albany River. Photo from Albany FB group 
Major Flooding around Lakes and Rivers 
FLOODING: ISSUE 3 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
 
How can we prepare? 
Avoid building on flood plains 
A flood plain is an area of low-lying ground next to a lake, 
river, or other waterway. These areas are susceptible to 
flooding and should be avoided when planning new 
development, including housing and roads. Since many 
remote communities do not have flood plain maps or water 
level records, traditional knowledge about high water levels 
and past floods are a valuable tool for future planning. In 
some cases, communities may want to relocate 
infrastructure that has already been built to higher ground 
Monitoring and forecasting 
Monitoring for the conditions that can lead to 
flooding (like weather, water levels, etc.) can help 
communities be prepared for potential flood 
events. Communities can take ownership of their 
own monitoring with systems like NetAtmo, 
weather stations with online software for 
recording local weather. Provincial and federal 
programs also collect data related to flooding 
and flood prediction, including real-time 
monitoring of water levels and water flow, and 
a flood forecasting and warning program. 
Traditional knowledge, together with measurements of past climate, can also help to build a better 
understanding of flooding trends in remote areas. Communities that experience regular flooding may want to 
partner with consultants to create a flood forecasting model for their area to look at the conditions that have 
caused flooding in the past to predict conditions that are likely to result in a flood in the future.  Flood 
forecasting models can potentially give communities advanced warning of a flood event, allowing time for 
emergency measures such as evacuations. 
Emergency Planning 
An emergency plan can lower the risk to people and infrastructure in the event of a flood. A community plan 
could include measures for community protection (like sandbags), a list of vulnerable residents, evacuation 
plans, and/or a refuge center. Communities can also encourage households to be ready for emergencies by 
providing information, like a packing list for evacuation or a list of supplies that might be useful. 
Structures for water level regulation 
Structures like dams, dikes and berms are sometimes used for flood control in areas where floods have 
happened in the past. Other structures like ice booms, and ice retention structures, are used to prevent ice 
jams, which can be a cause of major flooding. 
Climate change could make major flooding events more common in Ontario because of faster snow melt and 
heavy rain in the spring. People and communities should prepare by building above past high-water levels, 
monitoring water levels and rain events, listening for flood warnings and creating an emergency plan. 
Flood forecast mapping in Ontario. 
https://www.gisapplication.lrc.gov.
on.ca/webapps/flood/ 
Water level monitoring stations. 
https://wateroffice.ec.gc.ca/ 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Several geese species can be found soaring over Ontario in the spring, using northern Ontario and the Hudson Bay 
wetlands for staging and breeding grounds. Ducks return to the north in the spring as well. Grouse and Ptarmigan 
don’t migrate but instead survive the cold northern winters by eating buds and some hide under the snow. These 
birds are important country foods for communities in the north.  
What have people noticed? 
Several communities have noticed changes in vegetation in their area including a disappearance of certain grasses 
and increased growth of willows that may be impacting important feeding and nesting habitat for the geese. 
People have also noticed a change in the migration patterns of geese. Snow geese have been observed migrating 
south in the fall earlier than they used to, leaving around mid-August or early September, as opposed to the third 
week of October, while the spring migration route of Canada geese is seen as becoming more inland and less 
coastal. Many people report that there are fewer geese and ducks than there used to be, and some have said that 
duck meat doesn’t taste the same as it used to. Some communities say they have found fewer grouse or 
partridge. 
How could climate change impact these animals? 
Ducks and grouse are commonly hunted. Ruffed grouse (partridge), spruce grouse, and mallard ducks are 
probably the most popular, but certainly not the only birds that are important to food security or have traditional 
value. The mallard duck and the ruffed grouse can be found across Canada and Ontario, but climate change may 
impact these birds differently. The ruffed grouse will likely lose some of their summer and winter range by the 
2080s, but the mallard duck may actually gain some winter range by the 2080s. 
 
 
 
These maps show the predicted change of habitat range ruffed grouse in summer and mallard in winter by the year 2080                      
when the temperature is predicted to increase by 3°C. https://www.audubon.org/bird-guide 
Mallard (winter) 
Geese, Duck and Grouse in a Changing Climate 
Ruffed Grouse (summer) 
FOOD SECURITY: ISSUE 1 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare?  
Adjust Harvesting Practices 
Many First Nations hunters have already needed to adjust their harvest time and methods, particularly in the fall 
and early winter. Many community members have said they now have to travel further to hunt or gather 
traditional foods. This may require more costly means of transportation, such as a vehicle, ATV or snowmobile or 
even helicopters that some communities are now organizing for goose hunting. As some birds become less 
common on the land and others become more common, perhaps hunters can switch which species they hunt. 
Community Initiatives 
Community coolers can help lower the risk of 
meat spoilage by providing people with a cool 
place to butcher or store meat they harvest. 
Sharing harvested meat within a community 
and starting community gardens can also help 
increase food security for everyone. 
Habitat Restoration and Protected Areas 
Important habitats for geese and duck are staging areas for resting during migration, nesting sites for successful 
production of chicks and wetlands to keep their chicks safe. Identifying these areas can allow them to be 
protected, restored if necessary, and monitored for change. Many communities have also noticed a decline in 
food sources for geese, particularly grasses declining or being outcompeted by increased woody plant growth 
such as willows. Restoring important grassy plants may help to re-establish goose feeding grounds.  
Monitoring 
Understanding what is happening with the geese, ducks, and grouse in your area can be an important step 
towards developing adaptation plans now and into the future.  
Monitoring activities can take many forms and can be conducted by environmental stewards, researchers, and 
community members, alone or in partnerships. It can involve hunters, trappers, and other land users collecting 
observations while out on the land, or more high-tech methods like GPS tracking. Many communities have 
created their own monitoring programs, often called “Community-based monitoring”. These community-led 
programs are often driven by local information needs and guided by the values of the community.  
 
Want to know more? 
 
 
 
Range prediction maps for birds in Ontario,  
https://www.audubon.org/climate/survivalbydegrees 
Community cooler in Chapleau 
Cree FN. Photo by D. Souliere 
Community garden in Fort Albany FN 
Community-based monitoring: 
https://www.wcscanada.org/Portals/96/Documents/WCSCanada_CommunityBasedMon
itoring_2017%20(1).pdf?ver=2018-02-21-090420-447 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate change is likely to impact important traditional and medicinal plants as well as berries. For 
example, wetland plants like wild rice, cedar, cranberries, cloudberries and Labrador tea will be 
impacted by changing water levels, especially during extreme events of drought and severe rain. In the 
subarctic, permafrost decay is disrupting muskeg plant communities. The severity of these impacts may 
depend on the species ability to adapt. In some instances, climate change may benefit key berry 
producing plants or expand the types of berries and plants that can be cultivated in northern regions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lowbush Blueberry 
Labrador Tea 
Shifting North: Berries & Plants 
Recent 
Projected 
Recent 
Projected 
Recent 
Projected 
Recent 
Projected 
Wild Rice 
Core range (species is abundant) and range (species is found) in the recent past (1970-2000) and projected (2041-2070) of berries and 
plants with continued greenhouse gas emissions (Composite AR5 model RCP8.5). More info: http://www.planthardiness.gc.ca/?m=2b 
Wild Strawberry 
FOOD SECURITY: ISSUE 2 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
 
How can we prepare? 
Monitoring 
Understanding the status of medicinal and berry plants and the threats to their continued availability is 
the first step in developing adaptation strategies. Targets and goals can be established by the 
community, as well as decisions about what needs to be monitored and how to monitor. A community-
based monitoring approach can involve hunters, trappers, gatherers, and other land users in data 
collection and may include the following steps: 
• 
Identify important plants and potential threats 
• 
Use traditional knowledge to create a 
community baseline 
• 
Collect data while out on the land and monitor 
changes (location, abundance, health, etc.) 
• 
Consider collaborations with universities, 
governments or other groups to merge 
traditional knowledge with scientific study 
• 
Consider using an online citizen science app (see 
box) 
Habitat protection  
The protection of areas where important plants are found should be considered. Plants often prefer 
specific conditions to grow, such as water depth, amount of light, and soil requirements. As climate 
changes, plants may shift their ranges to follow their preferred climate envelope. This may make it 
necessary to change the geographic boundaries of protected areas over time.  
Assisted Migration 
Assisted migration helps to establish plants that may grow and survive well in a warmer future climate. 
For instance, if lowbush blueberries are under threat from climate change in your community, the same 
species of blueberries that grows in a more southern climate can be transplanted. A more extreme case 
would be planting a blueberry species that grows in a more southern range, e.g. highbush blueberries, 
that may now survive further north. The movement of any plant species into a new location is not 
without risks; the plant could become invasive displacing native plants. All risks should be weighed 
carefully before any assisted migration plan is implemented. More information on the types of assisted 
migration can be found at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/node/13121. 
Adjusting harvesting practices and community initiatives 
Many harvesters are already saying they have had to adjust their time 
and methods to access traditional areas due to low water or trails being 
blocked by trees from downbursts. Many in First Nations communities 
have said they now have to travel further to gather traditional foods. This 
may require more costly means of transportation, such as a vehicle or 
ATV. Sharing harvested resources within the community can help ensure 
food security for those without the resources to harvest berries or plants. 
The range of berry and medicinal plants is predicted to move further 
north in the next 50 years with the changing climate. If harvesting is to continue, communities should 
consider monitoring, protecting habitat, assisted migration and adjusting harvesting practices. 
Citizen science apps 
 
The Indigenous Knowledge Social Network created 
to facilitate self-determination for Indigenous 
communities. https://siku.org/#/about 
 
 
Create specialized projects, track your observations, 
connect with others. www.inaturalist.org 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Moose, caribou, and deer are important country food in 
Ontario. The hunting of these large animals is also of cultural 
significance having been traditionally harvested through 
generations. In these changing times, hunting of wild game can 
help ensure local food security, especially in remote 
communities. 
What have people noticed? 
In the northwest, First Nation’s Elders speak of seeing caribou in 
the hundreds or even thousands during their childhoods. Now, these large herds of the 1930s and 1940s are no 
longer seen on their traditional lands. Many across the province speak of moose being harder to find and some 
express concerns about their health. Harvesting has also become more challenging, with further travel 
sometimes required for harvest and freeze-up impacting travel over land. Warmer fall temperatures can also 
make it harder to keep harvested meat cool.  
How could climate change impact these animals? 
Climate change will impact where animals can live and thrive. Moose, for example, are a cold weather species 
and suffer heat stress when temperatures get too high. Moose and other cold adapted species are likely to 
shift their ranges further north. Landscape changes, such as permafrost loss, wildfire, or changes in vegetation, 
will also change where animals like moose, caribou, and deer can survive. 
As the habitat for moose and caribou shrink toward the northern coast, the territory for deer will likely grow, 
as warmer temperatures and less snow in winter allow these animals to live further north than they’re found 
today. 
 
 
Photo by Xavier Sagutch 
Caribou 
Moose 
These maps show the predicted change of habitat range for caribou (left) and moose (right) in the boreal forest by the 
year 2080. Maps were featured in the Toronto Star and are based on the information presented in a scientific paper by 
Murray, et al. (2017). Toronto Star article found at https://projects.thestar.com/climate-change-global-species-shakeup/  
Shifting North: Caribou, Moose and Deer 
FOOD SECURITY: ISSUE 3 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare?  
Adjust Harvesting Practices 
Many First Nations hunters have already had to adjust their harvest time and methods, particularly in the fall 
and early winter. Warmer fall temperatures can mean a greater chance of harvested meat spoiling, and 
hunting trips must sometimes wait for cooler weather. Less snow in winter means that snowmobiles must 
sometimes be swapped for ATVs. When hunters need to travel further from their communities to find game, 
transportation can become more expensive. Ride-sharing could be an option to help lower costs. 
As some animals become less common on the land and others become more common, perhaps hunters can 
switch target species, like hunting deer instead of moose. 
Community Initiatives 
Sharing knowledge and harvests can help increase food security in a 
community. Community coolers can also help, lowering the risk of 
meat spoilage by providing people with a cool place to butcher or 
store meat they have harvested.  
Habitat Restoration and Protected Areas 
Protecting or restoring the habitat that moose and caribou need can 
help protect these populations in your area. Caribou, especially, need 
uninterrupted tracts of undisturbed land. 
Monitoring 
Understanding what is happening with the moose, deer, and caribou 
in your area can be an important step towards developing adaptation plans now and into the future.  
Community-based monitoring is a monitoring initiative that is community-led and often driven by local 
information needs and guided by the values of the community. Monitoring activities can take many forms and 
can be conducted by environmental stewards, researchers, and community members. Monitoring can include 
having hunters, trappers, and other land users collecting data and observations while they’re out on the land or 
can be high-tech where animals are tracked using GPS collars or recorded on trail cameras. It can be done as a 
single group or in partnership with other communities, organizations, or scientists.  
Want to know more? Check out these examples: 
A community-based monitoring program for moose was carried out in the Mayo region of 
the Yukon. This program had local hunters record their observations while they were out 
on the land to provide information about the local moose population. The final report can 
be found at:  
http://www.env.gov.yk.ca/publications-maps/documents/MayoEarlyWinterMooseSurvey_2011.pdf 
The Naskapi Nation of Kawawachikamach, in partnership with researchers and consultants, 
conducted an assessment of climate change impacts on their traditional lands and the 
caribou that reside there. The work incorporated TEK, mapping, and caribou surveys and 
set out priority actions for adaptation. The final report can be found at: 
https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/RapportMameamskum2014_EN.pdf  
 
Climate change is affecting caribou, moose, and deer in Ontario. We need to prepare 
for the shift in their range by monitoring, protecting habitat and adjusting hunting 
practices. 
Community cooler in Chapleau 
Cree FN. Photo by Dakota Souliere 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
Fish are a staple in the traditional diet of many First Nations people, but climate change in the north is 
having an impact on this important group of animals. 
How will climate change impact fish in northern Ontario? 
With increasing air temperature, the lakes and rivers in Ontario are 
becoming warmer, and this can have a big impact on fish. Being cold-
blooded, fish are directly affected by the temperature of the water that 
they’re in. Water temperature can affect where fish are able to live, how 
they grow, and can even impact when they spawn. As climate continues to 
change, warmer lakes and rivers could mean: 
• 
Fewer places where cool-water fish and cold-water fish can live (range 
contraction).  
• 
More places where warm-water fish can live (range expansion).  
• 
New invasive species that can live in warmer conditions. 
• 
New fish diseases and parasites that can live in warmer conditions. 
• 
A possible advantage for fish diseases and parasites already in lakes and 
rivers (many do better in warmer temperatures1). 
Warmer air temperatures will also drive more evaporation from lakes and 
rivers and could cause water levels to fall. Lower water levels can change 
important fish habitat like spawning grounds and cold-water refuges and 
make it harder for fish to migrate or move from one place to another. 
In lakes, the changes in water levels and increase temperature can lead to a 
deepening of the thermocline (the transition layer between hot water on the 
surface and cold water beneath) leaving less cold water for cold-water fish 
like cisco and trout.  
The predicted increase in extreme storms can have an impact on water 
quality. Heavy rain can carry contaminants and sediment into lakes and 
rivers impacting fish. The change in ice cover will also affect fish growth and 
survival. 
What are people noticing? 
Changes in fish have been noticed by people across the north. People say 
bass are becoming more common, especially in northeastern Ontario. Others 
have observed that spawning times have changed or become unpredictable. 
Important events, like the fish run, are sometimes missed by harvesters 
because they are now happening at unexpected times.  Fish health is a 
concern for many, with people saying they’ve seen fish with sores, spots, 
bumps, or worms. Some people also say they find that the meat of harvested 
fish is softer than it used to be.  
Climate change can also make it harder to harvest fish. Lower water levels can cut off traditional routes 
and limit access to fishing areas. A shorter ice-on season and ice that is thinner or poor quality is limiting 
travel and ice fishing. In some cases, these difficulties in harvesting have led to people in First Nations 
communities eating less fish than they used to.  
Cisco are harvested by many First 
Nations in the north. Cisco need cold 
water to live and thrive. 
Climate Change and Harvesting Fish 
Warm-water fish like smallmouth 
bass will likely become more 
common in the north as climate 
change makes lakes and rivers 
warmer 
FOOD SECURITY: ISSUE 4 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How do we prepare? 
Monitor 
Monitoring allows us to gather information about the environment 
and the changes that are occurring. Monitoring can be done by 
environmental stewards, researchers, and community members, and 
can be guided by traditional knowledge. Community-based 
monitoring is when a community decides what to monitor and 
implements a monitoring program with or without a researcher as a 
partner. When community members gather information on their own 
it is sometimes termed “citizen science”. Citizen science is a growing 
field due to the availability of apps and websites that make it easy to collect and share data, like Fish 
ON-Line (www.ontario.ca/page/how-use-fish-line) or iNaturalist (www.inaturalist.org). Citizen science is 
also a good way to engage people in environmental issues and encourage good stewardship.  
Protect and restore fish habitat 
Protect the places fish need to live and thrive, like cold water refuges, spawning 
grounds, near-shore areas, and migration routes. As the climate warms, the areas 
of cooler water that cool-water fish and cold-water fish need (called cold water 
refuges) are particularly threatened. Protect these areas by maintaining water 
levels, keeping shoreline vegetation to create shade, and making sure any cool 
water inputs (like groundwater springs or cooler tributaries) are uninterrupted.  
Keep lakes and rivers healthy 
Healthy lakes and rivers benefit all species, including fish. Keep the lakes and 
rivers in your area healthy by limiting pollution, protecting wetlands, and 
maintaining vegetation on the shoreline and in the watershed. Take steps to keep invasive species out of 
your area. Many invasive species, like zebra mussels or spiny water flea, are carried between 
waterbodies by people who unknowingly have them on their boats or fishing gear. One study that 
looked at lakes in northern Minnesota (including two that span the Ontario/Minnesota border) found 
that in lakes where zebra mussels or spiny water flea had invaded, walleye grew more slowly in their 
first year of life compared to walleye in lakes that didn’t have those invasive species. Walleye in those 
invaded lakes were also smaller at the end of their first summer, lowering their chance of survival2. 
Make changes to harvesting  
Many in the north have already had to make changes to when and where they harvest fish because of 
changes in climate. In winter, ice fishing might be delayed until the ice is safe to travel on. In summer, 
low water levels might mean shallower boats are needed, or motors need pivoting brackets so they can 
be quickly raised out of the water. Climate change might also mean making changes to the type of fish 
that are harvested, like shifting away from fish species that are under threat. Consider catching fish new 
to the area like smallmouth bass. 
Want to know more? Check out the research mentioned in this write-up! 
1Chetkiewicz, C., McDermid, J., Cross, M. & Rowland, E. Climate Change and Freshwater Fish in Ontario’s Far North. (2012) 
2Hansen, G. J. A., Ahrenstorff, T. D., Bethke, B. J., Dumke, J. D., Hirsch, J., Kovalenko, K. E., LeDuc, J. F., Maki, R. P., Rantala, H. 
M., & Wagner, T. (2020). Walleye growth declines following zebra mussel and Bythotrephes invasion. Biological Invasions, 
22(4), 1481–1495. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10530-020-02198-5 
Fish monitoring 
• 
What species are in the area 
• 
Number of fish in the area 
• 
When and where fish spawn  
• 
Fish migration and movement 
• 
Fish health 
Protecting spawning areas helps 
protect fish. Photo: Cooperative 
Freshwater Ecology Unit 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From changing land to damaged belongings to evacuations, climate change can directly and indirectly 
impact mental health and wellbeing. 
 
Changing Land and Ecological Grief 
Changes to the land, the water, the ice, the snow, and the weather can impact a person’s sense of place 
and threaten traditional practices that support well-being. Loss of land-based activities and work because 
of climate change can impact personal and community income and disrupt a person’s sense of belonging 
and cultural identity. It can also lead to reduced food security as it becomes more difficult to get out on the 
land and find the animals and plants that they traditionally harvest. This may be especially true in areas 
where land-based activities are an essential part of 
tradition and where changes are occurring faster such 
as in the North, including the far north of Ontario. 
 
First Nations in the North speak of how being out on 
the land keeps them grounded and is part of their 
identity. They are worried that the changes will 
continue and stop them from practicing long-lived 
traditions. The voices of Inuit in the video “Lament for 
the Land” may echo what you feel and have heard in 
your community, that climate change is affecting 
culture, leading to fear, worry, sadness and mental 
illness.  
 
 
Severe Weather, Floods, Fires and Evacuations 
Severe weather, flooding and wildfire are all becoming 
more common because of climate change. The threat 
of natural disasters and uncertainty of the future can 
leave people feeling stressed and worried. These 
natural disasters can cause personal injury, damage to 
belongings and buildings and require evacuation 
especially of vulnerable people. People can feel 
defeated when they are always recovering from a loss. 
Evacuations lead to cultural disruption and 
displacement all of which has been shown to lead to 
mental health disorders. Mental health impacts from 
climate change are also expected to magnify existing 
stresses like food insecurity. Some community 
members will be more vulnerable to mental health 
issues depending on age, gender, social and economic 
factors, and pre-existing disorders. 
 
Evacuation of Fort Hope in 2011 due to wildfires. 
Mental Health, Well-Being and  
Climate Change 
HEALTH: ISSUE 1 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2
 
 
What can we do? 
Finding ways to continue cultural activities 
The best way to prevent the sense of loss of a way of life is to make sure 
that it is not lost. If you can’t get out to a traditional area because of 
downed trees from a severe windstorm, try to find a different route to get 
there. Or, if there are no berries where you used to go, search for new 
patches and share the findings with community members. It’s about 
minimizing impacts to cultural activities and working around them. It’s also 
about sharing your knowledge with others, especially youth. By organizing 
cultural activities, you are keeping traditions alive and strengthening your 
sense of value. Supporting each other in a time of change is important; 
talking to friends and family about your feelings increases the sense of 
community and togetherness, so you know you are not alone in a 
difficult situation.  
Taking action: Active Hope 
Active hope is the concept of moving hopeful intentions from an inactive state to an active process of 
taking action on climate change adaptation. It starts by accepting the reality of the problem, then setting 
goals to address the problem, and then engaging in actions to reach the goals. In other words, accept that 
things are changing, set goals to fix it and then do it! By taking action, people feel like they are making a 
difference. This might mean activism like Autumn Peltier of Wikwemikong First Nation, addressing world 
leaders at the United Nations about protecting water. Or, planning and building a sustainable energy grid in 
your community. Or, speaking up when you see someone being reckless with a campfire. The key is to take 
action to make the world a better place. This will give you and the people around you, especially youth, 
some hope for the future.  
Advocating for More Services 
Addressing mental health impacts requires a support system of mental health professionals, resources, and 
services. Mental health services are already lacking in many areas of the north. Communities should 
continue to push for the resources they need, build mental health response into emergency preparedness 
planning and climate action plans, as well as help community members see how climate change and mental 
health is relevant to them. It is also important to end the stigma surrounding mental health issues. People 
in need of mental health services may be more willing to ask for help if mental illness is accepted as an 
illness like any other, like cancer, for example. 
Environment and Health Monitoring                                       
Monitoring of the land and public health is a possible strategy for responding 
and adapting to changes. For example, a community in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut 
Labrador has developed a community-led, and community-designed 
environment and health monitoring strategy called the “eNuk Program”. An 
important part of the program is the eNuk app, which is a tool for community 
members to record their observations while on the land. Observations like 
thin sea ice or poor trail conditions can be shared to help community 
members make decisions when planning their travel routes, increasing safety.  
 
More Reading 
Examining relationships between climate change and mental health in the Circumpolar North 
http://www.lamentfortheland.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/CC-Circumpolar-MH_Cunsolo-Willox-et-al.-Online.pdf 
Climate change and mental health: risks, impacts and priority actions 
https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/1807/88223/1/13033_2018_Article_210.pdf 
Charlie Flowers, a research lead and 
community member in Rigolet, 
demonstrating the eNuk app. 
https://enuk.ca 
Birthing of the drum, Camp Chikepak 2017 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
  
 
The occurrence of diseases transmitted by animals (called zoonotic diseases) is predicted to change with 
the changing climate.  
 
As ecosystems shift with changing climate, there is potential for the distribution of many insects and 
animals to change. This could pose challenges for the control of zoonotic diseases. Warmer 
temperatures, especially in winter, are allowing more southern species to exist further north. And 
warmer temperatures in spring and fall are increasing the length of time some carriers and vectors can 
remain active. West Nile virus (carried by mosquitoes), Lyme disease (carried by ticks) and rabies 
(carried by mammals) are examples of vector-borne diseases that have the potential to spread north.  
West Nile Virus (WNV) 
West Nile Virus was introduced into Canada in 2001 and is transmitted by infected Culex 
mosquitos. It is expected that the range of the Culex mosquito will expand northward. 
Very few people have severe illness from being infected by WNV; 80% of people have no 
symptoms at all. Of those who do show symptoms (fever, headache, fatigue, skin rash), 
most experience only mild illness, however, when WNV causes severe illness (1% of 
cases) it involves the brain and nerves. So, as the range of the mosquito that carries 
it moves north, it is important that people in more northern areas are aware of 
WNV and the steps that can be taken to avoid infection. 
 
Lyme Disease 
The blacklegged tick (also called the deer tick) is the vector responsible for carrying the bacteria Borrelia 
burgdorferi, which is the cause of Lyme disease. Like the Culex mosquito, the range of the blacklegged 
tick has the potential to move north with a warmer 
climate. The number of Lyme disease cases in Canada 
has increased significantly from 144 cases in 2009 to 
992 in 2016, with Ontario having the highest incident 
rate of 25-30 cases per 100,000 people. The map to the 
right shows the upper geographical limit of blacklegged 
tick historically (1971-2000) and projected into the 
future with predicted changes 
in climate. With the range 
potentially pushing to the far 
north of Ontario, it will be 
necessary to be aware of the 
potential risk of Lyme disease 
in your community and what can be 
done to mitigate the risk of exposure. 
Shifting North: Insects, Animals & Diseases They Can Carry 
Potential habitat shift of the Culex pipiens mosquito with predicted changes in climate. The darker the colour, the more favourable 
the conditions for Culex pipiens establishment. Taken from Hongoh et al., 2012. 
Culex mosquito Photo from 
www.publichealthontario.ca 
Potential range expansion of the blacklegged tick 
with continued climate change. Taken from Greer 
et al., 2008. 
Black-legged tick 
https://www.ontario.c
a/page/lyme-disease 
HEALTH: ISSUE 2 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Adapt and prepare 
Preventing bites 
The best way to prevent infection from vector-borne diseases is to prevent bites.  
To avoid rabies, do not handle injured wild animals like bats, foxes, raccoons and skunks. 
To prevent insect bites, the Ontario Ministry of Health recommends: 
• 
Wearing light coloured, long-sleeved shirts and pants – you 
can spot ticks more easily and mosquitoes are attracted to 
dark colours. 
• 
Covering exposed skin - wear a hat, closed footwear, pull 
socks over your pants, and tuck in your shirt. 
• 
Using insect repellents (bug spray, lotions) with DEET or 
lcaridin. 
If you find a tick on your body, remove the entire tick including the 
head. See here for instructions: https://www.ontario.ca/page/lyme-disease 
Remove or limit habitat
Ticks: 
• 
Keep grass mowed short and trim trees 
and bushes to let sunlight in (ticks avoid 
hot, dry places) 
• 
Remove brush and leaf litter 
• 
Create a border of gravel or woodchips 
at least 1 meter wide at the edge of 
wooded areas or areas with tall grasses 
• 
Keep children’s play sets away from the 
edges of wooded areas. Consider 
placing them on mulch or woodchips 
and in areas of sun. 
Mosquitoes: 
• 
Remove standing water. Mosquitoes lay 
their eggs in stagnant water, even small 
amounts. 
• 
Keep lawn, trees and shrubs trimmed to 
let sunlight in and clear away brush and 
leaf litter. If you have a compost pile, 
turn it regularly. Adult mosquitoes like 
these cooler, darker areas. 
• 
Put screens on windows and doors to 
keep mosquitoes out of your house. 
Be aware of diseases and their symptoms 
Ensure community members are aware of the potential of these illnesses and are familiar with the signs 
and symptoms of infection. Prompt and proper treatment can help mitigate the potential health effects 
of illnesses like Lyme disease and rabies. Identification of these illnesses can also help provincial 
monitoring programs that track the spread of these and other illnesses. More information on these 
diseases can be found at: https://www.ontario.ca/page/outdoor-health 
Monitor  
Climate change has the potential to allow species to live in areas where 
they couldn’t live before. Monitoring can help alert communities when new 
species have entered their area. Consider including tick 
(https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t7rwiofSuKc) and mosquito 
monitoring in your community-based monitoring program.  
 
Animals that can carry diseases transmissible to humans are predicted to move north with climate 
change. People in northern Ontario should be aware of the risk, protect themselves from bites and 
monitor changes on the land.  
 
Find out more:https://www.publichealthontario.ca/en/diseases-and-conditions/infectious-
diseases/vector-borne-zoonotic-diseases 
Mosquitoes lay their eggs in standing 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
The blacklegged tick, also known as the deer tick, is a small animal that feeds on the blood of birds, reptiles, 
amphibians, and mammals including humans. Once limited to the southern parts of Ontario, climate change is 
shifting where they can live and thrive. What makes them a big concern is their potential to carry the bacteria 
that causes Lyme disease, a potentially serious illness in humans.  
The life history of ticks and how they spread disease 
The life of a blacklegged tick (Ixodes scapularis) generally lasts two years. They go 
through four life stages: egg, larva, nymph, and adult. At each life stage except for 
the egg, they must have a blood meal from a new host to survive.  
Ticks find their animal host by “questing”; they hang on to a short branch or 
blade of grass with their back legs and reach out with their front legs. When 
they sense an animal either by its breath, smell, body heat, moisture, or 
vibrations, they climb on. Then they might attach to the animal within a few 
minutes or wander for an hour or two looking for an area of thinner skin like in the 
armpit.  
When they attach, they cut the skin and insert a feeding tube full of spikes and 
secrete cement that both serve to hold them in place. They “spit out” saliva and 
painkillers so the animal doesn’t notice them. The tick then sucks blood for several 
days. If the host animal has the bacteria that causes Lyme disease (Borrelia 
burgdorferi), the tick takes it up with the blood. After feeding, the tick will drop off 
and go to the next life stage where it will feed from another animal. If the tick 
picked up the bacteria from its first host, it can transmit it to the second host when 
it “spits out” saliva into the wound.  
How is climate change impacting blacklegged ticks and Lyme disease? 
Changing climate conditions, such as warmer winter 
temperatures means ticks can now survive through the 
winter further north. With growing blacklegged tick, 
populations they are being found further north than 
where they have been found in the past.  
On the map to the right, the red line shows the 
northern limit of blacklegged ticks that was seen 
between 1971 and 2000. With predicted changes in 
climate, we can expect to see the edge of their range  
change over time. In 30 years (2050 - the orange line), 
blacklegged ticks could be found in more than half of 
Ontario and with them the risk of Lyme disease. 
What have people noticed about blacklegged ticks and Lyme disease? 
Lyme disease is a growing concern, especially in the more southern areas of northwestern Ontario. Already, 
areas in and around Kenora, Rainy River, and Thunder Bay are considered risk areas for Lyme disease because 
10% of blacklegged ticks tested were positive for Borrelia burgdorferi, the bacteria that causes Lyme disease. 
 
POTENTIAL RANGE EXPANSION OF THE BLACKLEGGED TICK WITH 
CONTINUED CLIMATE CHANGE. TAKEN FROM GREER ET AL., 2008*. 
Blacklegged Ticks & Lyme Disease Moving North 
A blacklegged tick “questing” 
for a host on a blade of 
grass. CDC 
A blacklegged tick feeding 
https://www.nature.com/ar
ticles/ncomms10507 
*Greer, A., Ng, V. & Fisman, D. Climate change and infectious diseases in North America: the road ahead. Can. Med. 
Assoc. J. 178, (2008) 
HEALTH: ISSUE 3 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
How can we prepare? 
Prevent bites 
Covering your skin and using bug spray can help stop ticks and 
insects from biting. When in the bush, try to stay on trails if 
possible. Make your property less inviting for ticks by keeping 
your grass mowed short and removing brush and leaf litter. After 
being outdoors, check yourself, your children, and your pets for 
any ticks that may have attached.  
Tick Checks 
Check for ticks on your body, paying special attention to the 
groin area, belly button, armpits, head and behind ears and 
knees. Use a mirror to check the back of your body or have 
someone else check for you. Don’t forget to check for ticks on your children 
and your pets.  
Removing ticks 
If you find a tick, be sure to remove it properly. The tick will have embedded 
its mouth parts into the skin and so it will be necessary to grab the tick near 
its head and pull up gently to be sure to remove the entire tick. You can 
submit it to your local health unit to be tested for the Lyme causing 
bacteria. 
Be aware of Lyme disease and its symptoms 
Know what the symptoms of Lyme disease are so you can seek treatment as 
quickly as possible. Most symptoms of Lyme disease in humans usually 
appear between 3 and 30 days after a bite from an infected blacklegged tick. 
You should contact your local public health unit or speak to a health care 
professional right away if you have been bitten by a blacklegged tick, or if you 
have been in an area that ticks might live and experience any of the following 
symptoms: rash (typically a bull’s-eye rash or a bruise-like rash (usually on 
darker skin tones), another type of unusual rash, fever, chills, headache, stiff neck, muscle aches and joint 
pains, fatigue (more tired than usual), swollen lymph nodes, spasms, numbness or tingling or facial paralysis. If 
not treated, Lyme disease can make you feel tired and weak and, if it gets really bad, it can even harm your 
heart, nerves, liver and joints. Symptoms from untreated Lyme disease can last years and include recurring 
arthritis and neurological problems, numbness, paralysis and, in very rare cases, death. 
Monitor for ticks in your area 
Knowing if blacklegged ticks are in your area can help you understand your risk for 
Lyme disease. While there are other species of tick in Ontario, only the blacklegged 
tick transmits Lyme disease.  Consider including tick dragging to your community-
based monitoring program (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t7rwiofSuKc). 
Read more:https://www.tbdhu.com/health-topics/insects-rodents-other-pests/ticks-lyme-disease; 
https://www.ontario.ca/page/lyme-disease 
REMOVING A TICK WITH TWEEZERS FROM 
WWW.CDC.GOV/LYME 
Tick check from: TBDHU.COM/ticks  
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
Climate change is expected to have substantial effects on airborne allergens, such as pollen and mould 
spores, and will impact those with asthma, hay fever and other respiratory diseases. 
Pollen on the rise  
Pollen is a yellow powder produced by the male part of a flower that serves to 
fertilize the female part of the same species to produce seeds that germinate 
into new plants.  Pollen is transported by the wind, insects, or other animals. 
When pollen is transported through the air in large quantities, it can cause 
irritation to the nose, eyes, and lungs of people especially those who are 
allergic to pollen and those with asthma or other respiratory diseases.  
The changes in temperature and precipitation that are 
predicted to occur due to climate change will increase the 
growing season of plants. With a longer growing season, plants 
may produce more pollen and for longer periods each year. 
Warmer temperatures have already resulted in an earlier 
onset of the pollen season in many locations in Ontario. 
Warmer temperatures could also mean a longer pollen season, 
new plants entering the area, and an increase in plant pollen 
production overall.  
Air quality 
Elevated temperatures can also negatively impact air quality 
with higher levels of smog and increases in ground level ozone 
(which irritates the eyes and lungs). A potential increase in 
wildfire would also impact air quality through high levels of 
smoke and particulate matter. Poor air quality further irritates 
the lungs and can increase the risks of respiratory events like 
asthma attacks in vulnerable people. 
Mould is a threat 
Mould is a microscopic fungus that grows in moist 
environments. As it spreads and becomes larger it can have a 
fuzzy appearance like on rotting bread or a dark stain like black 
mold on drywall in a damp house. Increased precipitation and 
humidity can raise moisture content in the forest and increase 
the growth of mould affecting air quality. Heavy rainfall or rain 
in winter may lead to flooded homes, which can also increase 
the risk of mould growth. When mature, moulds release spore 
into the air to reproduce. It is these spores that irritate the 
nose and lungs of people. Some moulds also produce toxins 
that can be dangerous and even fatal.    
More intense and longer exposure to airborne allergens like pollen and mould can lead to more cases of 
reactions to allergens and/or respiratory diseases and cause existing conditions to become more severe 
and ultimately lead to higher death from asthma and other respiratory diseases 
 
Airborne Allergens & Climate Change 
Male White Pine flowers 
Mould on an orange and in a on walls.  Photos 
from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mold 
Change in number of grains of pollen per cubic 
metre over time in 5 Canadian cities 
from:https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/cities
-seasonal-allergies-symptoms-worsening-climate-
change-1.5256496 
HEALTH: ISSUE 4 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Limit contact with allergens 
Avoiding or limiting contact with allergens like pollen and mould can help prevent asthma attacks and 
allergy symptoms. Raise community awareness of the importance of allergen avoidance, especially for 
those with asthma or other respiratory conditions. 
Pollen avoidance measures can include:  
• Closing windows during pollen season 
• Removing shoes and leaving them in the entrance to buildings 
• Washing clothing to remove pollen from fabric 
• Avoid drying clothes outside during pollen season 
• Avoid being outdoors in the morning or on windy days 
• Use medication before exposure 
To prevent mould growth in your home: 
• If things get wet, remove water and dry immediately 
• Ventilate your home (especially damp areas like bathrooms) 
• Keep your home warm with good air circulation (cool areas 
increase condensation and mould growth) 
• Remove items that can grow mould (wet or musty smelling 
items, firewood, carpet in basements, etc.) 
• Repair leaky roofs, windows and plumbing 
• Prevent water from entering your home (slope ground so rainwater/snow melt runs away) 
The Government of Canada offers a First Nation-based report that can be used to inform your 
community about the health risks of mould, identifying mould and how to prevent and/or remove 
mould from the home (https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-
sc/migration/hc-sc/fniah-spnia/alt_formats/pdf/promotion/public-
publique/home-maison/mould-moisissure-eng.pdf) 
Monitoring 
Communities can monitor when the pollen season begins in their 
area by noting when plants and trees begin to bloom or when 
pollen starts to collect in lakes and on vehicles. Pollen reports are 
often available alongside weather forecasts in more southern areas 
of the province. They provide a measurement of the number of 
grains of pollen per cubic meter of air and can even identify the 
types of pollen present. More remote communities may want to 
investigate the possibility of creating a pollen count program for 
their area. Regardless of the source of information, it should be 
shared with community members. 
Adequate Healthcare 
Access to appropriate healthcare and medication is extremely important for 
managing asthma and other allergic respiratory diseases. Accessing healthcare in 
remote communities can be challenging. Communities should continue to push 
for their healthcare needs to be met. 
Airborne allergens are predicted to increase because of climate change. People should 
prepare by limiting their contact to allergens, monitor pollen in the community and 
advocate for good healthcare. 
Hospital in Attawapiskat 
Allergy report from Weather Network  
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
Temperatures are expected to increase for all seasons in northern Ontario because of climate change. In 
summer, extreme heat events and heat waves are projected to happen more often and to be more 
extreme. These heat events may lead to heat-related illness in people especially the vulnerable. 
What is considered an extreme heat event? 
What is classified as an extreme heat event varies depending on the region. In northern Ontario, where 
temperatures are generally cooler, an unusually hot period might be defined as temperatures over 25°C, 
whereas southern Ontario might use days over 30°C. Extreme heat is also more than just temperature; it 
also depends on humidity (the amount of water vapour in the air), wind speed, and radiant load (heat 
from sunlight or other heated surfaces). The term “humidex” is an effort to combine the temperature 
and humidity factors into a number that describes how hot the weather feels to the average person. An 
extreme heat warning is often called when there is the potential for an unacceptable level of health 
effects, including increased mortality. A “heat wave” is generally defined as three consecutive days of 
extreme heat. 
What is heat illness? 
Heat illness is when your body is unable to cool down and can 
lead to conditions such as heat rash, heat cramps, heat edema 
(swelling of the hand/feet/ankles), heat exhaustion and heat 
stroke. Heat stroke is a medical emergency, it is when a person’s 
core temperature reaches 40°C. Heat can also affect mental 
health and community well-being. Heat waves can increase 
irritability and aggression. Domestic violence and violent crimes 
have been shown to spike during heat events. 
Populations at the greatest risk for heat illnesses are:
• 
elders 
• 
infants and young children 
• 
people confined to a bed 
• 
overweight individuals 
• 
those who work or exercise in the heat 
• 
those with low-income 
• 
homeless individuals 
• 
those that have a pre-existing health condition (breathing, 
heart and kidney problems, hypertension, mental illness) 
Extreme Heat & Health 
1976-2020
2021-2050
2051-2080
Number of heat waves 
(at least 3 days of 
hotter than 30°C) in 
the past and projected 
into the future. From 
www.ClimateAtlas.ca 
HEALTH: ISSUE 5 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
 
How can we prepare? 
Increase awareness of heat illness 
Understanding the potential for heat-related illness, and 
knowing what can be done to prevent it, are good ways to 
help reduce the risks of heat events. People should also 
familiarize themselves with the signs and symptoms of heat 
illness, so they know when they or someone around them 
may be at risk, and what can be done to help. Community 
education campaigns could be used to spread information 
about heat illness. They can take many forms (local 
television/radio, social media, community meetings, printed 
materials) and can be specifically targeted to the most 
vulnerable groups. Communication of the risks of extreme 
heat should begin before the summer season arrives, 
continue through the summer season, and especially during 
extreme heat events. 
Emergency action plan 
Communities may also wish to develop an emergency plan for extreme heat events. It should include 
roles and responsibilities of the key people who will roll out the emergency plan as well as a list of 
vulnerable community members with contact information. The plan should also include a monitoring 
and alerting system and cooling centers.  
Community monitoring and alerting system 
A community monitoring and alerting system for extreme heat 
events can help warn community members of hot weather days and 
expected heat waves. This allows individuals to prepare the 
appropriate preventative measures (modifying activities, monitoring 
vulnerable individuals, preparing a cool rest area, etc.). Community 
alerting can be done through multiple avenues including online 
(Facebook and band websites), local media, and community bulletins.  
Cooling centres 
Community cooling centres can offer relief for individuals that are of greater risk to heat illness, or to 
those who do not have access to air conditioning, electric fans or a cool area in their home. These 
centres could be equipped with air conditioning, provide access to cool liquids (water, sport drinks, fruit 
juices) and foods (fruit and vegetables with high water content, ice treats etc.). In addition, trained 
individuals could be available at these locations to provide any assistance or treatment to heat ill 
individuals. 
Heat waves are projected to happen more often in the north. Prepare by raising awareness of heat 
related illness and having an emergency plan for vulnerable people in your community. 
More information: 
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/sun-safety/extreme-heat-heat-waves.html 
https://climateatlas.ca/sites/default/files/PCC%20-
%20Heat%20Waves%20and%20Health%20-%20Nov%202019.pdf 
Prevent heat-related illness 
Avoid direct sun and use sunscreen 
Wear breathable, loose fitting, light 
coloured clothing 
Keep hydrated (drink often, avoid 
alcohol and caffeinated beverages) 
Plan outdoor activities for the cooler 
parts of the day 
Keep your home cool (close 
windows/blinds for hottest part of 
the day, avoid using your oven) 
Use fans or air conditioning 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
Rain can wash contaminants into drinking water sources. More rain, especially heavy rains, are expected with 
climate change increasing the risk of contamination.  
How do floods or heavy rain events impact drinking water? 
Flood waters and heavy rain events can carry contaminants into drinking water supplies like lakes, streams and 
ground water, causing waterborne illness. These illnesses are caused by pathogens (microbes like bacteria, 
viruses), bio-toxins (toxins produced by living things like algae) and toxic contaminants. The majority of 
waterborne diseases are gastrointestinal (diarrheal diseases), however they can also impact the kidneys, the 
lungs, the brain, and metabolic processes. 
In 2000, Walkerton, Ontario had a large rain event (about 130 ml over 5 days ending with a day of heavy rain 
on May 12th where 80 mL fell in 24 hours) and a few days after the community had a massive surge of people 
with E. coli bacteria infection. It is thought that Escherichia coli bacteria from cattle manure fertilizer spread on 
a farmer’s field was washed into the municipal water supply where other oversights left the water 
inadequately treated. 
How are drinking water sources impacted by climate change? 
With climate change, large rain events (50mm to 150mm of rain in one day) are expected to happen more 
often. This could present more chances for contaminants to enter drinking water sources. Climate change is 
also expected to bring higher temperatures which will increase water temperatures which can also increase the 
risk of algal blooms and certain waterborne pathogens. 
*Greer, A., Ng, V. & Fisman, D. Climate change and infectious diseases in North America: the road ahead. Can. Med. Assoc. 
J. 178, (2008) 
 
 
More Rain, More Risk of Contaminated Drinking Water  
CASE STUDY: WALKERTON, ON 
Heavy rainfall and Escherichia coli 
This graph depicts both the rainfall 
(black line) and number of E. coli 
cases (brown bars) in Walkerton, 
ON, in May 2000. 
 
A large rain event (about 80mL) hit 
the area just days before an 
outbreak of E. coli cases. This 3-4 
day lag time between the rain and 
the spike of cases is consistent with 
the incubation period of E. coli. 
 
Heavy rain and associated flooding 
and runoff can quickly transport 
pathogens into water supplies. 
Graph from Greer et al., 2008*. 
Heavy rain event 
Spike in 
E. coli 
cases 
HEALTH: ISSUE 6 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Advocate for safe drinking water 
Clean, safe drinking water is already an issue for many First Nations communities. Communities should 
continue to push for safe drinking water and effective training for water treatment staff. In communities that 
do have drinkable tap water, make sure effective monitoring programs are in place and that the water 
continues to be safe to drink. During times that water is not safe to drink, communities should have an alerting 
system to notify members and provide alternative sources of water (bottled water, boiled water, different 
water sources, etc.).  
Manage stormwater runoff 
When stormwater flows over the 
landscape, it can pick up debris, 
chemicals, bacteria, and other pollutants 
that can then end up in lakes and rivers 
that provide drinking water. Keep 
drinking water sources safe by managing 
stormwater runoff with a good drainage 
plan. This can include ditches and 
culverts to direct water flow, green 
spaces to soak up rainwater, and holding 
areas (like ponds or wetlands) for excess 
water.  
Sourcewater protection 
A watershed is the area of land that drains into a waterway like a stream or lake. Your house may not be on the 
shore of a lake but the water that runs off your yard eventually makes it to the nearby lake. Limiting pollutants 
on the landscape can help keep water systems healthy. This can include steps like: 
- Locate sewage lagoons and garbage dumps far and downstream of drinking water sources 
- Keep plants and trees near the shore to prevent erosion and trap contaminants before they reach the water 
- Avoid using chemicals (like pesticides) or fertilizers 
- Be careful not to spill gas or oil when pouring into tanks 
- Don’t use or reduce the use of road salt 
- Reduce the area with hard surfaces and lawns, instead leave wetlands or plant a rain garden 
- Maintain septic and waste systems 
- Pick up garbage and dog poop especially near the water 
Best-practices for home wells 
Drinking water wells can be at risk of contamination during flooding events. If your home well has flooded, or 
you find your well water has changed in colour, taste, or smell, the water should be tested before you drink it. 
Your well and plumbing systems may also need to be disinfected. 
Heavy rain events are predicted to happen more often because of climate change will put drinking water at 
risk. Protect the source of your drinking water and monitor its quality. 
Resources 
https://conservationontario.ca/conservation-authorities/source-water-protection/ 
https://www.gov.mb.ca/asset_library/en/spring_outlook/wellwater_safety_factsheet.pdf 
  
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
Climate change will challenge food security and traditional harvesting in many First Nation communities. 
Higher temperatures can increase the risk of food spoilage and foodborne pathogens, like Salmonella 
bacteria and parasites. This danger can extend to wild-harvested foods and can have far-reaching effects 
on the health, nutrition, and mental wellbeing of those in First Nation communities. 
What are foodborne illnesses? 
Foodborne illness is the term used to describe when people 
become sick after eating food that contains harmful bacteria 
(like E. coli or Salmonella), parasites (like roundworm), 
viruses (like Norovirus), toxic mushrooms or other 
chemicals. You might have heard it described as “food 
poisoning”. Common foodborne illness symptoms include 
vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever, and chills. Most 
foodborne illnesses are acute, meaning they happen suddenly 
and last a short time, and most people recover on their own without 
treatment. Occasionally, foodborne illness may lead to more serious 
complications. 
 
How will the odds of getting foodborne illness change with climate change? 
Climate, like air temperature, water temperature, and rain patterns, 
can affect how quickly pathogens grow and spread. In warmer 
temperatures, like we are expecting with climate change, food can 
spoil more quickly both when harvested and once in the kitchen. For 
example, research has found that outbreaks of E. Coli and Salmonella 
in Canada occur more often in warmer temperatures. Foodborne 
pathogens like parasites will also grow and spread more quickly and 
infect more of the game species that are harvested. 
 
What have people noticed? 
Already, during the fall or early winter season when many people are 
setting out fish nets, or hunting moose and partridge, temperatures 
are warmer than in the past. This has made it harder for people to 
keep harvested meat cool, which is necessary to stop it from spoiling. 
People speak of seeing more worms as wells as other diseases in fish, 
partridge and moose, making them wonder if the animals are safe to 
eat. Burying meat in the ground is not as effective at keeping meat cool as it was in the past because the 
ground is much hotter. 
 
 
Rising Temperatures & Foodborne Illness 
°C 
Predicted rise in fall temperatures by the 
2050s (compared to the average for 1986-
2005) (RCP8.5, 75th percentile, CMIP5) 
http://climate-
scenarios.canada.ca/?page=download-
cmip5 
Roundworms (arrows) in the 
intestines of a harvested grouse. 
Photo provided by Isabell Souliere 
Magnified image 
of E. coli 
HEALTH: ISSUE 7 OF 7 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Harvested game 
Hotter temperatures can pose a special challenge for harvesting wild 
game. Keeping meat, fish, and even harvested berries cool from the time 
they are collected in the bush until harvesters return home is important 
for preventing the growth of bacteria that can contaminate food and 
make people sick. Some hunters have adapted to changing temperatures 
by waiting for cooler weather later in fall or earlier in spring to hunt.  
Small game, like fish and birds, can be kept in coolers for transport. 
Keeping harvested berries cool and out of the sun will help stop them 
from spoiling. For keeping large game cool in warm weather: 
• 
have a plan in place to get game out of the bush as quickly as 
possible 
• 
field dressing (removing the intestines and stomach) should be done as soon as possible 
• 
removing the hide (skinning) can help cool game that have a thick coat, like moose  
• 
harvested game can be kept cool during transport by packing ice inside the body and keeping it 
where air can circulate, such as the back of a pickup truck 
 
Proper food-handling 
Proper thawing, chilling, and storage of food can 
help prevent food spoilage and dangerous 
bacterial growth that could lead to foodborne 
illnesses. Hand washing and cleaning work 
surfaces and utensils can also help prevent other 
foods and surfaces from being contaminated. 
Meat, including wild game, should be cooked to 
a temperature high enough to kill potential 
bacteria and parasites. Meat thermometers are a 
useful tool for this.  
Community initiatives  
Some communities have already begun taking steps to prevent food spoilage in 
light of warmer temperatures. Chapleau Cree First Nation, for example, created a 
community moose cooler, where harvested moose can be hung and butchered in 
a cool space. In the Hudson Bay area, two Nunavut communities, Sanikiluaq and 
Arviat, completed community freezer projects in 2016. These large freezers can 
store a lot of game and are open for members of the community to use.  
Want to know more? 
Health Canada’s Food Safety for First Nations People of Canada  
https://www.gov.mb.ca/inr/pdf/pubs/nhfi_food_safety_for_first_nations_people_of_canada.pdf 
Ice and coolers can keep harvested fish 
cool while they are transported. Photo 
https://lakeofthewoodsmn.com 
Inside of community cooler in 
Chapleau Cree First Nation 
Photos by Dakota Souliere. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Climate change will impact energy infrastructure and we can expect winter conditions to create a number of 
challenges, especially in the north. 
How will a changing winter impact energy 
infrastructure? 
Climate change is projected to bring warmer 
winter temperatures and more winter 
precipitation to all regions in Ontario. The 
temperature impacts the types of precipitation 
that we experience, and warmer conditions could 
mean areas see more rain, freezing rain, and ice 
storms in winter. Warmer air also leads to more 
heavy, wet snow which can weigh down power 
lines, transmission poles, and trees.  
Ice accumulation can also add a lot of weight to 
power lines and equipment, causing damage. In 
windy conditions, icy lines can move so much 
that they snap wires and wooden poles or even 
cause steel transmission structures to crumble.  
 What do winter power outages mean for people and communities? 
The impact of a power outage on people and communities depends on how long the outage lasts and how 
much the community’s heat relies on electricity. A short power outage might only be an inconvenience. But 
when power outages drag on in winter, houses will become cold and people will need to seek out warm spaces 
and worry about freezing pipes. Power outages in cold temperatures are considered an emergency by many 
communities.  
How can our community prepare? 
Community Emergency Planning 
Winter power outages can be a great risk for northern communities. 
Communities can benefit from having an emergency plan in place. Plans 
can include: 
• 
Well defined conditions to call an emergency 
• 
List of roles and responsibilities for community leaders during 
an emergency 
• 
Written response plans and how to implement them 
• 
Methods for alerting the community 
• 
Plan to support the most vulnerable community members 
 
Air temperature influences if precipitation falls as rain, freezing rain, sleet, or 
snow. Image modified from https://www.weather.gov/rnk/Measure_Icing 
Preparing for Winter Power Outages 
INFRASTRUCTURE: ISSUE 1 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Community Warming Centres 
Making community warming centres available during long 
power outages can help protect community members in 
cold conditions. The city of Yellowknife uses the chart 
shown on the right as a guideline for deciding when to 
open emergency warming centres. Outdoor temperature 
and the duration of the power outage are used to 
determine the need. 
A warming center should be in a large building that has its 
own backup power generator in case of a community-
wide power outage.  
Maintenance of Power Infrastructure 
Power transmission infrastructure (like hydro poles, transmission towers, etc.) that is well maintained may be 
less likely to be damaged by weather events. Communities may consider having their power grid assessed and 
advocating for necessary maintenance. This can include the replacement of damaged or aging structure and/or 
clearing trees that could damage infrastructure if they fall. 
 
Communities may also want to consider creating their own electricity 
with a local microgrid. Microgrids can be done with renewable energy, 
like wind, solar or nuclear, which can reduce dependence on diesel 
generators. They also allow communities to be more independent.  
 
How can people prepare? 
Emergency Supplies 
Households can be prepared for winter power outages by keeping supplies such 
as canned food, candles, flashlights and batteries. A crank or battery powered 
radio can be handy, so you get news and alerts. Communities can help 
households by providing information on how to get prepared and by supplying 
provisions that may be hard to get because of cost or availability.  
Prepare your Home 
Other heat sources, like woodstoves, can heat your home when the electricity is out but be sure that chimneys 
and stoves are working and maintained regularly. Never use fuel stoves, BBQs, or any other outdoor appliance 
inside your house because exhaust fumes, like carbon monoxide, can build up and make you sick or even cause 
death. Gas/diesel generators can provide short term electricity, but they too should be kept outdoors and away 
from windows and vents that could draw exhaust inside the house. If you don’t have a way to keep your house 
warm, take steps to prevent water pipes from freezing; if you are on a well, drain your pipes; if you are on 
community water, leave taps on a little.  
  
Decision chart for opening warming centres in Yellowknife, NWT, 
in response to a winter power outage. Yellowknife's Emergency 
Measures Plan (available online) 
Example emergency supply kit. 
Image from https://prrd.bc.ca/services/emergency-
services/get-prepared/ 
Solar power microgrids can help with 
energy independnce  
Risk Assessment Matrix 
Temperature
0-2 hours 3-4 hours 4-5 hours 5-7 hours 8+ hours
+10°C or more
   0°C 
-10°C
-20°C 
-30°C
-40°C
No warming centre needed
Warming centre "MAY" be needed (situational)
Warming centre will open
Duration of the full power outage
Image from https://scitechdaily.com/no-more-blackouts-new-
framework-guarantees-the-stability-of-microgrids/ 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
Many First Nation communities face existing challenges with water and wastewater infrastructure. 
Climate change is likely to add additional stress.  
How will more precipitation impact water and wastewater systems? 
Contaminants 
Climate change is expected to increase precipitation in northern Ontario 
and large rain events (50mm to 150mm in one day) are projected to 
happen more often. Increased snow loads and heavier rains can cause 
more runoff (when water flows over the land) and flooding, which can 
carry contaminants like animal and human waste and oil into waterbodies 
contaminating drinking water. This can stress water treatment plants. 
More precipitation can increase the amount of water entering the wastewater lagoon, requiring 
infrastructure to cope with larger volumes of water than before. If a wastewater lagoon is too full, it 
may need to be dumped before the wastewater has been held for the amount of time required for 
treatment, increasing the risk of contaminating the surrounding ecosystem or drinking water source. 
Overwhelmed sewer systems can result in sewer backups into homes and buildings that flood and 
damage basements and may even require evacuations. 
Erosion and sedimentation 
Heavy rains may also lead to erosion, increased sediment entering the waterways as well as water 
cloudiness (turbidity) that may require more chlorine for water treatment, clog filters, or wear out 
pumps and turbines, increasing maintenance costs of drinking water systems. 
How will higher temperatures impact water and wastewater systems? 
Warming Lakes  
Lakes go through a yearly cycle of mixing and layering. 
In spring, after the ice is gone, strong winds mix the 
water so the entire lake has the same water 
temperature and quality. In summer, as the sun warms 
the surface of the lake, the warmer water is less dense 
and begins to create a layer, the epilimnion, that 
doesn’t mix with the water below, the hypolimnion; 
this is called stratification. In fall, the water cools and 
the layering disappears and the whole lake mixes again 
to then gets iced over in winter.  
The top layer in summer, the epilimnion, becomes 
quite warm and tends to hold onto contaminants that 
runoff from the land and harbour algae blooms, making 
it less than ideal for a drinking water intake. Water 
intakes are preferably placed in the deep hypolimnion 
where colder, cleaner water makes for easier 
treatment. Climate change is expected to bring higher temperatures that will warm the waters of lakes 
and streams. The top layer of warm water in lakes, the epilimnion, will become deeper and therefore 
water intakes will need to be deeper to access cold, cleaner water. 
Water & Wastewater Systems in a Changing Climate 
Yearly lake cycle 
Attawapiskat water treatment plant. 
INFRASTRUCTURE: ISSUE 2 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Advocate for safe drinking water 
Clean, safe drinking water is already an issue for many First Nation 
communities. Communities should continue to push for safe 
drinking water. In communities that do have drinkable tap water, 
make sure effective monitoring programs are in place and that 
the water continues to be safe to drink. During times that water is 
not safe to drink, communities should have an alerting system to 
notify members and have alternative water sources available 
(bottled water, boiled water, different water sources, etc.). 
Assessing risk and vulnerability 
Planning for infrastructure upgrades will require professional 
assistance/assessment, but an initial assessment of the current and potential 
climate change impacts can help identify priorities for adaptation planning. 
Ecology North developed a protocol to assess the vulnerability of northern water 
and wastewater systems to climate change impacts for communities in the 
Northwest Territories that may be useful for communities in northern Ontario. 
The guide includes a list of questions that will help determine the likelihood of an 
impact occurring and the severity of that impact to help prioritize action.  
Community planning 
Community planning can help protect drinking water sources as well as drinking water and wastewater 
infrastructure. Community planning actions could include: 
• 
 Limit building in sensitive areas, like riverbanks or shorelines, that could result in erosion. 
• 
Manage hazardous waste at landfills to prevent contaminated runoff. 
• 
Implement a drainage plan to manage stormwater; a good drainage plan can reduce the chance 
of flooding, and slow runoff to avoid erosion, sedimentation and contamination. 
• 
Protect and divert water into green spaces like wetlands or ponds. 
• 
Consider moving sewage treatment lagoons if they are upstream from water intake. 
 
Climate change is likely to add additional stress on infrastructure. Identifying potential climate change 
impacts can help communities determine what actions should be taken now or in the future.  
Resources 
• 
The Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative (NISI) Community Systems: From Start to Finish: 
https://www.scc.ca/en/nisi/community-systems 
• 
Protocol to Assess the Vulnerability of Northern Water and Wastewater Systems to Climate Change Impacts (2010): 
https://ecologynorth.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Vulnerability-Assessment-Protocol-03-10-Compressed.pdf 
• 
Integrating Climate Change Measures into Municipal Planning and Decision-Making: A Guide for Northern 
Communities (2014): https://ecologynorth.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/IntegratingClimateChange-book-Lowres-
Feb2015.pdf 
• 
Guidance For Providing Safe Drinking Water in Areas of Federal Jurisdiction: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/services/publications/healthy-living/guidance-providing-safe-drinking-water-areas-federal-jurisdiction-
version-2.html 
Assessing source water 
threats should consider 
regionally projected 
climate change impacts 
including potential for: 
• 
increased flooding 
• 
increased erosion 
• 
increased turbidity 
• 
melting permafrost 
(if applicable) 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Community roads are essential links that people use every day, but changing climate can damage the 
roads in the north by bringing more mid-winter thaws, more heavy rain, and other extreme weather 
events to the region. How can communities prepare? 
How can climate change impact roads? 
Weather can be hard on the roads of northern Ontario. Heat, rain, and freeze-thaw cycles can damage 
both paved and gravel roads, and climate change will likely intensify these weather events in the north. 
With climate change, we can expect warmer temperatures, more heatwaves, an increase in heavy rain 
events, and milder winters with more freeze-thaw cycles. 
 
What are people noticing? 
Already, people in many First Nation communities across the north say that heavy rains are damaging 
their roads, causing potholes and even washouts. In some cases, people point to poor road drainage as 
the problem. Washouts on provincial highways have also impacted people’s ability to travel to other 
cities and communities.  
Community Roads & Climate Change 
INFRASTRUCTURE: ISSUE 3 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Know what roads in your community are most at risk 
Knowing which roads could use improvement and which could be 
vulnerable to climate change impacts in the future is a good place 
to start the adaptation process. Roads that already have problems 
with flooding or washouts, or roads in low lying areas, could all be 
considered. Roads for emergency access and evacuation should 
also be prioritized. Keep climate change in mind when planning 
future community roads; for instance, plan new roads on high 
ground to reduce the risk of flooding.  
Culverts and water control 
Heavy rain and excess water can cause a lot of problems for both paved and gravel roads. Make sure 
drainage and culvert systems can handle the amount of rain and snow melt expected for your region 
now and into the future. Keep ditches and culverts clear of blockages and repair or replace pieces as 
needed. Where roads cross streams and creeks, make sure culverts are big enough for the width of the 
stream and work with the natural flow of the water instead of trying to divert it elsewhere. 
When water gets under the surface of roadways, potholes can form. To help promote drainage, roads 
are slightly higher in the middle (called the ‘crown’) and sloped down towards the edges to help water 
flow off the road surface. This sloping is 
especially important for dirt and gravel 
roads, which absorb water more readily 
than paved ones. The crown on gravel and 
dirt roads will need to be maintained and a 
machine with a grader blade is a good way 
to do that.  
Limit erosion 
As water from rainfall runs over the land, it can move soil, sand, and other materials along with it. This 
process is called erosion, and slopes and embankments along roadsides can be particularly vulnerable. 
When erosion happens on a large scale, road washouts can be the result. One cost-effective way to help 
limit erosion is by planting native plants. Plants help by slowing down the flow of water over the land, 
letting more soak into the ground, while their roots help hold the soil in position preventing it from 
being washed away. Keeping the slopes of roadside ditches as gentle as possible can also help lessen 
erosion. 
Dust control 
Traffic on dirt and gravel roads produces dust, a problem that can be made worse by periods of dry 
weather. If dust is a problem on local roads, communities can try: limiting traffic, suggesting people 
drive more slowly, watering the roads, changing road materials, or using a chemical to bind the road 
material together.   
Want to know more about gravel roads? https://westfordvt.us/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Appendix-B-
Answers-to-Frequently-Asked-Questions-About-Gravel-Roads.pdf 
Dirt and gravel roads can become marked 
with potholes when water doesn’t drain 
away properly.  
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The winter season is projected to 
have the greatest temperature 
increase, and warmer winters are 
already being felt and seen in 
communities. In reality, changes in 
temperature are even more 
pronounced in some regions and 
can vary year to year. 
 
 
 
What are the projected 
changes for Winter? 
 
 
 
How will this impact the ice? 
Ice growth and strength is directly linked to the weather in 
the area and this is especially important in the fall, when ice 
forms, and in the spring, when ice begins to lose its strength. 
In late fall, ice grows with cold days and colder nights 
(without snow to slow down freezing). Warming trends in 
fall and winter can delay ice freeze-up time making 
traditional routes unsafe when they would have been safe at 
that time in the past. This impacts people’s ability to travel 
or hunt.  
 
A faster spring melt of ice and snow can also create unsafe ice conditions earlier than when they have 
occurred in the past. Changes in ice thickness especially in the spring and fall can be a hazard to people’s 
safety, and incidents of break-through could become more frequent. 
 
The projected change in 
winter temperature (°C) in 
Ontario is 4°C to 9°C by the 
2050s, compared to the 
average for 1986-2005, 
assuming little reduction in 
carbon emissions (RCP8.5; 
75th percentile). Source: 
http://climate-
scenarios.canada.ca/index.p
hp?page=download-cmip5 
Changing Ice 
TRANSPORTATION: ISSUE 1 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
What can we do? 
Monitoring and community alerting systems 
Ice thickness monitoring on traditional routes can increase the 
safety of community members. In some towns, a community 
person is hired to check ice thickness regularly on commonly used 
travel ways or waterbodies. Usually, an axe or an auger is used to 
measure ice depth, but some places have invested in ground-
penetrating radar systems.  
 
Sharing information about ice is vital and should include 
information about unsafe areas where the ice may not be as thick. 
Social media sharing, such as Facebook or community websites, 
may serve as information platforms to inform community 
members. Lake Simcoe has a Facebook page and the Moose 
Factory Island Fire & Rescue put out regular reports to inform 
community members. 
Equipment modifications and changing routes 
In some regions, people have already needed 
to change the snowmobiles they drive to 
lighter weight machines for safer ice travel. 
Changing routes to avoid water crossings may 
be considered for safer access to traditional 
areas.  
 
Emergency planning and preparedness  
Emergency planning for safe travel is 
always a good idea, but especially in the 
winter. Telling a reliable community 
member where you are going and when 
you expect to return can ensure that 
someone will come looking for you if you don’t return. Safety equipment and supplies like a 
floater suit, throw rope and ice picks in case you fall through the ice should always be a part of a 
packing list. Emergency planning information and a complete packing list should be available to 
community members either as a poster or on a community website.  
 
Learn more: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165232X04000898 
http://lakeice.squarespace.com/bearing-strength/ 
https://www.ihsa.ca/PDFs/Products/Id/IHSA029.pdf 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
Most communities in northern Ontario rely on winter roads 
to receive goods and supplies. Warmer winters and changes 
in spring and fall weather are challenging winter road 
systems. As the climate continues to change, one way that 
communities can prepare is by becoming less dependent on 
goods shipped from other places.  
How is climate change impacting winter roads? 
Climate change is expected to bring higher temperatures in 
every season, but temperature changes in winter are 
predicted to be the most dramatic of all. Winter 
temperatures in the far north are predicted to be as much as 
5°C to 9°C higher in the 2050s as compared to the average 
for 1985-2005.  
Snowfall, which can play a big part in winter road 
construction, is also predicted to change. The amount of 
winter precipitation an area can expect, when it falls, and 
whether it falls as rain or snow, can all impact winter road 
construction, quality, and lifespan.  
 
For winter roads, these changes in climate can mean:
• 
 Delays in opening dates 
• 
 Earlier closing dates 
• 
 Weaker, thinner ice 
• 
 Rivers freezing later or not at all 
• 
 Rivers break-up earlier and ice melts faster 
• 
 More slush 
• 
 Poor quality roads 
• 
 Melting of underlying permafrost 
• 
 Muskeg no longer freezes well 
 
What are people noticing? 
In First Nations communities across Ontario people 
agree that the winter road season has gotten shorter. In 
some communities, people say that this shorter season 
has meant a shortage of goods and supplies, as fewer 
trucks can arrive or loads need to be lighter. Many people 
also have concerns with the safety of their winter road, 
saying they now limit their travel to February since January 
and March conditions are too unpredictable. 
 
Predicted changes in winter temperatures (°C) by the 2050s 
compared to the average for 1985-2005 (RCP8.5, 75th percentile) 
From http://climate-scenarios.canada.ca/?page=download-cmip5 
Off Road Thinking –  
How local production can reduce dependence on winter roads 
Map from 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/resources/publications/i
mpacts-adaptation/reports/assessments/2008/ch6/10363 
TRANSPORTATION: ISSUE 2 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
 
How can communities become less dependent on goods shipped over winter roads? 
Less diesel, more green energy 
Fuel for the diesel generators that power many remote communities is a big portion of the goods hauled over 
winter roads. When winter road seasons are short or the road quality only allows for partial loads, communities 
can face fuel shortages and are often forced to fly in fuel at much higher costs. 
Adding green energy technology, such as solar and wind power, to the existing power grid can help communities 
reduce their use of diesel fuel. Not only does this lessen the need for costly fuel and fuel delivery, but it also 
reduces the community’s overall greenhouse gas emissions and can improve air quality. As green technologies 
continue to improve, so does the potential for these energy sources to replace traditional, non-renewable energy! 
Local food production 
Food is an important good shipped into remote communities on winter roads. Shortening of the winter road 
season can have a big impact on food security in the north. Growing food locally is one way to reduce 
dependence on outside supplies and improve access to food.  
Berries and vegetables can be grown in outdoor gardens planted by individuals or by community members in 
shared community. Community gardens can help ensure that all community members have access to healthy 
foods, without the price tag that comes from shipping costs and retail markup. Greenhouses can extend the 
growing season even further and can be built fairly inexpensively. Hydroponics (using water instead of soil to 
grow plants) and aquaponics (growing fish for the waste they provide for growing plants) can be used to grow 
food indoors year-round or outdoors in summer in areas with poor soil. 
 
 
 
 
Kiashke  
Zaaging  
Anishinaabek 
https://montreal.ctvnews.ca/from
-shore-to-sky-a-reconciliation-
story 
In August of 2019, the diesel generators that powered the 
community of KZA in Ontario for 60 years were turned off 
and the community’s new solar powered micro grid was 
turned on. Since its launch, solar power in the community 
has saved over 20,000 litres of diesel fuel!  
A remote community in northern Alaska installed its first 
turbine in 1997 and has since integrated a wind farm into the 
diesel generating system. Since 2015, excess wind energy is 
captured to heat the water in a boiler for the local hospital. 
In 2016, a bank of lithium ion batteries was installed. 
Kotzebue 
Alaska 
https://www.youtube.com/watch
?v=4xna4-PSlUU 
FROM THIS: 
Aquaponics 
TO THIS: 
Community Garden 
Greenhouse 
Although the changing climate threatens the longevity of winter roads, communities can prepare by reducing 
their reliance on shipping goods like food and supplies like diesel. Green energy and local gardening may be the 
answer. In fact, thanks to climate change, a longer growing season in northern Ontario will make it possible to 
grow a wider variety of berries and vegetables. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
  
In the far north of Ontario, winter roads 
connect 31 First Nation communities to an 
all-season road system further south or 
west. The winter road season in the far 
north typically runs about 3 months, from 
January to March, and connects First 
Nations to each other and to urban centres, 
allowing for transportation of goods and 
access to special services. The climate is 
changing, and winter roads have and will 
continue to be affected. 
• 
Weaker, thinner ice 
• 
Delays in winter road opening dates 
• 
Reduction in winter road quality 
• 
More slush 
• 
Melting of underlying permafrost 
• 
Roads may have air pockets and 
earth patches 
• 
Muskeg no longer freezing well 
• 
Rivers freezing later or not 
completely, river ice melts faster 
and break-ups are earlier 
 
What are some construction 
options?  
Change/improve ice road flooding technique 
Flooding roads is a common practice to increase the thickness of the ice road and 
technique varies based on local practice, but the strength of the ice can vary 
depending on flooding method. Thickening of the ice is usually done with high 
volume pumps which pump water from beneath the ice onto the surface. The 
water is applied in layers about 3 cm thick and allowed to freeze before another 
layer is applied. Read about construction methods in “State of the art of ice 
bearing capacity and ice construction” by D.M. Masterson.   
 
Reroute roads to avoid water or add bridges over water 
To reduce the number of times that the road goes over water where ice can be 
unsafe, consider moving existing routes away from major rivers to high ground like 
beach ridges. Extensive consultation and assessments of the land are required 
similar to what is being done for Webequie’s Supply Road 
http://www.supplyroad.ca/. Another option is to build a bridge over rivers and 
creeks.  
 
All-season road  
As the length of the winter road season continues to shorten, consider building an all-season road. This 
option can be very expensive and social aspects of connecting remote communities must be considered. 
Follow the progress of the western James Bay all season road on Facebook: Mushkegowuk Council All 
Season Road Feasibility Study 
Winter Road Construction 
Winter road near Peawanuck, 
March 2014, JLH3Photography 
Winter road connecting 
KI and Wapekeka 
Flooding pump with submersible 
auger. (Masterson, 2009) 
 
Permanent crossing over creek: 
Government of NWT. 
Winter road network 
in northern Ontario 
TRANSPORTATION: ISSUE 3 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Winter Road Best Practices 
Follow the rules! 
Proper use of the winter road, especially over 
water crossings, will help to road last as long as 
possible. The rules are in place to extend the life of 
the road. Not following the rules will impact the 
integrity and safety of winter ice roads.  
 
Vehicles (especially heavy ones) should not park on 
water crossings as they fracture the ice, reducing 
its strength. It is also important to follow the speed 
limit and to keep your distance from the vehicle 
ahead of you. 
 
Speed limits are not just for the safety of the 
vehicles and the people in them. Going too fast 
damages the road. Vehicles travelling on ice generate waves 
in the ice. When staying below the speed limit, the ice sinks 
and flexes with the movement of the vehicle. If you speed, 
waves are formed in the ice which can stress and break it. If 
the vehicle is travelling too fast, the stress on the ice 
increases and can lead to extensive cracking, and blowouts 
that may even break through the ice. The speed vehicles can 
travel on ice depends on the thickness of the ice, the depth 
of the water below it and the length of the crossing. More 
information in Best Practices for Building and Working 
Safely on Ice Covers in Ontario. 
 
Alert system for unsafe conditions/closure of road 
To enforce these best practices, users need to be aware of them. A combination of signs on the road and 
Facebook posts may help residents and transport drivers follow best practices. Wetum Road, among 
others, have a Facebook page to keep everyone informed:  https://www.facebook.com/wetumroad/ 
 
Next Steps? 
Assess vulnerability of winter roads currently and in the future with changing climate. Consider the 
alternative construction options and make an action plan to implement them. Communities can also 
look to incorporate safety training as part of the construction costs. 
 
Resources: 
Findings from CIER and Manitoba First Nations research on climate change impacts on winter roads: 
http://www.yourcier.org/uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/findings_pamphlet2_3.pdf 
 
Impact of Climate Change on Winter Road Systems in Ontario’s Far North: First Nations’ and 
Climatological Perspectives on the Changing Viability and Longevity of Winter Roads. (Hori, Y., University 
of Toronto, 2016): 
https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/1807/76442/3/Hori_Yukari_201611_PhD_thesis.pdf 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
Rivers and lakes provide transportation corridors as do traditional routes on the land in summer, but as 
the climate changes these traditional routes are becoming more challenging to navigate.  
 
How can climate change impact travel on land and on water? 
Northern Ontario is getting warmer and will continue to warm with climate change. More heat waves in 
summer are expected and more droughts. The increased frequency and duration of droughts due to 
increased temperature may lower water levels so much that people cannot navigate rivers or streams.  
On the other hand, extreme rainfall and/or wind may contribute to unanticipated and dangerous 
weather conditions if traveling by boat. When travelling over land, increased windstorms and extreme 
weather may down trees making it difficult to navigate traditional routes. 
 
What are people noticing? 
Across the north, people are finding that low water levels in summer is making travel across the land 
more difficult. Near Lake Nipigon, for example, travelers needed to portage in spots where the water 
was too low to paddle. On the James Bay coast, low water in summer has meant that some travelers are 
unable to reach their destinations. When trails near Wunnumin get blocked by fallen trees, chainsaws 
are needed to clear them out. 
 
 
 
 
Traditional Routes: Summer travel over water and land 
Projected summer mean temperature in Sioux Lookout with continued greenhouse gas emissions. www.climateatlas.ca 
2030 
2065 
Low water levels make navigating streams 
difficult. Photo of stream entering Eabamet Lake. 
Forests are drying out and being downed 
by high winds making travelling on land 
difficult. Photo near Dowling. 
TRANSPORTATION: ISSUE 4 OF 4 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
 
 
How can we prepare? 
Equipment modifications 
In communities along rivers, some traditional routes are no 
longer accessible during parts of the summer. Simple equipment 
modifications can involve adding a bracket that allows you to 
quickly pivot the motor out of the water as the driver 
approaches shallow waters. More costly equipment could 
include motors designed for shallow water like long shaft mud 
motors where the prop stays near the surface or jet drive 
motors that does not use a propeller. 
Community initiatives 
Where river waters are shallow near a community, the 
construction of a permanent road along the river would give 
residents the option of driving to their boats that are shored further downstream to avoid the 
shallowest waters. Where traditional trails are blocked by downed trees, communities can band 
together to do the hard work of removing the trees to allow passage to community members once again  
Emergency planning and preparedness  
Emergency planning for safe travel is always a good idea, but especially with the unpredictable and 
changing weather. Checking weather forecasts before a trip can help an individual to plan the best travel 
time and allow them to better be prepared for possible adverse weather. Telling a reliable community 
member where you are going and when you expect to return so that someone can come looking for you 
if you don’t return. Safety equipment and supplies as well as food and water should always be a part of 
a packing list (e.g. satellite phone, extra food, pocket knife, fire starter, first aid kit, extra medication, 
water container and purifier, and warm clothing). Emergency planning information and a complete 
packing list should be available to community members either as a poster or on a community website. 
www.adventure16.com/info/checklists provides a useful starting point for packing and planning in 
different seasons.  
Common outboard motor is replaced by a mud 
motor to navigate better in shallow water and 
reduce damage. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
 
 
 
Fire is a natural and essential part of many ecosystems including the boreal forest in northern Ontario. It can 
also, sometimes, be a threat to people and communities. So, it is critical to explore how climate change may 
change wildfires on the land.  
Why are there wildfires and why are they important? 
In many of Earth’s ecosystems, fire plays an 
important role. In fire-adapted environments like 
the boreal forest, natural wildfires are frequent and 
serve to renew the forest by clearing away dead 
material, like branches, that have collected over 
time allowing for the growth of new plants and 
trees. After a fire, trees like aspen and birch come 
back quickly because they grow from their stumps. 
Jack pine cones open from the heat of the fire and 
release seeds to grow the next generation of trees. 
Some animals like moose are attracted to this new 
forest of young trees. Fire creates a pattern of 
forest of various ages which provides habitat for a 
large variety of plants and animals. In northwestern 
Ontario, a high proportion of the forest has burned 
at some point in the last 50 years.  
How is climate change impacting wildfires?  
Warmer temperatures 
Climate change is bringing warmer temperatures to all regions of Canada. In 
Ontario, summer temperatures in 2050 are predicted to be as much as 3°C to 
5°C warmer than the average summer temperatures in 1985-2005. Hotter 
temperatures draw more moisture out of plants and soils (an effect called 
evapotranspiration), and these drier conditions cause wildfires to ignite and 
spread more easily. Changes in other seasons, like warmer winters with less 
snow, warmer springs and faster spring melt, and warmer fall weather, can 
also influence the wildfire season. In many places, the wildfire season now 
starts earlier in the year and lasts longer into the fall than it has before. 
Climate change is impacting the timing, frequency, and intensity of wildfires on 
the land. 
Insect damage 
Trees that are severely damaged or die in insect outbreaks can increase 
wildfire risk by becoming potential wildfire fuel. Climate change is 
predicted to make some forest insect outbreaks, like eastern spruce 
budworm, more severe. Eastern spruce budworm is a native moth; the 
caterpillar life stage of the budworm feeds on the needles of balsam fir and 
white spruce and can cause widespread tree damage in the boreal forest. 
One study predicted that climate change will lead to eastern spruce 
budworm outbreaks lasting longer and causing more damage, especially 
in the northern portion of its range1. 
Wildfire – Natural but Risky 
Evapotranspiration 
Area burned by wildfire 
between 1960 and 2015 
Defoliation caused by the spruce budworm 
Photo https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/. 
WILDFIRE: ISSUE 1 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Severe Weather 
Climate change has the potential to make storms happen more often and be more severe than in the past. 
Many people in First Nation communities across the north have already noticed a change, saying wind storms 
are stronger now than they used to be, and hearing of tornados in their area for the first time in living memory. 
Storms and severe weather can impact wildfire through: 
Micro bursts and tornados  
When trees are blown down by strong winds or tornados, the dead 
wood becomes fuel for forest fires as it dries out. As these events 
become more common, the amount of forest fire fuel across the 
landscape can also increase. 
More lightning and more lightning-caused fires 
More storms bring the possibility of more lightning, a trend some 
say they are already seeing. Lightning is how most natural wildfires 
start. Drier conditions on the land also mean that lightning strikes 
are more likely to ignite wildfires, making the impact of increased 
lightning strikes even more significant.  
How do we know that the change in fires is because of climate change? 
There are, of course, multiple factors that 
contribute to the ignition and growth of 
wildfires. Some people may use this fact to 
try to downplay the relationship between 
human-caused warming and wildfire 
occurrence.  However, when researchers look 
at wildfires over a long period of time, like 
decades, many have found a clear and stable 
trend between wildfire and temperature. The 
graph to the right, looking at Canadian forest 
fires from 1920 to 1999, is an example of this, 
with temperature (the red line) and area 
burned in forest fires (the black line) 
following each other closely. Trends like this 
are good evidence that warmer temperatures 
are leading to more wildfires. It also means that, 
as warming continues, we will likely see even 
more wildfire activity in the future. 
Wildfire is natural but the fire season is changing. Warmer temperatures are drying forests, severe weather 
and insect outbreaks are happening more often all increasing the risk of fire. We need to ask ourselves if 
animals and plants can adapt and how will these changes impact people. 
Want to know more? https://sites.ualberta.ca/~flanniga/climatechange.html 
1Gray, D. R.2008 The relationship between climate and outbreak characteristics of the spruce budworm in eastern Canada. Clim. Change 87, 361–383 . 
2Gillett, N. P., Weaver, A. J., Zwiers, F. W. & Flannigan, M. D. 2004. Detecting the effect of climate change on Canadian forest fires. Geophys. Res. Lett. 31. 
This graph shows the relationship between temperature (the red line) 
and area burned by wildfire (the black line) in Canada over time. The 
two lines follow each other closely, illustrating their relationship. The 
green line is the trend predicted by a computer model, which also 
follows the two lines closely. Graph from Gillett, N. P. et al 20042. 
Severe weather blew over trees near Pickle 
Lake, ON. Photo Dave Cleaveley. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
Climate change is impacting the timing, frequency, and intensity of wildfires on the land and putting 
infrastructure at risk, but fire prevention and policies can be put in place to keep communities, homes 
and people safe. 
How is climate change impacting wildfires? 
Climate change is bringing warmer temperatures to 
summers in Ontario which can lead to drier conditions 
that cause wildfires to ignite and spread more easily. In 
many places, the wildfire season now starts earlier in the 
year and lasts longer into the fall than it has before.  
How can we prepare? 
Community emergency plan 
Having a community emergency plan is critical in order 
to be prepared for a wildfire, but community members must be aware of and have access to this 
information in order for it to be useful. A community emergency plan should outline:  
• 
An emergency meeting place. 
• 
List of contacts within the community. 
• 
List of who is responsible for a given task, 
such as ensuring hazardous materials like 
fuel tanks are protected and who can act as 
a back-up if those individuals are 
unavailable. 
• 
Inventory of the fire suppression equipment 
and a continually updated supply inspection 
log. 
• 
Information on the location of sprinklers, 
power pumps, hose lines, fire alarms, and 2-
way valves for splitting a single water 
supply within each community to protect 
valuables. 
• 
An outline of hazard zones that exist around 
the community. 
Monitor fire risk and smoke 
Hot, dry conditions can make fires more likely to start and spread. 
Communities can monitor the fire hazard risk for their area with tools like 
Ontario’s Forest Fire Info Map (https://www.ontario.ca/page/forest-fires). 
When fire risk is high, communities may want to restrict or ban outdoor 
burning, like campfires and encourage to butt out cigarettes before 
throwing them into the trash. Information on safe fire practices could also 
be shared with the community to lower the risk of human-caused fires. Communities may also wish to 
monitor for smoke and air quality. (https://firesmoke.ca/forecasts/current/) 
Vegetation management 
Managing the trees and plants near a community and your home can help reduce risk. Vegetation 
management will differ the closer you are to a building (priority zone). No vegetation should be within 
1.5m (5ft) of a building. As you move away from the building, more and more vegetation can be left 
intact. Forest stands near the community can be thinned to reduce the spread of fire into a community. 
This preventative work can employ local people and provide firewood for community members.   
Protecting Infrastructure from Wildfire 
WILDFIRE: ISSUE 2 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
Buffer zones & fireguards 
Fireguards act as barriers to potential fires, they can be made by 
digging a trench down to the mineral soil around the perimeter 
of the community and clearing fuel sources, like trees, on either 
side of the trench. Encouraging less flammable deciduous trees 
like birch, poplar, or maples can reduce the risk of fire spreading 
toward the community.  
Building with fire in mind 
Changing how homes and buildings are constructed can make them more resistant to damage from 
wildfires. For example, roofing materials like asphalt, metal, or slate, are good choices for fire resistance. 
Fire resistant materials for siding include stucco, metal siding, brick, or concrete.  
 
FireSmart Canada has many helpful resources and programs on how to reduce fire risk including 
vegetation and building management. 
 
Fighting fire with fire  
The Boreal forest is naturally shaped by fire. Lightning starts small regular fires that clear away dead 
material reducing fuel available for large damaging wildfires that can be especially risky for 
communities. This is the reason that fires that are not at risk of reaching a community, are left to burn 
themselves out. In many regions, controlled burns are set by government agencies to mimic the natural 
fire cycle. Clearing sections of the forest through controlled and prescribed burns were performed at 
nine First Nation communities across Ontario in 2017 to help reduce risk to those communities.  
 
Fire risk is increasing because of climate change. Communities can prepare by having an emergency 
plan, monitoring the risk, and managing the land to reduce the risk. 
 
For more information https://firesmartcanada.ca/programs-and-education/ 
Image modified from FireSmart Canada’s original image: 
https://firesmartcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/FireSmart-
Fireguards act as barriers to potential fires. 
Photo from www.livefiresmart.ca/community 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
 
 
Wildfire is a natural and essential part of the boreal forest ecosystem, renewing the land by clearing 
away dead material and prompting the growth of new plants and trees. However, wildfires can impact 
people when they happen close to communities. With climate change predicted to bring more wildfires 
to the north, the people who live there can prepare.  
How are people impacted by wildfires? 
Wildfires can have a wide range of impacts on people and 
communities. Fires burning close to communities can threaten 
homes and trigger evacuations. People may find their mental 
health is impacted as they experience worry or fear about having to 
leave their communities or the possibility of losing their homes. 
Smoke from wildfires can also impact people in the north. Smoke 
can lower the air quality in and around communities and can cause 
breathing problems in vulnerable people, like elders, children, and 
those with asthma. Smoke can affect air quality enough that people 
need to stay indoors, which can lead to feelings of isolation and 
anxiety. Sometimes, smoke can become so severe that community 
evacuations are needed.  
How will climate change impact wildfires? 
Climate change is already bringing hotter summers to the north, with more days over 30°C and more 
heatwaves than in the past. Hotter temperatures draw more moisture out of plants and soils drying the 
land which leads to more wildfire ignitions and greater spread. Changes in other seasons, like warmer 
winters with less snow, warmer springs and faster spring melt, and warmer fall weather, are also 
impacting the wildfire season, causing it to start earlier in the year and last longer into the fall than it has 
before.  
What have people noticed? 
Evacuations of First Nation communities due to wildfire or smoke danger happen nearly every year. 
Some recent examples: 
• 
2019: Pikangikum First Nation was evacuated twice in 
one season (first in late May, then again in July) as 
wildfires burned dangerously close to the community. 
• 
2019: Keewaywin First Nation was evacuated as a fire 
burned only 8 km away from the community. 
• 
2018: 80 residents of Wabaseemong Independent 
First Nations were evacuated for 12 days in July due to 
heavy smoke from a wildfire in the area. 
• 
2017: smoke from multiple wildfires lead to the 
evacuation of over 200 residents from Nibinamik First 
Nation. 
Forest fire outside Pikangikum First Nation on May 30, 
2019. Photo: Twitter/OPP IndigenousBureau 
Map of active fires in northern Ontario on July 29, 
2019. Map from Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources and Forestry, shared by CBC news. 
Wildfire and the People in Your Community 
WILDFIRE: ISSUE 3 OF 3 
UP NORTH ON CLIMATE INFOSHEET 
1/2 
How can we prepare? 
Prevent human-caused fires  
Fire safety is always important, but as the land gets drier causing 
fires to ignite and spread more easily, preventing human-caused 
fires becomes even more critical.  
• 
Promote safe fire practices in your community (campfire 
safety, guidelines for burning grass and yard trimmings, etc.) 
• 
Promote safe fire practices when on the land and point out 
actions that can cause accidental fires (sparks, cigarette butts) 
• 
Monitor the fire hazard risk in your area. When fire risk is high, 
communities may want to restrict or ban outdoor burning. 
Monitor for air quality  
Monitoring the air quality is important because people can be 
impacted by wildfire smoke even if the fire is burning at a safe 
distance away from the community. Tools like FireSmoke Canada 
(https://firesmoke.ca/forecasts/current/) and Canada’s Wildfire 
Smoke Prediction System (https://weather.gc.ca/firework) offer 
maps of current and predicted smoke plumes from wildfire 
allowing people to take action if necessary. Community alerts 
can be issued when air quality is poor so people can take 
precautions. Elders, children, or those with medical conditions 
can be particularly at risk. Those with a preexisting condition like 
asthma, should make sure to keep medication on hand if 
needed.  
Emergency preparedness 
Being prepared for emergencies can help events like evacuations happen smoothly and 
effectively. The “Summer of Smoke” study found that people felt better in emergency 
situations if they also felt prepared. If your community doesn’t have an emergency plan in 
place, programs like FireSmart can help you create one. Community members and 
households can also get prepared by: 
• 
Being familiar with the community emergency plan, such as where the emergency 
meeting places are and what evacuation routes to use. 
• 
Preparing a “Grab & Go Bag” that you can quickly grab in case of an evacuation. 
• 
Knowing how to prepare your home before you leave.  
Mental Health Support 
The stress of evacuations, the feeling of displacement, and the worry about losing your home can all 
take a toll on mental health. When smoke advisories keep people inside their homes, feelings of 
isolation can build. Check in on family and neighbours and continue to push for the mental health 
services.  
Want to know more? 
FireSmart (www.firesmartcanada.ca), Summer of Smoke (https://ecologynorth.ca/project/summer-of-smoke/), Red Cross 
(redcross.ca), Wildfire smoke air quality and health (https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/air-quality-health-index/wildfire-smoke.html) 
Tools like the Canadian Wildland Fire Information 
System (https://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/home) can 
help communities monitor their fire hazard risk. 
When air quality is poor people can: 
- 
Limit outdoor activity 
- 
Keep windows and doors closed at 
home (as long as it’s not too hot) 
- 
Keep car windows closed when 
driving 
- 
Drink plenty of water 
- 
Leave the area if necessary and 
possible 
Red Cross Canada 
has checklists of 
what can go in your 
Grab & Go bag. 
2/2 
UPDATED: APRIL 2020 
