Climate Change Adaptation 
PLANNING TOOLKIT 
for Indigenous Communities
INTRODUCTION
Check out our CIER Ecoversity course for an overview 
of how to implement the ICCAP guidebooks.
© 2020 Centre for Indigenous Environmental 
Resources, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this 
document may be reproduced, in any form or 
by any means, including electronic, mechanical, 
photocopied, recorded or other means without 
written permission of CIER.
CIER accepts no liability or responsibility for any 
damages that may be suffered or incurred by any 
third party as a result of the use of, reliance on, or 
any other decision made based upon this report.
CIER, the Centre for Indigenous Environmental 
Resources, is a national First Nation directed 
environmental non-profit organization. We offer 
research, advisory, and education and training 
services to Indigenous communities, governments 
and private companies through our two program 
areas: Building Sustainable Communities and 
Protecting Lands and Waters.
The Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation 
Planning Toolkit was created with financial support 
from Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern 
Affairs Canada’s (CIRNAC) First Nations Adapt 
Program. 
This document has been designed for double-sided 
printing and was originally printed on 100% post-
consumer content process chlorine free (PCF) paper.
PROJECT TEAM 
Kristy Anderson
Hunter Carlson
Cheyenne Ironman
Kathy Johnson
Andrea Kolbe
Maggie Low
Wendy Ross
Sjoerd van der Wielen
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank all those who contributed to the 
development of the Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation Planning 
Toolkit. We would like to thank our Steering Committee and the First 
Nations Adapt team who provided ongoing guidance and feedback 
throughout the development of the toolkit. We would also like to 
extend a special thank you to all of the individuals, organizations, 
and communities who participated in, and contributed to the 
development of, different components of the Toolkit.
Crown-Indigenous Relations
and Northern Affairs Canada
Relations Couronne-Autochtones
et Affaires du Nord Canada
INTRODUCTION
What is the Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation Toolkit?
The objective of the Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation Planning (ICCAP) Toolkit is to provide a suite of 
user-friendly tools, resources, and key considerations to support Indigenous individuals and communities 
interested in undertaking climate change adaptation planning. The intent is for the toolkit to be used by 
communities at all different stages of the adaptation planning process, including communities with little or 
no prior experience.
While the majority of the resources included in the ICCAP Toolkit are focused on communities located south 
of the 60th parallel, it is the intention that aspects of the Toolkit will also be useful for communities located in 
northern regions as well.
How was the ICCAP Toolkit Developed?
The ICCAP Toolkit was created by the Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources (CIER) in partnership 
with Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada’s (CIRNAC) First Nations Adapt program. 
The Toolkit was developed under the guidance of a Steering Committee comprised of six climate-change, 
Indigenous knowledge, and community planning experts.
In order to compile the content for the ICCAP Toolkit, CIER conducted research on a variety of climate 
change adaptation topics, undertook an extensive literature review, organized  outreach activities (e.g. survey, 
phone calls, meetings), and worked closely alongside a multitude of communities , with the goal of better 
understanding both climate-related impacts and the information needs/priorities of Indigenous communities. 
Existing tools and approaches for assessing infrastructure and climate-related impacts were also identified.
The Steering Committee and First Nations Adapt program provided input and feedback during the 
development of different components of the Toolkit to ensure its accuracy and relevance.
Please contact earth@yourcier.org for any questions or comments regarding the ICCAP Toolkit.
Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources
Established in 1994, the Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources is Canada’s first and only Indigenous-
directed environmental non-profit, charitable organization. CIER’s mission is to assist Indigenous Nations with 
building capacity to address the environmental issues they face. CIER’s mandate is to work with Indigenous 
Nations across Canada to educate, conduct research, and build skills to help them take action to solve the 
environmental problems that affect their lands and waters. CIER uses an integrated approach that combines 
multiple perspectives and fosters collaborative relationships.
To learn more, visit CIER’s website:  
yourcier.org
The First Nations Adapt Program
The First Nations Adapt Program is a Federal funding program under Crown-Indigenous Relations and 
Northern Affairs Canada. First Nations Adapt provides funding to First Nation communities located below the 
60th parallel to assess and respond to climate change impacts on community infrastructure and emergency 
management. The program prioritizes First Nation communities most impacted by climate change related to 
sea-level rise, flooding, forest fires, drought, fisheries and winter road failures.
To learn more, visit the First Nations Adapt Program:  
https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1481305681144/1481305709311
To learn more, visit the Indigenous Climate Hub:  
indigenousclimatehub.ca
Introduction      1 
OVERVIEW OF THE ICCAP TOOLKIT
The ICCAP Toolkit consists of the following 4 key components:						
1.
Indigenous Climate Change Adaptation Guidance document – focuses on infrastructure and climate 
change adaptation planning related to winter roads, forest fires, inland flooding, and sea-level rise and/ or 
coastal erosion.
2.
Two Indigenous Language Glossaries:
a.
Anishinaabemowin Climate Change Glossary  – the Anishinaabemowin Climate Change Glossary is 
intended to support Anishinaabe communities with climate change adaptation planning, and to 
provide a resource that can support language revitalization efforts related to climate change 
adaptation (e.g. conversations with Elders about changing landscapes and climate).
b.
Ininímowin Climate Change Glossary – The Ininímowin Climate Change Glossary has the same 
intention as the Anishinaabemowin Climate Change Glossary, however it is intended for Cree 
communities.
3.
Indigenous Languages Glossary Workbook – The Indigenous Languages Glossary Workbook 
accompanies the Glossaries. It will guide communities through the process of developing a language 
glossary of their own (in their own language), with a focus on climate change and the environment.
4.
Climate Change Adaptation Planning Guidebooks for Indigenous Communities - the objectives of the 
Climate Change Adaptation Planning Guidebooks are to provide user-friendly and culturally guidebooks 
to help Indigenous communities through planning to avoid, minimize, or adapt to impacts caused by 
climate change. The Guidebooks outline a planning process and framework for decision-making that 
allows wide application, local adaptation, and ongoing modifications. The six guidebooks include the 
following topics:
GUIDEBOOKS 
Identifying 
Community
Sustainability and 
Climate Change 
Vulnerabilities  
Identifying
Solutions
Taking 
Adaptive
Action
Monitoring 
Progress and 
Change
6
1
2
3
4
5
Climate Change
Impacts in the
Community   
Starting the
Planning Process
2    Climate Change Adaptation Planning Toolkit for Indigenous Communities
The following table is designed to assist you in identifying your climate adaptation needs and direct you to the appropriate ICCAP Toolkit resource.
Toolkit Component
Description
What would you like to achieve?
Indigenous Climate 
Change Adaptation 
Guidance Document 
The Indigenous Climate Change 
Adaptation Guidance document 
supports Indigenous communities in 
identifying tools and resources that can 
be used for infrastructure and climate 
adaptation planning related to each of 
the following impact areas: 
•	 Winter roads
•	 Forest fires
•	 Inland flooding; and
•	 Sea-level rise/coastal erosion 
The document includes best practices 
and key considerations for each impact 
area.
•	 Would you like to learn more about climate adaptation and infrastructure planning?
•	 Would you like to learn about key considerations for selecting an appropriate planning 
tool/resource?
•	 Would you like to learn more about best practices related to each of the impact areas 
(winter roads, forest fires, inland flooding, sea-level rise and coastal erosion)?
•	 Do you need help identifying tools and/or resources that can be used to plan for winter 
roads?
•	 Do you need help identifying tools and/or resources that can be used to plan for forest 
fires?
•	 Do you need help identifying tools and/or resources that can be used to plan for inland 
flooding?
•	 Do you need help identifying tools and/or resources that can be used to plan for sea-level 
rise and/or coastal erosion?
Refer to:
Introduction      3 
Toolkit Component
Description
What would you like to achieve?
Anishinaabemowin 
and Ininímowin 
Climate Change 
Glossaries & 
Indigenous 
Languages Glossary 
Workbook
The Anishinaabemowin and Ininímowin 
Climate Change Glossary supports 
Anishinaabe and Cree communities 
with climate change adaptation 
planning, serves as a resource to 
support language revitalization efforts 
related to climate change adaptation.
Indigenous Languages Glossary 
Workbook guides communities 
through the process of developing a 
language glossary.
The Climate Change Glossaries and 
Indigenous Languages Glossary 
Workbook aim to:
•	 Increases cultural relevance and 
community ownership over the 
ICCAP toolkit and climate change 
adaptation planning process;
•	 Engage a broader audience in 
climate change adaptation planning 
efforts in a culturally relevant and 
meaningful way; and
•	 Support initiation of, or ongoing, 
language revitalization efforts.
•	 Do you require access to a resource that contains key Anishinaabemowin or Ininímowin 
climate change terms and stories?
•	 Do you require access to a resource that contains key terms related to each of the four 
seasons as well as geographical regions to help support your climate change adaptation 
planning efforts?
•	 Do you require a resource to help initiate or support ongoing Indigenous language 
revitalization efforts?
•	 Are you a non-Indigenous government, industry, or partner interested in accessing a 
resource to help communicate information to community partners in a respectful and 
culturally relevant manner?
Refer to:
4      Climate Change Adaptation Planning Toolkit for Indigenous Communities
Toolkit Component
Description
What would you like to achieve?
Anishinaabemowin 
and Ininímowin 
Climate Change 
Glossaries & 
Indigenous 
Languages Glossary 
Workbook
•	 Would you like to learn more about the process for developing an Indigenous 
languages glossary?
•	 Would you like to learn more about how to develop a language resource to help 
encourage community discussions on climate change and adaptation?
•	 Would you like to learn more about how to develop a language resource that can 
support your community with participating in, and making informed decisions about, 
climate change adaptation and environmental challenges?
•	 Would you like to learn more about how to develop a language resource that can assist 
you in identifying the unique needs and priorities of your community?
•	 Would you like to learn more about how to develop a language resource that can assist 
you in framing climate change adaptation in a culturally relevant way?
Refer to:
Introduction      5 
Toolkit Component
Description
What would you like to achieve?
Climate Change 
Adaptation Planning 
Guidebooks 
for Indigenous 
Communities
These guidebooks provide a 
comprehensive six step planning 
process that Indigenous communities 
can use to avoid, minimize or adapt to 
climate change impacts:
1.	
Starting the Planning Process
2.	
Climate Change Impacts in the 
Community
3.	
Community Sustainability and 
Vulnerability
4.	
Identifying Solutions
5.	
Taking Adaptive Action; and
6.	
Monitoring Progress and Change
•	 Would you like to learn more about climate change?
•	 Are you or your community undertaking climate change adaptation planning?
•	 Do you need help developing a climate change adaptation plan?
•	 Do you require support with understanding and identifying climate change impacts?
•	 Do you need help identifying the climate-related risks faced by your community?
•	 Do you need help engaging the community to identify possible solutions and adaptive 
actions?
•	 Would you like to learn more about how other communities are identifying and 
implementing solutions?
•	 Would you like to learn more about activities, ideas, and key considerations for engaging 
community Leadership and membership in the climate change adaptation planning 
process?
•	 Do you need help with measuring and monitoring the progress of your climate change 
adaptation plan?
Refer to:
6      Climate Change Adaptation Planning Toolkit for Indigenous Communities
NOTES
Introduction      7 
NOTES
8      Climate Change Adaptation Planning Toolkit for Indigenous Communities
Mailing Address 
P.O. Box 26092 RPO Maryland
Winnipeg, MB  R3G 3R3
T: 204.956.0660
F: 1.866.288.3919
earth@yourcier.org
yourcier.org
