Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
Magdalena Gawrych
Institute of Psychology, The Maria Grzegorzewska University
Summary
This review article focuses on mental health implications of climate change. Global 
warming is likely to cause severe widespread emergencies: extreme heat, droughts, wildfires, 
water-related disasters (i.e., flooding, hurricanes and coastal storms), extreme snow, severe 
thunderstorms and tornadoes. Rising temperatures, sea level rise and extreme weather events 
have led to secondary and tertiary consequences, e.g., social disruption, impoverishment and 
population displacement. Mental health risks of climate change include greater stress, stress-
related disorders, anxiety, despair, depression, and suicidal ideation. Those risks can stem 
from climate-related natural disasters (e.g., extreme weather events), slower moving events 
(e.g., drought), or concern about the phenomenon of climate change itself. A focus on the 
impact of climate change on mental health can help enhance the understanding of factors that 
strengthen psychosocial resilience and adaptation, as well as design tailor-made local interven-
tions. Proper psychosocial adaptation strategies for the upcoming mental health challenges of 
climate change require development of social capital and strengthening of institutional systems.
Keywords: climate change, mental health, mental disorders
Introduction
According to the WHO’s definition of health, as contained in its constitution: 
“Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely 
the absence of disease or infirmity” [1, p. 1]. Mental health is “a state of well-being in 
which an individual realizes his or her own abilities, can cope with the normal stresses 
of life, can work productively and is able to make a contribution to his or her commu-
nity” [2, p. 23]. “Concepts of mental health include subjective well-being, perceived 
self-efficacy, autonomy, competence, intergenerational dependence and recognition of 
the ability to realize one’s intellectual and emotional potential” [3, p. 7].
This review article focuses on the mental health implications of climate change. 
On the one hand, symptoms of common mental disorders (CMD) are the consequences 
of ecological crisis, on the other, the number of patients suffering from eco-anxiety 
Psychiatr. Pol. 2022; 56(4): 903–915
PL ISSN 0033-2674 (PRINT), ISSN 2391-5854 (ONLINE)
www.psychiatriapolska.pl
DOI: https://doi.org/10.12740/PP/OnlineFirst/131991
Magdalena Gawrych
904
and habitual ecological worrying is on the rise. There is some evidence suggesting 
that the latter can be understood as adaptive responses to the changing climate [4, 5].
Health authorities and researchers from around the world have recognized the seri-
ous threat to health that the climate change poses and are taking protective measures 
to reduce current impacts and future risks. A focus on the impact of climate change on 
mental health can help enhance the understanding of factors strengthening psychosocial 
resilience and adaptation. Unfortunately, not all countries, including Poland, collect 
such evidence-based information about current and possible future risks [6].
Search strategy and literature selection
The aims of this review of literature are: (1) to point out the mental health threats 
triggered by climate change and (2) to make recommendations for some future local 
actions. The MEDLINE database (through PubMed) was searched for articles in this 
field published in 2010–2020. Mental health-related descriptors (i.e., “mental health” 
or “mental disorders”) and the “climate change” term were used in particular searches. 
Due to the limitations of this work, this study focuses on articles published in peer-
reviewed scientific journals published in English which directly concern climate change 
impacts on mental health. References of the screened full-text articles were manually 
searched for further literature. Additionally, worldwide publications and reports pre-
pared by mental health and/or climate change organizations were taken into account. 
The selected publications were categorized on the basis of the impacts of climate 
factors on mental health, with a focus on high-risk groups and prevention challenges.
Climate change and crucial emergencies
Anthropogenic global warming is connected with the use of fossil fuels, defor-
estation and pollution. Global warming is likely to cause the following widespread 
emergencies: (1) extreme heat (increased global mean surface temperature, heat waves); 
(2) climate change-related water disasters (CCRWDs) (flooding, hurricanes and coastal 
storms); (3) winter storms, extreme snow and severe CAPE (i.e., convective available 
potential energy) thunderstorms, tornadoes; (4) droughts; (5) wildfires [7].
The World Health Organization estimates that climate changes are expected to cause 
an additional 250,000 deaths worldwide per year between 2030 and 2050 [8]. Accord-
ing to estimates, 80% of the global population is affected by water and food insecurity 
due to climate change effects [9]. For many millions of people climate change poses 
a threat of food and water insufficiency and physical insecurity, and it heightens the 
risks of diarrheal disease, malaria, vector-borne diseases and other climate-sensitive 
infections. All of them can have mental health impacts through climate-related trauma.
905
Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
High-risk groups
Some population groups may be at greater risk of mental health difficulties dur-
ing and after disasters. Those groups include, among others: people living in low – or 
middle-income countries, those with low socioeconomic status, ethnic communities, 
migrants, indigenous peoples, children and pregnant women, the elderly, people with 
pre-existing somatic or psychiatric illness, people with disability, as well as sexual 
minorities [10-12].
Farmers, indigenous people and children are the most at risk for mental health 
problems. The climate variabilities/drought are one of four most-cited risk factors 
on the farmers’ mental health [13]. Societal changes and assimilation policies have 
contributed to the loss of language and cultural knowledge and have made indig-
enous people very vulnerable to the negative effects of climate change [14]. In turn, 
children and young people growing up with an uncertain future can develop mood 
and anxiety disorders. One quarter of Australian children are so troubled about the 
state of the world that they honestly believe it will come to an end before they get 
older [15].
Temperature and heat waves
Temperature extremes can increase acute stress as well as worsen mental health 
problems for people with pre-existing conditions or diagnoses including mood and 
anxiety disorders [16, 17]. With global warming, it is possible that the rates of aggres-
sion, crime and self-harm may increase over time. It has been observed that violent 
suicides are more common when preceded by a rise in temperatures [18-20].
Obradovich et al. [21] found that shifting from monthly temperatures between 
25 °C and 30 °C to > 30 °C increases the probability of mental health difficulties by 
0.5% points, and that a 1 °C of 5-year warming associates with a 2% point increase 
in the prevalence of mental health issues. This study was based on data from nearly 
2 million randomly sampled US residents between 2002 and 2012 [21]. Heat waves are 
associated with increased rates of admissions for mental disorders also in conjunction 
with somatic disorders [22]. The rate of emergency department visits due to mental 
health concerns increased between 5–10% at higher temperatures (i.e., 25 °C as opposed 
to 20 °C) [17]. As mentioned, temperature effects on mental health can be direct, but 
we should not forget about indirect impact (e.g., migration, increased social isolation 
during an extreme cold event which then influences depression).
Extreme events (disasters and extreme meteorological conditions)
Obradovich at al. [21] found that exposure to Hurricane Katrina increased the 
probability of mental health difficulties by 4% points. Whaley [23] conducted research 
Magdalena Gawrych
906
focused on the psychosocial impacts of Hurricane Katrina. The author estimated that 
20–35% of Hurricane Katrina survivors experienced some form of mental health issue 
following the disaster. The team of Galea et al. [24] reported a 31.2% prevalence of 
anxiety and mood disorders amongst Hurricane Katrina survivors.
Regarding winter extremes, it is known that low temperatures and icy condi-
tions increase social isolation and influence depression. In the cases of places of 
employment closing during winter extremes or people being unable to safely travel 
to work, loss of income and resulting financial stress can also adversely affect mental 
health [25, 26].
Global climate change is likely to exacerbate changes in precipitation patterns, in 
the coming years. From a current historical frequency of drought of 12%, these events 
may increase up to 60% [27]. Most of the studies suggest negative drought-related 
impacts on mental health in several population groups (e.g., increased risk of hospital-
ization for depression, worse relationships within farm families, psychological distress 
connected with the degradation of the physical environment) [28]. Research from New 
South Wales (Australia) found a statistically significant relationship between drought 
and suicide from 1964 to 2001 [29]. There is strong evidence for a link between drought 
and farmer suicides [30, 31].
Similarly, wildfires have a negative impact on the mental health of local residents 
in the affected areas. For instance, the Fort McMurray, Canada wildfire of 2016 burned 
5,890 km2 of land and destroyed more than 2,400 buildings. There were significantly 
increased prevalence rates for mental health and addiction problems in residents of 
Fort McMurray 18 months after the wildfires [32]. The youth (age ranged from 11 to 
19; mean age was 14.32) with greater impact from the wildfire exhibited significantly 
higher scores on measures of PTSD, depression, anxiety, and alcohol/substance use. 
They also had lower self-esteem and quality of life scores. Students with lower resil-
ience scores exhibited a similar pattern [33].
Global sea level is projected to rise between 30 to 121 centimeters by 2100, due 
to the influx of water from melting glaciers and the expansion of seawater as it warms 
[34]. Countries with low-lying areas or small islands are concerned that their land areas 
might decrease due to flooding and coastal erosion. As a result, many people may be 
forced to migrate. Researchers from all over the world who investigated experiences 
of mental health related to floods show that those who had residential displacement or 
damage due to the flooding experienced negative mental health impacts, both during 
and after the flood [35, 36].
As shown by Graham et al. [35], living in a storm – or flood-related damaged home 
was as an additional and independent risk factor for CMD. Findings indicated that 
storm – and flood-related damage was significantly associated with experience of CMD, 
suicidal ideation and even having attempted suicide. At the same time, associations 
with other mental disorders, including post-traumatic stress disorder, and with mental 
907
Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
health treatment and use of mental health services were not significant [35]. A six 
months post-flood study conducted by Matthews et al. [36] indicated that respondents 
revealed a substantial mental health burden. Over 22% of respondents reported being 
still distressed about the flood, 16% with probable anxiety, 15% probable PTSD, 15% 
probable depression and 7% suicidal ideation. Around 27% of respondents reported at 
least one of these and about 20% reported two or more of these problems [36].
Short – and long-term implications
Primary mental health impact is related mostly to disasters themselves and their 
consequences: environment of disruption, trauma and grief. Trauma exposure during 
disasters and pandemics can impair individual well-being, sleep, psychological health 
and cognitive function (i.e., memory, concentration and executive function). Direct 
consequences include increased rates of high-risk behaviors (e.g., domestic violence, 
alcohol and substance use). Mental health effects of disasters may also arise from 
implementation of public health response strategies, such as evacuation.
The consequences of indirect (secondary) and distant (tertiary) effects pose a sig-
nificant challenge because they typically result from changes in complex processes 
[37-40]. Secondary effects of climate change are due to various processes of environ-
mental changes and ecological disruptions. They consist of damages to physical and 
social infrastructure, physical health effects, food and water shortages, conflict, and 
displacement. Long-term droughts affect food and water supplies and can subsequently 
affect the economic and mental well-being of not only the land-based workers, but 
also various other groups. It should be noted that indirect mental health consequences 
of climate change at the community level are understudied. The consequences thereof 
may include things like a diminishment in community cohesion, loss of community 
identity, threat to a sense of continuity and sense of belonging as people are forced to 
move in and out of communities because of environmental stressors, and undermining 
of cultural integrity in the cases where people have to leave their homelands.
Distant effects include diffuse mental and physical health consequences of dis-
placements, community disruptions, migration, environmental decline, conflicts and 
violence. Forced migration is likely to continue to grow in the coming years due to 
climate change, disease outbreaks, conflict and other factors. There are a huge number 
of challenges to maintaining good health, and specifically good mental health, among 
migrants at all stages of migration [40].
Environmentally-motivated migration and displacement may lead to the disruption 
of existing social ties. The author can see potentially adverse consequences for migrants 
as well as their family members who remain in places of origin. Existing social ties 
may provide social and material resources that buffer mental health stressors related to 
both prolonged and acute climate events. Children under 18 years old represent over 
half of the refugee population. In general, children constitute a vulnerable group [40].
Magdalena Gawrych
908
Climate change-related phenomena may in themselves lead to mental health problems 
[7]. One of the reasons is that holistic understanding of mental health, often found within 
indigenous ways of knowing, includes spiritual well-being and connectedness to nature 
and one’s environment. As people’s understanding of climate change grows and deepens, 
it is likely to have a significant impact on their social, emotional and spiritual well-being 
[19]. People can experience not only emotional but also moral and ethical distress arising 
from awareness of climate change as a global environmental threat caused by human 
activity [41]. In the past decades we could observe the emergence of new terminology 
related to climate change and mental health, including the terms ‘solastalgia’— mental 
distress caused by experienced environmental changes, and ‘eco-anxiety’ — climate 
anxiety or grief related to potential environmental degradation or change [11].
The neologism ‘solastalgia’ refers to “the distress and isolation caused by the 
gradual removal of solace from the present state of one’s home environment” [42, 
p. 49] and it provides the framework to explore some of the broader mental health 
issues, explained on the basis of environmental and existential psychology concepts 
[43]. Solastalgia, also known as climate grief, is associated with mourning what has 
already been lost. The crucial part is that solastalgia is a place-based lived experience 
[44]. The Environmental Distress Scale (EDS) was developed and validated in 2006 
by Higginbotham et al. [45] in Australia as a tool to measure solastalgia.
Another relatively new concept is ‘eco-anxiety,’ which refers to the feeling of 
anxiety or grief related to climate change and environmental degradation; unlike so-
lastalgia, it concerns future, expected negative changes [11]. It is worth mentioning 
that even high levels of ecological worrying are constructive and adaptive. Verplanken 
and Roy [5] indicated that there is no correlation between habitual ecological worrying 
and pathological worry. Instead, habitual ecological worrying was associated with pro-
environmental attitudes and behaviors, and with a personality structure characterized 
by imagination and an appreciation for new ideas [5].
Literature concerning solastalgia and eco-anxiety is rather scarce. The systematic 
review by Galway et al. [44] included a set of 29 articles regarding general characteristics 
of solastalgia. Research confirms that both solastalgia and eco-anxiety are experienced 
by people worldwide. Temte et al. [46] discovered high levels of concern regarding 
climate change from a population of adult primary care patients in the USA. Researchers 
demonstrated a positive and highly significant association between an individual feeling 
concerned about climate change and experiencing dysphoria. Essentially, patients with 
positive screens for depression or anxiety were no more likely to affirm global warming 
or human causation of global warming than patients with negative screens [46].
Solastalgia and eco-anxiety especially deteriorate the well-being of the indigenous 
people. Individuals from indigenous communities are often deeply connected to the 
land for their well-being. As climatic changes alter the environment, access to places 
and practices of cultural significance are often disrupted [14, 47].
909
Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
table continued on the next page
The table below (Table 1) presents the main consequences of climate change and 
potential mental health effects.
Table 1. Main consequences of climate change and potential mental health effects
Impacts
Risks
Potential negative mental health effects
 PRIMARY
Extreme heats
•	 Exacerbated mood or behavioral disorders
•	 Aggression, violence, crime
•	 Suicide
Extreme weather event (flood, 
hurricane, mudslides, etc.)
•	 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression and violence
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
•	 Survivor guilt
•	 Vicarious trauma
Vector-borne disease (VBD)
(e.g., Lyme disease, West Nile 
Virus, ticks)
•	 Complex mental health problems (e.g., cognitive or 
neurological impairment, behavioral disorders)
Climate-related disasters
(floods, wildfires, etc.)
•	 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression and violence
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
•	 Survivor guilt
•	 Vicarious trauma
Slow-moving disasters
(i.e., drought, sea-level rise, 
melting permafrost)
•	 Depression
•	 Suicidality among rural populations
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
•	 Anxiety, worry, or fear of displacement
•	 Anxiety, worry, or fear of job loss
•	 Solastalgia
•	 Eco-anxiety
Deforestation
•	 Lower well-being
•	 Losing recreation places
•	 Losing opportunity to contact with nature
 SECONDARY
Decrement in the overall arable 
land, regional food shortages
•	 Increased diseases and disorders susceptibility  
(due to malnutrition)
•	 Stress-related disorders
Magdalena Gawrych
910
 SECONDARY
Migration and acculturation stress
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression and violence
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
Increased poverty and social 
inequalities
•	 Decline in social capital, social cohesion, community 
participation
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression and violence
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
Loss of individual’s 
connectedness to their 
environment of residence
•	 Solastalgia
•	 Depression
•	 Eco-anxiety
 TETRIARY
Less recreational and sporting 
opportunities
•	 Lower well-being
•	 Stress
•	 Negative emotional states
•	 Losing opportunity to contact with nature
Losing biodiversity and 
ecosystems
•	 Lower well-being
•	 Restricted emotional and esthetic development
•	 Solastalgia
•	 Eco-anxiety
Resource-related social 
disruption and civil conflict
•	 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression and violence
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
•	 Survivor guilt
•	 Vicarious trauma
Climate-related displacement 
(e.g., relocation forced by 
disaster or resource scarcity, 
overpopulation, camps, 
temporary settlement)
•	 Stress-related disorders
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression and violence
•	 Substance abuse and addiction
Awareness of climate change 
threats to human and planetary 
health and survival, experience of 
environmental change
•	 Solastalgia
•	 Eco-anxiety
•	 Stress
•	 Depression
•	 Hopelessness, despair
911
Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
Implications and challenges
National and international health authorities have recognized the seriousness of 
the threats of climate change to health. We already have evidence-based information 
about current and possible future risks to health, vulnerable populations and effective 
adaptation strategies. Many governments, communities and environmental organiza-
tions have begun to develop integrated strategies for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation.
Future mental health challenges of climate change cover: (1) developing scientific 
knowledge regarding the adaptation process, pro-health coping and resilience; (2) 
focusing on the mental health of migrants and their access to mental health services; 
(3) supporting high-risk groups (e.g., children, agricultural workers); (4) strengthen-
ing community engagement; (5) improving capacity for mental health and community 
services to respond to the needs of disaster-affected populations.
In recent years, there have been many initiatives focusing on climate change policy 
and research. The Asia Pacific Disaster Mental Health Network is a collaborative body 
which was established in June 2020 to support improvements in mental health among 
disaster-affected communities [10]. The “First Scientific Symposium on Health and 
Climate Change” (H&CC Symposium) took place in Rome in 2018, and its objective 
was the promotion of an intersectoral and multidisciplinary approach with regard to 
both mitigation and adaptation to climate change [48]. Organizations such as: the 
World Health Organization, the American Psychological Association, the American 
Psychiatric Association, and the Royal College of Psychiatrists are active in promoting 
mental health and psychological well-being in relation to global change [49]. In Po-
land, in November 2019, The Ministry of Climate was created, and in July 2020, the 
Special Committee on Climate Change at the Senate of the Republic of Poland was 
established. The Climate Psychiatry Commission established in March 2020 by the 
Polish Psychiatric Association is one of the very few in Europe involved in mental 
health actions regarding climate change. We should remember that the climate change 
effects will be differentially experienced by nations around the world; therefore, there 
is a need to appoint local competent authorities dealing with mental health in the age 
of climate change.
Some useful psychological intervention strategies to address climate change-related 
mental health problems or illnesses include: cognitive-based interventions (such as: 
psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, anti-stress training, relaxation training and 
crisis counselling), interventions based on social connectedness and connectedness 
to nature (e.g., forest-based therapy), and third wave of cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(e.g., acceptance and commitment therapy, mindfulness).
Proper adaptation to the upcoming mental health challenges of climate change 
requires natural resource management, enhancing food security, development of social 
and personal capital, and strengthening of institutional systems. Resilience, understood 
Magdalena Gawrych
912
as climate change adaptation efforts pursued by individuals and communities, plays 
a crucial role [6, 11, 40, 48]. Meaningful elements to support mental resilience include 
engaging with local community life, art, nature and spirituality [47].
Considering the above, the basic future challenge is to develop a prevention strategy 
targeted at individual groups of inhabitants. Plans and programs for the prevention 
of climate change-related mental disorders should take into account both local risk 
factors and available resources.
Declarations
The author declares no funding and no competing interests.
References
1.	 World Health Organization. Constitution of The World Health Organization; 2005.
2.	 World Health Organization. Promoting mental health: Concepts, emerging evidence, prac-
tice: A report of the World Health Organization, Department of Mental Health and Substance 
Abuse in collaboration with the Victorian Health Promotion Foundation and the University 
of Melbourne; 2005.
3.	 World Health Organization. Investing in mental health; ‎2003.
4.	 Ingle HE, Mikulewicz M. Mental health and climate change: Tackling invisible injustice. Lancet 
Planet. Health 2020; 4(4): e128–e130.
5.	 Verplanken B, Roy D. „My worries are rational, climate change is not”: Habitual ecological 
worrying is an adaptive response. PLoS One 2013; 8(9): e74708.
6.	 Berry P, Enright PM, Shumake-Guillemot J, Villalobos Prats E, Campbell-Lendrum D. Assess-
ing health vulnerabilities and adaptation to climate change: A review of international progress. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018; 15(12): 2626.
7.	 Cianconi P, Betrò S, Janiri L. The impact of climate change on mental health: A systematic 
descriptive review. Front. Psychiatry 2020; 11: 74.
8.	 World Health Organization. Climate change and health; 2018.
9.	 Climate Council. Climate Change, Security and Australia’s Defence Force. Australia: Climate 
Council of Australia Limited; 2015.
10.	 Newnham EA, Dzidic PL, Mergelsberg ELP, Guragain B, Chan EYY, Kim Y et al. The Asia 
Pacific Disaster Mental Health Network: Setting a Mental Health Agenda for the Region. Int. 
J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020; 17(17): 6144.
11.	 Nicholas PK, Breakey S, White BP, Brown MJ, Fanuele J, Starodub R et al. Mental health 
impacts of climate change: Perspectives for the ED Clinician. J. Emerg. Nurs. 2020; 46(5): 
590–599.
12.	 McMichael AJ. Climate change and children: Health risks of abatement inaction, health gains 
from action. Children (Basel). 2014; 1(2): 99–106.
13.	 Daghagh Yazd S, Wheeler SA, Zuo A. Key risk factors affecting farmers’ mental health: A sys-
tematic review. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019; 16(23): 4849.
913
Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
14.	 Cunsolo A, Ellis NR. Ecological grief as a mental health response to climate change-related 
loss. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2018; 8(4): 275–281.
15.	 Tucci J, Mitchell J, Goddard C. Children’s fears, hopes and heroes: Modern childhood in 
Australia. Melbourne: Australian Childhood Foundation; 2007.
16.	 Cervellin G, Comelli I, Lippi G, Comelli D, Rastelli G, Ossola P et al. The number of emergency 
department visits for psychiatric emergencies is strongly associated with mean temperature and 
humidity variations. Results of a nine year survey. Emerg. Care J. 2014; 10: 2271.
17.	 Vida S, Durocher M, Ouarda TB, Gosselin P. Relationship between ambient temperature and 
humidity and visits to mental health emergency departments in Québec. Psychiatr. Serv. 2012; 
63(11): 1150–1153.
18.	 Cohn EG, Rotton J, Peterson AG, Tarr DB. Temperature, city size, and the southern subculture 
of violence: Support for Social Escape/Avoidance (SEA) theory. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 2004; 
34(8): 1652–1674.
19.	 Linkowski P, Martin F, De Maertelaer V. Effect of some climatic factors on violent and non-
violent suicides in Belgium. J. Affect. Disord. 1992; 25(3): 161–166.
20.	 Lin HC, Chen CS, Xirasagar S, Lee HC. Seasonality and climatic associations with violent 
and nonviolent suicide: A population-based study. Neuropsychobiology 2008; 57(1–2): 32–37.
21.	 Obradovich N, Migliorini R, Paulus MP, Rahwan I. Empirical evidence of mental health risks 
posed by climate change. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 2018; 115(43): 10953–10958.
22.	 Nitschke M, Tucker GR, Hansen AL, Williams S, Zhang Y, Bi P. Impact of two recent extreme 
heat episodes on morbidity and mortality in Adelaide, South Australia: A case-series analysis. 
Environ. Health 2011; 10: 42.
23.	 Whaley AL. Trauma among survivors of Hurricane Katrina: Considerations and recommenda-
tions for mental health care. J. Loss Trauma 2009; 14(6): 459–476.
24.	 Galea S, Brewin CR, Gruber M, Jones RT, King DW, King LA et al. Exposure to hurricane-
related stressors and mental illness after Hurricane Katrina. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 2007; 
64(12): 1427–1434.
25.	 O’Neill MS, Ebi KL. Temperature extremes and health: Impacts of climate variability and 
change in the United States. J. Occup. Environ. Med. 2009; 51(1): 13–25.
26.	 Trombley J, Chalupka S, Anderko L. Climate change and mental health. Am. J. Nurs. 2017; 
117(4): 44–52.
27.	 Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United 
Kingdom–New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press; 2013.
28.	 Yusa A, Berry P, Cheng J, Ogden N, Bonsal B, Stewart R, Waldick R. Climate change, drought 
and human health in Canada. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2015; 12(7): 8359–8412.
29.	 Nicholls N, Butler CD, Hanigan I. Inter-annual rainfall variations and suicide in New South 
Wales, Australia, 1964–2001. Int. J. Biometeorol. 2006; 50(3): 139–143.
30.	 Hanigan IC, Butler CD, Kokic PN, Hutchinson MF. Suicide and drought in New South Wales, 
Australia, 1970–2007. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. 2012; 109(35): 13950–13955.
31.	 Guiney R. Farming suicides during the Victorian drought: 2001–2007. Aust. J. Rural Health 
2012; 20(1): 11–15.
Magdalena Gawrych
914
32.	 Moosavi S, Nwaka B, Akinjise I, Corbett SE, Chue P, Greenshaw AJ et al. Mental health effects 
in primary care patients 18 months after a major wildfire in Fort McMurray: Risk increased by 
social demographic issues, clinical antecedents, and degree of fire exposure. Front. Psychiatry 
2019; 10: 683.
33.	 Brown MRG, Agyapong V, Greenshaw AJ, Cribben I, Brett-MacLean P, Drolet J et al. Significant 
PTSD and other mental health effects present 18 months after the Fort McMurray wildfire: 
Findings from 3,070 grades 7–12 students. Front. Psychiatry 2019; 10: 623.
34.	 NASA Global climate change. The Effects of Climate Change. In: Sea Level Will Rise 1–4 
feet by 2100. California Institute of Technology. https://climate.nasa.gov/effects/ (retrieved: 
20.10.2020).
35.	 Graham H, White P, Cotton J, McManus S. Flood – and weather-damaged homes and mental 
health: An analysis using England’s Mental Health Survey. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 
2019; 16(18): 3256.
36.	 Matthews V, Longman J, Berry HL, Passey M, Bennett-Levy J, Morgan GG et al. Differential 
mental health impact six months after extensive river flooding in rural Australia: A cross-
sectional analysis through an equity lens. Front. Public Health 2019; 7: 367.
37.	 Clayton S, Manning CM, Hodge C. Beyond storms and droughts: The psychological impacts 
of climate change. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, ecoAmerica; 2014.
38.	 Deb AK, Kanungo S, Deb M, Nair GB. Impact of climate change on health and strategies for 
mitigation and adaptation. WHO South-East Asia J. Public Health 2012; 1(1): 8–19.
39.	 Hayes K, Blashki G, Wiseman J, Burke S, Reifels L. Climate change and mental health: Risks, 
impacts and priority actions. Int. J. Ment. Health Syst. 2018; 12: 28.
40.	 Sheath D, Flahault A, Seybold J, Saso L. Diverse and complex challenges to migrant and 
refugee mental health: Reflections of the M8 Alliance Expert Group on Migrant Health. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health 2020; 17(10): 3530.
41.	 Fritze JG, Blashki GA, Burke S, Wiseman J. Hope, despair and transformation: Climate change 
and the promotion of mental health and wellbeing. Int. J. Ment. Health Syst. 2008; 2(1): 13.
42.	 Albrecht G. Chronic environmental change: Emerging ‘psychoterratic’ syndromes. In: Weiss-
becker I. ed. Climate change and human well-being. New York: Springer; 2011. P. 43–56.
43.	 Hayes K, Poland B. Addressing mental health in a changing climate: Incorporating mental 
health indicators into climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018; 15(9): 1806.
44.	 Galway LP, Beery T, Jones-Casey K, Tasala K. Mapping the solastalgia literature: A scoping 
review study. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019; 16(15): 2662.
45.	 Higginbotham N, Connor L, Albrecht G, Freeman S, Agho K. Validation of an Environmental 
Distress Scale. EcoHealth 2006; 3: 245–254.
46.	 Temte JL, Holzhauer JR, Kushner KP. Correlation between climate change and dysphoria in 
primary care. WMJ 2019; 118(2): 71–74.
47.	 Kipp A, Cunsolo A, Vodden K, King N, Manners S, Harper SL. At-a-glance – Climate change 
impacts on health and wellbeing in rural and remote regions across Canada: A synthesis of 
the literature. Health Promot. Chronic. Dis. Prev. Can. 2019; 39(4): 122–126.
48.	 Ricciardi W, Marcheggiani S, Puccinelli C, Carere M, Sofia T, Giuliano F et al. Health and 
climate change: Science calls for global action. Ann. Ist Super Sanita 2019; 55(4): 323–329.
915
Climate change and mental health: a review of current literature
49.	 Coverdale J, Balon R, Beresin EV, Brenner AM, Guerrero APS, Louie AK et al. Climate 
change: A call to action for the psychiatric profession. Acad. Psychiatry 2018; 42(3): 317–323.
Address: Magdalena Gawrych
Institute of Psychology, The Maria Grzegorzewska University
02-353 Warszawa, Szczęśliwicka Street 40
e-mail: mgawrych@aps.edu.pl
