Communicating the 
Health Risks of Extreme 
Heat Events:
Toolkit for Public Health and 
Emergency Management Officials
Communicating the 
Health Risks of Extreme 
Heat Events:
Toolkit for Public Health and 
Prepared by:
Water, Air and Climate Change Bureau
Healthy Environments and
Consumer Safety Branch
Emergency Management Officials
Health Canada is the federal department  responsible for helping the people of Canada maintain and improve
their health. We assess the safety of drugs and many consumer products, help improve the safety of food, and
provide information to Canadians to help them make healthy decisions. We provide health services to First
Nations people and to Inuit communities. We work with the provinces to ensure our health care system serves
the needs of Canadians.
Published by authority of the Minister of Health.
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency
Management Officials
is available on Internet at the following address: 
www.healthcanada.gc.ca
Également disponible en français sous le titre :
Communiquer les risques des périodes de chaleur accablante pour la santé : Trousse à l’intention des
responsables de la santé publique et de la gestion des urgences
This publication can be made available in a variety of formats.
For further information or to obtain additional copies, please contact:
Publications 
Health Canada 
Ottawa, Ontario  K1A 0K9 
Tel.: 613-954-5995 
Fax: 613-941-5366 
Email: info@hc-sc.gc.ca
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada,  represented by the Minister of Health, 2011
This publication may be reproduced without  permission provided the source is fully  acknowledged.
HC Pub.: 100596
Cat.: H128-1/10-623E
ISBN: 978-1-100-17344-3
Acknowledgements
Health Canada gratefully acknowledges the contributions of the following people in reviewing chapters:
Chris Brown (City of Windsor), Quentin Chiotti (Pollution Probe), Lorraine Davidson (Canadian Centre
for Occupational Health and Safety), Nancy Dubois (University of Toronto), Stephan Hamel (New
Brunswick Public Health), Sandi Hirst (University of Calgary), Toni Morris-Oswald (Manitoba Health and
Healthy Living), Fred Ruf (Outsourcing Services Inc.), Scott Sheridan (Kent State University), Trevor
Smith Diggins (Risk Communications Specialist), Sue Sullivan (Canadian Public Health Association),
Rae-Anne van de Lande (City of Hamilton).
To receive more information about climate change and health activities at Health Canada, please contact:
Climatinfo@hc-sc.gc.ca.
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   i
Table of Contents
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   iii
Table of Contents 
Foreword
1
Using the Toolkit
1 
1
Extreme Heat and Health Risks
2
1.1 
Extreme Heat Events
2
1.2
Community and Individual Factors Affecting Heat Vulnerability
3
1.3
Heat-Vulnerable Groups
4
1.4
Reducing Heat Illnesses and Deaths
7 
2
Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat
8
2.1 
Identifying and Analyzing Target Audiences
8
2.2 
Setting Goals and Objectives
10
2.3
Choosing the Means of Communication
10
2.4
Tailoring Risk Communication Products and Removing Barriers to Action
12
2.5
When to Communicate Risks to Health from Extreme Heat
13
2.6
Special Considerations for Rural Communities
15
2.7
Developing Heat-Health Messages
16
2.8
Scientifically Sound Heat-Health Messages for the Public
19 
3
Evaluating Heat-Health Communication Campaigns
28
3.1
Process Evaluation
29
3.2
Outcome Evaluation
29
3.3
Evaluation Results
30 
Appendices
31
Appendix A: Plain-Language Checklist
32
Appendix B: Heat-Health Communication Message Review Tool
33
Appendix C: Heat-Health Messages
34
Appendix D: Heat-Health Fact Sheets
36
Appendix E: Heat Advisory Media Release Template
45
Appendix F: Public Involvement Strategies
46 
References
48 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   1
Extreme heat is a current health risk. As our climate
continues to change, extreme heat events/heat waves
are expected to increase in frequency, length and
severity, resulting in increased health risks for many
Canadians. Older adults, those who are chronically
ill and socially disadvantaged people, among others,
are more vulnerable to health effects related to
extreme heat. These effects can include serious
illness and even death. In some parts of Canada, the
annual number of extremely hot days is expected to
more than double over the next 30 years.
Public health and emergency management officials
play a key role in implementing communication
strategies to provide practical and useful
information to health service providers, caregivers
and the public to help manage health risks from
extreme heat events. These strategies and their
associated messages must be effective, consistent
and targeted to the appropriate audiences.
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat
Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency
Management Officials was developed by Health
Canada to help achieve this goal. 
The Toolkit is based on best communication
practices for addressing health risks from extreme
heat events. The practices are drawn from
experiences in Canadian communities and
internationally. They were developed with input
from public health officials and health
communication experts, as well as a review of the
existing literature. 
Using the Toolkit 
This Toolkit is intended for use by public health and
emergency management officials who are
developing or updating heat-health communication
strategies. It is designed to guide the development
of targeted heat-health communication campaigns
and necessary outreach products for specific
audiences. Currently, many Canadians do not
follow the prevention advice provided by public
health fact sheets and the media when extreme heat
events occur.1,2 Systematic application of best
communication practices in the design and
evaluation of heat-health communication campaigns
is required to communicate heat-health messages
consistently and effectively. 
To this end the Toolkit provides: 
• an overview of extreme heat events and the
potential health risks to all Canadians,
especially those most vulnerable to heat-health
impacts
• guidance on communicating heat-health risks
and strategies, including scientifically sound
health messages to support the development of
effective communication campaigns 
• guidance to help develop community-specific
and tailored heat-health communication
campaigns
• template materials for public health and
emergency management officials, such as fact
sheets, a media release and checklists 
Individual Canadians have an important
responsibility to prepare for extreme heat events and
modify their behaviour when weather poses a health
risk. Information about the dangers of extreme heat
and adaptation options delivered in a timely manner
will support the widespread adoption of protective
actions by people in communities across Canada.
Foreword 
Foreword
2
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
1.1
Extreme Heat Events 
There is no standard definition of an extreme heat
event, commonly known as a “heat wave.”a Most
jurisdictions define extreme heat events based on
the potential for hot weather conditions to result in
an unacceptable level of health effects, including
increased mortality. Environment Canada (Ontario
Region) defines a heat wave as “a period with more
than three consecutive days of maximum
temperatures at or above 32ºC [90ºF].”3 However,
temperature is only one component of heat, which
also depends on humidity, wind speed and radiant
load. The weather conditions that could result in
health risks depend on the sensitivity,
acclimatization and adaptability of the population to
extreme heat – that is, heat vulnerability.  
In Canada, extreme heat events are not well
documented and attributed deaths are often
estimated using sources such as media reports.
According to the Canadian Disaster Database, five
extreme heat events were reported in Canada
between 1900 and 2005 (1912, 1936, 1953, 1963,
1988) causing just over 1,200 deaths.4 Other
research indicates that in Toronto alone, an average
of 120 deaths from extreme heat occurred annually
between 1954 and 2000.5 Most recently, in 2005
Toronto experienced 41 extremely hot days
(exceeding 30ºC/86ºF).6 Internationally, there have
been a number of devastating extreme heat events,
such as:
• Chicago (1995) – resulting in over
700 deaths.7,8
• Europe (2003) – resulting in over
70,000 deaths.9
In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) concluded that “hot extremes” and
“heat waves” are very likely (>90% probability of
occurrence) to increase as our climate continues to
change.10 This predicted temperature increase is
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks 
2021–2040
2041–2060
2081–2100
SRES A1B
1961–1990
Observed
0
10
20
30
40
50
70
60
Fredericton
Number of days above 30ºC
Québec
Toronto
London
Windsor
Winnipeg
Calgary
Victoria
Figure 1: Current and projected number of days exceeding 30°C/86ºF for Canadian cities 
The number of hot days for each city is based on the observed temperature data between 1961 and 1990, and
projected for 2021–2040, 2041–2060 and 2081–2100. 
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks
Source: Developed by Kharin Slava, Canadian Centre for Climate Modeling and Analysis, Canadian Global Climate Change
Model version 3.1, personal communication, 2009. The temperature projections were analyzed with the Special Report on
Emissions Scenarios (SRES) using the IPCC middle-of-the-road emissions scenario (A1B).120 
aNote that this document uses “extreme heat event” rather than “heat wave.”
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   3
particularly pronounced for night temperatures,
resulting in reduced night-time relief from the
heat.11 In addition, Environment Canada (Figure 1)
forecasts that many cities in Canada can expect a
substantial increase in the number of days with
temperatures exceeding 30ºC/86ºF, levels that are
dangerous to human health.12,13 These changing
weather conditions are a growing concern for
individuals and communities in Canada.  
1.2
Community and Individual
Factors Affecting Heat
Vulnerability 
During extreme heat events, many people succumb
to underlying health conditions (e.g. respiratory,
cardiovascular),14 while some may experience heat
stroke (Table 1) that could result in death. These
health outcomes are preventable and are primarily
caused by over-exposure to extreme heat and/or
over-exertion for a person’s age and/or physical
condition.15 To prevent negative health impacts
from extreme heat events, public health and
emergency management officials can assess
Table 1: Extreme heat events can lead to one or more of the following health effects, in
descending order of severity  
Source: Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety, 2005.39
Heat stroke
The most serious type of heat illness is a result of body heat overload. Signs of heat
stroke may include a core body temperature of more than 40ºC/104ºF, complete or
partial loss of consciousness and/or reduced mental ability.15 Sweating is not a good
indicator, as there are two types of heat stroke:
• Classic – accompanied by little or no sweating, usually occurring in children,
those who are chronically ill and older adults.
• Exertional – accompanied by an increase in body temperature because of
strenuous exercise or occupational exposure in combination with
environmental heat, and where sweating is usually present. 
Heat exhaustion
Caused by excessive loss of water and salt. Symptoms may include heavy
 sweating, weakness, dizziness, nausea, headache, diarrhea and muscle cramps. 
Heat fainting 
(parade syncope)
Caused by the loss of body fluids through sweating and by lowered blood pressure
due to pooling of blood in the legs. Symptoms include temporary dizziness and
fainting resulting from an insufficient flow of blood to the brain while a person is
standing. 
Heat cramps
Caused by a salt imbalance resulting from a failure to replace salt lost through
excessive sweating. Symptoms are sharp muscle pains.
Heat rash 
(miliaria rubra)
A result of inflammation of clogged sweat glands and accompanied by tiny red
spots on the skin, which may give a prickling sensation.
Heat edema
Heat-induced swelling frequently noticeable in the ankles, feet and hands, and most
often seen in people who are not regularly exposed to heat.
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks
4
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
community and individual factors contributing to
vulnerability and develop intervention programs
supported by appropriate communication strategies.  
Community factors that can increase the
likelihood of heat exposure or affect the risk
associated with it may include16,17:
• Local climate – higher frequency, length and
severity of extreme heat events, humidity
levels, night-time temperatures, seasonal
weather variability.
• Community design – cities are often warmer
than their non-urban surroundings
(phenomenon referred to as the urban heat
island effect) which is increased by black
roofs or concrete surfaces that hold heat and
release it at night, and limited tree-shaded
areas that have a cooling effect and could be
as much as 5ºC/9ºF cooler than the
surrounding area.18
• Availability and accessibility of services to
cope with extreme heat – public
transportation, health services, community
outreach services, easy-to-access cooling
options with air-conditioning.19
Individual factors that can increase the likelihood
of heat exposure or the risk associated with it may
include:
• Health status – chronic illness, need for
medications that increase heat-health risks,
dependence on caregiver.
• Availability of an air conditioner and its use
during extreme heat events.
• Social isolation – limited access to heat-health
information and services.
• Income level – utility bill arrears, concerns
with costs associated with running an air
conditioner and accessing other cooling
options.
• Behaviours during extreme heat events –
strenuous physical activity, inadequate
hydration, inappropriate clothing.
• Type and location of place of work/residence –
individuals in occupations with high
temperature exposure or those living on higher
residential floors without an air conditioner.20
Heat sensitivity is increased for those who are not
regularly exposed to hot environments.21,22 Extreme
heat events early in the summer generally result in
higher mortality and morbidity than those later in
the season.21 This “acclimatization” is due to
physiological adaptation in both cardiovascular and
sweating systems.23 Furthermore, the body’s ability
to acclimatize may be limited for some, such as
those with heart disease,24,25 older adults25 and young
children, who are also considered to be heat-
vulnerable.25
1.3
Heat-Vulnerable Groups 
Analyses of extreme heat events help to identify
heat-vulnerable groups for which hot weather
conditions can be especially dangerous because of
underlying risk factors. The most common heat-
vulnerable groups and their challenges are listed in
Table 2.  
Health risks from extreme heat may be compounded
for those with more than one risk factor. For
example, people with a psychiatric illness, taking an
antipsychotic drug that affects heat sensitivity, and
who live alone may be at greater risk than those with
only one of these three risk factors. 
Current and future heat vulnerabilities have been
studied in Quebec. Climate modelling and a social
vulnerability index consisting of age, poverty, social
isolation and education indices were used in
prediction models (Box 1). This type of forecasting
is limited by uncertainty about future socio-
demographic conditions. However, by studying
populations at risk, health officials can learn about
the unique needs in their communities, identify the
most heat-vulnerable individuals, and provide
targeted advice and services to those in greatest
need. 
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   5
Heat-Vulnerable
Groups
Examples of Challenges
Older adults26
• Physiological characteristics that may contribute to increased vulnerability to
heat:
• reduced thirst sensation27
• reduced fitness level
• reduced sweating ability28
• increased susceptibility to chronic dehydration27
• Visual, cognitive and hearing impairments
• Agility and mobility challenges
• Differing perceptions of risks and vulnerabilities based on life experiences
• Reduced literacy
• Social isolation
Infants and young
children29
• Physiological and behavioural characteristics that may contribute to increased
vulnerability to heat:
• increased body heat production during physical activity30
• faster heat gain from the environment if air temperature is greater than
skin temperature, due to greater surface-area-to-body weight ratio30
• inability to increase cardiac output15
• reduced sweating31
• Dependence on caregiver to recognize heat impacts and take recommended
actions
People with chronic
illness or who are
physically impaired32
• Physiological characteristics that may amplify health risks, such as failing
cardiovascular or respiratory system,25 psychiatric illnesses,32 renal illnesses33
• Taking certain medications that affect heat sensitivity by interfering with the
body’s cooling functions or water/salt retention (e.g. antihypertensives,34
antidepressants,35 antipsychotics,35,36 anti-Parkinsonian36)
• Confined to bed or dependence on caregiver, family or friends for assistance with
daily living (e.g. water access)
• Communication, sensory, cognitive impairment
• Characteristics related to health status or behaiour (e.g. chronic dehydration, does
not leave home)
• Social isolation
Socially
disadvantaged
individuals and
communities:
• Low income20
• Homeless37
• Living alone32
• Limited financial resources to adequately take protective actions
• Reduced access to clean water and cool places
• Limited access to health care and social services
• More environmental exposures (e.g. homeless, living on higher floors with no air
conditioning38)
• Higher rates of alcohol and drug dependency 
• Social isolation
Newcomers to
Canada and
transient populations
such as tourists
• Language and literacy barriers for non-English or -French speakers
• Cultural differences, such as food consumption habits, clothing choices,  
pre-existing social or cultural beliefs
• Unique media use patterns
• Limited knowledge of local alert systems, health and social service programs
Table 2: Heat-vulnerable groups and examples of challenges they may face in adapting to
extreme heat events
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks
6
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Box 1: Method used to assess heat vulnerability in Quebec  
Climate models can be used to demonstrate current and projected biophysical vulnerability. Vescovi
(2007) evaluated the heat vulnerability of individuals by examining geo-spatial characteristics of
climate  hazards and social vulnerability, as follows:
• Age index – people older than 65.
• Poverty index – low-income earners.
• Social isolation index – single-person households. 
• Education index – people older than 20 years of age with less than 13 years of education. 
Heat-Vulnerable
Groups
Examples of Challenges
Occupational
groups
• Environmental and workplace exposures (e.g. farmers, construction workers, miners,
tree planters)
• Increased physical strain
• Variation in health and safety regulations, codes and standards 
• Irregular exposure to heat (i.e. lack of acclimatization) for new workers with
job-related heat exposures and those faced with early season extreme heat events25
The physically
active39,40
• Greater environmental exposures (e.g. marathon runners, recreational athletes,
people who walk or bike)
• Increased physical strain
• Reduced perception of risks and heat vulnerabilities
• Expectation of usual performance in the heat
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks
Source: Vescovi, 2007.17,121
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   7
1.4
Reducing Heat Illnesses
and Deaths 
As our climate continues to change,
weather conditions that already pose risks
to health may increase in the future. 
The amount of lead time in forecasts of extreme
heat events is now allowing public health officials
and the public to prepare for dangerous conditions.
Heat-related illnesses can be reduced with measures
that help people to maintain a normal body
temperature (approximately 37ºC/99ºF). To reduce
the likelihood of morbidity and mortality, public
health and emergency management officials,
together with individual Canadians, need to take
measures that include both short- and long-term
strategies. 
Short-term strategies provide targeted groups with
timely, consistent and accurate information to help
people make informed decisions and change their
behaviour to minimize health risks, such as drinking
more water and going to cooling shelters during
extreme heat. Many communities in Canada and
around the world have developed heat alert and
response systems that encourage people to take
actions to protect their health.41 The four typical
components of heat alert and response systems
include:
• Alert Protocol – Designed to identify
extremely hot weather conditions that could
result in increased morbidity and mortality in
a region. The protocol is used to alert officials
and stakeholders (e.g. managers of long-term
care facilities) who can then take actions to
inform the target audience and/or physically
adapt the facility.
• Community Response Plan – Developed for a
network of stakeholders with a goal of
reducing barriers to action and meeting the
needs of the community and especially those
who are most heat-vulnerable during an
extreme heat event.
• Communication Plan – Raises awareness
about heat-health impacts and provides advice
on how to reduce health risks by educating the
audience about protective actions and services
and resources that are available (described in
detail in Section 2).
• Evaluation Plan – Provides continual
improvement to a heat alert and response
system to meet the needs of the community. 
Long-term strategies are designed to reduce the
exposure of the general public to extreme heat and
help them adapt more effectively. Such strategies
include:
• minimizing the urban heat island effect by
modifying infrastructures to decrease heat
absorption, retention and release over time
(e.g. planting trees to decrease heat absorption
and increase shade, designing streets and
buildings to allow maximum air flow)42
• designing the community to include easy
access to heat-relief places and drinking water
• encouraging public participation in planning
exercises and using their skills, knowledge
and experiences43,44
• adapting the awareness campaign and alert
system to reach people at risk and encourage
them to change their perceptions and
behaviour 
Public health and emergency management officials
play an important role in communicating short-term
and long-term strategies to help individuals,
organizations and communities take the most
appropriate adaptive actions and make informed
decisions to reduce health risks.
1. Extreme Heat and Health Risks
Source: Craig A.L. Riedl
Green roof in Ottawa
8
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
To overcome barriers to behavioural
change, communication activities must
acknowledge that “there is no ‘general
public’ … there are many publics, each with
differing views and perceptions of health
and environment risks.”45
Past experiences with health promotion campaigns
to prepare for public health emergencies and natural
disasters provide useful guidance for developing
effective heat-health communication campaigns.
Campaigns are most effective when public health
and emergency management officials46:
• identify and analyze the audiences and their
needs
• take a collaborative approach with
stakeholders and government organizations
• set clear goals and objectives that fit budgets
and are logically linked to the campaign
• choose effective communication channels and
vehicles 
• develop risk communication products and
materials tailored to specific audiences
• build on existing health communication
campaigns (e.g. emergency preparedness,
public health)
• offer programs and services to minimize
barriers to action
• follow critical timelines for effective heat-
health communications
• take into consideration needs of specific
communities (e.g. rural versus urban)
• use pre-tested, consistent and scientifically
sound heat-health messages 
2.1
Identifying and Analyzing
Target Audiences 
Know your target audience – Identify who
you are trying to reach with your heat-
health communication campaign and
consider their physical conditions, level of
knowledge and needs, demographic
characteristics, recent experiences, beliefs
and values. 
The characteristics of a community and population
groups (Table 2) that increase heat vulnerability
should be assessed at the beginning of your
campaign so you can choose appropriate
communication strategies and tools. This process,
often called formative evaluation, allows you to
identify individuals and groups who should be
targeted to receive risk communication materials
and interventions, and ensure that the needs of your
stakeholders are met. This process also focuses
efforts and resources to prepare for extreme heat
events and helps to tailor the development of
“how-to” information.  
Successful heat-health communication campaigns
should be targeted to guide heat-vulnerable
individuals at four distinct levels of audience
organization47:
• heat-vulnerable individuals
• social networks 
• organizations
• communities and/or societies 
Targeting communication campaigns requires that
heat-vulnerable individuals be separated into groups
according to their characteristics. These
characteristics could relate to demographics,
specific behaviours, attitudes, perceptions of heat-
health risks, personal values, lifestyles and
opinions.48 These characteristics are key
determinants of how people receive and process
information from education and outreach
2. Communicating Health Risks from
Extreme Heat 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   9
campaigns. Empower interested individuals to play
a key role in your campaign by including them in
the process. This will encourage active participation
and increase the chance that communication
activities will have an impact.49
You can reach target groups directly and/or
indirectly by involving their social networks 
(e.g. family members, friends, co-workers, opinion
leaders, and gatekeepers to information goods and
services) to spread heat-health messages and
increase awareness of health risks.47 Involving
members of social networks also helps them learn
about the need to pay close attention to heat-
vulnerable people during extreme heat events. 
Your heat-health communication campaigns should
also target supporting organizations, to raise
awareness about heat-health issues, guide the
establishment of heat-health action plans (e.g.
emergency plans for extreme heat events), and
provide direction on preventative measures to
minimize health impacts. This will help to ensure
that heat-health messages are adopted and
distributed (Box 2) and that the information flows to
target audiences.  
Relevant organizations include:
• schools
• worksites
• long-term care facilities
• retirement homes
• landlord associations
• community outreach groups
• primary health care settings 
When community organizations are engaged, they
can often bring additional resources to the table
along with knowledge of the target audiences and
their needs. They may also be encouraged to take
the lead on heat-health issues and act as role models
for other organizations in the community.47
At the societal level, effective heat-health
campaigns aim for long-term impacts to help
communities and people cope with extreme heat
events. A longer-term impact can be achieved by
modifying social norms and implementing
supportive policies and regulations to protect those
most vulnerable and bring about needed
environmental changes, such as reducing the urban
heat island effect.  
Box 2: Canadian Red Cross — Expect the Unexpected program 
The Canadian Red Cross developed its Expect the
Unexpected program in 1997, following the major
floods in Saguenay, Quebec, in 1996. Intended for
educators and parents, the program is designed to
help youth and their families deal with the impact of
natural disasters and adopt disaster preparedness
behaviours. The Canadian Red Cross is grateful to
the American Red Cross for permitting the
adaptation of its Masters of Disasters™program in
order to create the Expect the Unexpected program. 
The only disaster-based educational  program of its
kind in Canada, Expect the Unexpected is designed to help children, youth, educators and parents learn
about the importance of disaster preparedness. It features in-class and at-home activities on topics such
as climate change, weather events, knowing the risks in your community, safety rules, making a plan,
getting a kit and dealing with emotions related to emergencies.41,50
Source:  Canadian Red Cross
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
10
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
2.2
Setting Goals and
Objectives 
After identifying your target audiences for a
campaign, the next step is to develop realistic
objectives that fit budgets and that focus on health-
related outcomes of both ultimate goals and
intermediate objectives. 
The ultimate goal of your communication campaign
is to reduce heat-related morbidity and mortality. To
achieve this, intermediate objectives need to be set
to1,47:
• raise awareness and increase knowledge about
the effect of extreme heat on health
• change health-related behaviours and develop
skills for behavioural change to improve self-
care during extreme heat events
• provide timely warnings about extreme heat
events
• improve social network interactions by
engaging family members, friends, co-
workers, neighbours
• build credibility and engage stakeholders in
heat-health communication campaigns 
2.3
Choosing the Means of
Communication  
Choose the right messenger – In advance of
an extreme heat event, you should identify
and train credible and empathetic
messengers who can move the message
forward (e.g. health care providers and
caregivers).51
There is no single approach to developing an
effective communication campaign. The most
appropriate strategy will depend on:
• communication goals and objectives
• available resources
• audience reach – which relates to48:
• audience size
• ability for messages to be passed on to
others
• relevance to the heat-vulnerable audience
• specific needs of target audiences
• involvement of community partners 
Successful heat-health communication campaigns
often include three means of communication to
reach the target audience, all of which should be
community-based:
• media
• mass/broadcast
• targeted (also known as narrowcast)
• interpersonal networks
• community and group events 
Mass/broadcast media include television, radio,
Internet, newspapers and magazines that reach very
large audiences.47 To reach specific audiences,
campaign planners tailor messages and deliver them
through selected vehicles and messengers at times
when these audiences are likely to be accessing or
using certain sections of particular media.  
Recent surveys of Canadians show that most people
receive their extreme weather information from
mass/broadcast media, through television (56%),
radio (35%) and the Internet (27%).52 Partnering
and engaging local media is important to establish
credibility and ensure dissemination of consistent
messages. Messages from mass/broadcast media
can often blend into other channels of
communication by stimulating discussion,
especially if the campaign messages are presented
as “news” rather than “advertising.” 
Source:  The Weather Network
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   11
Box 3: Heat-health communication framework used by Montréal’s public health
authority  
The communication framework developed by the Direction de santé publique de l’Agence de la santé et
des services sociaux de Montréal is a good example of how interpersonal networks (activities to support
health professionals), targeted media (promotional tools) and mass/broadcast media (press relations) are
used to communicate heat-health messages to the target audience. 
The three communication strategies used include:  
• Activities to support health professionals – During the heat season, information is sent
electronically to health professionals, in particular to physicians and professionals in health and
social services centres. This information encourages them to pay particular attention to patients at
risk and provide appropriate prevention advice about coping with extreme heat. 
• Promotional tools – Promotional material is sent out in early May. Posters and information cards are
mailed to a broad and varied distribution network responsible for communicating with the target
population. Information cards can also be downloaded from the Direction de santé publique website.  
• Press relations – Early in the heat season, a press release is sent to health and social services centres
for publication in local weeklies. It contains information on health risks related to extreme heat
events, identifies heat-vulnerable populations and suggests protective measures to guard against the
effects of heat. During periods of high heat and humidity warnings, media releases are distributed
and interviews in electronic and print media are conducted with community officials to remind the
population of this information.  
Source: Direction de santé publique de l’Agence de la santé et des services sociaux de Montréal, 2009.122
Strategies
Dissemination channels
Communication 
mediums
Target population
Activities to support
health professionals
Health network
• Physicians
• Home-care nurses
• Other health practitioners
• Discussions
• Documentation
Promotional tools
Information relay networks
• Medical clinics
• Pharmacies
• Health and Social Services
 Centres
• Municipal Housing Authority
• Private residences
• Seniors’ organizations
• Others
• Website (DSP)
• Cards
• Posters
• News
• Weather
 information
• Articles
• Etc.
Electronic media:
• Television
• Radio
• Internet (other than DSP)
(early in the season and
during periods of high
heat)
Print media:
• Dailies
• Weeklies
• Magazines
“Heat wave, be
cautious!”
Press relations
Informal network
• Family member
• Neighbour
• Friend
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
12
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Communication strategies should also be
supplemented with targeted media such as fact
sheets, pamphlets, posters, fridge magnets, and
personal alerts through short message service
(SMS), facsimile and e-mail. Some of these could
be mailed directly to people’s homes or inserted into
the newspapers your audience is likely to read. This
method gives people an information resource they
can use as they become more interested in the
campaign.44
Interpersonal networks are crucial and often most
powerful. They allow for greater participation in the
issue, especially when feedback is required.
Interpersonal networks spread public messages by
community leaders, health care providers, educators,
friends and relatives who will often endorse the
messages and enhance their impact.47
Distributing heat-health messages during
community and group events is also important. The
attention of the targeted audience is already
captured, as community events are often well
promoted and reported on by the media. For
example, messages could be integrated into
activities planned by faith-based groups, scientific
conferences, and industry, community and outdoor
events (e.g. festivals). 
Multiple, diverse channels and vehicles should be
coordinated to distribute heat-health messages and
to reinforce them. For example, mailed fact sheets
or fridge magnets should be supplemented with an
awareness campaign before the mail-out to increase
the likelihood of an audience keeping this material.
Shortly after, it is beneficial to follow up with
additional heat-health messages using multiple
means to spike interest and entice the audience to
read the mailed material.44 Apply the rule: three
messages, three times, using three different ways.48 
If the community borders another jurisdiction, the
target audience may also receive their health
information during extreme heat events from other
authorities. It is important to coordinate these heat-
health messages and alerts as much as possible to
build and maintain credibility, and to make the best
use of available resources. 
2.4
Tailoring Risk
Communication Products
and Removing Barriers to
Action 
Communication products should be tailored to each
target audience (Box 4). To enhance understanding
and retention of the message, heat-health written
material and graphics must be appropriate for the
Box 4: Tailored extreme heat and health fact sheets 
The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) has
developed fact sheets on risks
to health from extreme heat
that are tailored to the needs of
specific target audiences. The
“It’s Too Darn Hot” fact sheet
is offered in 17 languages and
comes in two versions – the
high-literacy version and a
simpler version for those with
a lower reading ability. EPA
also offers a large-font series
of fact sheets for people with a
visual impairment.53
Source: www.epa.gov/aging/resources/factsheets/index.htm. 
Source:  Environmental Protection Agency
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   13
reading level, age range, and ethnic or cultural
background of the audience. Focus the message on
the abilities of the audience and address their unique
challenges and perspectives. The information
provided should emphasize practical steps to protect
health within available community resources.  
Socio-economic factors may prevent people from
changing their behaviours in the face of serious
risks to health. These challenges include insufficient
financial resources for air conditioning, lack of
clean water or adequate shelter, inadequate skills
and knowledge, limited physical ability, and certain
views and beliefs (local preferences, accepted
behavioural patterns). Risk communication efforts
have more chance of influencing behaviour when
they are complemented by programs that remove
barriers to action and provide opportunities for
citizens to adopt coping strategies. For example,
providing free bus tickets during extreme heat
events will encourage people to go places where
they can cool down. Interventions to overcome
barriers to action should take into account the
existing capacity of communities and partners. They
should also address the need of target audiences and
be based on service utilization, availability and
accessibility of services, and stakeholders’
perceptions of audience need (Box 5). 
2.5
When to Communicate
Risks to Health from
Extreme Heat 
Effective communication planning must begin well
in advance of an extreme heat event to positively
influence behavioural change and to help the
audience deal with extremely hot weather. Extreme
heat and health communication campaigns
generally occur over three phases:
• before the heat season
• during the heat season
• during an extreme heat event 
Choose the right moment – Your message
will have the greatest impact if it is in the
right place at the right time. Choose the
means of distribution that are most
appropriate for your audiences. Look for
ways to tie messages to events that will
catch the audiences’ attention and spark
their interest. 
Before the Heat Season  
To reach targeted individuals in time, awareness
campaigns should begin in the spring before
extremely hot weather begins and continue during
the summer months. Educate audiences about
available resources in communities, such as cooling
facilities, utility rebates, subsidies and
transportation assistance. 
Before summer, raising public and stakeholder
awareness is more challenging than communication
during the heat season. This is because both the
media and the public are less likely to get interested
and involved in heat-health issues. Communication
activities should focus on raising the audiences’
curiosity about heat-health issues. This will
encourage information sharing and a desire to look
for more details from multiple sources. Make sure
these sources are available in advance (e.g.
websites, fact sheets). This will empower audiences
and give people an opportunity to plan their own
protective measures.44
It is beneficial to build on and possibly incorporate
(where appropriate) heat-health awareness activities
into existing community and group events and
health promotion campaigns (e.g. West Nile virus)
held in the spring. Properly timed and audience-
appropriate messages will ensure the best use of
resources, contribute to wider audience reach and
increase the likelihood of messages being
understood and retained. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
14
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Box 5: Interventions and communication strategies used in Canadian programs to
encourage adaptation to extreme heat  
Many steps to encourage adaptation to extreme heat address more than one barrier to action. 
Socio-economic challenges
• Open cooling facilities and extend their hours: 
• free swimming
• spray pads
• cooling rooms in apartment buildings and retirement
homes
• cooling shelters (e.g. libraries, government buildings,
shopping malls).
• Promote the use of available cooling options (e.g. water-
front, tree-shaded areas, public libraries).
• Provide subsidy programs and social services to eligible
residents (e.g. for purchasing a fan or air conditioner, public transportation to cooling facilities).
• Assist with utility arrears, disconnections and security deposits to restore services where necessary so
that vulnerable populations have access to power and water for the duration of an extreme heat event.
• Install water fountains and distribute water in locations where heat-vulnerable populations are likely to
gather.
Newcomers to Canada and cultural barriers
• Use culturally appropriate risk communication strategies by translating heat-health materials into
multiple languages.
• Adapt culturally appropriate themes with photographs, imagery, symbols and graphic elements as
determined through public involvement methods (e.g. focus groups).
• Use cultural leaders and ethnic media outlets to help disseminate culturally appropriate heat-health
messages.
• Include both degrees Fahrenheit and Celsius in the messages if the audience might find this information
useful (e.g. older adults, newcomers to Canada, transient populations). 
Inadequate skills and knowledge
• Actively distribute targeted media (e.g. fridge magnets, tailored fact sheets) and use media,
interpersonal channels, community and group events to disseminate heat-health messages.
• Provide maps with locations of cooling facilities.
• Provide support and services that help audiences maintain independence.
Limited mobility
• Provide transportation assistance to and from cooling facilities.
• Involve family members, neighbours and friends to provide support during extreme heat. 
Source: Examples are based on actions being taken by the cities of Toronto, Hamilton and Montréal.63,123
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   15
During the Heat Season and During an
Extreme Heat Event 
Heat stroke has a fast onset and low
survival rate.32
The timing of communication activities is critical.
Early summer extreme heat events result in higher
mortality and morbidity than do those occurring
later in the season.21 Extra communication efforts
are needed early in the season to warn and help
protect heat-vulnerable individuals.  
During an extreme heat event, providing effective
and rapid communication materials emphasizing
only three to seven bits of familiar information that
audiences can/should remember is very important.
This will increase the likelihood of retention of key
messages. By repeating these messages often,
through different channels and vehicles, you will
increase the reach and number of times they hear
your message, demonstrate credibility, and provide
needed support to those most at risk.54
Heat-related mortality also continues to occur
shortly after extreme heat events,55 so it is a good
idea to build the recovery phase into your
communication campaign. Provide ongoing
reminders to the public even after such events have
passed (e.g. “we are still recovering from an
extreme heat event, continue to drink cool water
before you feel thirsty”). 
Be prepared – use the “window of opportunity”
after the extreme heat event to communicate with
your audience. This will increase the likelihood of
messages being heard and picked up by the
audience, and encourage behavioural change.44
2.6
Special Considerations
for Rural Communities 
Although residents of rural and small town
communities are less likely to be affected by the
urban heat island effect (i.e. there is more night-time
relief from the heat) or crime if they keep their
windows open, they are likely to be at high risk for
several reasons:
• Small towns and rural communities are home
to many heat-vulnerable individuals, including
older adults whose numbers are growing
rapidly in rural regions.56
• There are occupational hazards resulting from
exposure to environmental heat (e.g. farming
and outdoor work).57
• There is a greater likelihood of people being
isolated compared with those living in urban
settings.58
• Without convenient public transportation,
people without vehicles may not be able to go
to a cooler place.58
• Communities may also be resort/tourist towns
and attract transient populations during the
summer months, which need to be considered
when developing communication campaigns.59
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
16
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Small towns and rural communities often face
unique challenges in developing and implementing
extreme heat and health communication campaigns.
These can include:
• limited financial resources60
• lower levels of formal education60
• access to health services that may require
travel outside the community58
• fewer public health and emergency
management staff to set up communication
campaigns58
• a smaller number of community support
organizations and facilities (e.g. shelters,
retirement homes, emergency assistance)58
• fewer services that allow vulnerable people to
maintain their independence in the community
(e.g. public transportation and housing
options)58
• limited channels for communicating with the
audience during extreme heat events (weekly
newspapers, few local radio stations) 
These communities also have important strengths
that can be drawn upon when developing
communication plans. These may include:
• strong community and social networks61,62
• highly credible and trusted communicators
(e.g. community leaders in places of worship)
• gathering places familiar to most residents
• capacity to go door-to-door to disseminate
information (in some communities)62
• rapid decision-making capacity
• high numbers of volunteers to help get the
messages out61,62 
Authorities in rural communities may need to find
innovative approaches to use their strengths and
address challenges. For example, because of fewer
ways to communicate with the public, heat
awareness campaigns may need to focus on
empowering people to take independent action by
monitoring important weather information and the
health of those around them. To facilitate
communication with audiences in summer, officials
may inform the public about the severity of extreme
heat events by displaying a “heat meter” sign by the
side of the road, an entrance to a park or
recreational facility. The sign could display
community-specific heat warnings such as an
advisory, warning or alert. The heat monitor design
used by the City of Hamilton is one example that
could be adapted to develop a local heat meter sign
in rural areas (Box 6).  
To distribute heat-health information in rural areas,
you could use:
• postings on bulletin boards in public placesb
(e.g. post office, grocery store)64
• community and group events (e.g. festivals)
• local newspapers, bulletins and radio
• tourist and recreational facilities
• schools
• interpersonal channels (e.g. word of mouth,
telephone, community centres, places of
worship) 
2.7
Developing Heat-Health
Messages 
When communicating with intended audiences, take
advantage of techniques designed to capture
attention, along with strategies that will influence
behavioural outcomes.65 It is important to ensure
that heat-health messages are accessible, credible,
personally relevant, take into consideration existing
knowledge and focus on achievable outcomes 
(Box 7). See Appendix B for the Toronto Health
Communication Unit’s Message Review Tool to
develop messages that address an audience’s level
of understanding and relevance. 
Box 6: Heat meter used by the City
of Hamilton63
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Source:  City of Hamilton
bFocus groups with older adults in rural communities across Canada showed this to be the most effective communication
tool (Public Health Agency of Canada, 2007).64
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   17
Successful public education campaigns, such as
“Quit smoking,” “Fasten your seat belt” and “Don’t
litter,” have had three strategies in common44:
• They introduced uncertainty in the target
audiences – Introduce uncertainty by
discussing the chance of an extreme heat
event and the possibility of impact on the
audience. Guide them to additional resources
where they can find weather information or
heat-health information (e.g. websites,
doctors’ offices, fact sheets).
• They provided simple solutions to protect
health – Describe an extreme heat event using
“the local angle” and the possible impacts that
the target audience care about (e.g. health for
parents with young children and older adults,
performance for those who are physically
active) and offer simple solutions (e.g. drink
water).
• They reinforced messages through
stakeholder communication activities –
Present a united voice with your stakeholders.
Give the right amount of detail about actions
that audiences can take before, during and
after an extreme heat event to minimize health
impacts. 
It is important to keep messages consistent
throughout all stages of the campaign and between
distribution vehicles (e.g. fact sheets, media
releases, websites). Consistent messages from all
public officials, community leaders, health care
providers, educators and other sources help develop
and maintain credibility and trust with the
audiences. To do this, look for potential
inconsistencies with other health-promotion
campaigns (e.g. ultraviolet radiation, air quality,
infectious diseases, physical activity, green city and
energy-use reduction campaigns). It is very
important to ensure that heat-health messages are
complementary before you distribute them.  
Box 7: Guidelines for developing effective messages54,66,67
• Identify and test key messages and required actions – Use simple, focused, scientifically sound
(see Section 2.8) and audience-relevant heat-health messages emphasizing health and safety.
Prioritize the messages and communicate actions that your audience should take when they receive
the information. 
• Communicate clearly – Grab the attention of the audiences with plain language (Appendix A),
personal pronouns (e.g. you) and action verbs, and use them throughout the message.  
• Motivate your audience – “It’s good for you” is not a reward that motivates people. Understand the
needs of audiences and what will motivate them to consider changing their behaviour (e.g. improved
performance for those who are physically active). 
• Use vivid and appropriate images – A good comparison (e.g. image) can be a very powerful
method to communicate a message. People will remember it, relate to it and repeat it. Make sure the
comparison is relevant and appropriate for the audience. 
• Build trust by providing evidence and acknowledge any lack of certainty – Target audiences
may need examples of how your heat-health campaign saved a life or made a lasting difference. At
the same time, acknowledge that extreme heat does not impact everyone the same way and that some
may be more vulnerable than others. 
• Avoid – Technical jargon, unnecessary words, condescending/judgmental phrases, promises or
guarantees, and humour which can be misinterpreted and requires testing with the audience. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
18
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Address contradictory messages by integrating heat-
health messages into other health-promotion
campaigns (Box 8) or developing a databank of
health messages for the public when extreme heat
events happen at the same time as other public
health emergencies or events. This would help to
maintain consistency, minimize confusion among
the public and give appropriate health protection
guidance to your audiences. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Box 8: Example of contradictory messages sent out by Canadian public health
authorities 
Go outdoors only in the
coolest part of the day
Stay indoors at dusk 
and dawn, when mosquitoes
are most active
When outdoors, stay in the
shade whenever possible
Avoid areas with heavy
vegetation or shaded areas
(i.e. woods)
Solution: 
Incorporate messages about the need to take protective measures against vector-borne
diseases into heat-health communication materials (see Appendix D for a fact sheet
example). 
Extreme Heat
Contradictory Messages
West Nile Virus
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   19
2.8
Scientifically Sound Heat-Health Messages for the Public 
Message 1:
Heat illnesses are preventable. 
Explanation:
This message empowers the reader. It reduces barriers to action. 
Message 2:
While extreme heat can put everyone at risk from heat illnesses, health
risks are greatest for:
•
older adults;
•
infants and young children;
•
people with chronic illnesses, such as breathing difficulties, heart
conditions, or psychiatric illnesses;
•
people who work in the heat;
•
people who exercise in the heat;
•
homeless people; and
•
low-income earners. 
Explanation:
Heat-vulnerable individuals – The list should accurately represent populations at higher
risk in your community (determined through an assessment of individual- and
community-level vulnerabilities). 
Older adults – Older adults may be faced with compounding factors that could put them
at increased risk during extreme heat events. These factors may include chronic
illnesses,68,69 impaired thermoregulatory system,70 medications that interfere with the
body’s cooling mechanisms,36,71–73 social isolation,32 lower literacy26 and poverty.26
The following heat-health messages were developed
through a review of the scientific literature about
risks to health from extreme heat, best practices in
health risk communication and the most effective
actions to protect Canadians. The messages were
reviewed by health communication experts and
public health officials in communities developing
heat alert and response systems. Explanations for
each message and considerations to help minimize
contradictory and confusing statements are provided.  
The messages are not presented in order of
importance. Some may be more appropriate
depending on the target audience, timing and
vehicle chosen for communication. Testing of these
messages with your audience is important to ensure
relevance and applicability. Fact sheets aimed at
older adults, those who are physically active and
parents with young children, which use many of
these messages, are included in Appendix D. 
Source: City of Toronto
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
20
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
The term “older adults” is seen as appropriate for this target group because it eliminates
association with a specific age (e.g. “senior” usually denotes a person 65 years of age or
older). The term “elderly” may be inappropriate or confusing when addressing
communities that include Aboriginal people. “Elder” is a title given to some Aboriginal
people in recognition of their wisdom and is often reserved as a title of honour.74
Infants and young children – Given the unique physiological characteristics of
children’s bodies and their high dependency on caregivers, they are likely to be at risk
during extreme heat events.75,76
People with chronic illnesses – Individuals with breathing difficulties,77 heart problems78
and psychiatric illnesses79–81 are at a higher risk of heat-related health effects. 
People who work in the heat – Some work environments expose people to higher heat-
health risks. Examples include foundries, steel mills, smelters and glass factories. As well,
people who work outdoors (e.g. construction, road repair, open-pit mining and farming),
in laundries, restaurant kitchens, bakeries and canneries39 are at higher risk.82
People who exercise in the heat – Physically active individuals who exercise in the heat
(e.g. professional athletes, marathon runners, recreational athletes, people who walk or
bike outdoors) could face greater environmental heat exposure and physical strain. In
addition, some of these people may expect their usual performance despite the dangerous
weather conditions. 
Homeless people and low-income earners – These populations have limited financial
resources to take protective actions and often experience greater social isolation. They
therefore experience greater environmental exposures to heat and may also be faced with
less access to clean water, cool places, and health and social services. 
Message 3:
If you are taking medication or have a health condition, ask your doctor or
pharmacist if it increases your health risk in the heat and follow their
recommendations. 
Explanation:
Some drugs interfere with the body’s ability to maintain normal body temperature.
Sensitivity can vary widely, so people should be encouraged to seek advice from their
doctors and pharmacists. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   21
Message 4:
Heat illnesses include heat stroke, heat exhaustion, heat fainting, heat
edema (swelling of hands, feet and ankles), heat rash and heat cramps
(muscle cramps). 
Watch for symptoms of heat illness, which include:
•
dizziness or fainting;
•
nausea or vomiting;
•
headache;
•
rapid breathing and heartbeat;
•
extreme thirst; and
•
decreased urination with unusually dark yellow urine. 
If you experience any of these symptoms during extreme heat, immediately
move to a cool place and drink liquids. Water is best. 
Explanation:
Urgency of the situation – Immediate actions need to be taken when signs of heat illness
are seen. If not treated immediately, they may result in a life-threatening condition such as
heat stroke.13 This urgency should be highlighted in the message. 
First aid advice – When symptoms of heat exhaustion are seen, the most effective
treatment is to move the person to a cool place.82–84 The message should focus on a cool
place rather than an air-conditioned place (e.g. shopping mall, public building). This will
provide more cooling options, such as a shaded area in the park, which could be as much
as 5ºC/9ºF cooler than the surrounding area.18
Message 5:
Heat stroke is a medical emergency! Call 911 or your local emergency
number immediately if you are caring for someone, such as a neighbour,
who has a high body temperature and is either unconscious, confused or
has stopped sweating. 
While waiting for help – cool the person right away by:
•
moving them to a cool place, if you can;
•
applying cold water to large areas of the skin or clothing; and
•
fanning the person as much as possible. 
Explanation:
Medical emergency – Heat stroke is a medical emergency and requires immediate
medical attention, as the mortality rate can be high.32 Emphasize the immediate need to
call 911 or a local emergency number, which should be included in the message. 
Sweating – Sweating is not a good indicator of heat stroke for the general public because
there are two types of heat stroke – classic (accompanied by little or no sweating, usually
occurring in children, those who are chronically ill and older adults) and exertional
(accompanied by an increase in body temperature because of strenuous exercise or
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
22
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
occupational exposure along with environmental heat, and where sweating is usually
present).39 
High body temperature – Core body temperature over 40ºC/104ºF is indicative of heat
stroke. However, to get an accurate reading you need to use a rectal thermometer, which
may not be available or convenient. Therefore, “high body temperature” was chosen to
describe this sign of heat stroke since immediate action is required. 
Cooling advice – Full body submersion in cool water is the fastest method to treat
exercise-induced heat stroke (effective among young people, military personnel and
athletes with exertional-related heat stroke). However, it is mainly applicable in a clinical
setting.85–87 In other settings, cool the person by applying cold water to large areas of the
skin or clothing and fan them as much as possible, keeping in mind that cooling larger
areas will improve efficiency.88–90
Message 6:
Frequently visit neighbours, friends and older family members, especially
those who are chronically ill, to make sure that they are cool and hydrated. 
Explanation:
Importance of visiting – Visitors can help identify signs of heat illness that could be
missed over the telephone. Checking with a telephone call is sufficient only for people
who have excellent self-care ability.
Frequency of visits – It is essential to use careful judgment of a person’s ability for self-
care and past experiences in hot environments when determining how often to visit the
person under your care. 
Message 7:
Drink plenty of cool liquids, especially water, before you feel thirsty to
decrease your risk of dehydration. Thirst is not a good indicator of
dehydration. 
Explanation:
Drink “before you feel thirsty” – Many people, especially older adults, may be in a state
of chronic dehydration because of a reduced ability to feel thirst, the body’s reduced
ability to react to dehydration and concern over frequent urination.26,27 By the time a
person feels thirst, they have already lost about 2% of their body water and dehydration
has occurred.91 One method of reminding people to drink water is by advising them to
leave a colourful glass by the sink and to drink from it after every hand washing.92 
Volume of water – Individuals should take personal responsibility for keeping hydrated.93
People gain water from food and liquid intake, and lose water through urination, sweating
and normal metabolic processes. Everyone has different water needs, depending on their
activity level, diet, exposure to heat, perspiration rate and sodium concentration in
sweat.94 Canada’s Food Guide recommends drinking “more water in hot weather or when
you are very active.”95
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   23
•
People who eat very little, such as older adults, may not be getting sufficient
amounts of water and may need to drink more.83 However, it is important not to
over-hydrate as it may lead to a medical emergency (hyponatremia) caused by
low plasma salt levels.96
•
Research has also shown that people who do not take part in intense activity do
not need to take supplements, such as salt tablets, to maintain proper plasma salt
levels.97
Water versus juice or sports drinks – Water is the best hydrating liquid. Sports drinks
and juices are popular but are also expensive. Considering the large quantities of juice or
sports drinks that need to be consumed to stay properly hydrated in the heat, consumption
of these liquids could be dangerous for diabetics. On the other hand, as our society has
developed a taste for juices and sodas, flavouring water with natural fruit juice may make
it more appealing.83
Caffeinated beverages – Caffeine is a diuretic that increases urination. Regular caffeine
users are adjusted to the effect of caffeine, minimizing its diuretic properties.98 Therefore,
people may continue to drink caffeinated beverages during extreme heat, but should not
increase consumption during this time. 
Cool liquids – Research suggests that people will not drink enough water unless it has
been cooled (21–24ºC/70–65ºF).25
Fruits and vegetables – Fruits and vegetables have high water content and are a great
snack to increase daily water consumption.
Message 8:
Reschedule or plan outdoor activities during cooler parts of the day. 
Explanation:
Defining “cooler parts of the day” – Every region has its own micro-climate.
Depending on the location of a person’s residence, their body could get a heat load from
direct sunlight during the day or from pavement and buildings even after the sun sets.99 It
is important to let people decide which time is cooler and more comfortable for outdoor
activities. 
Give options – For those who may want to participate in outdoor activities, offer safer
options such as:
•
rescheduling outdoor activities to a cooler part of the day or another day;
•
exercising in an air-conditioned place rather than heading outdoors;
•
choosing a cooler outdoor location such as a tree-shaded area away from high
traffic to avoid high levels of air pollution; or
•
if one of these options is not possible, the activity duration and intensity should be
reduced.100
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
24
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
West Nile virus – Mosquitoes can transmit West Nile virus and are most active during
cooler parts of the day. To minimize the possibility of infection, include the following
West Nile virus safety tip from Health Canada101:
•
If you are in an area where mosquitoes are active, protect yourself with insect
repellent and follow the manufacturer’s directions.  
Encourage the audience to move around – Moving around may actually reduce the
possibility of fainting in the heat. People who sit or stand for an extended period of time
may be at greater risk during extreme heat events.83
Acclimatization – Exposure to outdoor temperatures in the summer helps to prepare a
healthy person’s body for the heat through acclimatization and may reduce the probability
of heat illnesses. Acclimatization takes time and will depend on individual characteristics.
Guidelines for healthy people who exercise or work in the heat indicate that it requires 10
to 14 days of exposure to hot temperatures for the body to adapt.102 Consequently, even
for healthy people strenuous activities in the heat could be dangerous, especially early in
the heat season.  
Message 9:
Wear loose-fitting, light-coloured clothing made of breathable fabric. 
Explanation:
Clothing – Clothing thickness and the amount of skin covered will affect the efficiency of
heat transfer and the evaporation of sweat from the skin.103 Insulation, permeability and
breathability are characteristics important to consider when determining the most
appropriate clothes to wear during extreme heat.104
Message 10:
Never leave people or pets in your care inside a parked vehicle or in direct
sunlight.
Explanation:
“People or pets in your care” versus “anyone” – It is not feasible to list all people (e.g.
infants, those who are chronically ill) who should not be left in the vehicle during extreme
heat. The designation “people or pets in your care” implies those with caregiver needs.
Indicating “anyone” may appear to be too generic and could result in mistrust and
disregard of the message. 
Temperature inside a vehicle could get very dangerous – When the outside air
temperature is 23ºC/73ºF, the temperatures inside a vehicle can be extremely dangerous –
more than 50ºC/122ºF.105
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   25
Message 11:
Take a break from the heat by spending a few hours in a cool place. It could
be a tree-shaded area, swimming facility or an air-conditioned spot such as
a public building, shopping mall, grocery store, place of worship or public
library. 
Explanation:
Time needed for sufficient cooling – This depends on individual characteristics. Every
person needs to judge their own comfort level and when they feel refreshed after cooling. 
Unique community cooling options – Develop this message based on the existing air-
conditioned resources and programs that are most appropriate for your target audience
and their demographics (e.g. cooling centre, public library, cooling room in an apartment
building, place of worship, shopping mall, grocery store). Keep in mind that some people
may not have access to air-conditioned places. Therefore, it is a good idea to highlight
other cooling options (e.g. waterfront locations, tree-shaded areas, swimming facility or
spray pads – some of these may be excellent choices for children).
Air-conditioned spot – Use of air conditioners during extreme heat events diminishes
heat-health risks.32 However, air conditioners can use a lot of energy, give off greenhouse
gases and may decrease acclimatization to heat. Therefore, public health information
should highlight alternatives and educate about the most efficient use of air conditioners.
Messages that suggest using air conditioners should include user guidelines such as:
•
If you have an air conditioner, make sure it works properly before the hot weather
starts.
•
If you have an air conditioner with a thermostat, keep it set to the highest setting
that is comfortable (somewhere between 22ºC/72ºF and 26ºC/79ºF), which will
reduce your energy costs and provide you with needed relief.106
•
If you are using a window air conditioner, cool only one room where you can go
for heat relief. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
26
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Message 12:
Take cool showers or baths until you feel refreshed. 
Explanation:
“Cool” versus “cold” – Some people who are at a higher risk from extreme heat may
have other health conditions such as cardiovascular disorders. Exposure to a rapid shift in
temperature could have health consequences.107 Recommending a “cool” rather than
“cold” shower or bath minimizes this risk. 
Bathroom safety – Older adults108 and children109 may be at increased risk of injuries
while in the bath tub. Messages to these groups could add additional suggestions to
protect them from injuries, such as including Health Canada’s fall prevention guidelines:
•
For older adults – Make sure to use non-slip surfaces in the tub and shower, and
wipe up moisture or spills immediately to avoid slipping.110
•
For children – Always supervise your child in the bath.111
Misting – Misting with cool water is helpful during extreme heat. Mist cools the body by
conductive cooling and contributes to evaporative cooling, especially when windy. 
Cooling hands and forearms – Cooling a person’s hands and forearms can improve
athletic and occupational performance and comfort while reducing heat strain.13,36,73,84,85,112
Message 13:
Prepare meals that don't need to be cooked in your oven. 
Explanation:
Ovens produce a lot of heat. Cooking with an oven will increase the indoor temperature,
which is difficult to lower during extreme heat events, especially without an air conditioner. 
Message 14:
Block sun out by closing awnings, curtains or blinds during the day. 
Explanation:
“Greenhouse effect” – Allowing the sun to beam through the windows will increase your
indoor temperature due to the “greenhouse effect” and will result in trapping hot air in the
home. Installing and closing awnings or shutters is very effective at keeping the heat
outside, since the sun’s rays will be blocked before they reach the window. 
Plan for the future – Planting a broadleaf tree on the side of the house where the sun hits
during the hottest part of the day will provide shade during the summer months and
shelter the house from radiant heat. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   27
Message 15:
Avoid sun exposure. Shade yourself by wearing a wide-brimmed,
breathable hat or using an umbrella. 
Explanation:
Heat is made up of four main physical and environmental factors that contribute to the
body’s heat load: humidity, radiant load, temperature and wind speed.39 Direct sun
exposure will increase the radiant load and total heat exposure. This is why shaded areas
are cooler and wearing a wide-brimmed, breathable hat or using an umbrella in the sun is
recommended. 
Hats – Basic scientific principles, as well as designs that have evolved in hot climates,
indicate that hats worn to protect against the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) rays and sunburn
should be:
•
Wide-brimmed – Peaked baseball caps offer good protection to the nose, but not
other areas of the face, ears and back of the neck. Hats with a wide brim (at least
7.5 cm/3 ins.) are necessary to provide adequate protection.113
•
Breathable – Breathable fabrics are practical for evaporative cooling and
decreasing heat accumulation in the hat.114
Umbrella – Using an umbrella to avoid sun (radiant load) exposure is ideal as it does not
interfere with evaporative cooling and provides a lot of shade. 
Sunburn – UV exposure could result in sunburn. Sunburned skin loses its sweating
efficiency, which impairs the ability of the body to regulate its temperature.115
Sun safety – If sun exposure is unavoidable, recommend the use of a sunscreen lotion
that is SPF 15 or higher and that users follow the manufacturer’s directions for safe use.116
Remind your audience that sunscreen and insect repellents can be safely used together,
and that they should apply the sunscreen first, then the insect repellent. 
2. Communicating Health Risks from Extreme Heat 
28
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
The evaluation plan should be simple and cost-
effective. It should also include those involved in
developing and participating in the campaign (e.g.
audiences, stakeholders, government and non-
government organizations).118 Engaging these
groups and receiving constant feedback will ensure
identification of common goals among
stakeholders, realistic expectations of the campaign
outcomes, and appropriate measurable indicators for
use in evaluation.119 
Develop an evaluation plan along with the
communication campaign to best capture
opportunities for data gathering during the
implementation phase. Base the plan on the
ultimate goals and intermediate objectives
of the campaign.  
Evaluations could be completed using qualitative
(focus groups, interviews, questionnaires, diaries)
and quantitative (surveys, analysis of records,
service utilization, morbidity/mortality data)
methods (Appendix F).  
Campaign evaluations will help you to117,118:
• assess the effectiveness/impacts of campaign
activities by identifying successes and
shortfalls
• evaluate the use of time and resources (cost–
benefit analysis)
• assess whether the needs of your partner
organizations and target audiences were met
• assess progress in achieving intermediate
goals and ultimate objectives
• apply lessons learned to improve future heat-
health communication activities
• justify financial support 
Formal evaluation of heat-health
communication campaigns can help to
improve communication strategies and
messages, and will ensure that they are cost-
effective and appropriate for your audience.  
There are three main types of evaluation:
• formative (described in Section 2)
• process
• outcome 
To evaluate programs, campaign leaders may use
informal feedback from stakeholders and target
audiences, as well as their own observations from
past experiences. However, this type of evaluation is
often based on incomplete data and may be biased.
Formal evaluation is more credible and is better for
accurately capturing the strengths and weaknesses
of heat-health communication campaigns.117
Formal and informal evaluations should117:
• aim to strengthen and improve the campaign
• use multiple approaches when feasible
• address real community issues identified in the
early stages of the evaluation
• use a participatory process as much as possible 
3. Evaluating Heat-Health Communication
Campaigns
3. Evaluating Heat-Health Communication Campaigns
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   29
3.1
Process Evaluation 
Process evaluation is used to examine a
program during its implementation. 
A process evaluation examines services related to
implementation of the campaign and allows the
campaign leader to assess117,118:
• the effectiveness of the campaign regarding
use of channels and vehicles to get your heat-
health messages to audiences
• whether the audience has equal opportunity to
participate in the program
• target audience reach, especially for specific
services offered to reduce barriers to action
(e.g. number and demographic make-up of
visitors to cooling facilities)
• the clarity of messages identifying actions
needed to protect health
• the appropriate use of resources to realize
objectives 
As part of a process evaluation, it is important to
monitor and evaluate news and trends to identify
emerging needs of the audience and stakeholders,
allow for timely response to new scientific
developments, address criticisms and build
partnerships.119 Monitoring includes:
• collecting and reviewing published documents
(e.g. peer-reviewed literature, newsletters,
reports)
• analyzing media coverage for consistency and
support
• performing Internet searches of reliable sites
(e.g. Health Canada) to get the latest
information about heat-health risks and
effective adaptation strategies
• tracking Internet traffic on heat-health web
pages
• meeting with key players (e.g. target audience,
stakeholders, health care professionals) 
• interviewing stakeholders and the public
following awareness-raising activities 
3.2
Outcome Evaluation 
Outcome evaluation is appropriate for 
well-developed heat-health communication
campaigns that have been implemented
over a number of years and have made
progress toward campaign objectives. 
Outcome evaluation, also known as summative
evaluation, should focus on117:
• Intermediate objectives – immediate changes
in people’s behaviour and views of heat-health
issues.
• Ultimate goals – reductions in heat-related
morbidity and mortality. 
Box 9: Examples of items to be
measured in process
evaluation  
• Type of work performed
• Staff time spent on program at various
stages
• Expenditures/costs
• Promotion/publicity earned
• Participation rate of your stakeholders
(could be measured over time)
• Number and type(s) of inquiries received
• Number and type(s) of resources distributed
• Number and type(s) of groups formed
• Number and type(s) of training sessions
held
• Number of contacts made
• Level of client/stakeholder satisfaction 
Source: Health Communication Unit, 2007.117
3. Evaluating Heat-Health Communication Campaigns
30
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
3.3
Evaluation Results 
Document the results of the formal evaluation to
guide future efforts to strengthen heat-health
communication activities. Share them with team
members and stakeholders, through presentations,
discussions, meetings and e-mail updates.119 The
evaluation reports should be published and available
for dissemination.c
Evaluation activities are most beneficial when they
are ongoing, as behaviour changes take place over
time. Long-term efforts to measure impacts are
needed to ensure sustained behavioural adaptations
during extreme heat events. Even if behavioural
changes are observed shortly after a program is
launched, it does not mean that they will be
sustained over time.119
Box 10: Examples of items to measure in
an outcome evaluation  
Intermediate objectives 
• Changes in policies (e.g. urban heat island,
building standards)
• Changes in awareness, knowledge or beliefs
• Benefits to participants or barriers to actions
• Changes in service utilization
• Level of self-care before and during extreme heat
events
• Changes in social network interactions such
as engagement with family members, friends, 
co-workers, neighbours 
Ultimate goals 
• Changes in morbidity and mortality rates
• Changes in health-protective behaviours
• Changes in social norms that protect health 
Source: Health Communication Unit, 2007.117
3. Evaluating Heat-Health Communication Campaigns
cFor a good evaluation example of a heat-health communication campaign see “Evaluation of the Education Campaign
on Health Risks Associated with Heat Waves and on Related Protection Measures” developed by the Direction de santé
publique de l’Agence de la santé et des services sociaux de Montréal, 2009.122
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   31
Appendices
Appendices
32
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Appendix A: Plain-Language Checklist 
The plain-language checklist can be used to develop or modify heat-health messages.  
Source: Adapted from Health Canada, 1999 and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2002.54,124 
q Avoid acronyms and complex/technical language or provide definitions where
necessary.
q Use familiar words and a conversational, personal tone.
q Proceed logically, in order of importance, and provide links between paragraphs. 
q Use action verbs and active construction (versus passive). 
q Favour short words and short sentences. 
q Use short paragraphs when possible.
q Use concrete examples to illustrate ideas or concepts. 
q Present ideas with illustrations or diagrams if this makes them easier to understand. 
q Highlight main ideas and important information with sub-headings, point-form lists
and boldface type.
Appendix A
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   33
Appendix B: Heat-Health Communication Message Review Tool  
This message review tool can be used with stakeholders and target audiences to evaluate the appropriateness of
heat-health messages.  
Final Recommendation
Use
Adapt
Reject 
Comments:  
Source: Adapted from the Health Communication Unit, 2002.125 
Excellent
Very Good
Fair
Fail
The message will get and maintain the attention of the
audience.
The strongest points are given at the beginning of the
message.
The message is clear (i.e. it is easy for the audience to
point out the actions to take; the incentives or reasons
for taking those actions; the evidence for the incentives
and any background information or definitions).
The action you are asking the audience to take is
 reasonably easy.
The message uses incentives effectively (more than one
type of incentive is used; the audience cares about the
incentives presented; the audience thinks the incentives
are serious and action is likely to be taken).
Good evidence for threats and benefits is provided.
The messenger is seen as a credible source of
 information.
Messages are believable.
The message uses an appropriate tone for the audience.
The message uses an appeal that is appropriate for the
audience (i.e. rational or emotional).
The message will not harm or be offensive to people
who see or hear it.
Target audience identity is displayed throughout the
 message.
The message is consistent with other health
promotional materials (e.g. ultraviolet radiation, air
quality, infectious diseases, green city, energy-use
reduction campaigns).
Appendix B
34
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Appendix C: Heat-Health Messages 
Message 1: 
Heat illnesses are preventable. 
Message 2: 
While extreme heat can put everyone at risk from heat illnesses, health risks are greatest for:
•
older adults;
•
infants and young children;
•
people with chronic illnesses, such as breathing difficulties, heart conditions, or
psychiatric illnesses;
•
people who work in the heat;
•
people who exercise in the heat;
•
homeless people; and
•
low-income earners. 
Message 3: 
If you are taking medication or have a health condition, ask your doctor or pharmacist if it
increases your health risk in the heat and follow their recommendations. 
Message 4: 
Heat illnesses include heat stroke, heat exhaustion, heat fainting, heat edema (swelling of hands,
feet and ankles), heat rash and heat cramps (muscle cramps). 
Watch for symptoms of heat illness, which include:
•
dizziness or fainting;
•
nausea or vomiting;
•
headache;
•
rapid breathing and heartbeat;
•
extreme thirst; and
•
decreased urination with unusually dark yellow urine. 
If you experience any of these symptoms during extreme heat, immediately move to a cool
place and drink liquids. Water is best. 
Message 5:
Heat stroke is a medical emergency! Call 911 or your local emergency number
immediately if you are caring for someone, such as a neighbour, who has a high body
temperature and is either unconscious, confused or has stopped sweating. 
While waiting for help – cool the person right away by:
•
moving them to a cool place, if you can;
•
applying cold water to large areas of the skin or clothing; and
•
fanning the person as much as possible. 
Appendix C
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   35
Message 6: 
Frequently visit neighbours, friends and older family members, especially those who are
chronically ill, to make sure that they are cool and hydrated. 
Message 7: 
Drink plenty of cool liquids, especially water, before you feel thirsty to decrease your risk of
dehydration. Thirst is not a good indicator of dehydration. 
Message 8: 
Reschedule or plan outdoor activities during cooler parts of the day. 
Message 9: 
Wear loose-fitting, light-coloured clothing made of breathable fabric. 
Message 10: 
Never leave people or pets in your care inside a parked vehicle or in direct sunlight.
Message 11:
Take a break from the heat by spending a few hours in a cool place. It could be a tree-shaded
area, swimming facility or an air-conditioned spot such as a public building, shopping mall,
grocery store, place of worship or public library. 
Message 12:
Take cool showers or baths until you feel refreshed. 
Message 13: 
Prepare meals that don't need to be cooked in your oven. 
Message 14: 
Block sun out by closing awnings, curtains or blinds during the day. 
Message 15:
Avoid sun exposure. Shade yourself by wearing a wide-brimmed, breathable hat or using an
umbrella. 
Appendix C
36
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Appendix D: Heat-Health Fact Sheet—Older Adults 
Protect yourself from the dangers of very HOT weather
It’s way too HOT!
Know your risks
Hot temperatures can be dangerous, especially if you have:
• breathing difficulties;
• heart problems;
• hypertension;
• kidney problems;
• a mental illness such as depression or dementia;
• Parkinson’s disease; or
• if you take medication for any of these conditions.
If you are taking medication or have a health condition, ask your doctor or pharmacist if it
increases your health risk in the heat and follow their recommendations.
Heat illnesses include heat stroke, heat exhaustion, heat fainting, heat edema (swelling of
hands, feet and ankles), heat rash and heat cramps (muscle cramps). Heat illnesses can affect
you quickly and are mainly caused by over-exposure to heat or over-exertion in the heat.
Five steps to protect your health in very HOT weather
Step 1
Prepare for the heat
Tune in regularly to local weather forecasts and alerts so you know when to take
extra care.
Arrange for regular visits by family members, neighbours or friends during very hot
days in case you need assistance. Visitors can help identify signs of heat illness that
could be missed over the phone.
If you have an air conditioner, make sure it works properly before the hot weather
starts. Otherwise, find an air-conditioned spot close by where you can cool off for a few
hours during very hot days. This will help you cope with the heat better.
Step 2
Pay close attention to how you – and those around you – feel
Watch for symptoms of heat illness, which include:
• dizziness or fainting;
• nausea or vomiting;
• headache;
Appendix D — Older Adults
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   37
• rapid breathing and heartbeat;
• extreme thirst (dry mouth or sticky saliva); and
• decreased urination with unusually dark yellow urine.
If you experience any of these symptoms during hot weather, immediately move to a
cool place and drink liquids. Water is best.
Step 3
Stay hydrated
Drink plenty of cool liquids, especially water, before you feel thirsty to decrease your
risk of dehydration. Thirst is not a good indicator of dehydration.
• Remind yourself to drink water by leaving a glass by the sink.
• Flavouring water with natural fruit juice may make it more appealing.
• Eat more fruits and vegetables as they have a high water content.
• If you eat less, you may need to drink more water.
Step 4
Stay cool
Dress for the weather – Wear loose-fitting, light-coloured clothing made from
breathable fabric.
Keep your home cool.
• If you have an air conditioner with a thermostat, keep it set to the highest setting that
is comfortable (somewhere between 22ºC/72ºF and 26ºC/79ºF), which will reduce
your energy costs and provide you with needed relief. If you are using a window air
conditioner, cool only one room where you can go for heat relief.
• Prepare meals that don't need to be cooked in your oven.
• Block the sun by closing awnings, curtains or blinds during the day.
• If safe, open your windows at night to let cooler air into your home.
Appendix D — Older Adults
Heat stroke is a medical emergency! Call 911 or your local emergency number
immediately if you are caring for someone, such as a neighbour, who has a high
body temperature and is either unconscious, confused or has stopped sweating.
While waiting for help – cool the person right away by:
• moving them to a cool place, if you can;
• applying cold water to large areas of the skin or clothing; and
• fanning the person as much as possible.
38
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
If your home is extremely hot:
• Take a break from the heat by spending a few hours in a cool place. It could be a
tree-shaded area, swimming facility or an air-conditioned spot such as a shopping
mall, grocery store, place of worship or public library.
• Take cool showers or baths until you feel refreshed. Make sure to use non-slip
surfaces in the tub and shower, and wipe up moisture immediately to avoid slipping.
• Use a fan to help you stay cool and aim the air flow in your direction.
Step 5
Avoid exposure to very hot temperatures when outdoors
Never leave people or pets in your care inside a parked vehicle or in direct sunlight.
• When outside air temperature is 23ºC/73ºF, the temperature inside a vehicle can be
extremely dangerous – more than 50ºC/122ºF.
Reschedule or plan outdoor activities during cooler parts of the day.
• Before heading out, check the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) in your area, if
available – air pollution tends to be at higher levels during very hot days.
• If you are in an area where mosquitoes are active, protect yourself with insect
repellent and follow the manufacturer’s directions.
Avoid sun exposure. Shade yourself by wearing a wide-brimmed, breathable hat or
using an umbrella.
• Tree-shaded areas could be as much as 5ºC/9ºF cooler than the surrounding area.
• Use a sunscreen that is SPF 15 or higher and follow the manufacturer’s directions.
Remember, sunscreen will protect against the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) rays but
not from the heat.
• Sunscreen and insect repellents can be safely used together. Apply the sunscreen
first, then the insect repellent.
Additional Resources
Public Health Agency of Canada’s “You CAN prevent falls!”
www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/seniors-aines/publications/public/injury-blessure/prevent-
eviter/index-eng.php
Health Canada’s “It’s Your Health – Insect Repellents”
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/iyh-vsv/life-vie/insect-eng.php
Health Canada’s “Sun Safety”
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/pubs/sun-sol/safety-prudence-eng.php
Environment Canada’s “Air Quality Health Index”
www.airhealth.ca
Appendix D — Older Adults
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   39
Appendix D: Heat-Health Fact Sheet—Physically Active 
Protect yourself from the dangers of EXTREME HEAT
You’re ACTIVE in the HEAT!  You’re at RISK!
Know your risks
Being physically active provides many health benefits, but during extreme heat it
can put you at risk even if you are healthy. Your risk increases if you have:
• breathing difficulties;
• heart problems;
• a mental illness such as depression;
• hypertension; or
• kidney problems.
If you are taking medication or have a health condition, ask your doctor or
pharmacist if it increases your health risk in the heat and follow their recommendation.
Heat illnesses can lead to long-term health problems and even death. These illnesses include heat stroke,
heat exhaustion, heat fainting, heat edema (swelling of hands, feet and ankles), heat rash and heat
cramps (muscle cramps), and are mainly caused by over-exposure to extreme heat or over-exertion for a
person’s age and physical condition.
How your body regulates its temperature
Your body produces heat, especially during physical activity. Hot air and exposure to direct sun rays or
hot surfaces also heat your body. This heat is lost by contact with cool air and by sweat production,
which cools your body as the sweat evaporates. Weather conditions play a big role in how your body
regulates its temperature. For example, if it’s windy, sweat evaporates faster, which helps to cool you.
However, high humidity slows down this process, contributing to increased body temperature.
Four steps to increase your comfort and protect your health during extreme heat:
Step 1
Get ready for extreme heat
Your body is not used to (not acclimatized to) extreme heat at the beginning of the summer.
You are also not acclimatized if you don't exercise regularly during hot weather.
• Know what the outdoor temperature is before you start so you can modify your physical
activity as needed.
• Ask your sports organization or trainer if they have a plan for extreme heat.
• Ask your coach, trainer or a teammate to pay special attention to you during extreme heat if
you are particularly at risk. If you suffer from asthma, make sure you carry your inhaler with
you, and that those around you are aware of your condition.
Appendix D — Physically Active
40
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Step 2 Stay alert and pay close attention to how you–and those around you–feel
Protect your health – watch for symptoms of heat illness, which include:
• dizziness or fainting;
• nausea or vomiting;
• headache;
• unusually rapid breathing and heartbeat; and
• extreme thirst.
If you experience any of these symptoms during extreme heat, immediately move to a cool place
and drink liquids. Water is best.
Never leave people or pets in your care inside a parked vehicle or in direct sunlight.
• When the outside air temperature is 23ºC/73ºF, temperatures inside a vehicle can be extremely
dangerous – more than 50ºC/122ºF.
Step 3 Stay cool and hydrated
Drink plenty of cool liquids, especially water, before you feel thirsty. Thirst is not a good
indicator of dehydration. By the time you feel thirsty, you are already dehydrated.
• Drink plenty of water before, during and after being physically active.
• Wear loose-fitting, light-coloured clothing made of breathable fabric.
• Increase your comfort by splashing yourself with cold water.
Step 4 Modify your activities
Reschedule or find alternatives – If you can, reschedule strenuous outdoor activity to a cooler
part of the day or another day. There are ways in which you can still be physically active while
avoiding the heat, such as: 
• exercising in an air-conditioned place; or
Appendix D — Physically Active
Heat stroke is a medical emergency! Call 911 or your local emergency number
immediately if you are caring for someone, such as a running partner, who has a high body
temperature and is either unconscious or confused.
While waiting for help – cool the person right away by:
• moving them to a cool place, if you can;
• applying cold water to large areas of the skin or clothing; and
• fanning the person as much as possible.
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   41
• choosing a cooler outdoor location such as a tree-shaded area away from high traffic to avoid
higher levels of air pollution. These spots can be as much as 5ºC/9ºF cooler than the
surrounding area.
• Before heading out, check the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) in your area, if available –
air pollution tends to be higher during extreme heat. When active, you are more sensitive
to air pollution because you breathe deeply and allow more air to enter your lungs.
• If you are in an area where mosquitoes are active, protect yourself with insect repellent and
follow the manufacturer’s directions.
Be realistic – Try not to expect the usual performance from yourself during extreme heat.
Take extra water breaks – Move into the shade, drink water and remove gear, such as a
helmet or equipment, to let your body cool off. 
Avoid sun exposure – Exposure to direct sun will heat your body and can result in sunburn.
Sunburned skin loses its sweating efficiency, which impairs your body’s ability to regulate its
temperature.
• Shade yourself by wearing a wide-brimmed, breathable hat or using an umbrella.
• If you can’t avoid the sun, use a sunscreen that is SPF 15 or higher and follow the
manufacturer’s directions. Remember, sunscreen will protect you from the sun’s
ultraviolet (UV) rays but not from the heat.
• Sunscreen and insect repellents can be safely used together. Apply the sunscreen first, then
the insect repellent.
Recover – Allow your body to recover after heat exposure. Spend a few hours in a cooler tree-
shaded area or somewhere that’s air conditioned, such as your home, a shopping mall, grocery
store, public building or public library.
Additional Resources
Health Canada’s “It’s Your Health – Insect Repellents”
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/iyh-vsv/life-vie/insect-eng.php
Health Canada’s “Sun Safety”
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/pubs/sun-sol/safety-prudence-eng.php
Public Health Agency of Canada’s “Canada’s Physical Activity Guide to Healthy Active Living”
www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/hp-ps/hl-mvs/pag-gap/pdf/handbook-eng.pdf
Environment Canada’s “Air Quality Health Index”
www.airhealth.ca
Appendix D — Physically Active
42
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Appendix D: Heat-Health Fact Sheet—Young Children 
Protect your child from the dangers of EXTREME HEAT
Keep children COOL!
Children are at risk
Extreme heat can be dangerous for all children, especially for infants and young
children. 
Heat illnesses include heat stroke, heat exhaustion, heat fainting, heat edema
(swelling of the hands, feet and ankles), heat rash (prickly heat) and heat cramps
(muscle cramps). They are mainly caused by over-exposure to heat or over-
exertion in the heat, and if not prevented, can lead to long-term health problems
and even death. 
Five steps to protect your child’s health during extreme heat
Step 1
Prepare for extreme heat
Stay informed about local weather forecasts and alerts so you know when to take extra care.
If you have an air conditioner, make sure it works properly before the hot weather starts.
Otherwise, find an air-conditioned spot near you that you can use to cool off for a few hours
during extreme heat.
Learn about ways to keep your home cool during the summer. For example, if you live in a
house, plant trees on the side where the sun hits the house during the hottest part of the day.
Step 2
Watch your child’s health closely
Stay alert for symptoms of heat illness. They include:
• changes in behaviour (sleepiness or temper tantrums);
• dizziness or fainting;
• nausea or vomiting;
• headache;
• rapid breathing and heartbeat;
• extreme thirst; and
• decreased urination with unusually dark yellow urine.
If you see any of these signs during extreme heat immediately move the child to a cool place
and give liquids. Water is best. If you are breastfeeding your child, breast milk will provide
adequate hydration, but remember to keep yourself hydrated so you can produce a sufficient
amount of milk.
Appendix D — Young Children
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   43
Children most at risk include those with breathing difficulties (asthma), heart conditions,
kidney problems, mental and physical disabilities, developmental disorders, diarrhea, and those
who take certain medications. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if the medication increases risk to
their health in the heat and follow their recommendations.
Step 3
Keep your child hydrated
DEHYDRATION is dangerous. Give plenty of cool liquids to drink, especially water, before
your child feels thirsty. 
• Make it fun – leave a colourful glass by the sink and remind your child to drink after every
hand washing.
• Make it tasty – flavouring water with natural fruit juice may make it more appealing.
• Make it healthy – provide extra fruits and vegetables as they have a high water content.
• Make it a routine – encourage your child to drink water before and after physical activity.
Step 4
Keep your child cool
Dress your child in loose-fitting, light-coloured clothing made from a breathable fabric.
Keep your home cool.
• If you have an air conditioner with a thermostat, keep it set to the highest setting that is
comfortable (somewhere between 22ºC/72ºF and 26ºC/79ºF), which will reduce your energy
costs and provide needed relief. If you are using a window air conditioner, cool only one
room where you can go for heat relief.
• Prepare meals that don't need to be cooked in your oven.
• Block the sun by closing awnings, curtains or blinds during the day.
• If safe, open your windows at night to let cooler air into your home.
If your home is extremely hot:
• Take a break from the heat and spend a few hours with your child in a cool place. It could
be a tree-shaded area, swimming facility, spray pad or an air-conditioned spot such as a
shopping mall, grocery store or public library.  
Appendix D — Young Children
Heat stroke is a medical emergency! Call 911 or your local emergency number
immediately if you are caring for a child who has a high body temperature and is
unconscious, confused, or has stopped sweating.
While waiting for help – cool the child right away by:
• moving them to a cool place;
• applying cold water to large areas of the skin or clothing; and
• fanning the child as much as possible.
44
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
• Bathe your child in a cool bath until your child feels refreshed.
• Always supervise your child in the bath.
• If using a fan, keep it at a safe distance from the child and aim the air flow in their
direction.
Step 5
Avoid exposing your child to extreme heat when outdoors
Never leave children inside a parked vehicle or in direct sunlight.
• When outside air temperature is 23ºC/73ºF, the temperature inside a vehicle can be
extremely dangerous – more than 50ºC/122ºF.
Reschedule or plan outdoor activities during cooler parts of the day.
• Before heading out, check the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) in your area, if available –
children are more sensitive to air pollution, which tends to be at higher levels during
extreme heat.
• If you are in an area where mosquitoes are active, protect uncovered skin with insect
repellent and follow the manufacturer’s directions.
Avoid sun exposure – Keep your child in the shade or protected from the sun by wearing a
wide-brimmed, breathable hat or shade them with an umbrella.
• Tree-shaded areas could be as much as 5ºC/9ºF cooler than the surrounding area.
• If sun exposure can’t be avoided, use sunscreen that is SPF 15 or higher and follow the
manufacturer’s directions. Remember, sunscreen will protect against the sun’s
ultraviolet (UV) rays but not from the heat.
• Don’t apply sunscreen to a child less than 6 months old.
• Sunscreen and insect repellents can be used safely together. Apply the sunscreen first, then
the insect repellent.
Additional Resources
Health Canada’s “Babies, children and sun safety”  
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/pubs/sun-sol/babies_child-bebes_enfant-eng.php
Health Canada’s “Is your child safe?”  
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/cps-spc/pubs/cons/child-enfant/index-eng.php
Health Canada’s “It’s Your Health – Insect Repellents”  
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/iyh-vsv/life-vie/insect-eng.php
Environment Canada’s “Air Quality Health Index”  
www.airhealth.ca
Appendix D — Young Children
SAMPLE
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   45
Appendix E: Heat Advisory Media Release Template 
[Citizens of public] Urged to Take Precautions for Upcoming
Extreme Heat Event 
[DATE]
For Immediate Release
[PLACE] – The Chief Medical Officer of Health, [NAME], is advising [PLACE] to take steps to prevent
heat-related illness during the upcoming extreme heat event, also known as a “heat wave.” With
temperatures expected to rise in the next [days], Environment Canada has issued a humidex advisory
(humidex values in excess of 40). 
While extreme heat can put everyone at risk from heat illnesses, health risks are greatest for older adults,
infants and young children, people with chronic illnesses such as breathing difficulties, heart conditions or
psychiatric illnesses, people who work or who exercise in the heat, homeless people and low-income
earners. Those who take medication or have a health condition should ask their doctor or pharmacist if it
increases their health risk in the heat and follow their recommendations. 
Heat illnesses are preventable, but they can lead to long-term health problems and even death. If any
symptoms of heat illness are present (such as dizziness or fainting, nausea or vomiting, headache, rapid
breathing and heartbeat, or extreme thirst), immediately move to a cool place and drink liquids. Water is
best. The most dangerous heat illness is heat stroke, with symptoms that include complete or partial loss of
consciousness or confusion and high body temperature. If caring for someone with these symptoms, call
[LOCAL EMERGENCY NUMBER] immediately. While waiting for help, cool the person right away
by moving them to a cool place, applying cold water to large areas of the skin or clothing and fanning the
person as much as possible. 
Public health officials urge everyone to stay alert and take precautions. Remember to frequently visit
neighbours, friends and older family members, especially those who are chronically ill, to make sure that
they are cool and hydrated. 
[PLACE] Public Health recommends taking the following actions to stay cool: 
• Drink plenty of cool liquids, especially water, before feeling thirsty. 
• Wear loose-fitting, light-coloured clothing made of breathable fabric.
• Take cool showers or baths until you feel refreshed.
• Take a break from the heat by spending a few hours in a cool place. 
• Block sun out by closing awnings, curtains or blinds during the day.
• Avoid sun exposure. Shade yourself by wearing a wide-brimmed, breathable hat or using an umbrella.
• Reschedule or plan outdoor activities during cooler parts of the day.
• Never leave people or pets in your care inside a parked vehicle or in direct sunlight. 
Additional tips on how to stay safe and what to do during an extreme heat-related emergency are available
on the following websites: [Insert web links] 
MEDIA CONTACT: [NAME, PHONE NUMBER]
Appendix E
46
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Appendix F: Public Involvement Strategies 
Qualitative Methods 
Source: Adapted from the Health Communication Unit, 2007.117
Method Description
Applications and Strengths
Limitations
Focus groups
•
recorded semi-structured
discussion with 8–12
stakeholders led by a
facilitator 
•
to gather in-depth information
and to pre-test materials
•
to develop a better
understanding of stakeholder
attitudes, opinions, language
•
can be inexpensive
•
implementation and analysis
requires a minimum of
specialized skills
•
participants influence each
other
•
subjective 
•
potential for facilitator bias
•
can be difficult to analyze
•
results are not quantifiable to a
population
In-depth interviews
•
10–40 one-on-one interviews
using a flexible outline
•
to investigate sensitive issues
confidentially
•
to develop a better
understanding of stakeholder
attitudes, opinions, language
•
eliminates peer influence
•
opportunity for interviewer to
explore unexpected issues
•
more detailed information
than focus groups
•
more expensive to implement
and analyze than focus groups
•
potential for interviewer bias
•
can be difficult to analyze
•
results are usually not
quantifiable to a population
Open-ended survey questions
•
structured survey that allows
for a complete answer
•
to add depth to survey results
with the potential to be
quantified and generalized to
population
•
to further explore the reasons
for answers to close-ended
questions 
•
adds depth to quantitative data
•
time consuming to analyze
properly 
•
adds considerable time to the
survey
•
not flexible
Diaries
•
ongoing documentation
•
used primarily for process
evaluation 
•
puts other evaluation results
into context
•
captures unexpected
information
•
very inexpensive to collect
•
can be difficult or expensive to
analyze
•
observations are subjective
Appendix F
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   47
Quantitative Methods
 
Method Description
Applications and Strengths
Limitations
Surveys
•
standardized and structured
questionnaire with many
stakeholders in a short time
frame
•
feedback can be quantified
and generalized to an entire
population 
•
minimizes interviewer bias
•
tremendous volume of
information collected in short
period of time
•
rarely provides
comprehensive understanding
of respondents’ perspective
•
can be very expensive
•
requires specialized
knowledge to interpret results
Process tracking forms/records
•
collection of data in a
standardized manner that is
incorporated into routine
•
to document the process of a
project/program and identify
areas for improvement 
•
can be incorporated into
normal routine
•
easy to design and use
•
can provide accurate and
detailed process information
•
can be seen as extra burden on
staff/volunteers
•
risk that it will not be
completed regularly or
accurately
Large data sets
•
evaluation of data about the
target audience (e.g.
morbidity/mortality)
•
to position your campaign
within a broader context
•
to monitor trends in your
community 
•
can be inexpensive or free to
access
•
provide accurate, well-
researched information
•
can lead to networking/
information-sharing
opportunities
•
minimal usefulness for
evaluating your
program/project
•
can be difficult to relate to
your program/project 
Appendix F
48
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
1. Berry, P., Clarke, K., Pajot, M. et al. (2009). The Role
of Risk Perception and Health Communication in
Adapting to the Health Impacts of Climate Change in
Canada. Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa, ON,
106. Retrieved January 18, 2010, from 
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/projdb/pdf/205_e.pdf. 
2. Sheridan, S. C. (2007). A Survey of Public Perception
and Response to Heat Warnings Across Four North
American Cities: An Evaluation of Municipal
 Effectiveness. Int. J. Biometeorol., 52, 3–15. 
3. Environment Canada – Ontario Region. (2002).
Glossary. Environment Canada. Retrieved November
11, 2009, from http://www.on.ec.gc.ca/community/
classroom/glossary-e.html. 
4. Canadian Disaster Database. (2009). Retrieved July 8,
2009, from http://ww5.ps-sp.gc.ca/res/em/cdd/
search-en.asp. 
5. Cheng, C. S., Campbell, M., Li, Q. et al. (2005).
 Differential and Combined Impacts of Winter and
Summer Weather and Air Pollution due to Global
Warming on Human Mortality in South-Central
Canada. Health Policy Research Program: Project
number 6795-15-2001/4400011, Retrieved
September 30, 2009, from http://www.toronto.ca/
health/hphe/pdf/weather_air_pollution_impacts_exec
_summary.pdf. 
6. Environment Canada – Ontario Region. (2010).
 Historical Heat-Related Events. Environment
Canada. Retrieved April 23, 2010, from
http://ontario.hazards.ca/historical/Heat_Ontario-
e.html. 
7. Bassil, K., Gournis, E., Real, E. et al. (2007). Utility of
911 Ambulance Dispatch Data for the Syndromic
 Surveillance of Heat-Related Illness in Toronto,
Ontario, 2002-2005. Adv. Dis. Surveillance, 2, 143. 
8. Whitman, S., Good, G., Donoghue, E. R. et al. (1997).
Mortality in Chicago Attributed to the July 1995 Heat
Wave. Am. J. Public Health, 87, 1515–1518. 
9. Robine, J. M., Cheung, S. L., Le Roy, S. et al. (2008).
Death Toll Exceeded 70,000 in Europe during the
Summer of 2003. C. R. Biol., 331, 171–178. 
10. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
(2007). Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report.
Allali, A., Bojariu, R., Diaz, S. et al (eds). IPCC,
Valencia, Spain, 73. 
11. Robeson, S. M. (2004). Trends in Time-Varying
 Percentiles of Daily Minimum and Maximum
 Temperature Over North America. Geophys. Res.
Lett., 31, 4. 
12. Hengeveld, H., Whitewood, B. and Fergusson, A.
(2005). An Introduction to Climate Change: A
Canadian Perspective. Environment Canada, 29–44.
Retrieved June 26, 2009, from http://www.msc.ec.
gc.ca/education/scienceofclimatechange/
understanding/icc/icc_e.pdf. 
13. Pengelly, L. D., Campbell, M. E., Cheng, C. S. et al.
(2007). Anatomy of Heat Waves and Mortality in
Toronto: Lessons for Public Health Protection. Can.
J. Public Health, 98, 364–368. 
14. Kalkstein, L. S. and Greene, J. S. (1997). An
 Evaluation of Climate/Mortality Relationships in
Large U.S. Cities and the Possible Impacts of a
 Climate Change. Environ. Health Perspect., 105,
84–93. 
15. Grubenhoff, J. A., du Ford, K. and Roosevelt, G. E.
(2007). Heat-Related Illness. Clin. Pediatr. Emer.
Med., 8, 59–64. 
16. Preston, B. L., Abbs, D., Beveridge, B. et al. (2007).
Spatial Approaches for Assessing Vulnerability and
Consequences in Climate Change Assessments,
261–267. Retrieved June 30, 2009, from
http://www.mssanz.org.au/modsim07/papers/4_s30/
SpatialApproaches_s30_Preston_.pdf. 
17. Vescovi, L., Rebetez, M. and Rong, F. (2005).
Assessing Public Health Risk due to Extremely High
Temperature Events; Climate and Social
 Parameters. Clim. Res., 30, 71–78. 
18. Spronken-Smith, R. A. and Oke, T. R. (1998). The
Thermal Regime of Urban Parks in Two Cities with
Different Summer Climates. Int. J. Remote Sensing,
19(11), 2085–2104. 
19. Blum, L. N., Bresolin, L. B. and Williams, M. A.
(1998). Heat-Related Illness during Extreme
Weather Emergencies. J. Am. Med. Assoc., 279,
1514. 
20. Naughton, M. P., Henderson, A., Mirabelli, M. C. et
al. (2002). Heat-Related Mortality during a 1999
Heat Wave in Chicago. Am. J. Prev. Med., 22, 221–
227. 
21. Marmor, M. (1975). Heat Wave Mortality in New
York City, 1949 to 1970. Arch. Environ. Health, 30,
130–136. 
References
References
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   49
22. Mitchell, D., Senay, L. C., Wyndham, C. H. et al.
(1976). Acclimatization in a Hot, Humid
 Environment: Energy Exchange, Body Temperature,
and Sweating. J. Appl. Physiol., 40, 768–778. 
23. Robinson, S. (1967). Training, Acclimatization and
Heat Tolerance. Can. Med. Assoc. J., 96, 795–800. 
24. Ellis, F. P., Nelson, F. and Pincus, L. (1975).
 Mortality during Heat Waves in New York City July,
1972 and August and September, 1973. Environ.
Res., 10, 1–13. 
25. Ellis, F. P. (1976). Heat Illness. III. Acclimatization.
Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg., 70, 419–425. 
26. Kenny, G. P., Yardley, J., Brown, C. et al. (2009).
Heat Stress in Older Individuals and Patients with
Common Chronic Diseases. Can. Med. Assoc. J., 8. 
27. Morley, J. (2000). Water, Water Everywhere and Not
a Drop to Drink. J. Gerontol., 55, M359-60. 
28. Foster, K. G., Ellis, F. P., Dore, C. et al. (1976).
Sweat Responses in the Aged. Age and Ageing, 5,
91–101. 
29. Bridger, C. A., Ellis, F. P. and Taylor, H. L. (1976).
Mortality in St. Louis, Missouri, during Heat Waves
in 1936, 1953, 1954, 1955, and 1966. Environ. Res.,
12, 38–48. 
30. Anderson, S. J., Griesemer, B. A., Johnson, M. D. et
al. (2000). Climatic Heat Stress and the Exercising
Child and Adolescent. Pediatrics, 106, 158–159. 
31. Foster, K. G., Hey, E. N. and Katz, G. (1969). The
Response of the Sweat Glands of the Newborn Baby
to Thermal Stimuli and to Intradermal
 Acetylcholine. J. Physiol., 203, 13–29. 
32. Bouchama, A., Dehbi, M., Mohamed, G. et al.
(2007). Prognostic Factors in Heat Wave Related
Deaths: A Meta-Analysis. Arch. Intern. Med., 167,
2170–2176. 
33. Larrieu, S., Carcaillon, L., Lefranc, A. et al. (2008).
Factors Associated with Morbidity during the 2003
Heat Wave in Two Population-Based Cohorts of
Elderly Subjects: PAQUID and Three City. Eur. J.
Epidemiol., 23, 295–302. 
34. Fujimura, A., Sasaki, M., Harada, K. et al. (1996).
Influences of Bathing and Hot Weather on the
 Pharmacokinetics of a New Transdermal Clonidine,
M-5041T. J. Clin. Pharmacol., 36, 892–896. 
35. Cheshire, W. P. and Fealey, R. D. (2008).
 Drug-Induced Hyperhidrosis and Hypohidrosis:
 Incidence, Prevention and Management. Drug
Safety, 31, 109–126. 
36. Cuddy, M. L. (2004). The Effects of Drugs on
 Thermoregulation. AACN Clin. Issues, 15, 238–
253. 
37. Yip, F. Y., Flanders, W. D., Wolkin, A. et al. (2008).
The Impact of Excess Heat Events in Maricopa
County, Arizona: 2000–-2005. Int. J. Biometeorol.,
52, 765–772. 
38. Smargiassi, A., Fournier, M., Griot, C. et al. (2008).
Prediction of the Indoor Temperatures of an Urban
Area with an in-Time Regression Mapping
Approach. J. Expo. Sci. Environ. Epidemiol., 18,
282–288. 
39. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety
(CCOHS). (2005). Working in Hot Environments: A
Health and Safety Guide. CCOHS, Hamilton, ON,
97. 
40. Greenberg, J. H., Bromberg, J., Reed, C. M. et al.
(1983). The Epidemiology of Heat-Related Deaths,
Texas – 1950, 1970–79, and 1980. Am. J. Public
Health, 73, 805–807. 
41. Berry, P. (2008). Vulnerabilities, Adaptation and
Adaptive Capacity in Canada. In Human Health in a
Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of
 Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. Séguin, J.
(ed). Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, 367–448. 
42. Kalkstein, L. S. and Sheridan, S. C. (2003). The
Impacts of Heat Island Reduction Strategies on
Health-Debilitating Oppressive Air Masses in
Urban Areas. Environmental Protection Agency,
U.S., 26. Retrieved April 19, 2010, from
http://www.as.miami.edu/geography/research/
climatology/MM5_complete.pdf. 
43. Kellermann, A. L. and Todd, K. H. (1996). Killing
Heat. N. Engl. J. Med., 335, 126–127. 
44. Mileti, D. S. (2006). Public Education and Training
to Improve Building Occupants Preparedness for
Evacuation. 13. Retrieved January 14, 2010, from
http://wtc.nist.gov/recommendations/
MiletiWhitePaperEvacPrepare.pdf. 
45. Health Canada. (1998). The Health and Environment
Handbook for Health Professionals. Health Canada,
Ottawa, ON, 29. Retrieved October 1, 2009, from
http://www.bvsde.paho.org/muwww/fulltext/saneam
/health/health.html. 
46. McBean, G. (2006). Global Change and Threats to
Communities: Disaster Management. In The
 Americas: Building the Adaptive Capacity to Global
Environmental Change. Fenech, A., MacIver, D.,
Auld, H. et al. (eds). Environment Canada, Ottawa,
ON, 198. 
References
50
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
47. Flora, J. A., Maibach, E. W. and Maccoby, N. (1989).
The Role of Media Across Four Levels of Health
Promotion Intervention. Annu. Rev. Public Health,
10, 181–201. 
48. The Health Communication Unit. (2007). Overview
of the Health Communication Campaigns. The
Health Communication Unit at the Centre for Health
Promotion, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
109. Retrieved December 18, 2009, from
http://www.thcu.ca/. 
49. Economic and Social Council. (2005). Resolution
and Decisions Adopted by the Economic and Social
Council at Its Resumed Substantive Session of 2005.
United Nations, 195. Retrieved April 19, 2010, from
http://www.unescap.org/stat/apex/2/APEX2_S.7_EC
OSOC_Resolution_2010WP.pdf. 
50. Canadian Red Cross. (June 30, 2009). Expect the
Unexpected Program. Canadian Red Cross.
Retrieved February 4, 2010, from http://www.
redcross.ca/article.asp?id=9879andtid=025. 
51. UK Resilience. (2003). Communicating Risk.
 Cabinet Office, UK, 80. Retrieved December 19,
2009, from
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/132679/com-
municatingrisk.pdf. 
52. Environics Research Group Ltd. (2008). Assessing
Perceived Health Risks of Climate Change:
 Canadian Public Opinion – 2008. Prepared for
Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, 145. 
53. United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(2009). Fact Sheets. Environmental Protection
Agency. Washington, D.C. Retrieved December 19,
2009, from http://www.epa.gov/aging/resources/fact-
sheets/index.htm. 
54. Raynolds, B., Galdo, J. H. and Sokler, L. (2002).
Crisis and Emergency Risk Communication.
Freimuth, V. F., Eberl-Lefko, A., Weinberg, L. et al
(eds). Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, GA, 277. Retrieved December 17, 2009,
from http://emergency.cdc.gov/cerc/pdf/
CERC-SEPT02.pdf. 
55. Davis, R. E., Knappenberger, P. C., Michaels, P. J. et
al. (2003). Changing Heat-Related Mortality in the
United States. Environ. Health Perspect., 111, 1712–
1718. 
56. Statistics Canada. (2008). Seniors in Rural Canada.
Statistics Canada, Ottawa, ON, 56. Retrieved April
23, 2010, from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/21-
006-x/21-006-x2007008-eng.pdf. 
57. Statistics Canada. (2003). More Than Just Farming:
Employment in Agriculture and Agri-Food in Rural
and Urban Canada. Statistics Canada, Ottawa, ON,
30. Retrieved April 23, 2010, from http://www.
statcan.gc.ca/pub/21-006-x/21-006-x2002008-
eng.pdf. 
58. Jennissen, T. (1992). Health Issues in Rural Canada.
Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 20. Retrieved
April 23, 2010, from http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/
collection_2008/lop-bdp/bp/bp325-e.pdf. 
59. Statistics Canada. (2005). A Visit to Canada’s
 Country Side: Rural Tourism. Statistics Canada,
Ottawa, ON, 25. Retrieved April 22, 2010, from
http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/Statcan/21-
006-X/21-006-XIE2005005.pdf. 
60. Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2006).
How Healthy Are Rural Canadians? An Assessment
of their Health Status and Health Determinants.
DesMeules, M., Pong, R., Lagacé, C. et al (eds).
PHAC, 183. Retrieved April 23, 2010, from
http://www.carrn.com/files/rural_canadians_2006_
report_e.pdf. 
61. Statistics Canada. (2006). The Influence of
 Education on Civic Engagement: Differences Across
Canada’s Rural–Urban Spectrum. Statistics Canada,
Ottawa, ON, 18. Retrieved April 22, 2010, from
http://dsp-psd.pwgsc.gc.ca/Collection/Statcan/21-
006-X/21-006-XIE2006001.pdf. 
62. Health Canada. (DRAFT). Assessment of Vulnerability to
the Health Impacts of Extreme Heat in Winnipeg and
Melita. Health Canada, Ottawa, ON. 
63. van de Lande, R. A. (2009). Developing the City of
Hamilton’s Community Heat Response Initiative.
City of Hamilton for Health Canada, Hamilton, ON,
16. 
64. Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2007).
Age-Friendly Rural and Remote Communities: A
Guide. PHAC, Ottawa, ON, 50. Retrieved February
10, 2010, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/
seniors-aines/alt-formats/pdf/publications/public/
healthy-sante/age_friendly_rural/AFRRC_en.pdf. 
65. Rimer, B. K. and Kreuter, M. W. (2006). Advancing
Tailored Health Communication: A Persuasion and
Message Effects Perspective. J. Commun., 56,
S184–S201. 
66. Wray, R. J., Becker, S. M., Henderson, N. et al.
(2008). Communicating with the Public About
Emerging Health Threats: Lessons from the
 Pre-Event Message Development Project. Am. J.
Public Health, 98, 2214–2222. 
References
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   51
67. National Association of Country and City Health
Officials (NACCHO). (2004). NACCHO Public
Health Communication Toolkit. NACCHO, 44.
Retrieved June 29, 2009, from http://archive.
naccho.org/documents/Communication-toolkit.pdf. 
68. Kovats, R. S. and Hajat, S. (2008). Heat Stress and
Public Health: A Critical Review. Annu. Rev. Public
Health, 29, 41–55. 
69. Stafoggia, M., Forastiere, F., Agostini, D. et al.
(2008). Factors Affecting in-Hospital Heat-Related
Mortality: A Multi-City Case-Crossover Analysis. J.
Epidemiol. Community Health, 62, 209–215. 
70. Vassallo, M., Gera, K. N. and Allen, S. (1995).
 Factors Associated with High Risk of Marginal
Hyperthermia in Elderly Patients Living in an
 Institution. Postgrad. Med. J., 71, 213–216. 
71. Agence française de securité sanitaire des produits de
santé. (2004). Good Utilisation of Medications
 During a Heat Wave. Rev. Prat., 54, 1319–1323. 
72. Martinez, M., Devenport, L., Saussy, J. et al. (2002).
Drug-Associated Heat Stroke. South. Med. J., 95,
799–802. 
73. Stöllberger, C. and Finsterer, J. (2007). Did
Thirst-Blockers Like Angiotensin-Converting-
Enzyme Inhibitors, Sartans, Serotonine-Re-Uptake-
Inhibitors, Dopamine Agonists/Antagonists, or
 Atypical Neuroleptics Contribute to the Exorbitant
Number of Fatalities During the French 2003 Heat
Wave? Pharmacoepidemiol. Drug Saf., 16, 1252-
1253. 
74. Health Canada. (1998). Reaching Out: A Guide to
Communicating with Aboriginal Seniors. Health
Canada, Ottawa, ON, 47. 
75. Rowland, T. (2008). Thermoregulation During
 Exercise in the Heat in Children: Old Concepts
Revisited. J. Appl. Physiol., 105, 718–724. 
76. Falk, B. and Dotan, R. (2008). Children’s
 Thermoregulation during Exercise in the Heat: A
Revisit. Appl. Physiol. Nutr. Metab., 33, 420–427. 
77. Michelozzi, P., Accetta, G., De Sario, M. et al.
(2009). High Temperature and Hospitalizations for
Cardiovascular and Respiratory Causes in 12
 European Cities. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.,
179, 383–389. 
78. Barnett, A. G., de Looper, M. and Fraser, J. F.
(2008). The Seasonality in Heart Failure Deaths
and Total Cardiovascular Deaths. Aust. New
Zealand J. Public Health, 32, 408–413. 
79. Martin-Latry, K., Goumy, M. P., Latry, P. et al.
(2007). Psychotropic Drugs Use and Risk of
Heat-Related Hospitalisation. Eur. Psychiatry, 22,
335–338. 
80. Kwok, J. S. and Chan, T. Y. (2005). Recurrent 
Heat-Related Illnesses During Antipsychotic 
Treatment. Ann. Pharmacother., 39, 1940–1942. 
81. Bark, N. (1998). Deaths of Psychiatric Patients
 During Heat Waves. Psychiatr. Serv., 49, 1088–
1090. 
82. DeFranco, M. J., Baker, C. L.,3rd, DaSilva, J. J. et
al. (2008). Environmental Issues for Team
 Physicians. Am. J. Sports Med., 36, 2226–2237. 
83. Worfolk, J. B. (2000). Heat Waves: Their Impact on
the Health of Elders. Geriatr. Nurs., 21, 70–77. 
84. Glazer, J. L. (2005). Management of Heatstroke and
Heat Exhaustion. Am. Fam. Physician, 71, 2133–
2140. 
85. Bouchama, A., Dehbi, M. and Chaves-Carballo, E.
(2007). Cooling and Hemodynamic Management in
Heatstroke: Practical Recommendations. Crit. Care,
11, R54. 
86. Vaile, J., Halson, S., Gill, N. et al. (2008). Effect of
Cold Water Immersion on Repeat Cycling
 Performance and Thermoregulation in the Heat. J.
Sports Sci., 26, 431–440. 
87. Proulx, C. I., Ducharme, M. B. and Kenny, G. P.
(2006). Safe Cooling Limits from Exercise-Induced
Hyperthermia. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., 96, 434–445. 
88. Choi, J. W., Kim, M. J. and Lee, J. Y. (2008).
 Alleviation of Heat Strain by Cooling Different Body
Areas During Red Pepper Harvest Work at WBGT
33 Degrees C. Ind. Health, 46, 620–628. 
89. Goosey-Tolfrey, V., Swainson, M., Boyd, C. et al.
(2008). The Effectiveness of Hand Cooling at
Reducing Exercise-Induced Hyperthermia and
Improving Distance-Race Performance in
Wheel-chair and Able-Bodied Athletes. J. Appl.
Physiol., 105, 37–43. 
90. Grahn, D. A., Murray, J. V. and Heller, H. C. (2008).
Cooling Via One Hand Improves Physical
 Performance in Heat-Sensitive Individuals with
Multiple Sclerosis: A Preliminary Study. BMC
 Neurol., 8, 14. 
91. Speedy, D. B., Noakes, T. D., Rogers, I. R. et al.
(1999). Hyponatremia in Ultradistance Triathletes.
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., 31, 809–815. 
References
52
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
92. World Health Organization (WHO). (2008).
 Demystifying the Myths of Ageing. Ritsatakis, A.
(ed). WHO, Copenhagen, Denmark, 39. 
93. Montain, S. J. (2008). Hydration Recommendations
for Sport 2008. Curr. Sports Med. Rep., 7, 187–192. 
94. Valentine, V. (2007). The Importance of Salt in the
Athlete’s Diet. Curr. Sports Med. Rep., 6, 237–240. 
95. Health Canada. (2007). Eating Well with Canada’s
Food Guide. Health Canada, Ottawa, ON, 6.
Retrieved October 2, 2009, from http://www.
hc-sc.gc.ca/fn-an/alt_formats/hpfb-dgpsa/pdf/food-
guide-aliment/print_eatwell_bienmang-eng.pdf. 
96. Almond, C. S., Shin, A. Y., Fortescue, E. B. et al.
(2005). Hyponatremia among Runners in the Boston
Marathon. N. Engl. J. Med., 352, 1550–1556. 
97. Hew-Butler, T. D., Sharwood, K., Collins, M. et al.
(2006). Sodium Supplementation Is Not Required to
Maintain Serum Sodium Concentrations During an
Ironman Triathlon. Br. J. Sports Med., 40, 255–259. 
98. Maughan, R. J. and Griffin, J. (2003). Caffeine
Ingestion and Fluid Balance: A Review. J. Hum.
Nutr. Dietet., 16, 411–420. 
99. Watkings, R., Palmer, J. and Kolokotroni, M. (2007).
Increased Temperature and Intensification of the
Urban Heat Island: Implications for Human
 Comfort and Urban Design. Built Environ., 33, 85–
96. 
100. Larsen, T., Kumar, S., Grimmer, K. et al. (2007). A
Systematic Review of Guidelines for the Prevention
of Heat Illness in Community-Based Sports
 Participants and Officials. J. Sci. Med. Sport, 10,
11–26. 
101. Health Canada and Public Health Agency of
Canada. (August, 2005). It’s Your Health: West Nile
Virus. Health Canada. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved
 February 4, 2010, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/
hl-vs/alt_formats/pacrb-dgapcr/pdf/iyh-vsv/diseases-
maladies/wnv-vno-eng.pdf. 
102. American Conference of Industrial Hygienists
(ACGIH). (2009). TLV and BEIs. ACGIH,
 Cincinnati, Ohio, 254. 
103. Caravello, V., McCullough, E. A., Ashley, C. D. et
al. (2008). Apparent Evaporative Resistance at
 Critical Conditions for Five Clothing Ensembles.
Eur. J. Appl. Physiol., 104, 361–367. 
104. Havenith, G. (1999). Heat Balance When Wearing
Protective Clothing. Ann. Occup. Hyg., 43, 289–
296. 
105. Krous, H. F., Nadeau, J. M., Fukumoto, R. I. et al.
(2001). Environmental Hyperthermic Infant and
Early Childhood Death: Circumstances, Pathologic
Changes, and Manner of Death. Am. J. Forensic
Med. Pathol., 22, 374–382. 
106. Natural Resources Canada. (2004). Air
 Conditioning Your Home. Natural Resources
Canada, Ottawa, ON, 48. Retrieved May 11, 2010,
from http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/publications/
infosource/pub/energy_use/air-conditioning-
home2004/air-conditioning.pdf. 
107. Kauppinen, K. (1989). Sauna, Shower, and Ice
Water Immersion. Physiological Responses to Brief
Exposures to Heat, Cool, and Cold. Part II.
 Circulation. Arctic Med. Res., 48, 64–74. 
108. Public Health Agency of Canada. (2005). Report on
Seniors’ Falls in Canada. Public Health Agency of
Canada, Ottawa, ON, 65. Retrieved October 1,
2009, from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/seniors-
aines/alt-formats/pdf/publications/pro/injury-
blessure/seniors_falls/seniors-falls_e.pdf. 
109. Mao, S. J., McKenzie, L. B., Xiang, H. et al.
(2009). Injuries Associated with Bathtubs and
 Showers Among Children in the United States.
 Pediatrics, 124, 541–547. 
110. Public Health Agency of Canada. (2007). You Can
Prevent Falls! Public Health Agency of Canada.
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved October 1, 2009, from
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/seniors-
aines/pubs/ycpf_info/pdf/ycpf_info_e.pdf. 
111. Health Canada. (2006). Is Your Child Safe? Health
Canada. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved October 1, 2009,
from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/cps-
spc/pubs/cons/child-enfant/content-contenu-
eng.php#Tips. 
112. American College of Sports Medicine, Armstrong,
L. E., Casa, D. J. et al. (2007). American College of
Sports Medicine Position Stand. Exertional Heat
 Illness During Training and Competition. Med. Sci.
Sports Exerc., 39, 556–572. 
113. Diffey, B. L. and Cheeseman, J. (1992). Sun
 Protection with Hats. Br. J. Dermatol., 127, 10–12. 
114. Kim, H. E. and Park, S. J. (2004). The Effect of
Safety Hat on Thermal Responses and Working
 Efficiency Under a High Temperature Environment.
J. Physiol. Anthropol. Appl. Human Sci., 23, 149–
153. 
115. Pandolf, K. B., Gange, R. W., Latzka, W. A. et al.
(1992). Human Thermoregulatory Responses
 During Heat Exposure After Artificially Induced
Sunburn. Am. J. Physiol., 262, R610–R616. 
References
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials   53
116. Health Canada. (February, 2007). Sun Safety.
Health Canada. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved February 4,
2010, from http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hl-vs/pubs/
sun-sol/safety-prudence-eng.php. 
117. The Health Communication Unit. (2007).
 Evaluating Health Promotion Programs. The Health
Communication Unit at the Centre for Health
 Promotion, Toronto, ON, 100. Retrieved December
17, 2009, from http://www.thcu.ca/. 
118. UK Cabinet Office. (2002). Viewfinder: A Policy
Maker’s Guide to Public Involvement. UK Cabinet
Office, UK, 70. Retrieved December 18, 2009, from
http://www.nationalschool.gov.uk/policyhub/docs/
Viewfinder.pdf. 
119. Schiavo, R. (2007). Health Communication: From
Theory to Practice. Schiavo, R. (ed). Jossey-Bass,
New York, NY, 464. 
120. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(IPCC). (2001). Climate Change 2001: The
 Scientific Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to
the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmen-
tal Panel on Climate Change. Houghton, J. T., Ding,
Y., Griggs, D. J. et al (eds). Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA, 881. Retrieved October 16, 2009, from
http://www.grida.no/publications/other/ipcc_tar/. 
121. Vescovi, L., Bourque, A., Simonet, G. et al. (2007).
Climate Change Science Knowledge Transfer in
Support of Vulnerability, Impacts and Adaptation
Activities on a North American Regional Scale:
Ouranos as a Case Study. 221–225. Retrieved July
8, 2009, from http://www.gulfofmaine.org/ESIP-
Planning/subcommittees/climatechange/CCRef-
Docs/Vescovi.pdf. 
122. Gosselin, C., Kosatsky, T., Fournier, M. et al.
(2009). Evaluation of the Education Campaign on
Health Risks Associated with Heat Waves and on
Related Protection Measures. Direction de santé
publique de l’Agence de la santé et des services
sociaux de Montréal, Montréal, QC, 72. Retrieved
April 19, 2010, from http://www.santepub-
=mtl.qc.ca/Publication/pdfenvironnement/campag-
nechaleur.pdf. 
123. Gower, S., Campbell, M., Mee, C. et al. (DRAFT).
A Draft Evaluation Framework for Toronto’s Hot
Weather Response Plan. Toronto Public Health,
Toronto, ON, 125. 
124. Health Canada. (1999). Communicating with Sen-
iors: Advice, Techniques and Tips. Health Canada,
Ottawa, ON, Retrieved October 1, 2009, from
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/seniors-aines/pubs/com-
municating/comsen_e.htm. 
125. The Health Communication Unit. (2002). Health
Communication Message Review Criteria. The
Health Communication Unit at the Centre for
Health Promotion, University of Toronto, Toronto,
ON, 6. Retrieved December 18, 2009, from
http://www.thcu.ca/. 
References
54
Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency Management Officials
Notes
Notes
