Resilient Rurals
2 0 2 2
COMMUNITY
COOLING CENTRES
GUIDE
About the guide
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
What are cooling centres?
Why do Canadian communities
need them?
1
Alberta’s Heat Forecast:
Projections and impacts
2
Guide for developing cooling
centres for rural communities
3
Resilient Rurals’ Guide to Community Cooling Centres provides a framework for policy-makers and
frontline service providers in rural municipalities to develop effective community cooling centres as
a response measure during periods of extreme heat and heat waves. 
Strategies and best practises for centre planning, implementation and evaluation are outlined in the
guide and accompanied by case studies from Canadian communities. The guide also includes a
discussion of heat-vulnerable populations, the impacts of extreme heat on public health and public
systems, and the forecast for Alberta’s extreme-heat future. 
 
Contents
Case Studies: Community
cooling centres in action
4
1
Cooling Centres - An effective community response
measure for vulnerable populations 
As the climate changes and heat waves and high heat days become a pressing reality for Canadian
communities, it’s critical for municipalities to mitigate heat-health risks among residents. Developing
a community cooling centre plan is a preventative action local governments can take to reduce
these risks. 
As part of the community response planning component of Heat Alert Response Systems (HARS) in
Canada, cooling centres can be an effective response mechanism in the prevention and mitigation
of heat-health complications and fatalities among rural residents. Other community response
measures of a HARS include outreach to bolster awareness and education on heat-health risks and
improving municipal emergency response capacity for heat waves. 
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Adapting to Climate Change Impacts
Cooling centres are an adaptive climate
change measure and should be included as a
component of a larger, integrated adaptation
and mitigation effort to protect communities
from climate change-induced impacts. 
For their residents to be resilient,
municipalities must address a wide spectrum
of climate change impacts, including more
frequent and intense heat waves and a
greater number of high heat days each year. 
 
Cost-Effective and Energy-Efficient Cooling
A Resilient Rurals risk-defining survey, administered in 2019 to residents of Bruderheim, Gibbons
and Lamont found an average of 61% of residents in all three communities do not have air
conditioning units to regulate the temperature of their homes.   Ensuring every home in a
community is air-conditioned is not required for resilience—in fact, running an air conditioning unit
requires a great deal of energy, making air conditioning units climate change contributors. The
intake also presents a strain to local energy grids and can be a burdensome expense on 
Creating shelters
(i.e., cooling
centres) to offer
protection in 
high heat
Improving
emergency 
response capacities
for heat waves 
and other major
events

Undertaking outreach
and education to bolster
community awareness of
heat-health risks and 
 preparedness

Community response measures 
to address heat wave impacts
What are cooling centres? Why do
Canadian communities need them?
1
2
1 
2 
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
households. Alternately, offering a centralized air-conditioned centre open to every community
member is one way that residents and municipalities can cool down in an energy-efficient and cost-
effective manner. 
Heat-vulnerable populations
A number of groups within a community are at higher heat-risk during heat waves and high heat
days. These vulnerabilities exist for a variety of reasons, including individual risk factors like age,
health and socioeconomic status, as well as environmental conditions like where people live and
work.
Planners of effective cooling centre responses understand people in their communities face
unequal levels of risk, so they design their cooling centres to make them accessible first and
foremost to the most vulnerable groups. They will also target centre promotion and public health
messaging to these populations to ensure they understand their vulnerabilities and use the centre. 
Commonalities among those at greater heat-risk
Underlying health conditions 
Caregiver dependence 
Age 
Social isolation 
Physical strain outdoors
Poor working or living conditions
Older adults and the elderly
People with chronic illnesses
People with physical impairments
Infants and young children
Occupational groups working outdoors or in hot indoor conditions
Rural homeless
Rural disadvantaged (living in poor housing conditions)
Those exercising outdoors or in hot conditions
Newcomers to Canada 
Tourists
Groups at-risk
Note: It's important to remember that while certain groups face a higher risk of heat-induced
illness, everyone's health is at risk in extreme heat.
3
Heat Waves in Alberta
Climate projections and recent heat events warn that
Canadian communities will see more high heat days
annually, more frequent and intense heat waves, and
unique and greater risks during the summer season. 
Alberta’s Heat Forecast: Projections
and impacts
2
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Environment Canada’s current
heat warning criteria for central
Alberta is if daytime maximum
temperatures are expected to
reach or exceed 29°C, with
nightly temperatures only falling
to 14°C or warmer for 2 or more
consecutive days.
Historic
2050 - 2080
2021 - 2050
3.4 days
30°C+/year
High carbon
Low carbon
Low carbon
High carbon
10.8
9.4
25.2
15.2
Projected number of annual high heat days (days 30°C and above) for the
Edmonton Region (high carbon and low carbon climate change scenarios.)
Source: Climate Atlas of Canada
Climate scientists and policy-makers are closely watching the changes happening today and the
future projections for their regions. As the Canadian climate changes, the average annual daily
temperature for the country will increase between 2°C and 6°C by 2100, depending on the level of
global emissions produced over the next century. However, it’s evident the rates of warming are
not equally distributed; Western Canada is warming faster than the rest of the country at three
times the global rate, and it is particularly important to note that nighttime temperatures during the
summer are warming faster than daytime temperatures. 
Historic
2050 - 2080
2021 - 2050
0.4 heat
waves/year
High carbon
Low carbon
Low carbon
High carbon
1.5
1.3
3.3
2.1
Projected number of annual heat waves for the Edmonton Region (high carbon and
low carbon climate change scenarios.)
Source: Climate Atlas of Canada
4
3
4
5
6
The impacts of high heat days and heat waves
As heat waves become more frequent and intense, they will also become more deadly and
disruptive. With the annual number of dangerously hot days increasing overtime, Canadian
communities must prepare and adapt to mitigate the various impacts to public health, healthcare
systems and different areas of the workforce. 
Each of the following areas of impact reveal the significant costs to life and community wellbeing a
more intense climate presents.
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Impacts to public health
Cramps and rashes 
Fainting 
Heat exhaustion 
Heat stroke
There can be severe impacts to cardiovascular systems, respiratory health, and even mental
health when the body is not able to cool itself down due to blistering ambient temperatures.
Communities will see more high heat days passing the threshold for inducing heat-related
deaths. Along with more premature heat-related deaths, we should expect increases in mild,
moderate, and severe heat illnesses. 
Heat illnesses include:
Choices determined that the greatest changes in hospitalizations will be from four diseases:
coronary heart disease, stroke, hypertensive disease, and diabetes. 
Hotter days will mean more hospital visits for
Alberta communities. The new strain will
present costs to the healthcare system,
putting more pressure on resources as well as
taxpayers.
As stated above, new heat patterns will
increase illness and death in communities. ​In a
2021 report the  Canadian Institute for Climate 
Healthcare impacts
5
During Alberta’s historic, record-
breaking heat wave in July 2021,
the Edmonton Journal reported
that the province logged 66 more
deaths than the same week in
2020—a 55% increase.7
8
Edmonton Journal 
Reports:
Other impacts
Industries like manufacturing, agriculture, quarrying, oil and gas extraction, utilities,
transportation, forestry, and construction may need to face challenges of reduced labour
productivity and outputs during high heat days and heat waves. Workers in these industries can
work extended hours outdoors and/or in indoor workspaces that potentially do not provide
sufficient and safe cooling. The greater risk for heat exposure and the resulting illnesses that
these employees face can potentially undermine industry productivity. 
Productivity impacts
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
In addition to impacts relating directly to
community health and productivity, extreme
heat has serious implications for agricultural
production, local ecosystems and
infrastructure.
Extreme heat enhances conditions for other
climate hazards like drought and wildfire,
which are also occurring more frequently
across the Prairies. Together with extreme
heat, these hazards put considerable stress
on crop health. Along with the hotter
environment threatening crop production,  hot
temperatures can also welcome unwanted
pests. In terms of livestock rearing, farmers
will need to prepare for a greater chance of
heat stress on their animals in order to keep
them healthy and productive if heat strikes. 
At the municipal level, extreme heat presents
expensive stressors to infrastructure systems.
Municipalities will see greater and potentially
excessive pressure on electric systems during
heat waves as more and more residents install
and run air conditioning units and fans. High
temperatures also lend to quicker
deterioration of pavement and this fact,
Did you know? 

Alberta broke the summer
record for electricity demand
during the 2021 summer heat
wave.    Such a demand for
electricity can quickly lead to
widespread outages. 

An outage within a
community increases the
need for a local cooling
centre as residents seek
places to cool down while
they aren’t able to run their
fans or air conditioning at
home.  
10
6
9
unfortunately, will present new issues for 
maintaining road systems—the capacity and budgets of municipalities to repair these
systems could even be surpassed. 
libraries
recreational or community centres
city halls
places of worship
local businesses
senior centres or legions
bingo halls
shelters
cool rooms in apartment buildings
established by landlords
museums
parked air conditioned mobile vehicles
(e.g., school bus)
drinking water supply
places to sit and/or lie down
medical supplies 
trained staff and/or volunteers
brochures and/or posters with heat-health
information
back-up power source as a safeguard in
the case of a power outage 
Ideal community cooling centre locations are
spacious, easily accessible, and equipped with
air conditioning and a drinking water supply.
Municipalities may choose to operate a centre
in a municipal-owned building or to coordinate
with the owner of a privately-owned building or
business to provide residents with a place of
refuge from the heat. 
Potential locations
What to have on-site
Location
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Guide for developing cooling centres
for rural communities
3
Some rural communities may be challenged by
a limited number of large, easily accessible and
air-conditioned buildings. Alternately, outdoor
locations like splash pads or wading pools can
also be designated as cooling facilities. Another
option is to connect with the local business
community and have vendors with air
conditioning and cool spaces open their doors
to people. A coordinated response like this
would offer more options at once, rather than
relying on a single suitable space.
7
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Best practices for effectiveness
How are people going to travel to and from
the centre?
Are there ways to transport people who do
not have access to vehicles (i.e., elderly)?
Is the location familiar to most people in
the community?
Does the location have wheelchair access
ramps and doors?
Should centres have extended hours? 
Is the information about the cooling centre
and heat-health communicated in simple
language? 
A community cooling centre should be
accessible in terms of location, mobility
features, convenient operating hours and
information adapted for english-as-second-
language community members. A heat-
response plan should consider how to
overcome any obstacles the community—
particularly heat-vulnerable people—may face
in benefiting from the centre.
Accessibility considerations:
Accessibility
Having knowledgeable staff or volunteers on-
site is invaluable to the health and safety of
visitors; they can provide assistance by
ensuring people are hydrating, answering
questions, and delivering heat-health
information. And in the case of serious
distress, a staff member who is either
medically trained or has first aid training can
be on standby to notice and potentially
manage the symptoms. 
Staff and/or volunteers
The purpose of the centre; who it is for,
what services visitors will receive
How to get to the centre and how to
identify cooling centre signage
The hours of operation; clarify if there will
be overnight access
If there will be drinks and food on site 
If pets are allowed
Additional rules that must be followed
during extraordinary circumstances (e.g.,
COVID-19 pandemic)
Integrating strategic communications and
outreach into a cooling centre response can
help ensure its effectiveness by increasing
usage by targeted populations, raising
awareness of heat-health risks among the
community and improving efficiencies in
emergency responses. Timely and direct
communication will be most effective in
protecting community members.
Communicating about the cooling centre(s)
The public, particularly vulnerable populations,
should be made aware of their local cooling
centre prior to extreme summer heat as well as
during a heat wave. Make sure to
communicate: 
Additionally, educate the community about the
risks heat waves pose to health and why
cooling is critical to stay safe in extreme heat.
(use this brochure)
Communication
It’s critical that any staff member or volunteer
on-site is knowledgeable in identifying heat-
illness symptoms, and is prepared to contact
emergency officials in the case of severe
illness. 
8
Have an emergency action plan in place for
the cooling centre and be prepared to
contact emergency officials in the case of
severe illness.
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Recommendations for cooling and
hydrating 
Tips for keeping the home comfortable
How to avoid unnecessary heat exposure
in the day 
How to help children, elderly and other
vulnerable populations
Recommendations for people with health
problems
Signs of heat distress and what to do when
someone feels unwell
Additionally, keep brochures on hand and
place posters around the centre with key heat-
health messages. 
Messaging could include:
Best practices for effectiveness cont.
Town authorities - websites, social media
Frontline service providers
Public notification systems
Institutions - hospitals, clinics, schools,
retirement homes, help centres, child
centres, schools
Local media and newsletters
Vulnerable populations registration
programs
Communication channels
Organizers should use multiple channels to
reach people who would benefit from the
cooling centre and information about heat-
health risks. Consider coordinating with
credible partner organizations to target
vulnerable groups. 
Channels can include: 
On-site communication
Knowledgeable staff/volunteers on-site can be
another vehicle to share heat-health
information to visitors, and can connect them
to further agencies and resources. 
Site staff and/or volunteers can also act
quickly to coordinate an emergency response
if a visitor is in severe distress. 
Reaching people with limited social
networks and interaction and those
continuing regular activities (i.e., outdoor
physical activity) with a false sense of
safety.
The benefits of community cooling centres are
magnified with a complementary and rigorous
outreach strategy on the part of the
municipality, community members, and local
businesses and organizations. 
Outreach tactics include: 
Coordinated outreach
9
The Resilient Rurals Resource Hub hosts
a bank of downloadable heat-health fact
sheets for heat wave education
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Best practices for effectiveness cont.
Encouraging people to act as ‘buddies’ for
their friends, neighbours, family and to
check in on those they know to be heat-
vulnerable. 
Encouraging people to open their homes—
if they are cool—to family and neighbours
as a refuge. 
Encouraging local businesses with air
conditioning to welcome the public into
their shop without expectation of
purchase. Businesses may use signage
provided to them by Resilient Rurals to
indicate they are a centre for cooling.
Total visitors/day
Peak usage time and visitor volumes
Visitor demographics
Visitation lengths
To improve emergency efforts season after
season, it’s important to integrate evaluation
of the cooling centre response into planning
processes. Evaluation can be based on
quantitative data gathered by staff/volunteers
for a variety of metrics that can include, but
aren’t limited to: 
Gathering feedback from those accessing and
staffing the cooling centre can also be
valuable to gauge the public support for a
cooling centre facility and to identify any
shortcomings in amenities, location and
staffing.
Evaluation
10
Government of Canada
recommendation:
Set up systems for people to self-register or
be registered by family members to receive
updates on response measures.
The Rural Assist program, a pilot developed by Resilient Rurals for the Town of
Bruderheim, will provide residents with the opportunity to receive tailored
information during heat waves and other climate-related events. The program will
be delivered through the Bruderheim Alert System (an Everbridge platform), which
allows residents to register to receive information through phone, email or text
messages. Residents will have the option to respond to messages if they require
assistance. 
Rural Assist will also offer an opt-in service, through which vulnerable members of
the community can identify themselves and provide information about their specific
concerns, vulnerabilities and services they may require during extreme weather
events like heatwaves.
11
Case Study: Gibbons' response to the 2021
summer heat wave
During Alberta’s record setting summer 2021 heat wave, Gibbons’ Town Office operated a cooling
centre and hydration station to accommodate residents looking to escape the heat. The town’s air
conditioned cultural centre was opened up to the public, which had previously been closed due to
COVID-19 restrictions. 
As the cooling centre was set up in quick response to rising temperatures, no long-term, formal
planning processes occurred before implementation.
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
11
Cooling centres in action
4
Cooling during COVID-19: The Town received
approval from Alberta Health Services (AHS)
before opening the centre, and limited user
capacity to meet current COVID-19 policies.
Chairs were set up to meet social distancing
requirements, and users were provided with
hand sanitizer and asked to sign in for contact
tracing. The program was designed for self
sufficiency, with limited staff supervision.
Signage encouraged residents to enter, and a
staff member was always present in the
building in case of any issues.
Hydration station: A hydration station was set
up in the parking lot of the Cultural Centre while
the cooling centre was closed. The hydration
station is normally used for public events in the
town and involves 300-gallon tanks that
dispense refrigerated water to eight fountains
and eight water fill stations. 
Centre usage: Staff saw approximately five to
ten residents using the cooling centre each day,
and low utilization rates, but attributed this to
the novelty of the program, predicting that
usage would increase in future years with
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
residents becoming more familiar with the cooling centre concept. The cooling centre was
promoted through Gibbons’ website, social media accounts and public alert system, Voyent.
Future considerations: Overall, Town staff were content with the cooling centre’s operation and
would run it again during future heat waves. In the event that COVID-19 restrictions were not
limiting capacity and facility options, staff would have set up the centre in a larger space. Although
the centre was somewhat under-utilized, it was generally successful, and in future years, usage
may increase as more residents learn about it.
12
Case Study: Developing a HARS and cooling centre
in rural Manitoba
The Assiniboine Regional Health Authority (ARHA), serving a large rural region in Manitoba, piloted a
Heat Alert Response System (HARS) development project with Health Canada. To ensure
coordination and effectiveness, the HARS was integrated into the authority’s Disaster Emergency
Response Plan. 
This case demonstrates what a rural community, appearing limited in resources and capacity, can
accomplish with a comprehensive map of regional assets, strategic communication and
coordination among existing departments and health care providers, and meaningful stakeholder
engagement. 
ARHA first conducted a temperature-mortality assessment for the region. As a region made up of
small rural communities, planners didn’t have heat mortality data for the communities. To work
around this, they used the heat mortality curves of nearby urban communities in Manitoba as
evidence of local heat risks. They then completed a vulnerability assessment consisting of rigorous
stakeholder engagement. This process determined there was a need to prioritize community
response measures like cooling centres for both year-round residents and tourists that frequent the
region during the summer. 
Cooling Centre Response: One challenge found during stakeholder consultation was the region’s
limited options for buildings that were spacious, easily-accessible and air conditioned. This fact was
taken into consideration, and for some areas, cooling was brought directly into homes for seniors
and those with limited mobility. Air-conditioned common areas provided easily accessible refuge for
residents in seniors living and care facilities. For the community cooling facilities that were
established successfully, ARHA leveraged existing volunteer networks to have volunteers on-site to
aid people and provide them drinking water.
Note: As of 2012, Assiniboine Regional Health Authority is now Prairie Mountain Health, following an
amalgamation of three regional health authorities in Manitoba.12
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Endnotes
1. Health Canada. (2011). “Adapting to Extreme
Heat Events: Guidelines for Assessing Health
Vulnerability.”
https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-
sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-
semt/alt_formats/hecs-
sesc/pdf/pubs/climat/adapt/adapt-eng.pdf 
2. Resilient Rurals. (2020). "Resilience Surveys
Summary."
https://www.resilientrurals.com/_files/ugd/16c5
d2_7bdfd172864b4fa5a066b943fdbde37a.pdf.  
3. Environment Canada. “Table 11: Alerting
parameters Environment Canada uses for
issuing a Heat Warning.”
https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/types-weather-
forecasts-use/public/criteria-alerts.html#heat 
4. Prairie Climate Centre. Climate Atlas of
Canada.
https://climateatlas.ca/map/canada/plus30_203
0_85#.
5. Prairie Climate Centre. Climate Atlas of
Canada.
https://climateatlas.ca/map/canada/plus30_203
0_85#.
6. Prairie Climate Centre. (2019). “Heat Waves
and Health: A special report on climate change
in Canada.”
https://climateatlas.ca/sites/default/files/PCC%
20-
%20Heat%20Waves%20and%20Health%20-
%20Nov%202019.pdf 
7. Edmonton Journal. (2021). “Alberta saw
spike in reported deaths during heatwave,
causes still under investigation.”
https://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-
news/alberta-saw-spike-in-reported-deaths-
during-heatwave-causes-still-under-
investigation 
8. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices.
(2021). “The health costs of climate change:
how Canada can adapt, prepare, and save
lives.” https://climatechoices.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ClimateChoices_Hea
lth-report_Final_June2021.pdf 
9. Canadian Institute for Climate Choices.
(2021). “The health costs of climate change:
how Canada can adapt, prepare, and save
lives.” https://climatechoices.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ClimateChoices_Hea
lth-report_Final_June2021.pdf 
10. Edmonton Journal. (2021). “Alberta breaks
summer record for electricity demand Monday
amid heat wave; air quality statement issued.”
https://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-
news/alberta-breaks-summer-record-for-
electricity-demand-monday-amid-heat-wave
11. Health Canada. (2012). “Heat Alert and
Response Systems to Protect Heath: Best
Practices Guidebook.”
https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-
sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-
semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/climat/response-
intervention/response-intervention-eng.pdf
12. Prairie Mountain Health. “Our Region.”
https://www.prairiemountainhealth.ca/our-
region. 
8
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
References
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. (2021).
“The health costs of climate change: how
Canada can adapt, prepare, and save lives.”
https://climatechoices.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ClimateChoices_Hea
lth-report_Final_June2021.pdf    
Edmonton Journal. (2021). “Alberta breaks
summer record for electricity demand Monday
amid heat wave; air quality statement issued.”
https://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-
news/alberta-breaks-summer-record-for-
electricity-demand-monday-amid-heat-wave 
Edmonton Journal. (2021). “Alberta saw spike
in reported deaths during heatwave, causes
still under investigation.”
https://edmontonjournal.com/news/local-
news/alberta-saw-spike-in-reported-deaths-
during-heatwave-causes-still-under-
investigation 
Environment Canada. “Table 11: Alerting
parameters Environment Canada uses for
issuing a Heat Warning.”
https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/types-weather-
forecasts-use/public/criteria-alerts.html#heat 
Health Canada. (2012). “Heat Alert and
Response Systems to Protect Heath: Best
Practices Guidebook.”
https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-
sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-
semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/climat/response-
intervention/response-intervention-eng.pdf
Health Canada. (2011). “Adapting to Extreme
Heat Events: Guidelines for Assessing Health
Vulnerability.”
https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-
sc/migration/hc-sc/ewh-
semt/alt_formats/hecs-
sesc/pdf/pubs/climat/adapt/adapt-eng.pdf 
Leeds, Grenville & Lanark District Health Unit.
“Emergency Cooling Centres.”
https://healthunit.org/for-
professionals/municipal-staff-
partners/emergency-cooling-centres/ 
Prairie Climate Centre. Climate Atlas of
Canada.
https://climateatlas.ca/map/canada/plus30_20
30_85#.
Prairie Climate Centre. (2019). “Heat Waves
and Health: A special report on climate change
in Canada.”
https://climateatlas.ca/sites/default/files/PCC%
20-
%20Heat%20Waves%20and%20Health%20-
%20Nov%202019.pdf 
Prairie Mountain Health. “Our Region.”
https://www.prairiemountainhealth.ca/our-
region. 
World Health Organization. (2011). “Heat-
Health Action Plan to prevent the heat waves
consequences on the health of the population
in the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia.”
https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_fil
e/0020/144173/e95093.pdf 
8
Resilient Rurals is a partnership between
the towns of Bruderheim, Gibbons and
Lamont for a regional climate adaptation
and resilience project in Alberta’s Industrial
Heartland. It is a new approach—created by
small towns, for small towns. 
In 2015, the Town of Bruderheim was selected for
participation in a one-day Climate Resilience Express
workshop with All One Sky Foundation. The Town
was provided with a Climate Resilient Action Plan that
outlined a number of actions to promote resilience in
a changing climate. 
The plan was a unique opportunity—a launching point
from which to build a regional collaborative
framework with neighbouring municipalities of similar
size (under 3,500) in Alberta’s Industrial Heartland.
The towns of Gibbons and Lamont agreed to partner
with Bruderheim to form Resilient Rurals.
With Bruderheim as the project lead, the group has
worked to identify shared priority risks and
opportunities for collaboration among partners, and
creates climate education, communication and
planning resources for rural communities.
About Resilient Rurals
www.ResilientRurals.com
@ResilientRurals
RESILIENT RURALS | GUIDE TO COMMUNITY COOLING CENTRES
Contact
Resilient Rurals
780-299-2946

Connect@ResilientRurals.com
