SPRING 2022
CONNECTING 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
AND HEALTH
A GUIDEBOOK OF HEALTH AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE CONTENT ON THE 
CLIMATE ATLAS OF CANADA
Health Risks of Climate Change
From heat-related illnesses to increasing 
infectious diseases, learn more about 
the many ways that climate change 
threatens human health
Climate and Health Maps
Explore a range of maps from the 
Climate Atlas of Canada that show 
how key climate variables may present 
increasing risks to health into the future
Protect Your Health
Find a range of strategies to better 
prepare for the health challenges of a 
changing world
Connecting Climate Change and Health
A guidebook of health and climate content on the 
Climate Atlas of Canada
© 2022 Prairie Climate Centre
Prairie Climate Centre
University of Winnipeg
Richardson College for the Environment and Science Complex
Winnipeg, Manitoba
info@climateatlas.ca
Funding for this project has been made possible through contributions from:
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada
Conseil de recherche en sciences humanines du Canada
The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of Public Health Agency of Canada or the Social Science 
and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
Recommended citation:
Prairie Climate Centre. 2022. Connecting Climate Change 
and Health: A Guidebook Health and Climate Change 
Content on the Climate Atlas of Canada. University of 
Winnipeg, Manitoba.
1  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
This guidebook, created by the University of Winnipeg’s Prairie Climate Centre (PCC), takes a look at some of the ways climate change is 
impacting the health of Canadians. It draws together the data, research, and stories on climate change and health available through the 
Climate Atlas of Canada (climateatlas.ca) - an interactive tool produced by the PCC - and includes links to articles, videos, and maps where 
more information about these health impacts can be found.  
Introduction
Health and Climate Change in Canada
We often think about climate change as something abstract 
or remote. We hear scientists talking about melting ice caps, 
see images of drought in faraway places, or browse through 
news coverage of exotic weather disasters.
But climate change is having effects right here and right now 
in Canada. And the risks aren’t just theoretical or abstract. 
The effects of climate change are up close and personal, 
affecting the everyday lives and health of Canadians.
Increasing temperatures across Canada and changing 
precipitation patterns have many health implications for 
Canadians.
As our climate changes, some of the main health impacts 
we’re seeing are:
•	
A rise in heat-related illnesses
•	
More illnesses from reduced air quality
•	
Increasing and emerging cases of diseases
•	
A rise in mental health impacts
We have to understand how climate change is linked to our 
health in order to be able to protect ourselves and make 
changes to reduce these short and long-term impacts of 
climate change. The COVID-19 pandemic has given us many 
lessons in the importance of adapting our behaviours and 
preparing our healthcare systems for the changes to come.
This guide to the materials on the Climate Atlas aims to 
provide a deeper understanding of these impacts and how to 
adapt.
The Climate Atlas of Canada
The Climate Atlas of Canada is an interactive tool for citizens, 
researchers, businesses, and community and political leaders 
to learn about climate change in Canada. It combines climate 
science, mapping and storytelling to bring the global issue 
of climate change closer to home, and is designed to inspire 
local, regional, and national action and solutions.
Various aspects of climate change can be explored using 
maps, graphs and climate data for provinces, local regions 
and cities across the country. We can look at climate model 
variables to give us an indication of how some of the health 
risks of climate change can be expected to change as well. 
To explore how climate is changing in Canada visit the 
interactive maps on the Climate Atlas of Canada.
In this guidebook
This guidebook  includes a range of information, maps, and 
videos on the following health impacts of climate change:
•	
Climate maps for health
•	
Air quality illnesses
•	
Heat-related illnesses
•	
Infectious diseases
•	
Vector-borne diseases
•	
Waterborne diseases
•	
Mental Health Impacts
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  2
How is climate change 
impacting the health 
of Canadians
The changing climate can impact our health in a range of 
ways, from increasing heatwaves causing heat-related 
illnesses and fatalities, to changing temperature and 
precipitation affecting seasonal allergens.
The Climate Atlas of Canada has a range of maps related to health impacts of 
climate change, such as:
•    Annual Mean Temperatures
•    Number of Heatwaves  and  Average Length of Heatwaves
•    Very Hot Days (30C+)
•    Wet Days
•    Precipitation
•    Dry Days
These maps help visualize climate impacts in the immediate and near future, 
as well as through different “low carbon” and “high carbon” emissions 
scenarios. Two of these maps are shown on the next page.
See our article Climate Maps for Health for more information on how maps 
can help us understand key climate impacts facing the health of Canadians.
About the Data
The data in these maps are derived from an ensemble of 24 downscaled 
global climate models obtained from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium 
(PCIC; pacificclimate.org). Values and comparisons use ensemble averages 
across the 30-year periods 1976-2005 and 2051-2080 under the High 
Carbon (or RCP8.5) emissions scenario that assumes greenhouse gas 
emissions will continue to increase at current rates throughout this century. 
This latest-generation model data has been made available thanks to a 
partnership with Environment and Climate Change Canada, PCIC, Ouranos, 
and the Computer Research Institute of Montréal. See the Climate Atlas at 
climateatlas.ca to explore more data and to see what happens if the world 
reduces its greenhouse gas emissions and slows the pace of global warming.
Projected change in
very cold da
Map B
3  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
Longer, hotter summers bring new and re-emerging 
vector-borne diseases
Warmer, longer summers are increasing the range of some 
insect and animals that can carry and transmit infectious 
diseases. For instance, cases of tick-borne Lyme disease  have 
increased and spread to new areas over the last decade. This 
map shows the number of days above +30˚C in a high carbon 
future.
The loss of cold causes mental health stress
The Arctic regions of Canada are warming two to three times 
faster than anywhere else. Changing sea ice, loss of snow, and 
milder winters are having profound impacts on the health and 
wellbeing of Indigenous communities in the region. This map 
shows the expected change in very cold days at or below -30˚C 
in a high carbon future.
Both maps represents RCP8.5 projected changes for 
2051 - 2080, relative to the baseline period of 1976 - 2005
Projected change in mean number of 
very hot days (+30°C)
Map A
n mean number of 
ays (-30°C)
Change (in days) 
-40 
0 
40
70 
0 
-70
A
B
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  4
Air Quality Illnesses
Understanding the connection between climate change and air quality is critical to protect our immediate and long-term 
health. Poor air quality can come from wildfire smoke, increased pollution from burning of fossil fuels, and increased allergens 
from a changing environment. Some of these impacts involve immediate breathing problems, but increasingly we’re seeing that 
chronic diseases can also develop from long-term exposure to air pollution. 
Health Concerns
Cardiovascular health
Short-term exposure to poor air quality can increase the 
risk of heart attack, stroke, arrhythmias and heart failure in 
susceptible people, such as the elderly or those with pre-
existing medical conditions.1
Respiratory health
Climate change is a large threat to respiratory health as it can 
directly cause and further aggravate pre-existing conditions. 
Climate change can increase pollutants and create other air 
quality issues, such as increased wildfire smoke, which can 
result in breathing problems and damage to lung tissue.2 
Increased allergies
Those of us with allergies and asthma know these seasonal 
irritants all too well, and the sneezing, wheezing, and itchy 
eyes that accompany them. Allergens like pollen, mold, and 
mildew are also beneficiaries of climate change thanks to 
higher temperatures and longer growing seasons. Longer 
allergy seasons allow for more of this matter to develop and 
spread in our environment. This means longer and worse 
seasonal allergies for many people across Canada. 
Watch the video below for more information on allergies and 
climate change.
Increased pollution & heat
Increased wildfires, air pollutants 
& allergens
Cardiovascular, respiratory & 
allergy-related illnesses
Watch a Video: Aggravated Allergies: Predicting 
pollen levels in a changing climate
5  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
Air Pollution
Air pollution can have an impact on cardiovascular illness 
and respiratory illness. Some of the primary air pollutants 
that affect our health are nitrous oxides, particulate matter 
(from sources such as vehicle emissions and wildfire smoke), 
and ozone (often called smog at ground level).3 While 
not all sources of pollutants are human-made, increased 
temperatures from climate change will increase the ability 
of these pollutants to harm our health. Read more about air 
pollutants and climate change on the Climate Atlas of Canada. 
Record-breaking wildfire seasons have made headlines across 
Canada every summer in recent years. This will only continue 
as climate change makes summers longer and drier, leading to 
more and more wildfire risk for Canadians. 
 
One of those growing risks is exposure to smoke. More 
wildfires mean more wildfire smoke, and more smoke means 
more smoke-related health problems. Since smoke travels 
easily, these health problems don’t only affect people who live 
in fire-prone areas. They can affect people’s health all across 
the country and beyond. 
Read more about wildfire smoke and climate change on the 
Climate Atlas of Canada.
Protect Your Health
What you can do to lower air pollution exposure according to 
Health Canada:
•	
Limit outdoor activity and strenuous physical activities as 
much as possible. If you have difficulty breathing, reduce 
your activities or stop altogether.
•	
Try to avoid highly polluted areas, such as high-traffic 
areas, where possible
•	
Be aware of potential hazards in your indoor 
environment and try to reduce exposure.
•	
Close your windows and turn off your furnace and 
air conditioner if they are drawing smoke or irritants 
indoors. 
•	
Use HEPA air filters if you can.
•	
In a vehicle, keep the windows closed and set the 
ventilation system to recirculate.
 
Consult your family doctor or a health-care professional if 
you have concerns or want more advice.
There’s an App for that!
The Air Quality Health Index from Health Canada provides 
a straightforward air quality risk rating for your community. 
The rating is on a scale of 1 to 10; the higher the number, the 
greater the risk.
 
Download Air Quality Health Index from the App Store or 
Google Play
Who’s  at Risk? 
We all breathe, which means that all of us are vulnerable 
to the impacts of air pollutants. And a majority of us are 
especially vulnerable, including: 
 
•	
People who work, play, or spend significant time 
outdoors
•	
People with existing heart or lung issues (including 
asthma, allergies, etc.)
•	
People with limited economic means
•	
Children
•	
Older adults
•	
Pregnant people
More information on air quality and health under climate change currently available on the Atlas:
Air Pollution and Heart Disease, Stroke 
Climate and Health Concerns for Asthma and Allergies
Climate Change Decreases the Quality of the Air We Breathe
How Air Pollution is Destroying Our Health
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  6
Heat Illnesses
Many Canadians welcome the arrival of hot summer days as respite from our long, cold winters. Understandably, we tend to 
think of more summer heat as a good thing. But too much heat can be dangerous. 
An increase in heat waves and extreme heat, especially in urban areas, means increases in cardiovascular health issues, 
respiratory health issues, and mental health issues. 
Health Concerns
Cardiovascular health
On hot days, your heart beats faster and pumps harder in 
order to lower your body temperature. Heat exhaustion and 
heatstroke are common health concerns in extreme heat and 
in the most extreme circumstances, being unable to lower 
your body temperature could result in death. Protect your 
heart in the heat and know the symptoms of heat-related 
illnesses such as heat stroke and heat exhaustion. 
Respiratory health
High temperatures “bake” vehicle exhaust, turning it into 
harmful surface-level ozone/smog when breathed in. Smog 
is often concentrated in big cities, but air-quality problems 
can be just as bad in rural and suburban areas, especially as 
Canada experiences more wildfires. Heat can make breathing 
more difficult, especially for those with asthma or chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).4
Mental Health
Occurrences of mood disorders, anxiety disorders, dementia, 
and psychological distress have all been shown to increase 
with higher temperatures. Heat can have an impact on 
interpersonal interactions, with increases in irritability and 
aggression. Domestic violence and violent crimes have also 
been shown to spike during heat events. See our mental 
health articles for more information on mental health and 
climate change.
Read more about the health impacts of heat on the Climate 
Atlas of Canada’s Heat Waves and Health Report. 
Exposure to excessive heat &
increased urban heat island effect
Cardiovascular/respiratory illness 
& mental health impacts
Increased heat & number of heat 
waves
7  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
Who’s at Risk?
Canadian cities have a higher increase in heat due to the 
urban heat island effect. The urban heat island effect occurs 
in cities because of their  low natural land cover. Surfaces 
such as pavement and buildings retain heat and increase the 
overall air temperature of the area. Therefore, people living 
in cities may have higher risk of suffering from heat-related 
illnesses.
Other populations at risk include:
•	
Those with inadequate access to resources, such as air 
conditioning and a sufficient supply of drinking water
•	
Socially isolated individuals or those with mobility issues
•	
Those with barriers to accessing public health 
information
•	
Those with pre-existing medical conditions
•	
Seniors
•	
Children 
Watch a Video: Heatwaves and Hope
Near the end of the century, the City of Toronto could 
experience nearly two months of +30 °C days a year, 
according to climate projections. To address the growing 
risk of future heat waves, local faith leaders have created a 
network of cooling centres in churches, mosques, temples and 
synagogues, and are mobilizing their congregations to provide 
support for susceptible populations. For City Counsellor Gord 
Perks, this example of grassroots community resilience makes 
him hopeful about the future.
Protect Your Health
Tips to stay healthy in the heat from Health Canada:
•	
Prepare for the heat, tune in regularly to weather 
forecasts.
•	
Know the signs of heat illness
•	
Pay attention to how you and those around you feel
•	
Drink plenty of liquids
•	
Stay cool 
•	
Dress light
•	
Take cool showers
•	
Minimize strenuous outdoor activities
•	
Stay in the shade or air-conditioned facility
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  8
!
Infectious Diseases
Tick-borne Diseases
Health Concerns
Longer, hotter summers and more mild winters can increase 
the survival, growth, and reproduction of tick species such 
as blacklegged (deer) ticks. This means that they can survive 
and establish populations in areas where they previously 
couldn’t, and increase their numbers where they were already 
established. Longer summers also mean a longer season 
where ticks are active and people are outdoors - increasing 
the window of opportunity for the two to meet and for people 
to be potentially infected with tick-borne diseases such as 
Lyme Disease. 
Increased temperatures 
& changing precipitation
Canadians might be surprised to hear that climate change can also increase the spread of certain types of infectious diseases. 
Infectious diseases are caused by bacteria, viruses, or parasites that are spread through food, water, or animal and insect 
“vectors” such as mosquitoes and ticks. Impacts of climate change, such as increases in temperature, precipitation, floods, and 
droughts, are changing the range and spread of these diseases.
Increased water 
contamination & 
temperatures suitable 
for bacteria/algae 
Increased range and 
season for vectors like 
mosquitoes and ticks
More 
waterborne 
diseases
More 
vector-borne 
diseases
Watch a video: Lyme Disease, Climate Change, 
and Public Health
Who’s at Risk?
Children who spend lots of time outdoors as well as adults 
who work outdoors or participate in outdoor activities are at 
greater risk of tick-borne diseases.5 You can stay up to date 
with currently identified risk areas in Canada according to the 
Public Health Agency of Canada.
Protect Your Health
Public Health Agency of Canada’s advice on preventing tick-
borne illnesses:
•	
Apply the insecticide permethrin to clothing to repel 
ticks when outdoors
•	
Wear light coloured long-sleeved clothing
•	
Tucking in shirts and pants
•	
Stay on cleared paths when walking or hiking
•	
Do daily tick checks and remove any found ticks 
9  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
Mosquito-borne Diseases
Health Concerns
Most Canadians think of diseases carried by mosquitoes, 
called mosquito-borne diseases, as being limited to warm 
southern climates, like malaria or dengue fever. While it is 
true that they are far more common in the tropics, warming 
temperatures and increasing precipitation under climate 
change in Canada are expected to increase the presence 
of some of these diseases right here at home.  Read more 
on mosquito-borne diseases under climate change on the 
Climate Atlas of Canada.
Who’s at Risk?
Those who spend more time outdoors and are exposed to 
mosquito bites are at greater risk of mosquito-borne diseases, 
especially at dusk and dawn, when mosquitoes are most 
active.6
Protect Your Health
Public Health Agency of Canada’s advice on preventing 
mosquito-borne illnesses include:
•	
Wearing bug repellent
•	
Wearing long sleeves and long pants when outdoors
•	
Avoiding going out when mosquitoes are most active 
(dusk and dawn)
•	
Removing standing water around your home (in tires, 
flower pots, containers, etc.)
•	
Ensuring windows have properly fitting screens.
Watch a video: Mosquito-borne 
Diseases and Climate Change
Waterborne Diseases
Health Concerns
When enjoying activities out on the water - such as boating, 
fishing, or swimming - people should be aware of potential 
risks that can come from using the water. The main risks of 
waterborne disease are associated with harmful algal blooms 
and high bacteria in the water. 
While we can control how we use the water recreationally 
when risks are present, other uses of water are not so 
avoidable. Water used for livelihood and drinking can also be 
contaminated and many communities face the health risks 
associated with them. Read more about water-borne diseases 
under climate change on the Climate Atlas of Canada. 
Who’s at Risk?
Those who spend lots of time in the water, using it 
recreationally, and children who play in the water and sand 
are more at risk of water-borne illnesses. Those who live in 
rural communities, particularly Indigenous communities, that 
depend on water for livelihood and may have sensitive water 
treatment facilities are also at higher risk. 
Protect Your Health
It is important to keep updated with government advisories 
on water quality used for drinking and recreation. Ways to 
protect yourself when swimming at beaches or lakes include:
•	
Rinsing your body with clean water immediately after 
swimming
•	
Avoid swallowing water
•	
Avoid swimming after a rain event
•	
Avoid swimming where algae is visible
•	
Monitor children and pets around algal blooms
Watch a video: Algal Blooms, Climate Change, 
and Public Health
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  10
Historic range of blacklegged 
ticks in Canada (1976 - 2005)
Baseline map 
About the Maps
Temperatures sufficient for the growth and development of blacklegged ticks are at least 
2800 degree days (the total of all daily temperatures above 0°C in a year). The colour 
scale shows 2860 degree days (beige) to 4000 degree days (rust). This map does not apply 
to the species of Lyme-carrying ticks that live west of the Rocky Mountains. The climate 
projections on these maps were made using 24 climate models running the “low carbon” 
(RCP4.5) and “high carbon” (RCP8.5) emissions scenarios for two time periods. Climate 
model data was downscaled and made available by the PCIC.
Blacklegged tick range is affected by temperature, as well as other 
factors such as habitat suitability and animal host populations. As you 
can see on these maps, greater emissions will cause temperatures to 
increase and allow blacklegged ticks to spread further north. On the 
other hand, we see that taking action on climate change to lessen our 
emissions can help limit the future spread of blacklegged ticks, and 
reduce the increase of Lyme disease.
Climate change and Lyme 
Disease Risk in Canada
Potential range in the near futu
under a low emission scenario
Map A 
Map C 
Potential range in the near futu
under a high emission scenario
11  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
2021 - 2050
2051 - 2080
re 
Map B 
Map D 
Potential range in the far future 
under a low emission scenario
Potential range in the far future 
under a high emission scenario
re 
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  12
!
!
Mental Health
Previous research on the health impacts of climate change tend to focus on physical health impacts, but mental health impacts 
have been greatly overlooked. It is very important that we start exploring and discussing the mental health impacts of climate 
change, because more people - children, youth and adults alike - are experiencing emotional distress in response to climate 
change.
Health Concerns
Mental health impacts of climate change are diverse, and 
can include anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress 
disorder, among others. The mental health impacts of climate 
change can be categorized in 3 general pathways:
•	
Experiences of extreme climate-related events such as 
flooding, droughts and wildfires, which can cause acute 
stress and trauma
•	
Experiences of environmental change over time, 
such as local losses of species or changes in seasonal 
temperatures, which can lead to feelings of grief and loss 
of sense of place
•	
Exposure to information about the climate crisis (e.g. on 
social media, news, classroom), which can lead to anxiety, 
sadness, frustration, fear, and hopelessness
Experiences 
of extreme 
weather 
events, such 
as flooding or 
fires
Experiences of 
environmental 
changes
Awareness 
and exposure 
to climate 
change 
information
Who’s at Risk? 
People of all ages in Canada are experiencing mental health 
impacts from climate change. 
Those who spend more time outdoors and who have a 
stronger connection to the natural environment around them 
such as farmers, fishers, hunters, and outdoor enthusiasts 
may bear witness to environmental changes more frequently 
and intensely, and may therefore experience more mental 
health effects. This is particularly true for many Indigenous 
communities who remain closely connected to their lands, 
waters, and species within their traditional territories. 
Young people - described as the ‘climate generation’ by some 
- may be particularly at risk of mental health impacts, since 
many young people have never known a life without hearing 
Watch a video: Wildfires and Community Health
When wildfires are at your community’s door, there’s only 
one thing to do: evacuate. As communities are uprooted 
and fires are being fought, people are put under extreme 
stress that leads to both short- and long-term mental health 
impacts. Under climate change, we’ll be seeing more and 
more wildfires, so it’s vital that we address the links between 
wildfires and mental health.
13  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
about climate change and how it will adversely affect their 
future. Research indicates that the rapidly developing brain of 
children and adolescents, combined with their limited ability 
to avoid and adapt to climate stressors, may make children 
worry about climate change more than any other group.
Taking Action 
Climate change is a daunting and complex threat that can lead 
to distressing emotions, such as anxiety, depression, grief and 
hopelessness. Since climate change is a long-term threat, we 
must learn to cope with the potentially difficult emotions that 
it may cause to ensure our well-being over time. If we learn 
to manage these feelings, we can recognize them as signs of 
our compassion and connection to the world around us, and 
harness them as important motivators for taking action on 
climate change.
Read more about coping with climate change on our Climate 
Atlas, see our article Taking Action on our Climate Emotions.
Finding Hope
Many people feel like the story of the environment and 
climate change is all “doom and gloom,” but finding sources of 
hope is critically important. In her recent book entitled Hope 
Matters, author Dr. Elin Kelsey advocates for “evidence-based 
hope”, which takes a critical look at the problems we face as 
well as the trends and advances that are moving us through 
these problems. “If we continue to reproduce feelings of 
hopelessness,” Kelsey explains, “that’s as big a problem as the 
problem [of climate change] itself.” 
In this video, Kelsey explains the importance of finding hope 
in the face of climate change, and offers tips on where to find 
it. She describes hope as a “brave political act” that requires 
courage and commitment in the face of uncertainty.
Watch a video: Dr. Elin Kelsey on Why Hope 
Matters
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  14
Climate Action to Protect Health
While there are actions we can take to adapt to climate change, the most important work that can be done to protect our 
health is to limit the impacts by reducing our emissions. Climate change solutions can start close to home, with simple actions 
in our own homes and families, but also require large-scale changes in our ways of thinking, planning, and acting in workplaces, 
neighbourhoods, and communities across the country. It is not all the responsibility of individuals; our social, political, and 
economic systems have a central role to play in tackling the climate challenge head on.
We need political will to create market incentives such as carbon taxes, to put a price on pollution from big industry, and to 
create climate-smart laws and regulations in the face of resistance and denial. And we know that political will requires public 
pressure, from community members and constituents voicing their concerns, writing letters, staging demonstrations, and 
organizing with their neighbours. We all have a role to play in making sure climate action is a top priority for our governments.
Providing health benefits
Actions we take to fight climate change also often have immediate health benefits beyond lessening future risks. Some 
examples of the ways that climate action can improve health are:
•	
Investing in public transit and active transportation, which can increase levels of physical activity and decrease air 
pollution, and in turn reduce chronic diseases and acute health impacts. This in turn saves the healthcare system huge 
amounts of money that are spent on treating these illnesses every year. 
•	
Renewable energy, such as solar or wind power, is a clean way to get the power that runs our communities. Scaling up 
renewables means less water pollution and air pollution that harms us, not to mention less reliance on fossil fuels that 
cause pollution in the first place.
•	
Greening our cities through parks, trees, and urban agriculture encourages physical activity and healthy local food, while 
making beautiful places to live in. Smart landscape and city design can help us manage the effects of extreme heat, reduce 
damage from extreme events such as floods, and more.
The health risks of climate change can sound intimidating and worrying, but there are creative, innovative strategies that can 
promote healthy and sustainable communities and help respond to the challenge of climate change. Taking climate action 
seriously means building more sustainable, pleasant, thriving communities. And taking an energy-efficient and climate-friendly 
approach to building and living in our communities will have important health benefits above and beyond helping with climate 
change.
15  |  CONNETING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
Resources
Overview of Climate Atlas health content
Articles
•    Climate Change and Health
•    Climate Maps for Health
•    Heat Waves and Health
•    Health Impacts of Extreme Heat
•    Wildfires, Water, and Our Health
•    Wildfire Smoke and Climate Change
•    Waterborne Diseases and Climate Change
•    Lyme Disease Under Climate Change
•    Mosquito-borne Diseases and Climate Change
•    Climate Change, Air Quality, and Public Health
•    Mental Health and Climate Change
•    Taking Action on Our Climate Emotions
•    Take Action on Climate Change
Videos
•    Aggravate allergies
•    Heat waves and hope
•    Lyme disease, climate change, and public health
•    Mosquito-borne diseases and climate change
•    Algal blooms, climate change, and public health	
•    Wildfires and community health
•    Quality control: Wildfire, water, and our health
•    Overcoming climate anxiety
•    Why hope matters
More information on the health impacts of 
climate change
There are a wide range of additional resources to help you 
explore more about the how climate change can impact 
our health. Groups of healthcare professionals such as the 
Canadian Association of Physicians for the Environment 
(CAPE) and the Canadian Association of Nurses for the 
Environment (CANE) have developed thorough resources 
that may be particularly helpful to professionals in this field.
A few more resources include:
•    Climate Change Toolkit for Health Professionals  - CAPE
•    Climate Change and Health - WHO
•    Climate Effects on Health - CDC
•    Climate Change and Health - PAHO/WHO
References
1.  American Heart Association. “Air pollution and heart 
disease, stroke.” https://www.heart.org/en/health-topics/
consumer-healthcare/what-is-cardiovascular-disease/air-
pollution-and-heart-disease-stroke
2.  Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America. “Climate and 
Health.” https://www.aafa.org/climate-and-health/
3.  National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. “Air 
Pollution and Your Health.” https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/
topics/agents/air-pollution/index.cfm
4.  Canadian Lung Association. “Heat and humidity.” https://
www.lung.ca/lung-health/air-quality/outdoor-air-quality/
heat-and-humidity
5.  Mayo Clinic. “Lyme Disease.” https://www.mayoclinic.org/
diseases-conditions/lyme-disease/symptoms-causes/syc-
20374651
6.  Johns Hopkins Medicine. “West Nile Virus.” https://www.
hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/west-
nile-virus
CONNECTING CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH  |  16
