2022/23
CIPI
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure
Assessing the financial impacts of 
extreme rainfall on public linear storm
and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario
LINEAR STORM
AND WASTEWATER
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                          
 
 
 
About this document 
Established by the Financial Accountability Officer Act, 2013, the 
Financial Accountability Office (FAO) provides independent analysis 
on the state of the Province’s finances, trends in the provincial 
economy and related matters important to the Legislative Assembly 
of Ontario. 
 
This report was prepared by Sabrina Afroz, Nicolas Rhodes and Jay 
Park under the direction of Edward Crummey. This report benefitted 
from contributions from Eklavya Jain, Christina Rachmadita, Mavis 
Yang, Katrina Talavera, Laura Irish, Paul Lewis and David West. 
External reviewers were provided with earlier drafts of this report for 
their comments. However, the input of external reviewers implies no 
responsibility for this final report, which rests solely with the FAO. 
 
In keeping with the FAO’s mandate to provide the Legislative 
Assembly of Ontario with independent economic and financial 
analysis, this report makes no policy recommendations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario 
2 Bloor Street West, Suite 900 Toronto, Ontario M4W 3E2 
fao-on.org | info@fao-on.org | 416-644-0702 
This document is also available in an accessible format and as a 
downloadable PDF on our website. 
 
ISSN 2564-3924
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public 
Infrastructure: Linear Storm and Wastewater  
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on 
public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
 
1 | Introduction and context 
6 
2 | Summary 
7 
3 | Maintaining storm and wastewater infrastructure in a stable climate 
8 
4 | The infrastructure costs of not adapting to more extreme rainfall 
13 
5 | The costs of adapting linear storm and wastewater infrastructure 
22 
6 | Comparing the costs of different asset management strategies 
31 
7 | Appendices 
37 
8 | References 
50 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Glossary of Terms 
 
List of Abbreviations 
Term 
Definition 
CIPI 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure (project) 
CRV 
Current Replacement Value 
IDF 
Intensity-Duration-Frequency (Curve) 
IPCC 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
O&M 
Operations and Maintenance 
RCP 
Representative Concentration Pathway 
SME 
Subject-Matter Expert 
USL 
Useful Service Life 
WSP 
WSP Global Inc. 
 
Definitions 
Current Replacement Value: The current cost of rebuilding an infrastructure asset with the equivalent capacity, 
functionality and performance. 
 
Operations and Maintenance (O&M): The routine activities performed on an asset that maximize service life 
and minimize service disruptions without altering the physical components of the asset. 
 
Rehabilitation: Repairing part or most of an asset to extend its service life, without adding to its capacity, 
functionality or performance.  
 
Renewal: Replacement of an existing asset, resulting in a new or as-new asset with an equivalent capacity, 
functionality and performance as the original asset. Renewal is different from rehabilitation, as renewal rebuilds 
the entire asset. 
 
State of Good Repair: A performance standard which helps to maximize the benefits of public infrastructure in a 
cost-effective manner over time and ensures that infrastructure operates in a condition that is considered 
acceptable from an engineering perspective.  
 
Stable Climate: A stable climate scenario assumes that climate indicators for extreme rainfall remain unchanged 
from their 1975-2005 average levels over the projection to 2100. 
 
Rest of the Century: Refers to the 79 years from 2022 to 2100.  
 
Baseline Cost: The operations and maintenance, rehabilitation, and renewal expense that would have been 
required to maintain public storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair in a stable climate.  
 
Acute Hazard: Severe climate hazards that occur rarely (such as the 100-year storm event).  
 
 
5 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Chronic Hazard: Climate hazards that occur often, such as heaviest annual 5-day rain.  
 
Adaptation: Adaptation is modelled as an alteration of an asset’s physical components or its surroundings to 
prevent increased O&M expenses and more rapid deterioration (when applicable) caused by changes in extreme 
rainfall. In addition, adaptation ensures adequate capacity, minimizing flood risk from more extreme rainfall. 
Adaptation can be done during an asset’s service life or at renewal.  
 
No Adaptation Strategy: An asset management strategy where public infrastructure assets are not adapted to 
more extreme rainfall.  
 
Reactive Adaptation Strategy: An asset management strategy where public infrastructure assets are only 
adapted at the time of renewal to withstand more extreme rainfall.  
 
Proactive Adaptation Strategy: An asset management strategy where a majority of public infrastructure assets 
are adapted to withstand more extreme rainfall during the asset’s service life.  
 
 
 
 
6 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
1 | Introduction and context 
In June 2019, a Member of Provincial Parliament asked the FAO to analyze the costs that the impacts of climate 
change could impose on Ontario’s provincial and municipal infrastructure, and how those costs could affect the 
long-term budget outlook of the province. In response, the FAO launched its Costing Climate Change Impacts to 
Public Infrastructure project (CIPI). 
 
In the first phase of the project, the FAO assessed the composition and state of repair of provincial1 and 
municipal2 infrastructure, with findings released in November 2020 and August 2021.  
 
In fall 2021, as part of the second phase of the project, the FAO released three reports: a project backgrounder3 
describing the overall context and methodology of the project, a report prepared by WSP Global describing the 
detailed engineering impact of climate hazards on public infrastructure,4 and a report detailing how changes in 
extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles will impact the long-term costs of maintaining Ontario’s 
public buildings and facilities in a state of good repair.5 In September 2022, as part of the final phase, the FAO 
released a report detailing how changes in extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles will impact the 
long-term costs of maintaining Ontario’s public transportation infrastructure in a state of good repair.6  
 
This report examines the impacts of more extreme rainfall on the long-term costs of maintaining public linear 
storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair.  
 
 
 
1 See Provincial Infrastructure, 2020. 
2 See Municipal Infrastructure, 2021. 
3 See CIPI: Project Backgrounder and Methodology, 2021. 
4 See CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021. 
5 See CIPI: Buildings – Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on public 
buildings in Ontario, 2021. 
6 See CIPI: Transportation – Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on 
transportation infrastructure in Ontario, 2022. 
Figure 1-1 
CIPI project timeline 
 
Source: FAO. 
 
7 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
2 | Summary 
Ontario’s municipalities manage a large portfolio of linear storm and wastewater infrastructure  
This report examines public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure. Stormwater assets include pipes, ditches 
and culverts, while wastewater assets include sewer pipes and sanitary force mains. In total, these assets are 
valued at $124 billion (all costs are in 2020 real dollars) and are owned by Ontario’s 444 municipalities.  
The cost to maintain the existing portfolio in a state of good repair is substantial, even in a stable climate 
If the climate was stable, it would cost an average of $3.0 billion per year over the century to bring these assets 
into a state of good repair and maintain this state. These costs would accumulate to $240 billion by 2100. 
More extreme rainfall is already increasing the costs of maintaining this portfolio 
In the absence of adaptation, more extreme rainfall is expected to add a cumulative $6.2 billion to the costs of 
maintaining the portfolio of assets by 2030, a 27 per cent increase above the stable climate scenario.   
In the absence of adaptation, more extreme rainfall will increase the costs of maintaining this portfolio 
throughout the century, but the extent of the increase will depend on global climate change 
In a medium emissions scenario where global emissions peak by mid-century, more extreme rainfall would 
increase infrastructure costs by an average of $1.1 billion per year, totalling $88 billion in climate-related costs by 
2100. This is a 37 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable climate scenario. In the high emissions 
scenario, where global emissions continue rising throughout the century, infrastructure costs would instead 
increase by $1.8 billion per year on average, totalling $145 billion by 2100 (a 61 per cent increase). These 
additional climate-related costs primarily arise from the higher operations and maintenance expenses required.  
Proactively adapting linear storm and wastewater infrastructure to withstand more extreme rainfall will cost 
less than not adapting over the long term 
Proactively adapting public storm and wastewater infrastructure, either by increasing its capacity or 
incorporating source control measures (such as green infrastructure), will add between $71 billion to $127 billion 
to infrastructure costs relative to the stable climate scenario by 2100. This represents a cost increase between 
29 and 53 per cent. While significant, these additional climate-related costs are lower (in real dollars) than those 
incurred in the absence of adaptation or if adaptation was undertaken at a more gradual pace. This is due to the 
avoidance of higher climate-related operations and maintenance costs.  
Adaptation also ensures that linear storm and wastewater assets will have adequate capacity to manage 
more extreme rainfall, reducing flood risk 
As extreme rainfall becomes more frequent and intense, unadapted assets will increasingly face capacity 
constraints, raising the flood risk to surrounding areas. While outside the scope of this report, the costs of 
flooding damages are likely to be substantial. In addition to being the least expensive strategy for municipalities 
(in real dollars), a proactive adaptation strategy would also most rapidly reduce flood risk.  
Costing climate impacts to public infrastructure over the long term is subject to significant uncertainty 
Climate-related infrastructure costs will depend on the future path of global emissions, the pace of adaptation, 
and the specific capacity of storm and wastewater infrastructure to convey more extreme rainfall. The FAO’s 
study presents median cost projections as well as a range of possible cost outcomes in each scenario that 
account for this uncertainty. 
 
8 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
3 | Maintaining storm and wastewater 
infrastructure in a stable climate 
This chapter presents the scope of municipal storm and wastewater infrastructure considered in this report, 
discusses the costs necessary to maintain these assets in a state of good repair, and estimates the long-term 
infrastructure costs required to maintain this portfolio to 2100 under a stable climate. The purpose of this chapter 
is to establish a baseline projection of infrastructure costs. In later chapters, this baseline is compared to 
projections that account for changes in extreme rainfall. 
 
Ontario has a large portfolio of storm and wastewater 
infrastructure 
Stormwater infrastructure is critical in reducing flood risk by managing the impact of sudden and heavy rainfall or 
the gradual melting of snow and ice. Wastewater infrastructure plays an important role in preventing water 
pollution and protecting public health by collecting, treating and discharging waste from domestic, commercial, 
industrial and agricultural activity.7  
 
This report focuses on linear storm and wastewater infrastructure owned and controlled by Ontario’s municipal 
governments. Non-linear storm and wastewater assets, such as those related to treatment and disposal, are 
excluded from this report.8 Drinking water infrastructure, which represents 14 per cent of municipal 
infrastructure,9 is also excluded.10  
 
The linear storm and wastewater assets considered in this report include stormwater pipes, ditches and culverts, 
as well as wastewater sanitary force mains and sewer pipes.11 Throughout this report, these assets are referred 
to as “storm and wastewater infrastructure” or “storm and wastewater assets.” The following is a brief 
description of the various asset types: 
• 
Stormwater pipes collect and convey stormwater (rain and melted snow) to areas where it is then 
disposed of, such as rivers, lakes or temporary holding ponds. These pipes are buried underground, 
often under existing infrastructure, such as roadways.  
 
 
7 For details, see Stormwater and Wastewater in the Canadian Infrastructure Report Card.  
8 The CIPI buildings report included the impact of climate hazards on storm and wastewater building and facilities, such as 
treatment plants. However, only the impact of climate hazards on the building components (e.g., structure, envelope, etc.) 
were considered. Any climate-related costs required to expand capacity, such as increasing the size of treatment plants to 
manage more extreme rainfall or the impact of extreme rainfall on the machinery and equipment used to treat water, were not 
included. See CIPI: Buildings – Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles on 
public buildings in Ontario, 2021. 
9 The FAO estimates that the current replacement value of linear drinking water infrastructure in Ontario was $69 billion in 
2020. See FAO’s Municipal Infrastructure report. 
10 While drinking water infrastructure may experience climate impacts, the FAO was not able to examine all climate impacts to 
all public infrastructure asset classes. For details on the scope of infrastructure covered in the CIPI project, see CIPI: Project 
Backgrounder and Methodology, 2021. For detailed information about the assets covered in this report, see Appendix A. 
11 For details on how these assets interact, see Township of Muskoka’s Drainage Maintenance, City of Toronto’s Ditches, and 
Region of Peel’s Sewer systems. 
 
9 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
• 
Stormwater ditches are excavations in the ground made to capture, convey and remove stormwater. 
Ditches are mainly located on the sides of roads to drain stormwater from nearby road surfaces.  
• 
Stormwater culverts are small non-structural culverts less than three metres in diameter. Culverts facilitate 
drainage between ditches, stormwater pipes and other drainage outlets. Culverts are typically found under 
driveways and roadways and are required when an entrance or road crosses a drainage ditch. 
• 
Wastewater sewer pipes collect and convey wastewater to treatment facilities by gravity. These sewer 
pipes are buried underground, often under existing infrastructure, such as roadways. Many older 
municipalities have sewer systems that were built during or before the 1940s and include combined 
sewers that carry both wastewater and stormwater.  
• 
Wastewater sanitary force mains are pressurized sewer pipes that transport wastewater from a lower 
to a higher elevation. These assets are buried underground, often under existing infrastructure, such 
as roadways. 
The FAO estimates that the current replacement value12 (CRV) of these storm and wastewater assets is $124 
billion in 2022. Figure 3-1 presents the breakdown of this valuation by asset type. Stormwater assets account for 
43 per cent of the CRV, while wastewater assets account for 57 per cent. 
 
 
 
 
12 Current replacement value is the current cost of rebuilding an asset with the equivalent capacity, functionality and performance. 
Figure 3-1 
Ontario’s municipal portfolio of linear storm and wastewater infrastructure has an 
estimated Current Replacement Value of $124 billion 
  
  
Note: CRV estimates are in real 2020 billion dollars. Percentage values refer to a sector’s share of total CRV. 
Source: FAO. 
Culverts,
$8, 6%
Ditches,
$6, 5%
Pipes, 
$39, 31%
Sanitary force mains, 
$3, 3%
Sewer pipes, 
$68, 55%
Stormwater
Wastewater
 
10 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Maintaining a large portfolio of public storm and wastewater 
infrastructure requires continual spending 
Stormwater infrastructure is critical in reducing flood risks, while wastewater infrastructure plays an important 
role in preventing water pollution and protecting public health. To determine whether these critical services will 
be delivered, municipalities evaluate their infrastructure against level of service targets, one of which is keeping 
assets in a state of good repair.  
 
Keeping assets in a state of good repair helps to maximize the benefits of public infrastructure in the most cost-
effective manner over time. To be maintained in a state of good repair, assets require annual operations and 
maintenance (O&M) spending, as well as intermittent capital spending either to rehabilitate13 an asset during its 
service life or renew14 an asset at the end of its service life.  
 
The costs to maintain public storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair reflect both the value 
of assets owned, as well as their condition, age and standards to which they must perform. For example, assets 
in poorer condition require more capital spending to bring them into a state of good repair. Likewise, older assets 
must be renewed sooner than newer assets. 
 
To project the costs of maintaining public storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair, the FAO 
gathered and estimated asset-specific information on age, condition and current replacement value, as well as 
the general performance standards used to evaluate if an asset is in a state of good repair. Using an infrastructure 
deterioration model based on modelling techniques developed by the Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure,15 the FAO 
projected the capital and operating expenses necessary to maintain the current portfolio16 of public storm and 
wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair to 2100, in the absence of climate considerations.17  
 
These long-term O&M, rehabilitation and renewal spending estimates form the baseline projection against which 
the climate change costing scenarios will be compared. The baseline projection represents the infrastructure costs 
that would have been required to maintain public storm and wastewater infrastructure in a stable climate.18 This 
allows the FAO to identify the additional climate-related infrastructure costs that are associated with changing 
climate hazards in later chapters. 
 
Given the long useful service life of public storm and wastewater infrastructure, costs are projected to 2100. The 
results in this report are presented as average annual costs, as well as cumulative total costs over the century. 
Average annual costs are also presented over three time periods. 
 
 
13 Rehabilitation means repairing part or most of an asset to extend its service life, without adding to its capacity, functionality 
or performance. Rehabilitation is different from maintenance, which is the routine activities performed on an asset that 
maximize service life and minimize service disruptions. Assets are rehabilitated to a benchmarked “state of good repair” 
target and not to a new condition. For more information on the asset management framework used in this report, see CIPI: 
Project Backgrounder and Methodology, 2021. 
14 Renewal is the replacement of an existing asset, resulting in a new or as-new asset with an equivalent capacity, functionality 
and performance as the original asset. Renewal is different from rehabilitation, as renewal rebuilds the entire asset. 
15 For details, see Municipal Infrastructure, 2021. 
16 This report only examines the existing suite of linear storm and wastewater infrastructure; it excludes assets that are 
currently under construction, planned for future construction or necessary to meet future infrastructure demand. 
17 The cost estimates presented throughout this report do not incorporate new technologies or practices that may be used or 
required of asset managers in the future. 
18 In this report, a “stable climate” means that all climate indicators for extreme rainfall remain unchanged from their 1975-
2005 average levels over the projection to 2100. 
 
11 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
• 
The short term (2022-2030) shows how changing climate hazards are already impacting public 
infrastructure costs in the current decade.  
• 
The mid-century (2031-2070) captures a period in which projections for the relevant climate variables 
begin to diverge in the three global emissions scenarios examined in this report.  
• 
The late century (2071-2100) captures the period where projections for the relevant climate variables 
diverge significantly in the three global emissions scenarios. 
 
All infrastructure cost projections presented in this report assume that the funding necessary to bring the current 
portfolio of storm and wastewater infrastructure into a state of good repair, and maintain this state, is made 
available and spent in a timely manner. In practice, infrastructure repair backlogs19 exist and maintaining assets 
in a state of good repair is only one aspect of asset management.  
 
The baseline cost projection does not include spending associated with assets currently under construction, 
planned for future construction or necessary to meet future infrastructure demand.20 
 
$3 billion per year is needed to maintain the current portfolio of 
linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in a stable climate 
The FAO projects that bringing Ontario’s existing suite of linear storm and wastewater infrastructure into a state 
of good repair and maintaining it until 2100 would have cost an average of $3.0 billion per year in a stable 
climate, which would accumulate to approximately $240 billion by the end of the century. This cumulative 
baseline cost includes $98 billion ($1.2 billion per year) in O&M expense and $142 billion ($1.8 billion per year) in 
rehabilitation and renewal expense to 2100.  
 
 
 
19 For more information on the current infrastructure backlog of storm and wastewater assets, see the FAO’s Municipal 
Infrastructure report. 
20 In addition, the projection does not incorporate future functionality improvements to existing public infrastructure. 
Figure 3-2 
The cumulative cost of maintaining Ontario’s linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in 
a state of good repair to 2100 in a stable climate 
 
Note: All values presented in real 2020 dollars. 
Source: FAO.  
 
12 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
To maintain this portfolio in a stable climate, municipal governments would need to spend approximately $2.6 
billion per year over the short term. Average annual costs remain similar in the mid-century period at $2.5 billion. 
By late century, average costs rise to $3.9 billion per year when a significant share of Ontario’s linear storm and 
wastewater infrastructure will have to be replaced.21 
 
 
 
 
 
21 The FAO estimates that 87 per cent of the public storm and wastewater assets in scope have a remaining useful service life 
of 40-80 years. See Figure 5-1 for details. 
Figure 3-3 
Maintaining Ontario’s public storm and wastewater infrastructure in a stable climate would 
have cost $3.0 billion per year 
 
 
Source: FAO. 
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
$5
Short term
Mid century
Late century
2022-2100
(2022-2030)
(2031-2070)
(2071-2100)
Average
Average annual infrastructure 
spending (real $2020, billions)
 
13 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
4 | The infrastructure costs of not 
adapting to more extreme rainfall  
This chapter summarizes how projected changes in extreme rainfall would impact the costs of maintaining Ontario’s 
linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in the absence of adaptation measures. The first section provides an 
overview of how changes in extreme rainfall will impact the different asset types examined in this report. Next, the 
additional infrastructure costs of these impacts are estimated in the medium and high emissions scenarios. The 
chapter concludes with a discussion of how increases in extreme rainfall would challenge the capacity of these 
infrastructure systems, increasing the risk of flooding, and why these costs are excluded from the report. 
 
Extreme rainfall is projected to increase 
To ensure safety and reliability, infrastructure is designed, built and maintained to withstand a specific range of 
climate conditions typically based on historic climatic data.22 However, many climate hazards are projected to 
increase in the future.  
 
Climate change is associated with many hazards to public infrastructure, which can take the form of extreme 
weather events or long-term chronic impacts. Ontario has been subject to costly floods and ice storms and is 
also prone to droughts, intense rainfall, wildfires, windstorms, heatwaves and permafrost melt.23 The broader CIPI 
project focused on only three climate hazards – extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycles – as they 
were determined to have broad and financially material impacts to public infrastructure and can be projected 
with a reasonable degree of scientific confidence.24 
 
Unlike with buildings and transportation infrastructure, extreme heat or freeze-thaw cycles are not expected to 
significantly impact storm and wastewater infrastructure since many components are buried underground. 
However, extreme rainfall will have significant impact on storm and wastewater infrastructure as the frequency 
and intensity of storm events increase over the century.25 
 
The impacts of extreme rainfall on Ontario’s public storm and wastewater infrastructure will depend on the path 
of global greenhouse gas emissions and the extent of global mean temperature increases. The FAO costed 
climate impacts to public storm and wastewater infrastructure for three global emissions scenarios:  
 
22 Several Ontario regulatory agencies mandate the use of storm event statistics as a major criterion for the design of 
stormwater and wastewater systems. For example, see Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains, 2009. 
23 See Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report for more information. 
24 Numerous potentially significant climate hazards such as wildfires and fluvial flooding were not included. See CIPI: Project 
Backgrounder and Methodology, 2021 and CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021 for more information. 
25 See CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021, page 37. 
 
14 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
• 
A low emissions scenario that assumes a major and 
immediate turnaround in global climate policies. Emissions 
are projected to peak in the early 2020s and decline to 
zero by the 2080s. By the end of the century, net 
emissions are negative. In this scenario, global mean 
temperatures are projected to increase by 1.6°C (0.8 to 
2.4°C) by 2100 compared to the pre-industrial average 
(1850-1900).26 The key results for this scenario are 
presented in Appendix E. 
• 
A medium emissions scenario, where global emissions peak 
in the 2040s, then decline rapidly over the following four 
decades before stabilizing at the end of the century. In this 
scenario, the global mean temperature is projected to 
increase by 2.3°C (1.7 to 3.2°C) by 2100 relative to 1850-1900.  
• 
A high emissions scenario that assumes global emissions 
continue to grow for most of the century.27 Global mean 
temperatures are projected to increase by 4.2°C (3.2 to 5.4°C) 
relative to 1850-1900. Cumulative emissions from 2005 to 
2020 most closely match the high emissions scenario.28  
 
Figure 4-1 presents a brief description of the projected changes in some of the climate indicators used to 
represent extreme rainfall in this report. Appendix B contains a full description of all climate variables relevant to 
public storm and wastewater infrastructure, and their trends in all scenarios.  
 
 
 
 
26 See Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis, Annex II, Table “AII.7.5.” Ranges for the global mean surface 
temperature represent the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile projections of models used. 
27 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s fifth comprehensive assessment (AR5), released in 2013, 
produced four scenarios called Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs). The low emissions scenario corresponds to 
RCP2.6, the medium emissions scenario corresponds to RCP4.5 and the high emissions scenario corresponds to RCP8.5. 
See the IPCC’s Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. The IPCC’s sixth assessment (AR6), released in 2021, contains five 
updated scenarios called Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs), which line up with the RCPs from AR5 in terms of 
average warming. This means that the RCP scenarios from AR5 are still relevant. 
28 See PCIC Science Brief: Should the RCP 8.5 emissions scenario represent “business as usual”? for more information. 
Uncertainty in climate change 
projections 
The FAO partnered with the Canadian 
Centre for Climate Services at 
Environment and Climate Change 
Canada to acquire projections of key 
climate indicators for Ontario. To 
account for uncertainty in climate 
projections and in line with common 
practice in climate science, the median 
(50th percentile) projections of climate 
variables are presented, followed by 
ranges in parentheses. For Ontario 
climate indicators, the ranges indicate 
the 10th and 90th percentile projections 
from the ensemble of 24 climate 
models used by the Canadian Centre 
for Climate Services.  
15 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
Figure 4-1  
2-year and 100-year storm events to increase in Ontario
•
Compared to the 1976-2005 baseline, the intensity of the
24-hour 1-in-2-year and 1-in-100-year rainfall events is
projected to increase by 15 per cent (10 to 24 per cent) in the
low emissions scenario and by 53 per cent (38 to 78 per cent)
in the high emissions scenario by the 2071-2100 period.29
•
Over the 1976-2005 period, a 1-in-2-year rainfall event
averaged 48 mm of rain in 24 hours. By the 2071-2100
period, an average of 55 mm (53 to 59 mm) of rain is
projected in the low emissions scenario and 73 mm (66 to
86 mm) of rain in the high emissions scenario.
•
Over the 1976-2005 period, a 1-in-100-year rainfall event
averaged 103 mm of rain in 24 hours. By the 2071-2100
period, an average of 118 mm (113 to 127 mm) of rain is
projected in the low emissions scenario and 158 mm (142
to 184 mm) of rain in the high emissions scenario.
•
There is medium confidence in the projected trends and
ranges of aggregate precipitation variables based on how
well climate models represent the climate processes
involved.30
Maximum 5-day precipitation to increase in Ontario 
•
Compared to the 1976-2005 baseline, the maximum amount of
precipitation received during five consecutive days in a year is
projected to increase by 9 per cent (8 to 12 per cent) in the low
emissions scenario and by 19 per cent (13 to 20 per cent) in
the high emissions scenario by the 2071-2100 period.
•
Over the 1976-2005 period, the highest annual
precipitation over five days averaged 54 mm. By the 2071-
2100 period, an average of 59 mm (56 to 63 mm) is
projected in the low emissions scenario and 64 mm (59 to 67
mm) in the high emissions scenario.
•
Projections of maximum 5-day precipitation are associated
with high-to-medium confidence. All model projections point
to a positive trend in these variables, but the climate processes
involved are more uncertain than for temperature variables.
Source: Canadian Centre for Climate Services. 
29 For 2-year and 100-year storm events, the per cent changes for each RCP scenario are identical because the same mean 
temperature projection is used in the Clausius–Clapeyron relation to estimate the projections. See FAO’s CIPI: Project 
Backgrounder and Methodology for more information. 
30 Scientific confidence in climate projections differs by variable. In general, temperature projections have high scientific 
confidence due to a large body of evidence on the causes of observed changes and a strong understanding of the climate 
processes involved. Precipitation projections have medium scientific confidence due to uncertainty associated with a weaker 
understanding of precipitation-producing processes and how they might be affected by projected climate change. Other 
climate variables such as wind pressures and snow load have low scientific confidence due to a limited understanding of the 
climate processes involved. For more information, see Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core Public Infrastructure: An 
Assessment of the Impact Climate Change on Climatic Design Data in Canada. 
25.0
50.0
75.0
100.0
2011
-2040
2031
-2060
2051
-2080
2071
-2100
Ontario IDF 24-hour 1:2 (mm)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
50.0
100.0
150.0
200.0
2011
-2040
2031
-2060
2051
-2080
2071
-2100
Ontario IDF 24-hour 1:100 (mm)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
50.0
60.0
70.0
2011
-2040
2031
-2060
2051
-2080
2071
-2100
Ontario maximum 5-day 
precipitation (mm)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
More extreme rainfall is projected for Ontario 
 
16 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
More extreme rainfall will impact storm and wastewater 
infrastructure 
The following section outlines the key engineering impacts of increases in both acute and chronic extreme 
rainfall on linear storm and wastewater infrastructure, and how these impacts will influence the costs of 
maintaining these assets.31 The impacts of flooding to surrounding areas due to undersized storm and 
wastewater infrastructure, while out of scope for this project, are discussed at the end of the chapter. 
 
Stormwater 
Pipes 
Stormwater pipes are usually designed to address more frequent rainfall events (i.e., 2-year storm events). As 
the intensity of extreme rainfall events increases, pipes will require more frequent and costly inspections and 
preventive maintenance, as more debris, sediment and vegetation are expected to enter stormwater systems.  
Ditches  
Ditches are generally constructed with higher capacity than pipes but are vulnerable to large overflow events. In 
urban areas, major systems must be able to convey the flow resulting from acute rainfall events such as the 100-
year storm. As the intensity of extreme rainfall events increases, ditches will require more frequent clearing of 
debris, shape and slope maintenance, and vegetation pruning to convey increased amounts of stormwater.  
Small Non-Structural Culverts 
Small culverts are also vulnerable to overflow events. As the intensity of extreme rainfall events increases, these 
assets will require more frequent clearing of debris and sediments resulting from increased water flow. Channel 
protection will also be subject to accelerated erosion. 
 
Wastewater 
Sewer Pipes 
Sewer pipes allow wastewater to flow by gravity from source to treatment facility. These assets are vulnerable to 
both short duration and long duration rainfall events. Increased intensity of short duration rainfall events will 
increase the inflow of surface water into sewer pipes, while increased intensity of longer duration events will 
cause groundwater to infiltrate sewer pipes. Due to increased inflow and infiltration, pipes will require more 
frequent inspections, maintenance and clearing of debris. These impacts are likely to be more severe for older 
and combined sewer systems. 
Sanitary Force Mains 
In areas where wastewater cannot be conveyed through a gravity-reliant system, sanitary force mains force 
wastewater up to higher elevations using a pressurized system. More extreme rainfall will result in higher inflow 
and infiltration, increasing the volume of wastewater being conveyed to treatment facilities, as well as the 
pressure required to do so. The increased need for pumping results in greater friction and stress on joints, as 
well as corrosion, accelerating the deterioration of these assets.  
 
 
31 This material is drawn from CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021. 
 
17 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
More extreme rainfall is raising the cost of maintaining 
public storm and wastewater infrastructure 
In this section, the FAO presents the cost projections of a no adaptation asset management strategy. In this 
strategy, asset managers do not adapt public storm and wastewater infrastructure to withstand changing climate 
hazards, but instead pay higher costs to maintain their assets in a state of good repair in the face of increasing 
extreme rainfall. While in practice many climate change adaptation initiatives are under way (see Chapter 5), the 
intent of the no adaptation strategy is to explore the cost implications of not adapting public storm and 
wastewater infrastructure to extreme rainfall. 
 
Figure 4-2 
Examples of how more extreme rainfall will impact linear storm and wastewater 
infrastructure 
 
Note: For more examples of how these climate hazards impact water infrastructure, see CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021. 
Source: WSP. 
Stormwater – Pipe 
More frequent and costly inspections 
and preventive maintenance 
required, as more debris, sediment 
and vegetation are expected to enter 
stormwater systems.  
Stormwater – Culvert 
More frequent clearing of debris and 
sediments required due to increased 
water flow. Channel protection will also 
be subject to accelerated erosion. 
Stormwater – Ditch 
More frequent clearing of debris, 
shape and slope maintenance, and 
vegetation pruning required to convey 
increased amounts of stormwater. 
Wastewater – Sewer Pipe 
More frequent inspections, maintenance, and 
clearing of debris required due to increased inflow 
and infiltration. Impacts on older and combined 
sewer systems are likely to be more severe.   
Wastewater – Sanitary Force Main 
Higher inflow and infiltration, increasing the volume 
of wastewater being conveyed to treatment 
facilities, as well as the pressure required to do so. 
The increased need for pumping results in greater 
friction and stress on joints, as well as corrosion, 
accelerating the deterioration of these assets.  
Sanitary 
force main 
Stormwater 
pipe 
Wastewater 
sewer pipe 
Ditch 
Culvert 
 
18 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
In the absence of adaptation actions, increasing extreme rainfall will shorten the useful service life (USL) of some 
public storm and wastewater infrastructure, requiring more frequent and additional rehabilitations relative to the 
stable climate scenario. More extreme rainfall will also result in higher spending on operations and maintenance 
(O&M). Taken together, these factors will increase the costs of maintaining the current portfolio of public storm 
and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair.  
 
As extreme rainfall increases throughout the century, the existing capacity of storm and wastewater 
infrastructure will not be adequate, increasing flood risk to surrounding areas. The cost estimates presented 
below do not include the costs of flooding that could result from inadequate capacity (capacity issues are 
discussed at the end of this chapter).  
 
Projecting public storm and wastewater infrastructure costs in the no adaptation strategy 
Figure 4-3 shows the costs to maintain infrastructure in the no adaptation strategy. In the medium emissions 
scenario (median projection), more extreme rainfall will raise the average annual cost of maintaining the existing 
portfolio of public storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair by $1.1 billion per year over the 
century. This represents a 37 per cent increase in costs over what would have occurred in a stable climate. 
These average annual costs rise from $0.6 billion per year this decade, to $1.0 billion in the mid-century period, 
and $1.4 billion in the late century as rainfall becomes more extreme.  
 
 
 
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), more extreme rainfall would instead raise average annual 
infrastructure costs by $1.8 billion per year over the century, a 61 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable 
climate scenario. In this case, climate-related costs increase from $0.7 billion this decade, to an average of $1.4 
billion in the mid-century period, rising to $2.8 billion by late century.  
 
The larger costs in the high emissions scenario occur because rainfall is projected to become more extreme 
throughout the century. In contrast, the pace of change in extreme rainfall slows by mid-century in the medium 
emissions scenario (see Figure 4-1). 
 
Figure 4-3 
Changing climate hazards will raise the cost of maintaining the current portfolio of public 
storm and wastewater infrastructure in the absence of adaptation  
 
 
Note: Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purposes. 
Source: FAO.  
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$0.6
$1.0
$1.4
$1.1
$0.7
$1.4
$2.8
$1.8
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
$5
$6
$7
$8
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
Average annual infrastructure spending
(real $2020, billions)
Stable Climate
No adaptation strategy, additional climate-related costs
Medium emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
High emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
 
19 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
There is uncertainty in the extent of warming 
that will occur in each emissions scenario 
(see Figure 4-1), as well as engineering 
uncertainty in how more extreme rainfall will 
impact Ontario’s storm and wastewater 
infrastructure (see Appendix C). The full 
range of average annual climate-related 
costs is presented in Figure 4-4.  
 
These average annual costs would 
accumulate over the projection. In the short 
term (2022-2030), annual climate-related 
costs from more extreme rainfall average 
$0.7 billion across the medium and high 
emissions scenarios, which would 
accumulate to approximately $6.2 billion by 
2030 in the absence of adaptation.32 This is 
a 27 per cent increase in municipal 
infrastructure costs relative to the stable 
climate projection.  
 
 
Figure 4-5 presents the cumulative spending 
required to maintain infrastructure over the 
projection. In the medium emissions 
scenario (median projection), the cumulative 
cost of maintaining the existing portfolio of 
public storm and wastewater infrastructure 
in a state of good repair will increase by $88 
billion over the century. This represents a 
37 per cent increase in costs over what 
would have occurred in a stable climate. 
These cumulative costs could range from 
$45 billion to $166 billion given the climate 
and engineering uncertainties. 
  
In the high emissions scenario (median 
projection), the cumulative cost would 
instead increase by $145 billion (a 61 per 
cent increase), with a range of $78 billion to 
$258 billion. 
 
 
32 The $6.2 billion in cumulative climate-related costs by 2030 is the average of the medium and high emissions scenarios’ 
median projections. This cost could range from $3 billion to $11 billion given the climate and engineering uncertainties. 
Figure 4-5 
In the absence of adaptation, climate-related costs 
accumulate to significant sums by 2100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: FAO. 
Figure 4-4 
Uncertainty ranges around annual climate-related 
costs widen over time  
 
Note: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The 
coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes in each 
emissions scenario.  
Source: FAO. 
$0.6
$1.0
$1.4
$0.7
$1.4
$2.8
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
$5
$6
2022-2030
2031-2070
2071-2100
Average annual climate-related 
costs
(real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
$240
$240
$88
$145
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
$500
Medium emissions
scenario
High emissions
scenario
Cumulative spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
No adaptation strategy,
additional climate-related costs
Stable Climate
$45
$258
$166
$78
20 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
33 Municipalities have many types of metrics for assessing services for storm and wastewater infrastructure, including the 
proportion of assets in a state of good repair, the share of houses connected to the sewer network, the number of main line 
backups, the number of sewer odour investigations, the number of combined sewer overflow events, among others. For more 
examples of level of service requirements for both wastewater and stormwater infrastructure, see the asset management 
plans of City of Hamilton (pages 131-132), City of London (page 111) and Region of Peel (pages 129-130).  
34 See Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains, 2021, pages 88 and 100. 
35 See CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021 for more information. 
36 See Canada inundated by severe weather in 2013: Insurance companies pay out record-breaking $3.2 billion to 
policyholders for more information. 
37 See Toronto Flood Causes over $80 Million in Insured Damage for more information. 
38 See page 7 of the City of Windsor’s Degrees of Change: Climate Change Adaptation Plan for more information. 
39 Other public health impacts can include drowning, hypothermia, or electrocution from damaged wiring. See Climate 
Change and Public Health Factsheets for more information. 
More extreme rainfall is also increasing the risk of flooding 
Many municipalities assess flood risk by determining if their infrastructure has sufficient (or excess) capacity to 
accommodate major storm events,33 based on municipal design guidelines that often rely on historical storm 
events. However, future rainfall intensities are expected to surpass design standards in some cases, which could 
lead to more frequent flooding events. These flooding events would occur even if the storm and wastewater 
systems remain in a state of good repair because future extreme rainfall could exceed existing design capacities. 
For example, the City of Toronto’s ditches and underground storm water systems are designed to accommodate 
runoff from 2-year storm events with an estimated 24-hour intensity of 44 mm.34 Projections from the Canadian 
Centre for Climate Services for extreme rainfall in the Toronto region indicate that this figure could rise to 51 mm 
(49 to 53 mm) over the 2021-2050 period in the low emissions scenario, and up to 67 mm (61 to 75 mm) over 
the 2071-2100 period in the high emissions scenario. 
All asset types examined in this report will be vulnerable to capacity issues as extreme rainfall increases over time, 
increasing flood risk to surrounding areas.35 In the past, flooding events have caused extensive property damage.  
•
In 2013, flash flooding in Toronto resulted in $940 million in damages.36
•
In 2018, a thunderstorm in Toronto that produced 51 mm of rain in one hour resulted in over $80 million
in insured damages.37
•
Extreme rainfall in the Windsor region in both 2016 and 2017 led to significant flooding, resulting in $232
million of insured damages.38
While these events have not been directly linked to climate change, they demonstrate how flooding events can 
cause significant property damage to Ontario households and businesses.  
Flooding can also result in water pollution as floodwaters mix with agricultural waste, chemicals or raw sewage 
and contaminate drinking water as well as cause other public health concerns.39  
The CIPI project focuses on estimating how changing climate hazards will impact the cost of maintaining existing 
linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair. This scope does not include the costs of 
flooding to households or businesses when this infrastructure fails to adequately convey stormwater. However, 
these costs are likely to be significant and as such, are an area for further research that could greatly benefit the 
public interest. 
 
21 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4-6 
Insufficient capacity of storm and wastewater infrastructure can result in flooding and 
property damage 
 
Source: FAO. 
Sanitary 
force main 
Stormwater 
pipe 
Wastewater 
sewer pipe 
Ditch 
Culvert 
Basement flooding, 
backups, overflows 
Water ponding 
Insufficient capacity in stormwater and 
wastewater systems 
 
22 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
5 | The costs of adapting linear storm 
and wastewater infrastructure  
Chapter 4 projected how more extreme rainfall would impact the costs of maintaining Ontario’s storm and 
wastewater infrastructure in the absence of adaptation measures. The chapter also described how inadequate 
capacity of storm and wastewater infrastructure can impair its ability to convey water, causing more frequent 
flooding. In practice, storm and wastewater infrastructure can be adapted to withstand these impacts and avoid 
accelerated deterioration and higher O&M expenses from more extreme rainfall. Adaptation can also ensure that 
these assets will have adequate capacity to manage increasing extreme rainfall, reducing flood risk to 
surrounding areas. 
 
This chapter defines the scope of adaptation analyzed in this report and estimates a range of costs to adapt 
Ontario’s portfolio of public storm and wastewater infrastructure to withstand late-century climate projections for 
extreme rainfall in the medium and high emissions scenarios.  
 
Adapting public storm and wastewater infrastructure can 
help prevent the impacts of more extreme rainfall  
Ontario’s linear storm and wastewater 
infrastructure assets have long useful lives, 
as shown in Figure 5-1. Of the $124 billion 
in infrastructure, 13 per cent has a 
remaining useful life of 0-40 years, while 87 
per cent of assets have a remaining useful 
life of 40-80 years. Given the long useful 
lives of public storm and wastewater 
infrastructure, late-century climate 
conditions are relevant to adaptation 
decisions being made now, which will 
impact public infrastructure costs 
throughout the century.  
 
However, climate projections depend on 
the trajectory of global emissions, which 
remains uncertain. This raises the challenge 
of how projected changes in key climate 
hazards should be accounted for when 
linear storm and wastewater infrastructure 
is designed, built or rehabilitated.40 
 
 
 
 
40 See Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens for a general guidance on different factors to consider when making 
adaptation decisions.  
Figure 5-1 
Ontario’s linear storm and wastewater infrastructure 
assets have long remaining useful service lives 
 
Source: FAO.  
1
12
48
39
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0-20 years
20-40 years
40-60 years
60-80 years
Share of stormwater and wastewater 
assets by CRV (per cent)
Remaining useful service life
 
23 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Adapting linear storm and wastewater infrastructure to withstand more extreme rainfall could take many forms. A 
few examples include:  
• 
addressing gaps in standards and best practices for stormwater and wastewater management, such as 
defining and incorporating a consistent level of service across provincial and municipal design guidelines;41  
• 
changing the way assets are managed, for example, altering the frequency of operations and 
maintenance schedules or improving the monitoring and maintenance of drainage systems;42   
• 
managing stormwater in urban areas through low-impact development, such as the use of permeable 
pavement and green infrastructure, which helps to soak rainwater into the ground and reduce the runoff 
volume managed through conventional stormwater systems;43 
• 
planting urban forests that help retain stormwater;44 
• 
enabling municipalities to plan and implement robust systems for surface drainage of settlement areas;45 
• 
separating drainage and sanitary systems to reduce the flow of stormwater into wastewater systems;46 and 
• 
improving flood plain mapping of areas at risk of flooding that could support the development of flood 
control bylaws.47  
 
Figure 5-2 presents some examples of adaptation measures for storm and wastewater infrastructure components 
included in the FAO’s modelling framework. These adaptations would prevent accelerated deterioration and 
higher O&M costs caused by more extreme rainfall, as well as increase the capacity of this infrastructure and 
reduce flood risk.48 
 
 
 
 
41 See Developing a Stormwater Quality Management Standard (QMS) in Light of a Changing Climate for more information. 
42 For example, see Asset Management BC’s Climate Change and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer. 
43 See Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues for more information. 
44 Ibid. 
45 For examples of municipal planning, see Developing a Stormwater Quality Management Standard (QMS) in Light of a 
Changing Climate, 2018, Table 2 and Appendix 9.2. 
46 See Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation for more information. 
47 For example, see Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues, Box 2.5. 
48 For a full description of adaptation examples, see CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021. 
 
24 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5-2 
Examples of adaptations to extreme rainfall for linear storm and wastewater infrastructure 
 
Note: For more examples of how linear storm and wastewater infrastructure components can be adapted to climate hazards, see 
CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021. 
Source: WSP. 
Stormwater – Pipe 
Upsize to larger pipes/twinned pipes, 
and/or incorporate source control 
measures and green infrastructure 
solutions to reduce and slow down 
stormwater. 
Sanitary 
force main 
Stormwater pipe 
Wastewater 
sewer pipe 
Ditch 
Culvert 
Stormwater – Ditch 
Dig out ditches and reinforce 
using concrete or geotextiles. 
Stormwater – Culvert 
Upsize using a combination 
of larger pipes, twinned 
pipes and/or incorporate 
source control measures. 
Wastewater – Sanitary Force Main 
Upsize to larger pipes and increase the 
capacity of force mains, as inflows 
from the gravity system could increase 
loads downstream. 
Wastewater – Sewer Pipe  
Upsize to a larger pipe and/or 
incorporate source control measures 
such as green infrastructure to help 
control the infiltration of stormwater 
flow into gravity sewer. 
 
25 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Adaptation strategy costs vary based on the approach taken 
To estimate adaptation costs, the FAO assumed that public storm and wastewater infrastructure assets are 
adapted to accommodate late-century projections49 for extreme rainfall. Once adapted, the FAO assumes that 
the asset no longer faces additional O&M and capital expenses due to more extreme rainfall. Adaptation also 
ensures storm and wastewater assets will have adequate capacity to manage more extreme rainfall, reducing 
flood risk in surrounding areas. 
 
The additional infrastructure costs of an adaptation strategy include higher capital expenses from increased 
deterioration and higher O&M expenses until adaptation (but no costs associated with flooding in surrounding 
areas), and a one-time adaptation expense. After an asset is adapted, it no longer experiences accelerated 
deterioration and higher O&M costs due to more extreme rainfall. The costs presented in this chapter would 
occur instead of those estimated in the no adaptation strategy presented in Chapter 4. 
 
The costs of an adaptation strategy would vary based on when the adaptation actions are undertaken. To 
highlight how these costs could vary, the FAO developed two adaptation strategies.  
• 
Reactive adaptation strategy: Storm and wastewater assets are only adapted at the time of renewal. 
This approach results in a gradual increase in the share of adapted assets over the century, with only about 
10 per cent of assets adapted by 2050 and 43 per cent adapted by 2070. By 2100, all assets are adapted.  
• 
Proactive adaptation strategy: Storm and wastewater assets are adapted at the first available 
opportunity. This occurs either during an asset’s next major rehabilitation (where instead of rehabilitating 
the asset, it is replaced with a new adapted asset) or at renewal, whichever comes first. In this approach, 
33 per cent of storm and wastewater assets are adapted by 2030 and all assets are adapted by 2070.  
 
 
 
49 The 2080s are selected to approximate the changes in climate in the latter half of the 21st century. The decadal adaptation 
costs are presented in Appendix C. However, in practice, assets can be adapted to the projected climate over the service life of 
individual assets.  
Figure 5-3 
The proactive adaptation strategy has a faster pace of adaptation over the century 
 
Note: The results presented are based on the average results for the median (or 50th percentile) projection in the medium and 
high emissions scenarios. Uncertainty bands are omitted from this figure for presentation purposes.  
Source: FAO.  
10
43
33
100
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2022
2028
2034
2040
2046
2052
2058
2064
2070
2076
2082
2088
2094
2100
Proportion of adapted linear storm 
and wastewater infrastructre by CRV
(per cent)
Reactive adaptation
Proactive adaptation
 
26 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
The pace of adaptation of storm and wastewater infrastructure in the two strategies will also impact flood risk in 
surrounding areas. The gradual pace of adaptation in the reactive adaptation strategy means that a large 
proportion of infrastructure will remain unadapted for a longer period, with only 43 per cent of assets adapted by 
2070, leaving a significant exposure to flood risk.  
 
In contrast, the faster pace of adaptation in the proactive adaptation strategy lowers flood risk more rapidly as a 
larger share of the assets in the portfolio are adapted much sooner. By 2030, one-third of the portfolio is adapted 
to late-century projections of extreme rainfall, while by 2050 that share rises to over 70 per cent. By 2070, the 
entire portfolio is adapted to the impacts of more extreme rainfall. While adapting the entire portfolio of storm and 
wastewater infrastructure will not eliminate flood risk entirely, rapid adaptation will lower flood risk sooner than in 
the reactive strategy.  
 
 
Projecting public storm and wastewater infrastructure costs in the reactive adaptation 
strategy  
In the reactive adaptation strategy, storm and wastewater assets are adapted at the time of renewal, resulting in 
a gradual pace of adaptation that leaves flood risks largely unaddressed throughout most of the century (see 
Figure 5-3).   
 
Figure 5-4 shows the average annual climate-related costs in the reactive adaptation strategy. In the medium 
emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would increase by $1.1 billion per 
year over the century. This represents a 37 per cent increase in costs over what would have occurred in a stable 
climate. These average annual costs rise from $0.9 billion per year this decade, to $1.1 billion in the mid-century 
period, and to $1.2 billion per year in the late century as the pace of adaptation increases. 
 
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would instead increase 
by $1.9 billion per year over the century, a 62 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable climate scenario. In 
this scenario, climate-related costs increase from $1.3 billion this decade, to an average of $1.7 billion in the mid-
century period, then increasing to $2.3 billion in the late century.  
 
Costs in the high emissions scenario are larger than in the medium emissions scenario as more extreme rainfall 
accelerates deterioration and raises the O&M costs of non-adapted assets. Adaptation costs are also higher 
relative to the medium emissions scenario due to the higher design standards required to withstand the high 
emissions scenario. 
 
27 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
Given the uncertain extent of warming that will 
occur in each emissions scenario, as well as the 
engineering uncertainty in costing the array of 
adaptation options, the full range of climate-
related costs is presented in Figure 5-5.  
These average annual costs will accumulate 
over the remainder of this century. The FAO 
projects that climate-related costs would 
accumulate to approximately $8 billion by 2030 
in the medium emissions scenario (a 34 per 
cent increase in municipal infrastructure costs 
relative to the stable climate projection). In the 
high emissions scenario, these additional costs 
accumulate to approximately $11 billion by 
2030 (a 48 per cent increase, as adapting 
assets to withstand more extreme rainfall in 
high emissions scenario is more expensive).50  
50 These costs could range from $4 billion to $15 billion in the medium emissions scenario and from $6 billion to $19 billion in 
the high emissions scenario given the climate and engineering uncertainties. 
Figure 5-4 
Adaptation will raise storm and wastewater infrastructure costs, but more so in the high 
emissions scenario  
Note: Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purposes. 
Source: FAO.  
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$0.9
$1.1
$1.2
$1.1
$1.3
$1.7
$2.3
$1.9
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
$5
$6
$7
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
Average annual infrastructure spending
(real $2020, billions)
Stable Climate
Reactive adaptation strategy, additional climate-related costs
Medium emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
High emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
Figure 5-5 
Climate-related costs in the reactive adaptation 
strategy are subject to climate and engineering 
uncertainty 
Note: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The 
coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes in each 
emissions scenario.  
Source: FAO. 
$0.9
$1.1
$1.2
$1.3
$1.7
$2.3
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
2022-2030
2031-2070
2071-2100
Average annual climate-related costs
(real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
 
28 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure 5-6 shows the cumulative 
infrastructure costs under both emissions 
scenarios. Maintaining the existing portfolio 
of public storm and wastewater infrastructure 
in a state of good repair and expanding its 
capacity in the reactive adaptation strategy 
will increase cumulative infrastructure costs 
by $89 billion over the century in the 
medium emissions scenario (median 
projection). This represents a 37 per cent 
increase in costs over what would have 
occurred in a stable climate. These 
cumulative costs could range from $49 billion 
to $164 billion given the climate and 
engineering uncertainties. 
 
In the high emissions scenario (median 
projection), cumulative infrastructure costs 
would instead increase by $148 billion (a 62 
per cent increase), with a range of $89 billion 
to $256 billion. 
 
Projecting public storm and wastewater infrastructure costs in the proactive 
adaptation strategy  
In the proactive adaptation strategy, storm and wastewater assets are adapted at the first available opportunity. 
This occurs either during an asset’s next major rehabilitation when it is replaced with a new adapted asset 
instead of being rehabilitated, or at renewal, whichever comes first. In this approach, 33 per cent of storm and 
wastewater assets are adapted by 2030 and all assets are adapted by 2070. Under this strategy, flood risk is 
more rapidly reduced compared to the gradual pace of adaptation in the reactive adaptation strategy.  
 
Figure 5-7 shows the average annual climate-related costs in the proactive adaptation strategy. In the medium 
emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would increase by $0.9 billion per year 
over the century. This represents a 29 per cent increase in costs over what would have occurred in a stable climate. 
In the high emissions scenario (median projection), average annual infrastructure costs would instead increase by 
$1.6 billion per year over the century, a 53 per cent increase in costs relative to the stable climate scenario.  
 
In a stable climate, a large share of Ontario’s storm and wastewater system would have been replaced in the late 
century period. In the proactive adaptation strategy, a significant share of storm and wastewater infrastructure is 
renewed and adapted well before the end of its service life. This would significantly raise infrastructure costs in 
the short term and mid-century period relative to the stable climate scenario. This also means that fewer 
renewals would occur in the late century period compared to the stable climate scenario, lowering infrastructure 
costs in this period.51  
 
 
51 However, these cost savings would be temporary. If assets are replaced before the end of their useful life in this century, it 
will also bring forward renewals in the 22nd century. 
Figure 5-6 
Cumulative climate-related costs in the reactive 
adaptation strategy to 2100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: FAO. 
$240
$240
$89
$148
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
$500
Medium emissions
scenario
High emissions
scenario
Cumulative spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
Reactive adaptation strategy,
additional climate-related costs
Stable Climate
$89
$256
$164
$49
 
29 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
Given the uncertain extent of warming that will occur in 
each emissions scenario, as well as the engineering 
uncertainty in costing the array of adaptation options, 
the full range of annual climate-related costs is 
presented in Figure 5-8.  
 
These projected annual costs will accumulate over the 
remainder of this century. The FAO projects that these 
climate-related costs would accumulate to 
approximately $31 billion by 2030 in the medium 
emissions scenario (a 130 per cent increase in 
municipal infrastructure costs relative to the stable 
climate projection). In the high emissions scenario, 
these costs would accumulate to approximately $40 
billion by 2030 (a 170 per cent increase, as adapting 
assets to withstand more extreme rainfall in the high 
emissions scenario is more expensive).52  
 
 
52 These costs could range from $25 billion to $41 billion in the medium emissions scenario and from $31 billion to $56 billion 
in the high emissions scenario given the climate and engineering uncertainties. 
Figure 5-7 
Proactive adaptation significantly raises infrastructure costs in the short term, and lowers 
costs over the long term  
  
 
Note: Uncertainty ranges are omitted from this chart for presentation purposes.  
Source: FAO. 
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$2.6
$2.5
$3.9
$3.0
$3.4
$2.0
-$1.3
$0.9
$4.4
$2.8
-$0.8
$1.6
-$2
-$1
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
$5
$6
$7
$8
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
2022-2030 2031-2070 2071-2100 2022-2100
Average annual infrastructure spending
(real $2020, billions)
Stable Climate
Proactive adaptation strategy, additional climate-related costs
Medium emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
High emissions scenario 
(Median projection)
Figure 5-8 
Climate-related costs are subject to 
climate and engineering uncertainty
 
Note: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) 
projection. The coloured bands represent the range of 
possible outcomes in each emissions scenario. 
Source: FAO. 
$4.4
$2.8
-$0.8
$3.4
$2.0
-$1.3
-$2
-$1
$0
$1
$2
$3
$4
$5
$6
$7
2022-2030
2031-2070
2071-2100
Average annual climate-related costs
(real $2020, billions)
High emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
 
30 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure 5-9 shows the cumulative 
infrastructure costs under both emissions 
scenarios. Over the projection, maintaining 
the existing portfolio of public storm and 
wastewater infrastructure in a state of good 
repair and expanding its capacity in the 
proactive adaptation strategy will increase 
cumulative infrastructure costs by $71 
billion over the century in the medium 
emissions scenario (median projection). 
This represents a 29 per cent increase in 
costs over what would have occurred in a 
stable climate. These cumulative costs 
could range from $41 billion to $127 billion 
given the climate and engineering 
uncertainties. 
 
In the high emissions scenario (median 
projection), the cumulative cost would 
instead increase by $127 billion (a 53 per 
cent increase), with a range of $79 billion 
to $217 billion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5-9 
Cumulative climate-related costs in the proactive 
adaptation strategy to 2100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Source: FAO. 
$240
$240
$71
$127
$0
$100
$200
$300
$400
$500
Medium emissions 
scenario
High emissions 
scenario
Cumulative spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
Proactive adaptation strategy,
additional climate-related costs
Stable Climate
$217
$79
$41
$127
 
31 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
6 | Comparing the costs of different 
asset management strategies 
 
Chapters 4 and 5 examined the costs of maintaining public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state 
of good repair in the presence of climate change under three asset management strategies: no adaptation, 
reactive adaptation and proactive adaptation. These strategies were designed to estimate the scale of the impact 
that changes in extreme rainfall will impose on municipal infrastructure budgets over the rest of the century.53  
 
This chapter first discusses the scope of the costs analyzed across the three asset management strategies. Next, 
cost estimates across the strategies are compared and the implications of each strategy for reducing flood risks 
are considered. The chapter then presents the cost profiles of each strategy over the projection. The chapter 
concludes by discussing the factors that were beyond the scope of the FAO’s analysis but are relevant in 
determining the most cost-effective strategy for managing specific assets.  
 
The FAO’s analysis focuses on the costs of maintaining 
municipal linear storm and wastewater infrastructure  
This report estimates the impact of increasing extreme rainfall on the costs to municipal governments to keep 
their linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in a state of good repair, either through maintaining unadapted 
infrastructure or adapting the assets. The report does not attempt a full cost-benefit analysis and does not 
estimate the costs that could result from undersized storm and wastewater infrastructure, such as flooding costs 
borne by households or businesses. These costs were beyond the project’s scope but are likely substantial and 
relevant to adaptation decisions.   
 
For example, if extreme rainfall inundates an undersized culvert during a storm and the surrounding area floods, 
this analysis includes the cost of removing the debris that accumulated in the culvert, as well as any repairs 
required, but does not include the costs to repair the flood damages sustained by households and businesses in 
the surrounding area. However, the adaptation strategies do include the adaptation costs of installing a new 
larger culvert, which expands its capacity and reduces flood risk in the surrounding area (see Figure 6-1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 None of the strategies presented in this report are meant to precisely represent future costs, and portfolio-level costing 
results are not intended to inform asset-specific management decisions. 
 
32 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6-1 
The costs of maintaining linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in a changing climate were 
included, but the impacts of inadequate capacity on households and businesses were not 
  
 
Source: FAO.  
 
33 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Proactive adaptation will lower flood risks and climate-
related costs compared to not adapting  
As extreme rainfall becomes more frequent and intense, unadapted assets will increasingly face capacity 
constraints, heightening flood risk in surrounding areas. Adaptation ensures that storm and wastewater assets 
will have adequate capacity to manage future projections of extreme rainfall, reducing flood risk. The faster 
assets are adapted, the faster flood risk is reduced.  
 
Figure 6-2 shows how the share of unadapted public storm and wastewater assets changes over the projection 
for the three asset management strategies.  
 
The proactive adaptation strategy reduces flood risk faster than the other asset management strategies, as the 
portfolio of storm and wastewater assets are adapted at a faster pace. In this strategy, the share of unadapted 
assets quickly declines over the projection, falling to 68 per cent by 2030, to 27 per cent by 2050 and to zero by 
2070.54 While the reactive strategy eventually sees the share of unadapted assets fall to zero, this happens at a 
much slower pace since the majority of assets remain unadapted for most of the projection. In the no adaptation 
strategy, flood risk is the largest, as no assets are adapted over the projection.55 
 
 
 
54 Adapting the entire portfolio of storm and wastewater assets does not eliminate flood risk entirely. However, since 
adaptation ensures that assets can manage the increased volume of rainfall, adapted infrastructure assets are expected to 
significantly lower the flood risk in surrounding areas compared to unadapted assets.  
55 The magnitude of flood risk of unadapted assets also increases over the projection as extreme rainfall becomes more 
frequent and intense. For instance, in the high emissions scenario, flood risk will be greater in 2080 than in 2050, since rainfall 
is expected to become more extreme later in the century. 
Figure 6-2 
Proactively adapting Ontario’s linear storm and wastewater infrastructure reduces flood risk at 
the fastest pace 
 
 
Note: The results presented are based on the average results for the median (or 50th percentile) projection in the medium and 
high emissions scenarios. The uncertainty bands are omitted from this figure for presentation purpose.  
Source: FAO. 
100
100
100
68
0
90
57
0
0
25
50
75
100
2022
2028
2034
2040
2046
2052
2058
2064
2070
2076
2082
2088
2094
2100
Share of unadapted assets by CRV 
(per cent)
No adaptation
Proactive adaptation
Reactive adaptation
 
34 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Apart from lowering the flood risk to the largest extent, proactively adapting infrastructure is the least costly 
strategy for municipalities (in real dollars),56 as highlighted in Figure 6-3. In the no adaptation strategy, no assets 
are adapted and thus incur higher climate-related infrastructure costs over the entire projection. Similarly, the 
gradual pace of adaptation in the reactive approach exposes a large share of assets to higher climate-related 
infrastructure costs over most of the projection, while also incurring the costs of adaptation. In contrast, the rapid 
pace of adaptation in the proactive strategy avoids much of the higher climate-related operations and 
maintenance costs.  
 
When comparing cumulative costs in the three strategies, note that if the costs of flooding borne by households 
and business were incorporated, cumulative costs in the no adaptation strategy would rise significantly, while 
those in the proactive adaptation strategy would rise the least. 
 
Regardless of which asset management strategy is pursued, the future path of global climate change will be a 
key determinant in the extent of additional climate-related infrastructure costs. Costs are lower in the medium 
emissions scenario than in the high emissions scenario (median projections) across all asset management 
strategies. 
 
 
 
56 For a discussion of these cost profiles on a discounted basis, see Appendix D. 
Figure 6-3 
Proactively adapting Ontario’s public storm and wastewater infrastructure will cost 
municipalities less than not adapting over the long term, and lowers flood risk more rapidly 
 
Note: The costs presented are based on the median (or 50th percentile) projection in each emissions scenario. The costs 
presented in this chart are in addition to the baseline costs over the same period. The uncertainty bands are omitted from this 
figure for presentation purposes.  
Source: FAO. 
$88 
$145 
$89 
$148 
$71 
$127 
$0
$20
$40
$60
$80
$100
$120
$140
$160
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Cumulative climate-related 
infrastructure spending by 2100
(real $2020, billions)
No adaptation
Reactive adaptation
Proactive adaptation
Flooding costs to households and businesses are not included.
Flood risk is highest in no adaptation and lowest in proactive adaptation.
 
35 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Proactively adapting linear storm and wastewater 
infrastructure would require significant upfront costs  
Figure 6-4 shows how costs accumulate in the medium and high emissions scenarios under the three asset 
management strategies.  
 
 
 
In the first half of the century, the cost profiles of the no adaptation strategy and the reactive adaptation strategy 
are similar, as assets in both incur higher costs from more extreme rainfall. In the second half of the century, 
these two cost profiles start to diverge as the spending necessary to adapt storm and wastewater infrastructure 
to extreme rainfall raises the cost of the reactive adaptation strategy slightly above the no adaptation strategy.  
 
In contrast, under the proactive adaptation strategy, assets are adapted at a rapid pace largely through early 
renewals. This strategy sees a substantial accumulation in costs over the next four decades. However, late- 
century costs decrease as adapted assets avoid higher climate-related operating and capital costs, and fewer 
future renewals are required.  
 
While the proactive adaptation strategy is the least expensive in real 2020 dollars over the projection, the 
strategy requires significant upfront costs. By 2030, additional climate-related costs amount to $31 billion in the 
medium emissions scenario and $40 billion in the high emissions scenario, an average of $3 and $4 billion 
annually over the nine-year period. This would be a substantial increase in infrastructure spending for 
municipalities, which have spent an average of $11 billion per year on capital assets across all types of 
infrastructure (including storm and wastewater assets) over the 2009-2019 period.57 
 
57 Average spending is calculated based on additions and betterments spending across all functional areas of assets 
managed by Ontario’s municipalities as reported in Financial Information Return (FIR) data from 2009 to 2019.  
Figure 6-4 
Proactive adaptation has much higher upfront costs  
  
 
Note: The costs presented are based on the median (or 50th percentile) projection in each emissions scenario. The costs 
presented in this chart are in addition to the baseline costs over the same period. The uncertainty bands are omitted from this 
figure for presentation purposes.  
Source: FAO. 
$6
$88
$8
$89
$31
$71
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
Cumulative climate-related
infrastructure spending
(real $2020, billions)
Medium emissions scenario
No adaptation
Reactive adaptation
Proactive adaptation
$7
$145
$11
$148
$40
$127
High emissions scenario
 
36 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Making asset-specific adaptation decisions should consider 
many other factors 
Costing three different asset management strategies at the portfolio level was designed to estimate the scale of 
the budgetary impact that changes in extreme rainfall could impose over the rest of the century. However, to 
make asset-specific climate adaptation decisions, many other factors should be considered,58 including: 
• 
an asset’s individual characteristics (including age, condition and specific climate vulnerabilities);  
• 
a wider array of climate impacts (such as fluvial flooding and permafrost degradation) over the entire 
useful life of an asset;  
• 
costs to households and businesses, including the costs of flooding and the costs of service disruptions 
as construction occurs; and 
• 
other non-asset related considerations.59  
Incorporating these factors would further enhance the FAO’s methodology and would better support adaptation 
decision-making for individual assets in a changing climate. 
 
 
 
 
 
58 Several decision-making tools can be used to assist climate change adaptation decisions that capture both financial and 
economic costs and benefits of adaptation. See Chapter 7: Economics of Adaptation and Assessing the Costs and Benefits of 
Adaptation Options: An Overview of Approaches for details on different decision tools, Climate-Resilient Infrastructure for a 
general discussion on costs and benefits of adaptation, and Climate Lens for a general guidance on adaptation decisions.  
59 For example, if a section of road is being replaced (or adapted), this may impact the decision of whether to adapt a section 
of stormwater pipe. Flooding may also put additional financial burden on governments beyond the cost of maintaining the 
storm and wastewater infrastructure, as emergency funding needs to be allocated to support flood-affected areas. 
 
37 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
7 | Appendices 
Appendix A : Scope of storm and wastewater sector assets  
 
Table A-1: Linear storm and wastewater infrastructure valued at $124 billion (current replacement value) included in the 
scope of this report 
Level of 
Government 
Sector 
Total CRV  
(2020$ 
billions) 
Description 
Municipal 
 
Stormwater 
$52.8 
• 
40,368 kilometres of stormwater pipes valued at $38.8 
billion 
• 
8,967 kilometres of stormwater culverts valued at $7.5 
billion 
• 
76,423 kilometres of open ditches valued at $6.5 billion 
• 
More than one-fifth (22.9 per cent) of Ontario’s 
stormwater linear engineering infrastructure was built 
between 1970 and 1999, while 9.3 per cent was built 
between 1940 and 1969 
Wastewater 
$71.1 
• 
44,802 kilometres of sewer pipes of small (less than 450 
mm), medium (450 to 1500 mm), large (more than1500 
mm) and unknown diameter valued at $67.9 billion 
• 
2,334 kilometres of sanitary force mains valued at $3.2 
billion 
• 
A large share (42.8 per cent) of Ontario’s wastewater 
linear engineering infrastructure was constructed 
between 1970 and 1999, while one-fifth (19.7 per cent) 
was built between 1940 and 1969 
Note: The age data presented are as of 2020.  
Source: FAO analysis of municipal data as detailed in FAO’s Municipal Infrastructure report. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Appendix B : Scope of climate variables used in costing analysis 
The Canadian Centre for Climate Services provided the projections of all climate indicators used in the FAO’s 
costing analysis. Depending on the nature of the hazard’s interaction with specific storm and wastewater infrastructure 
components, different climate indicators were used. See WSP’s report for a full description and rationale.60 
 
Table B-1: Projected change in relevant climate variables from 1976-2005 to 2071-2100, Ontario average61 
Climate Hazard 
Variable 
Definition 
Low Emissions 
(RCP2.6) 
Medium Emissions 
(RCP4.5) 
High 
Emissions 
(RCP8.5) 
Extreme Rainfall 
 
IDF 24-hour 1:2 
Short duration rainfall 
intensity for a 24-hour 1-in-2-
year event 
+15 per cent 
(+10 to 24  
per cent) 
+25 per cent 
(+16 to 39  
per cent) 
+53 per cent 
(+38 to 78  
per cent) 
IDF 24-hour 
1:100 
Short duration rainfall 
intensity for a 24-hour 1-in-
100-year event 
+15 per cent 
(+10 to 24  
per cent) 
+25 per cent 
(+16 to 39  
per cent) 
+53 per cent 
(+38 to 78  
per cent) 
Maximum 5-day 
precipitation 
Maximum amount of 
precipitation within a year 
received during five 
consecutive days 
+9 per cent 
(+8 to 12 per 
cent) 
+11 per cent 
(+9 to 14  
per cent) 
+19 per cent 
(+13 to 20  
per cent) 
Gravity sewer 
index62 
0.5 * per cent change in IDF 
24-hour 1-in-2-year event + 
0.5 * per cent change in 
maximum 5-day precipitation 
+12 per cent 
(+9 to 18  
per cent) 
+18 per cent 
(+13 to 27  
per cent) 
+36 per cent 
(+25 to +49  
per cent) 
Note: Numbers are rounded. Median (50th percentile) projections of climate variables are presented, followed by ranges in 
parentheses. Ranges show the 10th and 90th percentile projections.  
Source: Canadian Centre for Climate Services. 
 
The full suite of climate data used in the CIPI project is available on the FAO’s website at https://www.fao-
on.org/en/cipi.   
 
 
 
60 See CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021. 
61 For IDF variables, the per cent changes for each RCP scenario are identical because the same mean temperature 
projection is used in the Clausius–Clapeyron relation to estimate the projections. See CIPI: Project Backgrounder and 
Methodology, 2021 for more information. 
62 The gravity sewer index captures the impact of extreme rainfall on gravity sewers from higher rainfall intensity (2-year 
storm events) and increased infiltration (maximum 5-day precipitation). See CIPI: WSP Engineering Report, 2021, page 17. 
 
39 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Appendix C : The impact of extreme rainfall on linear storm 
and wastewater infrastructure  
This appendix presents the impact of extreme rainfall on the key infrastructure costs for stormwater culverts, 
stormwater ditches, stormwater pipes, wastewater force mains and wastewater sewer pipes. The appendix 
presents the total impact of extreme rainfall on operations and maintenance (O&M) spending and useful service 
life (where applicable) in the absence of adaptation, as well as the costs of adapting this infrastructure to prevent 
these climate-related impacts.  
 
To establish relationships between relevant climate indicators and key infrastructure costs, the FAO worked with 
WSP, a large engineering firm with expertise in all aspects of public sector infrastructure, including asset 
management, public infrastructure construction and operations, and climate change impacts.  
 
At the start of the CIPI project, the FAO and WSP established which climate hazards within the project’s scope 
(extreme heat, extreme rainfall and freeze-thaw cycles) could have the most significant impact on each asset 
type. As each hazard would interact with each asset type in a different way, it was agreed that WSP would focus 
attention on the “interactions” that could present the greatest financial impact to asset managers.  
 
WSP then estimated relationships between changing extreme rainfall variables and infrastructure costs by 
surveying the relevant engineering experts. To account for engineering uncertainty, WSP aggregated its responses 
and provided optimistic, pessimistic and most-likely cost relationships.63 This forms the basis on which the FAO 
estimated the additional costs of climate hazards to linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario.64  
 
While regional climate projections were used to develop the FAO’s infrastructure cost estimates, for simplicity 
this appendix presents Ontario-average infrastructure cost results by asset type. The results reflect a weighted 
average climate projection based on the proportion of assets (by CRV) located in each region.65 The figures 
below provide three estimates for each infrastructure cost impact in the medium and high emissions scenarios: 
• 
The solid lines represent the most likely infrastructure cost impact for the 50th percentile climate 
projection.  
• 
The upper limit of the uncertainty bands represents the pessimistic infrastructure cost impact for the 90th 
percentile climate projection. 
• 
The lower limit of the uncertainty bands represents the optimistic infrastructure cost impacts of the 10th 
percentile climate projection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 Some of these cost relationships were subsequently revised to align with the professional judgement of external reviewers.  
64 See CIPI: Project Backgrounder and Methodology, 2021 for more information. 
65 Most of Ontario’s public infrastructure is located in the southern regions. The weighted-average results presented in 
Appendix C largely reflect the climate projections for those regions.  
 
40 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure C-1: Stormwater culverts – Impact of extreme rainfall 
In Absence of Adaptation 
 
Useful Service Life 
 
• 
 No meaningful impact on asset’s USL. 
Operations & Maintenance 
 
  
• 
O&M spending as a share of CRV of stormwater 
culverts is projected to rise due to increases in 
extreme rainfall. 
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, O&M spending is 
projected to increase by 1.0 percentage point of CRV 
by the end of the century. In the high emissions 
scenario, O&M spending is projected to increase by 2.5 
percentage points of CRV by the end of the century. 
• 
For a culvert with a CRV of $1 million,* the annual 
O&M spending in a “stable climate” is estimated to 
be $10,000 (1 per cent of CRV) per year. However, 
by 2100, the annual O&M spending is projected to be 
approximately $20,000 in the medium emissions 
scenario and $35,000 in the high emissions scenario 
(in real 2020 dollars).  
Adaptation Costs** 
 
  
 
• 
The cost of adapting an average stormwater culvert 
to withstand extreme rainfall increases will vary with 
the extent of these increases.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of adapting 
is projected to be 35 per cent of CRV by 2100. In the 
high emissions scenario, the cost of adapting is 
projected to be 85 per cent of CRV by 2100. 
• 
If a culvert has an original CRV of $1 million, adapting 
this asset to the projected climate condition in 2100 
will cost approximately $350,000 in the medium 
emissions scenario and $850,000 in the high 
emissions scenario (in real 2020 dollars) in addition 
to the original $1M replacement cost.  
* The CRVs presented in the examples are not meant to represent actual unit costs of these assets. 
** The unit cost of adapting storm and wastewater assets is the same in both the proactive and reactive adaptation strategies. 
Source: FAO.  
 
 
 
1.0
2.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in O&M from projected changes 
in extreme rainfall (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
35
85
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Adaptation cost as a share of CRV 
(per cent)
 
41 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure C-2: Stormwater ditches – Impact of extreme rainfall 
In Absence of Adaptation 
 
Useful Service Life 
 
• 
 No meaningful impact on asset’s USL. 
Operations & Maintenance 
  
• 
Increases in extreme rainfall are projected to raise 
O&M spending (as a share of CRV) of stormwater 
ditches in Ontario in both emissions scenarios.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, O&M spending is 
projected to increase by 1.0 percentage point of CRV 
by the end of the century. In the high emissions 
scenario, O&M spending is projected to increase by 2.5 
percentage points of CRV by the end of the century. 
• 
For a length of ditch with a CRV of $1 million,* the 
annual O&M spending in “stable climate” is estimated 
to be $10,000 (1 per cent of CRV) per year. However, 
by 2100, the annual O&M spending is projected to be 
approximately $20,000 in the medium emissions 
scenario and $35,000 in the high emissions scenario (in 
real 2020 dollars). 
Adaptation Costs** 
 
  
 
• 
The cost of adapting the average stormwater ditch to 
withstand extreme rainfall increases will vary with the 
extent of these increases.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of adapting 
is projected to be 31 per cent of CRV by 2100. In the 
high emissions scenario, the cost of adapting is 
projected to be 74 per cent of CRV by 2100. 
• 
If a length of ditch has a CRV of $1 million, adapting 
this asset to the projected climate condition in 2100 will 
cost approximately $310,000 in the medium emissions 
scenario and $740,000 in the high emissions scenario 
(in real 2020 dollars) in addition to the original $1M 
replacement cost. 
* The CRVs presented in the examples are not meant to represent actual unit costs of these assets. 
** The unit cost of adapting storm and wastewater assets is the same in both the proactive and reactive adaptation strategies. 
Source: FAO.  
 
 
1.0
2.5
0
1
2
3
4
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in O&M from projected changes 
in extreme rainfall (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
31
74
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Adaptation cost as a share of CRV 
(per cent)
 
42 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure C-3: Stormwater pipes – Impact of extreme rainfall 
In Absence of Adaptation 
 
Useful Service Life 
 
• 
 No meaningful impact on asset’s USL. 
Operations & Maintenance 
  
• 
Trends in extreme rainfall are projected to increase 
O&M spending (as a share of CRV) of stormwater pipes 
in Ontario in both emissions scenarios.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, O&M spending is 
projected to increase by 2.1 percentage points of CRV 
by the end of the century. In the high emissions 
scenario, O&M spending is projected to increase by 5.1 
percentage points of CRV by the end of the century. 
• 
For a length of pipe with a CRV of $1 million,* the 
annual O&M spending in a “stable climate” is estimated 
to be $10,000 (1 per cent of CRV) per year. However, 
by 2100, the annual O&M spending is projected to be 
approximately $31,000 in the medium emissions 
scenario and $61,000 in the high emissions scenario (in 
real 2020 dollars). 
Adaptation Costs** 
 
  
 
• 
The cost of adapting the average stormwater pipe to 
withstand future trends in extreme rainfall will vary with 
the extent of these increases.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of adapting 
the average stormwater pipe is projected to be 31 per 
cent of CRV by 2100. In the high emissions scenario, 
the cost of adapting the average stormwater pipe is 
projected to be 75 per cent of CRV by 2100. 
• 
If a length of pipe has a CRV of $1 million, adapting the 
asset to the projected climate condition in 2100 will 
cost approximately $310,000 in the medium emissions 
scenario and $750,000 in the high emissions scenario 
(in real 2020 dollars) in addition to the original $1M 
replacement cost. 
* The CRVs presented in the examples are not meant to represent actual unit costs of these assets. 
** The unit cost of adapting storm and wastewater assets is the same in both the proactive and reactive adaptation strategies. 
Source: FAO.  
 
 
 
 
2.1
5.1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in O&M from projected changes 
in extreme rainfall (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
31
75
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Adaptation cost as a share of CRV 
(per cent)
 
43 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure C-4: Wastewater sanitary force mains – Impact of extreme rainfall 
In Absence of Adaptation 
 
Useful Service Life 
 
• 
Trends in extreme rainfall are projected to reduce the 
USL of sanitary force mains in Ontario in both 
emissions scenarios. 
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, the USL is projected to 
decline by 6 per cent by the end of the century. In the 
high emissions scenario, the USL is projected to decline 
by 14 per cent by the end of the century. 
• 
For a sanitary force main with a USL of 128 years, the 
USL by 2100 will be reduced to 121 years in the 
medium emissions scenario and to 110 years in the 
high emissions scenario. 
Operations & Maintenance 
 
 
• 
Increases in extreme rainfall are projected to raise O&M 
spending (as a share of CRV) in both emissions scenarios.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, O&M spending is 
projected to increase by 1.0 percentage point of CRV 
by the end of the century. In the high emissions 
scenario, O&M spending is projected to increase by 2.5 
percentage points by the end of the century. 
• 
For a sanitary force main with a CRV of $1 million,* the 
annual O&M spending in a “stable climate” is estimated 
to be $10,000 (1 per cent of CRV). However, by 2100, 
annual O&M spending is projected to be approximately 
$20,000 in the medium emissions scenario and $35,000 
in the high emissions scenario (in real 2020 dollars). 
Adaptation Costs** 
 
  
 
• 
The cost of adapting the average sanitary force main to 
withstand the increases in extreme rainfall will vary with 
the extent of these increases.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of adapting 
an average sanitary force main is projected to be 27 
per cent of CRV by 2100. In the high emissions 
scenario, the cost of adapting an average asset is 
projected to be 65 per cent of CRV by 2100. 
• 
For a sanitary force main with a CRV of $1 million, 
adapting the asset to the projected climate condition in 
2100 will cost approximately $270,000 in the medium 
emissions scenario and $650,000 in the high emissions 
scenario (in real 2020 dollars) in addition to the original 
$1M replacement cost. 
* The CRVs presented in the examples are not meant to represent actual unit costs of these assets. 
** The unit cost of adapting storm and wastewater assets is the same in both the proactive and reactive adaptation strategies. 
Source: FAO.  
 
-6
-14
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in USL from projected 
changes in extreme rainfall
(per cent)
1.0
2.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in O&M from projected 
changes in extreme rainfall
(per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
27
65
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2020s 2040s 2060s 2080s 2100s
Adaptation cost as a share of CRV (per 
cent)
 
44 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Figure C-5: Wastewater sewer pipes – Impact of extreme rainfall 
In Absence of Adaptation 
 
Useful Service Life 
 
• 
 No meaningful impact on asset’s USL. 
Operations & Maintenance 
  
• 
Increases in extreme rainfall are projected to raise 
O&M spending (as a share of CRV) of wastewater 
sewer pipes in Ontario in both emissions scenarios.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, O&M spending is 
projected to increase by 0.6 percentage point of CRV 
by the end of the century. In the high emissions 
scenario, O&M spending is projected to increase by 1.6 
percentage points by the end of the century. 
• 
For a sewer pipe with a CRV of $1 million,* the annual 
O&M spending in a “stable climate” is estimated to be 
$10,000 (1 per cent of CRV) per year. However, by 
2100, annual O&M spending is projected to be 
approximately $15,000 in the medium emissions 
scenario and $25,000 in the high emissions scenario (in 
real 2020 dollars). 
Adaptation Costs** 
 
  
 
• 
The cost of adapting the average wastewater sewer 
pipe to withstand the increases in extreme rainfall will 
vary with the extent of these increases.  
• 
In the medium emissions scenario, the cost of adapting 
an average sewer pipe is projected to be 18 per cent of 
CRV by 2100. In the high emissions scenario, the cost 
of adapting an average asset is projected to be 49 per 
cent of CRV by 2100. 
• 
For a length of sewer pipe with a CRV of $1 million, 
adapting the asset to the projected climate condition in 
2100s will cost approximately $180,000 in the medium 
emissions scenario and $490,000 in the high emissions 
scenario (in real 2020 dollars) in addition to the original 
$1M replacement cost. 
* The CRVs presented in the examples are not meant to represent actual unit costs of these assets. 
** The unit cost of adapting storm and wastewater assets is the same in both the proactive and reactive adaptation strategies. 
Source: FAO.  
 
 
 
0.6
1.6
0
1
2
3
4
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Change in O&M from projected changes in 
extreme rainfall (per cent)
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
18
49
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2020s
2040s
2060s
2080s
2100s
Adaptation cost as a share of CRV 
(per cent)
 
45 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Appendix D : Comparing the present value costs of different 
asset management strategies 
Each asset management strategy has a different cost profile over time (see Chapter 6). The proactive adaptation 
strategy sees higher costs earlier in the century, while the no adaptation and reactive adaptation strategies see 
costs rise significantly in the latter part of the century. When evaluating alternative long-term financial decisions 
where the timing of costs varies, a standard approach is to discount real costs into present value dollars using a 
real discount rate. When discounted, costs incurred further in the future carry less weight relative to costs 
incurred sooner.  
 
This appendix presents how the choice of discount rates impacts the present value of the costs of the three asset 
management strategies presented in the report. The discounted costs only highlight the implications of choosing 
different discount rates and should not be interpreted as a comprehensive cost-benefit analysis.  
 
Evaluating the financial implications of asset-specific adaptation decisions should consider a wider range of 
societal costs and asset-specific factors that were beyond the scope of this analysis. The discounted results 
presented below should be viewed in consideration of the following limitations: 
• 
The adaptation costs include the costs needed to upgrade the capacity of storm and wastewater 
infrastructure to mitigate the risks of flooding damage. However, the costs of flooding damage to 
households, businesses and government as well as the broader costs of impaired level of service were 
excluded from the analysis.  
• 
The comparison only includes the impacts of extreme rainfall and excludes other hazards (such as 
permafrost degradation).  
• 
The results reflect the median projections for the medium and high emissions projections, but exclude 
the other possible outcomes as estimated by the climate and engineering uncertainties presented 
throughout the report. 
• 
While this appendix presents a range of discount rates, the appropriate discount rate for evaluating long-
term financial decisions about climate change is subject to significant debate.66 In a paper surveying over 
200 experts, recommended discount rates ranged from zero to 10 per cent, with a median value of 2.3 
per cent. Despite the wide range of recommended rates, over 90 per cent of respondents indicated they 
were comfortable with a rate between one and three per cent.67  
Figure D-1 shows how the choice of a discount rate impacts the present value of the total cost estimates for the 
median climate projections.  
 
66 For more discussion on discounting, see Costs and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation: National Issues 
Report. 
67 For more information, see Discounting Disentangled. 
 
46 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure D-1 
The present value cost of each asset management strategy under different discount rates  
 
Note: The costs presented use the median (50th percentile) climate projections and “most likely” engineering costs. 
Source: FAO. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0.0% 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 6.0% 7.0%
Additional cumulative cost to maintain public 
linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in a 
state of good repair, 2022-2100
($2020, billions present value)
Discount rate
Medium emissions scenario
No Adaptation
Reactive Adaptation
Proactive Adaptation
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0.0% 1.0% 2.0% 3.0% 4.0% 5.0% 6.0% 7.0%
Discount rate
High emissions scenario
 
47 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Appendix E : Costing results in the low emissions scenario 
While the report focused on the medium and high emissions scenarios, Appendix E presents the costing results 
of the three adaptation strategies for all emissions scenarios. The additional climate-related costs in each 
emissions scenario are presented as cumulative summations over the century. 
 
In the low emissions scenario, a major and immediate turnaround in global climate policies is assumed. 
Emissions are projected to peak in the early 2020s and decline to zero by the 2080s, limiting the rise in global 
mean temperatures to 1.6°C (0.8 to 2.4°C) by 2100 compared to the pre-industrial average.68 Even in the low 
emissions scenario, changes in extreme rainfall will still have material financial impacts, and would raise the costs 
of maintaining Ontario’s public storm and wastewater infrastructure assets by $61 billion (26 per cent above 
baseline) to 2100 in the absence of adaptation (median projection). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 See Annex II: Climate System Scenario Tables, Table “All.7.5.” Ranges for the global mean surface temperature represent 
the 5th percentile to the 95th percentile projections of models used. 
Figure E-1 
More extreme rainfall will raise the cost of maintaining the current portfolio of public 
stormwater and wastewater infrastructure by $61 billion in the low emissions scenario in the 
absence of adaptation  
 
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes 
in each emissions scenario. The costs presented in this chart are in addition to the projected baseline costs over the same period.  
Source: WSP and FAO.  
+$61 billion
(+26%)
+$88 billion
(+37%)
+$145 billion
(+61%)
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
2022
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Additional cumulative cost to maintain public 
stormwater and wastewater infrastructure
in a state of good repair
(undiscounted real $2020, billions)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
 
48 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
  
 
 
Figure E-2 
A reactive adaptation strategy, where assets are adapted when renewed at the end of their 
service life to withstand the impacts of more extreme rainfall, will add $62 billion in 
infrastructure costs over the century in the low emissions scenario 
 
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes 
in each emissions scenario. The costs presented in this chart are in addition to the projected baseline costs over the same period.  
Source: WSP and FAO. 
+$62 billion
(+26%)
+$89 billion
(+37%)
+$148 billion
(+62%)
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
2022
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Additional cumulative cost to maintain 
public stormwater and wastewater 
infrastructure in a state of good repair
(undiscounted real $2020, billions)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
Figure E-3 
A proactive adaptation strategy, where assets are adapted at the earliest opportunity to 
withstand the impacts of more extreme rainfall, will add $47 billion in infrastructure costs 
over the century in the low emissions scenario 
 
Notes: The solid line is the median (or 50th percentile) projection. The coloured bands represent the range of possible outcomes 
in each emissions scenario. The costs presented in this chart are in addition to the projected baseline costs over the same period.  
Source: WSP and FAO.  
+$47 billion
(+20%)
+$71 billion
(+29%)
+$127 billion
(+53%)
$0
$50
$100
$150
$200
$250
$300
2022
2030
2040
2050
2060
2070
2080
2090
2100
Additional cumulative cost to maintain 
public stormwater and wastewater 
infrastructure in a state of good repair
(undiscounted real $2020, billions)
Low emissions scenario
Medium emissions scenario
High emissions scenario
49 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
Appendix F : Breakdown of cumulative costs under different 
adaptation strategy by asset categories   
Table F-1: Stormwater 
Cumulative Additional Costs (2022-2100) 
Emissions 
Scenario 
Estimate 
Base 
No Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Reactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Proactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Medium 
Low 
$97 
 
$21 
$23 
$26 
(22%) 
(24%) 
(27%) 
Median 
$57 
$51 
$46 
(59%) 
(53%) 
(47%) 
High 
$103 
$92 
$77 
(107%) 
(95%) 
(80%) 
High 
Low 
$38 
$43 
$47 
(40%) 
(44%) 
(49%) 
Median 
$95 
$84 
$77 
(98%) 
(86%) 
(80%) 
High 
$160 
$140 
$126 
(165%) 
(145%) 
(130%) 
Table F-2: Wastewater 
Cumulative Additional Costs (2022-2100) 
Emissions 
Scenario 
Estimate 
Base 
No Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Reactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Proactive 
Adaptation 
($ Billions) 
Medium 
Low 
$143 
 
$23 
$26 
$15 
(16%) 
(18%) 
(10%) 
Median 
$31 
$38 
$25 
(22%) 
(27%) 
(17%) 
High 
$63 
$72 
$50 
(44%) 
(51%) 
(35%) 
High 
Low 
$39 
$46 
$31 
(27%) 
(32%) 
(22%) 
Median 
$50 
$64 
$50 
(35%) 
(45%) 
(35%) 
High 
$98 
$115 
$91 
(68%) 
(81%) 
(64%) 
Source: FAO. 
 
50 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 | References 
8 | References 
 
 
51 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Asset Management BC. (n.d.). Climate Change and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer. 
Retrieved from https://www.assetmanagementbc.ca/wp-content/uploads/The-BC-Framework_Primer-on-
Climate-Change-and-Asset-Management.pdf  
Boyd , R., & Markandya, A. (2021). Cost and Benefits of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation: National Issues 
Report. Government of Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved from 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/nrcan/files/GNBC/Chapter%206_Costs%20and%20Benefits%20of%20Clim
ate%20Change%20Impacts%20and%20Adaptation_Final_EN.pdf  
Canadian Infrastructure. (2019). Wastewater Collection and Treatment – The Canadian Infrastructure Report 
Card. Retrieved from http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/en/waste-water.html  
Canadian Infrastructure. (2019). Stormwater Management – The Canadian Infrastructure Report Card. Retrieved 
from http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/en/storm-water.html  
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices. (2022). Under Water: The Costs of Climate Change for Canada’s 
Infrastructure. Retrieved from https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Infrastructure-
English-FINAL-jan17-2022.pdf  
Cannon, A. J., Jeong, D. I., Zhang, X., & Zwiers, F. W. (2020). Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core Public 
Infrastructure: An Assessment of the Impact of Climate Change on Climatic Design Data in Canada. 
Government of Canada, Environment and Climate Change Canada, Gatineau. Retrieved from 
https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2021/eccc/En4-415-2020-eng.pdf  
City of London. (2019). Corporate Asset Management Plan. London. Retrieved from 
https://london.ca/sites/default/files/2020-10/AMP%20-%20Interactive%20Format-
%20all%20sections_2019-08-27_AODAv4.2%20%281%29.pdf  
City of Toronto. (2009). Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains. Toronto. Retrieved from 
https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/9753-ecs-specs-dcm-
Toronto_Sewer_and_Watermain_Manual_March2014.pdf  
City of Toronto. (2014). Staff Report: Impacts from the December 2013 Extreme Winter Strom Event on the City 
of Toronto. Retrieved from https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2013/ex/bgrd/backgroundfile-61502.pdf  
City of Toronto. (2021). Design Criteria for Sewers and Watermains. Toronto. Retrieved from 
https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/8d16-ecs-specs-dcm-design-criteria-sewers-
watermains-Jan2021.pdf  
City of Toronto. (n.d.). Ditches. Retrieved from https://www.toronto.ca/services-payments/streets-parking-
transportation/road-
maintenance/ditches/#:~:text=Ditches%20are%20linear%2C%20sodded%20excavations,corridors%2C%
20residential%20and%20industrial%20areas  
City of Toronto. (n.d.). The Sewers on the Street. Retrieved from https://www.toronto.ca/services-
payments/water-environment/managing-rain-melted-snow/what-is-stormwater-where-does-it-go/the-
sewers-on-the-street/  
City of Windsor. (2020). Degrees of Change: Climate Change Adaptation Plan. Retrieved from 
https://icleicanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/S-20_2020-Climate-Change-Adaptation-Plan-FINAL-
Feb-19-2020.pdf  
Drupp, M. A., Freeman, M. C., Groom, B., & Nesje, F. (2015). Discounting Disentangled. University of Leeds and 
London School of Economics and Political Science, Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy 
and the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and Environment. Retrieved from 
https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Working-Paper-172-Drupp-et-al.pdf  
Engineers Canada. (2018). Developing a Stormwater Quality Management Standard (QMS) in Light of Climate 
Change. Toronto. Retrieved from https://www.scc.ca/en/system/files/publications/SCC_RPT_SW-
QMS_EN.pdf  
 
52 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. (2020). Investing in Canada’s Future: The Cost of Climate Adaptation at 
the Local Level. Retrieved from http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Disaster/The-Cost-of-Climate-Adaptation-
Report-EN.pdf  
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario. (2020). Provincial Infrastructure. Retrieved from https://fao-
on.org/en/Blog/Publications/provincial-infrastructure-2020  
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario. (2021). Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: 
Project Backgrounder and Methodology. Toronto. Retrieved from https://fao-
on.org/en/Blog/Publications/cipi-backgrounder  
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario. (2021). Municipal Infrastructure. Toronto. Retrieved from https://fao-
on.org/en/Blog/Publications/municipal-infrastructure-2021  
Financial Accountability Office of Ontario. (2021). Costing Climate Change Impacts to Public Infrastructure: 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall, extreme heat and freeze-thaw cycle on public 
buildings in Ontario. Toronto. Retrieved from https://fao-on.org/en/Blog/Publications/cipi-buildings  
Financial Information Return. (n.d.). Provincial Summary. Retrieved October 28, 2022, from 
https://efis.fma.csc.gov.on.ca/fir/index.php/en/open-data/provincial-summary/  
Gaur, A., Gaur, A., Yamazaki, D., & Simonovic, S. P. (2019). Flooding related consequences of climate change on 
Canadian cities and flow regulation infrastructure. Water, 11(1), 63. Retrieved from 
https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/11/1/63/htm  
Globe Staff. (2021). Are B.C.’s flood defences holding? What you need to know about forecasts, road closings 
and more. The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/british-
columbia/article-bc-fears-new-floods-as-storms-return-heres-what-you-need-to-know-about/#transport  
Government of Canada. (2021, February 1). Climate Change and Public Health Factsheets. Retrieved from 
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/health-promotion/environmental-public-health-climate-
change/climate-change-public-health-factsheets-floods.html  
Green Analytics Corp. and Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources. (2015). The Economic 
Impacts of the Weather Effects of Climate Change on Communities. Retrieved from 
http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Studies/IBC-The-Economic-Impacts.pdf  
Hamilton. (2022). Waterworks Asset Management Plan. Hamilton. Retrieved from 
https://www.hamilton.ca/sites/default/files/2022-09/waterworks-asset-management-plan.pdf  
Infrastructure Canada. (2019). Climate Lens. Government of Canada. Retrieved from 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/other-autre/cl-occ-eng.html#3  
Insurance Bureau of Canada. (2018, September 7). Toronto Flood Causes Over $80 Million in Insured Damage. 
Toronto. Retrieved from http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/toronto-flood-
causes-over-80-million-in-insured-damage  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2013). Annex II: Climate System Scenario Tables. In Climate 
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Retrieved from 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2017/09/WG1AR5_AnnexII_FINAL.pdf  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Geneva. 
Retrieved from https://ar5-syr.ipcc.ch/ipcc/ipcc/resources/pdf/IPCC_SynthesisReport.pdf  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2021). Summary for Policymakers. In Climate Change 2021: The 
Physical Science Basis. Retrieved from 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGI_SPM.pdf  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Chapter 17: Economics of Adaptation. In Climate Change 
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Retrieved from 
https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/WGIIAR5-Chap17_FINAL.pdf  
 
53 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
International Institute of Sustainable Development. (2021). Advancing the Climate Resilience of Canadian 
Infrastructure: A review of literature to inform the way forward. Retrieved from 
https://www.iisd.org/system/files/2021-07/climate-resilience-canadian-infrastructure-en.pdf  
Lu, D., Tighe, S. L., & Xie, W. C. (2018). Impact of flood hazards on pavement performance. International Journal 
of Pavement Engineering. Retrieved from 
https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Donghui_Lu/publication/327144278_Impact_of_flood_hazards_on_p
avement_performance/links/5b9fb74592851ca9ed11a06c/Impact-of-flood-hazards-on-pavement-
performance.pdf  
Nicholson, M. (2021). Hundreds of thousands of farm animals die in B.C. floods: The agricultural region of Sumas 
Prairie, near Vancouver, is one of the hardest hit flood zones. Financial Post. Retrieved from 
https://financialpost.com/commodities/agriculture/farm-animals-died-by-the-hundreds-of-thousands-in-
canada-floods  
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer. (2016). Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events. Ottawa. Retrieved from https://qsarchive-
archiveqs.pbo-dpb.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf  
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (2018). Climate-resilient Infrastructure. 
Retrieved from https://www.oecd.org/environment/cc/policy-perspectives-climate-resilient-
infrastructure.pdf  
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium. (2021). PCIC Science Brief: Should the RCP 8.5 emissions scenario 
represent “business as usual?”. Victoria. Retrieved from 
https://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Science_Brief_39-June_2021-final.pdf  
Region of Peel. (2022). Enterprise Asset Management Plan. Retrieved from 
https://www.peelregion.ca/finance/_media/2021-enterprise-asset-management-plan.pdf  
Region of Peel. (n.d.). Sewer Systems. Retrieved from https://www.peelregion.ca/water/your-home/sewer-systems.asp  
Township of Muskoka Lakes. (2019). Drainage Maintenance. Retrieved from 
https://www.muskokalakes.ca/en/residents/drainage-maintenance.aspx#Bridges-Culverts  
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). (2021). Buildings and Climate Change Adaptation: A Call to 
Action. Retrieved from https://globalabc.org/resources/publications/buildings-and-climate-change-
adaptation-call-action  
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. (2011). Assessing the Costs and Benefits of 
Adaptation Options. Retrieved from 
https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/publications/pub_nwp_costs_benefits_adaptation.pdf  
Warren, F. J., & Lemmen, D. S. (2014). Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation. Government of Canada, Natural Resources Canada, Ottawa. Retrieved from 
https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/earthsciences/pdf/assess/2014/pdf/Full-Report_Eng.pdf  
Warren, F., & Lulham, N. (2021). Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues. Government of Canada, Ottawa. 
Retrieved from https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/nrcan/files/pdf/National_Issues_Report_Final_EN.pdf  
WSP. (2021). Costing climate change impacts and adaptation for provincial and municipal public infrastructure in 
Ontario, Deliverable #10 – Final Report. Toronto. Retrieved from https://fao-on.org/web/default/files/publications/CIPI-
wsp/cipi-wsp-report.pdf    
 
 
54 
 
Assessing the financial impacts of extreme rainfall on public linear storm and wastewater infrastructure in Ontario 
 
Costing Climate Change Impacts to Water Infrastructure 
 
 
 
fao-on.org 
