Managing Flooding and Erosion at the 
Watershed-Scale: Guidance to Support 
Governments Using Nature-Based Solutions
S TA N D A R D S  R E S E A R C H
April 2023
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
2
csagroup.org
Authors
Joanna Eyquem, PGeo. ENV SP. CWEM. CEnv. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo
Project Advisory Panel
Antoine Verville, Metropolitan Community of Quebec, Quebec 
Christine Zimmer, Credit Valley Conservation, Ontario 
Darwin Durnie, Darwin Durnie Consulting Corporation
Enda Murphy, National Research Council Canada
Michelle Tetreault, Public Works Management Corp., Alberta 
Ralph Schielen, Rijkswaterstaat, Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management, The Netherlands
Rehana Rajabali, Toronto and Region Conservation Authority, Ontario 
Steve Litke, Fraser Basin Council, British Columbia
Kenneth Clogg-Wright, CSA Group (Project Manager)
Ana-Maria Tomlinson, CSA Group
Dragica Jeremic Nikolic, CSA Group
Helene Vaillancourt, CSA Group 
Acknowledgments
CSA Group and the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation wish to thank the stakeholders below for their active 
participation in the focus groups, their contributions to the research, and their guidance. 
Thomas Bergeron, AECOM Canada
Sally-Beth Betts, Credit Valley Conservation
Ursule Boyer-Villemaire, Ouranos Ind
Thomas Bowers, (formerly) Greenbelt Foundation
Rachel Clarke, ACAP Cape Breton
Guillaume Durand, Ministère des Affaires municipales et de l'Habitation, Quebec
Sean Ferguson, National Research Council Canada
Rosemarie Ferjuc, Red Deer River Watershed Alliance
Raelene Fewer, Helping Nature Heal
Mark Hartley, Nottawasaga Valley Conservation Authority
Steve Hounsell, Ontario Biodiversity Council
Jillian Hudgins, City of Fredericton
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
3
csagroup.org
Fabien Hugue, AECOM Canada
Zahra Jandaghian, National Research Council Canada
Sean Lee, City of Fredericton
Bernard McDonell, Government of British Columbia
Michelle Molnar, Municipal Natural Assets Initiative
Alistair Ozon, City of Charlottetown
Shelley Petrie, Greenbelt Foundation
Ted Preister, Red River Basin Commission
Ashley Rawluk, International Institute for Sustainable Development
Pablo Rodriguez, Government of Saskatchewan
Lynne Roszell, Saskatchewan Association of Watersheds
Namrata Shrestha, Toronto and Region Conservation Authority
Barbara Veale, Conservation Halton
Joshua Wiebe, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Disclaimer
This work has been produced by Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation and is owned by Canadian Standards Association. It is 
designed to provide general information in regards to the subject matter covered. The views expressed in this publication are 
those of the author. Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation and Canadian Standards Association are not responsible for any loss 
or damage which might occur as a result of your reliance or use of the content in this publication.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
4
csagroup.org
Table of Contents
Executive Summary	
6
1 Introduction	
9
	
1.1	 Background	
9
	
1.2	 Aim and Objectives	
10
	
1.3	 Scope	
10
	
1.4	 Intended Audience	
11
2 Methods	
	
11
	
2.1	 Desktop Research and Analysis	
11
	
2.2	Stakeholder Engagement	
11
3 Review of Current Understanding and Practices	
12
	
3.1	 Recent NbS Research: Key Findings for Decision Makers	
12
	
3.2	Review of Watershed Management in Canadian Provinces	
12
	
	
3.2.1	
Watersheds in Canada	
12
	
	
3.2.2	 British Columbia	
14
	
	
3.2.3	 Alberta	
15
	
	
3.2.4	 Saskatchewan	
16
	
	
3.2.5	 Manitoba	
16
	
	
3.2.6	 Ontario	
18
	
	
3.2.7	 Quebec	
18
	
	
3.2.8	 New Brunswick	
19
	
	
3.2.9	 Nova Scotia	
19
	
	
3.2.10	 Prince Edward Island (PEI)	
20
	
	
3.2.11	 Key Findings	
20
	
3.3 Analysis of Federally Funded Flood and Erosion Risk Management Projects	
21
	
	
3.3.1 	 The National Disaster Mitigation Program (NDMP)	
21
	
	
3.3.2	 Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund	
26
	
	
3.3.3	 Key Findings	
30

MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
5
csagroup.org
4 Good Practices and Opportunities for Improvement	
32
	
4.1 Towards a Watershed Approach for NbS	
32
	
	
4.1.1 Perceptions of Watershed Management	
32
	
	
4.1.2 Current Implementation of NbS for Flood and Erosion Management	
33
	
	
4.1.3 Lessons Learned Working at the Watershed-Scale	
34
	
	
4.1.4  Recommendations to Better Integrate NbS and Flood and Erosion 
Management at a Watershed-Scale	
35
	
4.2 Including NbS Benefits in Options Appraisal	
36
	
	
4.2.1 Current Options Appraisal Approaches and Tools	
36
	
	
4.2.2 Accounting for NbS Benefits in Options Appraisal	
37
	
	
4.2.3 Support for Standardization of Option Appraisal	
37
5 Conclusions and Recommendations	
38
	
5.1	 Three Key Conclusions	
38
	
5.2	Recommended Actions for Governments	
38
	
5.3	Recommendations for Guidance and Standardization	
40
6 References	
41
Appendix A: Focus Group Structure	
51
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
6
csagroup.org
Executive Summary
Flooding and erosion are natural river processes that have been, and continue to be, modified by human activity. 
Risks result where flooding and erosion present a danger to public safety and built infrastructure.
Historically, flood and erosion risk management techniques have relied largely on “grey” infrastructure solutions, 
such as flood walls, dikes, and river channel modifications, to control natural processes and reduce risk. Many of 
these techniques resulted in negative impacts on river ecosystems. 
In contrast, nature-based solutions (NbS), such as restoring wetlands or upland forests, can be used to manage 
river flooding and erosion in a way that provides benefits for both people and nature. This role is specifically 
identified in Target 11 of the recently adopted Kunming-Montreal Global Framework Directive, which calls for 
parties to use NbS to restore, maintain, and enhance nature’s contributions to people, including protection from 
natural hazards.[1]
The role of NbS in flood and erosion risk management is increasingly recognized in Canada but it is not yet 
mainstream. Key needs identified in recent international and national publications include:
	• Adoption of a “whole-ecosystem” approach to flood and erosion management at the watershed-scale.
	• Identification and valuation of the multiple co-benefits of NbS; and
	• Proactive management of natural infrastructure alongside built infrastructure, including preserving, conserving, 
and restoring natural assets.
The paper puts forward three recommendations to support future implementation of NbS for flood and erosion risk 
management by governments in Canada, supported by findings of this research report:
1.	
Development of a consistent approach to integrated watershed management. 
A review of watershed management in Canadian provinces, where the majority of Canadians live, found that 
Ontario is the only province where watershed-scale organizations (called Conservation Authorities) have a 
legal mandate that combines river flood and erosion risk management (with exceptions) and nature conservation. 
While many provinces have developed programs to support NbS, the objectives of these programs frequently 
focus on habitat quality and biodiversity rather than flood and erosion risk objectives. There is opportunity to 
build on the existing good practice approaches identified in this report and extend them to other provinces.
2.	 Funding of watershed-scale flood and erosion strategies that address high-risk areas.
Analysis indicates that many flood and erosion risk management projects funded under the federal National 
Disaster Mitigation Program (NDMP) and Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF) have been led by, 
and undertaken within, single cities and towns. Watershed-scale organizations have only undertaken funded 
projects in Ontario and British Columbia. In addition, only a few projects funded under the NDMP and DMAF 
programs have incorporated NbS. Future funding of watershed-scale strategies should support measures, such 
as NbS, that address underlying causes of flood and erosion risk, while achieving multiple benefits. Indigenous 
governments could play a leading role in such watershed-scale approaches.
3.	 Routine consideration of NbS for river flood and erosion management.
NbS are currently an underutilized option for flood and erosion risk management in Canada. There is an 
opportunity to update protocols or funding procedures to promote consideration of NbS as the default solution, 
with grey solutions being compared and applied where technically required or more beneficial overall. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
7
csagroup.org
Federal, provincial, watershed-scale, and local governments (including municipal and Indigenous governments) 
all have roles to play in implementing the above stated recommendations. In particular, provincial governments 
play a key role, since they have jurisdictional responsibility for implementing flood and erosion risk management.
Federal government
	• Support and work with provincial governments to develop guidance for, and help fund, a nationally consistent 
watershed planning framework that includes agreed-upon minimum requirements for flood and erosion risk 
management at the watershed scale. This could be progressed through the Canadian Water Agency or through 
work to achieve targets set by the National Adaptation Strategy (although the strategy itself does not explicitly 
include watershed-scale management, several of the objectives and targets would benefit from this approach). 
	• Work with provincial governments to identify priority watersheds (high-risk areas or vulnerable communities) for 
which flood and erosion management strategies are required to be completed first (if they have not been 
completed already).
	• Update existing federal funding programs (e.g., DMAF, Natural Infrastructure Fund) or create new funding 
programs to a) direct funds to projects that address flood and erosion risk at the sub-watershed / watershed-
scale and b) require routine consideration of NbS as the default solution, to be combined with grey infrastructure 
where necessary.
	• Support development and use of national guidelines and standards to support use of NbS for flood and erosion 
management (see Section 5.3 for discussion of specific standards).
Provincial governments 
	• Strengthen provincial legislation and policy to support watershed-scale approaches to manage flood and erosion 
risk, including the use of NbS. 
	• Work with the federal government to develop guidance for, and help fund, a nationally consistent watershed 
planning framework that includes agreed-upon minimum requirements for flood and erosion risk management at 
the watershed scale. Provincial governments have a key role to play as watershed management (apart from 
international watersheds) is a provincial jurisdiction.
	• Work with federal government to identify priority watersheds (high-risk areas or vulnerable communities) for 
which flood and erosion management strategies are required to be completed first (if they have not been 
completed already).
	• Develop flood and erosion risk management strategies at the watershed / sub-watershed scale for prioritized 
high-risk areas. Update provincial funding programs to a) direct funds to projects that address flood and erosion 
risk at the sub-watershed / watershed-scale and b) require routine consideration of NbS as the default solution, 
to be combined with grey infrastructure where necessary.
Watershed governance organizations 
	• Work to include the use of NbS for flood and erosion risk management as a watershed management objective. 
Ensure that the flood and erosion risk reduction benefits of NbS are documented, even when this is not the 
primary objective of the solution.
	• Continue to use NbS for flood and erosion management as a default solution where appropriate. Work with local 
community groups, businesses, and governments to publicize the multiple benefits delivered. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
8
csagroup.org
	• Work to inventory, value, and manage the services provided by natural assets within the watershed, including 
flood and erosion protection. Continue to protect existing natural assets and prioritize restoration efforts in areas 
with the highest potential benefit.
	• Continue to provide technical support to local governments with flood and erosion risk management and 
planning / implementation of NbS projects. 
	• Communicate the value of natural assets and the role of NbS in flood and erosion protection to residents. 
Local governments (including municipal and Indigenous governments)
	• Work with watershed organizations to help identify, plan, and implement NbS for flood and erosion risk 
management.
	• In the absence of a watershed governance organization, work with other local governments to help identify, plan, 
and implement NbS for strategic flood and erosion risk management at a watershed / sub-watershed scale.
	• Consider NbS as the default solution for flood and erosion risk management, to be combined with grey 
infrastructure where necessary.
	• Work to inventory, value and manage the services provided by natural assets, within both the local government 
jurisdiction and upstream watershed, including flood and erosion protection.
	• Communicate the value of natural assets and the role of NbS in flood and erosion protection to residents.
	• Work with private land owners / farmers who can contribute to nature-based solutions.
Future standards that could support implementation of the three recommendations are:
	• A minimum framework for watershed management planning;
	• A standardized approach to the strategic appraisal of river flood and erosion risk management options at the 
watershed-scale;
	• Standards to support the identification, valuation, and management of services provided by natural assets; and
	• A standardized option appraisal protocol for flood and erosion management projects, integrating the financial 
value of benefits and costs associated with NbS.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
9
csagroup.org
1 Introduction
1.1 Background
Floods are the costliest natural disasters in Canada in 
terms of property damage [2]. Canada’s natural assets, 
including floodplains, wetlands, natural river channels, 
riparian vegetation, and upland forests, help regulate 
riverine flooding and erosion. However, changing 
climatic conditions, alongside the continued 
degradation of these natural assets, are causing 
worsening river hazards in many watersheds. In 
particular, more intense rainfall and drought conditions 
are foreseen in many locations of Canada [3], making 
the role that nature plays in reducing the impacts of 
these extreme weather events even more vital.
Nature-based solutions (NbS) are actions to protect, 
sustainably manage, and restore natural or modified 
ecosystems that address societal challenges effectively 
and adaptively, simultaneously providing human 
well-being and biodiversity benefits [4]. NbS tackle 
climate change by enhancing resilience and 
sequestering carbon, while enhancing biodiversity and 
delivering a wide range of ecosystem services. In 
particular, NbS can be used to reduce river flood and 
erosion risk, as demonstrated by CSA’s recent research 
report “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine 
Flood and Erosion Risk Management” [5]. 
Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy, launched in 
November 2022, includes clear support for NbS with a 
bespoke objective that states “the use of nature-based 
solutions is accelerated to increase resilience and 
maximize co-benefits such as reducing stress on grey 
infrastructure and increasing social benefits of nature” 
[6]. In addition, the newly signed Kunming-Montreal 
Global Biodiversity Framework includes Target 11: to 
“restore, maintain and enhance nature’s contributions to 
people, including…protection from natural hazards and 
disasters, through nature-based solutions and/or 
ecosystem-based approaches for the benefit of all 
people and nature” [1]. It is anticipated that Canada will 
update the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action 
Plan to align with the new framework. However, NbS 
are not yet used extensively by provincial and local 
governments as part of the routine toolbox for river 
flood and erosion management in Canada. Their 
multiple benefits are not routinely reflected in option 
appraisal, and grey infrastructure (engineered 
infrastructure composed of man-made materials) 
remains the default solution for many projects.
Deployment of NbS requires a strategic approach to 
flood and erosion management, ideally at the 
watershed-scale. A watershed (also often referred to as 
a drainage basin or river basin) is an area that drains 
water into a particular river or set of rivers [7], and it is 
the fundamental unit for managing fresh water. There is 
currently no national guidance or Canadian standard 
concerning management of flood and erosion risk at 
the watershed-scale.
Historically, flood and erosion risk management in 
Canada has focused on the community or building 
scale. Consequently, solutions, standards, and 
“Changing climatic conditions, alongside the 
continued degradation of these natural assets, 
are causing worsening river hazards in many 
watersheds.”
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
10
csagroup.org
guidance have also been primarily developed at the 
community or building scale (Figure 1). Provincial and 
local governments, as well as other stakeholders 
involved in riverine flood and erosion management, 
now need national actionable guidance on appraising 
NbS to help them mainstream these techniques, 
including working up to the watershed-scale.
1.2 Aim and Objectives
The key aim of this research report is to identify 
best practices and recommendations for all levels of 
government, specifically to support river flood and 
erosion management at the watershed-scale, including 
the use of NbS. The work builds on findings of a 
previous CSA Group research report, “Nature-Based 
Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion 
Risk Management [5].”
Specific objectives are to:
	• Summarize key findings of recent research on the 
use of NbS in Canada for decision makers.
	• Review the status of watershed management in 
Canadian provinces (excluding Newfoundland and 
Labrador).
	• Analyze the scale of flood and erosion projects that 
have been funded by two key federal government 
programs: the National Disaster Mitigation Program 
and the Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund.
	• Identify existing good practices and lessons learned 
in watershed management and use of NbS to reduce 
river flooding and erosion.
	• Identify how the benefits of NbS can be better 
integrated into the appraisal of options.
	• Provide guidance and recommendations for 
governments to improve watershed-scale 
management of river flood and erosion risk, 
including the use of NbS.
	• Identify areas for future guidance and standardization 
to support governments managing river flood and 
erosion risk and using NbS at the watershed-scale.
1.3 Scope
This research report is scoped to the management of 
river flooding and erosion. Excluded from the scope are 
other sources of flooding and erosion, including coastal 
or tidal flooding and erosion, heavy rainfall flooding, 
groundwater flooding, ice-jam flooding, and landslides. 
The guidance is relevant to inhabited watersheds in 
the following Canadian provinces: British Columbia, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, 
New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward 
Island. The research does not specifically address the 
Great Lakes, international transboundary watersheds, 
estuaries, or watersheds in Newfoundland and 
Labrador and Canadian territories (Northwest 
Territories, Nunavut, Yukon,) that are subject to 
unique challenges.
Figure 1: Focus of Flood Resilience Guidance and Standards in Canada
Canadian Focus
Emerging
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
11
csagroup.org
1.4 Intended Audience
This guidance is intended to be useful to a wide range 
of stakeholders involved in the management of river 
flooding and erosion, including, but not limited to:
	• All levels of government;
	• Watershed and river management practitioners, 
including Indigenous peoples (First Nations, 
Metis, and Inuit). This may include, but is not 
limited to, people working in the public sector, 
regional authorities, communities, governments, 
watershed management organizations, non-
governmental organizations, and consultants; 
	• Project financers; and
	• Others with a role in the delivery of river 
flood and erosion management services.  
Readers are strongly recommended to consult the 
preceding research report “Nature-Based Solutions 
for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk 
Management” [5].
2 Methods
This guidance has been developed through a 
combination of desktop research and analysis and 
stakeholder engagement.
2.1 Desktop Research and Analysis
Desktop research and analysis focused on establishing 
current understanding and practices relating to 
watershed management of river flood and erosion 
risks and the use of NbS. Specific tasks were to:
	• Summarize key findings of recent research on 
the use of NbS in Canada for decision makers;
	• Review the status of watershed management 
in Canadian provinces (excluding 
Newfoundland and Labrador); and
	• Analyze the scale of flood and erosion projects, 
including NbS projects, that have been funded by 
two key federal government programs—the National 
Disaster Mitigation Program and the Disaster 
Mitigation and Adaptation Fund—and implications for 
application of NbS approaches at the watershed-scale.
2.2 Stakeholder Engagement 
Stakeholder engagement was undertaken to document, 
share, and collate guidance and best practices in 
implementing NbS for river flood and erosion risk 
management in Canada. 
Over 40 stakeholders were engaged, contributing 
experiences from British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New 
Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. 
Additional insights were provided from the Netherlands 
and the United Kingdom. Participants represented a 
range of organizations, including governments, 
watershed organizations, consultants, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), and academia.
Stakeholder engagement was centred around two 
half-day, virtual focus groups, held in May and 
June 2022:
	• Focus Group 1 - Taking a Watershed Approach
	• Focus Group 2 - Including NbS Benefits in 
Options Appraisal
The focus groups were structured to stimulate 
discussion and collect information and feedback using 
a variety of methods:
	• Online questionnaires send to invitees 
prior to each focus group; 
	• Brief presentations from subject matter experts;
	• Interactive polling activities; and 
	• Small group and plenary discussions with 
interactive whiteboards and note takers 
to capture key discussion points.
The program of each workshop is detailed in 
Appendix A.
Stakeholders were also invited to review and provide 
comments on this report.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
12
csagroup.org
3 Review of Current 
Understanding and Practices 
3.1 Recent NbS Research: Key 
Findings for Decision Makers
This section extracts key findings of selected recent 
research publications that are directly relevant to the 
use of NbS to reduce river flooding and erosion by 
governments in Canada (Table 1). The findings are 
provided as context for the current research project. 
Readers are invited to consult the original reports for 
further details. 
Common messaging from these recent key 
publications includes the need to:	
• Adopt a “whole-ecosystem” approach to flood
and erosion management that may necessarily
go beyond municipal or community boundaries.	
• Identify and value multiple co-benefits
of NbS, in addition to the potential flood
and erosion damages avoided.	
• Proactively manage natural infrastructure in
view of the services provided, in a similar way
to built infrastructure, including preserving
/ conserving existing natural assets.
3.2 Review of Watershed Management 
in Canadian Provinces 
3.2.1 Watersheds in Canada
Canada is the second largest country in the world, with 
very different sized watersheds, from the very large 
(e.g., Great Lakes – St. Lawrence River Basin) to the 
very small (e.g., watersheds on Prince Edward Island). 
Watersheds have been identified and mapped 
nationally across Canada. The Standard Drainage Area 
Table 1: Key Findings of Relevant Research Publications
Publication
Key Findings for Decision-Makers
International Guidelines on Natural 
and Nature-Based Features for Flood 
Risk Management [8]
•	NbS can contribute to riverine flood and erosion management by:	
• Storing, slowing, and reducing flood waters in the upper and
middle watershed, using native vegetation where possible;	
• Improving connectivity of watercourses with their ﬂood
plains, creating space for water and room for the river;	
• Preserving or restoring sediment processes; and	
• Restoring lowland and river delta functions.
•	In addition to flood and erosion risk management, riverine NbS also provide
a wide range of ecosystem services, including:	
• Groundwater recharge and drought amelioration;	
• Water quality improvement and greater freshwater availability;	
• Biodiversity enhancement and habitat improvement;	
• Improved aesthetics compared to conventional infrastructure; and	
• Human health, welfare, and recreational opportunities.
•	Five categories are identified for application of NbS:	
• River and ﬂoodplain management;	
• Vegetation management;	
• Rural runoﬀ management;	
• Urban runoﬀ management; and	
• Erosion management.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
13
csagroup.org
Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal 
and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk 
Management [5]
•	NbS can play a much greater role in managing flood and erosion risk in 
Canada, and they are currently underutilized.
•	Flooding and erosion are fundamental to the function of natural systems. 
Negative consequences and risks occur where flooding and erosion intersect 
with vulnerable people or valued assets. Disruption of natural processes can 
narrow the range of options available to manage these risks.
•	Several guides and programs have been produced in Canada (overviewed in 
Appendix B of the referenced report). These outputs provide a useful basis for 
future national guidance but lack technical detail.
•	Further research needs include:
	• Inclusion of NbS in Planning/Decision-Making Frameworks –There is 
a need for improved planning and decision-making frameworks that 
incorporate NbS as tools in the portfolio of possible strategies for flood and 
erosion risk management.
	• Performance Monitoring – Long-term multi-year monitoring programs are 
needed to demonstrate performance over time and build confidence in NbS.
Natural Assets Management 
Considerations for Engineering and 
Geoscience Professionals [9]
•	Natural assets, such as streams, aquifers, forests, and foreshores, provide 
core services that local governments are commonly directly responsible 
for in Canada (e.g. stormwater management, drinking water filtration, and 
groundwater protection) as well as other benefits including recreation, climate 
regulation, clean air, natural habitat, and biodiversity.
•	Proactive management of natural assets can help local governments to:
	• Manage community financial and asset risk
	• Enhance service provisioning to communities
	• Partner with Indigenous communities in support 
of local infrastructure enhancements
	• Build climate resilience.
•	Natural assets do not follow jurisdictional or ownership boundaries. Local 
governments must concern themselves not only with natural assets they 
own or manage, but also with natural assets they do not own or manage but 
rely on for services. 
Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: 
Combining Natural and Grey 
Infrastructure to Protect Canada’s 
Eastern and Western Coastal 
Communities [10]
•	Canada can use NbS alongside grey infrastructure to manage flooding and 
erosion risk. Diﬀerent measures can be combined to fulfill multiple objectives 
within communities.
•	National standards are needed to enable formalized evaluation of the 
multiple benefits of NbS when comparing different infrastructure options. It is 
recommended that this considers minimum requirements alongside regional-
specific standards, together with ways to elevate and integrate the knowledge 
of Indigenous peoples and the financial value of benefits derived from NbS.
•	Flood and erosion protection measures should be subject to minimum 
monitoring requirements, including funding for long-term monitoring and 
engagement with Indigenous peoples. Monitoring should be designed to 
document performance against project-specific objectives. 
•	Public–private partnerships can potentially assist in financing, delivering, 
monitoring, and maintaining NbS.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
14
csagroup.org
“Although watersheds have been identified 
throughout Canada, the degree to which they 
are used as a basis for management varies 
significantly across the country.”
Classification (SDAC) is Statistics Canada's official 
classification of drainage areas in Canada [11]. The 
classification identified 11 major drainage areas and 
164 sub-drainage areas in Canada.
Within sub-drainage areas, smaller sub-sub-drainage 
areas were identified and form the basis of the National 
Hydrographic Network (NHN) database that is 
maintained by National Resources Canada. The NHN 
provides continuous geospatial data and basic 
attributes describing Canada's inland surface waters, 
including watershed boundaries of more than 1,382 
basins covering the entire Canadian landmass [12]
The online data service, ClimateData.ca, provides over 
30 pre-calculated climate indices that can be analyzed 
at the NHN watershed level. Data can be viewed on a 
map, as an interactive time series, or downloaded from 
the website [13].
Although watersheds have been identified throughout 
Canada, the degree to which they are used as a basis 
for management varies significantly across the country. 
A review of integrated watershed management 
approaches across Canada was undertaken by the 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment in 
2016 [14]. This review did not specifically focus on flood 
and erosion risk management responsibilities, and 
many significant changes in provincial watershed 
management have occurred in the six years since 
the review was published. 
This section presents an up-to-date overview of 
watershed management within Canadian provinces 
(excluding Newfoundland and Labrador) and the 
key organizations involved, with specific focus on the 
management of flooding and erosion risks. In particular, 
the following subjects have been reviewed for each 
province:
	• Existing watershed-scale organizations;
	• Mandate and authority, as defined by either 
legislation or a clear policy statement;
	• Watershed management functions; and
	• Role in flood and erosion risk management.
For further details relating to the mandate and 
activities of the specific watershed management 
organizations mentioned in this section, readers are 
directed to the online references provided, where they 
can consult the most up-to-date information.
3.2.2 British Columbia
There are currently no watershed-scale organizations 
with a legal mandate for integrated watershed 
management in British Columbia. However, there are 
several organizations that work on select aspects of 
watershed management or that work without a legal 
mandate. The key organizations are identified below.
Under the B.C. Forest and Range Practices Act (FRPA), 
466 community watersheds have been designated for 
source water protection purposes. The FRPA sets 
requirements for forest company activities working 
within community watersheds to conserve water 
quality and quantity and prevent adverse cumulative 
hydrological effects [15].
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
15
csagroup.org
A key charitable watershed organization within the 
province is the Fraser Basin Council. It is a non-profit 
organization that aims to advance sustainability 
solutions and practices in the Fraser Basin and across 
British Columbia. The Council’s directors represent four 
orders of government—federal, provincial, local, and 
First Nations—together with the private sector and civil 
society. The organization works through facilitation and 
education, working with a vast variety of stakeholders 
across the province [16]. 
Another key organization that has no legal or policy 
basis but that may influence regulatory decisions is the 
Mackenzie River Basin Board. The board was established 
by the Mackenzie River Basin Transboundary Waters 
Master Agreement in 1997, and was signed by British 
Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, the Northwest 
Territories, Yukon, and the Government of Canada [17]. 
The agreement commits the signatories to “work 
together to manage the water resources of the whole 
Mackenzie River Basin,” according to four guiding 
principles: equitable utilization, prior consultation, 
sustainable development, and maintenance of 
ecological integrity [18]. 
In relation to flood and erosion risk management, the 
provincial government provides Flood Hazard Area 
Land Use Management Guidelines [19] and administers 
funding for developing and updating ﬂood risk 
assessments. However, land use regulation itself is the 
responsibility of local governments, or of provincial 
approving officers for land outside of municipal 
boundaries, and provincial land officers responsible for 
Crown land [20]. As a result, land use planning does not 
consistently account for flood risk within the province, 
as highlighted in responses to a recent survey on 
provincial flood preparedness [21]. 
The need for improved flood and erosion risk 
management was dramatically highlighted during the 
November / December 2021 floods in British Columbia—
the most-costly severe weather event in the province’s 
history [22]. A key report, developed following this flood 
event to improve understanding of risk and resilience in 
British Columbia, specifically recommends a more 
integrated approach to flood risk management [23]. 
With a view to improving watershed security, in January 
2022, the provincial government issued a discussion 
paper on the development of a Watershed Security 
Strategy and Fund for public consultation. The 
discussion paper suggested “reduced risks from water 
related hazards such as flooding and drought” as one 
of the elements of watershed security [24]. Work is 
ongoing to develop the strategy, with a launch currently 
planned for spring 2023 [25]. In addition, the province of 
British Columbia is currently gathering feedback on a 
proposed Flood Strategy to manage flood safety risks, 
which includes consideration of watershed-based 
approaches and emphasizes green infrastructure as a 
preferred option for flood mitigation where suitable [26].
3.2.3 Alberta
In Alberta, the Water for Life strategy has been the key 
strategy for managing the province’s waters resources 
since 2003 [27]. The strategy was renewed in 2008 
[28]. It identifies three geographical scales of 
partnerships for managing water [29]:
	• Alberta Water Council (AWC) – at the province-
wide scale;
	• Watershed Planning and Advisory Councils 
(WPACs) – at the watershed-scale; and
	• Watershed Stewardship Groups (WSGs) – at 
the local scale. 
The Alberta Water Council is a not-for-profit, 
collaborative partnership that provides leadership, 
expertise, sector knowledge, and perspectives to 
advance the outcomes of Water for Life and other 
water management priorities within the province [30]. 
Watershed Stewardship Groups are local-community, 
volunteer-based partnerships that are actively engaged 
in environmental stewardship of their watershed [29]. 
These volunteer-based groups are supported by the 
Land Stewardship Centre [31].
The 11 WPACs are stewards of the province’s major 
watersheds. They are independent, non-profit 
organizations that are officially designated by Alberta 
Environment and Parks and have a mandate to [32] 
“support multi-stakeholder collaboration and community 
engagement within four main program areas:
	• Education and Outreach
	• Environmental Stewardship
	• Watershed Evaluation and Reporting
	• Watershed Management Planning”
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
16
csagroup.org
The WPACs are mandated by the government to 
produce two key deliverables [32]:
	• A State of the Watershed Report; and 
	• An Integrated Watershed Management Plan.
In relation to the first deliverable, a “Handbook for 
State of the Watershed Reporting” was published in 
2008 to support WPACs and WSGs that may be 
undertaking similar work. The handbook mentions 
“floodplain presence and flooding pattern” as indicators 
of the condition of the watershed, whose metric is an 
“area of historically connected floodplain vs. area of 
currently connected floodplain” [33]. 
In relation to the second deliverable, the “Guide to 
Watershed Management Planning in Alberta” 
recognizes the role of natural systems in attenuating 
flooding but does not specify that flood risk 
management should form part of watershed 
management planning [34]. Flooding is considered in 
some of the technical reports prepared to support 
Integrated Watershed Management Planning, for 
example for the Red Deer Watershed Alliance [35].
Flood risk management is undertaken largely outside 
of the watershed management activities described 
above. The provincial government retains responsibility 
for flood management through the Flood Hazard 
Identification Program, Alberta Community Resilience 
Program, and specific flood mitigation studies for 
flood-prone watersheds [36]. Many of these studies 
consider the watershed-scale [37]. Upstream water 
storage is being pursued as a flood management 
strategy along the Elbow River upstream of Calgary 
through the construction of the Springbank Off-Stream 
Reservoir [38] and on the Bow River through the 
Modified Operations Agreement with TransAlta [39]. 
The provincial government also funds the Watershed 
Resiliency and Restoration Program, which focuses on 
improving natural watershed functions to build greater 
long-term resiliency to droughts and floods [40]. 
3.2.4 Saskatchewan
The Saskatchewan Association of Watersheds (SAW) is 
a non-profit umbrella organization for nine watershed 
groups in the province that are focused on the 
protection of ground and surface water [41]. These 
NGOs receive funding from the Saskatchewan 
government for education, awareness, and 
coordination of program delivery but they do not 
address flood and erosion risk management.
The Water Security Agency (WSA) is a Crown 
corporation that holds core water management 
responsibilities in the province. The 25 Year Water 
Security Plan, originally released in 2012, includes 
several actions relating to identifying and reducing 
flood risk, although these actions are largely organized 
around communities or critical infrastructure rather than 
the watershed-scale [42]. With the introduction of WSA’s 
new Strategic Plan, launched in 2022–23, the agency is 
not only reviewing its Strategic Plan on an annual basis 
but renewing it every four years instead of five [43].
The WSA administers the Flood Damage Reduction 
Program (FDRP), which provides funding to local 
governments for flood damage reduction work across 
the province [44]. The agency also obtained funds 
under the federal government’s National Disaster 
Mitigation Program (NDMP) to complete a provincial-
scale natural hazard risk assessment, which was 
published in 2018 [45]. This assessment identified high 
to extreme risk from convective summer storms and an 
increasing risk from overland flooding of both urban 
and rural communities in the context of climate change. 
3.2.5 Manitoba
In Manitoba, the Watershed Planning & Programs 
Section of the provincial Environment, Climate and 
Parks Department administers and manages the 
Watershed Districts Program as defined by The 
Watershed Districts Act. Proclaimed on January 1, 2020, 
the Act transitioned 18 conservation districts to 14 new 
Watershed Districts, with boundaries aligned with 
natural watersheds to support integrated watershed 
management [46]. These newly formed Watershed 
Districts cover the majority of municipal Manitoba.
Watershed Districts are formed as a partnership 
between the province and local municipalities to 
“protect, restore and manage land and water resources 
on a watershed basis.” Each district is charged with 
“developing and implementing programming to improve 
watershed health, while four districts also have a 
surface water infrastructure mandate to maintain 
provincial waterways within their boundary” [47].
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
17
csagroup.org
Watershed Districts can also be designated as “a Water 
Planning Authority for integrated watershed management 
planning under The Water Protection Act. They provide 
leadership in both the development and implementation 
of watershed plans, that assist in planning long-term and 
short-term goals and identifying priority project to 
improve watershed health.” The province reports 
that there are currently 26 integrated watershed 
management plans (IWMP) in various stages of 
completion, as well as one plan under renewal [46]. 
The Watershed Districts are supported by the Manitoba 
Association of Watersheds (MAW) [48]. MAW delivers 
the GRowing Outcomes in Watersheds (GROW) 
Program announced by the province in 2019. The 
GROW and Conservation Trusts that provide funding 
to landowners under this program are administered by 
Manitoba Habitat Heritage Corporation. GROW aims to 
support the delivery of ecological goods and services 
in Manitoba. Focus areas include watershed health, 
management, and resiliency. Two priority outcomes 
of the program are watershed resilience to the impacts 
of climate change and improved water quality, while 
improved biodiversity and habitat and carbon 
sequestration and storage are identified as 
co-benefits [49].  
Activities that are eligible for inclusion in a Local 
GROW Program include [49]: 
	• “water retention
	• wetland conservation, restoration or enhancement
	• riparian area conservation, restoration or 
enhancement
	• buffer establishment (ex: shelterbelts and multi-
species buffer strips)
	• upland area conservation, restoration, or 
enhancement (ex: woodlot management, grassland 
conservation, converting marginal cropland to 
grassland, and soil health improvements)”
The Manitoba government also supports Watershed 
Districts through the Assurance: Watershed Ecological 
Goods and Services grant that is part of the Ag Action 
Manitoba Program. The grant facilitates “work with 
farmers to implement sustainable environmental 
practices,” including water retention, runoff management, 
and wetland restoration and enhancement [50].
Water retention studies are being undertaken in the 
province as a method of managing both flood and 
drought conditions, as well as improving water quality 
and achieving other watershed management objectives. 
When the cumulative impacts of several projects are 
combined, benefits can occur at both the local and the 
watershed-scale [51].
Although several natural infrastructure elements relating 
to flood and erosion risk are addressed by Watershed 
Districts, it is Manitoba Infrastructure that leads and 
retains responsibility for flood risk management projects 
at the provincial level [52]. Work has been conducted at 
the watershed-scale, such as in the Assiniboine River 
and Lake Manitoba Basins Flood Mitigation Study [53]. 
However, not all watersheds have a flood risk 
management strategy. 
“Manitoba reports that there are currently 
26 integrated watershed management plans 
(IWMP) in various stages of completion, as 
well as one plan under renewal.”
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
18
csagroup.org
3.2.6 Ontario
In Ontario, Conservation Authorities promote integrated 
watershed management and are organized on a 
watershed basis. Conservation Ontario is a non-profit 
association that represents the 36 Conservation 
Authorities. Thirty-one of them operate in Ontario 
and five deliver programs and services in northern 
Ontario [54]. 
Conservation Authorities have a legislated mandate 
under the Conservation Authorities Act, originally 
enacted in 1946 [55]. Following severe economic 
and human losses due to Hurricane Hazel in 1954, 
Conservation Authorities were given regulatory powers 
within floodplains, which have since been broadened 
to cover regulating and permitting development within 
river and stream valleys, wetlands, hazard-prone 
areas (flooding, erosion, dynamic beaches), and 
geotechnically hazardous sites [55].
The core mandate of Conservation Authorities is to 
undertake watershed-based programs to protect 
people and property from flooding and other natural 
hazards and to conserve natural resources for 
economic, social, and environmental benefits [54]. 
Mandatory programs and services provided by 
Conservation Authorities are set out in Ontario 
Regulation 686/21 and include development of a 
watershed-based resource management strategy [56]. 
Conservation Authorities have also worked extensively 
with municipalities to develop sub-watershed plans for 
areas identified for development. Consultations on new 
guidance occurred in early 2022 [57]. 
The undertaking of watershed management planning 
alongside land use planning has been identified as a 
key factor that helps limit flood damage in Ontario. A 
comparison of the use of Disaster Financial Assistance 
Arrangements (DFAA) by provinces during the 1970–
2014 period suggested the primary reason for limited 
use of DFAA payments in Ontario, in comparison with 
greater use in the Prairie provinces (Alberta, Manitoba, 
and Saskatchewan), was the administration of 
floodplain regulation by the Conservation Authorities 
[58]. Similarly, a study comparing Michigan and 
Ontario flood damages in August and September 1986 
also highlighted the benefits of long-term floodplain 
regulation in limiting flood damages in Ontario [59].
In 2022, the Ontario government passed Bill 23, which 
includes significant modifications to several sections 
of the Conservation Authorities Act [60]. These 
modifications include:
	• Removal of the ability of Conservation Authorities 
to review or comment on proposals or 
applications made under a prescribed Act; and 
	• Exemption of activities authorized under the Planning 
Act from the prohibitions that restrict activities and 
development in lands over which Conservation 
Authorities hold jurisdiction (including hazard 
lands, river and stream corridors, and shorelines).
These modifications will reduce the role that 
watershed-scale Conservation Authorities play in 
land use planning in the province. 
3.2.7 Quebec
In 2002, the Quebec Water Policy supported reforming 
water governance and establishing integrated 
watershed management in Quebec [61]. The Water Act, 
enacted in 2009 and amended in 2017 and 2022, sets 
out the responsibility of watershed organizations (in 
French: Organisme de bassin versant) to undertake 
watershed planning in consultation with a variety of 
stakeholders [62]. The Act also introduced integrated 
management for the Saint Lawrence River, providing 
for the establishment of 12 regional consultation tables 
(in French: tables de concertation régionales). There 
are currently 40 legally recognized watershed 
organizations [63] and six regional consultation tables 
[64]. The Regroupement des organismes de bassins 
versants du Québec (ROBVQ) is a non-profit 
organization that is recognized by the Ministry of the 
Environment, the Fight Against Climate Change, 
Wildlife and Parks (MELCCFP) as being its privileged 
interlocutor for the implementation of integrated 
water management by watershed in Quebec [65].
The mandate of each watershed organization, as 
defined in the current reference framework, includes 
consulting with stakeholders, developing and 
implementing a water master plan, and raising 
awareness and promoting integrated water resource 
management [66]. Key issues identified and addressed 
in work by watershed organizations include water 
contamination, health of wetlands, shoreline erosion, 
water quality, flooding, public access to water bodies, 
and drinking water supply [67]. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
19
csagroup.org
While watershed organizations are responsible for 
developing a water master plan, they are not 
responsible for managing flood and erosion risk and 
they do not have the authority to permit development 
in areas at flood or erosion risk. This limits direct 
integration of these activities. The 2020 provincial flood 
protection plan included a new flood resilience and 
adaptation program [68]. As part of the program, the 
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing (Ministère 
des Affaires municipales et de l'Habitation) established 
10 new project offices tasked with planning flood 
resilience interventions at the watershed-scale. Each of 
the new project offices must work with both a 
municipal round table and a civil round table in 
planning flood resilience interventions [69]. 
3.2.8 New Brunswick
There is currently no provincially appointed organization 
for integrated watershed management in New 
Brunswick. 
Watershed management in the province is undertaken 
by 31 NGOs, overseeing 78% of the province [70]. The 
N.B. Watershed Caucus, a program led by the New 
Brunswick Environmental Network (NBEN), provides a 
forum for these watershed organizations [70]. Many of 
the watershed organizations have developed an 
integrated watershed management plan that includes 
actions relating to management of flooding and 
erosion / sedimentation using NbS. The organizations 
vary in terms of their objectives and the funding and 
resources available to implement the identified actions. 
An action to develop a renewed framework for 
watershed-scale management of surface water quality 
was included in A Water Strategy for New Brunswick 
(2017) [71]. The province’s Watershed Protection 
Program focuses on source water protection for 
communities that receive their drinking water from 
surface watersheds (about 40% of the population) [72].
The provincial strategy for flood risk management is 
set out in the New Brunswick Flood Risk Reduction 
Strategy (2014). In this strategy, flood mitigation is 
focused on risk reduction by working with communities 
and infrastructure owners [73]. The provincial 
government recently released updated coastal and 
inland flood risk mapping that incorporates the impacts 
of climate change [74], and has been working with 
New Brunswick communities to undertake Climate 
Change Adaptation Plans [75]. 
The potential to use NbS to address flood and erosion 
risk was initially outlined in the 2016 plan, Transitioning 
to a Low-Carbon Economy – New Brunswick’s Climate 
Change Action Plan. The plan includes the action to 
“promote and use natural infrastructure (e.g., forests, 
wetlands, salt marshes, floodplains) as an important 
tool to buffer against climate change impacts” (action 
71) [76]. 
New Brunswick’s new Climate Change Adaptation Plan 
(2022–2027) sets out 30 actions for the province, with 
“preparing for climate change” as one of the three key 
pillars identified. Under this pillar, biodiversity and NbS 
are a key area for action. The provincial government 
intends to continue to support NbS as an approach to 
adapt to climate change, including through training 
and capacity building. New actions identified 
increasing protected areas to beyond 10% of the 
province’s land and fresh water, as well as implement 
a Living Shorelines program by 2026. [77].
3.2.9 Nova Scotia
In 2010, through Water for Life: Nova Scotia’s Water 
Resource Management Strategy, the province 
committed to an approach based on integrated water 
management, using the watershed as a unit for 
analysis. The strategy identified 46 primary watersheds 
in the province and established a Nova Scotia Water 
Advisory Group (NSWAG) to support implementation 
of integrated water management. However, the 
strategy did not include actions for flood and erosion 
risk management [78].
The Nova Scotia Watershed Assessment Program 
(NSWAP) was launched in 2011 to characterize and 
evaluate the state of the province’s watersheds 
according to 11 different watershed variables [79], 
including variables of interest to flood and erosion 
management. The project subdivided the primary 
watersheds into major and residual watersheds, as 
many of the streams in Nova Scotia drain directly to the 
ocean rather than being part of larger watershed units 
[80]. Phase 2 of this project, to develop watershed report 
cards, does not appear to have been completed to date 
[81]. The last progress report on the province’s Water for 
Life strategy webpage was for 2014 [82].
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
20
csagroup.org
Watershed management, including protection and 
enhancement of natural infrastructure, is undertaken 
by several NGOs in Nova Scotia, including the 
Sackville Rivers Association [83], Clean Annapolis 
River Project [84], and ACAP Cape Breton [85]. 
However, there is currently no coordinating body, and 
activities vary between the NGOs depending on their 
specific objectives and available resources. 
In relation to flood and erosion risk management, the 
Nova Scotia Flood Mitigation Framework provides an 
approach based on 1) support for communities and 2) 
provincial leadership [86]. Work with communities is 
through the Flood Risk Infrastructure Investment 
Program (FRIIP), which provides match-funding for: [87]
	• “river training and floodway improvements
	• floodwater containment and flood intensity mitigation
	• studies including mapping to identify flood-prone 
areas and identification of potential solutions to 
mitigate flood impacts”
The provincial leadership part of the Framework lists 
eight actions. One action is to provide scientific and 
geo-technical advice for coastal flood risk assessments. 
There is no explicit mention of the use of natural 
infrastructure to manage flood and erosion risk as part 
of the Flood Mitigation Framework, and action is not 
organized at the watershed-scale. 
However, in the new plan, Our Climate, Our Future: 
Nova Scotia’s Climate Change Plan for Clean Growth, 
released in December 2022, minimizing climate 
impacts by restoring natural areas and ecosystems is a 
key theme identified to help respond to climate 
impacts. Action 12 of the plan includes to “strengthen 
and coordinate responses to coastal and inland flood 
risk by investing in natural flood protection” [88].
3.2.10 Prince Edward Island (PEI)
Watershed management in PEI is undertaken by local 
watershed groups that do not have a formal mandate 
[89]. There are 24 watershed groups across the island, 
supported by the PEI Watershed Alliance [90]. Both the 
watershed groups and the PEI Watershed Alliance are 
supported by the government through the Watershed 
Management Fund, which is designed to support 
projects for watershed management planning and 
capacity building, pollution control, erosion 
management, wildlife habitat enhancement and 
biodiversity, and research and outreach [91].
In terms of flood risk management, PEI is an island 
with small river basins of limited relief. The recent 
Climate Change Risk Assessment, published in 2021 
and used to inform the province’s Climate Change 
Action Plan 2018–2023, identified coastal erosion, 
post-tropical storms, and heavy precipitation and 
inland flooding as “high” risks for the province [92]. 
The provincial government has funded mapping of 
coastal and inland flooding in the context of climate 
change; however, this is available on a community 
basis rather than for watersheds [93]. 
Flood risk management projects are not specifically 
listed as eligible for funding through the Watershed 
Management Fund, although natural infrastructure 
projects that may reduce downstream flood risk are 
supported. The Guide to Watershed Planning produced 
by the PEI government also does not specifically 
mention flood risk management, although soil erosion 
and sedimentation are highlighted as key issues for 
consideration [94]. It is worth noting that municipal 
land use planning is in place for only approximately 
10% of PEI’s land base, with the provincial government 
acting as the planning authority for the remaining 90% 
of land area [95].
In 2020, the Government of Prince Edward Island 
established a $1 million annual Climate Challenge 
Fund that supports NbS for flood and erosion risk 
management [96]. The province’s climate adaptation 
plan, launched in October 2022, also mentions NbS 
under several actions with the themes of resilient 
communities and natural habitat and biodiversity, but 
does not explicitly include a watershed approach to 
flood and erosion risk management [97].
3.2.11 Key Findings 
An overview of key elements of watershed management 
in the Canadian provinces examined is provided in Table 
2. Review focused on the use of NbS for river flood and 
erosion management and yielded the following key 
findings:
	• Legislative mandate and authority:
Few of the Canadian provinces have set a clear 
mandate for integrated watershed management. 
Many provincial mandates are focused on specific 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
21
csagroup.org
problems (e.g., drinking water source protection) 
or specific watersheds, or their responsibilities 
are shared with other organizations. 
	• Varied involvement in flood and erosion river 
management: 
Only Conservation Authorities in Ontario have a legal 
mandate and permitting authority (with exceptions) 
in relation to river flood and erosion risk management. 
Several watershed management organizations 
are indirectly involved in flood and erosion risk 
management, although they may be consulted.
	• Focus on NbS for different purposes: 
Many provinces have developed programs to support 
NbS but the objectives of these programs vary and 
frequently focus on habitat quality and biodiversity 
rather than using NbS as a means to manage flood 
and erosion risk.
	• Resourcing: 
While funding is provided by many provincial 
governments to support watershed management, 
the level of resourcing available varies significantly. 
This impacts the capacity (staff, time, money) of 
watershed management organizations, including the 
development and retention of in-house knowledge.
3.3 Analysis of Federally Funded Flood 
and Erosion Risk Management Projects
The federal government has financially supported, and 
continues to support, flood risk management work 
undertaken by provinces, territories, and communities. 
The two major funds are: 
	• The National Disaster Mitigation Program (NDMP), 
administered by Public Safety Canada from 2015 
to 2022; and 
	• The Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund 
(DMAF), administered by Infrastructure 
Canada, the first intake of which was in 2018. 
Funding under these programs has already been 
allocated and project-level data is available. 
This section presents an analysis of the spatial 
jurisdiction of the recipients to whom federal funding 
has been allocated for flood risk management work 
under the two programs. The scale at which projects 
themselves are being undertaken has also been 
analyzed for DMAF-funded projects, based on the 
project descriptions that are readily available for each 
project. The purpose of the analysis is to establish how 
federal funding to date under these programs has 
supported watershed-scale flood and erosion 
management approaches, including the use of NbS.
3.3.1 The National Disaster Mitigation 
Program (NDMP)
3.3.1.1 Overview of Funding Program
The NDMP allocated funds between 2015 and 2022 to 
recipients to increase understanding of, and community 
resilience to, flood risk. Budget 2014 allocated $200 
million over five years, from 2015 to 2020. In 2020, a 
further $25 million was allocated to the program over 
two years, beginning in fiscal year 2020–2021 and up 
to March 31, 2022 [98]. 
The analysis for this report concerns the Mitigation 
Contribution Component (MCC) of the NDMP, which 
provided financial support to provinces (up to 50%) 
and territories (up to 75%) for cost-shared projects in 
four streams of eligible activities (see Table 3) [99]. 
3.3.1.2 Project-Level Data 
Data relating to 460 projects funded under the seven 
annual cycles of NDMP funding was provided by 
Public Safety Canada for analysis and approved for 
release. The data provided included the project title, 
recipient organization, province or territory, cycle of 
funding, and funding stream. 
No projects were funded in Quebec, as an agreement 
was not signed with the province. In addition, no 
projects were funded in Nunavut. In 2020–2021 (cycle 
6), during the COVID-19 pandemic, additional funding 
was allocated to existing projects only. No new projects 
were established. 
Detailed project descriptions were not provided for 
each project; therefore, it was not possible to isolate 
NDMP projects that addressed river flooding and 
erosion based on the data available. Several of the 
projects also addressed multiple types of flood risk in 
the same project (e.g., coastal, heavy rainfall, as well as 
river flooding). Therefore, the analysis includes all 
projects, not only those relating to river flooding and 
erosion. Due to the lack of project descriptions, it was 
also not possible to classify projects by the spatial 
scale of the projects themselves. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
22
Table 2: Overview of Watershed Management in Canadian Provinces (excluding Newfoundland and Labrador)
Character
BC
AB
SK
MB
ON 
QC
NB
NS
PEI
Watershed-Scale 
Governance Bodies
NGOs, Community 
watersheds (govt)
Watershed Planning 
and Advisory Councils 
(WPACs)
Watershed Associations
Watershed Districts
Conservation Authorities
Watershed Organizations 
(Organisations des bassins 
versants)
NGOs
NGOs
NGOs – Local Watershed 
Groups
Co-ordinating Body
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Website
Fraser Basin Council
Government of Alberta
Saskatchewan Association 
of Watersheds
Government of Manitoba
Conservation Ontario
ROVBQ
Watershed Caucus
Water for Life Strategy
PEI Watershed Alliance
Number of Watershed 
Management 
Organizations
Unknown
11
9
14
36
40
18
Unknown
24
Formal Mandate
No – Strategy in 
development
Yes, but shared and for 
certain functions
Yes, but shared and for 
certain functions
Yes, but shared and for 
certain functions
Yes, for certain functions
Yes, but shared and for 
certain functions
No
Yes, but not fulfilled
No – Informal
Functions
Varies by organization
Fraser Basin Council – 
facilitation and education
Community watersheds 
(466) designated to protect
surface drinking water
Watershed evaluation and 
reporting
Watershed management 
planning
Education and outreach
Environmental stewardship
Source water protection: 
ground and surface water
Protecting, preserving, 
conserving, managing, 
controlling, or prudently 
using the resources of the 
district
Protect people and 
property from flooding and 
other natural hazards
Conserve natural resources 
for economic, social, and 
environmental benefits
Promote consultation with 
regional stakeholders
Inform, mobilize, consult, 
and raise public awareness
Develop a master plan for 
water (MPW)
Varies by organization
Varies by organization
Varies by organization
Role in Flood 
and Erosion Risk 
Management
Fraser Basin Council – 
facilitation and education
Limited role. Provincial 
government maintains 
responsibility.
No formal role.
Water Security Agency is 
responsible.
Limited role in use of 
natural infrastructure to 
reduce flood and erosion 
risk through GROW 
program.
Part of core mandate.
Authority for permitting 
of development (with 
expanded exceptions) and 
undertaking projects to 
manage flood and erosion 
risk.
Consultative role.
MAMH Project Offices 
responsible for flood risk.
No formal role.
Provincial government 
maintains responsibility.
No formal role.
Limited role in use of 
natural infrastructure 
to manage erosion 
risk.  Riverine flood risk 
not identified as a key 
objective.
Decision Making
No formal authority.
Adoption of own water­
shed management plans 
and action plans.
No formal authority.
Adoption of Watershed 
Management Plans.
No formal authority.
Can carry out or support 
work inside and outside its 
boundaries to benefit core 
function.
Development permitting 
authority in hazard-prone 
areas (with expanded 
exceptions).
Adoption of Watershed 
Management Plans.
No formal authority.
Adoption of own water­
shed management plans 
and action plans.
No formal authority.
Adoption of own water­
shed management plans 
and action plans.
No formal authority.
Province and municipalities 
retain authority.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
23
csagroup.org
Table 3: Four NDMP Funding Streams  
Stream
Description
Stream 1: Risk 
Assessments
Provided funding for risk 
assessments that inform 
flood risk management. 
Risk assessment includes 
identifying flood hazards, 
potential impacts, and 
community and 
infrastructure vulnerabilities.
Stream 2: Flood Mapping
Provided funding for the 
production and/or updating 
of flood maps.
Stream 3: Mitigation 
Planning
Provided funding for 
the development and/or 
updating of mitigation plans 
to address flood risks. 
Stream 4: Investments 
in Non-Structural and 
Small-Scale Structural 
Mitigation Projects
Provided funding for other 
non-structural and small-
scale structural mitigation 
projects to address flood 
risk. 
3.3.1.3 Spatial Jurisdiction of Funding 
Recipient Organizations
Each NDMP project was classified according to the 
spatial jurisdiction of the funding recipient organization, 
using the following classification:
	• Province;
	• Watershed;
	• Region;
	• Indigenous government; and
	• City / Town.
A breakdown of the number of NDMP projects funded 
in each province, according to the scale of the funding 
recipient organization, is illustrated in Figure 2. 
Analysis of the data reveals distinct differences 
between the provinces and territories in terms of both 
the number of projects funded from 2015 to 2022 and 
the spatial scale of the recipients leading the projects. 
Over half of the projects receiving funding from the 
NDMP were in the province of Ontario (235 projects, 
51%), with a significant number of projects in British 
Columbia (106 projects, 23%) and Alberta (49 projects, 
11%). The remaining provinces and territories each 
received funding for 5% or less of the NDMP-funded 
projects.
With regard to the spatial scale of funding recipients:
	• The provincial government was the only recipient 
of NDMP funding in Manitoba, Yukon, and 
Newfoundland and Labrador. The provincial 
government was also the recipient for the 
majority of NDMP projects in Alberta, Nova Scotia, 
Prince Edward Island, and Saskatchewan.
	• Regional governments were key leaders of NDMP 
projects in British Columbia, and led some of the 
projects in Ontario, Nova Scotia, and Alberta.
	• Watershed scale organizations received funding 
for NDMP projects in only two provinces: Ontario 
and British Columbia. However, together these 
projects represented 34% of projects funded, 31% 
of which were led by Conservation Authorities 
in Ontario. The remaining nine projects were led 
by the Fraser Basin Council and the Okanagan 
Basin Water Board in British Columbia. 
	• Indigenous governments secured funding for 
11 NDMP projects, with nine of these projects 
based in Prince Edward Island. It is notable that 
Indigenous governments also had access to 
alternative funding programs, such as First Nations 
Adapt, during the 2015–2022 time period [99].
	• Cities and towns were the key funding recipients 
for NDMP projects in New Brunswick, where 
funds for 14 projects were secured by seven cities 
and towns. Many projects in Ontario and British 
Columbia were also led by cities and towns. In the 
Northwest Territories, Tuktoyaktuk and Aklavik 
received NDMP funding. Overall, cities and 
towns led 31% of the NDMP-funded projects.
The results of the analysis reflect the significant 
differences between provinces in terms of both their 
approach to watershed management and in the roles 
and responsibilities for flood and erosion risk 
management, as described in section 3.2. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
24
csagroup.org
Figure 2: NDMP Projects Classified by Scale of Recipient Organization
In particular, the findings underline the pivotal role of 
Conservation Authorities in undertaking and attracting 
investment to flood and erosion risk management at 
the watershed-scale in Ontario, and the lack of 
organizations playing a similar role in other provinces 
and territories. 
The allocation of NDMP funding was based on 
evaluation of applications received, rather than on an 
assessment of baseline flood and erosion risk across 
Canada. To access funding, organizations required the 
necessary resources (staff, time, and knowledge) to 
develop a successful application. Ontario Conservation 
Authorities evidently were among the organizations 
that had these necessary resources and successfully 
secured funding for multiple projects. For example, 
over the seven-year period, the Toronto and Region 
Conservation Authority secured NDMP funding for 23 
projects, the Upper Thames River Conservation 
Authority for 16 projects, and the Credit Valley 
Conservation Authority for 12 projects. 
The lack of organizations undertaking a similar 
watershed-scale role led to fewer applications being 
made in other provinces and territories, and ultimately 
less work being funded to reduce flood and erosion 
risk in Canada. The evaluation of the NDMP 
undertaken in 2020 identified that the MCC part of the 
program had a budget of $183.8 million for the period 
2015–2020, but only $94.8 million was allocated to 
projects in this period. The remaining funds (48%) 
were either reprofiled to future years of the program, 
reallocated to other departmental priorities, or returned 
to Treasury Board Secretariat [99].
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
25
csagroup.org
The findings also highlight the significant role that 
cities and towns currently play in undertaking projects 
to address flood and erosion risk. A key issue with this 
arrangement in terms of managing river flooding and 
erosion is that the jurisdiction of cities and towns often 
does not encompass the watershed or sub-watershed 
of concern from a flood risk management perspective. 
While studies to understand and map flood risk may be 
designed to cover areas outside the jurisdiction 
(Stream 1 and 2 of the NDMP), mitigation planning 
and implementation of solutions (Stream 3 and 4 of 
the NDMP) are likely to be focused within the 
jurisdiction of the city and town. This may effectively 
preclude consideration of many NbS that work with 
natural processes at the watershed or sub-watershed 
scale (e.g., increasing floodwater storage upstream of a 
city or town by reconnecting floodplains). In addition, 
the potentially negative and cumulative impacts of 
solutions implemented by cities and towns on 
downstream communities may not be appropriately 
considered.
3.3.1.4 Use of Nature-based Solutions 
NbS to reduce flood and erosion risk were eligible for 
funding under Stream 4 of the NDMP, covering non-
structural and small-scale structural disaster mitigation 
projects. 112 projects received funding under Stream 4, 
accounting for 24% of the funded projects (Figure 3).  
Figure 3: Classification by Stream of 460 NDMP Projects 
Funded 2015–2022
Funding allocation to NbS was not specifically tracked. 
The titles and descriptions of the Stream 4 projects 
funded between 2015 and 2022 were reviewed to 
identify projects that related to NbS. Following review of 
project titles and, where available, project descriptions, 
six projects were identified as relating to NbS (Table 4). 
Other projects may have included NbS that were not 
detailed in the project name or description.
Table 4: : Details of Six NbS Projects Funded by NDMP between 2015 and 2022
Prov.
Project Name
Funding Year
Organization
Project Description (where available)
ON
Reducing Impacts of 
Stormwater - Green 
Infrastructure Promotion 
Program
2017–18
Upper 
Thames River 
Conservation 
Authority
Public education outreach program 
(non-structural)
ON
McKellar Ward Green 
Infrastructure Installation 
Tree Planting Project
2018–19
City of Thunder 
Bay
Green infrastructure installation tree 
planting project
ON
Saltfleet Flood and Erosion 
Control Wetland Mitigation 
Project
2019–20
Hamilton 
Conservation 
Authority
Establishment of four wetlands located 
in the Upper Stoney Creek and Upper 
Battlefield Creek watersheds. Work aims to 
reduce flooding in Lower Stoney Creek and 
Battlefield Creek for a range of storm events 
(2- to 100-year return period). 
1
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
26
csagroup.org
Prov.
Project Name
Funding Year
Organization
Project Description (where available)
ON
Wetland Enhancement 
Partnership within the Lake 
Simcoe Basin to Eliminate 
Chronic Community 
Flooding
2019–20
Lake Simcoe 
Region 
Conservation 
Authority
Development of a strategic wetland 
enhancement project to reduce flood risk. 
Includes a Class Environmental Assessment, 
public consultation, and engagement of 
stakeholders in the design process. Post-
construction performance monitoring and 
operational / maintenance are also included.
ON
Greening Your 
Neighbourhoods Waterloo 
Region**
2019–20
Reep Green 
Solutions
Workshops to engage local residents and 
stakeholders in considering priority actions 
that could help to reduce stormwater 
runoff within their neighbourhood. Goal 
to increase uptake of green stormwater 
infrastructure solutions to help mitigate flood 
risks associated with increasingly intense 
precipitation events.
ON
Focus on Flooding and 
Reducing the Impacts of 
Stormwater in the Upper 
Thames Watershed – 
Phase 2
2019–20
Upper 
Thames River 
Conservation 
Authority
Phase 2 to further the 2017–18 funded 
project. Extended delivery of program and 
additional components to students and 
residents of high-risk communities. Includes 
a low-impact development pilot project and 
education programming with schools.
The six projects identified represent just over 1% of the 
460 projects funded by the NDMP and 5% of Stream 4 
projects. It is notable that all of the projects relating to 
NbS were funded in Ontario, with four of them being led 
by Conservation Authorities. 
3.3.2 Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund
3.3.2.1 Overview of Funding Program
In 2018, the Government of Canada committed $2 billion 
over 10 years to the Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation 
Fund (DMAF) to invest in structural and natural 
infrastructure projects to increase the resilience of 
communities that are impacted by natural disasters 
triggered by climate change [100]. This first intake of 
DMAF aimed to support “shovel-ready”, large-scale 
projects with total eligible costs of at least $20 million, 
with match-funding being provided by applicants in 
most cases [101]. Funding from the first intake of the 
DMAF was allocated between 2018 and 2022 and is 
the focus of analysis presented in this section. Projects 
were considered for funding as part of a competitive 
intake process, as well as to respond to urgent and 
emergent situations [101].
In Budget 2021, an additional $1.375 billion in federal 
funding over 12 years was announced to renew the 
DMAF. Starting in 2021, the DMAF funding has two 
streams: the small-scale project stream (projects with 
total eligible costs between $1 million and $20 million) 
and the large-scale project stream (projects with total 
eligible costs of $20 million and above) [102]. In 
launching the National Adaptation Strategy, up to 
$489 million in further funding was allocated to the 
DMAF [103].
3.3.2.2 Project-Level Data 
Funding from the first intake of the DMAF was allocated 
to 70 projects between 2018 and 2022. Project-level 
information relating to these projects is publicly 
available online as part of Infrastructure Canada’s 
project dataset [104]. Information provided in the 
dataset includes project title, ultimate recipient, location, 
province, and federal funding contribution. 
In addition to the project dataset, news releases issued 
by the Government of Canada to announce each project 
were researched online and used to extract a brief 
27
csagroup.org
description of each project. Using these project 
descriptions, it was possible to identify DMAF projects 
that addressed river flooding and erosion. Subsequently, 
these projects were analyzed and classified according 
to the spatial scale of the funding recipient(s), the spatial 
scale of the project itself, and the use of NbS.
3.3.2.3 River Flooding and Erosion Projects 
DMAF funding was available for projects that reduce 
future climate-related risks and disasters triggered by 
a range of natural hazards, including, but not limited 
to, avalanche, drought, earthquake, erosion, extreme 
temperature, flood, hurricane, landslides, permafrost 
thaw, sea level rise, storm, tsunami, and wildland 
fire. Analysis of project titles and descriptions reveals 
that 45 of the 70 projects funded during the first 
intake of DMAF related directly, or in part, to reducing 
river flooding and erosion risks. See Figure 4. The 
federal funding contribution to these 45 projects 
was $1.389 million.
Further analysis described in the following sections 
has been undertaken considering these 45 projects 
directly or partly related to reducing river flooding and 
erosion risks.
3.3.2.4 Spatial Jurisdiction of Funding 
Recipient Organizations
Each DMAF river flood and erosion project was 
classified according to the spatial jurisdiction of the 
funding recipient organization, using the following 
classification:
	• Province;
	• Watershed;
	• Region;
	• Indigenous government; and
	• City / Town.
A breakdown of the number of DMAF projects 
funded in each province / territory, according to the 
scale of the funding recipient organization, 
is illustrated in Figure 5.
Figure 4 : Classification of 70 DMAF Projects Based on their 
Relationship to River Flooding and Erosion Risks [104]
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
“Analysis of project titles and descriptions 
reveals that 45 of the 70 projects funded  
during the first intake of DMAF related  
directly, or in part, to reducing river flooding 
and erosion risks.”
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
28
csagroup.org
Table 5: Details of Six DMAF River Flood and Erosion Projects Using NbS
Prov.
Project Name
Organization
Project Description 
BC
Mill Creek Flood Protection
City of Kelowna 
Project to increase creek capacity through rehabilitating 
riverbanks, upgrading drainage, and providing additional 
off-stream water storage areas.
BC
Cowichan Watershed 
Resiliency Program
Cowichan Tribes 
First Nation
Project to improve watershed resilience by increasing 
capacity to buffer drought and flooding. Focus areas 
include sediment management and habitat rehabilitation.
ON
Natural infrastructure 
enhancement and 
restoration of the urban 
forest in the York Region
York Region
Planting trees and adding natural features to improve 
drainage capacity during heavy rainfall events.
ON
Repair, remediate, and 
enhance resilience of 
Toronto's tree canopy 
and waterfront shoreline 
structures to protect 
against future flooding 
and storm events
Toronto and Region 
Conservation 
Authority (TRCA)
Rehabilitating shoreline infrastructure, beaches, waterfront 
parks, embankments, trails, and pathways. Improving the 
resiliency and tree canopy cover.
ON
Toronto Region Ravine 
Erosion Risk Management 
and Hazard Mitigation 
Project
Toronto and Region 
Conservation 
Authority (TRCA)
Management of erosion at 111 locations within the Region 
of Peel, York Region, and the City of Toronto over the next 
10 years.
QC
Rehabilitation of natural 
shoreline threatened by 
accelerated erosion in the 
major waterfront parks on 
the Island of Montreal, in 
the province of Quebec
City of Montreal
Rehabilitating 10 km of shoreline using bioengineering 
techniques that include vegetation. Aim to better manage 
the impacts of erosion and protect shoreline communities 
and ecosystems.
The province with the most DMAF-funded projects to 
manage river flood and erosion risk was Ontario (17 
projects). Several projects were also funded in Quebec 
(8 projects) and British Columbia (7 projects), with 
other provinces receiving funding for 5 or fewer 
projects. No river flood and erosion projects were 
funded in Nova Scotia, Nunavut, Prince Edward Island, 
or Yukon.
Regarding the spatial scale of funding recipients, over 
two-thirds of the projects were led by cities and towns. 
Watershed-scale organizations only received funding 
in Ontario, while Indigenous governments only 
received funding in British Columbia. In Manitoba and 
Newfoundland and Labrador, only the provinces 
received DMAF funding. 
3.3.2.5 Spatial Jurisdiction of Projects
Based on project descriptions, each DMAF river flood 
and erosion project was classified according to the 
spatial jurisdiction of project implementation, using the 
following classification:
	• Province;
	• Region;
	• Watershed; and
	• City / Town / Community.
A breakdown of the number of DMAF projects funded 
in each province / territory, according to the scale of 
the project, is illustrated in Figure 6. No projects were 
funded at the provincial scale.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
29
csagroup.org
Figure 5: DMAF River Flood and Erosion Projects Classified by Scale of Recipient Organization [104]
Figure 6: DMAF River Flood and Erosion Projects Classified by Scale of Project [104]
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
30
csagroup.org
Over half the projects involved managing river flood and 
erosion risk at the city / town / community scale, while 
just over one-third of projects worked at the regional 
scale, benefitting more than one community. In a 
number of cases, this was a result of collaboration 
between communities to develop some of the projects, 
with one of the communities acting as the funding 
recipient. A number of projects at the regional scale also 
involved provincial-led works to improve the climate 
resilience of public infrastructure (e.g., road corridors). 
Only five projects aimed to reduce flood and erosion 
risk working at a watershed-scale. These project were 
in Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec. 
3.3.2.6 Use of Nature-based Solutions 
The 2018 DMAF application guide stated that the fund’s 
key objective was “strengthening the resilience of 
Canadian communities through investments in large-
scale infrastructure projects, including natural 
infrastructure projects” [105].
Eligible investments for infrastructure projects under 
the DMAF included [105]: 
	• “New construction of public infrastructure including 
natural infrastructure
	• Modification and/or reinforcement including 
rehabilitation and expansion of existing public 
infrastructure including natural infrastructure
	• Land acquisition costs for land to be used as 
natural infrastructure.” 
Merit criteria used to evaluate full applications also 
promoted use of natural infrastructure in projects 
proposed for DMAF funding:
	• Criteria 4: Promote use of innovation - including 
consideration of natural infrastructure, innovative 
technologies and/or global best practices
	• Criteria 10: Consideration of infrastructure solutions 
that provide additional benefits to the community 
such as cultural and environmental value.
Funding allocation to NbS was not specifically tracked. 
The titles and descriptions of the 45 river flood and 
erosion projects were reviewed to identify projects that 
implemented NbS. Six projects were identified as using 
NbS. A further nine projects were identified as 
incorporating NbS as part of the overall project works, 
although a significant part of the works concerned 
grey infrastructure (Figure 7).
The projects using NbS to manage river flood and 
erosion risk were led by a range of funding recipients, 
including an Indigenous government, a region, a 
Conservation Authority, and two cities (Table 5). Projects 
including NbS as part of the proposed works were also 
led by cites and one municipal district (Table 6).
Figure 7: DMAF River Flood and Erosion Projects and NbS [104]
3.3.3 Key Findings 
Based on the analysis of projects funded under the 
NDMP and DMAF programs, the following overall 
conclusions can be drawn:
	• Many federally funded flood and erosion risk 
management projects were led by, and undertaken 
within the jurisdiction of, single cities and towns. It 
may not be possible to effectively use NbS to reduce 
flood and erosion risk at the community scale (e.g., 
interventions upstream may be excluded). Similarly, 
potentially negative downstream impacts may not be 
fully considered.
Projects using Nbs 
6 Projects
13%
Projects 
including some 
Nbs elements 
9 Projects
20%
Projects not including Nbs 
30 Projects
67%
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
31
csagroup.org
	• While a significant number of funded projects 
were undertaken by organizations working at a 
watershed-scale, these organizations are located 
only in Ontario and British Columbia. Conservation 
Authorities have played a major role in Ontario 
in securing federal funding for, and completing, 
projects to understand and reduce flooding and 
erosion. There has effectively been a positive 
feedback loop in place. Additional funds to further 
reduce flood and erosion risks have been secured 
in the province that already has the most robust 
approach to watershed management. The Fraser 
Basin Council has undertaken a similar but less 
pronounced role in British Columbia. The lack of 
organizations undertaking a similar watershed-
scale role has historically led to fewer applications 
for federal funding being made in other provinces 
and territories, and ultimately less work being 
completed to reduce flood and erosion risk. 
	• NbS accounted for a minority of projects 
funded under the NDMP and DMAF (first 
intake) programs. A greater number of projects 
incorporating NbS were funded through the DMAF, 
as the application process actively encouraged 
natural infrastructure to be considered.
	• Indigenous governments can play a role securing 
funding for and leading watershed-scale approaches 
employing NbS to reduce river flooding and erosion.
Table 5: Details of Six DMAF River Flood and Erosion Projects Using NbS
Prov.
Project Name
Organization
Project Description 
BC
Mill Creek Flood Protection
City of Kelowna 
Project to increase creek capacity through rehabilitating 
riverbanks, upgrading drainage, and providing additional 
off-stream water storage areas.
BC
Cowichan Watershed 
Resiliency Program
Cowichan Tribes 
First Nation
Project to improve watershed resilience by increasing 
capacity to buffer drought and flooding. Focus areas include 
sediment management and habitat rehabilitation.
ON
Natural infrastructure 
enhancement and 
restoration of the urban 
forest in the York Region
York Region
Planting trees and adding natural features to improve 
drainage capacity during heavy rainfall events.
ON
Repair, remediate, and 
enhance resilience of 
Toronto's tree canopy 
and waterfront shoreline 
structures to protect 
against future flooding and 
storm events
Toronto and Region 
Conservation 
Authority (TRCA)
Rehabilitating shoreline infrastructure, beaches, waterfront 
parks, embankments, trails, and pathways. Improving the 
resiliency and tree canopy cover.
ON
Toronto Region Ravine 
Erosion Risk Management 
and Hazard Mitigation 
Project
Toronto and Region 
Conservation 
Authority (TRCA)
Management of erosion at 111 locations within the Region 
of Peel, York Region, and the City of Toronto over the next 
10 years.
QC
Rehabilitation of natural 
shoreline threatened by 
accelerated erosion in the 
major waterfront parks on 
the Island of Montreal, in 
the province of Quebec
City of Montreal
Rehabilitating 10 km of shoreline using bioengineering 
techniques that include vegetation. Aim to better manage 
the impacts of erosion and protect shoreline communities 
and ecosystems.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
32
csagroup.org
Table 6: Details of Nine DMAF River Flood and Erosion Projects that Include NbS elements
Prov.
Project Name
Organization
Project Description 
AB
Bow Valley Mountain 
Creeks Flood Mitigation
Municipal District of 
Bighorn No. 8
Includes re-vegetation and bio-engineering work to 
control erosion problems.
BC
Coastal flood protection 
for the cities of Surrey and 
Delta, and the Semiahmoo 
First Nation
City of Surrey
Includes establishing a riverfront park on the Nicomekl 
River with natural flood-attenuating features.
BC
Grand Forks and Regional 
District of Kootenay 
Boundary Flood Mitigation
City of Grand Forks, 
Includes re-establishing a natural floodplain in North 
Ruckle and building new retention ponds in South Ruckle.
NB
Multiple Natural and 
Structural Infrastructure 
Projects to Adapt to Pluival 
and Fluvial Flood Events in 
Fredericton
City of Fredericton 
Includes works to create and expand wetland areas to 
improve local resilience to flooding.
NT
Flood Hazard Mitigation for 
the Yellowknife Region
City of Yellowknife 
Includes investing in natural infrastructure to reduce the 
risk of flooding in the community.
ON
Implementing Vaughan 
Stormwater Flood 
Mitigation projects
City of Vaughan
Includes projects that will improve water quality, increase 
floodplain storage, and create wetlands.
ON
Kitchener Stormwater 
Network Adaptation
City of Kitchener
Includes work to redesign a natural channel to help 
manage heavy rainfalls.
QC
Wabassee Creek 
Watershed
City of Gatineau 
Includes work to rehabilitate three natural assets in the 
Wabassee Creek watershed.
QC
Protection and resilience 
increase against flooding 
in Pierrefonds-Roxboro
City of Montreal
Includes work toward creating the largest urban park 
in Canadian history, including wetland enhancement to 
support ecosystems and improve local flood resilience.
4 Good Practices and 
Opportunities for Improvement
NbS could play a greater role in managing river ﬂood 
and erosion risk in Canada, while delivering multiple 
benefits. However, a watershed approach is key to 
facilitate both the identification and implementation 
of these type of solutions. This section presents key 
findings of focus groups to identify current good 
practices, lessons learnt, opportunities, and 
recommendations to better integrate NbS into 
flood and erosion management at the watershed 
scale in Canada.
4.1 Towards a Watershed 
Approach for NbS
The first of the two focus groups “Towards a Watershed 
Approach” was held on May 30, 2022. Key findings are 
summarized below and additional details are included 
in Appendix A.
4.1.1 Perceptions of Watershed Management
As highlighted through the literature review in section 
3.2, approaches to watershed management vary 
significantly across Canadian provinces. This is 
also reflected in the stakeholder perceptions. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
33
csagroup.org
Figure 8 illustrates the scores out of 10 assigned by 25 
stakeholders regarding their perception of watershed 
management in their province. While personal 
perceptions within the same province are different 
and the number of viewpoints is limited, the results 
still indicate perceived strengths in watershed 
management in Ontario, Alberta, and Manitoba, and 
relative weakness in British Columbia and Nova Scotia.
4.1.2 Current Implementation of NbS 
for Flood and Erosion Management
There was clear consensus among stakeholders that 
Conservation Authorities in Ontario are leading the way 
in terms of both watershed management and the use of 
NbS for flood and erosion risk management in Canada. 
It was highlighted that, since Conservation Authorities 
have responsibility for flood and erosion risk 
management, as well as conservation/restoration and 
environmental monitoring, they are well positioned to 
integrate NbS into flood and erosion risk management. 
The Toronto and Region Conservation Authority and 
Credit Valley Conservation are particularly well-
established and have developed best practice guidance 
in many areas relating to NbS. Watershed organizations 
in other provinces were also cited for their work with 
NbS, including Fraser Basin Council (BC), Bow River 
Basin Council (AB), and the PEI Watershed Alliance. 
However, these organizations do not have the same 
legislated mandate as Conservation Authorities.
At the provincial scale, the establishment of the 
Watershed Districts Program by the Government 
of Manitoba was identified as supportive to the 
implementation of NbS, although the transition from 
municipal to watershed-based management is ongoing. 
The importance of local government leadership was 
underlined by several participants, both in terms of 
managing flooding within a watershed context and in 
implementing NbS. Examples cited included the City of 
Calgary’s Riparian Strategy and Action Plan and work 
to value natural assets, as well as the early integration 
of “freedom space” for the Coaticook River into land 
use planning by the MRC of Coaticook in Quebec.
NGOs and consultants are also actively supporting 
implementation of NbS on the ground. These actions are 
not necessarily part of overall watershed strategies and 
are being implemented to achieve multiple benefits, 
including, but not limited to, reducing flood and erosion 
risk. Examples cited by participants included: 
Figure 8: Perceptions of Watershed Management in Canadian Provinces (excluding Newfoundland and Labrador)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
34
csagroup.org
“Many tools are used to compare and assess 
river management options in Canada. There is 
currently no standardized approach.”
	• ALUS, working with landowners to implement NbS 
on farmland; 
	• MNAI, working with municipalities to inventory, value, 
and effectively manage their existing natural assets;
	• Ducks Unlimited, working to restore and enhance 
wetlands in multiple provinces;
	• WWF Canada, working to increase resiliency using 
NbS in the Saint John Watershed; 
	• NbS projects led by the Transcoastal Adaptations 
Centre for Nature-based Solutions in Nova Scotia; 
and
	• Forests Ontario, working with landowners and 
Conservation Authorities to strategically restore 
forests at a landscape and watershed-scale.
4.1.3 Lessons Learned Working at the 
Watershed-Scale
The following lessons learned provide a summary 
of the outputs of small group discussions between 
stakeholders.
1.	 A coordinated, multi-stakeholder watershed 
approach is best practice
	
Flood and erosion management is best approached 
as part of integrated watershed management, which 
considers many other inter-related watershed 
functions and uses. Participants highlighted the 
value of coordination, close working relationships, 
and collaboration between watershed management 
organizations and communities. This was perceived 
as a key benefit of partnerships already established 
between Conservation Authorities and municipalities. 
It is particularly important because of the need to 
consider natural river systems in flood and erosion 
management. These natural river systems do not 
follow jurisdictional boundaries. 
2.	Supportive policy and legislative powers 
facilitate good decisions
	
Strong land use planning or zoning rules help to 
support use of NbS and management of at-risk 
areas. It was perceived that, in many cases, the key 
challenges are not technical understanding but 
political support for appropriate long-term 
management. For example, it is desirable to avoid 
development in zones at flood and erosion risk but 
these zones remain subject to development pressure. 
The importance of creating alternative purposes or 
uses for high-risk areas, using NbS, to lessen this 
pressure was highlighted. NbS can also provide 
benefits as part of solutions to retreat development 
from high-risk areas. In either case, land rights were 
identified as being able to influence land use and 
activities that can be undertaken in high-risk areas.
3.	Whole-life cost-benefit analysis supports 
better decision making
	
It is important to demonstrate, compare, and 
communicate the value of different NbS and 
grey infrastructure solutions for flood and risk 
management. Stakeholders are already implementing 
triple-bottom line approaches to compare options. 
Cost-benefit analysis can be used to demonstrate 
where hard engineering options are not the best 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
35
csagroup.org
solution and where retreat from high-risk areas of 
the floodplain is more beneficial overall. It was 
also highlighted that NbS can reduce long-term 
maintenance commitments, especially where 
grey infrastructure is obsolete.
4.	A solid technical understanding is required as 
a basis for river flood and erosion management
	
Solid technical understanding is a prerequisite for 
appropriate flood and erosion management. Technical 
understanding of how NbS can be used to reduce 
flood and erosion and the level of service achievable 
was perceived as lacking. Appropriate data collection 
is critical, including ongoing watershed monitoring 
and project-based monitoring of NbS.
5.	One size does not fit all in watershed management
	
Canadian watersheds are diverse in terms of their 
spatial scale, key functions, and stakeholders. As 
such, watershed management approaches need to 
be flexible to enable regional application.
6.	An adaptive approach is needed 
	
It is not possible to foresee all future drivers of 
watershed management. Watershed approaches 
need to be adaptive in the context of ongoing social, 
economic, and environmental change.
4.1.4 Recommendations to Better Integrate 
NbS and Flood and Erosion Management at 
a Watershed-Scale
Extend Watershed Management to All Provinces
There was consensus that a watershed management 
approach, similar to that originally developed in Ontario, 
should be applied to other provinces. Federal and 
provincial governments should develop and fund a 
nationally consistent watershed planning framework 
that has agreed minimum requirements and is flexible 
enough to address local watershed needs. A national 
approach should build on established guidance and 
best practices, particularly from Ontario (e.g., Provincial 
Policy Statement, Natural Heritage Reference Manual). 
The Canadian Water Agency was suggested as a 
potential vehicle for watershed-based governance [106]. 
This approach provides opportunities to engage with 
Indigenous communities and governments who are 
already working with NbS. The National Adaptation 
Strategy [107] was mentioned as another initiative that 
would benefit from watershed management, with a 
need to also manage future drought conditions. 
Consultation in British Columbia on a Watershed 
Security Strategy and Fund was seen as a potential 
catalyst in that province. 
Develop Flood and Erosion Risk Management 
Strategies for Watersheds on a Prioritized Basis
It was recommended that flood risk management 
strategies be developed for all watersheds, starting 
with those most at-risk. These strategies should involve 
coordination between all levels of government to 
prioritize strategic action based on risk.
Standardize Valuation and Management of 
Natural Assets 
It was recommended that standards and guidelines are 
prepared to support valuing of ecosystem services 
provided by NbS and existing natural assets. This is 
needed to compare NbS to traditional solutions and to 
demonstrate and communicate benefits to watershed 
users. This can build on existing standard development 
for natural asset inventory. Such standards would also 
be useful in identifying appropriate compensation or 
incentives for “non-use”, prescribed beneficial uses of 
land, or opportunities that could be realized as part of 
managed retreat.
Require Consideration of NbS as the Default Solution
Protocols or funding procedures should be updated to 
promote consideration of NbS as the default solution, 
with grey solutions being compared and applied where 
technically required or more beneficial. 
Provide Additional Incentives for NbS on 
Private Lands
It was recommended that additional incentives be 
developed to increase use of NbS or protection of 
existing natural assets on private lands. This may 
include tax incentives, project financing conditions, 
or green loans. 
Facilitate Sharing of Data and Best Practices
Networks are required to facilitate communication and 
data sharing between communities within a watershed, 
between watersheds, and between provinces. There is 
currently limited exchange between watershed 
organizations in different provinces.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
36
csagroup.org
4.2 Including NbS Benefits 
in Options Appraisal
The benefits of NbS are currently not adequately 
addressed in options appraisal approaches in Canada. 
The second of the two focus groups, “Including NbS 
Benefits in Options Appraisal,” was held on June 14, 
2022. Key findings are summarized below and 
additional details are included in Appendix A.
4.2.1 Current Options Appraisal Approaches 
and Tools 
Many tools are used to compare and assess river 
management options in Canada. There is currently 
no standardized approach, with common approaches 
including:
	• Multi-criteria analysis (largely qualitative 
assessment);
	• Evaluation against specific performance objectives;
	• Return on investment (often based on avoiding 
damages); and
	• Cost-benefit analysis (largely quantitative 
assessment of tangible and intangible benefits/
costs).
Approaches are usually tailored to the specific project 
objectives, and approaches may be combined to 
capture and evaluate different outcomes. 
Canadian-specific federal or provincial protocols used 
to appraise river flood and erosion management 
options include:
	• Application of Infrastructure Canada’s Climate Lens 
(includes Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Assessment 
and Climate Change Resilience Assessment) [108];
	• Evaluation against Disaster Mitigation and 
Adaptation Fund application criteria [109]; and
	• Legally required Environment Impact Assessment 
procedures (vary by province and territory). 
Tools to support options appraisal have also been 
developed by other Canadian organizations. Cited 
examples are briefly profiled below.
Sustainable Asset Valuation (SAVi) 
SAVi is an assessment methodology that aims to 
help governments and investors steer capital toward 
sustainable infrastructure [110]. The International 
Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) and 
MAVA Foundation built SAVi to identify and value the 
costs of risks, as well as the costs of externalities, of 
infrastructure projects, portfolios, and policies. SAVi is 
a simulation methodology that combines the outputs 
of systems dynamics simulation with project finance 
modelling. It is customized to each asset, portfolio, or 
policy, and it can be specifically tailored for nature-
based infrastructure [111]. In Canada, the tool has 
been used to estimate the value of ecosystem and 
infrastructure services provided by Pelly’s Lake and 
Stephenfield Reservoir in Manitoba and to assess the 
required costs of providing these services with built or 
updated infrastructure [112]. The tool is not available for 
use by organizations themselves; rather the IISD team 
seeks to work with partners to customize the tool to 
each case [113].
Class Environmental Assessment for Remedial 
Flood and Erosion Control Projects
Environment Assessment in Ontario includes several 
approved Class Environmental Assessments (Class 
EAs) that set out a standardized planning process for 
classes or groups of activities [114]. A Class EA for 
Remedial Flood and Erosion Control Projects was 
developed by Ontario’s Conservation Authorities and 
coordinated by Conservation Ontario. The Class EA sets 
out a planning and design process that ensures that 
environmental effects are considered when undertaking 
remedial flood and erosion control projects [115]. The 
Class EA documents requirements relating to option 
appraisal, including identifying alternative methods, 
selecting a preferred alternative, and determining the 
net impacts of the preferred alternative.
Risk and Return on Investment Tool (RROIT) 
The RROIT was developed by Credit Valley 
Conservation and partners to support decision makers 
in selecting cost-effective measures to reduce flood 
and erosion risks [116], The tool can be used to:
	• “Quantify potential direct and indirect damages in 
dollars from flooding and erosion under different 
climate scenarios.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
37
csagroup.org
	• Compare the effectiveness of different stormwater 
management solutions, including natural assets, land 
acquisition in the floodplain, low impact development, 
and grey infrastructure.
	• Perform financial assessments of the return on 
investment for each solution (and combinations) to 
help make cost-effective decisions and reduce risk.”
The tool is not yet available for use by organizations 
themselves but those interested in using it are invited 
to reach out to Credit Valley Conservation for further 
details [116].
4.2.2 Accounting for NbS Benefits in 
Options Appraisal
NbS can deliver multiple benefits that are not typically 
provided by hard “grey” protection measures [117, 118]. 
Such benefits are often referred to as “ecosystem 
goods and services” that provide benefits to people. 
These goods and services often do not have a direct 
monetary market value and are therefore more difficult 
to integrate into options appraisal in financial terms.
Feedback from participants suggest that NbS are 
being considered as options for flood and erosion 
management but not routinely or in a way that enables 
all of the benefits to be evaluated. Flood and erosion 
control benefits are typically quantified by calculating 
the cost of damages avoided over time. Other 
ecosystem goods and services are often, but not always, 
considered in the appraisal of river flood and erosion 
management options. When ecosystem goods and 
services are considered, qualitative or semi-quantitative 
methods, including ranking and scoring, are often used, 
with some stakeholders undertaking economic valuation.
For example, the DMAF 2021 application process 
requires applicants to calculate economic benefits as a 
Return on Investment (ROI), based on a ratio between 
avoided damages and the cost of the project. Project 
co-benefits, including greenhouse gas reduction and 
ecosystem services, do not factor into the ROI 
calculation and are to be described qualitatively 
under a separate merit criterion [109].
However, ecosystem services, such as water quality, 
carbon sequestration and storage, and biodiversity and 
habitats may also be quantifiable in terms of both 
predicted changes and their monetary value. Both 
quantitative and qualitative approaches may be used to 
appraise impacts as part of option appraisal (Table 7). 
Economic valuation of NbS solutions can employ a 
variety of methods, including estimation of costs to 
replace the service using a grey infrastructure solution, 
revealed preference, and statement preference methods 
[118]. Benefit transfer methods that are less resource 
and time intensive may also be used where “broad 
brush” analysis is sufficient. Semi-quantitative or 
qualitative approaches may be suitable to reflect cultural 
ecosystem services perceived to be less robustly 
quantifiable, such as recreation or aesthetics. Methods 
to assess or quantify changes in ecosystem service 
provision may also be useful as part of performance 
monitoring once a solution has been implemented.
Increasingly, modelling tools are available to help 
evaluate changes in ecosystem goods and services 
that may be associated with coastal management 
options. The Integrated Valuation of Ecosystem 
Services and Tradeoffs (InVEST) tool, developed by the 
Natural Capital Project, is a suite of open-source tools 
that helps users explore how changes in ecosystems 
may lead to changes in benefits to people [119]. Several 
modules are available, including urban flood risk 
mitigation, sediment retention, urban stormwater 
retention, habitat quality, and carbon [120]. 
A key issue identified during the focus group was the 
need to appraise strategic approaches to flood and 
erosion risk management at the watershed-scale in 
order to guide more local level interventions on the 
ground. This is an approach similar to Catchment 
Flood Management Planning undertaken in the United 
Kingdom [121]. Options appraisal on a project-specific 
basis can otherwise often overlook the incremental 
benefits (or adverse impacts) of multiple actions / 
interventions within a watershed. 
4.2.3 Support for Standardization of Option 
Appraisal
As part of the June 14, 2022 focus group, participants 
were asked if they would welcome development of a 
standardized option appraisal protocol for flood and 
erosion management projects to include the benefits / 
costs associated with ecosystem goods and services. 
The majority of participants replied “yes”. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
38
csagroup.org
 
Table 7: Examples of Methods, Indicators, and Lessons Learned in Assessing Changes in Ecosystem Goods and Services
Impact
Methods, Indicators, and Values Used
Lessons Learned
Water quality
•	Use of bespoke software (InVEST)
•	Change in, or replacement value of, water 
treatment costs
•	Change in water quality indicators (applying 
established standards)
•	Visual indicators of water quality (turbidity, 
algal blooms) that may be obtained using earth 
observation techniques
•	Established standard protocols are available
•	Can be difficult to address variability over 
space and time 
Carbon 
sequestration 
and storage
•	Use of bespoke software (InVEST)
•	Social value of carbon 
•	Change in soils and vegetation and impact on 
carbon flux and storage
•	Calculation of embedded carbon in “grey” 
infrastructure protection measures 
•	No standardized method available
•	Time lag in carbon sequestration needs to 
be accounted for
•	Calculations should be based on local data 
Biodiversity and 
habitats
•	Use of bespoke software (InVEST, iTree)
•	Use of traditional ecological knowledge / 
participative mapping to obtain baseline 
•	Change in species diversity / species at risk / 
invasive species
•	Change in land use area of different habitats 
(using GIS)
•	Different tools may be suited to different 
habitats 
•	High-resolution mapping can be obtained 
using drones
•	The value of habitat connectivity is difficult 
to capture
Many of those who replied “not sure” indicated in more 
detailed comments that they were open to 
standardization as long as there was appropriate 
consultation in developing the standard and flexibility 
in applying methods suited to the local context. 
5 Conclusions and 
Recommendations
5.1 Three Key Conclusions
Drawing together the findings of the research and 
stakeholder engagement undertaken through this 
project, the following three key conclusions can 
be drawn:
1.	
Canada already has good practice approaches 
for watershed management that support 
implementation of NbS for flood and erosion 
risk management. These approaches 
need to be strengthened and supported in 
Ontario and extended to other provinces.
2.	 Funding for river flood and erosion risk 
management needs to be directed to 
watershed-scale strategies that address 
prioritized high-risk areas or projects that 
have been identified by such strategies. This 
approach would support meaningful appraisal 
and implementation of measures (including 
NbS) that address underlying causes of flooding 
and erosion while achieving multiple benefits.
3.	 NbS need to be considered for river flood 
and erosion management with the same 
rigour as grey infrastructure solutions. This 
includes routine appraisal of NbS alongside 
a full range of grey infrastructure solutions.
5.2 Recommended Actions for 
Governments
Federal, provincial, watershed-scale, and local 
governments (including municipal and Indigenous 
governments) all have roles to play in implementing 
the above recommendations. In particular, provincial 
governments play a key role, since they have 
jurisdictional responsibility for implementing flood 
and erosion risk management. 
The actions that different levels of government can 
take in using NbS to reduce flood and erosion risk 
are outlined in Table 8.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
39
csagroup.org
Table 8: Roles of Governments in Using NbS for Flood and Erosion Risk Management at the Watershed Scale 
Government
Recommended Actions
Federal 
government
Support and work with provincial governments to develop guidance for, and help fund, a nationally 
consistent watershed planning framework that includes agreed-upon minimum requirements for 
flood and erosion risk management at the watershed scale. This could be progressed through the 
Canadian Water Agency or through work to achieve targets set by the National Adaptation Strategy 
(although the strategy itself does not explicitly include watershed-scale management, several of the 
objectives and targets would benefit from this approach). 
Work with provincial governments to identify priority watersheds (high-risk areas or 
vulnerable communities) for which flood and erosion management strategies are required 
to be completed first (if they have not been completed already).
Update existing federal funding programs (e.g., DMAF, Natural Infrastructure Fund) or create 
new funding programs to a) direct funds to projects that address flood and erosion risk at the 
sub-watershed / watershed-scale and b) require routine consideration of NbS as the default 
solution, to be combined with grey infrastructure where necessary.
Support development and use of national guidelines and standards to support use of NbS 
for flood and erosion management (see Section 5.3 for discussion of specific standards).
Provincial 
governments 
Strengthen provincial legislation and policy to support watershed-scale approaches to manage 
flood and erosion risk, including the use of NbS. 
Work with the federal government to develop guidance for, and help fund, a nationally consistent 
watershed planning framework that includes agreed-upon minimum requirements for flood and 
erosion risk management at the watershed scale. Provincial governments have a key role to play 
as watershed management (apart from international watersheds) is a provincial jurisdiction.
Work with federal government to identify priority watersheds (high-risk areas or vulnerable 
communities) for which flood and erosion management strategies are required to be completed 
first (if they have not been completed already).
Develop flood and erosion risk management strategies at the watershed / sub-watershed scale 
for prioritized high-risk areas. Update provincial funding programs to a) direct funds to projects 
that address flood and erosion risk at the sub-watershed / watershed-scale and b) require routine 
consideration of NbS as the default solution, to be combined with grey infrastructure where 
necessary.
Watershed 
governance 
organizations
Work to include the use of NbS for flood and erosion risk management as a watershed 
management objective. Ensure that the flood and erosion risk reduction benefits of NbS are 
documented, even when this is not the primary objective of the solution.
Continue to use NbS for flood and erosion management as a default solution where appropriate. 
Work with local community groups, businesses, and governments to publicize the multiple benefits 
delivered. 
Work to inventory, value, and manage the services provided by natural assets within the watershed, 
including flood and erosion protection. Continue to protect existing natural assets and prioritize 
restoration efforts in areas with the highest potential benefit.
Continue to provide technical support to local governments with flood and erosion risk 
management and planning / implementation of NbS projects. 
Communicate the value of natural assets and the role of NbS in flood and erosion protection 
to residents. 
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
40
csagroup.org
Government
Recommended Actions
Local governments 
(including municipal 
and Indigenous 
governments)
Work with watershed organizations to help identify, plan, and implement NbS for flood and erosion 
risk management.
In the absence of a watershed governance organization, work with other local governments to help 
identify, plan, and implement NbS for strategic flood and erosion risk management at a watershed / 
sub-watershed scale.
Consider NbS as the default solution for flood and erosion risk management, to be combined with 
grey infrastructure where necessary.
Work to inventory, value, and manage the services provided by natural assets, within both the local 
government jurisdiction and upstream watershed, including flood and erosion protection.
Communicate the value of natural assets and the role of NbS in flood and erosion protection to residents.
Work with private land owners / farmers who can contribute to nature-based solutions.
5.3 Recommendations for Guidance and Standardization
Potential opportunities for further national guidance and standardization that have been identified as part of this 
research project are outlined in Table 9, together with specific considerations and recommendations drawn from 
this research project.
Table 9: Potential New National Guidance and Standards
Potential National Guidance / Standard
Considerations and Recommendations
Minimum framework for watershed 
management planning
•	Opportunity to build on Canadian provinces and international jurisdictions that 
already have standardized watershed management planning.
•	To include, but not be limited to, flood and erosion risk management.
•	Requires buy-in from provincial governments to be useful; potential role for the 
Canadian Water Agency.
Standard for strategic appraisal 
of river flood and erosion risk 
management options
•	Standard would be applicable at a watershed- / sub-watershed-scale.
•	Opportunity to build from Canadian provinces and international jurisdictions 
that already have standardized strategic flood and erosion risk management.
•	Opportunity to build on the CSA W211:21 Management standard for stormwater 
systems [122].
•	Recommended to include NbS as the default solution, to be combined with grey 
infrastructure where necessary.
Standards to support the 
identification, valuation, and 
management of services provided 
by natural assets
•	First standard on “Specifications for Natural Asset Inventories,” CSA W218 under 
development [123].
•	Additional standard needs may include a) condition assessment, b) valuation, 
c) risk, and d) integration in asset management planning.
•	Standards relating to valuation require integration with the work of the Canadian 
Public Sector Accounting Board to enable financial value to be reported in financial 
statements.
•	Standards could inform standardized project option appraisal and be used by 
various levels of government.
•	Opportunity to tie to targets recently agreed-upon under the Global Biodiversity 
Framework.
Standard option appraisal protocol 
for flood and erosion management 
projects
•	Standard would specifically integrate the financial value of benefits and costs 
associated with NbS and consider the watershed context.
•	Opportunity to build on existing methods and international jurisdictions that 
already have standardized option appraisal protocols.
•	Would be useful to several funding programs to ensure allocation of funds to 
achieve maximum benefits (including, but not limited to, flood and erosion risk 
management benefits).
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
41
csagroup.org
References
[1]	
Convention on Biological Diversity, “Kunming-Montreal Global biodiversity framework - Draft decision 
submitted by the President,” United National Environment Program, CBD/COP/15/L.25, 18 December 2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/e6d3/cd1d/daf663719a03902a9b116c34/cop-15-l-25-en.pdf 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022).
[2]	
Public Safety Canada. “Floods,” publicsafety.gc.ca. https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/
ntrl-hzrds/fld-en.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022).
[3]	
E. Bush and D. Lemmen, Eds., “Canada’s Changing Climate Report,” Government of Canada, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: https://changingclimate.ca/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2020/06/CCCR_FULLREPORT-EN-
FINAL.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[4]	
International Union for Conservation of Nature, “IUCN Global Standard for Nature-based Solutions: a user-
friendly framework for the verification, design and scaling up of NbS: first edition,” 2020, [Online]. Available: 
https://portals.iucn.org/library/node/49070 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[5]	
I. Vouk et al., “Nature-Based Solutions for Coastal and Riverine Flood and Erosion Risk Management,” 
CSA Group, Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.csagroup.org/wp-content/uploads/CSA-Group-
Research-Nature-Based-Solutions-for-Coastal-and-Riverine-Flood-and-Erosion-Risk-Management.pdf 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[6]	
Environment and Climate Change Canada, “Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan.” Government 
of Canada, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/
climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy/full-strategy.html#toc11 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[7]	
Government of Canada, “Drainage Basins,” opendata.canada.ca.
https://open.canada.ca/data/en/dataset/dc475fb0-8893-11e0-9ab7-6cf049291510
[8]	
T.S. Bridges et al., “Use of Natural and Nature-Based Features (NNBF) for Coastal Resilience,” U.S Army 
Corps of Engineers, Engineer Research and Development Center, Jan. 2015. [Online]. Available: https://usace.
contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p266--1coll1/id/3442/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[9]	
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative (MNAI), Companion Guide to the Engineering and Geoscientists BC 
Professional Practice Guidelines – Local Government Assets Management,” Jul. 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://mnai.ca/media/2022/03/MNAI-EGBC-companion-guide-mar2021-105.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[10]	
J.L. Eyquem, “Rising Seas and Shifting Sands: Combining Natural and Grey Infrastructure to Protect Canada's 
Coastal Communities." Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, Dec. 2021. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/UoW_ICCA_2021_12_
Coastal_Protection_Grey_NbS.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[11]	
Statistics Canada, “Standard Drainage Area Classification (SDAC) 2003,” statcan.gc.ca. https://statcan.gc.ca/
en/subjects/standard/sdac/sdac (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
42
csagroup.org
[12]	
Government of Canada, “Watershed Boundaries,” nrcan.gc.ca. https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/science-and-data/
science-and-research/earth-sciences/geography/topographic-information/geobase-surface-water-
program-geeau/watershed-boundaries/20973 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[13]	
ClimateData.ca, “Analyze Climate Data,” climatedata.ca https://climatedata.ca/analyze/ (accessed Oct. 21 2022).
[14]	
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME), “Summary of Integrated Watershed Management 
Approaches Across Canada,” PN 1559, IBN 978-1-77202-034-2, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://ccme.ca/en/
res/summaryofintegratedwatershedmanagement approahcesacrosscanada.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[15]	
Government of British Columbia, “Community Watershed,” gov.bc.ca. https://www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/
environment/air-land-water/water/water-quality/community-watersheds (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[16]	
Fraser Basin Council, “FBC Today,” fraserbasin.bc.ca. https://www.fraserbasin.bc.ca/about_fbc_today.html 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[17]	
Mackenzie River Basin Board, “Mackenzie River Basin Transboundary Waters Master Agreement,” mrbb.ca. 
https://www.mrbb.ca/about-us/what-we-do/mackenzie-river-basin-transboundary-waters-master-
agreement (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[18]	
Mackenzie River Basin Board, “About the River Basin,” mrbb.ca. https://www.mrbb.ca/about-us (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[19]	
B.C. Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection, “Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines,” 
Province of British Columbia, May 2004, Amended by B.C. Ministry of Forests, Lands, Natural Resource 
Operations and Rural Development, Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/
environment/air-land-water/water/integrated-flood-hazard-mgmt/flood_hazard_area_land_use_
guidelines_2017.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[20]	 Government of British Columbia, “Flood Hazard Land Use Management,” gov.bc.ca. https://www2.gov.bc.ca/
gov/content/environment/air-land-water/water/drought-flooding-dikes-dams/integrated-flood-hazard-
management/flood-hazard-land-use-management (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[21]	
B. Feltmate et al., “Climate Change and the Preparedness of Canadian Provinces and Territories to Limit 
Flood Risk,” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, Aug. 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Provincial-Territory-Flood-
Report.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[22]	 Insurance Bureau of Canada, “British Columbia floods cause $450 million in insured damage,” ibc.ca. http://
www.ibc.ca/bc/resources/media-centre/media-releases/british-columbia-floods-cause-450-million-in-
insured-damage. (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[23]	 S. Safaie, S. Johnstone, and N.L. Hastings, Eds., “Resilient pathways report: co-creating new knowledge 
for understanding risk and resilience in British Columbia,” Geological Survey of Canada, Open File 8910, 
Sep. 2022 [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.4095/330521 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[24]	 B.C. Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, “Watershed Security Strategy and Fund: Discussion 
Paper,” Government of British Columbia, Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://engage.gov.bc.ca/app/uploads/
sites/722/2022/01/Watershed-Security-Strategy-Discussion-Paper_04.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
43
csagroup.org
[25]	 Government of British Columbia, “Watershed Security,” engage.gov.bc.ca. https://engage.gov.bc.ca/
watershedsecurity (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[26]	 Government of British Columbia, “From Flood Risk to Resilience in B.C.: An Intentions Paper,” Government 
of British Columbia, October 2022. [Online]. Available: https://engage.gov.bc.ca/app/uploads/
sites/797/2022/10/From-Flood-Risk-to-Resilience-in-B.C.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[27]	 Government of Alberta, “Water for Life: Alberta’s Strategy for Sustainability,” Alberta Environment, ISBN No. 
0-7785-3058-2, Nov. 2003. [Online]. Available: https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/77189444-7456-47f7-944c-
085272b1a79c/resource/17c41dc3-1692-4cf9-b931-2892c57a62b1/download/2003-water-life-albertas-
strategy-sustainability-november-2003.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[28]	 Government of Alberta, “water for life: a renewal,” Alberta Environment, ISBN 978-0-7785-7670-9, 
Nov. 2008. [Online]. Available: https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/16e373f7-35c6-438c-8028-b9ab7e3e2fee/
resource/bd7930bf-da3b-449a-8630-ef0b11dde99e/download/waterforlife-renewal-nov2008.pdf (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[29]	 Government of Alberta, “Watershed management – Overview,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/
watershed-management-overview.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[30]	 Alberta Water Council, “Albertans working together to advance water management priorities,” awchome.ca. 
https://www.awchome.ca/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[31]	
Land Stewardship Centre, “Watershed Stewardship Grants,” landstewardship.org. https://www.
landstewardship.org/enable/programs/watershed-stewardship-grants (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[32]	 Government of Alberta, “Watershed Planning and Advisory Councils,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/
watershed-planning-and-advisory-councils.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[33]	 Alberta Environment, “Handbook for state of the watershed reporting: a guide for developing state 
of the watershed reports in Alberta,” Nov. 2008. [Online]. Available: https://open.alberta.ca/
publications/9780778576686 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[34]	 Government of Alberta, “Guide to Watershed Management Planning in Alberta,” Jan. 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://open.alberta.ca/dataset/5a8bc71a-e08a-476e-abb3-f7454597797b/resource/97053643-777e-407e-
800c-79e2a5975dfd/download/guidewatershedmanagementplanning-2015.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[35]	 O2 Planning + Design Inc. “DRAFT Background Technical Report: Surface Water Quantity and Groundwater 
Resources, Prepared for the Red Deer River Integrated Watershed Management Plan,” Red Deer River 
Watershed Alliance, Sep. 2013. [Online]. Available: https://rdrwa.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/O2_
RDRWA_BT3_GW_SW_20130913.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[36]	 Government of Alberta, “Flood mitigation - How government is reducing the risk of flooding and reducing 
potential damage that could result from a flood,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/flood-mitigation.aspx 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[37]	 Government of Alberta, “Flood mitigation studies - Engineering studies on flood mitigation options for 
Alberta's most flood-prone river basins,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/flood-mitigation-studies.aspx 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
44
csagroup.org
[38]	 Government of Alberta, “Springbank Off-stream Reservoir,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/springbank-
off-stream-reservoir.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[39]	 Government of Alberta, “Bow River Basin – TransAlta operations,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/bow-
river-basin-transalta-operations.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[40]	 Government of Alberta, “Watershed Resiliency and Restoration Program,” alberta.ca. https://www.alberta.ca/
watershed-resiliency-and-restoration-program.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[41]	
Saskatchewan Association of Watersheds, “Members,” saskwatersheds.ca. https://saskwatersheds.ca/
members/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[42]	 Water Security Agency, “25 Year Saskatchewan Water Security Plan: Report for 2020-21,” 2021. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.wsask.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/25-Year-Saskatchewan-Water-Security-Plan-
Report-for-2020-21_FINAL.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[43]	 Water Security Agency, “Strategic Plan,” wsask.ca. https://www.wsask.ca/about/publications/strategicplan/ 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[44]	 Water Security Agency, “Flood Damage Reduction Program,” wsask.ca. https://www.wsask.ca/water-
programs/flood-damage-prevention/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[45]	 V. Wittrock et al., “Saskatchewan Flood and Natural Hazard Risk Assessment,” Prepared for Saskatchewan 
Ministry of Government Relations, Saskatchewan Research Council, SRC Publication No. 14113-2E18, Dec. 
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.src.sk.ca/blog/saskatchewan-flood-and-natural-hazard-risk-
assessment (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[46]	 Government of Manitoba, “Manitoba's Watershed Districts,” manitoba.ca. https://www.manitoba.ca/sd/
water/watershed/wd/index.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[47]	 Government of Manitoba, “Watershed, Aquifer and Basin Planning,” manitoba.ca. https://www.manitoba.ca/
water/watershed/cd/index.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[48]	 Manitoba Association of Watersheds, “About the Manitoba Association of Watersheds,” manitobawatersheds.
org. https://manitobawatersheds.org/history (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[49]	 Government of Manitoba, “GRowing Outcomes in Watersheds (GROW),” manitoba.ca. https://www.gov.mb.
ca/sd/water/watershed/grow/index.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[50]	 Government of Manitoba, “Financial Assistance - Ag Action Manitoba Program - Assurance: Watershed 
Ecological Goods and Services,” gov.mb.ca https://www.gov.mb.ca/agriculture/environment/ecological-
goods-and-services/watershed-egs.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[51]	
International Institute for Sustainable Development, “The Value of Water Retention Beneficial Management 
Practices to Farmers and Landowners in the Seine Rat Roseau Watershed District,” International Institute for 
Sustainable Development, November, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.iisd.org/system/files/2022-12/
water-retention-practices-seine-rat-roseau-watershed-district.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[52]	 Government of Manitoba, “Transportation and Infrastructure> Water Management and Structures> Public 
Information on Current Projects and Initiatives,” gov.mb.ca. https://www.gov.mb.ca/mit/wms/projects/index.
html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
45
csagroup.org
[53]	 Government of Manitoba, “Assiniboine River and Lake Manitoba Basins Flood Mitigation Study,” gov.mb.ca. 
https://www.gov.mb.ca/mit/wms/wm/study.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[54]	 Conservation Ontario, “About Conservation Ontario,” conservationontario.ca. https://conservationontario.ca/
about-us/conservation-ontario (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[55]	 Government of Ontario, “Conservation Authorities Act,” R.S.O. 1990, chapter C.27. [Online]. Available: https://
www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/90c27#BK29 
[56]	 Government of Ontario, “O. Reg. 686/21, MANDATORY PROGRAMS AND SERVICES under Conservation 
Authorities Act,” R.S.O. 1990, c. C.27. [Online]. Available: https://www.ontario.ca/laws/regulation/210686 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[57]	 Ministry of the Environment, Conservation and Parks, “Subwatershed Planning Guide – Draft,” Government of 
Ontario, Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://ero.ontario.ca/notice/019-4978 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[58]	 Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer, “Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial 
Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events,” Ottawa, Feb. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://qsarchive-
archiveqs.pbo-dpb.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[59]	 D. W. Brown, et al., “A Comparison of Flooding in Michigan and Ontario: ‘Soft’ Water Management 
Approaches,” Canadian Water Resources Journal / Revue canadienne des resources hydriques, vol. 22, 
no. 2, pp. 125-139, Jan. 2013. DOI: 10.4296/cwrj2202125 (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[60]	 Bill 23, An Act to amend various statutes, to revoke various regulations and to  enact the Supporting Growth 
and Housing in York and Durham Regions Act, 1st Sess, 43rd Leg, Ontario, 2022 (assented to 28 November 
2022), SO 2022, c 21. [Online]. Available: https://www.ola.org/sites/default/files/node-files/bill/document/
pdf/2022/2022-11/b023ra_e.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[61]	
Ministère du Développement durable, Environnement et Parcs, “Water, our life, our future: Québec water 
policy,” Gouvernement du Québec, 2002. ISBN 2-550-40076-3 [Online]. Available: https://numerique.banq.
qc.ca/patrimoine/details/52327/43937?docref=vtVIFuTdWfBX4_tOgzY6vA (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[62]	 Gouvernement du Québec, “Loi affirmant le caractère collectif des ressources en eau et favorisant une 
meilleure gouvernance de l'eau et des milieux associés,” chapitre C-6.2, Éditeur officiel du Québec, 2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.legisquebec.gouv.qc.ca/fr/pdf/lc/C-6.2%20.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[63]	 Ministère de l’Environnement, de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques, de la Faune et des Parcs, 
“Gestion intégrée des ressources en eau par bassins versants,” environnement.gouv.qc.ca. https://www.
environnement.gouv.qc.ca/eau/bassinversant/gire-bassins-versants.htm (accessed Oct. 24, 2022) 
[64]	 Ministère de l’Environnement, de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques, de la Faune et des Parcs, 
“Gestion intégrée du Saint-Laurent,” environnement.gouv.qc.ca. https://www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca/eau/
st-laurent/gestion-integree/tables-cr.htm (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[65]	 Regroupement des organismes de bassins versants du Québec, “Le Regroupement des organismes de 
bassins versants du Québec,” robvq.qc.ca. https://robvq.qc.ca/qui-sommes-nous/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
46
csagroup.org
[66]	 Ministère de l’Environnement et de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques (MELCC), “Cadre 
de reference de la gestion intégrée des ressources en eau,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.
environnement.gouv.qc.ca/eau/bassinversant/cadre-reference-gire.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[67]	 Regroupement des organismes de bassins versants du Québec, “La gestion intégrée de l’eau par bassin 
versant,” robvq.qc.ca. https://robvq.qc.ca/la-giebv/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[68]	 Ministère des Affaires municipales et de l’Habitation, “Plan de protection du territoire face aux inondations: 
des solutions durables pour mieux protéger nos milieux de vie,” Gouvernement du Québec, 2020. [Online]. 
Available: https://cdn-contenu.quebec.ca/cdn-contenu/adm/min/affaires-municipales/publications-adm/
documents/plan_protection_territoire_inondations/PLA_inondations.pdf?1634924214 
[69]	 Gouvernement du Québec, “Bureaux de projets,” quebec.ca. https://www.quebec.ca/gouvernement/
politiques-orientations/plan-de-protection-du-territoire-face-aux-inondations/bureau-de-projets (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[70]	 New Brunswick Environmental Network, “Watershed Caucus,” nben.ca. https://nben.ca/en/groups-in-
action/watershed-caucus.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[71]	
Government of New Brunswick, “A Water Strategy for New Brunswick: 2018–2028,” Department of 
Environment and Local Government, Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/
Departments/env/pdf/Water-Eau/WaterStrategy-StrategieSurLeau/WaterStrategy-2018-2028.pdf (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[72]	 Government of New Brunswick, “Watershed Protection,” gnb.ca. https://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/
departments/elg/environment/content/land_waste/content/reference_manual/watershed_protection.html 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[73]	 Government of New Brunswick, “New Brunswick’s Flood Risk Reduction Strategy,” Province of New 
Brunswick, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/Departments/env/pdf/
Flooding-Inondations/NBFloodRiskReductionStrategy.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[74]	 Government of New Brunswick, “New Brunswick Flood Hazard Maps,” GeoNB, flooding-inondations-geonb.
hub.arcgis.com. https://flooding-inondations-geonb.hub.arcgis.com/apps/new-brunswick-flood-hazard-
maps/explore (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[75]	 Government of New Brunswick, “Flooding in New Brunswick,” flooding-inondations-geonb.hub.arcgis.com. 
https://flooding-inondations-geonb.hub.arcgis.com/ 
[76]	 Government of New Brunswick, “Transitioning to a Low-Carbon Economy New Brunswick’s Climate Change 
Action Plan,” Province of New Brunswick, Dec. 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/
gnb/Departments/env/pdf/Climate-Climatiques/TransitioningToALowCarbonEconomy.pdf (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[77]	 Government of New Brunswick, “Our Pathway Towards Decarbonization and Climate Resilience,” Province 
of New Brunswick, [Online]. Available: https://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/Corporate/Promo/climate/
climate-change-action-plan.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
47
csagroup.org
[78]	 Government of Nova Scotia, “Water for Life: Nova Scotia’s Water Resource Management Strategy,” Province 
of Nova Scotia, 2010. [Online]. Available: https://novascotia.ca/nse/water.strategy/docs/WaterStrategy_
Water.Resources.Management.Strategy.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[79]	 K. Garroway, et al., “Nova Scotia Watershed Assessment Program Part A – Discussion Paper,” Nova Scotia 
Environment, Dalhousie University and Nova Scotia Natural Resources, Jun. 2012. [Online]. Available: https://
novascotia.ca/nse/water.strategy/docs/Nova.Scotia.Watershed.Assessment.Program_Part-A_Phase-1_
Discussion.Paper.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[80]	 Hydrologic Systems Research Group, “Nova Scotia Watershed Assessment Program, Part A – Initial 
Assessment, Summary Report,” Nova Scotia Environment, Dalhousie University and Nova Scotia Natural 
Resources, Aug. 2011. [Online]. Available: https://novascotia.ca/nse/water.strategy/docs/Nova.Scotia.
Watershed.Assessment.Program_Part-A_Phase-1_Summary.Report.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[81]	
Department of Environment and Climate Change, “Nova Scotia’s Water Resources Management Strategy,” 
Government of Nova Scotia, novascotia.ca. https://novascotia.ca/nse/water.strategy/ (accessed Oct. 24, 
2022)
[82]	 Nova Scotia Environment, “Water for Life: Nova Scotia’s Water Strategy - Progress Report,” Government of 
Nova Scotia, May 2014. [Online]. Available: https://novascotia.ca/nse/water/docs/Water.For.Life.Progress.
Report.2014.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[83]	 Sackville Rivers Association, “Sackville Rivers Association,” sackvillerivers.ns.ca. https://www.sackvillerivers.
ns.ca/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[84]	 Clean Annapolis River Project, “About the Clean Annapolis River Project,” annapolisriver.ca. https://www.
annapolisriver.ca/about-us (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[85]	 Atlantic Coastal Action Program (ACAP) Cape Breton, “About Us,” acapcb.ns.ca. https://www.acapcb.ns.ca/ 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[86]	 Department of Environment and Climate Change, “Flood Mitigation Framework,” Government of Nova Scotia, 
novascotia.ca. https://novascotia.ca/nse/climate-change/nsfaf-flood-mitigation-framework.asp (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[87]	 Government of Nova Scotia, “Apply for funding to invest in infrastructure to protect communities from 
flooding: Flood Risk Infrastructure Investment Program,” novascotia.ca. https://beta.novascotia.ca/apply-
funding-invest-infrastructure-protect-communities-flooding-flood-risk-infrastructure-investment-program 
(accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[88]	 Government of Nova Scotia, “Our Climate, Our Future: Nova Scotia’s Climate Change Plan for Clean Growth,” 
Province of Nova Scotia, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://climatechange.novascotia.ca/sites/default/files/
uploads/ns-climate-change-plan.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[89]	 Department of Environment, Energy and Climate Action, “Watershed Management on PEI,” Government of 
Prince Edward Island, princeedwardisland.ca. https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/en/information/
environment-energy-and-climate-action/watershed-management-pei (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[90]	 Prince Edward Island Watershed Alliance (PEIWA), “Boundary Lines,” peiwatershedalliance.org/. https://
peiwatershedalliance.org/groups/#boundary (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
48
csagroup.org
[91]	
Department of Environment, Energy and Climate Action, “Watershed Management Fund,” Government 
of Prince Edward Island, princeedwardisland.ca. https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/en/information/
environment-energy-and-climate-action/watershed-management-fund (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[92]	 Government of Prince Edward Island, “Taking Action: A Climate Change Action Plan for Prince Edward 
Island,” Government of Prince Edward Island, Feb. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.princeedwardisland.
ca/sites/default/files/publications/pei_ccra_2021.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[93]	 Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association, “Flood Risk Mapping for Community Assessment in PEI,” 
atlanticadaptation.ca. https://atlanticadaptation.ca/objects/acasa_627.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[94]	 Department of Environment, Energy and Forestry, “A Guide to Watershed Planning on Prince Edward Island,” 
Government of Prince Edward Island, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/
default/files/publications/a_guide_to_watershed_planning_on_prince_edward_island.pdf (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[95]	 Government of Prince Edward Island “Municipal Land Use Planning,” Government of Prince Edward Island, 
princeedwardisland.ca. https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/en/information/fisheries-and-communities/
municipal-land-use-planning (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[96]	 Government of Prince Edward Island, “Climate Challenge Fund: Guidelines and Criteria 2022-2023,” 
Government of Prince Edward Island, 2022. [Online]. Available : https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/
default/files/publications/climatechallengefundguidelinesandcriteria.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[97]	 Government of Prince Edward Island, “Building Resilience: Climate Adaptation Plan,” Government of Prince 
Edward Island, October 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.princeedwardisland.ca/sites/default/files/
publications/building_resistance_climate_adaptation_plan_oct_2022.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[98]	 Public Safety Canada, “National Disaster Mitigation Program (NDMP),” publicsafety.gc.ca. https://www.
publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/ndmp/index-en.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[99]	 Public Safety Canada, “Evaluation of the National Disaster Mitigation Program: Final Report,” Government of 
Canada, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/vltn-ntnl-dsstr-mtgtn-
prgrm-2019/index-en.aspx (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[100]	 Infrastructure Canada, “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Overview,” infrastructure.gc.ca. https://
www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/index-eng.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[101]	 Infrastructure Canada, “Audit of the Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund – Final Approved Report,” 
Jun. 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/ia-vi/dmaf-report-rapport-
faac-eng.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)  
[102]	 Infrastructure Canada, “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Overview,” infrastructure.gc.ca. https://
www.infrastructure.gc.ca/dmaf-faac/index-eng.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[103]	 Environment and Climate Change Canada, “Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan.” Government 
of Canada, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/documents/pdf/climate-
change/climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy/GCAAP-Report-EN.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
49
csagroup.org
[104]	 Government of Canada, “Infrastructure Canada Projects,” open.canada.ca. https://open.canada.ca/data/en/
dataset/beee0771-dab9-4be8-9b80-f8e8b3fdfd9d (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[105]	 P. Bartnik, “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund Special Spring 2019 Flooding Intake - Expression of 
Interest and Full Application,” The Corporation of the Town of Tecumseh, Report Number PWES-2019-02, 
July 23, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.tecumseh.ca/en/news/resources/PWES-2019-02-Disaster-
Mitigation-and-Adaptatin-Fund.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[106]	 Government of Canada, “Canada Water Agency – Overview,” canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/water-overview/canada-water-agency.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[107]	 Government of Canada, “Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy,” canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/en/
services/environment/weather/climatechange/climate-plan/national-adaptation-strategy.html (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[108]	 Infrastructure Canada, “Climate Lens - General Guidance.” Government of Canada, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/pub/other-autre/cl-occ-eng.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[109]	 Infrastructure Canada, “Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund: Applicants Guide.” Infrastructure Canada, 
2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/alt-format/pdf/dmaf-faac/dmaf-faac-applicant-
guide-demandeur-en.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[110]	 International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), “The Sustainable Asset Valuation (SAVi) helps 
policy-makers and investors make informed decisions on financing sustainable infrastructure,” iisd.org. 
https://www.iisd.org/savi/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[111]	 International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), “Nature-Based Infrastructure,” iisd.org. https://
www.iisd.org/savi/sector/natural-capital/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[112]	 A. Bassi et al., “An Application of the Sustainable Asset Valuation (SAVi) Methodology to Pelly's Lake and 
Stephenfield Reservoir, Manitoba, Canada: Assessing the value of nature-based infrastructure,” International 
Institute for Sustainable Development, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.iisd.org/system/files/
publications/savi-pellys-lake-stephenfield-canada-en.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[113]	 International Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD), “How Savi Works,” iisd.org. https://www.iisd.org/
savi/how-savi-works/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)   
[114]	 Government of Ontario, “Class Environmental Assessments: Approved Class EA Information,” ontario.ca. 
https://www.ontario.ca/page/class-environmental-assessments-approved-class-ea-information (accessed 
Oct. 24, 2022)
[115]	 Conservation Ontario, “Class Environmental Assessment for Remedial Flood and Erosion Control Projects,” 
Jan. 2002, amended Jun. 2013. [Online]. Available: https://conservationontario.ca/fileadmin/pdf/
conservation_authorities_section_planning___regulations/Class_EA_for_Remedial_Flood_and_Erosion_
Control_ProjectsCA.pdf 
[116]	 Sustainable Technologies Evaluation Program, “Risk and Return on Investment Tool (RROIT Version 1.0),” 
sustainabletechnologies.ca. https://sustainabletechnologies.ca/home/urban-runoff-green-infrastructure/
rroit/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
50
csagroup.org
[117]	 N. Moudrak, et al., “Combating Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural infrastructure is an underutilized option.” 
University of Waterloo, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/09/IBC_Wetlands-Report-2018_FINAL.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[118]	 J. L. Eyquem, et al., “Getting Nature on the Balance Sheet: Recognizing the Financial Value of Natural Assets 
in a Changing Climate,” Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo, Sep. 2022. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/UoW_
ICCA_2022_10_Nature-on-the-Balance-Sheet.pdf (accessed Oct. 24, 2022) 
[119]	 R. Sharp, et al. Eds. “InVEST 3.9.2 User’s Guide.” The Natural Capital Project, Stanford University, University of 
Minnesota, The Nature Conservancy, and World Wildlife Fund, 2020. [Online]. Available: http://releases.
naturalcapitalproject.org/invest-userguide/latest/index.html (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[120]	 Stanford University. “InVEST.” naturalcapitalproject.stanford.edu https://naturalcapitalproject.stanford.edu/
software/invest (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[121]	 UK Government, “Catchment flood management plans,” gov.uk. https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
catchment-flood-management-plans (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[122]	 CSA Group. “Management standard for stormwater systems.” CSA W211:21. CSA Group, 2021. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.csagroup.org/store/product/2705167/ (accessed Oct. 24, 2022)
[123]	 CSA Group. “Specifications for Natural Asset Inventories.” CSA W218:23. CSA Group, in preparation.
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
51
csagroup.org
Appendix A – Focus Group Structure  
This appendix provides an overview of the two workshops held in May and June 2022. Each of the workshops was 
attended by over 35 subject matter experts from across Canada. Attendees are recognized in the acknowledgements 
list at the beginning of this report.
Table A.1: Goals and Content Output of Focus Group #1: Taking a Watershed Approach
Date:
Monday, May 30, 2022, 12-3pm EDT
Goals:
•	Review the use of nature-based solutions for river flood and erosion risk management and their 
use in Canada.
•	Capture subject matter expertise regarding how nature-based solutions are currently being 
implemented, considering the watershed-scale to manage flooding and erosion.
•	Inform guidance and standards development for governments (local, provincial and federal) and 
communities to help scale-up implementation of nature-based solutions.
Content:
Pre-workshop questionnaire (via MS Forms)
Polling activities (via Mentimeter)
Presentations: 
•	Nature-Based Solutions for River Flood and Erosion Risk Management (Enda Murphy, National 
Research Council of Canada).
•	Overview of Watershed Management in Canada – research results to date (Joanna Eyquem, Intact 
Centre on Climate Adaptation).
•	Practical Tips on Using NbS to Manage Flooding and Erosion – Learning from The Netherlands 
(Ralph Schielen, Rijkswaterstaat / Delft University of Technology)
Small-group, virtual whiteboard sessions:
1.	 Current use of nature-based solutions for riverine flood and erosion management 
2.	 Lessons learnt across Canada working at the watershed scale 
3.	 Opportunities and recommendations to integrate NbS and flood and erosion management 
at the watershed-scale 
Review and Structured Plenary Discussion
•	How can local governments and communities work more effectively together to implement 
NbS at the watershed scale?
•	Is payment for ecosystem services helping to implement NbS in your province? Who is doing this?
•	Are additional national standards or guidance required to strengthen watershed approaches? 
What would be most useful?
MANAGING FLOODING AND EROSION AT THE WATERSHED-SCALE: GUIDANCE 
TO SUPPORT GOVERNMENTS USING NATURE-BASED SOLUTIONS
52
csagroup.org
Table A.2: Goals and Content Output of Focus Group #2: Including NbS Benefits in Options Appraisal 
Date:
Tuesday, June 14, 2022, 12-3pm EDT
Goals:
•	Identify option appraisal tools currently applied across Canada to plan and design river flood and 
erosion management infrastructure, and how they incorporate Nature-based Solutions (NbS).
•	Capture subject matter expertise regarding how costs and benefits relating to NbS are being / 
can be better addressed in the riverine environment.
•	Inform guidance and standards development for options appraisal that specifically includes 
NbS co-benefits.
Content:
Pre-workshop questionnaire (via MS Forms)
Polling activities (via Mentimeter)
Presentations: 
•	Overview of Approaches to Include NbS Benefits (Joanna Eyquem, Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation).
•	Evolution of flood and erosion risk management in Quebec City– opportunities for NbS 
(Antoine Verville, CMQuébec)
Small-group, virtual whiteboard sessions:
1.	 Current practices in option appraisal of NbS for river flood and erosion management 
2.	 Methods of better incorporating NbS benefits in Canada
	• Advantages and disadvantages of methods for different benefits
	• Lessons learnt 
Review and Structured Plenary Discussion
•	Wider economic and accounting context
•	Roles and responsibilities 
CSA Group Research
In order to encourage the use of 
consensus-based standards solutions to 
promote safety and encourage innovation, 
CSA Group supports and conducts 
research in areas that address new or 
emerging industries, as well as topics and 
issues that impact a broad base of current 
and potential stakeholders. The output of 
our research programs will support the 
development of future standards solutions, 
provide interim guidance to industries on 
the development and adoption of new 
technologies, and help to demonstrate 
our on-going commitment to building a 
better, safer, more sustainable world.
© 2023 Canadian Standards Association. All Rights Reserved. 
