DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
1
        DAMAGE
CONTROL
        REDUCING THE COSTS 
                OF CLIMATE IMPACTS
                     IN CANADA
SEPTEMBER 2022
CANADIAN
CLIMATE
INSTITUTE
L’INSTITUT
CLIMATIQUE
DU CANADA
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
2
CONTENTS
FOREWORD......................................................................................................................................................................................3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY...........................................................................................................................................................4
1. INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................................................................................18
2. OUR APPROACH................................................................................................................................................................. 23
Identifying climate change impact groups...................................................................................................................................... 26
Quantifying the impacts of climate change and adaptation........................................................................................................ 28
Estimating macroeconomic impacts................................................................................................................................................ 34
Caveats..................................................................................................................................................................................................39
3. QUANTIFYING THE COSTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE....................................................................................41
Damages are widespread and compounding....................................................................................................................................42
Drag: The macroeconomic impacts of climate change..................................................................................................................45
Broken windows: The affordability impacts of climate change................................................................................................... 58
4. THE BENEFITS OF ADAPTATION.............................................................................................................................69
The avoided national income losses with adaptation are large.....................................................................................................70
Adaptation investments pay big social dividends............................................................................................................................71
5. KEY FINDINGS.......................................................................................................................................................................74
6. RECOMMENDATIONS........................................................................................................................................................77
GLOSSARY......................................................................................................................................................................................79
REFERENCES................................................................................................................................................................................ 84
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.......................................................................................................................................................... 86
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
3
FOREWORD
This ground-breaking report, Damage Control: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada, is 
the culmination of the Costs of Climate Change series. Since December 2020, we have released four 
comprehensive reports—Tip of the Iceberg, The Health Costs of Climate Change, Under Water and 
Due North—analyzing the growing breadth and depth of climate change damages in Canada. In a first 
of its kind approach, Damage Control uses new data and research to apply a macroeconomic lens to 
the costs of climate change impacts.
The results are sobering. The mounting costs of climate change will cause severe damage to Canada’s 
economy, with the worst costs being experienced directly by individual households. As climate change 
impacts intensify, life will become even less affordable as economic growth slows, governments will 
be forced to raise taxes or cut services to pay for climate disasters, job losses will be measured in the 
millions, and goods will become more costly as supply chains are disrupted.
This is not, however, our inevitable future. Damage Control demonstrates that if we invest in adaptation 
now, we can cut many of the costs of climate change in half. And, if adaptation is paired with Canadian 
and global success in reducing emissions in line with international commitments, these costs can be 
cut by three-quarters, helping to secure a more stable, affordable, and prosperous future for Canadians.
As the current and future costs of climate change become clearer, governments have a responsibility to 
implement effective policy solutions. The return on investment for adaptation is massive: as Damage 
Control shows, every dollar spent on some of the most important adaptation measures for Canada can 
save $13 to $15 in the long term.
So much of the climate change discussion is focused on the cost of taking action. What Damage 
Control demonstrates is that it is, in fact, the cost of inaction that is measurable and growing. The costs 
of climate change impacts are already a drag on Canada’s economic growth—and that drag will only 
intensify. Investing in mitigation and adaptation measures, as quickly as possible, is the best way to 
secure Canada's future prosperity.
Rick Smith
President
Canadian Climate Institute
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY
Climate change is a serious and growing drag on Canada’s economy and a major 
financial burden on households in Canada. Damage Control quantifies these impacts, 
showing how climate change is already damaging infrastructure, destroying assets, 
and causing avoidable illness and death.
We find that climate change results in cascad­
ing negative effects through Canada’s economy, 
as climate damages slow the level of economic 
activity across sectors and regions, strain govern­
ment budgets, lower household income, and 
erode competitiveness. Further, individual house­
holds end up paying the highest price for climate 
change, as slower growth, higher taxes, higher 
prices, and the costs of direct damages shrink 
income and wealth. 
These impacts are already beginning to take hold 
and will compound quickly unless something 
changes. This future is not inevitable: There is a 
great deal that governments can do to reduce the 
economic risks and protect people in Canada from 
these impacts. Investment in proactive adapta­
tion can substantially reduce overall economic 
damages, as will global success in reducing green­
house gas emissions. 
Damage Control is the culmination of the 
Canadian Climate Institute’s Costs of Climate 
Change series, a multi-year modelling and 
research project that aims to better understand 
and quantify the potential costs of a changing 
climate in Canada. This report documents a first-
of-its-kind study on the combined direct and 
indirect costs of climate change in Canada, inte­
grating economy-wide macroeconomic analy­
sis with bottom-up studies, including those from 
previous Costs of Climate Change reports. 
MAY 12, 2017: Volunteers fill sandbags at an emergency flooding station in Kelowna, British Columbia.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
4
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
5
Our approach to the macroeconomic analysis in 
Damage Control consisted of three steps:
	
▶
First, we identified 16 impact groups where 
climate change is likely to trigger major 
material economic consequences in Canada. 
	
▶
Second, we estimated the direct economic 
cost and benefits for each impact group in 
a series of bottom-up analyses that exam­
ined impacts across 14 future climate scenar­
ios, including a low- and high- emissions 
scenario and seven different climate models. 
We analyzed impacts at fine geographic 
scales and short time intervals.
	
▶
Third, we integrated these findings into a 
macroeconomic model of the Canadian 
economy, simulating economy-wide 
economic impacts across the 16 impact 
groups through to the end of the century, 
as well as the costs and benefits of proactive 
adaptation. 
In total, accounting for each impact group, we 
assessed 84 scenarios: two global climate emis­
sions scenarios, seven downscaled climate 
scenarios, three asset growth scenarios, and two 
adaptation scenarios. Yet despite the much more 
detailed picture that our analysis provides over 
previous studies, our results nonetheless remain 
the “tip of the iceberg” when it comes to the full 
range of effects to Canada’s economy and soci­
ety from a changing climate. There remain many 
below-the-waterline risks, where climate change 
will likely generate substantial impacts, but that 
have too much uncertainty and complexity to 
quantify at this stage.
August 29, 2021: Pedestrians in Penticton, British Columbia watch as a forest fire flares up in the hills above the city.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
6
FINDINGS
Absent aggressive policy to reduce and adapt to the impacts of a warming planet, 
climate change will drag down the rate of Canada’s economic growth and result in 
a much smaller future economy. This macroeconomic damage will kill jobs, erode 
Canada’s competitiveness, and drive greater government spending. 
Climate damages are already resulting in large 
national income losses over the very short term. In 
2025, Canada will experience $25 billion in losses 
relative to a stable-climate scenario, which is equal 
to 50 per cent of projected 2025 GDP growth. The 
mounting costs compound quickly over the years 
and decades ahead, rising to $78 and $101 billion 
annually by mid-century for a low and high emis­
sions scenario respectively, and $391 and $865 
billion respectively by end of century.
In addition to slowing GDP growth, climate 
impacts will cause large job losses, as heat-induced 
productivity losses and premature deaths shrink 
the workforce. Job losses could double to 500,000 
by mid-century, and increase to 2.9 million by end 
of century. These impacts to labour will then ripple 
through the economy, reducing productivity and 
raising prices, and ultimately undermining the 
ability of the economy to support an affordable 
and secure future for people in Canada. 
Climate change is a macroeconomic 
risk that threatens to significantly 
undermine future prosperity.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
7
Min
Max
Median
Climate change will harm Canada’s economy
and Canadian households across multiple dimensions.
Economic drag indicators
Low | High 
emissions scenario
Broken window indicators
Household income
Investment
Size of 
government
Real GDP
2025
End of 
century
Exports
Job losses
-10%
-20%
-30%
-10%
-20%
-30%
-40%
-40%
4%
3%
2%
1%
Export losses will grow over time as costs increase 
and competitiveness is reduced, and imports slow 
as output falls, reflecting a deepening economic 
weakness. By the end of the century, export losses 
in the low-emissions scenario will be $300 billion 
or seven per cent below a stable-climate scenario, 
and $600 billion or 16 per cent under a high-emis­
sions scenario.
The losses in the global high-emissions scenario 
will be substantially higher than in the low-emis­
sions scenario across all indicators, particularly 
after mid-century, driving home the imperative 
to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions in 
order to reduce costs. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
8
The broken window fallacy
While the topline macroeconomic losses from climate impacts are concerning, actual costs for people in 
Canada are even more severe. These household impacts, obscured in the hit to national gross domestic 
product (GDP), are a classic case of the broken window fallacy, which describes the distorting effect that 
spending to repair destroyed assets can have on measures of the economic costs of climate damages. 
Such forced spending carries with it an opportunity cost, as significant expenditures are being directed 
merely towards fixing what has been broken, rather than towards new productive activities that create 
wealth, supporting the long-term well-being of people living in Canada.
Climate change will make life less affordable
by reducing income and increasing expenses.
Higher
taxes
More
damages
Investments will shrink
because of reduced 
economic opportunities
Taxes will increase 
because of mounting 
government costs
to respond to
climate impacts
Income will shrink
because of slower
growth
Damage-related costs 
will continue to 
increase as climate 
change impacts 
infrastructure
The cost of living will 
increase as prices rise
Higher
prices
Reduced
economic 
opportunities
Slower
growth
AVAILABLE
INCOME
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
9
The impacts of climate change will inevitably lower individual wealth as income falls and is redirected 
to fix what gets prematurely broken. The full extent of the burden placed on individual households is 
partially obscured by looking only at topline macroeconomic indicators of economic drag. Spending 
to fix “broken windows” appears on the surface to stimulate some sectors of the economy, as the size 
of government grows and the construction sector receives a boost. However, there are opportunity 
costs to this forced spending to fix what climate change has damaged or destroyed, as resources are 
redirected away from productive new investments that otherwise would support output and wealth 
creation. These costs are reflected in falling household income, declining business investment, and 
increased taxation or a reduction in social services. So, while GDP may fall by 12 per cent in a median 
high-emissions scenario by end of century, prospects for households are even more dire, with income 
falling by 18 per cent.
All households will lose income,
and low-income households will suffer the most.
Low-emissions scenario
High-emissions scenario 
-5%
-10%
-15%
-20% of income lost
Q1
Q5
Lowest
income
Highest 
income
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
10
Climate change will hit households hard, making life even less affordable for people 
in Canada in the years and decades ahead. Affordability pressures will come from all 
directions. 
Slowing economic growth will reduce economic 
opportunity and result in lower incomes at the 
same time as governments must raise taxes 
in order to maintain services and pay for the 
clean-up and repair from increased weath­
er-related disasters. Job losses will accumulate, 
depriving people in Canada of a primary source of 
economic security, while prices for goods increase 
as costs multiply through supply chains.
As a result, households will be worse off across all 
climate scenarios. The loss of household income 
is already materializing, with a drop in income 
per capita of $720 in both emissions scenarios 
by 2025 compared to a stable-climate scenario, 
rising to $1,890 per capita by mid-century in a 
low-emissions scenario and almost $2,300 per 
capita in a high-emissions scenario. Real income 
losses will cut deep into household affordabili­
tyafter mid-century, and low-income households 
will be most affected, facing income cuts of 23 
per cent in a high-emissions scenario by end of 
century, while the median income group faces 
cuts of 19 per cent. 
Climate change is an affordability risk 
for households in Canada, and especially 
for vulnerable populations. 
FINDINGS
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
11
The impacts of climate change are not confined to particular regions or sectors of the 
economy. Businesses and investors across the country and in virtually every sector 
are at risk. 
Climate damages will make all regions worse 
off by the end of the century, with Northern 
Canada and Alberta bearing the most signifi­
cant losses. Northern Canada will bear a dispro­
portionate impact primarily due to infrastructure 
damage from the effects of permafrost thaw. 
Northern Canada could see GDP losses of $5,490 
or $7,080per capita by mid-century in low- or 
high-emissions scenarios, respectively, rising to 
$11,820 and $26,060 by end of century. Alberta, 
the province most exposed to weather-related 
disasters, could experience median GDP losses at 
mid-century of $2,890 per capita in a low-emis­
sions scenario or $3,920 per capita in a high-emis­
sions scenario. 
Most economic sectors will also be negatively 
impacted across all future climate scenarios. 
Manufacturing, the services sector, and transporta­
tion will be particularly hard hit by climate impacts. 
While the construction and agriculture sectors 
could see benefits, these sectors comprise just 8.5 
per cent of Canada’s economy and their gains are 
swamped by the losses experienced by all other 
sectors. Moreover, the boost to the construction 
sector is an example of the broken window fallacy, 
as sector growth is driven by spending to repair 
damaged infrastructure, which redirects resources 
away from more productive uses in the economy. 
Finally, climate damages impair investments 
in future productivity. Investment will drop 
across all climate change scenarios relative to a 
stable-climate scenario, with the decline accel­
erating rapidly in the longer term, as costs accu­
mulate and output shrinks.
The Canadian economy is highly 
climate-sensitive, posing a major risk 
to businesses and investors.
FINDINGS
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
12
Climate change puts significant pressure on public finances. Slower economic growth 
throughout the economy will put downward pressure on government revenue. 
This fiscal pressure will manifest at the same time 
as demands will increase on governments to 
respond to growing climate costs, such as back­
stopping weather-related disasters, upgrading 
and replacing infrastructure, and maintaining 
healthcare services amidst increased pressures 
on the health system.
The result will be a forced choice between rais­
ing taxes in order to maintain services, accru­
ing additional public debt, or cutting services 
as climate damages consume a greater share 
of government budgets. By 2025, a 0.35 per cent 
increase in corporate and personal income taxes 
will be required to cover increased government 
spending of about $5 billion annually on climate 
damages, without eroding services. By mid-cen­
tury this will rise to more than $17 billion annually, 
corresponding to a tax rate increase of approxi­
mately one per cent, and by end of century will 
increase to $24 billion or $55 billion annually with 
tax rate increases of 1.4 per cent and 2.7 per cent 
for low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios, 
respectively. 
Climate change is a fiscal risk that 
threatens to upend government spending.
FINDINGS
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
13
Both global emissions reductions and proactive adaptation measures will substan­
tially reduce the costs of climate change to Canada’s economy. 
Reducing emissions will result in major benefits 
after mid-century, with the reductions in the 
low-emissions scenario reducing damages by 
more than half compared to the high-emissions 
scenario. Proactive adaptation, meanwhile, will 
yield major benefits regardless of the emissions 
trajectory, and over a shorter time horizon. Taken 
together, a combination of proactive adaptation 
measures and global emissions reductions will 
be the most effective in mitigating damages, 
reducing Canada’s total real GDP losses by 
75 per cent.
Emissions reductions and proactive 
adaptation measures, taken together, are 
the most effective means of reducing cost.
FINDINGS
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
14
Adaptation and global emissions reductions, taken 
together, can dramatically reduce costs.
Combined. 
Together, they cut 
climate costs by ¾.
Either. 
Adaptation measures and 
shifting from a “high” to 
“low” emissions scenario 
each cuts climate costs in 
half in the impact areas we 
analyzed.
No action taken.
-75%
-50%
Full cost
Per cent reduction in GDP impacts
Moreover, our macroeconomic analysis shows 
that spending on proactive adaptation has major 
economy-wide benefits. Our results indicate that 
for every $1 spent on the adaptation measures we 
modelled, $13-$15 in total benefits accrue. This 
includes $5-$6 of benefits for every adaptation 
dollar spent by avoiding direct damages such 
as premature infrastructure repair and replace­
ment costs and $6-$10 of knock-on benefits that 
work their way through the economy. A macro­
economic frame reinforces the case that proac­
tive adaptation is a smart investment, illustrating 
that it generates substantial direct and indirect 
societal returns.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
15
Proactive adaptation is a strong investment
that generates major economic returns.
Economy-wide beneﬁts. 
Knock-on beneﬁts associated 
with avoided direct costs, 
such as avoided disruption of 
supply chains, avoided loss of 
labour productivity, and 
avoided loss of income as a 
result of road delay and 
damage.
Direct beneﬁts.
Reduction of costs directly 
associated with the adaptation 
measure, such as reduction in 
cost of repair or replacement 
of lost or damaged
infrastructure.
$10
$5
$1
A dollar invested today 
will return $15 in 
a low-emissions 
scenario 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
16
Recommendations
1.	 Governments should build climate impacts and adaptation policies 
into their own economic decision making.
Governments in Canada have failed to account for the economic threat posed by a warming and 
increasing volatile climate, leading to a collective underestimation of both the costs of inaction 
and the economic benefits of ambitious climate policies. Moving forward, governments should 
build the costs of climate change impacts, as well as the costs and benefits of adaptation and miti­
gation policies, into economic analysis and decision-making processes so that policy and spend­
ing decisions reflect the very real and significant costs of choosing not to invest in adaptation and 
emissions reductions. 
2.	 Governments should encourage—and where appropriate, mandate—
accounting for climate change risks in private-sector decision making. 
As the frequency and severity of weather-related disasters continues to increase, the costs from 
physical climate damages are already beginning to accumulate both through direct impacts as 
well as through indirect costs that spread through the economy. The private sector must respond to 
this growing threat by integrating physical risk and risk-reduction measures into their risk manage­
ment practices, a practice that governments and regulators should support through accelerat­
ing climate risk disclosure initiatives and generating climate information to support accurate and 
consistent disclosure nationwide. 
3.	 Governments should scale-up adaptation measures to match the 
magnitude of the risk Canada faces.
Proactive adaptation can protect the health, security, and well-being of people in Canada and 
mitigate the impacts of climate change on Canada’s economy, providing a return on investment 
of $13-$15 per dollar spent. Despite the clear benefits, Canada is behind on adaptation and govern­
ments need to urgently scale-up adaptation policy and investment to match the scale of our climate 
risk, starting with the forthcoming National Adaptation Strategy.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
17
4.	 Governments should double down on aggressive reductions in 
emissions both at home and abroad.
Moving from a high to a low-emissions scenario results in significant reductions in climate damages. 
Without major emissions reductions, adaptation alone will be insufficient to address growing 
climate damages in Canada. All orders of government should continue to develop and implement 
ambitious policies to reduce Canadian emissions and meet our targets, while also supporting and 
encouraging global efforts to reduce emissions. 
5.	 Governments should invest in understanding and preparing for the 
economic risks of climate change that have not yet been modelled.
While this report provides a more detailed picture of the economic risks facing Canada from a 
changing climate, these risks are just the tip of the iceberg and there are many others that we 
suspect may have major impacts but that we don’t yet have the tools to understand. While govern­
ments should not hesitate to act immediately based on what we know today, they should also 
invest in further research to better understand and prepare for the full scope of climate impacts 
and economic risks that lie ahead.
Wind turbines dot the shoreline of West Pubnico, Nova Scotia.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
18
1INTRODUCTION
The worsening impacts of climate change are a significant drag on Canada’s economy 
and a major burden on households.
This report is the culmination of a multi-year 
investigation of the costs of climate change in 
Canada. The macroeconomic analysis presented 
here draws on a series of earlier reports from the 
Canadian Climate Institute on the economic impli­
cations of climate change and provides a top-down 
perspective on the overall macroeconomic drag 
that Canadians need to prepare for.
What we found is concerning. A warming and 
increasingly volatile climate is a drag on sustained 
economic growth that erodes Canadians’ income 
and prosperity by accelerating infrastructure 
decay, destroying assets, and causing avoidable 
illness and death. While a few international stud­
ies to date have suggested that Canada could be 
a climate change winner, (Burke et al. 2015; Lafakis 
et al. 2019) our analysis shows that this is not the 
case: there are no scenarios we modelled under 
which climate change has a net positive impact 
on Canada’s economy. 
While the topline macroeconomic losses are 
concerning, actual impacts for Canadians are even 
more severe. These household impacts, obscured 
in the hit to national gross domestic product (GDP), 
are a classic case of the broken window fallacy, 
which describes the distorting effect that spending 
to repair destroyed assets can have on measures 
of the economic costs of climate damages. Such 
forced spending carries with it an opportunity 
cost, as significant expenditures are being directed 
merely towards fixing what has been broken, rather 
than towards new productive activities that create 
wealth, supporting the long-term well-being of 
people living in Canada. 
Increased government expenditures required to 
clean up the damage caused by climate change 
are a good example of the cost illusion of national 
macroeconomic accounting. Government expen­
ditures are the only component of national 
income, as measured by real gross domestic 
product (GDP), that increases in our scenarios 
because of increased spending to address climate 
damages—consumption, exports, imports, and 
investment all see relative declines because of 
these damages. But the increase in government 
spending masks real cost. Climate change lowers 
government revenue due to the economic hit. To 
preserve the fiscal balance, tax rates must neces­
sarily rise, which brings about other economic 
April 30, 2019: The Gatineau River flooding the Boulevard de la Gappe in Gatineau, Quebec. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
19
costs that manifest in time, notably a loss in 
economic efficiency (Dalby and Ferede 2018).
Canadian households will pay the largest price for 
the many windows that climate change will break 
as slower economic growth, high unemployment, 
higher taxes, and direct climate damages come 
together to raise the cost of living and reduce 
economic opportunity. Moreover, not all house­
holds are impacted equally, with lower-income 
households countrywide and all households in the 
North and Alberta experiencing disproportionate 
income losses. And true to the broken window 
fallacy, some of these household costs, notably 
the increased risk of premature death or illness, 
are far more significant than the market-based 
costs that the macroeconomic analysis captures 
(Clark et al. 2021). 
Business will also suffer significant investment 
losses under a changing climate. While construc­
tion and allied support sectors see net positive 
effects from climate change, all other sectors are 
negatively affected, with large drops in investment, 
labour demand, exports, and economic output.
Our analysis finds that these economic damages 
from climate change are already occurring, that 
they will continue to worsen, and that they will 
accelerate rapidly after mid-century, mean­
ing that future generations will bear the high­
est costs. But Canadians are not powerless in 
facing this threat. We find that both greenhouse 
gas emissions reductions globally and proac­
tive adaptation here in Canada can cut future 
economic damages in half, and, in combination, 
can insulate Canada from the worst climate 
change damages, reducing losses in national 
income (as measured by real GDP) by 75 per cent 
in the impact areas we analyzed. 
Moreover, the investment returns to society of 
proactive measures to prepare for worsening 
climate damages are multiples greater than 
the costs of such measures, with the adaptation 
measures we modelled providing a return on 
investment of $13-$15 for every one dollar spent. 
Notably, the economy-wide or general equilib­
rium impacts were a factor of two times greater 
than the direct costs of the adaptation measures 
we analyzed. This rate of return drives home the 
fact that investing in proactive adaptation is smart 
economic policy that pays substantial dividends. 
The benefits of mitigation and adaptation also 
occur at different time scales—adaption pays now 
while mitigation avoids future damages.
This report shows that governments and the 
private sector need to better bring into view the 
economic threat posed by a changing climate. 
The failure to do so thus far has led Canadian 
governments to drastically underestimate both 
the economic benefits of climate policies and the 
costs of the status quo. 
The results of our analysis help lay the foundation 
for governments to set policy priorities, allocate 
programmatic and infrastructure spending, and 
better protect the health, well-being, and jobs of 
people in Canada. The results should also inform 
the federal government’s forthcoming National 
Adaptation Strategy and its implementation. By 
quantifying where and how climate damages may 
create the biggest drag on Canada’s economy, 
this analysis provides both a broader and a more 
detailed understanding of the largest climate risks 
that Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy must 
guard against (Ness and Miller 2022). 
The combination of top-down macroeconomic 
modelling and bottom-up analysis in this report 
Introduction
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
20
The failure to understand the economic 
threat posed by climate change has led 
Canadian governments to drastically 
underestimate both the economic 
benefits of climate policies and 
the costs of the status quo.
The aftermath of a massive wildfire that destroyed the community of Lytton, British Columbia in 2021. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
21
paints a more comprehensive picture than earlier 
studies of how climate change will continue to 
affect people in Canada. However, we must empha­
size that the economic drag and broken windows 
we modelled are only the tip of the iceberg, repre­
senting just a subset of the total impacts to be 
expected from a warming and increasingly danger­
ous climate. The true potential for macroeconomic 
damage is almost certainly far greater than the 
specific damages we have calculated.
As the threat of climate change comes increas­
ingly into view, and as climate policy and the under­
standing of future climate conditions evolve, all 
orders of government should develop and main­
tain an up-to-date understanding of the economic 
risks we face, move quickly to address those risks, 
and ensure that the private sector follows suit.
The remainder of this report is organized as follows: 
	
▶
SECTION 2 describes the approach we 
followed to model 84 scenarios, including 
16 impact groups and proactive adaptation 
responses, in a regionally disaggregated 
macroeconomic model of the Canadian 
economy. 
	
▶
SECTION 3 presents an overview of the 
macroeconomic impacts that a warmer 
and more volatile climate has on the econ­
omy over the next several decades. This 
section presents these impacts in terms of 
their overall drag on the economy and how 
continually fixing broken windows impairs 
wealth creation. It also shows how global 
effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
can substantially reduce future economic 
risks here in Canada. 
	
▶
SECTION 4 highlights how a significant 
scale-up in proactive adaptation can cut the 
costs of climate damage in half.
	
▶
SECTION 5 summarizes the key findings 
and SECTION 6 provides a list of recom­
mendations for policymakers.
Bottom-up analyses of the direct damages of 
climate change—like those in our earlier reports 
Tip of the Iceberg, The Health Costs of Climate 
Change, Under Water, and Due North—are 
important for understanding frontline costs, but 
do not capture the true scale of the economy-wide 
damages. As the case of the Fort McMurray fire 
illustrates, and as this report seeks to quantify, 
climate change will have economic consequences 
that far exceed the costs of the direct damage to 
homes, infrastructure, and people’s health. 
The top-down macroeconomic modelling study 
in this report seeks to fill in this picture, captur­
ing not only the direct costs but also the indirect 
consequences of climate change, and showing 
how climate damages will reverberate through 
Canada’s entire economy, impacting every­
one and every sector. However, even this more 
comprehensive approach does not capture the 
full extent of the impacts a warming climate will 
have on our economy and society, as not all mate­
rial economic damages are modelled, and there 
are significant risks that have too much uncer­
tainty to include. 
Finally, our findings unequivocally conclude that 
investments in proactive adaptive responses to 
climate change are an economic winner and 
should be scaled up aggressively. 
Introduction
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
22
BOX 1
The direct and indirect costs 
of the Fort McMurray wildfire
Recent years have seen an increase in climate change-fuelled, weather-related disasters with major 
economic consequences. A closer look at one of these recent events highlights the magnitude of the 
damages that will be experienced more frequently in a changing climate. It also shows the importance 
of looking not only at direct, immediate damages but also at how impacts reverberate throughout 
the Canadian economy. 
The Fort McMurray wildfire of May 2016 was, at the time, the most expensive climate-related disaster 
in Canadian history. The fire caused approximately $4 billion in damage to homes and businesses 
(Alam et al. 2017). However, accounting for direct damages alone vastly undercounts the total costs. 
Economists estimate that, in addition to physical infrastructure damages, the fire caused an additional 
$7 billion in net additional and indirect costs, including over $3 billion in loss of production in the oil 
and gas industry and other economic sectors, over $3 billion in indirect environmental and resource 
impacts, $2 billion in government emergency response costs, and $200 million in lost provincial and 
municipal tax revenue, partially offset by gains from repair and reconstruction (Alam et al. 2017). In 
other words, when the total costs of the Fort McMurray wildfire are accounted for, the final bill balloons 
from $4 billion to $11 billion.
May 2016: Cars lined up on Highway 63 south as the Fort McMurray fire burns. DarrenRD, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
23
OUR APPROACH
We developed a multi-step approach to estimate future economic damages of 
climate change for Canada, with and without adaptation. The approach began with 
bottom-up analysis of some of the most important costs (and, in some cases, bene­
fits) of climate change for Canada using highly detailed models of climate change 
impacts on health, infrastructure, and climate-sensitive economic sectors. These costs 
and benefits were then fed into a top-down macroeconomic model to simulate reper­
cussions to Canada’s economy through the end of the century.
1 gTech is Navius Research’s computable general equilibrium model of the Canadian and the United States economy. 
This report is the capstone of the Canadian Climate 
Institute’s Costs of Climate Change series combin­
ing a top-down macroeconomic analysis with a 
series of bottom-up studies. Our approach included 
three discrete steps (Figure 1):
1.	
We studied the literature and consulted with 
experts to identify 16 impact groups where 
climate change is likely to result in material 
economic costs and benefits in Canada. 
2.	 We estimated direct economic costs and 
benefits from climate change in a series 
of bottom-up analyses. For each of these 16 
impact groups, we analyzed impacts for a 
total of 14 future climate scenarios—two 
global greenhouse gas emissions scenarios 
and seven downscaled global climate models. 
We then analyzed impacts to infrastructure, 
populations, and economic sectors across 
Canada from now to the end of the century 
at geographic resolutions as detailed as 10 by 
10 kilometres and with timesteps as short as 
individual days. For many impact groups we 
also estimated the costs of investing in proac­
tive climate change adaptation as well as the 
benefits to be gained in terms of avoided 
damages. 
3.	 We integrated the findings of the bottom-up 
analyses into a top-down macroeconomic 
analysis using an advanced model of the 
Canadian economy.1 We used the model to 
simulate economy-wide economic changes 
across all 16 impact groups until the end of 
the century, for the same 14 emissions and 
August 7, 2020: An EF-3 tornado touched down near the town of Scarth, Manitoba, killing two people.
2
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
24
climate scenarios and three scenarios with 
different assumptions about growth in the 
value of assets at risk. We also examined the 
macroeconomic impacts of proactive adap­
tation as well as estimating the social return 
on investment within a cost-benefit analysis 
framework. 
Bottom-up analyses of costs and adaptation bene­
fits for health, on infrastructure, and on Northern 
infrastructure are documented in previous reports 
in the Institute’s Costs of Climate Change series. 
To support a broader scope of macroeconomic 
modelling in this report, we also conducted addi­
tional bottom-up analyses of economic costs of 
climate change from weather-related disasters, 
and from effects on the agriculture, forestry, and 
tourism sectors specifically.
Our approach uses detailed bottom-up analy­
ses to estimate costs and benefits across a wide 
range of impact groups, followed by integration 
into a macroeconomic model. This approach 
follows methods used successfully in other coun­
tries to assess national-scale economic impacts of 
climate change (Steininger et al. 2015; Szewczyk 
et al. 2018). Our results provide a more nuanced 
and granular picture of national-scale economic 
impacts of climate change in Canada than other 
solely top-down macroeconomic studies that rely 
on very broad and simplified assumptions about 
the effects of global temperature increases on 
Canada’s economic performance without consid­
eration of the actual processes through which 
specific climate and weather changes will affect 
different industries, regions, and demographics 
(Burke et al. 2015; Lafakis et al. 2019). 
Table 1 summarizes the main climate change 
impact groups and their associated economic 
costs and benefits that we assessed in our 
research. For further information on how these 
costs and benefits were characterized in our 
economic impact modelling, consult the accom­
panying technical report (Navius Research and 
Canadian Climate Institute 2022). 
Our approach
1. Identification of 
16 material climate 
impact groups
Health data
Infrastructure data
Disaster data
Sector data
Bottom-up input
2. Bottom-up analysis of 
costs and benefits
Health impacts
Infrastructure impacts
Weather-related costs
Forestry, Agriculture, Tourism
Bottom-up input /
Top-down input
Labour productivity
Direct costs and benefits
Sector productivity
Top-down output
Overall national 
macroeconomic impacts
Regional
macroeconomic impacts
Sector impacts
Economic outcomes 
of adaptation
3. Top-down
macroeconomic
and affordability
impacts
Figure 1: Our approach to assessing the impacts of climate change in Canada
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
25
Table 1. The economic costs and benefits of 16 climate impacts
Theme
Impact group
Description of economic cost or benefit
Infrastructure
Coastal and inland 
flooding
Damage to homes and buildings due to inland and coastal 
flooding* 
Road damage
Damage to roads resulting from increased heat, freeze-
thaw, and precipitation impacts
Rail damage
Track buckling caused by heat that exceeds design param-
eters
Road delay
Lost productivity in the commercial transport sector from 
supply chain disruptions due to road damage 
Rail delay
Lost productivity in the rail sector resulting from supply 
chain disruptions due to rail damage 
Electricity infra-
structure damage
Damage to electrical transmission and distribution infra-
structure due to increased heat and changes in precipitation 
impacts
Electricity demand
Increased costs for building cooling due to rising electricity 
demand driven by increased air temperatures
Hydropower supply
Change in hydroelectricity generation due to changes in 
precipitation and snowmelt patterns
Northern 
infrastructure
Permafrost thaw
Damages to airports, roads, and buildings due to permafrost 
thaw
Health
Premature death
Reduction in labour supply due to premature death re-
sulting from extreme heat and heat-induced increases in 
ground-level ozone levels
Illness
Increased healthcare costs due to more Lyme disease, lower 
air quality, and extreme heat
Labour productivity
Reduction in labour productivity due to extreme heat
Disasters
Weather-related 
disasters
Damage to homes, buildings, and infrastructure plus 
government response costs due to wildfires, ice storms, 
catastrophic floods and other extreme weather
Agriculture
Agriculture
Increased or decreased crop yields due to increased temper-
ature and changes in precipitation
Forestry
Forestry
Reduction in timber harvest volumes due to increased tem-
perature and changes in precipitation
Tourism
Tourism
Increased international tourism arrivals due to increased 
seasonal temperatures
Our approach
*Damage to homes and buildings from coastal and inland flooding are net of catastrophic flood events, which 
are captured in weather-related disasters.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
26
Identifying climate change impact groups
We identified 16 impact groups where climate 
change could trigger major economic costs 
and benefits for Canada. However, the costs 
and benefits on our list are ultimately just the 
tip of the iceberg—a warmer and more vola­
tile climate will bring many more economic 
costs than the 16 we studied.
In our first report in the Costs of Climate Change 
series, Tip of the Iceberg, the Canadian Climate 
Institute reviewed current understanding of the 
potential scope and scale of the economic costs 
and benefits of climate change in Canada. The 
report highlighted that damages will cut across 
the Canadian economy, and without adaptation, 
these damages will compound over time (Sawyer 
et al. 2020).
We prioritized 16 impact groups as the focus for 
further analysis of economic costs and benefits 
from climate change that we ultimately integrated 
into a macroeconomic model of provincial and terri­
torial economies in Canada (Table 1). These areas 
were selected to capture the largest estimated 
economic outcomes that are currently quantifiable 
using available data, methods, and models. 
The impact groups we prioritized represent major 
economic risks for Canada, but are only the tip of 
the iceberg of the total economic outcomes to 
be expected (Figure 2). Other, hard-to-measure 
outcomes such as the impacts to productivity and 
healthcare costs of mental illness exacerbated by 
climate change could dwarf the anticipated costs 
of of other climate-induced illness (Clark et al. 2021). 
Because of Canada’s close integration into the 
global economy, climate change fallout at a global 
scale, including ecosystem collapse, war, famine, 
rising political extremism, and authoritarianism, 
could also have devastating impacts on Canada’s 
economy and society. We need look no further 
than the COVID-19 crisis or climate-fuelled conflicts 
in Syria and Mali (Eyzaguirre et al. 2021) to appreci­
ate the magnitude, complexity, and unpredictabil­
ity of these risks. 
July 2020: A homeless encampment in Vancouver's Strathcona Park.
Our approach
Costs of conditions exacerbated by climate change in 
complex ways, such as mental illness.
Unpredictable changes to precipitation, wind, and cloud cover 
patterns that may affect renewable electricity generation.
Cascading impacts across multiple infrastructure and social 
systems, such as shutdown of healthcare systems during more 
frequent power outages, or inability of emergency responders 
to reach those in need after road network damage.
International conflict and migration exacerbated by climate 
change, leading to global geopolitical and economic 
instability.
Deterioration or collapse of ecosystems that provide vital 
ecological services and underpin Canada’s economic activity.
International supply chain interruption impacts on food 
and water security and on business continuity for Canadian 
industry.
Tipping cascades of domino effect-changes that could 
fundamentally and irreversibly destabilize global ecosystems 
and institutions.
Climate change is amplifying existing climate hazards and creating new ones, threatening Canadian 
prosperity and well-being. We can estimate some of these risks and their potential costs for households, 
businesses, communities, and the economy as a whole, but what we can measure so far is only the tip 
of the iceberg: many other risks loom under the surface. Governments need to address the risks we do 
understand while seeking to better understand and prepare for the many that we don’t yet.
RISKS IN OUR PATH 
for which we can 
start to calculate the 
scale of impact
 and cost
RISKS THAT MAY 
HAVE MAJOR IMPACTS
through complex interactions 
and processes that are 
very challenging 
to predict
Direct damage from increased heat, flooding, and permafrost 
thaw to vital infrastructure, including roads, railways, electricity 
systems, and buildings. 
Costs of climate change-induced health hazards such as heat 
and declining air quality.
First-order costs of delays and outages to operators and 
primary users of critical infrastructure, such as transportation, 
energy, and communications systems.
Lower economic productivity due to more frequent weather-
induced outages of critical infrastructure. 
Figure 2: The climate costs iceberg
CLIMATE IMPACTS 
WE SUSPECT WILL 
AFFECT CANADA 
but whose scope and scale 
we don’t yet have the tools
to understand
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
27
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
28
Quantifying the impacts of climate 
change and adaptation
We quantified potential economic costs and 
benefits across all 16 impact groups. We consid­
ered a range of possible future climate condi­
tions, based on seven global climate models 
and two global emissions scenarios for a total 
of 14 scenarios. We also evaluated the effect of 
proactive adaptation for infrastructure and 
health in reducing economic damages.
Our analyses are based on two scenarios of poten­
tial future global greenhouse gas emissions. Our 
low-emissions scenario generally reflects the 
greenhouse gas emissions reduction policies 
that had been announced globally in 2020. This 
low-emissions scenario would result in approx­
imately 2.5 degrees Celsius of global warming 
above pre-industrial levels (4.0 degrees of warm­
ing in Canada, which is warming faster than the 
global average) by the end of the century. Our 
high-emissions scenario reflects a future where 
2020 rates of growth of global greenhouse gas 
emissions continue, causing about 4 degrees of 
warming globally and 7.5 degrees of warming in 
Canada by the end of the century (Box 2). 
To understand what Canada’s future climate 
might look like under these two global emis­
sions scenarios, we chose an ensemble of seven 
different global climate models. Global climate 
models project future climate across the globe, 
and climate models from different research 
centres project different future climate conditions 
for the same emissions, all of which are plausible 
(Climate Data Canada n.d.). It is good practice in 
climate change impact assessment to use multi­
ple climate models to capture this range of poten­
tial future plausible climates. 
We obtained future projections of tempera­
ture and precipitation to 2095 for each of the 
seven global climate models. These projections, 
provided by the Canadian Centre for Climate 
Services, have been downscaled by the Pacific 
Climate Impacts Consortium to a grid of approx­
imately ten kilometres by ten kilometres across 
all of Canada (PCIC 2019).
We used these high-resolution climate projections 
to estimate climate change impacts to infrastruc­
ture, populations, and economic activity across 
the country. For example, we were able to model 
the change in the number of freeze-thaw events 
for every segment of road and highway across the 
country, or the number of days per year that maxi­
mum daily temperatures crossed health danger 
thresholds for every major municipality in Canada. 
A smoggy morning overlooking Hamilton, Ontario.
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
29
BOX 2
Projecting Canada’s future climate 
in an uncertain world
While many countries, including Canada, have committed themselves in the Paris Agreement to limit­
ing global temperature increases to “well below 2 degrees Celsius, while pursuing efforts to limit the 
temperature rise to 1.5 degrees,” and to continuing to ratchet-up ambition to achieve this goal, the poli­
cies and actions set by governments around the world so far, as formalized through their nationally 
determined contributions as of December 2021, are estimated to result in warming of approximately 2.4 
degrees (Climate Action Tracker 2021). Actual global emissions continue to trend upwards and remain 
on a trajectory towards warming of 4 degrees or higher.
In the analysis used for this report, the emissions scenarios reflect the above two future possibilities. Our 
emissions scenarios are based on the representative concentration pathway (RCP) scenarios used in 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s fifth Assessment Report: our low emissions 
scenario corresponds with RCP 4.5 and our high-emissions scenario corresponds with RCP 8.5, which 
result in projected warming of about 2.5 and 4.5 degrees respectively (Moss et al. 2010). 
In recent months, governments have made further commitments to emissions reductions and corre­
sponding actions that could restrict global warming to 2 degrees or less. At the time of our analysis 
being run, modelling that reflected the effects of such commitments (the IPCC 6th Assessment Report) 
was not yet available and has only been available in detailed form for Canada since December 2021. 
Nevertheless, the low-emissions scenario used throughout the Costs of Climate Change series reflects 
a highly plausible future to which Canada must be prepared to adapt, one in which countries meet but 
do not exceed or update their currently declared reduction targets. The high-emissions scenario serves 
to illustrate the dangerous consequences of continued growth in global emissions at current rates. 
It remains imperative that Canada and the rest of the world do everything possible to deliver on the Paris 
Agreement. If this is achieved, the long-term economic impacts of climate change for Canada would 
be somewhat lower than our low-emissions estimates. However, our low-emissions results are still a 
useful guide to the types of impacts Canada will experience to the middle of the century, as changes 
to the climate over this period will be largely the result of emissions that have already happened, rather 
than emissions from this point forward.
Nov. 17, 2021: A road in Abbotsford, British Columbia is flooded after heavy rains cause serious flooding of the Fraser Valley.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
30
Finally, while the IPCC scenarios also describe 
different global socio-economic development 
and demographic trajectories that would lead to 
the emissions associated with each representa­
tive concentration pathway, our modelling used 
more specific socio-economic scenarios based 
on projections of population and economic 
growth commonly used in Canada and three 
different assumptions about asset growth, as 
described below.
We developed detailed estimates of the potential 
costs in three categories—health, infrastructure, 
and Northern infrastructure—as the basis of the 
subsequent three reports in the Costs of Climate 
Change series: 
	
▶
The Health Costs of Climate Change quan­
tified the potential costs to the healthcare 
system and the costs of lost labour produc­
tivity from illness and premature death due 
to heat and declining urban air quality (Clark 
et al. 2021); 
	
▶
Under Water: The costs of climate change 
for Canada’s infrastructure analyzed the 
potential direct costs of property damage 
from increased flooding and infrastructure 
damage from rising global temperatures 
(Ness et al. 2021); and,
	
▶
Due North: Facing the costs of climate 
change for Northern infrastructure 
assessed the costs to governments and 
communities of permafrost thaw damage 
to roads, airports, homes, and buildings (Clark 
et al. 2022). 
Each report contains a detailed description of our 
methods and results.
We conducted additional assessments to estimate 
the impacts of weather-related disasters on infra­
structure, as well as of changing temperature and 
precipitation on agricultural productivity, forest 
timber harvest volumes, and tourist arrivals, for the 
sole purpose of developing inputs to the macro­
economic modelling that is the focus of this report:
	
▶
For weather-related disasters, we projected 
the potential future damage costs of weath­
er-related disasters—which we defined 
as floods, wildfires, and storms identi­
fied as catastrophic losses reported by the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada—by extrapolat­
ing historic trends in the growth of disaster 
costs and by scaling future growth accord­
ing to the severity of change projected by 
each climate model and emissions scenario. 
We allocated costs to each province and 
territory according to past regional distri­
butions of disasters and removed flood costs 
that were already accounted for in the Under 
Water analysis to avoid double-counting. 
	
▶
For agriculture, we obtained modelling esti­
mates of the yield of spring wheat, canola, 
maize, and soy in Canada from Agriculture 
and Agri-Food Canada to project the future 
productivity of the agricultural sector in the 
macroeconomic model for each climate 
scenario (Jing et al. 2017; Qian et al. 2019). 
	
▶
For forestry, we used estimates of the rela­
tionship between standing timber volumes 
and warming temperatures from Natural 
Resources Canada’s Canadian Forest Service 
studies (Boucher et al. 2018) to estimate the 
future resource endowment of the forestry 
sector in the macroeconomic model for each 
climate scenario. 
Our approach
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
31
	
▶
Finally, for tourism, we applied the Hamburg 
Tourism model (Hamilton et al. 2005), an 
econometric model of the relationship 
between climate and international tourism 
flows. We used the model to estimate changes 
in foreign tourist arrivals to Canada based 
on projected future temperatures for each 
climate scenario, to modify tourism expendi­
tures in the macroeconomic model. 
To assess the likely net benefits of proactive adap­
tation, we examined the costs to adapt and the 
resulting benefits of certain proactive adaptation 
actions identified in the analyses for The Health 
Costs of Climate Change, Under Water, and Due 
North. There are numerous other adaptation 
actions that can be taken to reduce damages and 
costs across the 16 impact groups we analyzed, but 
the estimation of adaptation costs and benefits 
is challenging because of a lack of research and 
data on the effectiveness of adaptation measures. 
Therefore, we focussed on adaptation measures 
that have already been researched and that could 
be applied to reduce some of the largest impact 
groups we assessed. 
Table 2 summarizes the findings of our bottom-up 
analyses, including adaptation scenarios.
Further detail on our bottom-up methods and 
results can be found in the accompanying techni­
cal report (Navius and Canadian Climate Institute 
2022) and our previous reports in the Costs of 
Climate Change series.
Hay bales float in flood waters amidst rows of corn in Nova Scotia's Colchester County in 2014.
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
32
Table 2. Key findings from the bottom-up analysis
Impact 
group
Predicted costs and benefits 
(high emissions scenario)
Adaptation findings
Infrastructure
Coastal 
and inland 
flooding 
Coastal flood damage increases by as much 
as $1 billion annually and inland flood dam-
age by as much as $13 billion per year.
Proactive coastal protection can 
reduce the net costs of coastal flood-
ing by up to 90%. Large-scale inland 
flood adaptation benefits cannot be 
easily quantified. 
Road damage
Additional damage to and degradation of 
roads costs up to $12 billion annually.
Proactive adaptation by choosing 
road materials suited to future cli-
mate conditions can eliminate costs 
or produce modest net benefits.
Road delay
Road delays for freight transport and 
passenger vehicles cost up to $2 billion 
annually.
Proactive adaptation can reduce 
delay costs from maintenance and 
repair by up to 92%. 
Rail damage
Additional damage to rails costs up to $60 
million annually.
Proactive adaptation with temper-
ature sensors to isolate vulnerable 
track sections can reduce costs by 
up to 98%.
Rail delay
Delays to freight and passenger travel cost 
up to $4 billion annually.
Proactive adaptation with temper-
ature sensors to target speed orders 
can reduce delay costs by up to 92%.
Electricity 
infrastructure 
damage
Damage to electrical infrastructure costs up 
to $4 billion annually.
Improving the resilience of electrical 
infrastructure can reduce costs by 
77%.
Electricity 
demand
Net effect of reduced heating and increased 
cooling demand causes national electricity 
use to increase by up to 4% annually, requir-
ing up to $5.3 billion per year in additional 
electricity system capital and operating 
expenditures.
N/A
Hydropower 
supply
Hydropower generation could decrease by 
up to 7% or increase by up to 35% annually 
in major hydro producing provinces.
N/A
Northern infrastructure
Permafrost 
thaw
Road repair and replacement costs approach 
$200 million annually across the North.
Damage to Northern airports in excess of 
$10 million annually.
Building damages increase by $200 
million annually.
Proactive adaptation can reduce net 
damage costs by up to 30% in some 
scenarios.
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
33
Illness
Elevated ground-level ozone increases 
healthcare costs by up to $1.5 billion annually.
Heat-related illness increases healthcare 
costs by up to $400 million annually.
Increased incidence of Lyme disease 
increases healthcare costs by up to $270 
million annually.
N/A
Labour 
productivity
Lost productivity caused by heat will cost up 
to $15 billion annually.
Installing shading technologies to 
cool 50% of manufacturing facilities 
would reduce total productivity 
losses by 12%. 
Disasters
Weather-relat-
ed disasters
Continued increases in the frequency, mag-
nitude and impact of weather-related dis-
asters could increase annual damage and 
response costs by up to $54 billion annually.
N/A
Agriculture
Agricultural 
yield
5-year average yields of key crops increase 
by up to 80% or decline by up to 30%, with 
high variability. Average yield generally in-
creases with warming to the end of century.
N/A
Forestry
Timber har-
vest volumes
Timber harvests decline by as much as 30% 
in major forest producing provinces.
N/A
Tourism
Tourist arrivals
International tourism arrivals increase by up 
to 130%
N/A
Health
Premature 
death
Up to 40,000 additional premature deaths 
could occur annually from elevated ground-
level ozone.
Up to 2,500 additional premature heat-relat-
ed deaths annually. 
N/A
Impact 
group
Predicted costs and benefits 
(high emissions scenario)
Adaptation findings
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
34
Estimating macroeconomic impacts 
We used economy-wide modelling to assess alterna­
tive macroeconomic futures under climate change, 
simulating changes to macroeconomic indicators 
such as real GDP and its key components—govern­
ment spending, household consumption, exports 
and imports, and investment. We also assessed 
other macroeconomic outcomes including employ­
ment, regional and sectoral impacts, and impacts 
stratified by household income.
For this economy-wide analysis, we used a modi­
fied version of the Navius Research macroeconomic 
model, gTech, to simulate the economic impact of 
climate change on Canada’s economy. gTech is a 
computable general equilibrium (CGE) model that 
simulates economic activity in all ten Canadian prov­
inces, the territories, and the United States (Navius 
Research and Canadian Climate Institute 2022). We 
make some key modifications to gTech for this anal­
ysis, including extending its time scale to 2095.
We integrated the costs and benefits for the 16 
impact groups into the gTech model. We carried 
forward bottom-up results for both emissions 
scenarios and all seven global climate models. 
For each of these 14 scenarios, we also simulated 
three asset growth scenarios to test the econo­
my’s sensitivity to different asset value assump­
tions to a changing climate. We then simulated 
scenarios with and without proactive adaptation 
across all combinations. 
We thus assessed a total of 84 scenarios (two 
global climate emissions scenarios multiplied by 
2 Note that the asset growth scenarios are only used to scale the assets at risk in the with-climate-change scenarios. The asset growth assumptions 
don’t impact the reference case in our analysis.	
3 Our macroeconomic growth assumptions are informed by Parliamentary Budget Office (2019). While we assumed a 1.7 per cent rate, the precise 
growth rate does not really matter. We are ultimately interested in the climate change impact relative to the reference case (that is, the climate 
change shock minus the reference case). Modellers developing long-term macroeconomic projections who assume alternative status quo growth 
rates such as 1.5 or 2 per cent can still use those growth rates and adjust them to reflect our study’s findings.	
seven downscaled climate scenarios, multiplied 
by three asset growth scenarios, multiplied by 
two adaptation scenarios) and compared each 
against a stable-climate reference case to iden­
tify the incremental impact of climate change.2
 This reference case is implicitly what typical long-
term macroeconomic projections capture though 
simply extrapolating historical data other than 
population projections. As we will see below, this 
results in serious omissions and gaps, as the costs 
of climate change have material impacts on long-
term macroeconomic projections. 
The starting point of all scenarios, including 
the reference case, is the economic structure 
that existed in 2015 as reported by Statistics 
Canada. This analytical starting point assumes 
that economic relationships and structure in 
2015 reflects the effects of climate change to 
that date. Starting simulations from the bench­
mark year of 2015, the macroeconomic model 
operates in 10-year increments to 2095 with 
the national economy growing in the reference 
case at an annual rate of about 1.7 per cent.3
This starting point allowed us to capture in the 
scenario analysis the effects of the climate change 
of the recent past on the macroeconomy through 
the 2015-2025 results.
For the reference case, no further climate change 
was simulated beyond 2015. For some impact 
groups, notably for weather-related disasters, 
we netted-out current damages (to 2015) from a 
projection of future damages to isolate the incre­
mental impacts of future damages above what 
exists today.
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
35
In addition to modelling the economies of the 
provinces and the territories, the gTech model 
fully represents the United States (U.S.) economy, 
including bilateral trade. To reflect how trade 
with our largest trading partner and Canada’s 
economic structure might evolve under a chang­
ing climate, we added to the model the macro­
economic impacts of climate change to the U.S 
economy. We adapted results from Hsiang et 
al. 2017, who evaluated the effects on U.S. GDP 
of a variety of climate change scenarios like the 
ones we considered for Canada. By including 
climate change impacts in the U.S., the analysis 
better reflects how price impacts from a chang­
ing climate would impact trade flows. Absent the 
adjustment, climate damages in Canada would 
be larger as trade moved in the U.S.’s favour. We 
did not model other global trade effects, as this 
would have required a separate global economic 
modelling exercise. However, we are confi­
dent that the most significant trade effects are 
captured given the primacy of Canada’s trading 
relationship with the U.S.
The costs and benefits of the 16 impact groups 
were translated into the macroeconomic model 
as direct and indirect impacts. 
DIRECT IMPACTS are mapped into the gTech 
model three ways:
1.	
Changes to physical assets and factors of 
production alter productivity and output 
positively and negatively. Productivity is 
negatively affected by climate impacts, as 
the costs of producing each additional unit of 
output increase. Climate impacts will trigger 
the premature retirement of productive capi­
tal or increase the operating costs of that capi­
tal as in the case of inland flooding. In either 
Our approach
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
36
case, the accelerated decay and higher costs 
reduce overall productivity. Impacted assets 
typically include residential and commercial 
buildings, and transportation and electric­
ity infrastructure. Higher temperatures alter 
growing seasons and crop yields, changing 
the level of agricultural output. 
2.	 Changes in the stock of resources impairs 
the creation of value. Climate change alters 
the quantity of resources available to support 
output, where a diminished endowment of 
resources means less production can occur and 
vice versa. Stock decreases from climate change 
include drops in available labour due to prema­
ture heat mortality and less timber for harvest. 
3.	 Supply and demand can increase or decrease. 
Climate change may require more or less of 
a good or service to be demanded, as in the 
case of increased tourism arrivals, which are 
essentially an export. A net increase in electric­
ity demand due to higher temperatures can 
also be expected as demand for more space 
cooling in summer outweighs drops in space 
heating in winter. 
INDIRECT IMPACTS flow through the economy 
as direct impacts change market prices. Indirect 
market impacts affect supply chains as costs are 
passed on, alter income levels, disrupt investment 
patterns, and ultimately reduce demand for goods 
and services. Three indirect channels flow through 
the gTech model:
1.	
Construction demand will grow alongside 
the need to rebuild and repair. In the case 
of weather-related disasters, for example, 
households and businesses must use scarce 
resources to repair, rebuild, or more frequently 
maintain damaged infrastructure, which then 
increases demand for construction services, 
providing a positive boost to income and 
labour demand. But this spending comes at 
a cost to overall wealth and well-being as these 
forced expenditures only re-establish what 
was lost due to climate change. (See broken 
window fallacy, page 8).
2.	 Supply chain costs will increase across the 
board. Indirect costs manifest through supply 
chains, road and rail delays slow the move­
ment of goods, and ultimately increase the 
costs of inputs for other business, which in 
turn experience a drop in productivity with 
higher costs. 
3.	 Taxes will increase to pay for damages while 
revenue will fall with a slowing economy. 
On the government revenue side, economic 
growth will slow due to the damages of climate 
change, which lowers personal and corporate 
income tax receipts. On the expenditure side, 
there are increased demands due to rebuild­
ing and repairing damaged infrastructure, 
backstopping damages for business and 
households through, for example, the Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA), and 
providing more healthcare services due to an 
increase in the prevalence of illness and hospi­
talizations. Governments must choose how 
to respond to a shrinking tax base and higher 
expenditures through some combination of 
service cuts, tax increases, or deficit spending. 
In our scenarios, we set gTech to endogenously 
increase tax rates to address fiscal gaps.
Table 3 provides an explanation of how the 16 
impact groups were translated into the macro­
economic model. 
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
37
Table 3. Modelling climate impacts and their translation into the macroeconomic model
Impact group 
Translation into macroeconomic model
Infrastructure
Inland and coastal 
flooding
Increased expenditures financed by households (consumption) and 
commercial sector (investment) to repair property and physical asset 
damage, treated as consumption of construction services. 
Road damage
Increased government expenditure on construction services for roads, 
recovered through higher corporate and personal income taxes.
Road delay
Reduction in productivity in trucking, freight transportation, and other road 
transportation sectors.
Rail damage
Reduction in productivity in the rail sector.
Rail delay
Electricity transmis-
sion & distribution
Reduction in productivity of the electricity sector.
Electricity demand
Changes in energy use intensities for heating and cooling in residential and 
commercial buildings.
Hydropower supply
Increased productivity of the electricity sector.
Northern infrastructure
Permafrost thaw
Increased federal government expenditure on construction services, recovered 
through increased personal and corporate income taxes (damage to roads and 
airports).
Increased expenditures by households and the commercial sector for repair 
of physical asset damage, treated as consumption of construction services 
(damage to buildings).
Health
Premature death
Reductions in labour supply due to premature death, evenly distributed across 
skill levels. The difference between willingness-to-pay measures of avoid-
ed premature death risk are 10 times higher than the market-based capital 
approach that was necessarily adopted to remain consistent with national 
macroeconomic accounting. 
Illness
Increased government healthcare spending funded by increases to personal 
and corporate income taxes. 
Labour productivity
Reduction in productivity of sectors affected by extreme heat. 
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
38
Impact group 
Translation into macroeconomic model
Weather-related disasters
Weather-related 
disasters
Increased expenditures by governments, households, and the commercial sec-
tor for repair of property and physical asset damage, treated as consumption 
of construction services. Government costs are recovered through increased 
personal and corporate income taxes. 
Agriculture
Agricultural yield
Increased (or decreased) productivity of key crops, modelled as reduced (or 
increased) economic input per unit of crop output.
Forestry
Timber harvest 
volumes
Reduction in timber resource availability modelled as reduced shipment vol-
umes and inventory. 
Tourism
International 
Tourism
Increased export demand in tourism services, including services, food, 
air travel, and vehicles.
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
39
Caveats
This analysis quantifies the macroeconomic 
impacts of key economic costs and benefits of 
climate change in Canada. As the most compre­
hensive study of its kind in Canada to date, it has 
required the development of new methodologies 
and approaches. While this analysis generates new 
insights, it also has limitations. As one overarching 
caveat, modelling is not a crystal ball exercise that 
accurately predicts the future. Instead, it is a tool 
that facilitates enhanced understanding of how 
climate change will affect the economy and a warn­
ing regarding the scale of potential impacts. 
1.	 The impacts estimated are only the 
tip of the iceberg.	
 
	
The analysis focuses on important climate 
risks and opportunities with material impact 
for Canada, but there are other material 
damagess, such as ecosystem damages, 
biodiversity loss, and mental health impacts 
not captured in our analysis. In addition, our 
analysis did not include risks that may have 
a major impact on Canada but that are beset 
by too much complexity and uncertainty 
to include in the model, such as geopoliti­
cal conflict or ecosystem collapse. As a result, 
readers should view our findings as merely 
the tip of the iceberg, understanding that 
the type and magnitude of impacts could 
far exceed our projections here. Much more 
research and data are still required to clarify 
the full scope of the types and scale of poten­
tial climate change impacts in Canada. This 
does not mean, however, that full clarity on 
these impacts should be seen as a prerequi­
site for working to mitigate them. 
2.	 The analysis focuses on aggregate 
impacts. 
	
While Section 3 explores some distributional 
implications, our analysis did not focus exten­
sively on equity-deserving populations, whose 
social and economic vulnerabilities are exacer­
bated by a changing climate. Ultimately these 
distributional impacts could be some of the 
most important for governments to consider, 
especially when it comes to designing and 
implementing climate change adaptation 
and other social and economic policies that 
address systemic vulnerabilities. 
3.	 The estimation of the benefits 
of adaptation is incomplete. 
	
Adaptation measures were only modelled in 
a subset of the impact areas, meaning that 
the benefits of adaptation have only been 
compared across impact areas where adapta­
tion measures were simulated. In other words, 
we have not quantified the benefits of adapta­
tion across all assessed climate change impacts. 
More work is still required to understand the full 
range of adaptation benefits.
4.	 The analysis does not consider all 
interactions with the net zero 
transition. 
	
This report isolates the macroeconomic 
impacts of physical climate change on 
Canada. In reality, the macroeconomic effects 
of climate change will be influenced by other 
dynamics in Canada’s economy, including 
efforts to reduce or offset greenhouse gas 
emissions. While the macroeconomic model­
ling reference case does include the impact of 
currently legislated policies to reduce emis­
sions in Canada, we do not explicitly consider 
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
40
interactions with other policy induced 
changes, such as:
a.	 Deeper structural change driven in part 
by the net zero transition. For instance, a 
more expansive electricity system in a net 
zero future may mean climate impacts on 
this sector are greater than the results of 
our analysis indicate.
b.	 New net zero and clean growth policies. 
Emissions reduction policies could inter­
act positively or negatively with climate 
change damages. For instance, the poten­
tially progressive impacts of Canada’s 
carbon pricing approach and energy effi­
ciency policies (specifically, their dispropor­
tionate benefit to low-income households) 
could help temper the regressive impacts 
of physical climate change on households. 
	
Future work could explore these interactions 
between adaptation and mitigation more 
explicitly, particularly to identify policy options 
that simultaneously reduce emissions while 
increasing resilience.
5.	 Uncertainty increases over time in 
our simulations. 
	
Modelling the macroeconomic effects of 
climate change impacts to 2095 comes with 
a range of uncertainties that accumulate and 
grow the farther out into the future we project. 
These uncertainties stem from assumptions 
that must be made in the macroeconomic 
model about future demographics, economic 
structure, growth rate of assets, and economic 
policies, assumptions that become harder and 
harder to make the further into the future we 
look. There are also significant uncertainties 
associated with global climate modelling—
for instance, in projecting the type and extent 
of climate impacts associated with differ­
ent atmospheric greenhouse gas emissions 
concentrations. The process of downscaling, or 
translating projected global climate patterns 
to regional and local effects, also introduces 
uncertainties. The choice of modelling tools, 
whether to model the physical impacts of a 
changing climate on infrastructure or an 
economic sector, or to conduct macroeco­
nomic simulations, can influence results. We 
performed sensitivity analysis on key assump­
tions and relied on multiple global climate 
models, but uncertainty associated with long-
term climate impact and economic projections 
remains inherent to this exercise.
	
Future work could explore a wider range of 
scenarios and could be updated over time to 
reflect new understanding of the science and 
economics of climate change as well as changes 
to global emissions policies and trajectories.
As a result of these limitations, the macroeco­
nomic impacts of climate change in Canada may 
well manifest differently in reality than what our 
projections show.
Our approach
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
41
QUANTIFYING THE COSTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE
QUANTIFYING THE COSTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change is projected to harm Canada’s economy across multiple dimen­
sions, slowing the generation of wealth and the level of economic activity at both the 
national and sector levels, straining government budgets, reducing household income 
and wealth, and eroding Canada’s competitiveness. It is a drag on Canada’s economy 
that will dramatically increase households’ cost of living.
How big are the costs of climate change in Canada, 
and who will pay those costs? Our analysis high­
lights the scale of the damages that climate 
change will cause—both for the Canadian econ­
omy as a whole and for Canadian households 
specifically. The two concepts of drag and broken 
windows are key to understanding the results, as 
this section will detail. 
By drag we mean that the physical impacts of 
climate change are having a material impact on 
the rate of economic growth and the ability of the 
economy to support the well-being of people in 
Canada. Drag implies that absent climate change, 
the economy would be growing at a faster rate, 
household income and consumption would be 
higher, investment levels would be greater, and 
Canada’s exports would be stronger. The cumu­
lative impact of the drag imposed by climate 
change is a much smaller future economy than 
would otherwise be the case.
Beyond the top-level macroeconomic impacts, 
the broken window fallacy in economics is 
instructive for understanding the costs of climate 
change. This parable teaches that an increase in 
economic activity to repair what is broken may 
look good from an economic perspective: money 
is spent, jobs are created, and output expands. But 
there is an opportunity cost to this spending on 
efforts to repair what was prematurely broken: it 
fails to contribute to beneficial outcomes such 
as productive output and wealth creation, and 
therefore represents a drag on growth and pros­
perity. Our analysis finds that Canadian house­
holds will disproportionately pay for the many 
broken windows that will result from a warming 
and increasingly volatile climate. 
June 21, 2013: Flooding in Calgary damaged major roadways, homes, and businesses when the Bow and Elbow Rivers hit record levels.
3
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
42
Slower growth coupled with higher costs, includ­
ing increased taxation, has big implications for the 
prosperity of people in Canada. It means higher 
prices, fewer new jobs, lost savings, and higher 
costs to fix broken assets. 
In other words, damage from climate change is 
shrinking the size of the economic pie for people 
in Canada and making life more unaffordable. The 
economy will adjust and respond to shocks over 
time, but Canadians’ well-being and income see 
the largest drops of the climate impacts we assess. 
Low-income households and certain regions of 
the country will bear a disproportionate burden 
of those costs. 
Damages are widespread 
and compounding 
In this section, we provide a general overview 
of how each of the 16 impact groups influence 
macroeconomic effects. To understand these 
impacts, we ran the macroeconomic model for 
each impact group independently to isolate its 
contribution to macroeconomic change. The 
main results that follow this section capture the 
combined effects of all 16 impact groups across 
the total economy. 
Projected improvements in agricultural produc­
tivity, foreign tourist arrivals, and increased hydro­
electric generation will boost economic activity, 
with agricultural productivity driving the largest 
net gain. But this increased economic activity will 
be more than offset by weather-related disasters, 
illness and premature death, and coastal and 
inland flooding (Figure 3), which will drag down 
the economy and raise the cost of living. 
More specifically:
	
▶
Weather-related disasters and flooding will 
continue to drive large damages. Of all the 
climate impacts we assessed, weather-related 
disasters and coastal and inland flooding are 
the most front-of-mind for people in Canada. 
These impacts erode household wealth, take 
scarce government resources away from other 
social services, and reduce income bene­
fits across many economic sectors. Disaster 
Damage from climate change is shrinking the size of the 
economic pie and making life more unaffordable.
April 27, 2019: Severe flooding on the Muskoka River running through Huntsville, Ontario.
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
43
0
Weather-related disasters
Heat labour productivity
Premature death
Flooding
Electricity demand change
Road and rail damage
Electricity T&D
Forestry
Road delay
Rail delay
Heat illness
Permafrost thaw
Tourism 
Hydro generation 
Agriculture
0.2%
0.4%
0.6%
-0.8%
-0.6%
-0.4%
-0.2%
Figure 3: Compared to the stable-climate reference case, by the middle
of the century, most impact groups will see a loss in real GDP.
Per cent change in GDP relative to a stable-climate reference case in a moderate low-emissions scenario
Note: This chart is based on one of the 42 no-proactive-adaption scenarios we simulated. It also represents a low-end esti­
mate of the GDP changes as it was based on a moderate climate impact scenario. Still, the scenario provides a good illustra­
tion of the relative GDP changes across impact groups.
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
44
damages also erode natural capital and 
personal well-being (for instance, by increas­
ing burdens on mental health), the assess­
ment of which were beyond the scope of this 
study. These damages represent a major and 
growing drag on Canada’s economy. 
	
▶
Impacts on labour productivity and prema­
ture deaths are a hidden yet significant 
source of economic drag. Lost produc­
tivity reduces the competitiveness of the 
economy, reduces household income, 
and impairs our ability to earn and gener­
ate wealth. We find that extreme heat in 
climate-sensitive sectors will significantly 
reduce labour productivity. The increase in 
premature death will be significant enough 
to impact labour supply, a stark indication 
of the breadth of the impacts of climate 
change on human health. 
	
▶
Infrastructure damages are widely 
distributed across the economy and will 
cause large direct and indirect changes. 
Infrastructure damages stem from an array 
of climate hazards such as permafrost thaw 
in the North, increased heat, changing rainfall 
patterns, and changing freeze-thaw cycles. 
These stressors cause direct infrastructure 
damage, but also create indirect losses—for 
instance, unprecedented floods in British 
Columbia washed out land access to the city 
of Vancouver for weeks, causing an estimated 
billion dollars in economic losses. 
	
▶
Natural resource sectors like agriculture 
and forestry will see significant impacts, 
in different directions. The forestry sector 
will experience reductions in timber harvest, 
while agricultural productivity for key crops is 
expected to rise in most scenarios, but not all. 
	
▶
Climate change will also benefit inter­
national tourism. Changes in seasonal 
temperatures will draw in more visitors 
from other countries, increasing domes­
tic economic activity, but the benefits 
look small. 
Manitou Beach, Saskatchewan, 2016: Due to flooding from the rising waters of Little Manitou Lake, the road was washed 
out and is now impassable.
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
45
Drag: The macroeconomic impacts of 
climate change 
This section focuses on the drag that climate 
change represents on the Canadian economy, 
highlighting national, regional, and sectoral macro­
economic changes. We explore effects on national 
income (real GDP), trade, employment, regions, 
and sectors. The next section, Broken Windows, 
explores affordability issues focusing on the 
broken-window implications of climate change, 
including how government budgets, household 
income, and business investment can be expected 
to change as climate damages accumulate. 
The macroeconomic impacts presented in this 
section, though calculated from a fine level of 
geographic resolution, are presented here as 
general trends at the national and provincial levels, 
and over long timescales. The magnitude and direc­
tion of some economic impacts may differ across 
regions and on shorter timescales. Furthermore, we 
acknowledge that the metrics we show in this report 
can each provide useful insights into economic 
well-being, but also have their limitations. We tackle 
the limitations of GDP in Box 3.
Climate damages are a drag on national income
Assessing the overall impacts of climate 
change over the coming decades, we find that 
damages are already showing up as large 
losses in national income today, as measured 
by real GDP. These losses are compounding 
fast, resulting in significant losses in national 
income over the medium and long term. 
Losses in national income in the low-emissions 
scenario after mid-century are less than half 
4 Measured as expenditure-based real GDP in 2020 Canadian dollars.	
5 All dollar values are reported as real 2020 Canadian dollars. Note that GDP per capita is not a measure of the impact on household income. We 
look at household income changes in Section 3.3.1 below.
those of the high-emissions scenario, however, 
suggesting that a slowing of global emissions 
can avoid large costs.
Climate change is already costing Canadians 
billions of dollars. With simulations starting 
in 2015, we can assess the impact of near-term 
damages on the size of today’s economy. In the 
simulations, climate impacts by 2025 result in a 
lower level of real GDP (in 2020 Canadian dollars)4
by up to $25 billion relative to the stable-cli­
mate reference case, which equals up to $620 
per person of lost national income (Table 4). 
To put this loss into context, the real GDP loss from 
climate change in 2025 is equal to half of the annual 
growth in national GDP in 2025. This shrinking in 
real GDP is equivalent to more than twice the cost 
of the November 2021 floods that ravaged British 
Columbia and 12 times larger than all insured losses 
from weather-related disasters in Canada in 2021, 
including the British Columbia November floods 
(IBC 2022).
Climate damages accumulate to lower the size 
of the economy and its rate of growth. To the 
end of the century, the median annual GDP growth 
rate under low-emissions slows 0.061 per cent, and 
0.14 per cent under high-emissions (Table 4).5 These 
annual drops in GDP growth might not seem a 
big deal, but they accumulate, reflecting a signif­
icant drop in investment, household income and 
consumption, trade, and employment. 
The level of real GDP in 2025 is about 1 per cent 
smaller than the reference case, 2 to 2.6 per cent 
by mid-century under low- and high-emissions 
respectively, and 5 (low) to 12 (high) per cent smaller 
by the end of the century (Table 4). National income 
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
46
Gross domestic product (GDP), the most commonly used indicator for tracking economic progress 
around the world, measures the total income that is generated from goods and services produced by 
an economy over a certain time period. While GDP can be a useful measure of economic performance, 
it has its limitations, particularly when seeking to understand the full extent of the macroeconomic 
impacts of climate change. 
As a metric that captures flows rather than stocks, GDP fails to capture changes in natural capital, such 
as the depletion of fish, forest, and mineral stocks, and less tangible assets such as Indigenous cultural 
traditions. It also fails to fully capture impacts on people’s standard of living, cost of living, health, life 
expectancy, extremes of inequality, and many other deeply important indicators of progress. Lastly, 
as the broken window fallacy illustrates, an increase in economic activity to repair a broken window 
looks good for the economy, as money is spent on labour and a new window, but is a net loss since 
that money can’t be spent on new, productive goods and services that create new value. 
We still use GDP as one metric among several to communicate the findings of our analysis, as it does 
provide insights into the level of economic activity and remains a common metric understood and 
applied by economic decision makers. However, readers should understand that no single metric 
provides a complete picture of the well-being of the economy or individuals in it and should strive to 
recognize both the strengths and limitations of different metrics. Governments  should consider apply­
ing additional metrics beyond GDP, such as household welfare, employment, and income inequality 
when assessing the economic impacts of climate change.
BOX 3 
Limits to ‘gross’: Why GDP is an imperfect 
measure of national wealth
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
47
losses, or the level of real GDP, average about $25 
billion in 2025, then rise to $78 (low) and $101 billion 
(high) by mid-century and to between $391 (low) 
and $865 billion (high) by the end of the century. 
Accounting for population growth, per capita 
national income losses by 2025 under both scenar­
ios is $600.6 By mid-century, per capita losses more 
than double under low-emissions and triple under 
6 A median population forecast was developed from all eight Statistics Canada population projections to 2065 (Statistics Canada 2019). The annual 
growth for the last decade in the series was used to project 2065 to 2095.	
high-emissions, but there is significant variation 
across the scenarios (Figure 4). 
Reducing global emissions cuts climate impact 
costs in half. As climate impacts intensify in the 
high-emissions scenario, national income losses 
increase exponentially to average over $11,000 
per capita. These losses are then halved in 
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 4: Large GDP losses are already happening and will continue to grow in both 
low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in real GDP relative to a stable-climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-10%
-5%
Min
Max
Median
-20%
-25%
-15%
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
48
the low-emissions scenario, indicating that 
global efforts to reduce emissions are in Canada’s 
best interest. 
National income losses add up to years of lost 
growth. We estimate the net present value of the 
stream of national income loss over the simulation 
period of 75 years. Monte Carlo analysis is used to 
account for uncertainty in the discount rate and 
across the 42 emissions and climate scenarios.7
We conducted a total of 5,000 simulations to esti­
mate the probable range of the net present value. 
7 Monte Carlo simulations are used to predict the probability of different outcomes given the existence of random variables—in this case, different 
discount rates. Monte Carlo simulations (n = 5,000) were run using real discount rates of 0.5, 1, and 2 per cent over the 75-year simulation period. The 
assumed real discount rates are 0.5, 1, and 2 per cent.	
In the high-emissions scenario, the present value 
of lost real GDP to the end of the century is about 
$8 trillion, equivalent to losing four years of 2025 
GDP. The low-emissions scenario avoids GDP 
losses of about $3 trillion, mainly by moderating 
the severity of climate impacts after 2050. 
The results also imply the risk of a higher-cost 
outcome is more probable than a lower-
cost outcome since more of the possible cost 
outcomes sit above the average than below.  
Quantifying the costs of climate change
Table 4. Real GDP will fall relative to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental loss in real GDP due to climate change
What is the size of the loss?
Dollar value (2020 $B) 
High
-$24.6
-$101.2
-$865.0
Low
-$23.9
-$77.9
-$391.0
How fast is the loss growing? 
Year-over-year change 
High
-3.7%
-6.6%
-6.2%
Low
-2.5%
-6.2%
-5.5%
What is the per capita loss?
Per capita GDP loss 
High
-$620
-$1,940
-$11,050
Low
-$600
-$1,490
-$5,000
Change in size of real GDP
How fast is real GDP 
growing?
Year-over-year change 
Reference
2.11%
1.65%
1.68%
High
2.01%
1.56%
1.24%
Low
2.01%
1.58%
1.51%
What is the loss? 
Loss in size of GDP 
relative to reference
Reference
100%
100%
100%
High
-1.0%
-2.6%
-12.4%
Low
-1.0%
-2.0%
-5.2%
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
49
Quantifying the costs of climate change
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 5: Canadian exports will shrink over time in both
low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in exports relative to a stable-climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-10%
-20%
-30%
Min
Max
Median
Climate damages are a drag on trade
Exports and imports are important compo­
nents of GDP. The ability to compete in domes­
tic and international markets is essential to a 
thriving economy, with a vibrant export sector 
creating value to support government services, 
consumption, and investment. Similarly, 
imports are needed to drive domestic produc­
tion and to create value while supporting 
consumption and investment. As the climate 
warms, both imports and exports fall signifi­
cantly relative to the reference case due to a 
loss in productivity as well as a contraction in 
domestic and foreign economies, constrain­
ing Canada’s ability to compete. 
Export losses will grow over time as costs rise 
and competitiveness is reduced. In the simula­
tions, the level of exports is down $14 billion by 2025, 
or 1.2 per cent lower than the reference case (Table 5). 
Losses compound in both emissions scenarios to 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
50
Quantifying the costs of climate change
Table 5. Exports will fall relative to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental loss in exports due to climate change 
What is the size of the loss?
Dollar value (2020 $B)
High
-$13.8
-$63.2
-$601.5
Low
-$13.5
-$49.4
-$295.3
How fast is the loss growing?
Year-over-year change
High
-5.4%
-6.8%
-6.1%
Low
-4.2%
-6.1%
-5.5%
What is the per capita loss?
Per capita export loss
High
-$350
-$1,210
-$7,680
Low
-$340
-$950
-$3,770
Change in size of total exports
How fast are exports 
growing?
Year-over-year change 
Reference
2.22%
1.97%
1.85%
High
2.10%
1.86%
1.32%
Low
2.10%
1.89%
1.63%
What is the loss? 
Loss in size of exports 
relative to reference
Reference
100%
100%
100%
High
-1.2%
-3.1%
-16.0%
Low
-1.2%
-2.4%
-7.3%
mid-century due to slowed export growth that 
slightly outpaces the drop in GDP growth. By the 
end of the century, export losses in the low-emis­
sions scenario are $300 billion or seven per cent 
below reference, and $600 billion under high 
emissions, which is a 16 per cent drop in the level 
of exports below reference. In the high-emissions 
scenario, by the end of the century, losses in exports 
are significantly lower than the reference case, with 
Figure 5 highlighting the variability across scenarios. 
Note that climate impacts are affecting aggregate 
U.S. demand in the simulations, which has the effect 
of lowering Canadian exports and output. 
Imports will slow as Canadian output falls, 
reflecting a deepening economic weakness 
due to climate change. The incremental fall 
in the level of imports is $17 billion by 2025, or 
1.5 per cent of the reference case (Table 6). The 
growth in imports continues to slow at about the 
same rate as GDP to mid-century and beyond. By 
the end of the century, the impact of slowed import 
growth results in a reduction in the level of imports 
below the reference case by six per cent to 13 per 
cent, depending on the scenario (Figure 6). The 
decline in imports reflects a growing weakness in 
the economy as climate damages accumulate. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
51
Quantifying the costs of climate change
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 6: Canadian imports will slow over time in both
low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in imports relative to a stable-climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-10%
-5%
-20%
-25%
-15%
Min
Max
Median
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
52
Quantifying the costs of climate change
Table 6. Imports will fall relative to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental loss in imports due to climate change 
What is the size of the loss?
Dollar value (2020 $B)
High
-$16.8
-$55.7
-$447.1
Low
-$16.8
-$44.8
-$222.5
How fast is the loss growing?
Year-over-year change
High
-3.1%
-4.6%
-6.2%
Low
-2.3%
-3.9%
-5.3%
What is the per capita loss?
Per capita import loss
High
-$420
-$1,070
-$5,710
Low
-$420
-$860
-$2,840
Change in size of total imports
How fast are imports 
growing?
Year-over-year change 
Reference
1.82%
1.85%
1.80%
High
1.67%
1.77%
1.35%
Low
1.67%
1.80%
1.62%
What is the loss? 
Loss in size of imports 
relative to reference
Reference
100%
100%
100%
High
-1.5%
-3.0%
-13.2%
Low
-1.5%
-2.4%
-6.2%
Climate damages kill jobs
The ability of an economy to generate and 
sustain jobs is central to securing an afford­
able future for people in Canada. With so many 
climate damages affecting labour, including 
heat-induced productivity losses and prema­
ture deaths shrinking the workforce, it is no 
surprise we see large employment reductions 
across all the simulations. These labour costs 
then ripple through the economy, reducing 
productivity and raising prices. 
Expect significant job losses across all scenar­
ios. In the high-emissions scenario by mid-cen­
tury, job losses more than double 2025 levels, 
representing 500,000 lost jobs, which is about 
1.5 per cent of all projected employment (Figure 7 
and Table 7). By the end of the century, 2.87 million 
job losses are projected. In our simulations, these 
employment effects increase the unemployment 
rate to as high as 15 per cent, although it is likely 
that the unemployed would become discouraged 
and leave the labour force, which would likely 
curb this rise in the unemployment rate through 
a reduced labour participation rate. In addition to 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
53
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 7: Climate change will cause major job losses in both
the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Change in employment relative to a stable-climate reference case (millions of jobs)
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-1M
-2M
-3M
-4M
-5M
Min
Max
Median
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
54
direct economic effects, this scale of job loss will 
create social costs related to mental health and 
other challenges.
Reducing global emissions will save jobs. 
Relative to the high-emissions scenario, lower 
global emissions avoid about 120,000 job losses 
by mid-century and halves the losses by the end 
of the century. Still, job losses in the low-emissions 
scenario add up to 345,000 by mid-century and 
1.3 million by the end of the century. 
Climate damages drag down some regions more 
than others
By the end of the century, all Canadian regions 
are projected to be worse off economically 
than they would otherwise be due to wors­
ening climate damages. The extent of these 
losses, however, varies across regions and 
time scales, with the North and Alberta being 
disproportionately impacted due to perma­
frost thaw in the North and a higher preva­
lence of weather-related disasters in Alberta.
The North will be hit particularly hard. Northern 
Canada is projected to experience the greatest 
proportional losses in GDP, with median GDP 
losses of $5,490 or $7,080 per capita by mid-cen­
tury in low- or high-emissions scenarios respec­
tively (Figure 8). By the end of the century, these 
losses are expected to increase to $11,820 and 
$26,060 per capita per year. GDP losses in the 
North are driven by changes in electricity demand, 
damage to buildings caused by permafrost thaw, 
and damage to infrastructure caused by weath­
Quantifying the costs of climate change
Table 7. Employment will fall relative to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental loss of jobs due to climate change
What is the size of the loss?
‘000s jobs 
High
-194
-478
-2,867
Low
- 183
- 345
-1,320
How fast is the loss growing?
Year-over-year change
High
-3.5%
-4.1%
-5.3%
Low
-3.7%
-3.7%
-4.5%
Change in number of total jobs
How fast are jobs growing?
Year-over-year change 
Reference
0.57%
0.65%
0.69%
High
0.49%
0.59%
0.31%
Low
0.49%
0.61%
0.54%
What is the loss? 
Change in employment 
level relative to reference
Reference
100%
100%
100%
High
-1.0%
-2.7%
-9.6%
Low
-0.9%
-1.8%
-4.4%
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
55
0
$5
$10
$15
$20
$25
0
$5
$10
Figure 8: No region is immune from the impacts of climate change, as losses take 
hold across the country, both in the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Median per capita GDP loss across ensemble of 24 scenarios (thousand $)
Newfoundland 
and Labrador
Quebec
New Brunswick
Nova Scotia
Saskatchewan
Prince Edward
Island
Ontario
British Columbia
Manitoba
Alberta
End of century
Mid-century
Northern Canada
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
56
Quantifying the costs of climate change
er-related disasters. These findings underscore 
the disproportionate impacts of climate change 
on Canada’s North, as detailed in the Institute’s 
report Due North: Facing the costs of climate 
change for Northern infrastructure.
Impacts are unevenly distributed across south­
ern regions. Alberta is projected to experience 
particularly significant losses, resulting primar­
ily from the impacts of weather-related disasters. 
Median GDP losses in Alberta are $2,890 or $3,920 
per capita by 2055, in low- and high-emissions 
scenarios respectively. In some provinces, such as 
Saskatchewan and Prince Edward Island, net losses 
are tempered by some benefits resulting from 
improvements in agricultural productivity, although 
some of the scenarios show net losses in agriculture. 
Newfoundland and Labrador see muted losses and 
some gains, primarily due to improved hydroelec­
tric supply, but these averages mask widespread 
damages in the other impact groups. 
Climate damages drag down most sectors
For most economic sectors, losses are experi­
enced across all global emission and climate 
scenarios, as direct impacts raise costs, indi­
rect supply chain costs impair productivity, 
and market effects reduce demand. There 
are very few economic sectors that are net 
winners under a changing climate, notably 
construction and agriculture, which comprise 
just 8.5 per cent of Canada’s economy and 
whose gains are swamped by the GDP losses 
experienced by all other sectors. 
The need to rebuild and repair will boost 
construction. Rebuilding damaged infrastructure 
boosts construction and allied industries such as 
cement and lime across all scenarios. The construc­
tion industry consistently increases its share of the 
total economy, albeit of a smaller total economy. In 
2025, this sector looks to be in the order of 1.2 per 
cent larger than in the reference case and growing 
into the future through the simulations (Figure 9). 
However, the gains seen in the construction sector 
are not a good news story, instead highlighting the 
broken window fallacy: the growth in construction 
comes from repairing damaged infrastructure and 
carries significant income and wealth impacts to 
those who must pay for the repair and replace­
ment. As the simulations suggest, there is an over­
all net cost to the economy. 
Agriculture is a likely beneficiary of a warming 
climate. The resource sector benefits slightly in 
the short term, while across all scenarios agricul­
ture expands relative to the reference case due 
to productivity increases from longer growing 
seasons. But as climate impacts intensify in the 
longer term, any gains from agriculture are wiped 
out as other resource sectors contract, including 
the forest products sector, which is particularly 
climate sensitive.
Manufacturing declines are widespread. 
Manufacturing will experience some of the largest 
declines as employment and labour supply impacts, 
including work stoppages from extreme heat, 
worsen, and as rising supply chain costs get passed 
on, for example, through increased shipping costs 
from road and rail delays. In 2025, the simulations 
suggest that climate change is already reducing 
the size of the sector by one per cent relative to the 
reference case. The sector continues to grow more 
slowly to mid-century under both scenarios, but in 
the high-emissions scenario the sector is ultimately 
down about 16 per cent compared to the reference 
case by the end of the century. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
57
Figure 9: Most sectors of the economy are negatively impacted by climate 
change both in the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in real GDP relative
to a stable-climate reference case
10%
0
-10%
-20%
10%
0
-10%
-20%
Canada
Construction
Resources
Services
Transportation
Utilities
Manufacturing
2025
End of century
The service sector is vulnerable to direct and 
indirect impacts. The service sector is at the 
end of supply chains and is labour-intensive, and 
therefore can expect to be hit hard as costs get 
passed on through rising prices. Add flood and 
storm damages to commercial buildings and a 
slowing total economy, and the costs compound. 
In 2025, the sector is already 1.4 per cent smaller 
relative to the stable-climate reference case, and 
the damage only gets worse over time.
Transportation is highly climate-sensitive, rais­
ing the costs of moving goods and people. 
Transportation, comprising both road and rail 
transport, is the most climate-sensitive economic 
sector to mid-century. Specific drags on economic 
growth in the transportation sector include 
delays that raise costs and reduce demand, as 
well as premature failure of assets which must be 
replaced. Demand for transportation services also 
falls as the economy contracts, hitting this sector 
particularly hard. By 2025, the sector is 1.4 to 1.5 per 
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
58
cent lower in size relative to the reference case, 
indicating that even in the short-term the sector 
is highly sensitive to climate damages. 
Electric utilities see short-term gain but long-term 
pain. Utilities fare relatively well in the short-term, 
but over the longer-term face a bigger contraction. 
Within the utilities sector, electricity transmission 
and distribution show a fairly high level of climate 
sensitivity, whereas generation is less impacted, 
particularly since more precipitation could support 
more hydro generation. A general contraction in 
the economy also drives a lower demand for energy 
services in the long run.
Broken windows: The affordability 
impacts of climate change
Our topline findings on the macroeconomic 
consequences of climate change—the drag 
it represents for overall growth—mask deeper 
affordability issues that will significantly raise the 
cost of living for households in Canada. Businesses 
are also picking up the tab to fix more and more 
broken windows as climate damages inten­
sify. In fact, the largest impacts we saw were in 
areas associated with affordability—rising taxes 
as governments are forced to backstop climate 
disaster damages and devote a greater share of 
budgets to climate impacts, rising costs of basic 
goods due to supply chain disruptions, and fall­
ing business investment as spending on climate 
damages eclipses other priorities. 
Climate damages hit households hardest
The consequences of climate change are 
not only impacting Canada’s industries and 
infrastructure; they are also hurting people. 
Households are worse off across all scenarios 
we modelled. In the simulations, household 
income will be negatively impacted as labour 
income vanishes due to heat impacts and 
other illness, prices rise as costs mount in supply 
chains, and increased taxation is needed to 
pay for damages and maintain services.
Real income from employment, government 
transfers, and other sources is an important 
measure of economic well-being. We use real 
income measured in 2020 Canadian dollars as 
May 21, 2022: Hydro crews work to restore power after rare derecho struck the city of Ottawa. 
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
59
the indicator for household impact in this section.8
Beyond the quantifiable costs to households 
reflected here through reduced household income, 
people will experience additional negative impacts 
that are not easily monetized, including significant 
mental health impacts, and the negative societal 
impacts of economic hardship. The fact that these 
below-the-waterline damages are not monetized 
and therefore cannot be included in the model is 
by no means an indication that they are not severe 
or worthy of significant government attention. 
The loss of household income is large relative to 
other economic impacts. The growth in annual 
real income immediately slows in the simula­
tions, outpacing the drop in GDP growth in the 
very near future. The impact of reduced income 
growth by 2025 is a drop in income per capita of 
8 Changes in consumption or welfare would also provide similar insight on the household affordability impact.	
$720 in both emissions scenarios. By mid-century 
in the low-emissions scenario, income losses are 
$1,890 per capita, which represents a 3.5 per cent 
drop in the level of income relative to the refer­
ence case. In the high-emissions scenario, per 
capita income losses are almost $2,300, repre­
senting a 4.5 per cent drop relative to the refer­
ence (Table 8 and Figure 10). 
After mid-century, real income losses are a big 
threat to affordability. After mid-century when the 
high-emissions scenario inflicts greater damages, 
income losses on a per capita basis rise to $10,600 by 
2095, with the low-emissions scenario about halving 
the level to $5,600 per capita. Across all high-emis­
sion scenarios by 2095, income levels are down 18 
per cent below the reference case and in the worst-
case scenario, 31 per cent lower (Figure 10). 
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
60
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 10: Canadian households will pay a high price for climate damages 
in both the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in per capita income relative to a stable-climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-10%
-20%
-30%
Min
Max
Median
Low-income households will see the largest 
reductions in real household income. While 
high-income households lose more income in abso­
lute terms, the share of real income lost by low-in­
come households is higher. By mid-century, the 
lowest-income households are projected to face 
income losses, relative to the refence case, of 5.8 
per cent under high-emissions and 4.8 per cent 
under the low-emissions scenario (Figure 11). This 
compares to losses of 4 per cent and 3.2 per cent for 
the highest-income households in the same period.
By the end of the century, the impacts on real 
household income cut deep into affordabil­
ity. Low-income households face real income 
cuts on average of 23 per cent in the high-emis­
sions scenario, and 12 per cent under low-emis­
sions. Even the median group faces significant 
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
61
income losses of 9 to 19 per cent under low- and 
high-emissions scenarios, respectively.9
The disproportionate losses for low-income house­
holds are driven by lower baseline levels of income, 
resulting in the same dollar amount of lost income 
comprising a higher share of total income lost 
compared to high-income households. As well, 
there is a higher share of income coming from 
low-income employment in the service sector that 
is impacted heavily by damages to infrastructure 
and supply chain disruptions. Finally, the lower-in­
9 This value differs from Figure 11 as it is calculated just for the third quintile, median income group and not all income groups.	
10 Equity-deserving groups are those that continue to face significant, collective barriers to full participation in society, including racialized people, 
Indigenous people, women, recent immigrants and new Canadians, people with disabilities, and people who identify as LGBTQ2S+ (lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender, queer or questioning, and two-spirit).	
come groups tend to spend more of their income 
on transportation services and housing, both of 
which are highly climate-sensitive. 
Other equity-deserving groups, such as Indigenous 
people, racialized people, recent immigrants, 
and women, are disproportionately represented 
in low-income groups (Statistics Canada 2021; 
Statistics Canada 2022).10 Therefore, climate change 
impacts risk exacerbating inequality across multi­
ple dimensions. 
Quantifying the costs of climate change
Table 8. Household income will fall relative to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental loss of income due to climate change
What is the size of the loss? 
Dollar value (2020 $B) 
High
-$28.6
-$120.4
-$829.0
Low
-$28.0
-$98.7
-$435.9
How fast is the loss growing? 
Year-over-year change
High
-5.8%
-5.7%
-4.8%
Low
-5.8%
-5.5%
-4.4%
What is the per capita loss?
Per capita income loss
High
-$720
-$2,300
-$10,590
Low
-$700
-$1,890
-$5,570
Change in the total size in real income
How fast is income growing? 
Year-over-year change 
Reference
2.17%
1.51%
1.59%
High
2.01%
1.36%
1.11%
Low
2.01%
1.39%
1.38%
What is the change in the 
level of income? 
Income level relative 
to reference 
Reference
-100%
-100%
-100%
High
-1.6%
-4.3%
-17.9%
Low
-1.6%
-3.5%
-8.7%
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
62
Quantifying the costs of climate change
-5%
-10%
-15%
-20%
Q1
Lowest
income
Q5
Highest 
income
Figure 11: Low-income households have the most to lose from climate impacts both 
in the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in household income relative to a stable climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
63
Quantifying the costs of climate change
Climate damages will lead to tax increases
Across all scenarios, climate impacts put 
stress on government budgets. A shrinking 
tax base reduces government revenue even 
as expenditure demands increase. Replacing 
and repairing damaged infrastructure, back­
stopping weather-related disaster costs, and 
funding increased healthcare needs all place 
greater demands on government budgets. To 
close this fiscal gap, taxes will need to rise to 
maintain services or costs will be transferred 
to future generations to service the debt, both 
of which add costs in the form of tax-induced 
inefficiencies. 
More government revenue is needed to main­
tain infrastructure and services. Demands on 
governments increase with more expenditures 
needed to backstop the costs of weather-related 
disasters, to upgrade and replace infrastructure 
more frequently, and to pay for more healthcare. 
For governments to continue providing services 
while addressing climate damages, personal and 
corporate taxes must rise to offset the hit to output 
and the induced effect on tax bases, or services 
must decline—both of which leave households on 
the hook as the cost of living climbs. Alternately, 
borrowing will need to rise, which will transfer 
current costs to future generations through debt 
servicing. The indirect cost of increased taxation is 
to lower overall efficiency in the economy, where 
there is marginal cost to the economy of raising 
public funds. 
11 Measured as expenditure-based real Gross Domestic Product in 2020 dollars. 
Our modelling suggests that as early as 2025, 
governments at all levels will see increased expen­
ditures of $4 billion annually to address climate 
damages. For governments to pay for these expen­
ditures without eroding services relative to the refer­
ence case, corporate and personal income taxes will 
need to be on average 0.4 per cent higher (Table 9).11 
Out to mid-century in both emissions scenarios, 
government’s share of the total economy rises 
from 24 to 25 per cent. After mid-century in the 
low-emissions scenario, this trend continues at 
about the same pace, with government spend­
ing eventually making up an extra three per cent 
of the economy relative to the reference case. The 
incremental rise in per capita revenue is $700 per 
year (Figure 12), representing an increase in the 
average tax rate of 1.4 per cent (Table 9). 
In the high-emissions scenario by the end of 
century, the size of government with climate 
impacts is still larger than the reference case, but 
the rate of government gain slows, as evidenced 
in the inverted U-shape in Figure 12. In this case, 
annual GDP growth falls fast and well below the 
reference case, which lowers government reve­
nue. At the same time, damages are mounting 
and there is still a need to raise taxes 2.7 per cent 
to meet the increased spending by government, 
which triggers an indirect cost on the economy. 
The net effect by the end of the century is a small 
rise in the size of government, with a per capita 
gain of $300, down from a high of $730 (Figure 12). 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
64
Quantifying the costs of climate change
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 12: Governments will need to increase taxes to pay for climate 
damages both in the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Taxation on a per capita basis relative to a stable-climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
$250
$500
After mid-century,
a rapidly shrinking 
economy lowers 
government
revenue
$750
$1000
Min
Max
Median
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
65
Table 9. Government spending will mostly increase relative 
to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental increase in size of government due to climate change 
What is the size 
of the increase? 
Dollar value (2020 $B) 
High
$4.6
$17.6
$23.6
Low
$5.3
$17.6
$55.1
How fast is the increase 
growing? 
Year-over-year change
High
7.9%
7.8%
-6.5%
Low
6.3%
8.2%
1.6%
What is the per capita 
increase?
Per capita change
High
$120
$340
$300
Low
$130
$340
$700
Change in the total size of government
How fast is government 
growing?
Year-over-year change 
Reference
1.71%
1.53%
1.69%
High
1.79%
1.62%
1.52%
Low
1.80%
1.62%
1.68%
What is the change in the 
size of government? 
GDP level relative to reference 
Reference
100%
100%
100%
High
0.7%
1.8%
1.3%
Low
0.8%
1.8%
2.9%
Change in average corporate and personal tax rates
High
0.35%
1.1%
2.7%
Low
0.35%
0.9%
1.4%
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
66
Climate damages impair investments in future 
productivity
A growing economy needs investment to 
generate income and build wealth. The slow­
down in investment by Canadian businesses, 
households, and from foreign direct invest­
ment that our model predicts will hurt future 
productivity. Across all emissions and climate 
scenarios we see investment dropping rela­
tive to the reference case. Before mid-century, 
investment declines accelerate as businesses 
address damages to infrastructure and lower 
productivity. In the longer term, the decline in 
investment accelerates as costs accumulate 
and output shrinks. 
Investment is already seeing declines in the 
short term, outpacing the drag on national 
income. In the simulations, the level of invest­
ment is down by about $7.5 billion by 2025, repre­
senting a drop in overall investment of about 2 
per cent from the reference case, or twice the 
reduction in real GDP (Figure 13 and Table 10).12 
This drop comes from a variety of sources: reduced 
savings from households as their costs rise, lower 
economic activity, and higher business costs. 
12 Measured as expenditure-based real GDP in 2020 dollars. The quantity of savings in the model is fixed relative to the quantity of labour assumed 
in the model, so the rate relative to income will vary if households consume more or less leisure.
Investment declines accelerate in the medium 
term. Through 2055, in both emissions scenar­
ios, the rate of investment falls faster than the 
rate of GDP decline, with the level of investment 
about 3 per cent lower across both scenarios. A 
large drop in investment is not a surprise given 
that business must continue to invest to address 
damages to infrastructure and declining labour 
productivity. Under high-emissions, the GDP drag 
starts to impact investment well in advance of the 
low-emissions scenario, indicating a longer-term 
trend of investment decline and adjustment lead­
ing to one of the highest drops of all the compo­
nents of GDP. 
Investment falls off a cliff around mid-century, 
reflecting a significant risk to long-term produc­
tivity and output. As climate damages mount, our 
modelling shows investment entering a precipi­
tous decline. In the high-emissions scenarios, the 
size of the investment loss jumps from 3.5 per cent 
at mid-century to 18 per cent by the end of century 
(Figure 13). This is a huge impact on business. The 
low-emissions scenario more than halves the level 
of lost investment after mid-century.
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
67
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
Figure 13: Investment declines accelerate over the medium term,
both in the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in business investment relative to a stable-climate reference case
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-10%
-20%
-30%
-40%
Min
Max
Median
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
68
Table 10. Business investment will fall relative to a stable-climate reference case
Emissions 
scenario
2025
Mid- 
century
End of 
century
Incremental investment loss due to climate change 
What is the size of the loss? 
Dollar value (2020 $B) 
High
-$7.6
-$20.4
-$170.8
Low
-$7.4
-$16.3
-$76.6
How fast is the loss growing? 
Year-over-year change
High
-0.5%
-6.0%
-6.9%
Low
-0.2%
-6.7%
-5.2%
What is the per capita loss?
Per capita investment loss 
High
-$190
-$390
-$2,180
Low
-$190
-$310
-$980
Change in the size of total investment 
How fast is investment 
growing?
Year-over-year change 
Reference
1.57%
1.89%
1.69%
High
1.38%
1.77%
1.00%
Low
1.38%
1.79%
1.48%
What is the cumulative loss 
in the size of investment? 
Investment level 
from reference 
Reference
100%
100%
100%
High
-1.9%
-3.5%
-17.8%
Low
-1.9%
-2.8%
-7.3%
Quantifying the costs of climate change
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
69
 
While climate damages represent a significant threat to Canada’s future well-being, 
proactive investments in adaptation accompanied by global emissions reductions in 
line with current commitments can cut those costs by a factor of four. In other words, 
protecting people in Canada from the costs of climate change requires both dramatic 
emissions reductions at home and abroad and a massive deployment of adaptation 
investment and policy across Canada.
Our analysis in the previous section shows that 
the costs of climate change increase with higher 
global emissions. Global efforts to reduce green­
house gas emissions significantly reduce these 
costs. Alongside these efforts, proactive adaptation 
can also pay significant dividends. 
Previous studies shed light on the benefits of 
adaptation. The earlier studies in the Costs of 
Climate Change series assessing the damages and 
costs to health, infrastructure, and Northern infra­
structure each included analysis of the benefits 
of proactive adaptation measures (Table 2). In the 
case of health, we estimated the costs of imple­
menting shading measures to mitigate summer 
overheating in manufacturing facilities and the 
associated benefits to labour productivity. For infra­
structure and Northern infrastructure, we esti­
mated the costs and benefits of installing adaptive 
infrastructure such as coastal protection measures 
to protect areas at risk of coastal flooding and incor­
porating resilient upgrades to infrastructure in 
planned maintenance and replacement cycles 
such as more temperature-resistant asphalt on 
roads and highways, or the excavation and replace­
ment of Northern highway embankments in areas 
impacted by permafrost thaw.
In total, these previous Costs of Climate Change 
studies quantified the costs and benefits of adapta­
tion interventions for eight of the 16 climate impact 
groups. To accurately compare the macroeconomic 
effects of adaptation against a scenario of contin­
ued inaction, for this report we developed a unique 
Blue Heron Pond in east Windsor, is a constructed storm water retention pond and recreation area/park.
4
THE BENEFITS 
OF ADAPTATION 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
70
set of with- and without- adaptation scenarios. 
Practically, this means a separate and more limited 
set of scenarios was developed to compare macro­
economic changes with and without adaptation.
Many adaptation measures that could be applied 
to the other eight impact areas that were not 
considered in this modelling have been shown to 
have significant positive returns on investment 
in other contexts. Therefore, we expect that more 
widespread implementation of adaptation across 
a variety of sectors and areas impacted by climate 
change will result in even greater net benefits and 
reductions in national economic losses. 
We measured the societal benefits of adaptation 
in two ways: calculating the avoided lost national 
income with adaptation and calculating the net 
benefits of adaptation.
The avoided national income losses with 
adaptation are large
The first approach mirrors the previous analysis in 
this document, where we add the direct costs of 
adaptation and the associated damages into the 
macroeconomic model and track out the macro­
economic changes. The indirect costs, those that 
manifest through supply chains and markets, are 
then tracked in the model alongside the direct 
benefits calculated from the bottom-up studies 
discussed in Section 2, Table 1 above. 
Figure 14 shows the results of the modelling of 
these eight impact groups, with and without 
adaptation, for all seven climate models and each 
of the two emissions scenarios. The results show 
that investment in proactive adaptation results 
in a substantial reduction in overall economic 
damages from climate change impacts to those 
The combined effects of lower global 
emissions and proactive adaptation 
reduces total real GDP losses by 
the end of century by 75 per cent.
The benefits of adaptation
A wind turbine and solar panels on a building in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
71
Figure 14: Proactive adaptation cuts costs by half across both  
the low-emissions and high-emissions scenarios.
Per cent change in total economy (GDP) from a stable-climate reference case 
with and without adaptation
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
2025
2055
Mid-century
2095
End of century
-1%
-2%
-3%
-4%
-5%
Scenario 
with 
adaptation
Investing in 
adaptation 
cut GDP 
change by 
47%
53%
Min
Max
Median
Scenario 
without 
adaptation
areas. In the low-emissions scenario, impacts 
are reduced by about 35 per cent by mid-cen­
tury and 50 per cent by end of century, while in a 
high-emissions scenario impacts are reduced by 
approximately 50 per cent in both time frames. 
The combined effects of lower global emissions 
and proactive adaptation reduces total real GDP 
losses by the end of century by 75 per cent. 
Adaptation investments pay 
big social dividends
We conduct a cost-benefit analysis using a welfare 
economic frame, which is the study of how the 
allocation of resources in an economy affects 
social welfare. This approach avoids the broken 
window fallacy by counting only those benefits 
The benefits of adaptation
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
72
that create value and those costs that expend real 
resources. The approach compares the stream of 
adaptation costs with the resulting direct and indi­
rect benefits, discounting them back to today’s 
dollars to reflect the time value of money. For a 
specific investment to pay a social dividend, the 
value of the social benefits of the adaption invest­
ments must be greater than the costs. 
A few notes on the cost-benefit analysis: 
	
▶
Costs and direct benefits of adaptation are 
estimated from the bottom-up Costs of 
Climate Change studies (see Table 2).
	
▶
Indirect benefits are estimated from the 
gTech model as a change in welfare. In the 
model, economic welfare is derived from 
the allocation of national income between 
private consumption and leisure. The 
welfare measure is the loss in economic 
value to households and is a measure of the 
social cost of the climate change damages 
we estimate. 
	
▶
This is a partial cost-benefit analysis, mean­
ing there are unquantified benefits of adap­
tion that are not included. This implies the 
net benefit we estimate is likely lower than 
actual outcomes. 
	
▶
We’ve used Monte Carlo analysis to vary the 
real discount rate and capture the signif­
icant variation in the emissions scenarios. 
We conducted a total of 5,000 simulations 
to determine the net present value of the 
net societal benefits of adaptation—in other 
words, whether the benefits of adaptive 
responses are greater than the costs. 
Table 11 presents the results of the cost-benefit 
analysis. Across all the simulations, the net pres­
ent value is positive and significant, indicating 
that a broad suite of adaptation investments is 
socially desirable. Indeed, adaptation investments 
pay large dividends with benefit-cost ratios in the 
order of 13 to 15, meaning every dollar invested 
in adaptation yields $13-$15 in benefits. The high 
benefit-cost ratio, or the multiple of benefits to 
The benefits of adaptation
Table 11. Proactive adaptation generates major economic returns
Costs
Direct 
benefits
Indirect 
benefits
Net 
benefit
Net present value ($B 2020)
(discounted @ 0.5, 1 and 2% (real); 75 years)
Low-emissions
$85
$411
$743
$,1069
High-emissions
$118
$696
$660
$1,237
Benefit cost ratio (b/c)
Low-emissions
N/A
 5.2
 9.5
 14.7
High-emissions
 6.4 
 6.1 
 12.5 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
73
The benefits of adaptation
costs, highlights the importance of the indirect 
benefits of adaptation as climate damages work 
their way through the economy. Many costs occur 
in the short-term, but so do adaptive benefits, 
meaning that costs today do not necessarily mean 
a long delay in realizing societal benefits. 
An important finding highlighted in Table 11 is that 
the indirect, economy-wide benefits of adaptive 
responses are a large multiple of the direct benefits. 
The economy-wide benefits in our analysis amplify 
the direct benefits that are typically calculated for 
adaptive responses by at least a factor of two. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
74
KEY FINDINGS
Climate damage is a major and growing drag on Canada’s prosperity that will dispro­
portionately burden households with a higher cost of living. Our multi-year effort to 
quantify the economic impacts of a changing climate shows conclusively that Canada 
cannot afford to let that drag go unchecked. 
Our modelling and analysis find that climate 
change is already causing widespread and costly 
economic losses with few economic benefits, and 
that these net damages are set to grow dramati­
cally over time. While the infrastructure damages 
from weather-related disasters and floods are 
already evident to many Canadians, our analysis 
brings more opaque and more insidious losses into 
view, including those to labour productivity and 
employment, investment, and household income. 
The direct impacts of a changing climate, we show, 
are amplified in various indirect ways through 
supply chains and market interactions. 
One of our most surprising findings was the scope 
and scale of damages in the very short term, up 
to 2025. Annual GDP losses rise by $25 billion 
between 2015 and 2025, equating to $620 per year 
for every Canadian. 
Based on our study, we conclude that the climate 
threat to Canada’s economy is marked by four 
major risks that must be addressed through policy 
changes if the damages are to be reduced: 
1.	 Climate change is a macroeconomic risk 
that threatens to significantly undermine 
future prosperity. A warmer and more 
volatile climate is eroding the income and 
well-being of people in Canada by reduc­
ing productivity, accelerating infrastruc­
ture decay, destroying assets, and imperiling 
health. Macroeconomic indicators under all 
84 climate change scenarios point to seri­
ous economic damages, including lower GDP 
relative to the reference case, higher govern­
ment spending and taxation adding to direct 
climate costs, lost household income, higher 
unemployment, slowed business investment, 
and lost competitiveness. These impacts are 
distributed widely across regions and sectors. 
Actual damages are likely to be much higher, 
as we were unable to quantify or monetize 
a wide range of other impacts, and more 
August 2015: Burned out vehicles after a fire in Rock Creek, British Columbia.
5
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
75
extreme but nonetheless plausible climate 
change scenarios may yet come to pass. 
2.	 Climate change is an affordability risk 
for households in Canada, and especially 
for vulnerable populations. While climate 
damages will represent a significant drag on 
Canada’s GDP, we find households will pay the 
highest price for climate impacts. All Canadian 
households will be worse off across all the 
scenarios we modelled, with low-income house­
holds being hardest hit. Households in Canada 
will experience the growing direct impacts of 
weather-related disasters and other climate 
impacts, such as loss and damage to homes 
and private assets. Meanwhile, wider macro­
economic risks also have material impacts. 
For instance, household taxation increases as 
government expenditures grow to cover climate 
damages, which erodes disposable income. 
Climate impacts lower labour productivity and 
increase unemployment, further eroding house­
hold income. Supply chain disruptions cause 
prices of consumer goods to rise. Moreover, 
climate change is colliding with existing socio­
economic vulnerabilities to amplify the risks to 
vulnerable populations. Low-income house­
holds, Alberta, and the North are disproportion­
ately impacted by climate change. And despite 
current generations already feeling the heat, 
future generations will bear disproportionate 
costs as climate damages grow over time.
3.	 The Canadian economy is highly 
climate-sensitive, posing a major risk 
to businesses and investors. Virtually no 
economic sector is immune to climate change 
impacts. Climate damages will trigger net 
losses for most of Canada’s economic sectors 
through lower productivity and output, lower 
returns on investment, and reduced employ­
ment. Even the case of construction—which 
appears on its surface to be a good news 
story—is indicative of the broken window 
fallacy. The growth is driven by public and 
private spending to repair climate damage, 
a reallocation of resources away from the 
production and purchase of new goods and 
services across the economy that will lower 
income and erode corporate and individual 
wealth. And investors—from pension funds to 
individuals—will see continually lower returns 
from investments in Canadian corporations, 
real estate, infrastructure, and other assets.
4.	 Climate change is a fiscal risk that threatens 
to upend government spending. Government 
revenues will be negatively impacted at the 
same time as expenditures must increase. 
Damages throughout the economy will lead 
to relatively lower revenue from corporate and 
personal income tax. An increased need to back­
stop weather-related disasters, to replace and 
repair damaged infrastructure, and to address 
health costs will require additional government 
spending. Moreover, these effects will inter­
act: despite the increasing drag on projected 
economic growth, government expendi­
tures will face pressure to grow to address the 
demands of a warming and increasingly vola­
tile climate, adding a tax-induced cost to the 
economy. This pressure forces governments 
into a choice between raising taxes to maintain 
services, taking on additional public debt, or 
cutting services as climate damages consume 
a greater share of the total budget.
Emissions reductions and proactive adaptation 
measures, taken together, are the most effec­
tive means of reducing costs. While pursuing 
Key findings
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
76
either emissions reductions or proactive adapta­
tion confers economic benefits, combining both 
will have the greatest impact and offer the greatest 
benefits. Taken together, mitigation and adapta­
tion lower the climate change impact on national 
income by 75 per cent in the impact groups we 
modelled. Substantial reductions in global green­
house gas emissions will significantly reduce 
impacts to the economy, particularly after mid-cen­
tury, when the low-emissions scenario more than 
halves the damages of the high-emissions scenario. 
Proactive adaptation that seeks to climate-proof 
infrastructure, businesses, and households, mean­
while, provides significant payback regardless of 
the future emissions trajectory. Investments in 
adaptation generate benefits almost immediately 
in all simulations, with the adaptation measures we 
modelled providing a $13-$15 return on investment 
for every one dollar spent. In the high-emissions 
scenario, GDP damages over the entire simula­
tion period can be cut in half by pursuing proactive 
adaptation responses that build resiliency. In the 
low-emissions scenario, GDP losses are halved in 
the latter part of the century. 
A final point that can’t be emphasized enough is 
that the risks we have identified are just the tip of 
the iceberg. Climate change carries a wide range 
of economic risks, many of which are not yet able 
to be quantified or are yet unknown (Figure 2). 
While our assessment focused on the limited set 
of economic impacts that could be quantified at 
this stage, the analysis and modelling still show 
large economic damages. 
It is abundantly clear that climate damage 
represents a substantial and growing drag on 
Canada’s economy, that households in Canada 
will be bearing the burden of these costs, and that 
the two most effective measures that can be taken 
to significantly reduce these costs are emissions 
reductions and proactive adaptation. 
While pursuing either emissions 
reductions or proactive 
adaptation confers economic 
benefits, combining both will have 
the greatest impact and offer the 
greatest benefits. 
Key findings
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
77
RECOMMENDATIONS
This report demonstrates the significant scale of climate impacts that Canada faces. 
Climate change is a major risk to Canada’s economy and to the prosperity of all people 
in Canada, with adverse impacts cutting across how we work, play, and earn income. 
Several high-level policy imperatives emerge from 
this analysis. 
Overall, governments need to start accounting for 
the macroeconomic risks of climate change and 
the macroeconomic benefits of proactive policy. We 
recommend that, going forward, economic policy 
in Canada must consider the serious economic risks 
and impacts of a changing climate and the imper­
ative to invest in adaptation, as follows: 
1.	 Governments should build climate impacts 
and adaptation policies into their own 
economic decision making. 
Specifically, governments at all levels should 
build climate damages and the costs and bene­
fits of adaptation into economic analysis and 
decision making as common practice. This 
includes budget processes, short- and long-
term economic projections, scenario analysis, 
and stress testing. Governments should also 
build climate change adaptation and resilience 
into programmatic spending by accounting for 
the potential costs of climate impacts and the 
benefits of increasing resilience in all program 
and infrastructure spending decisions. This also 
means factoring in the very real and signifi­
cant costs of inaction when evaluating the 
economic impacts of climate change adapta­
tion and mitigation policies.
2.	 Governments should encourage—and 
where appropriate, mandate—accounting 
for climate change risks in private-sector 
decision making. 
	
The physical risks of a changing climate are a 
major direct and indirect threat to the sustain­
ability and viability of Canada’s economy. 
Business, industry, and capital markets need 
to do a much better job of building physical 
climate risk and measures to address it into risk 
management practices. Federal, provincial, and 
territorial governments and regulators should 
accelerate climate risk disclosure initiatives 
and develop the information and scenarios the 
private sector needs to analyze and disclose risk. 
6
LEED Gold-certified Purdy's Wharf in Halifax. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
78
3.	 Governments should scale-up adaptation 
measures to match the magnitude of the 
risk Canada faces. 
	
Our results show that climate change will 
have significant and wide-ranging impacts 
across the Canadian economy, with substan­
tial economic benefits from adaptation in 
avoiding or mitigating these risks, regard­
less of the emissions scenario. Proactive 
adaptation is a sound investment that can 
pay returns of $13-$15 per dollar spent, under 
both lower- and higher-emissions scenarios. 
However, the gap between adaptation needs 
and adaptation action in Canada continues 
to grow. Governments should immediately 
scale-up adaptation policy and investment 
in proportion to the economic risk of climate 
impacts, beginning with the federal govern­
ment committing to aggressive new policies, 
actions, and investments in the forthcoming 
National Adaptation Strategy. 
4.	 Governments should double down on 
aggressive reductions in emissions both at 
home and abroad. 
	
All orders of government in Canada should 
implement and strengthen policies to reduce 
emissions quickly, in line with climate science 
and net zero goals. For high-level recommen­
dations on reducing emissions in Canada, see 
our report Canada’s Net Zero Future (Dion et al. 
2021). Furthermore, governments should also 
use their influence to encourage emissions 
reductions internationally, given the global 
nature of the emissions reduction challenge. 
Lowering global concentrations of greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere means easing up 
on the gas pedal that drives climate change 
impacts. Without drastic emissions reductions, 
adaptation measures alone will be insufficient 
to address many growing climate damages in 
Canada. 
5.	 Governments should invest in understanding 
and preparing for the economic risks of 
climate change that have not yet been 
modelled. 
	
The tip-of-the-iceberg economic risks high­
lighted in this report should be more than 
enough to impel a dramatic acceleration of 
climate change adaptation and mitigation 
policies. However, there are many other risks 
below the waterline that may have profound 
effects on the Canadian economy, including 
supply chain disruptions, international trade 
disruptions, and ecosystem collapse. While 
governments must act immediately to adapt 
to and mitigate a changing climate with the 
imperfect information already at hand, they 
must also urgently seek to better understand 
the full scope of economic risks from climate 
change by investing in further research, 
data collection, scenario development, and 
economic impact analysis.
Recommendations
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
79
GLOSSARY
ADAPTATION Actions that reduce damage and loss from actual or expected climate 
change, while taking advantage of potential new opportunities. 
ADAPTATION POLICY Policies that build adaptive capacity; legislation that builds strength, 
attributes, and resources that can be used to adapt to climate change. 
ADAPTIVE CAPACITY The strengths, attributes, and resources available to an individual, 
community, society, or organization that can be used to adapt to climate 
change. 
BROKEN WINDOW 
FALLACY 
A faulty economic concept that argues that repairing damage and 
destruction creates a net benefit for society and the economy. It is a fallacy 
because redirecting money towards repairing broken items, rather than 
towards new goods and services, may appear to boost one part of the 
economy but ultimately carries significant opportunity cost and results in 
net negative economic outcomes. 
CLIMATE The average weather in a place over a long period of time, typically 30 years 
or longer.
CLIMATE CHANGE Changes in the climate of the Earth, predominantly caused by the 
burning of fossil fuels, which add heat-trapping gases to Earth’s 
atmosphere. It manifests as overall global warming but also in sea level 
rise, melting of previously permanent snow and ice fields, and more 
extreme weather. 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
MITIGATION
Making the impacts of climate change less severe by preventing or 
reducing the emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, or 
sequestering them through nature-based or engineered approaches.
CLIMATE MODEL A climate simulation based on well-documented physical processes. 
Global climate models, also known as general circulation models (GCMs), 
use mathematical equations to characterize how energy and matter 
interact in different parts of the ocean, atmosphere, and land. 
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
80
CLIMATE 
PROJECTIONS 
A simulated response of the climate system to a scenario of future 
emissions or concentration of greenhouse gases and aerosols, generally 
derived using climate models. Climate projections are distinguished 
from climate predictions by their dependence on the emission, 
concentration, or radiative forcing scenario used, which is in turn based 
on assumptions concerning, for example, future socioeconomic and 
technological developments that may or may not be realized.
CLIMATE-RELATED 
HAZARDS 
The potential occurrence of a climate-related physical event that may 
cause loss of life, injury, or damage and loss to property, infrastructure, 
service provision, and environmental resources. Due to climate change, 
frequencies of some hazards are expected to continue to increase.
CLIMATE RISK 
DISCLOSURE 
The practice by corporations and financial system entities of disclosing 
the risks they are facing from the physical impacts of climate change 
and the transition to a low-carbon economy, to encourage preparation 
for those risks and to help investors make more informed investment 
decisions.
COMPUTABLE 
GENERAL 
EQUILIBRIUM (CGE) 
MODEL
A large numerical model that combines economic theory with real 
economic data to derive the impacts of policies or shocks in the economy. 
CGE models aim to capture how the structure of the economy changes 
due to policy-induced behavioural response of agents (firms, households, 
governments).  
COSTS The amount that must be paid or spent to obtain something. 
COST-BENEFIT 
ANALYSIS
A systematic process that analyzes which decisions to make and which to 
forgo by summing the potential benefits expected from an action, and 
then subtracting the total costs associated from taking that action.
DAMAGES The size of the economic drag or loss due to climate change. This 
includes physical, social, or economic loss. 
DISASTER Severe disruption of the normal functioning of a community or society 
due to hazardous physical events interacting with conditions of social 
vulnerability, leading to widespread negative human, material, economic, 
or environmental effects that require an immediate emergency response 
and may require external support for recovery. 
Glossary
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
81
DISCOUNT RATE
Refers to the rate used to reflect the time value of money to bring a 
future cash flow into today’s dollars.  
ECONOMIC DRAG A slowdown in economic activity.
ECONOMIC OUTPUT The total value of goods and services produced in a country or by an 
economic sector.
EXPOSURE The presence of people, livelihoods, environmental services and 
resources, infrastructure, or economic, social, or cultural assets in places 
that could be adversely affected by climate change. 
EXTREME WEATHER The occurrence of a weather variable (such as temperature) that exceeds 
the upper or lower limit of observed values for that variable. These 
events are often short-lived and include heat waves, ice storms, heavy 
downpours, tornadoes, tropical cyclones, and floods. 
FLOOD MAPS
Maps that identify areas that are expected to experience periodic 
coastal or inland flooding. Flood maps or floodplain maps typically 
show ground elevation contours, the location of buildings and roads, 
and the horizontal extent of the high-water mark for one or more flood 
events, such as a hundred-year flood. In Canada, flood maps are typically 
developed by provincial or municipal governments.
GEOGRAPHIC 
RESOLUTION
The spatial detail with which an analysis depicts the location and shape 
of geographic features.
GROSS DOMESTIC 
PRODUCT (GDP) OR 
NATIONAL INCOME 
Measures the value added, or national income created, through 
producing goods and services within a country’s borders, inclusive of 
all private and public consumption, government outlays, investments, 
additions to private inventories, paid-in construction costs, and the 
foreign balance of trade. Exports are added to the overall GDP value, 
while imports are subtracted. 
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
Refers to the gross income of all members of a household above a 
specified age, including spouses and dependents. It is a useful indicator 
of the standard of living.
IMPACTS Effects on natural and human systems. In this report, the term impacts 
is used to refer to the effects on natural and human systems of physical 
events, disasters, and/or climate change. 
Glossary
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
82
INVESTMENT An asset or item acquired with the goal of generating income or 
appreciation. The intent is not to consume the good, but to create future 
wealth. 
MACROECONOMIC 
IMPACT
A change in the level of economic activity due to a policy or spending. 
NET PRESENT VALUE The current value of a future cash flow.  The present value of the cash 
flow depends on the time period between now and when the cash flow 
occurs, as well as the assumed discount rate. 
PERMAFROST Ground that remains below zero degrees Celsius for at least two 
consecutive years. 
PRODUCTIVITY Measures output per unit of input, such as labour, capital, or any other 
resource. It is often calculated for the economy as a ratio of the Gross 
Domestic Product to hours worked. 
PROSPERITY The level of wealth of a country, including economic growth, economic 
security, and economic competitiveness.
RESILIENCE The ability of a physical, social, or ecological system and its component 
parts to anticipate, absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects of a 
disaster in a timely and efficient manner. 
RISK The potential for consequences where something of value is at stake and 
where the outcome is uncertain. Risk is often represented as probability of 
the occurrence of hazardous events or trends, multiplied by the potential 
impacts if these events or trends occur. Risk results from the interaction 
of vulnerability, exposure, and hazard. In this report, the term risk is used 
primarily to refer to the risks of impacts related to climate change. 
SENSITIVITY OR 
SUSCEPTIBILITY 
The degree to which an individual, asset, household, community, 
business, or ecosystem is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by 
climate change. 
STABLE REFERENCE 
CASE
The economic structure that existed in Canada in 2015, as reported by 
Statistics Canada. This starting point allows us to capture the effects of 
climate change of the recent past on the macroeconomy; The reference 
case shows no further climate change simulation after 2015. It is the basis 
from which the climate change scenarios are compared. 
Glossary
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
83
STRESS TESTING A computer simulation technique used to test the resilience of 
institutions and investment portfolios against future financial situations. 
SUPPLY CHAIN The network of companies and people that are involved in the 
production and delivery of a product or service.
VULNERABILITY The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, 
negative effects of climate change, including climate variability and 
extremes.
Glossary
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
84
REFERENCES
Alam, Rafat, Shahidul Islam, Eric Mosely, Sean Thomas, Virginia Dowdell, and Dawn Doel. 2017. Rapid Impact Assessment of Fort 
McMurray Wildfire. Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/Rapid-Impact-As­
sessment-of-Fort-McMurray-Wildfire.pdf 
Arnold, Jonathan, Rachel Samson, Weseem Ahmed, Dale Beugin, and Julien Bourque. 2020. 11 Ways to Measure Clean Growth. 
Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/reports/clean-growth/ 
Boucher, Dominique, Yan Boulanger, Isabelle Aubin, Pierre Y. Bernier, André Beaudoin, Luc Guindon, and Sylvie Gauthier. 2018. 
“Current and Projected Cumulative Impacts of Fire, Drought, and Insects on Timber Volumes across Canada.” Ecological Applica­
tions 28 (5): 1245–1259. https://doi.org/10.1002/EAP.1724 
Burke, Marshall, Solomon M. Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “Global Non-Linear Effect of Temperature on Economic Produc­
tion.” Nature 2015 527:7577 527 (7577): 235–239. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature15725 
Carew, R., T. Meng, W.J. Florkowski, R. Smith, and D. Blair. 2017. “Climate change impacts on hard red spring wheat yield and 
production risk: evidence from Manitoba, Canada.” Canadian Journal of Plant Science, 98(3): 782-795.
Clark, Dylan, Dena Coffman, Ryan Ness, Isabelle Bujold, and Dale Beugin. 2022. Due North: Facing the Costs of Climate Change 
for Northern Infrastructure. Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/Due-North.pdf 
Clark, Dylan, Ryan Ness, Dena Coffman, and Dale Beugin. 2021. The Health Costs of Climate Change: How Canada Can Adapt, 
Prepare, and Save Lives. Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/reports/the-health-costs-of-climate-change/ 
Climate Action Tracker. 2021. “The CAT Thermometer.” https://climateactiontracker.org/global/cat-thermometer/
Climate Data Canada. N.d. “Understanding Multi-Model Ensembles.” https://climatedata.ca/resource/multi-model-ensembles/
Dahlby, Bev, and Ergete Ferede. 2018. “The Marginal Cost of Public Funds and the Laffer Curve: Evidence from the Canadian Prov­
inces.” FinanzArchiv: Public Finance Analysis, Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen, vol. 74(2), pages 173-199.
Dion, Jason, Anna Kanduth, Jeremy Moorhouse, and Dale Beugin. 2021. Canada’s Net Zero Future: Finding Our Way In The 
Global Transition. Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/reports/canadas-net-zero-future/ 
Eyzaguirre, Jimena, Cedar Morton, Collete Wabnitz, Michael Copage, and Robert McLeman. 2021. “International Dimensions.” In 
Canada in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report, ed. F.J. Warren and N. Lulham. Ottawa, Ontario: Government of Canada
Hamilton, Jacqueline M., David J. Maddison, and Richard S.J. Tol. 2005. “Effects of Climate Change on International Tourism.” 
Climate Research 29 (3): 245–254. 
Hsiang, Solomon, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan, D. J. Rasmussen, et al. 2017. “Esti­
mating Economic Damage from Climate Change in the United States.” Science 356 (6345): 1362–1369. 
IBC (Insurance Bureau of Canada). 2022. “Severe Weather in 2021 Caused $2.1 Billion in Insured Damage,” Press release. January 18. 
http://www.ibc.ca/ns/resources/media-centre/media-releases/severe-weather-in-2021-caused-2-1-billion-in-insured-damage 
Jin, Z., E.A. Ainsworth, A.D. Leakey, and D.B. Lobell. 2018. “Increasing drought and diminishing benefits of elevated carbon dioxide 
for soybean yields across the US Midwest.” Global change biology, 24(2): e522-e533.
Jing, Q., T. Huffman, J. Shang, J. Liu, E. Pattey, M. Morrison, G. Jego, and B. Qian. 2017. “Modelling soybean yield responses to seed­
ing date under projected climate change scenarios.” Canadian Journal of Plant Science 97: 1152‒1164. 
Lafakis, Chris, Laura Ratz, Emily Fazio, and Maria Cosma. 2019. The Economic Implications of Climate Change. Moody’s Analytics. 
http://wedocs.unep
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
85
Moss, R.H., J. A. Edmonds, K.A. Hibbard, M.R. Manning, S.K. Rose, D.P. van Vuuren, T.R. Carter, D. Emori,, M. Kainuma, T. Kram, G.A. 
Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, N. Nakicenovic, K. Riahi, S.J. Smith, R.J. Stouffer, A.M. Thomson, J.P. Weyant, and T.J. Wilbanks. 2010. “The 
next generation of scenarios for climate change research and assessment.” Nature 463: 747–756.
Navius Research Inc. and Canadian Climate Institute. 2022. Evaluating the Macroeconomic Costs of Climate Change in Canada: 
Modelling methodology report. [url]
Ness, Ryan, Dylan G. Clark, Julien Bourque, Dena Coffman, and Dale Beugin. 2021. Under Water: The Costs of Climate Change for 
Canada’s Infrastructure. Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/reports/under-water/ 
Ness, Ryan, and Sarah Miller. 2022. Closing Canada’s Adaptation Gap: Key Elements of a National Adaptation Strategy. Cana­
dian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/closing-canada-s-adaptation-gap.pdf 
Parliamentary Budget Office. 2019. PBO and Finance Canada Long-term Projection Comparison. Ottawa, ON. https://distribu­
tion-a617274656661637473.pbo-dpb.ca/3ab934d0bf1bc92b1736a54fc5a33beaf0436db6e76c139f16f1ae7dd1d34060
PCIC (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium). 2019. “Statistically Downscaled Climate Scenarios.” University of Victoria. Victoria, B.C. 
https://www.pacificclimate.org/data/statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios 
Qian, Budong, Xuebin Zhang, Ward Smith, Brian Grant, Qi Jing, Alex J. Cannon, Denise Nielsen, Brian McConkey, Guilong Li, 
Barrie Bonsal, Hui Wan, Li Xue, and Jun Zhao. 2019. “Climate change impacts on Canadian yields of spring wheat, canola and 
maize for global warming levels of 1.5 C, 2.0 C, 2.5 C and 3.0 C.” Environmental Research Letters 14: 074005. 
Sawyer, Dave, Ryan Ness, Dylan G. Clark, and Dale Beugin. 2020. Tip of the Iceberg: Navigating the Known and Unknown Costs of 
Climate Change for Canada. Canadian Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/reports/tip-of-the-iceberg/ 
Statistics Canada. 2019. “Projected population, by projection scenario, age and sex, as of July 1 (x 1,000) [Table 17-10-0057-01].” 
Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1710005701 
Statistics Canada. 2022a. “Canadian Income Survey, 2020.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quoti­
dien/220323/dq220323a-eng.htm 
Statistics Canada. 2022a. “Canadian Income Survey, 2020.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quoti­
dien/220323/dq220323a-eng.htm
Statistics Canada. 2022b. “Low Income Statistics by Age, Sex and Economic Family Type [Table: 11-10-0135-01].” Government of 
Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/cv.action?pid=1110013501
Steininger, Karl, Martin Kong, Birgit Bednar-Friedl, Wolfgang Loibl, Lukas Kranzl, Franz Ernst Prettenthaler, Willi Haas, Herbert 
Formayer, Martin Goetz, and Klaus Peter Zylka. 2015. Economic Evaluation of Climate Change Impacts: Development of a Cross­
Sectoral Framework and Results for Austria, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing.
Szewczyk, W., J.C. Ciscar, I. Mongelli, and A. Soria. 2018. JRC PESETA III project: Economic integration and spillover analysis, EUR 
29456 EN, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
References
DAMAGE CONTROL: Reducing the costs of climate impacts in Canada
86
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
STAFF AUTHORS
Dave Sawyer, Principal Economist, Canadian Climate 
Institute
Ryan Ness, Adaptation Research Director, Canadian 
Climate Institute
Caroline Lee, Senior Research Associate, Canadian 
Climate Institute
Sarah Miller, Research Associate, Canadian Climate 
Institute
STAFF CONTRIBUTORS
Dale Beugin, Executive Vice President, Canadian 
Climate Institute
Julien Bourque, Research Associate, Canadian 
Climate Institute
Dylan Clark, Senior Research Associate, Canadian 
Climate Institute
Renaud Gignac, Senior Research Associate (former), 
Canadian Climate Institute
David Mitchell, Senior Communications Specialist, 
Canadian Climate Institute
EXPERT PANELISTS
Ursule Boyer-Villemaire, Ph.D., Team Leader, 
Socioeconomic Analyses, Ouranos; Associate 
Professor in Resilience, Risk and Disasters, UQAM 
(Geography)
Don Drummond, Stauffer-Dunning Fellow in Global 
Public Policy and Adjunct Professor, School of Public 
Policy, Queen’s University
Jimena Eyzaguirre, International Team Director and 
Climate Change Adaptation Lead, ESSA Technologies
Glen Hodgson, Chief Economist, International 
Financial Consulting Ltd; Senior Fellow, C.D. Howe 
Institute; Fellow, Public Policy Forum
Jennifer Winter, Associate Professor, Department 
of Economics and School of Public Policy, University
 of Calgary
EXTERNAL REVIEWERS 
Gabriel Bachner, Postdoctoral researcher, Wegener 
Center for Climate and Global Change, University 
of Graz
Van Lantz, Dean of the Faculty of Forestry and 
Environmental Management, Professor of Forest 
Economics, University of New Brunswick
PRODUCTION SUPPORT
Visualizations by 
 | chezVoila.com 
Photography credits: cover © Nicolas Brulois on 
Unsplash
Design and layout: Laurie Barnett, Graphic Designer
Translation: Edgar Co-operative
Published under a Creative Commons BY-NC-ND 
license by the Canadian Climate Institute. The text of 
this document may be reproduced in whole or part 
for non-commercial purposes, with proper source 
citation. Permission from copyright holders must 
be sought before any photographs are reproduced.
Recommended citation:
Sawyer, Dave, Ryan Ness, Caroline Lee, and Sarah 
Miller. 2022. Damage Control: Reducing the 
costs of climate impacts in Canada. Canadian 
Climate Institute. https://climateinstitute.ca/reports/
damage-control/ 
