Decolonizing Climate 
Policy in Canada
Report from Phase One
March 2021
Indigenous Climate Action
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
2
Table of Contents
About Indigenous Climate Action......................................................................................................................................3
Acknowledgments.................................................................................................................................................................4
Executive Summary...............................................................................................................................................................5
1. Introduction.........................................................................................................................................................................8
   1.1 The Methods we Used for Phase 1.........................................................................................................................10
   1.2 What we Found...........................................................................................................................................................11
2. Overview of Climate Policy and Plans in Canada....................................................................................................12
   2.1 The Pan-Canadian Framework (PCF)....................................................................................................................12
   2.2 A Healthy Environment, A Healthy Economy (HEHE)........................................................................................12
   2.3 Pre-existing Critiques of the PCF ............................................................................................................................13
   2.4 Pre-existing Praise and Critiques of the HEHE....................................................................................................15
3. Analysis of the Process by which these Climate Plans and Policies were Developed...................................17
   3.1 The Process of Developing the PCF ......................................................................................................................17
   3.2 The HEHE Development Process...........................................................................................................................25
4. Analysis of the Contents of these Climate Plans and Policies.............................................................................26
   4.1 Mentions of Indigenous Peoples and our Rights in the PCF...........................................................................26
   4.2 Mentions of Indigenous Peoples and our Rights in the HEHE........................................................................27
   4.3 Analysis of the Main Pillars of the Two Plans.......................................................................................................29
     4.3.1 Carbon Pricing .......................................................................................................................................................29
     4.3.2 Complementary Actions to Reduce Emissions ............................................................................................35
     4.3.3 Adaptation and Climate Resilience ..................................................................................................................40
     4.3.4 Clean Technology, Innovation, and Jobs (Building Canada’s Clean Industrial Advantage)..............43
     4.3.5 Nature-based Solutions ......................................................................................................................................47
5. Conclusion.........................................................................................................................................................................50
6. Moving Forward................................................................................................................................................................53
7. Sources...............................................................................................................................................................................55
Connect with ICA..................................................................................................................................................................63
Cover art: Allan Lissner for Indigenous Climate Action. Indigenous youth protesting for the inclusion of 
Indigenous rights in Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Rulebook at COP25 in Madrid, Spain. 
Indigenous Climate Action
3
About Indigenous Climate Action
Indigenous Climate Action (ICA) is an Indigenous-led organization guided by a diverse group of Indigenous 
knowledge keepers, water protectors and land defenders from communities and regions across the country. 
We believe that Indigenous Peoples’ rights and knowledge systems are critical to developing solutions to the 
climate crisis and achieving climate justice.
ICA works on connecting and supporting Indigenous communities to reinforce our place as leaders driving 
climate change solutions for today and tomorrow. We model our work and organizational structure on systems 
of free, prior and informed consent and self-determination. By providing our communities with knowledge and 
resources, we can inspire a new generation of Indigenous climate leaders building solutions centred around our 
inherent rights and cultures.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
4
Acknowledgments
This research was designed and conducted by Indigenous Climate Action, led by Eriel Deranger, and in close 
collaboration with Dr. Jen Gobby and Rebecca Sinclair.
Rebecca Sinclair  (Merasty) is a nêhiyaw-iskwêw, wife and mother of three, she is from Barren Lands First Nation 
and a member of Little Saskatchewan First Nation, she moved from Treaty 5 in northern Manitoba to Winnipeg, 
Treaty 1 territory to obtain a Bachelor’s degree (Environmental and Native Studies) from the University of 
Manitoba. 
Jen Gobby is a settler climate activist-researcher based in Abenaki territory in rural Quebec. She completed her 
PhD at McGill University in 2019 and is a postdoctoral fellow at Concordia University. She is the author of the 
book More Powerful Together: Conversations with Climate Activists and Indigenous Land Defenders. 
We’d like to thank knowledge keeper Victor Tssessaze, student researcher Carlie Kane and research assistant 
Rachel Ivey for their immense help on this project. The research team would also like to offer our heartfelt 
thanks to Graeme Reed, Deborah McGregor, Daniel T’seleie, Beze Grey, Marc Lee, and Tamra Gilbertson for peer 
reviewing this report and offering constructive and insightful feedback and guidance. Thank you for bringing 
your wealth of expertise to this project. We’d also like to thank Tamra Gilbertson and others at Indigenous 
Environmental Network for the very powerful training on false solutions. 
Jen would like to acknowledge support from the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada 
(SSHRC), which has made her work on this project possible. Rebecca would like to acknowledge the Canadian 
Center for Policy Alternatives (CCPA) and the Corporate Mapping Project (CMP) for supporting her work on this 
project. CMP is a research and public engagement initiative investigating the power of the fossil fuel industry, 
and is jointly led by the University of Victoria, Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives and the Parkland Institute. 
This research was supported by the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC). Eriel 
and Indigenous Climate Action would like to acknowledge all of those that contributed and supported the vision 
for this project including our supporters, allies, partners, and members of the ICA national Steering Committee.
We would also like to give thanks and honor the land defenders, water protectors and other folks on the 
frontlines of resistance. We hope that this work can be of benefit to the fight for climate justice and 
Indigenous-led climate solutions. 
Indigenous Climate Action
5
Executive Summary
Colonialism caused climate change. Indigenous rights are the solution.
As the climate crisis intensifies and greenhouse gases (GHGs) continue to rise, national efforts to curb GHG 
emissions are failing and oil and gas continue to be extracted, imported, exported and burned. Indigenous 
Peoples in Canada and across the world are among those that contribute the least to the growing climate 
crisis, yet remain among those being impacted the first and hardest by intensifying climate change. Amidst 
this massive injustice, Indigenous Peoples are leading movements for climate and environmental justice as we 
defend our lands and waters from ongoing colonial encroachment and extractive development. 
In an effort to respond to the climate crisis, governments around the world are setting targets, making plans, 
and creating policies to reduce their emissions. In Canada, over the past five years, two federal climate plans 
have come out  under the Liberal Government led by Justin Trudeau: the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean 
Growth and Climate Change (PCF) in 2019 and A Healthy Environment, A Healthy Economy (HEHE) in December 
2020.   
To effectively address climate change, policies and solutions need to take aim 
at the ongoing drivers and root causes of the crisis and should center the voices, 
needs and leadership of the people most impacted by the crisis. 
Image from the 2013 Tar Sands Healing Walk
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
6
This report shares the findings from Phase One of a research project that has investigated whether climate 
policy and planning in Canada has been including Indigenous rights and addressing the root causes of the 
climate crisis. This project has been a collaborative effort between the team at Indigenous Climate Action (ICA), 
Dr. Jen Gobby, Rebecca Sinclair, and Rachel Ivey.
The project includes two phases. In the first phase - the focus of this report - we conducted an in-depth critical 
analysis of the PCF and the HEHE to investigate whether they take aim at the root causes of climate change 
and both respect and meaningfully include Indigenous Peoples and our rights, knowledge and approaches to 
climate action. We also aim to understand how all this impacts the ability of the PCF and the HEHE to actually 
drive meaningful climate action.
As the following pages explain in detail, Indigenous Peoples and our rights, knowledge, and climate leadership 
were mentioned again and again in both plans, yet we were structurally excluded from the decision-making 
tables where these plans were made. In fact,  representatives from a few provinces actively opposed Indigenous 
inclusion in this process. This active exclusion constitutes a violation of Indigenous rights to self-determination 
and to free, prior and informed consent (FPIC), as defined by the United Nations. Additionally, this blatant 
exclusion conflicts with the Liberal government’s commitments to reconciliation and Nation-to-Nation, Inuit-
Crown, and government-to-government relationships. It also ignores many of the Calls to Action emanating 
from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission report and other important government-led inquiries, including 
the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP) and the National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered 
Indigenous Women and Girls (MMIWG). 
While these reports repeatedly state intentions to work in real partnership going 
forward, this “real partnership” has yet to materialize from words into action. 
Going beyond the process by which the plans were developed, the policies and proposed actions  contained in 
them are also problematic. Firstly, both plans allow for the continuation of fossil fuel production – a primary 
source of GHG emissions and a major contributor to Indigenous rights violations in Canada. Secondly, some of 
the solutions proposed ignore the realities faced by Indigenous communities and Nations, and fail to address 
the structural inequalities continually reproduced through ongoing colonial relations and policies in Canada. 
Moreover, some of the proposed actions and initiatives in the PCF and the HEHE may lead to disproportionate 
negative impacts to Indigenous Peoples and violations of Indigenous rights. Finally, there are many ways that 
these climate policies may serve to perpetuate the drivers and root causes of climate change.
The PCF and the HEHE are the strongest climate policies in Canada, to date, and there are signs that the HEHE 
plan is an improvement to the PCF, but both have significant flaws that have important implications for: 
•	 the efficacy of the plans to actually drive real action
•	 the ability for this to drive a just energy transition
•	 the relationships between Canada and Indigenous Peoples.

Indigenous Climate Action
7
These problems need to be addressed if climate policy in Canada is to be just and effective. In addition to 
providing this critique, in the final section of this report, we offer calls to action for an Indigenous-led climate 
policy agenda in Canada, which we are mobilizing as we enter Phase Two of our project. Following the release 
of this report, through the spring and summer of 2021, Indigenous Climate Action, Rebecca Sinclair, and Dr. Jen 
Gobby will be gathering Indigenous-led climate policy ideas and plans through conversations with Indigenous 
Peoples across the country, inviting all Indigenous folks to contribute to this important work. To find out more 
about this process or how to get involved you can contact Rebecca at climatepolicy@indigenousclimateaction.
com.
Non-Indigenous people and organizations who would like to actively support the second phase of Decolonizing 
Climate Policy in Canada can donate to ICA on our website (IndigenousClimateAction.com/donate). 
Image: ICA's first Steering Committee meeting in 2017
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
8
1. Introduction
The global climate crisis is worsening with the intensifying impacts of wildfires, floods, droughts and massive 
storms devastating lives, communities, and ecosystems across the world. Canada, a major contributor to 
the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions driving the crisis, is also facing more and more occurrences of extreme 
weather. The Canada’s Changing Climate Report released in April 2019 by Environment and Climate Change 
Canada, shows Canada warming at twice the global rate and that the North will warm at three times the global 
rate. This report also confirms that most of the warming is the result of burning fossil fuels.
Despite the clamouring of alarm bells being urgently sounded by Indigenous Peoples, scientists, communities 
and activists across the world, international efforts to reduce GHG emissions and transition to clean energy are 
failing to slow the crisis. In Canada, climate policy has not led to meaningful reduction of emissions, nor has it 
driven a transition away from fossil fuels. 
Indigenous Peoples in Canada and across the world, are among those being 
impacted first and hardest by climate impacts, while being among those least 
responsible for causing the crisis (Salick & Byg, 2007; Parks & Roberts, 2006). 
Amidst this massive injustice, Indigenous Peoples are leading social movements for climate and environmental 
justice and are defending our lands and waters from ongoing colonial encroachment and extractive 
development (Scheidel et al., 2020; Gobby, 2020; Gedicks 1994, 2001). 
Kyle Whyte, Potawatomi scholar, explains that “Colonialism often paved the way for the expansion of 
capitalism” (2017, p. 154). Inherent to capitalism is the “assimilation, depopulation, removal, and erasure of 
Indigenous Peoples; and the dispossession, expropriation, and territorial occupation of Indigenous resources, 
land, property, homes…all toward the end goal of profit” (Waldron, 2018, p. 41).
Inextricably tied together, colonialism and capitalism have laid the groundwork for 
the carbon-intensive economics which is driving climate change (Whyte, 2017).
These systems intersect with patriarchy and associated gender-based inequities, rendering women, 
especially Indigenous, Black and other women of Colour, “more likely to be negatively impacted 
by climate change and less likely to be ‘heard’ in climate change strategy-making than members of 
culturally dominant groups” (Williams et al., 2018, p. 8). Colonization has led to the devaluation of Indigenous 
knowledge; it has “negatively impacted gender roles, culture, the safety of Indigenous women as well as the 
health of the land that sustains Indigenous Peoples” (Quebec Native Women, 2019, p. 6). Climate change and 
environmental destruction continues to harm the lives of Indigenous women and 2SLGBTQIA+ folks.
While ongoing colonial capitalism is driving both the climate crisis and intensifying racial and gender-based 
inequality, Indigenous communities and Nations, often led by Indigenous women, are offering rich, diverse 
and urgently needed alternative values, worldviews, social organization and economic systems. To Indigenous 
Indigenous Climate Action
9
Peoples, “Everything is connected in a web of relationships. Nothing exists in isolation. Indigenous people over 
millennia have strived to live in harmony with all living things in their environments” (Snively & Williams, 2016, 
n.p.). Indigenous worldviews that centre interdependence, reciprocity and respect offer alternatives and act as 
a counterforce and antidote to the extractivist worldviews that are driving the climate crisis (Kimmerer, 2013; 
Simpson, 2017; Wildcat, 2010). 
Yet, it appears that Indigenous women and 2SLGBTQIA+ folks, and Indigenous Peoples in general, and our rights, 
our knowledges, and our approaches to climate change are systematically excluded from the creation and 
implementation of climate policies and plans.
Indigenous Peoples, our rights, our knowledges, and our approaches to climate 
change are systematically excluded from the creation and implementation of 
climate policies and plans.
To effectively address climate change, policies and solutions need to take aim at the ongoing drivers and root 
causes of the crisis and need to be centering the voices, needs and leadership of the people most impacted by 
the crisis. This report shares the findings of a research project that has investigated whether climate policy and 
planning in Canada has been doing so.
This project has been a collaboration between the team at Indigenous Climate Action and Dr. Jen Gobby, 
postdoctoral fellow at Concordia University, with support from co-researcher Rebecca Sinclair and research 
assistant Rachel Ivey.
The project includes two phases. In the first phase, which is the focus of this report, we conducted an in-depth 
critical analysis of Canada’s recent climate policy and plans - the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth 
and Climate Change (PCF) and A Healthy Environment, A Healthy Economy (HEHE) - to investigate whether they 
take aim at the root causes of climate change and respect and meaningfully include Indigenous Peoples and our 
rights, knowledges and approaches to climate action. We also seek to understand how all this impacts the ability 
of the PCF and the HEHE to actually drive meaningful climate action.
Phase Two of the project will take place between February and June 2021. ICA and Nehiyaw researcher Rebecca 
Sinclair, guided by an Advisory Council of Indigenous experts across the five biomes of so-called Canada, will 
be gathering Indigenous-led climate policy ideas and plans through conversations with Indigenous Peoples 
across the country. We enthusiastically invite all Indigenous folks in Canada who would like to contribute to this 
important work to get in touch with Rebecca at climatepolicy@indigenousclimateaction.com. 
Non-Indigenous people and organizations who would like to actively support the second phase of Decolonizing 
Climate Policy in Canada can donate to ICA on our website (IndigenousClimateAction.com/donate). 
We view Phase Two of our project as movement in the right direction when it comes to seeking input from 
Indigenous community members on future climate policy, embracing this effort not as a rigid process, but rather 
as a pilot effort to inform future engagement for Indigenous-led climate policies. 
A second report sharing this Indigenous-led climate policy is planned for release in summer 2021. 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
10
1.1 The Methods we Used for Phase 1
Our critical policy analysis has been guided by an Intersectionality-Based Policy Analysis (IBPA) Framework 
(Hankivsky et al., 2012). Applying an intersectional lens to policy analysis is a political act; it aims to critique 
and develop policy that contributes to transforming the inequitable relations of power that maintain inequality.  
Generally, relations of power remain unquestioned in dominant approaches to policy analysis. IBPA holds 
those relationships as central to policy and policymaking (ibid.). IBPA also pays close attention to the complex 
contexts and root causes of the social problems that the given policies aim to address (Wiebe, 2019). 
Although the intersectional approach attends to many forms of power relations, including race, gender, and 
class, our primary focus on this project has been to understand the PCF and HEHE in relation to Indigenous 
Peoples, our rights and perspectives, and the ways that climate policy is reproducing colonial relations in 
Canada. It’s important to note that Indigenous rights are defined, upheld and recognized through various 
Treaties, Section 35 of the Canadian Constitution (1982) and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 
Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). In particular, Section 35 of the Canadian Constitution, in conjunction with rulings 
of the Canadian courts created “a statutory, contractual and common law obligation” that outlines the federal 
government’s fiduciary responsibilities, including the duty to consult and accommodate “prior to taking actions 
or making decisions that may have consequences for the rights of Indigenous peoples in Canada” (Irwin, 2018). 
In order to review the various aspects and pillars of the PCF and the HEHE in relation to these rights, we 
developed a critical framework matrix to analyse and review a multitude of legal recognitions and articulations 
of Indigenous rights, including Section 35 of the Canadian Constitution and UNDRIP, to bring various dimensions 
and pillars of Canada’s climate policy into light. In addition to these legal instruments we analysed and reflected 
the many Recommendations and Calls to Action stemming from several government inquiry reports, including 
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC), The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP), and the 
National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls (MMIWG).
Through this critical framework matrix, we asked the following key questions:
•	 Do the PCF and the HEHE, and the processes by which they were developed, serve to reinforce settler 
colonial structures and relations? How?
•	 Are they in conflict with the federal government’s commitments to reconciliation and government-to-
government, Inuit-Crown, Nation-to-Nation relationships? How?
•	 Do these plans violate inherent, Treaty, constitutional and international Indigenous rights? In what ways?
•	 Do they ignore and erase Indigenous perspectives, knowledges, and approaches to climate action? How?
•	 What are the implications of the answers to all the above questions for Canada’s ability to meaningfully 
address the climate crisis?

Information about how the PCF and the HEHE were developed was not available online, so we also conducted a 
short series of telephone interviews with federal public servants who were involved in the creation of the plans.
Indigenous Climate Action
11
1.2 What we Found
The findings of our analysis, as presented in Section Two, make clear that federal climate policies and plans in 
Canada, specifically the PCF and HEHE, violate Indigenous rights from the development process all the way 
through to content, plan, and policies. Many of the policies put forth in the PCF and HEHE ignore the realities 
faced by Indigenous Peoples, communities, and Nations and promote climate solutions that may lead to 
disproportionate, negative impacts for Indigenous Peoples. 
Furthermore, in failing to uphold Indigenous communities’ and Nations’ rights to self-determination, the plans 
are in conflict with Federal commitments to Nation-to-Nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-government 
relationships and with many of the calls to action in RCAP, TRC, MMIWG, etc. Additionally, there are many 
other examples wherein these plans ignore the structural inequalities and injustices that are continually 
reproduced through ongoing colonial relations in Canada, creating the very conditions by which Indigenous 
communities and Nations are disproportionately impacted by and vulnerable to climate change. 
The Federal climate plans egregiously fail to address the fossil fuel industry as a 
driver of climate change, a violator of Indigenous rights, and a major contributor to  
the vulnerabilization of Indigenous communities and Nations by way of impacts on 
waters, lands, livelihoods and food systems.
While there are indications that the HEHE plan is an improvement to the PCF, both have significant flaws that 
have important implications for the ability of the plans to actually drive real climate action, promote a Just 
energy transition, and move forward on Canada’s reconciliation promises. While these climate plans are doing 
some important work and there is some sign of improvement, serious problems remain; these need to be 
addressed if climate policy in Canada is to be just and effective. 
The following sections explore these pertinent issues. Section Two provides overviews of the PCF and the HEHE 
and the existing critiques that have been laid against them. Section Three describes and examines the process 
by which these plans were created. Section Four provides a critical analysis of the contents of these climate 
plans. Section Five unpacks the implications of our findings. Finally, Section Six offers some key commitments 
that need to be embraced to move forward in creating just and effective climate policy. 
Going beyond critiques of climate policy, it is also important to have actionable steps to remediate centuries of 
colonial harm to build pathways of collective and collaborative climate solutions and alternative paths forward. 
This will be the aim of Phase Two of this research project. 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
12
2. Overview of Climate Policy and Plans in Canada
2.1 The Pan-Canadian Framework (PCF)
Canada’s efforts, since 2015, to reduce GHG emissions and take action on climate change is encapsulated 
in the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, which was released in 2016 by 
Trudeau’s Liberal government, following 30 years of failed attempts by the Canadian government to 
develop climate policy. Political scientist Robert MacNeil described the signing of the PCF accord in 2016 
as “one of the more remarkable feats of intergovernmental cooperation in recent history” (2019, p. 36). 
Echoing this sentiment, Ed Whittingham (2016), the former Executive Director of the Pembina Institute 
called it “a critical turning point in Canada’s response to climate change.” The PCF was launched through a 
formal agreement signed by the Premiers of all provinces and territories, except Saskatchewan.
According to the document, the PCF is Canada’s “collective plan to grow our economy while reducing 
emissions and building resilience to adapt to a changing climate” (n.p.). The plan is intended to help meet 
Canada’s emissions target: a 30% reduction in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (below 2005 levels) by 
2030. It was developed through the leadership of the First Ministers, through a process of several working 
groups and consists of four pillars: Pricing Carbon Pollution; Complementary Actions to Reduce Emissions; 
Adaptation and Climate Resilience; and Clean Technology, Innovations and Jobs.
Since the launch of the plan, the Federal Government has been issuing periodic status reports on the 
progress in implementing the plan. 
2.2 A Healthy Environment, A Healthy Economy (HEHE)
In December 2020, the federal government released the plan A Healthy Environment and A Healthy 
Economy. A news release from the Office of the Prime Minister explained that “Canada’s strengthened 
climate plan builds on continuing work with provinces and territories through the Pan-Canadian 
Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change (PCF), which was released in 2016. When coupled with 
the PCF, the strengthened plan will do more to cut pollution in a practical and affordable way than any 
other climate plan in Canada’s history” (2020, n.p.). 
The HEHE builds on the PCF through 64 new measures and $15 billion in investments, and proposes 
policies and plans presented through five pillars. The first is focused on energy efficient homes and 
buildings - “Making the Places Canadians Live and Gather More Affordable by Cutting Energy Waste.” The 
second pillar is called “Making Clean, Affordable Transportation and Power Available in Every Canadian 
Community” and focuses on increasing supplies of clean energy and cleaner modes of transportation. 
HEHE’s third pillar - “Continuing to Ensure Pollution Isn’t Free and Households Get More Money Back”- 
continues the PCF’s emphasis on carbon pricing. The fourth focuses on industry and jobs and is called 
“Building Canada’s Clean Industrial Advantage.” The fifth and final pillar centres on nature-based 
climate solutions -  “Embracing the Power of Nature to Support Healthier Families and More Resilient 
Communities.”
Indigenous Climate Action
13
Both of these federal climate plans have been analysed, assessed and critiqued by others before, and included 
below is a brief overview of these critiques.  
2.3 Pre-existing Critiques of the PCF 
The PCF has been subject to numerous critiques on various bases and from different perspectives. As policy 
analyst Marc Lee states, “’plan’ is too generous a term” for this framework (2016, n.p.). To begin with, it’s built 
around a GHG emissions target that is too weak to lead to effective climate mitigation. The target of 30% 
reduction below 2005 levels by 2030 was set by the Harper Conservative government and critiqued nationally 
and internationally by the environmental community, rendering the PCF fundamentally flawed. Various 
independent scientific analyses have shown clearly that this target is insufficient (Climate Action Tracker, 2019; 
Burck et al., 2018; MacNeil, 2019) and “not remotely inline with the international community’s goal of limiting 
global warming to 1.5°C” (MacNeil, 2019, p. 156).
To weaken the promise of the PCF further, it’s been shown that the policies and plans which are specified in 
the framework will fall short by 79 tonnes of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, being too weak to even 
meet the insufficient target it is designed around (CANRAC, 2019; OAG, 2018; Lee, 2016). Furthermore, the 
PCF repeatedly refers to “additional measures” necessary to meet the 2030 target, which amounts to about 
44 million tonnes of unaccounted for carbon reductions. These “additional measures” remain unspecified 
or unfunded (Lee, 2016) and thus will likely mean the purchasing of carbon credits from outside of Canada 
(Marshall, 2016). As will be discussed in Section 2.5, carbon trading schemes have significant social justice 
implications and will extend the reach of Canada’s carbon pollution.
Perhaps the most significant weakness of the PCF, which has been widely 
critiqued, is the fact that the framework essentially gives the oil and gas 
industry a pass, with no measures set to actually keep carbon in the ground (Lee, 
2016; O’Manique, 2017; Marshall, 2016). 
The framework focuses on reducing the demand for energy while almost completely ignoring the supply side of 
the equation (CANRAC, 2019). The PCF includes regulations to reduce methane emissions coming from the oil 
and gas industry, for which the industry was given $50 million to invest in the necessary technology (O’Manique, 
2017), but beyond that, the PCF lets this huge and massively polluting industry off the hook (Marshall, 2016). 
The PCF’s failure to include regulations to curb the expansion of the oil and gas industry has meant that the 
federal government, while taking great pride in its climate framework, has been able to approve various new 
fossil fuel infrastructure, including the TransMountain and Line 3 pipelines. These projects further facilitate the 
expansion of the tar sands, contributing significantly to the climate crisis (Lee, 2016), while locking-in fossil fuel 
dependency making it even more costly, difficult, and less likely for Canada to achieve its emission target by 
2030 (Marshall, 2016).
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
14
Not only does the PCF lack any regulations to curb the expansion of the fossil fuel industry, it allows for 
the continuation of government subsidies to the industry until 2025 (Lee, 2016). The PCF thus allows 
the government to support the continuation of an industry that is undermining the whole world’s efforts to 
curb GHG emissions (CANRAC, 2019). This extends the reach of pollution far beyond Canadian borders and 
contributes to global climate injustice.
“It should seem glaringly obvious…that Canada cannot simultaneously promote 
the expansion of the oil and gas sector and the decarbonization of its economy” 
(MacNeil, 2019, p. 158).
The PCF was also criticized for completely lacking any considerations of gender in the plan and policies 
(see Chalifour, 2017). Women, especially those in the North and those facing poverty, are generally more 
impacted by the effects of climate change. It is important to ensure that climate policy does not exacerbate 
existing inequalities, yet there is no evidence that this was considered at all in the PCF (Chalifour, 2017). 
Climate change is largely the result of the tightly interwoven forces of colonialism, patriarchy, and 
neoliberal forms of development. These conditions are constraining women’s knowledge, expertise, 
and unique agencies in addressing what is probably the most defining issue of our age. Yet women, 
including Indigenous women, have significant roles to play in the articulation of feminist and 
Indigenous worldviews, and aligned climate action strategies. (Lewis et al., 2018, p.3)
Integrating gender into climate policy requires decision makers to understand how gender and climate 
intersect and how climate policy can be shaped to promote gender equality. It is crucial to include a diversity of 
Indigenous women’s voices in the process of climate policy-making and It is clear that the PCF did not do that. 
The PCF has proven to be “extremely politically fragile” (MacNeil, 2019, p. 156). 
It was developed within the context of a long history of ambiguity as to whether environmental policy lies in the 
jurisdiction of the federal or the provincial governments. This reflects larger tensions stemming from Canada 
being a federated state – meaning it is made up of provinces with their own constitutional authority to make 
and enforce laws (MacNeil, 2019). All of this has contributed to deep and ongoing tensions between provincial 
and federal governments, and provinces have been typically very resistant to climate regulation being imposed 
on them from the federal government. This is further embedded by the federal government’s reluctance to 
enforce the already failing targets. For these reasons, the PCF included the caveat that the framework can be 
implemented through equivalency agreements, whereby provinces can design and adopt their own regulations, 
in place of the federal ones. This process has rendered the implementation of the PCF “highly political” while the 
signing of equivalency agreements has lacked transparency (Péloffy et al., 2019). This has led to the adoption of 
less aggressive emission reductions (CANRAC, 2019), and in some provinces a lack of effort to reduce emissions. 
Indigenous Climate Action
15
Underlying many of the weaknesses outlined above, is the fact that the PCF fails to 
address, or even name, the drivers and root causes of the climate crisis. 
For example, not only does it not name endless economic growth as a driver of climate change, the term “clean 
growth” is built right into the title of the framework; “Growth” appears 114 other times in the 86-page document 
(O’Manique 2017). This signals the PCF’s central focus of trying to reduce emissions while ensuring increased 
fossil fuel production. Though on the surface this may seem like a reasonable goal of balancing various interests, 
ecological economists and others make it abundantly clear that this is just not possible. 
Capitalist economic systems require endless economic growth to survive, and economic growth requires ever 
increasing amounts of energy and material throughput, driving ecological devastation and carbon pollution 
(Gilbertson, 2017; Whyte, 2017; Kohn & Reddy, 2017; Clark & York, 2005). Although some people argue that 
clean growth – the decoupling of economic growth from GHG emissions – is possible, clean growth puts all its 
hope in technological solutions and the ability of the market to generate these innovations. The PCF’s focus on 
technological innovations to somehow magically decouple economic growth from extraction and pollution is 
not only failing to bring the solutions it promises, but it masks the root causes and drivers of climate change and 
allows them to carry on driving the crisis (O’Manique, 2017).
2.4 Pre-existing Praise and Critiques of the HEHE
Since the release of HEHE, there have been many responses from economists, environmentalists, policy 
analysts, and others in Canada reflecting on whether and how this new plan is indeed a ‘strengthened’ climate 
plan. 
One improvement is that the HEHE proposes a stronger emissions reduction target than did the PCF. Where the 
PCF target had been 30% reduction below 2005 levels by 2030, the HEHE sets out a plan to exceed this target and 
aims for net-zero emissions by 2050. Meyer (2020) explains that if all the proposed actions in the HEHE are fully 
implemented, this will lead to emission reductions of at least 85 million tonnes beyond what the PCF aimed for.
Where the PCF’s proposed actions did not line up with its inadequate targets - leaving a large emissions gap 
to be addressed through ill-defined additional measures - the new plan offers a complete strategy for meeting 
its targets (Lee & Mertins-Kirkwood, 2020; Beugin, 2020). Furthermore, the HEHE proposes a higher price on 
carbon. Under the new plan, the carbon price will not be frozen at $50/tonne in 2022 as proposed in the PCF but 
will increase by $15/tonne per year starting in 2023, until it reaches $170 in 2030. According to Lee and Mertins-
Kirkwood (2020), “This is the boldest and most ambitious policy in the [new] federal plan, especially given 
the politically challenging politics of carbon pricing in Canada” (n.p.). The HEHE has also been celebrated for 
proposing border tax adjustment to compensate for a lack of carbon pricing on imported goods (ibid.).
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
16
Another improvement is that, in response to the critiques of the PCF failing to take into account gender and 
other social equity aspects of climate policy, the HEHE features an Annex on Gender Based Analysis Plus. 
A final aspect of the HEHE that has been lauded is that unlike the PCF, the HEHE is not dependent on the 
provinces to cooperate and take action. This plan lays out what is necessary for the target to be met through 
federal measures alone, and “Any additional climate policies brought in by the provinces and territories in areas 
of their jurisdiction will allow Canada to meet the target faster and/or exceed it even further” (Lee & Mertins-
Kirkwood, 2020, n.p.). Due to all these improvements on the PCF, the HEHE has been called “ambitious…brave” 
(Wherry, 2020, n.p.) and the “most serious piece of climate policy we’ve yet seen from this government” (Lee & 
Mertins-Kirkwood, 2020, n.p.).
All that said, there remain serious weaknesses of the HEHE which have been identified in various responses to 
the plan since it was released in December 2020. Firstly, the HEHE is clearly more of a proposal than a definite 
plan (Meyer, 2020); it is a vision for what kind of actions it would take to reach the target (Wherry, 2020). 
Secondly, much like the PCF, the HEHE relies mostly on creating incentives to shift spending patterns, but it 
fails to propose concrete measures to regulate the major sources of carbon pollution (Lee & Mertins-Kirkwood, 
2020). Like the PCF, the new plan lets the oil and gas industry off the hook once again. While the plan aims to 
incentivize the reduction of fossil fuel use in Canada, it remains committed to producing oil and gas to export 
to other countries, allowing a 20% increase in oil production and a 17% increase in gas production over the 
next few decades (ibid.). Green Party leader Annamie Paul has made clear that in releasing the new plan while 
refusing to cancel the Transmountain (TMX) pipeline or to end fracking, the federal government has rendered 
the HEHE nothing more than a “PR exercise” (Silver, 2020). With the HEHE, the federal government “continues to 
skirt around the inevitability of a global transition away from fossil fuels” (Lee & Mertins-Kirkwood, 2020, n.p.).
“Canada can’t keep pretending that we can solve the climate crisis while 
expanding oil and gas production and building new pipelines” (Bergamo, 2020, 
n.p.)
While the HEHE commits to phasing out all “inefficient subsidies” to the oil and gas industry by 2025 (Dyck et al., 
2020), the federal government takes the liberty of being able to define for itself what ‘efficient subsidies’ might 
mean, manipulating discourse to allow for the continuation of the extractive status quo in Canada. 
Indeed, the HEHE actually includes a number of potential new fossil fuel subsidies 
(Lee & Mertins-Kirkwood, 2020).
The findings presented in the remaining sections contribute to this chorus of critiques that have been laid 
against the Canadian Government’s climate plans and policies, by providing an in-depth analysis of the PCF and 
the HEHE from an Indigenous lens, and our rights and approaches to climate action. A significant aspect of our 
critique is the process by which these plans were developed.
Indigenous Climate Action
17
3. Analysis of the Process by which these Climate Plans and 
Policies were Developed
3.1 The Process of Developing the PCF 
The Vancouver Declaration of March 2016 set out the PCF development process. Four working groups were 
established, one for each of the four pillars: Pricing Carbon Pollution; Complementary Climate Actions; 
Adaptation and Climate Resilience; and Clean Technology, Innovation and Creating Jobs. Each working group 
was made up of officials from federal, provincial and territorial governments and led by First Ministers. The 
working groups were then tasked “to work with Indigenous Peoples; to consult with the public, businesses and 
civil society; and to present options to act on climate change and enable clean growth” (PCF, 2016, p. 2). 
Indigenous Peoples were to be consulted merely as stakeholders rather than 
central rights holders, and not given seats in the actual working groups.
Image: Chief Gerry Cheezie of Smith's Landing First Nation speaking at a 
Reject Teck press conference in Vancouver, BC on January 20, 2020
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
18
In the PCF Section 1.1, How we developed the Framework, it states that “Representatives of Indigenous Peoples 
contributed their knowledge and expectations for meaningful engagement in climate action and provided 
important considerations and recommendations either directly to working groups or to ministers, which helped 
shape this framework” and also mentioned that “Ministers also reached out to Canadians, businesses, non-
governmental organizations, and Indigenous Peoples to hear their priorities” (2016, p. 2).
This is the extent to which the PCF offers details about engagement with Indigenous Peoples and about what 
ways this engagement concretely shaped its actual contents. We dug deeper, beyond the PCF itself, and read the 
final reports from the four working groups. When this, too, uncovered unsatisfactory details about engagement 
with Indigenous Peoples, we searched for and read through public statements made by Indigenous government 
bodies about the PCF process. In a final effort to understand how Indigenous Peoples were engaged in the 
process and to what effect, we reached out to various MPs and public servants and others who were actively 
involved in the development of the PCF. This led to several email conversations and a few phone interviews.  
From the reports from the four working groups, we were able to access the following information. 
According the report from the Working Group on Carbon Pricing Mechanism, which was overseen by Ministers 
of Finance, the working group met with representatives from Assembly of First Nations (AFN), Métis National 
Council (MNC), and Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK), and received online input from “various organizations and 
individuals who identified issues relevant to Indigenous interests ” (2016, p.5). No further detail was provided 
about who specifically was consulted. 
The final report from the Working Group on Specific Mitigation Opportunities was explicit that the membership 
of the working group was limited to federal, provincial, territorial (FPT) officials, but they added that co-chairs 
of the working group held regular teleconference calls and face-to-face meetings with AFN, MNC, and ITK with 
updates on their work. These National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) were invited to three roundtables in 
2016, hosted by the Mitigation and Carbon Pricing Mechanism working groups, a process which included invited 
stakeholders such as NGOs, think tanks and industry associations. 
They also state that “in parallel to the working group process, the AFN, MNC, and ITK engaged with their 
respective memberships to develop input on climate change solutions that meet the needs and priorities of 
Indigenous peoples’’ (Working Group on Specific Mitigation Opportunities, 2016, p. 17). They admit, however, 
that the process’s timeline and the working group structure presented significant challenges to this engagement 
and that ongoing engagement would be needed to ensure priorities of Indigenous Peoples would be reflected in 
the framework. They did not state what these ongoing engagements would be. 
The final report from the Working Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience provides notably more 
information than did the other working groups, about their consultation processes including those with 
Indigenous Peoples. They provide specifics such as “engagement was carried out through a multi-day 
stakeholder engagement event held in Toronto on June 2-3, 2016. The Working Group invited approximately 50 
organizations that represent the broad range of adaptation stakeholders and are national in scope” (Working 
Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience, 2016, p. 34). 
Indigenous Climate Action
19
They also include a list of stakeholders that were engaged (it’s worth noting this included the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers) as well as a list of the questions that were asked and a summary of the 
answers they received. These efforts to make the consultation process transparent stood out in comparison to 
the previous two working groups.  
In terms of engagement with Indigenous Peoples, they specify that the co-chairs of the working group 
participated in weekly teleconference calls with AFN, ITK and MNC, who were also given the opportunity for 
two three-hour discussions at face-to-face working group meetings. They explain that “[f]ederal co-chairs also 
offered to make themselves available for discussions” (Working Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience, 
2016, p. 33). They make mention of reports submitted by the NIOs and state that “where possible, the issues, 
ideas, and recommendations have been integrated throughout this report” (ibid., p. 33, emphasis added). 
However, they don’t describe how and by whom it was decided which such inclusions were ‘possible,’ and which 
were not.
Also of note, this is the only working group report to directly quote an Indigenous 
person. All other findings from the consultations were included in paraphrased, 
summarized ways, without names, communities, or Nations specified. 
The final of the four working groups was the Working Group on Clean Technology, Innovation and Jobs. As 
with the Adaptation and Climate Resilience working group, the Clean Technology Working Group’s final report 
provides specifics about their stakeholder involvement: 
In June 2016, a national industry roundtable in Toronto involved about 50 representatives from 
the transportation, natural resources, construction, agriculture, energy and public utilities sectors. 
Representatives from NIOs participated in this event to hear directly from industry. Many Working 
Group members also held provincial or regional roundtables to solicit input from local experts and 
private-sector stakeholders. (Working Group on Clean Technology, Innovation and Jobs, 2016, p. 6)
They provide less detailed information about consultations with Indigenous Peoples, stating only that an 
“important feature” of the consultations they did “was regular communication with National Indigenous 
Organizations (NIOs), representing Canada’s First Nations, Métis and Inuit peoples, to obtain their valuable 
input” (ibid., p. v). They held three in-person meetings with AFN, MNC and ITK and held “weekly telephone calls 
with them during the consultation process” (ibid., p. 6).
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
20
Given that input was gathered from Indigenous People through the Working Groups, who then relayed this input 
through their Final Reports, it is interesting to note the relative frequency with which the word “Indigenous”1 
was included in the various Final Reports and how that compares to the inclusions of the word in the PCF 
(reference Table 1 below).
Note that while the four Working Group Final Reports average 1.3 uses per page of the word “Indigenous,” the 
PCF document itself has a lower average of 1 mention of the word “Indigenous” per page (85 times in an 86-page 
document). As such, the PCF brings Indigenous Peoples into its frame less often than the working group reports 
did.
Document
Total number of mentions of the 
word “Indigenous”
Average mention per 
page
Final Report for Working Group 
on Carbon Pricing Mechanism
55 times in 66 pages
0.8 times per page
Final Report for Working 
Group on Specific Mitigation 
Opportunities
118 times in 61 pages
2 times per page
Final Report for Working Group 
on Adaptation and Climate 
Resilience
79 times in  61 pages
1.3 times per page
Final Report for Working Group 
on Clean Technology, Innovation 
and Jobs
119 times in 116 pages
1.03 times per page
Average for all Working Group 
Final Reports
1.3 times per page
PCF
85 times in 86 pages
1 time per page
Table 1: Showing the relative number of mentions of the word “Indigenous” in the PCF and in the Final Reports of 
the Working Groups
From public statements and press releases from MNC and ITK, we were able to glean the following 
information about the process by which the PCF was developed.
In March 2016, MNC President Clément Chartier, AFN National Chief Perry Bellegarde, and ITK President Natan 
Obed, were invited to join the Prime Minister and Premiers to discuss the involvement of Indigenous Peoples in 
developing Canada’s Climate Change and Clean Growth Strategy. In that meeting “President Chartier told the 
First Ministers that the path forward on addressing climate change for the Métis people required respect for their 
1	
We use the word “Indigenous,” and the frequency with which it comes up as an indicator of consideration of Indigenous 
Peoples, issues and rights in these documents.
Indigenous Climate Action
21
Section 35 Aboriginal rights, including the inherent right to self government” (Métis Nation, 2016, n.p). According 
to Chartier, 
If Canada is serious about adopting a truly national framework on climate change, we as the Métis 
Nation, along with the First Nations and Inuit, must be full participants at the table. This means our full 
inclusion in the four working groups that are expected to develop the Climate Change and Clean Growth 
Framework – on carbon pricing, sectoral mitigation, adaptation and clean technology and jobs – as well 
as ensuring a nation-to-nation approach to solutions. (ibid, emphasis added)
In August of 2016, as the working group process was transpiring, ITK President Natan Obed made clear that 
“ITK, along with other National Indigenous Organizations, receives regular updates on the discussions of the 
four working groups, but does not have membership in the four groups” (Above & Beyond, 2016, n.p., emphasis 
added). And in September 2016, ITK released a statement making clear that “while the Vancouver Declaration 
recognizes that Indigenous peoples have an important role to play in ensuring a sustainable and prosperous 
future for Canada, the federal-provincial-territorial working groups that developed policy options for Canada’s 
Climate Strategy did not include Indigenous representatives.” (ITK, 2016a, n.p., emphasis added).
In September 2016, ITK released a report called Inuit Priorities for Canada’s Climate Strategy, providing First 
Ministers with an outline of Inuit expectations and policy recommendations for Canada’s climate action 
strategy. These Inuit-specific policy calls to action included 23 recommendations in five categories (p. 6). ITK 
also put out a statement urging the Federal, Provincial and Territorial Ministers who were then drafting Canada’s 
Climate Strategy to “consider these Inuit policy recommendations in full and in parallel with the policy options 
developed by four federal-provincial-territorial working groups” who would be reporting to First Ministers in the 
fall (ITK, 2016b, n.p., emphasis added). The report and statement contend that “Inuit must be included as equal 
partners in the federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) tables that are shaping Canada’s evolving climate strategy 
and its implementation” (ibid., p. 3, emphasis added).
Interviews and correspondences with politicians and public servants about the PCF process  provided us 
with the subsequent information. 
Having dug this far into researching the process by which the PCF was created and still not fully understanding 
how it came to be that Indigenous Peoples did not have seats on the working groups, we sent dozens of emails 
to the people who had been actively involved in the process. These emails resulted in several phone interviews 
with public servants who had helped lead the development of the PCF. They opted to have their answers to our 
questions remain anonymous.
In one interview we were told that while MNC, ITK, AFN, and other organizations and people representing 
Indigenous interests were consistently, and from the start, clear that they should have official seats on the 
working groups, with full decision-making power, this did not happen because representatives of one or two 
provinces actively blocked this from happening. Because individual decision-makers representing a small group 
of provinces did not want Indigenous Peoples on the working groups, it was decided, as a work-around, to have 
the working groups meet regularly with MNC, ITK, and AFN leadership.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
22
There are many important conclusions to be drawn from this analysis of the PCF development process. 
In several places in the PCF, the importance of Indigenous Peoples as leaders in addressing climate change is 
acknowledged. For example, in the forward of the PCF, it states that “We acknowledge and thank Indigenous 
Peoples across Canada for their climate leadership long before the Paris Agreement and for being active drivers 
of positive change” (2016, n.p). 
However, in the process of developing the PCF, Indigenous Peoples’ agency was 
ignored and disrespected by  the government’s refusal to bring us to the working 
group tables. 
Similarly, in the working groups’ final reports and the PCF itself, it is made clear that including and respecting 
Indigenous knowledges is key to tackling the climate crisis. The Principles listed at the beginning of the PCF 
include: “recognizing the importance of Traditional Knowledge in regard to understanding climate impacts and 
adaptation measures” (2016, p.3). 
Yet, Indigenous knowledges were systematically excluded, through not allowing 
Indigenous Peoples to participate in the working group tables as full partners. 
The Trudeau government has repeatedly made statements expressing their commitment to deepening the 
relationships with Indigenous Peoples. Trudeau has said, “No relationship is more important to Canada than 
the relationship with Indigenous Peoples. Our Government is working together with Indigenous Peoples to build 
a nation-to-nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-government relationship – one based on respect, partnership, 
and recognition of rights” (PMO, 2017). And indeed, the PCF reiterates the federal government’s “commitment to 
renewed nation-to-nation, government-to-government, and Inuit-to-Crown relationships with First Nations, the 
Métis Nation and Inuit, based on the recognition of rights, respect, cooperation, and partnership” (2016, p. 4). 
However, by failing to include Indigenous Peoples in the government FTP-only working groups, they were clearly 
and explicitly not respecting Indigenous Peoples’ right to self-governments. In the process of developing 
the PCF, Indigenous Peoples were treated more like interest groups and stakeholders, rather than as 
sovereign entities.
This erasure of Indigenous self-determination and blatant violation of the commitment to Nation-to-Nation, 
Inuit-Crown, government-to-government relationships is also evidenced in wording used in the PCF and 
the working group final reports. For example, in the preamble of the Final Report of the Clean Technology, 
Innovation and Jobs Working Group, it is stated that “efforts to coordinate and focus this work must go beyond 
governments and involve industry, stakeholders, academia and Indigenous Peoples” (2016, p. vi). Here, 
Indigenous Peoples are lumped in, not with governments, but with stakeholders, industry and academia. This 
failure is not just poor process, it constitutes a violation of Indigenous Peoples’ rights to self-determination and 
to free, prior, and informed consent. 
Indigenous Climate Action
23
In May 2016, around the same time the PCF was being developed, the Minister of Indigenous and Northern 
Affairs announced that Canada was now “a full supporter, without qualification,” of the United Nations 
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People (UNDRIP). 
Article 3 of UNDRIP states that “Indigenous peoples have the right to self-determination. By virtue of that right 
they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development” 
(United Nations, 2007, p. 4). Article 18 further states that “Indigenous peoples have the right to participate in 
decision-making in matters which would affect their rights, through representatives chosen by themselves 
in accordance with their own procedures, as well as to maintain and develop their own indigenous decision-
making institutions” (ibid, p. 8). And furthermore, in Article 19, it is made clear that “States shall consult and 
cooperate in good faith with the indigenous peoples concerned through their own representative institutions 
in order to obtain their free, prior and informed consent before adopting and implementing legislative or 
administrative measures that may affect them” (ibid, p. 8). 
The process by which the PCF was developed constitutes a clear violation of 
Indigenous rights as affirmed by UNDRIP.
For the federal government to begin to walk its talk on equitable relationships and upholding procedural rights 
under UNDRIP, it would have meant, at the very least, including Indigenous Peoples in the working groups as 
equal partners. This was not done. Indigenous rights to self-determination were further violated by adopting 
and implementing legislative and administrative measures that may affect us without obtaining free, prior, and 
informed consent (FPIC). The working group consultations that took place with AFN, ITK and MNC were 
not consent-based. While AFN, ITK and MNC were given regular updates and were asked for input, there was 
no clarity on how their contributions would be incorporated. This process was not created through anything 
resembling consent of Indigenous Peoples. Furthermore, there were no processes put in place to ensure 
that AFN, ITK and MNC were meaningfully gathering input about the PCF from the Indigenous Peoples they 
purportedly represent. This effectively allowed Canada to bypass Indigenous communities and Nations, 
misleading the public about the involvement of Indigenous Peoples in climate strategy and creating a 
facade of FPIC (Diabo, 2017). 
It is important to note that in order to respect the procedural rights set out in UNDRIP, any government 
consultation, engagement, or process of obtaining FPIC needs to allow for an Indigenous community to select 
its own representatives to deal with government, according to the Indigenous community’s decision-making 
procedures. These procedures will not necessarily be Indian Act Chief and Council elections, or other state-
sanctioned processes for selecting local or regional leadership of government-recognized organizations.
This is particularly important in the context of climate change, which is a land-based issue. It is unreasonable to 
expect that, for example, AFN can represent hundreds of culturally and linguistically distinct Nations spanning 
the breadth of a continent on an issue where impacts, experience, and knowledge are intimately tied to their 
unique territories. Knowledge and recommendations from different Indigenous communities and Nations are 
going to vary greatly, and that input can’t be centralized through National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs).
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
24
Consultations solely through national-level Indigenous organizations is simply not sufficient to meet the 
Federal government’s commitments to implement UNDRIP Articles 3, 18, and 19. 
For climate policy to be created in ways that respect Indigenous communities and 
Nations’ rights to free, prior and informed consent, there needs to be engagement 
beyond the NIOs. 
The PCF process has not only violated Indigenous rights, but also conflicts with many of the calls to actions 
coming from various government reports. Over and over the Canadian federal government has conducted 
expansive and expensive inquiries that produced a wealth of recommendations about how they can and 
should improve relations with Indigenous Peoples. In the 1990s, the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples 
(RCAP) was established by an Order in Council and was mandated to “investigate and propose solutions to the 
challenges affecting the relationship between Aboriginal peoples...the Canadian government and Canadian 
society as a whole” (RCAP, 1996, n.p.). The final report from the commission stated that 
The time has come…to start afresh, to put the relationship [Indigenous Peoples and Canada] on a 
more secure foundation, based on the following four principles: A) mutual recognition (three facets 
of which are equality, co-existence and self-government); B) mutual respect; C) sharing (based on the 
long overdue recognition that Canada’s past and present prosperity rests on a relationship of sharing 
extended by Aboriginal peoples); and D) mutual responsibility (involving the transformation of a 
colonial relationship into a partnership with joint responsibility for the land). (1996, n.p.)
These principles are not reflected in the process by which the PCF was developed.   
Decades after RCAP, another commission, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) was launched to 
advise the Canadian government on righting relations with Indigenous Peoples.
The Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) states:
We call upon federal, provincial, territorial, and municipal governments to fully adopt and implement 
the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples as the framework for reconciliation 
(Call to Action 43).
We call upon the Government of Canada to develop a national action plan, strategies, and other 
concrete measures to achieve the goals of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples (Call to Action 44). 
We call upon federal, provincial, territorial, and municipal governments to repudiate concepts used to 
justify European sovereignty over Indigenous peoples and lands, such as the Doctrine of Discovery and 
terra nullius, and to reform those laws, government policies, and litigation strategies that continue to 
rely on such concepts (Call to Action 47). (2015, p. 4-5)
Indigenous Climate Action
25
Our analysis shows again and again that the process by which the PCF was developed has reproduced colonial, 
unjust relations through the development of climate policy and plans that violate Indigenous rights to self-
determination and FPIC. Furthermore, there was blatant disregard of the many recommendations from 
Commission inquiries and even the principles laid out in the Vancouver Declaration itself to “strengthen the 
collaboration between our governments and Indigenous Peoples on mitigation and adaptation actions, based 
on recognition of rights, respect, cooperation, and partnership” were disregarded (PCF, 2016, p. 3). 
The procedural injustice in the crafting of the PCF was closely observed and fiercely contested by the NIOs 
and Indigenous Peoples across so-called Canada, as shown in the statements made by NIOs cited above. In 
response, three Senior Level Bilateral Tables were launched in 2017 between the federal government and each 
of the three NIOs.
It is unclear whether these bilateral tables are leading to more just, decolonial climate policy processes. From 
what we can tell, the HEHE was drafted through even less engagement with Indigenous Peoples than was the 
PCF. 
The process by which the PCF was developed shows a glaring disregard for the 
TRC recommendations. The Canadian federal government clearly acted under the 
assumption that they hold sovereignty over Indigenous Peoples and lands, and as 
shown above, the PCF process clearly violated UNDRIP. 
3.2 The HEHE Development Process
The relative transparency offered in the PCF document about how the plan was developed enabled us to 
provide the analysis above. For example, the PCF explained its plan had been drafted through the four working 
groups who each consulted in various ways with NIOs. In contrast, the HEHE document does not provide any 
explanation of how it was developed and by who. Nor was there any indication that Indigenous Peoples had 
been consulted. 
As we explain in the section below, the wording around Indigenous Peoples, our rights and our leadership is 
stronger in the HEHE than it was in the PCF. However, there appears to be no evidence that the promises made 
in the PCF to start working in real partnership, on the basis of Nation-to-Nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-
government relationships going forward happened in the process of developing the HEHE. To the contrary, it 
seems that Indigenous Peoples, Nations, communities, and organizations were represented less in the 
drafting of the HEHE than in the PCF. 
The ways that the PCF has perpetuated ongoing colonial relations in Canada is not just evidenced in the process 
by which the framework was developed. It can also be seen in the content of the framework. We critically 
analyse each of the main pillars of the two plans, in turn, in the following section. But first we overview how 
Indigenous Peoples, our knowledge, rights and leadership are discussed in the two plans.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
26
4. Analysis of the Contents of these Climate Plans and Policies
4.1 Mentions of Indigenous Peoples and our Rights in the PCF
The term “Indigenous” appears 83 times in the 78-page PCF plan and 98 times in the 79-page HEHE document.  
This indicates that the people drafting these plans understood the importance of mentioning Indigenous 
Peoples in relation to climate action and policy in Canada. But as shown, both plans lacked any substantive 
action toward inclusion of Indigenous Peoples within their development. Essentially, these mentions appear 
to be little more than lip service in place of the fiduciary obligations of the federal government to engage in 
meaningful consultation and accommodation. 
In the forward of the PCF document, it states:
In the Paris Agreement, Parties agreed that they should, when taking action to address climate change, 
recognize and respect the rights of Indigenous Peoples. As we implement this Framework, we will move 
forward respecting the rights of Indigenous Peoples, with robust, meaningful engagement drawing on 
their Traditional Knowledge. We will take into account the unique circumstances and opportunities of 
Indigenous Peoples and northern, remote, and vulnerable communities. We acknowledge and thank 
Indigenous Peoples across Canada for their climate leadership long before the Paris Agreement and for 
being active drivers of positive change. (2016, n.p.)
This paragraph acknowledges the need to engage “robustly” with Indigenous Peoples. It names Indigenous 
knowledge as valuable to climate policy and plans and that Indigenous Peoples are leaders in taking action on 
climate change. However, as illustrated in the next section, it appears these are empty sentiments. There is a 
clear absence of the inclusion of Indigenous knowledges and approaches to climate change in the PCF. 
Not only did the drafting of the PCF not constitute “robust engagement,”  
Indigenous Peoples were structurally excluded from the process by which the 
document was developed.
Indigenous rights are mentioned six times in the PCF document, and the United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), including the right to “free, prior and informed consent” (FPIC) is evoked 
once. With that said, neither UNDRIP nor FPIC were integrated in any meaningful way into the actual policies 
and plans that are included in the PCF (CANRAC, 2019). Further, the process by which the PCF was developed 
was carried out in ways that did not provide Indigenous Peoples with opportunities to give or withhold consent 
about the framework.
While UNDRIP was mentioned, other sources of Indigenous rights, such as inherent, Treaty, and constitutional 
rights were not mentioned at all. Put simply, Indigenous rights were mentioned repeatedly in the PCF but 
appear to have had no influence on the actual policies and plans developed.
Indigenous Climate Action
27
Along similar lines, the PCF recognizes that Indigenous Peoples will be and are disproportionately impacted by 
climate change. It states:
Indigenous Peoples, northern and coastal regions and communities in Canada are particularly 
vulnerable and disproportionately affected. Geographic location, socio-economic challenges, and 
for Indigenous Peoples, the reliance on wild food sources, often converge with climate change to put 
pressure on these communities. Much has been done to begin addressing these challenges, including 
by Indigenous Peoples. (2016, p. 1)
Despite these words put forward by the PCF, it fails to recognize the ways that the Canadian state continues 
to systematically and actively place Indigenous Peoples in a vulnerable position through ongoing colonial 
relations, land dispossession, impacts of extractive industries and failure to take meaningful action on climate 
change (O’Manique, 2017). As our analysis of the four pillars shows, there is a notable lack of initiatives in the 
PCF aiming to address the disproportionate burden Indigenous Peoples are enduring from climate change and 
the extractive industry. Further, many of the policies and plans in the PCF serve to reinforce and/or exacerbate 
these systemic inequities and injustices.
Indigenous rights were mentioned repeatedly in the PCF but appear to have had no 
influence on the actual policies and plans developed.
4.2 Mentions of Indigenous Peoples and our Rights in the HEHE
The HEHE also makes repeated mention of Indigenous Peoples and our rights. Like the PCF, the HEHE 
acknowledges that while “[g]reenhouse gas emissions originating from Indigenous communities are modest…
the impacts of climate change on Indigenous peoples are disproportionately greater” (2020, p. 67). The HEHE, 
much like the PCF, includes acknowledgement of climate injustice and the “unique circumstances” Indigenous 
Nations and communities face, but fails to recognize the ways that the Canadian state has created these 
conditions. 
Canada continues to systematically and actively place Indigenous Peoples in these 
“unique circumstances’’ and vulnerablized positions through ongoing colonial 
relations, land dispossession, impacts of extractive industries, and a consistent 
failure to take meaningful action on climate change. 
Not only is the federal government not taking responsibility for the ongoing colonial relations that are driving 
the disproportionate impact of climate change on Indigenous Nations and communities, but wording in the 
HEHE places the burdens for fixing these impacts on Indigenous People themselves. For example, on page 67, 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
28
the HEHE states that the federal government  “will help ensure that Indigenous peoples have the tools and 
resources they need to address the disproportionate impacts of climate change experienced by First Nations, 
Métis and Inuit across Canada” (emphasis added). 
“Indigenous knowledge” is mentioned two times in the new plan and the importance of Indigenous leadership 
is emphasized repeatedly in wording, such as: “Indigenous rights-holders, and their representatives and 
organizations are critical partners to conversations about addressing climate change at all levels of Canadian 
society, and have demonstrated their commitment to advancing positive climate outcomes through Indigenous-
led solutions” (2020, p. 67).
The HEHE mentions UNDRIP and Indigenous Peoples‘ rights to free, prior, and informed consent precisely one 
time (exactly the same number as in the PCF), but again the process by which this plan was developed did not 
provide Indigenous Peoples opportunities to give or withhold consent about the plan. And again, while UNDRIP 
was mentioned, other sources of Indigenous rights, such as inherent, Treaty, and constitutional rights were not 
mentioned at all.
Despite these commonalities with the PCF, there are several notable differences in the ways Indigenous Peoples 
were discussed in the new plan. Where Indigenous Peoples’ rights to self-determination was not mentioned at 
all in the PCF, Indigenous self-determination is mentioned five times in the HEHE. There are other examples of 
strengthened wording in terms of recognizing Indigenous leadership and Indigenous-led climate solutions, such 
as commitments to working in direct partnership and other promises to work together on an equal footing going 
forward. For example, on page 69, it states,
[r]ecognizing Indigenous climate leadership means investing in the agency of Indigenous peoples and 
communities, supporting Indigenous-led and delivered solutions, equipping Indigenous peoples with 
equitable resources, and ensuring appropriate access to funding to implement self-determined climate 
action” and that “to help support Indigenous peoples advance their climate priorities and adapt to 
the changing climate, the Government of Canada is committed to renewed nation-to-nation, Inuit-to-
Crown and government-to-government relationships with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, based 
on the recognition of rights, respect, cooperation, and partnership.
Furthermore, the HEHE claims to build on the foundational principles of Indigenous climate leadership, which 
they outline as including, 
Respecting and promoting self-determination; Advancing early and meaningful engagement; 
Incorporating inclusiveness-by-design principles in all of its climate actions; Advancing co-
development and other collaborative approaches to find solutions; Creating a space for Indigenous 
voices across and within distinctions; Positioning Indigenous peoples to have a say at governance 
tables; and Supporting Indigenous approaches and ways of doing, by acknowledging traditional, local, 
and Indigenous Knowledge systems as an equal part in policy development, programs, and decision-
making. (2020, p. 69-70)
Indigenous Climate Action
29
While these appear to be progress towards decolonizing and Indigenizing climate policy in Canada and are 
indeed something to acknowledge and celebrate, we must be cautious. The PCF repeatedly committed to 
working with Indigenous Peoples in real ways going forwards, and then proceeded to draft the HEHE with even 
less consultation with Indigenous Peoples than they did for the PCF. There is evidence that the federal policy 
makers are getting better at their choice of words, but it remains to be seen whether this is translating to actual 
action. 
It is one thing to claim to respect Indigenous Peoples’ rights to self-determination, 
it’s another altogether to actually respect Indigenous Peoples and our rights in the 
actual drafting and implementation of policy.
4.3 Analysis of the Main Pillars of the Two Plans
PCF Pillars
HEHE Pillars
1. Pricing Carbon Pollution
2. Complementary Actions to Reduce 
Emissions
3. Adaptation and Climate Resilience
4. Clean Technology, Innovations and Jobs
1. Making the Places Canadians Live and Gather 
More Affordable by Cutting Energy Waste
2. Making Clean, Affordable Transportation and 
Power Available in Every Canadian Community
3. Continuing to Ensure Pollution Isn’t Free and 
Households Get More Money Back
4. Building Canada’s Clean Industrial Advantage
5. Embracing the Power of Nature to Support 
Healthier Families and More Resilient 
Communities
Table 2: Main pillars of the two plans. Colouring represents overlap in content across the respective plans’ pillars. 
4.3.1 Carbon Pricing 
Carbon pricing is a central component of Canada’s approach to climate policy and is at the heart of both 
the PCF and the HEHE. The PCF refers to putting a price on carbon as “the most effective, transparent, and 
efficient policy approach to reduce [greenhouse gas] GHG emissions” (2016, p. 7). This pillar of the PCF is only 
documented in a mere two pages and does not provide much detail on Canada’s carbon pricing policies and 
plans. Rather, we had to look elsewhere to find enough detailed information about the policies to analyse them. 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
30
Indigenous Peoples are mentioned three times in the carbon pricing section of the PCF. The last of eight 
principles listed to guide the pan-Canadian approach to carbon pricing states that “[c]arbon pricing policies 
should include revenue recycling to avoid a disproportionate burden on vulnerable groups and Indigenous 
Peoples” (2016, p. 8). It also mentions that“[t]he federal government will also engage Indigenous Peoples to find 
solutions that address their unique circumstances, including high costs of living and of energy, challenges with 
food security, and emerging economies’’ (2016, p.8).
The first thing to note about this carbon pricing pillar is that provinces/territories are given the autonomy to 
design their own carbon pricing policies through equivalency agreements; they are supposed to receive all 
the revenue generated by carbon pricing in their “jurisdiction.” The autonomy of Indigenous communities 
and Nations to do the same is not recognized, but instead communities and Nations are subsumed within 
whatever carbon pricing policies are adopted by the province or territory they are in. This is a blatant erasure of 
Indigenous sovereignty, a violation of the Indigenous right to self-determination and another example of how 
the PCF disregards the government’s commitments to government-to-government, Inuit-Crown, and Nation-to-
Nation relationships. 
In 2019, as the federal and Saskatchewan governments were facing off in court over Saskatchewan’s failure 
to implement a carbon pricing program that meets the federal benchmark, the Athabasca Chipewyan First 
Nation (ACFN) intervened in the case arguing that Saskatchewan, in introducing its climate framework without 
consulting any First Nations, violated ACFN’s Section 35 rights, and Saskatchewan’s failure to adopt an effective 
climate change plan violated ACFN’s rights given the severe impacts that climate change poses to their 
community (Barrera, 2019).
What is Carbon Pricing? 
Carbon pricing refers to programs that involve attaching monetary value to units of carbon dioxide pollution. 
These can include carbon taxes; cap-and-trade; carbon offsets; REDD+ (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation 
and Forest Degradation) and cap-and-dividend; baseline and credit; baseline and offset, and so on (Gilbertson, 
2017). The PCF includes two approaches to carbon pricing: carbon tax and cap-and-trade. 
A carbon tax refers to a tax placed on greenhouse gas (GHG) pollution through surcharges on carbon-based fuels 
and other sources of pollution, such as industrial processes. The idea here is that carbon taxes increase the price 
of polluting fuels and processes. In theory, this creates incentives for households, businesses, and industry to 
choose cleaner options, which drives the demand for energy-efficient products, and also helps spur innovation 
and investment in green solutions (DSF, n.d., n.p.). 
In a cap-and-trade system, on the other hand, a government can put “a firm limit, or cap, on the overall level 
of carbon pollution from industry and reduces that cap each year in order to reach a set pollution target” (DSF, 
n.d., n.p.). The total amount of emissions is left in the hands of polluting industries to report. At the same 
time, “pollution quotas” are handed out or auctioned off by the government to polluters within that system. 
The polluters then trade these quotas amongst themselves, allowing emissions to be “cut” wherever that 
can be done most cheaply. This essentially creates a market in which to buy and sell the right to pollute. 
Indigenous Climate Action
31
Additionally, the price of quotas is 
determined by the market. Under 
most cap and trade systems, 
polluters can buy additional carbon 
credits from external jurisdictions 
and this can involve carbon offsets 
(Gilbertson, 2017). The theory 
behind cap-and-trade is that it 
will create an incentive for firms to 
reduce their emissions and therefore 
be able to sell rather than purchase 
pollution quotas (DSF, n.d.,n.p.).
A significant problem with carbon 
pricing schemes is that they can 
have greater economic impact 
on low-income individuals and 
families compared to those with 
higher income (Lee, 2011). In 2010, 
the Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives estimated that the BC 
carbon tax represented 1.3% of 
income for low income households, 
but only 0.3% of income for households in the top tenth of the population decile (Lee, 2011). 
Canada’s Carbon Pricing Plan
In October 2016, the Prime Minister announced the Pan-Canadian Approach to Pricing Carbon Pollution (the 
federal benchmark), which gave provinces and territories the flexibility to develop their own carbon pollution 
pricing system and outlined criteria all systems must meet. The PCF’s benchmark outlines the carbon pricing 
systems that are acceptable, including a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system. The government also committed 
to implementing a federal carbon pollution pricing system (i.e. the Backstop) in provinces and territories that 
request it or do not have their own carbon pollution pricing system that meets the federal benchmark. Provinces 
and territories were given until September 1, 2018 to outline their plans. The stringency of each of the provincial 
and territorial systems was assessed against the federal benchmark stringency criteria (Government of Canada, 
2019). The overall approach is set to be assessed in 2022. 
In June 2018, the Greenhouse Gas Pollution Pricing Act was adopted. This Act includes a carbon trading system 
for large industry (Government of Canada, 2019). Some major industrial emitters, instead of being covered 
by the pricing system, are covered instead by the federal output-based pricing system (OBPS), which applies 
a carbon price only to emissions above a certain threshold. The OBPS is ostensibly intended to preserve 
“competitiveness,” but ultimately serves as an excuse for heavy emitters to decarbonize slower than the rest of 
the economy (Lee & Mertins-Kirkwood, 2020).
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
32
British Columbia, Quebec, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador, and the Northwest 
Territories have their own systems and are “either already implementing or are on track to implement carbon 
pollution pricing systems that meet the federal benchmark” (Government of Canada, 2019). In Saskatchewan, 
Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, New Brunswick, Yukon, and Nunavut, the federal government has implemented 
the federal fuel charge (ibid.). In Ontario, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island, and partially in 
Saskatchewan, there is also a federal pricing system for industry (ibid.). 
In terms of where carbon pricing revenue goes, provinces and territories that voluntarily adopted their own 
carbon pricing systems “receive these proceeds directly from the federal government and can decide on how to 
use them” (Government of Canada, 2019). For provinces that have not committed to pricing carbon pollution 
(Ontario, New Brunswick, Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Alberta), “the federal government will return the 
majority of direct proceeds (approximately 90%) from the fuel charge directly to individuals and families in the 
form of tax-free Climate Action Incentive payments” (ibid.).
The BC carbon tax is  viewed  as one of the most developed amongst the Canadian provinces; it has a higher 
starting benchmark than most other provinces. It also includes government intervention, specifically, to remove 
the burden of the tax on Indigenous and low-income individuals and communities (PCF, 2016). 
The Impacts of Carbon Pricing on Indigenous Peoples in Canada 
The final report of the Carbon Pricing working group of the PCF states that representatives of AFN, MNC and ITK 
that were consulted had “emphasized that climate action should support, rather than jeopardize, the well-being 
of Indigenous communities” (2016, p. 2). The report also makes clear that “Indigenous representatives explained 
the need for governments to respect the principles of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
peoples, and to take into account Indigenous rights and interests in the development of all climate change-
related policies. The importance of establishing Free, Prior, and Informed Consent was particularly highlighted 
for guiding all local, provincial, and national interactions with Indigenous peoples” (p. 32). 
There is no evidence that these demands were heeded in the actual drafting of the PCF’s carbon pricing 
policies. Only aspirational wording is included in Pillar One where Indigenous rights and the potential of the 
disproportionate impacts of carbon pricing on Indigenous Peoples is mentioned. Furthermore, in lieu of using 
the word “commitment”  in the PCF policy, non-committal words and phrases, such as “should, “the need for,” 
and “will find solutions” are used. 
Since Indigenous Peoples have lower median income than non-Indigenous 
Canadians (Bubna-Litic & Chalifour, 2012), the impact of a carbon tax on 
Indigenous communities and Nations is of significant concern. 
Indigenous Climate Action
33
For example, in BC, prior to the current pricing regime that came into force, the provincial government created a 
low-income tax credit to help reduce the impact of the carbon tax on low-income individuals and families. This 
tax credit was set to increase by 15.5% over the first five years of the tax, however, the tax itself increased by 
150% over that same period (Lee, 2011). Further, given that many Indigenous Peoples don’t earn enough income 
in the first place to pay income tax, tax credits cannot benefit them, and as such, are a useless intervention for 
the most vulnerable (Bubna-Litic & Chalifour, 2012). 
First Nations (or more specifically, most “registered Indians”) are exempt from paying the tax on fuel when 
the purchase of the fuel happens on reserve land. However, the majority of First Nations people in BC live off 
reserve, and so that exemption does not benefit them. Of particular concern are the potential indirect costs 
of the carbon tax on these Nations, such as how the carbon tax leads to increasing food prices (Bubna-Litic & 
Chalifour, 2012). According to one high ranking public servant we spoke with, there have been studies done on 
the indirect effects of a carbon price on consumables like food, but it has proved to be very difficult to properly 
account for these. This puts into question whether the aforementioned interventions to reduce the impact of the 
carbon tax on Indigenous Peoples are effective or sufficient. Further, it demonstrates clearly how the carbon tax 
is expected to be paid for by consumers and not the polluting corporations. This calls into question the objective 
of the tax. 
Most of the government interventions in BC put in place to protect Indigenous Peoples and low-income 
communities from being disproportionately affected by the carbon tax do not seem to be working, but at least 
in BC there is discussion of reducing the regressivity of the tax. According to the public servant cited above, the 
PCF, while requiring all provinces to adopt carbon pricing mechanisms, does not require any intervention to 
reduce the impacts of the mechanism on Indigenous and low-income communities. 
Some First Nations have negotiated exemptions from carbon pricing on reserves (e.g. Alberta), but other 
provinces have not necessarily followed suit (Six Nations Council, n.d.). Ontario does not have this exemption 
and First Nation citizens there are reporting increased hydro bills, natural gas, and auto gas prices (Six Nations 
Council, n.d.). The exemptions that have been successfully negotiated are in provinces that have developed 
and implemented their own carbon pricing regimes. In the backstop jurisdictions – the provinces where the 
federal government has implemented the carbon pricing system – there are no such exemptions for Indigenous 
communities and Nations despite there being some exemptions for farmers, fishers, and some northern 
communities. 
Indigenous Peoples face the full force of the regressive policies without any 
interventions to reduce or mitigate this impact. 
It is important to note that any real policy to reduce emissions is going to increase fuel and other costs, and this 
can have a disproportionate burden on Indigenous Peoples. However, as climate policy expert Marc Lee argues, 
carbon pricing could be a huge benefit if the revenues are used in a progressive manner to address issues facing 
low-income households or Indigenous communities (personal correspondence, 2020). Presently, they are not.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
34
Currently in the backstop provinces, 90% of the revenues made from the carbon tax are returned to households. 
The remaining 10% goes into a category that is split between small and medium businesses (2/3 of the 10%) and 
the remaining 1/3 of 10% goes to municipalities, universities, schools, hospitals, and Indigenous communities 
(Forrest, 2018). This further demonstrates that as climate impacts are impacting Indigenous Peoples 
disproportionately, it seems that carbon pricing-based climate policy is doing so as well.
The HEHE’s plan to significantly increase the price of carbon pollution has been widely applauded, but 
the major implications this may have on Indigenous Peoples urgently needs to be considered. In addition, 
there is no clear plan for how revenues generated from carbon taxes will  be equitably distributed in ways 
that mitigate the disproportionate impact of carbon pricing and the climate crisis on Indigenous Nations and 
communities. 
Impacts of Carbon Pricing on Indigenous Peoples around the World
As mentioned in Section Two, there is a 79 mega tonnes gap between the amount of carbon emissions reduction 
the PCF policies can drive and the actual reductions target set by the federal government. This gap is likely to 
be bridged through the purchasing of credits or offsets (Wilt, 2016). This is very problematic given that there 
is much evidence showing that carbon offset schemes are not actually reducing emissions but are actually 
increasing global inequality by violating human rights of local communities and Indigenous Peoples (Glibertson, 
2017; see also Goldtooth, 2010; Dillon, 2015). 
For some, carbon offsets and related schemes are being described as a “new form of colonialism” (Indigenous 
Environmental Network, 2010). Indigenous Peoples around the world have been mobilizing and attending 
international climate negotiations to defend our lives, lands and rights from these so-called “climate solutions.”
Carbon offsets are purchased by polluting companies so that they can avoid reducing their own emissions and 
instead support carbon sequestration projects elsewhere. 
Given that intact forests sequester carbon and most of the world’s forests are found 
in Indigenous Peoples’ territories, many offset projects are being implemented 
on Indigenous lands and in many of these programs, implementation is leading 
to “land grabs, killings, violent evictions and forced displacement” of Indigenous 
Peoples (Goldtooth, 2010).
Carbon offset schemes have been leading to sources of revenue to coastal First Nations (e.g. BC) and in some 
contexts these schemes are welcomed by and of benefit to Indigenous communities (Dillon, 2016). However, 
in many parts of the world, putting a price on carbon is incentivizing the removal of Indigenous Peoples from 
our traditional lands and territories and increasing corporate control over the forests (Dillion, 2016). Indigenous 
Nations and communities are often pressured into signing contracts around carbon offsets and are not informed 
that the objective of the contract is to facilitate the continued pollution rights for industries and business sectors 
in other parts of the world (Gilbertson, 2017). Indigenous Peoples’ right to free, prior and informed consent is 
Indigenous Climate Action
35
rarely upheld by conservation NGOs, aid organizations, carbon brokers, corporations and governments in the 
negotiation and implementation of these programs (Indigenous Environmental Network & Climate Justice 
Alliance, n.d.). Indeed, it’s been shown that carbon offset schemes such as REDD result in violations 
of UNDRIP Articles 10, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 32, while leading to the criminalization of Indigenous 
agriculture and lifestyles (Indigenous Environmental Network, 2010).
The commodification of forests is leading to benefits for wealthy, polluting countries and corporations - oil 
companies are actively lobbying in favour of the carbon markets - while eroding the ability of local communities 
and Indigenous Peoples to continue to sustain themselves in these ecosystems. Commodifying forest carbon is 
inherently inequitable since it discriminates against people who had previous free access to forest resources but 
cannot afford to buy forest products or alternatives (Indigenous Environmental Network, 2010). 
As Tom Goldtooth has argued 
Carbon trading, off­sets and other market-based systems…turn the sacredness of our Mother Earth’s 
carbon-cycling capacity into property to be bought or sold in a global market…. Carbon trading will not 
contribute to achieving pro­tection of the Earth’s climate. It is a false solution with many risks, including 
the dangers of entrench­ing and magnifying social inequalities and human rights abuses. From the 
Indigenous mindset, it is a violation of the sacred, plain and simple. (quoted in Dillon, 2015, n.p.)
The PCF and the HEHE’s focus on market-based climate solutions is driving the disproportionate impacts of 
carbon pricing on Indigenous Peoples in Canada. Furthermore, carbon offset schemes that are also part and 
parcel of market-based climate solutions are driving violations of Indigenous Peoples’ rights across the globe. 
Meanwhile, it’s not even clear that market-based schemes are capable of achieving the scale of reductions of 
emissions necessary. 
The HEHE proposes a new Federal Greenhouse Gas Offset System which Lee and Mertins-Kirkwood describe as a 
get-out-of-jail-free card for heavy industrial emitters because it allows them to purchase credits from 
other emissions-reduction initiatives rather than reducing emissions themselves. Canada has long 
been attracted to ‘solutions’ that do not require the country to fundamentally change how it does 
business. Offsets have long been criticized for supporting initiatives that would have happened anyway 
or that do not provide durable, long-term emission reductions. (2020, n.p.)
It appears that both the HEHE and the PCF rely heavily on carbon pricing mechanisms which, as we’ve argued 
above, are questionably effective and decidedly unjust.
4.3.2 Complementary Actions to Reduce Emissions 
The second pillar of the PCF centres on complementary actions that can be taken to further reduce emissions 
within the following sectors: transportation, electricity, industry, forestry, agriculture and waste, government 
leadership, and international leadership. Proposed actions include: increasing renewable and non-emitting 
energy sources; improving the energy efficiency of new and old buildings; investing in public transit 
infrastructure; reducing methane and hydrofluorocarbon emissions from the oil and gas sector; protecting 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
36
carbon sinks; setting more ambitious government targets; and acquiring internationally transferred mitigation 
outcomes, amongst others. 
The HEHE reframes these kinds of emissions reductions efforts in two sections: “Making the Places Canadians 
Live and Gather More Affordable by Cutting Energy Waste” (focusing on energy efficient homes and buildings) 
and “Making Clean, Affordable Transportation and Power Available in Every Canadian Community” (increasing 
supplies of clean energy and cleaner modes of transportation). 
The second PCF pillar mentions Indigenous Peoples notably more than in the Carbon Pricing Pillar, including 
multiple mentions related to reducing remote Nations’ reliance on diesel as a fuel source. Indigenous 
communities are also identified as having particularly pressing housing concerns that would be addressed by 
increasing the efficiency standards of new and existing buildings. The importance of partnering with Indigenous 
Peoples to design programs for this sector is also mentioned. Despite these statements, the actions proposed 
in this pillar ignore the realities of Indigenous communities and Nations, negatively impacting us and 
violating Indigenous rights. 
For example, much of the transport-related action promoted in the PCF revolves around electric vehicles and 
public transit as a low emitting mode of transportation. These climate solutions fail to address the realities of 
many remote and northern Indigenous communities and Nations where public transport is generally not viable, 
has never existed or has been abandoned (Nutley, 2003). The PCF’s focus on increasing the number of zero-
emission private vehicles on the road is another climate solution that excludes Indigenous Peoples living in 
remote places where charging stations are few and far between (Ghaosh, 2017). 
Additionally, the prohibitive costs of purchasing an electric car renders this climate solution inaccessible 
to many. We mention this not to discourage the promotion of electric vehicles, but rather to point out that 
many of the climate solutions presented in the PCF and the HEHE are not designed with low income and 
remote communities in mind and championing these “solutions” is misleading. This all brings into focus the 
important questions of whose needs and realities Canadian climate policy solutions are meant to serve.
Both plans emphasize the need to support remote Indigenous communities and Nations in transitioning away 
from diesel. The claim is made in the PCF that ‘“investing in clean energy solutions will advance the priorities of 
Indigenous Peoples” (2016, p. 12). Supporting Indigenous clean energy leadership is of the utmost importance, 
but it is not clear how the PCF and the HEHE are positioning themselves to do that. 
While there are incredible Indigenous-led clean energy projects happening on the ground in communities across 
the country (e.g. Indigenous Clean Energy and Sacred Earth Solar), it’s been shown that renewable energy policy 
and programming in Canada systematically excludes Indigenous Peoples. One study exposed how a mere 14% 
of provincial and territorial renewable energy programs make any reference to Indigenous rights and only 18% 
of programs consulted or included Indigenous Peoples in their development (A SHARED Future Research Team, 
2019). 
Indigenous Climate Action
37
The problems centre on two key concerns. First, in terms of outcomes, renewable energy policy and 
programming fails to acknowledge Indigenous contexts as unique and demonstrates a widespread neglect and/
or ignorance of Indigenous issues and Indigenous rights. Second, in terms of process, even when Indigenous 
peoples are recognized and specified as potential stakeholders, partners, or beneficiaries, this is mostly in terms 
of tokenistic recognition that rarely impacts the policy and programming development process…In this regard, 
it is overwhelmingly clear that provincial/territorial policy and programming related to renewable energy in 
Indigenous contexts is in dire need of significant overhaul. (A SHARED Future Research Team, 2019, n.p.) 
The PCF has perpetuated this trend of excluding Indigenous Peoples from renewable energy policy and 
programming. In the introduction to Pillar Two it states that “Indigenous Peoples will be involved in defining and 
developing policies to support clean energy in their communities” (2016, p. 10). However, Indigenous Peoples 
were not included at the decision-making table to “define and develop” this very plan to reduce emissions, nor 
the plan that followed it. 
Meanwhile, there are indications that these federal climate plans allow for, and even promote, certain forms 
of energy that are far from clean, and actually contribute to environmental injustice and the violation of 
Indigenous rights. 
One source of electricity promoted by the PCF and the HEHE as a “non-emitting” climate solution is 
hydroelectricity. 
Hydro dams have been shown to destroy carbon sinks in wetlands and oceans, 
deprive ecosystems of nutrients and destroy habitats, increase sea levels and 
depend on the displacement of local, often Indigenous communities (Indigenous 
Environmental Network & Climate Justice Alliance, n.d.). 
There is also a link found between building dams and higher levels of toxic methylmercury in fish and mammals, 
including humans (Wilt, 2016). Hydro reservoirs have even been shown to release high levels of carbon dioxide 
and methane (Indigenous Environmental Network & Climate Justice Alliance, n.d.). Additionally, much of the 
hydro development in Canada has taken place in Indigenous territories in the North, adding social injustice to 
this list of impacts.
Hydro development in Northern Manitoba, for example, has led to devastating ecological and social impacts 
in Cree territories. Benefits are accruing to southern Manitobans while the costs are being borne by the Cree 
Nations in the North (kulchyski, 2012). Although the Cree Nations’ opposition efforts have been strong, united 
and generated enough public support within the province to force a modern treaty on Manitoba Hydro, the 
terms of this agreement have been systematically violated by the province (kulchyski, 2012).
In Quebec hydro development has disproportionately impacted Indigenous communities and Nations. Co-
author of this report, Jen Gobby, interviewed an Indigenous person, who explained, “the current Quebec hydro 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
38
grid caused the removal of both Cree and Inuit from their ancestral territories” (2020). Another interviewee 
explained that “vast areas were flooded, people were displaced, wildlife was impacted, and the land upon which 
they relied, and their ways of life, were permanently altered. This is an ‘out of sight, out of mind’ consequence in 
Quebec’s claim to green energy” (2020). 
A third interviewee made clear that one needs to “recognize the impact that being renewable in Quebec has had 
on other people. [Settlers] did that at the cost of Indigenous Peoples’ land, burial sites, traditional hunting sites” 
and “without understanding these historical processes, you contribute to the erasure. Especially now that a lot 
of the hydro facilities need to be revitalized and refurbished.” Indeed, currently many hydro dams across Canada 
are coming to the end of their life cycle and will need to be refurbished. This raises critical questions of consent, 
environmental racism, uneven impacts, and what counts as “clean energy.”
Towards the end of the PCF, there is a list of key actions to date from various provinces and territories. This 
list celebrates that “B.C.’s electricity is already 98% clean or renewable…Going forward under the Climate 
Leadership Plan, 100% of the supply of electricity acquired by BC Hydro for the integrated grid must be from 
clean or renewable sources. The $8.3 billion Site C Clean Energy Project is a major part of B.C.’s clean energy 
future and will create enough electricity to power 450,000 homes” (2016, p. 53). The Site C project has been 
fiercely resisted by the Indigenous Peoples in Treaty 8 territories surrounding the site and has been shown 
to pose massive ecological and social impacts (Cox, 2018). Yet, Site C is applauded in the PCF as a success in 
climate action. 
To refer to hydro as a clean energy solution, as is done in both the PCF (2016, 
p. 3, 53) and the HEHE (2020, p. 21) is to ignore the Indigenous lives and lands 
negatively impacted so that Canadians can enjoy cheap and easy access to 
electricity. 
In the same list of key actions to date in the PCF, it is stated that “B.C. has an abundance of natural gas, which is 
a lower carbon fuel that will play a critical role in transitioning the world economy off of high carbon fuels such 
as coal” (2016, p. 53). And on page 11 of the PCF, it is celebrated that “Provinces and territories have already 
taken action on moving from traditional coal-fired generation to clean electricity.” It explains that the phasing 
out of coal will be compensated by a new capacity that “will come from non-emitting sources—including hydro, 
wind, and solar—as well as natural gas.” These are two examples of how the use of natural gas is being promoted 
in the PCF.
Natural gas is often touted as a clean fossil fuel and as a “bridging” fuel to help societies move from dirty 
to clean energy (Cheon & Urpelainen, 2018; Howarth, 2015). However, the recent move to unconventional 
extraction techniques such as hydraulic fracturing (fracking) whereby water and chemicals are injected at high 
pressure to break up rock deep underground is leading to severe impacts to ecosystems and communities 
(Cheon & Urpelainen, 2018; Union of Concerned Scientists, 2014). Currently, a large majority of Canadian natural 
Indigenous Climate Action
39
gas is derived from fracking and that figure is expected to rise (Powell, 2017). Proponents argue that natural gas 
emits less carbon dioxide than other fossil fuels per unit of heat energy. However, when methane is considered, 
there is evidence that fracked natural gas may actually lead to higher greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions than 
conventional natural gas, coal, and oil (Howarth, 2015). The impacts of fracking, including climate change, 
earthquakes, water contamination, and more, are driving communities across the world to stand up in 
opposition to fracking, resulting in moratoriums, new legislation, and withdrawal of company investment 
(Temper et al., 2020).  
In Canada, natural gas extraction, pipelines and transportation projects have been approved and built on 
Indigenous territories against the will and without the consent of Indigenous Peoples. That the PCF and the 
HEHE allow for the continuation of the extraction of natural gas, when it violates Indigenous rights and has 
severe ecological and climate impacts, is another example of how Canadian climate policy is not only failing 
to address climate change but is actually contributing to climate injustice.
As a final and alarming example, note that on page 21 in the HEHE, in the section called “Making Canada a 
World Leader in Clean Power,” it is stated that the plan includes the Launch of a “Small Modular Reactor (SMR) 
Action Plan by the end of 2020…to lay out the next steps to develop and deploy this technology…utilizing these 
technologies to reduce emissions, decarbonize heavy industry and spur economic development”. To be clear, 
SMR is nuclear energy technology. 
Though some policymakers and organizations promote nuclear energy as a 
solution to climate change, nuclear is expensive, dangerous, and pollutive. 
On the webpage of Canada’s Small Modular Reactor Action Plan, it states that “Innovation in the nuclear sector 
plays a critical role in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and delivering good, middle-class jobs as Canada 
moves toward a low-carbon future.” The HEHE specifies that “the Government of Canada intends to work with 
interested parties to advance this important work, including Indigenous communities and organizations” (2020, 
p. 21). 
The PCF and the HEHE promote climate solutions in ways that ignore the 
disproportionate and devastating impacts the energy sources they promote have 
had and continue to have on Indigenous Peoples. Furthermore, the future projects 
they advocate for are likely to perpetuate these injustices. Canadian climate 
policy is not only failing to meaningfully address climate change but is actually 
contributing to climate injustice, while promoting false solutions like natural gas 
and nuclear energy.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
40
4.3.3 Adaptation and Climate Resilience 
The third pillar of the PCF is about adapting to current and future climate impacts and building resilience in 
communities across Canada. Five key actions are centred: translating scientific information and Traditional 
Knowledge into action; building climate resilience through infrastructure; protecting and improving human 
health and well-being; supporting particularly vulnerable regions; and reducing climate-related hazards and 
disaster risks. 
Specific sub-actions of the third pillar range from providing authoritative climate information; investing in 
infrastructure to build climate resilience, particularly in vulnerable regions; supporting healthy Indigenous 
communities; and advancing efforts to protect against floods. The Arctic’s disproportionate warming is made 
clear, as are the risks and impacts this warming is posing to Canada’s northern and coastal regions and to the 
Indigenous Peoples who live there.
Indigenous Peoples are mentioned in almost every action of this pillar, with the first action focused on the need 
to consider Indigenous Traditional Knowledge in guiding decision-making. For example, page 30 states, “To 
develop regional expertise and build regional capacity, the government aims to work with regional partners, 
including Indigenous Peoples through community-based initiatives, respectfully incorporating Traditional 
Knowledge to mobilize action” (PCF, 2016). 
Though the third pillar centres Indigenous communities and Nations and Indigenous knowledge more than 
the other pillars, there are several reasons for being critical of this inclusion. One key reason is that though 
it’s repeatedly mentioned that Indigenous communities and Nations, especially in the North, are particularly 
vulnerable to and disproportionately impacted by climate change, there is a remarkable absence of any 
attention to the drivers of these vulnerabilities and of the ways the Canadian state is responsible for creating 
and perpetuating them.
In terms of infrastructure adaptation, there is mention of the vulnerability of Indigenous Peoples’ infrastructure 
to climate change, but no mention of any collaboration with Indigenous communities and Nations to develop 
more resilient infrastructure. The PCF promises infrastructure investment to “enable greater climate change 
adaptation and resilience and ensure that more communities can provide clean air and safe drinking water 
for their citizens” (2016, p. 48) but does not make any mention of the reasons for this ongoing lack of access to 
clean drinking water. Baijius and Patrick make clear that the ongoing crises in the many First Nations who do not 
have access to clean drinking water is driven by historical and ongoing injustices and that only by addressing 
the ongoing colonial systems and relations in Canada will these injustices be addressed (2019). They also 
emphasize that the water crisis is being reproduced again and again as Indigenous Peoples have been 
excluded from decision-making and land use planning practices of the federal state (2019).
Indigenous Climate Action
41
We see the same dynamics at play with the way the PCF is addressing the climate crisis. To try to establish a 
plan for reducing vulnerability while excluding the most impacted communities in the decision-making process 
renders such plans both ineffective and unjust (Ratelle & Paquette, 2019).
The PCF egregiously fails to address the fossil fuel industry as a main force 
driving climate change, violations of Indgienous rights, and the vulnerabilization 
of Indigenous communities and Nations – through the impacts of fossil fuel 
development on Indigenous Peoples’ waters, lands, livelihoods and food systems. 
The PCF gives the fossil fuel industry a pass, and in doing so, actively contributes to the perpetuation of social 
and ecological impacts which increase the ways that Indigenous Peoples are particularly vulnerable to climate 
change. In short, the PCF – in failing to take on the fossil fuel industry as a primary cause of climate change – is 
contributing to the problems that this pillar aims to address.  
There is a considerable focus in this pillar on including Indigenous Knowledge into adaptation efforts, but there 
is no indication that this is any different than other problematic, failed attempts to incorporate Indigenous 
Knowledge in governmental decision-making and planning in Canada. As Eckert et al. (2019) show, attempts to 
bring Indigenous Knowledge into the Environmental Assessment process in Canada have failed due to multiple 
structural barriers, including the way knowledge is often extracted, misinterpreted, de-contextualized or 
Image: protest against the Kinder Morgan Pipeline in 2018
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
42
misused by western scientists and decision-makers. Perceived knowledge hierarchies, political power structures 
and the refusal to recognize the historical and ongoing impacts of colonization also underlie this failure (Eckert 
et al., 2019). According to Ellis (2005),
Simply stated...traditional knowledge threatens the stability of conventional power structures rooted 
in the Western industrial complex. The driving force behind this complex is growth and, consequently, 
industrial development…To empower traditional knowledge and its [Indigenous] holders on their own 
terms necessarily means to give voice to a system of understanding that may oppose the objectives and 
practices of Euro-Canadian institutions…. (p. 74) 
There is every indication that this is the case with the PCF as well; Indigenous Peoples and our rights and 
knowledge are brought in superficially and in ways to ensure that these forms of knowledge cannot hinder the 
ongoing extractive economy that is the foundation of the Canadian colonial state.
This may explain why Indigenous Peoples’ knowledge is being sought in lieu of consent and/or full partnership 
in a co-creation process of climate policy and plan making in Canada. It may also explain why Indigenous 
knowledge is sought for adaptation (addressing the impacts of climate change) but not mitigation related 
actions (stopping the causes of climate change). 
If mitigation were to be the focus, the extractive industry would be heavily 
implicated, which the federal government doesn’t want to happen, therefore, a 
focus on adaptation is less threatening to the colonial capitalist status quo.
Finally, there are problems with the way the PCF frames Indigenous communities as vulnerable and the ways it 
frames the need to build resilience in these communities. Illustrating this type of problematic framing, Cameron 
writes about the diagnosis of Inuit as vulnerable and in need of state support. This not only fails “to account 
for the most significant and pressing dimensions of climatic change in the region” but it also reinforces the 
colonial relations and “intellectual formations that underwrite a new round of dispossession and accumulation 
in the region” (2012, p. 104). In this way, the state’s initiatives to address climate vulnerability is leading to the 
strengthening and extension of colonial relations in the North (ibid.).
The PCF fails to acknowledge the colonial origins of climate vulnerability in Indigenous communities and 
Nations, and as such, its policies and plans to foster resilience will fail and/or make worse the problems they 
set out to “solve.” Further, “resilience” is a term often used in regard to Indigenous communities and other 
communities of Colour. “Resilience” suggests that the communities must be stronger, tougher and take on 
more responsibility for their survival in the face of ongoing settler colonial structures of oppression. This focus 
on resilience should be shifted to the corporate drivers of climate change and on corporations adapting their 
capitalist extractive and economic practices. 
Indigenous Climate Action
43
Acknowledging the colonial origins and other root causes of social and ecological 
problems is crucial for developing the appropriate responses and strategies to 
address these problems (Cameron, 2012).
The HEHE doesn’t not have adaptation or resilience as one of its pillars. However, the HEHE does commit to 
“developing Canada’s first-ever National Adaptation Strategy” (2020, p. 9). Interestingly, where the PCF used 
the words “vulnerable” or “vulnerability” 29 times, in the HEHE, the word “vulnerable” only appears twice, and 
“vulnerability,” not at all. This could be evidence that federal policy makers are questioning, or have received 
push back on vulnerability framing. 
4.3.4 Clean Technology, Innovation, and Jobs (Building Canada’s Clean Industrial Advantage)
The fourth and final pillar of the PCF focuses on clean technology, innovation, and jobs, with sections on early-
stage innovation; commercialization and growth; fostering adoption; and collaboration and metrics for success. 
In the introduction it states:
To effectively compete in the global marketplace and capitalize on current and future economic 
opportunities, Canada needs a step change in clean technology development, commercialization, 
and adoption across all industrial sectors. Clarity of purpose, investment, and strong coordination 
that leverages pan-Canadian regional and provincial/territorial strengths are essential to seizing 
the economic growth and job-creation opportunities of clean technology. International research, 
development, and demonstration collaboration is also essential. Governments, Indigenous Peoples, 
industry, and other stakeholders all have a role to play and must be engaged. (2016, p. 37)
The HEHE covers similar ground in its pillar called “Building Canada’s Clean Industrial Advantage.” This pillar 
discusses proposed actions around: supporting local economies and small and medium sized businesses; 
eliminating pollution from natural resource development and heavy industry; producing and using cleaner fuels 
across the economy; and others.
Indigenous Peoples are referred to multiple times in the fourth pillar of the PCF, often in relation to clean 
technology and innovation providing Indigenous communities with economic opportunities. It also mentions 
plans to support Indigenous Peoples in adopting and adapting clean technologies through community 
ownership and operation of clean technology solutions.
The importance of Indigenous Peoples’ leadership and the importance of working with Indigenous Peoples 
on clean tech and innovation is mentioned multiple times in the Pillar Four of the PCF, as is the importance 
of working with Indigenous Peoples on clean tech and innovation. On page 42, “[e]ffective engagement and 
partnership with Indigenous Peoples’’ is referred to as “essential to this effort.” These words ring hollow 
given that partnership with Indigenous Peoples was undoubtedly essential in drafting the PCF, yet we were 
structurally excluded from that working group table. 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
44
Additionally, as with other PCF Pillars, Indigenous Peoples are referred to in this section as one of many 
stakeholders, and not as self-governments. For example, on page 38, it is stated that “[e]fforts to coordinate 
and focus investment must go beyond governments and involve the collaboration of industry, stakeholders, 
academia, and Indigenous Peoples in the innovation process.”
In the HEHE’s “Building Canada’s Clean Industrial Advantage” pillar, it is explained that the strategy “to become 
a world-leading supplier of hydrogen and hydrogen technologies… is the result of three years of research 
and analysis including recent engagement with 1,500 leading experts, stakeholders, provincial and territorial 
partners, Indigenous businesses and communities” (HEHE, 2020, p. 40). That mention of Indigenous businesses 
is the sole mention of the word “Indigenous” is this section of the HEHE.
Digging deeper, woven through the words used, there are several fundamental assumptions underlying these 
pillars of the PCF and the HEHE, which are problematic from the perspective of Indigenous lives and rights. One, 
the insistence on economic growth and two, the interpretation of climate change as a technological issue.
Image by Desiree Wallace. March in Ottawa during the 2019 Powershift conference. The banner on the 
left was designed by Christi Belcourt and Isaac Murdoch. It says "Obinin Kida Onakinegewin," 
an Anishinaabeg phrase that translates to "lift our laws"
Indigenous Climate Action
45
The 2018 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report makes clear that stabilizing the climate will 
require “rapid, far-reaching and unprecedented changes in all aspects of society” and that an important part of 
this is “to negotiate societal values, well-being…and to determine what is desirable and fair, and to whom” (p. 
22). More and more it is being acknowledged by scholars and activists alike that what is needed is a profound 
transformation in mainstream economic, political, and thought systems that are driving the ecological crises 
(Moore et al., 2014; Beddoe et al., 2009; IPCC, 2018). This will require radical shifts in mainstream values and 
beliefs, patterns of social behaviour and governance (Westley et al., 2011). This requires that we confront not 
just the symptoms but the root causes of crises we face and this includes unequal power relations (Temper, 2018; 
Gobby, 2020).
Despite this resounding call for systems transformation, in these sections of the 
PCF and the HEHE, we can see the Canadian federal government - rather than 
aiming for the transformative change required - is taking aim at the symptoms, the 
surface layer of the crisis. 
They are perpetuating the idea of climate change as, at its base, a technical or technological problem, 
and promoting solutions that lie in the innovation of new technology. This is a problem because it fails to 
acknowledge the limitation of technological solutions. For example, in what is known as the rebound effect, 
increases in efficiency do not end up reducing emissions but can actually lead to increases in consumption rates 
(Druckman et al., 2011; Khazzoom, 1980). The technocratic approaches of the PCF and the HEHE are also an 
issue because they divert attention and resources away from the deeper structural changes that are necessary.
This approach also fails to acknowledge or address the ways that clean tech can have unintended consequences 
and disproportionate impacts and benefits, in the same ways that dirty energy has. A 2020 article by Temper et 
al. reviewing thousands of cases of environmental conflicts around the world showed that clean energy climate 
solutions such as wind and hydro were disproportionately impacting vulnerable groups and driving human 
rights abuses and the violations of Indigenous rights. Many of these cases involve violent repression and even 
the assassination of those defending their lands and rights. 
Climate solutions must not replicate the kind of unjust relations and oppressions 
that the fossil fuel industry is notorious for.
Failing to attend to the unequal power relations and other root causes of the crisis - promoting false solutions, 
instead - has rendered the PCF and the HEHE ineffective and unjust, perpetuating the systems and relations 
driving the climate crisis. It seems as though these aforementioned pillars are less about actually tackling 
climate change and more about finding ways for energy transition solutions to drive profit-making and 
economic growth.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
46
And indeed, that is the second problematic assumption underlying this pillar and the PCF, in general, the 
insistence that economic growth is part of the solution to climate change.
As mentioned previously, the word “Indigenous” appears 85 times in the PCF. The word ‘’growth,” on the other 
hand, appears 223 times, through mentions of economic growth and clean growth. The title of the document: 
Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change: Canada’s Plan to Address Climate Change and 
Grow the Economy underscores the centrality of economic growth to this climate framework. 
The fundamental flaw with this approach is that it fails to address or even acknowledge the very real ways 
that economic growth drives climate change, economic inequality, the violation of Indigenous rights, and the 
dispossession of Indigenous lands.
Capitalist economies have certain inherent characteristics, including the continuous need to expand in order 
to survive. This perpetual growth requires the increasing flows of raw material, natural resources, energy and 
labour (Whyte, 2017; Kohn & Reddy, 2017; Clark & York, 2005). Given that capitalism requires increasing use of 
energy to continually increase production, the use of fossil fuels — as an abundant form of cheap energy to drive 
the machines of production — has become locked in. According to Clark and York (2005), “Capital’s constant 
demand for energy necessitates the continual plundering of the Earth for new reserves of fossil fuel” (p. 409). 
The material demands of endlessly expanding economies have been outpacing the Earth’s ability to regenerate 
the raw materials needed and absorb the wastes being produced (Steffen et al., 2015). To tackle the climate 
crisis, our economic systems need to be transformed away from growth-driven capitalism (Clark & York, 
2005; Klein, 2014).
Proponents of economic growth commonly cite it as necessary for bringing marginalized communities out 
of poverty, and indeed, many income redistribution mechanisms - at least in theory - depend on growth. 
However, this seems to be more myth than reality, for what we see in practice is that “economic growth is 
usually accompanied by increases in both economic and political inequity, and worsening income distribution” 
(Perkins, 2019, p. 186; see also Piketty, 2014; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2009; Causa et al. 2014; Ray, 2010). To put it 
simply, “[e]conomic growth nearly always heightens inequities’’ (Perkins, 2019, p. 183). 
A lack of policies and institutions to ensure that increased GDP is equitably distributed across society creates an 
endless cycle whereby “wealth begets more wealth and political power…. The tendency…for the powerful to 
keep coming out better off, and for exploitation of less-powerful people and of nature to accelerate, is the prime 
driver of climate change” (Perkins, 2019, p. 183; see also Klein, 2014; Douthwaite, 1993; Tokar & Gilbertson, 2020; 
Wu, 2018; Whyte, 2018).
Indigenous Climate Action
47
Capitalism promotes not just economic and political inequality and the exploitation of nature; it also depends 
on racial discrimination. Racism justifies the hierarchies of labour and employment, which distribute the 
benefits of economic systems unequally across people in society (Waldron, 2018). Capitalism’s drive for endless 
growth and expansion has manifested in slavery and the ongoing subjugation of Black bodies and labour, 
colonization, and the theft of Indigenous lands and territories in the pursuit of new markets and new lands to 
exploit (Coulthard, 2014).
Kyle Whyte, Potawatomi scholar states it simply, “Colonialism often paved the way for the expansion of 
capitalism” (2017). Inherent to capitalism is the “assimilation, depopulation, removal, and erasure of 
Indigenous Peoples; and the dispossession, expropriation, and territorial occupation of Indigenous resources, 
land, property, homes…all toward the end goal of profit” (Waldron, 2018, p. 41). Inextricably tied together, 
colonialism and capitalism have laid the groundwork for carbon-intensive economics, which is driving 
climate change (Whyte, 2017). 
“Seeing capitalism and colonialism as structural forces generating exploitation and ecocide” is of critical 
importance as we need to be able to acknowledge that colonial capitalism will not and cannot solve the crises 
it is causing (Dawson, 2016, p. 63). This understanding is completely lacking from the PCF, the HEHE, and their 
proposed policies.
Federal climate policy appears stuck in a capitalist policy paradigm that is fundamentally incompatible with real 
climate action and respect for Indigenous Peoples and our rights. What we see in the inclusions of Indigenous 
Peoples in the PCF and the HEHE is that Indigenous Peoples are referred to as climate leaders and invited to 
participate in taking action on climate but only within the limits of an economic system created by others 
and imposed upon us and which was built at the expense of our lives, lands and cultures.
4.3.5 Nature-based Solutions 
One big difference between the PCF and the HEHE is that the HEHE brings in a whole new approach to climate 
solutions. The new plan includes a whole section on Nature-Based Solutions (also called “Embracing the Power 
of Nature to Support Healthier Families and More Resilient Communities”). Nature-based Solutions (NBS) are 
land-based offsets (e.g. soils, livestock, and trees). The HEHE argues that
Nature-based solutions unlock the power of nature to reduce emissions in the atmosphere through 
things like planting trees, restoring grasslands and wetlands, and improving agricultural land 
management to capture and store much more carbon. Large amounts of carbon are stored in Canada’s 
forests, soils, wetlands, grasslands and oceans today, and nature-based solutions can increase that 
storage, keeping harmful emissions out of the atmosphere. (2020, p. 52)
The plan proposes to plant two billion trees, restore and enhance wetlands, peatlands, grasslands and 
agricultural lands to boost carbon sequestration, and to establish a new Natural Climate Solutions for 
Agriculture Fund. It intends to spend about 4 billion dollars on these NBS initiatives. HEHE also claims that 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
48
combined, “these actions to accelerate nature-based climate solutions will reduce Canada’s carbon emissions 
by an estimated four to seven million tonnes annually in 2030” (2020, p. 55).
In this section of the HEHE, they also commit to continue to support partnerships with Indigenous communities 
across the country through the establishment of new Indigenous Protected and Conserved Areas (IPCAs) and 
Indigenous Guardians programs (2020, p. 55), although unlike the other NBS initiatives, there is no dollar 
amount associated with this commitment. 
Indigenous leadership in conserving ecosystems is emphasized in the plan, stating that “Indigenous peoples 
and their ancestors have long been stewards and managers of the land and waters, and leaders in ecosystem 
conservation in Canada” (2020, p. 55). Indigenous Peoples currently steward around one-fifth of the total carbon 
sequestered by forests and Indigenous territories encompass 40% of protected areas in the world (Rights and 
Resources Initiative, 2019). As such, Indigenous territories are critical for sequestering carbon (Walker et al., 
2014; Carlson et al., 2015) on the scale envisioned by NBS advocates. 
“Given the overlap of Indigenous territories and carbon sinks in Canada, it is 
unlikely that NbS could be widely implemented without upholding Indigenous 
rights to lands and resources and respecting Indigenous governance and 
knowledge systems in climate change policy” (Townsend et al., 2020, p. 552).
Indigenous leadership is at the heart of the transformative and systemic change that the climate crisis demands 
(Townsend et al., 2020; IPCC, 2018; Díaz et al., 2019). However, there are many reasons to be concerned that NBS 
will follow the patterns of previous forms of carbon offsets, leading to displacement of Indigenous Peoples and 
violations of our rights. 
Although NBS initiatives hold potential to support Indigenous-led economic development and Indigenous 
governance and cultures, this is unlikely unless initiatives are led by Indigenous Peoples (Nitah & Craig, 2020).  
There is every reason to be cynical about whether this would be the case in Canada where, as elsewhere in the 
world, Indigenous Peoples’ ability to take care of the lands and waters has been systematically undermined 
(McCarthy, 2020) through extractive development and ongoing settler colonial power relations (Manuel, 2017). 
Despite Indigenous Peoples successful leadership in protecting the lands and waters, power and funding is 
rarely turned over to Indigenous Peoples for conservation and other environmental projects (McCarthy, 2020). 
In a 2020 article about NBS and Indigenous rights in Canada, Townsend et al. make clear that NBS initiatives 
globally are negatively affecting Indigenous Peoples through displacement, restriction to livelihood practices, 
and cultural impacts. They also argue that these impacts of NBS can exacerbate disadvantages already faced by 
Indigenous communities and they emphasize that “how NbS are developed, on whose territories and with what 
outcomes matter deeply to their success and to the rights of Indigenous Peoples” (Townsend et al., 2020, p. 551). 
Indigenous Climate Action
49
If NBS are to be successful in sequestering carbon, they must be designed with 
Indigenous participation and Indigenous consent (Townsend et al., 2020; see also 
Energy Future Forum, 2020). 
However, as our report and the Townsend et al. article both show, the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples in 
development of NBS and climate change policy is sorely lacking. 
Though the impact to Indigenous rights posed by NBS is the key point to be made here, it’s important to note 
the other problems associated with NBS. Seddon et al. (2020) point out that there are major uncertainties about 
the cost-effectiveness of NBS, which leads to under investment in NBS. Additionally, the inflexible and highly 
siloed forms of governance (i.e. bureaucratic barriers in which different sectors relevant to NBS are managed by 
different governing bodies) significantly hinder uptake of NBS (ibid.). 
Lee and Mertins-Kirkwood point out that the HEHE relies on about 27 megatonnes of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
reductions to come from tree planting and related initiatives, and while this is “intrinsically important, measures 
to protect and enhance natural carbon sinks should not be counted on to substitute for climate policies that 
reduce emissions from fossil fuels in absolute terms” (2020, n.p.). In other words, planting trees to sequester 
carbon cannot be used to justify the continued extraction and burning of fossil fuels. According to Lee and 
Mertins-Kirkwood, “These loopholes are especially important as we consider the goal of net-zero emissions by 
2050. A plan that relies on offsets, nature-based solutions and denial about the future of export markets is not a 
full plan—too much ‘net’ and not enough ‘zero’” (2020, n.p.). 
It appears that NBS may be a new green-washed version of carbon offsets that 
allow big polluters off the hook. 
Tamra Gilbertson of Indigenous Environmental Network explained to our research team,
[Nature-based Solutions] are rapidly gaining traction across the globe. The premise allows polluting 
industries to finance soil or agriculture projects to ostensibly ‘compensate’ for their ongoing emissions. 
For example, corporations like Royal Dutch Shell have created an internal NBS unit investing $300 
million into mostly purchasing lands for NBS. In this way, NBS constitutes a new land grab and if 
expanded for more fossil fuel offsets, perhaps a new cycle of primitive accumulation. In other words, 
an offset. The concept has been pushed by conservation NGOs and Oil Majors in the UN climate change 
arena, and is now expanding into national and subnational policy. (personal correspondence, 2021)
There are compelling reasons to be concerned that Nature-based Solutions may not be the right direction to 
follow. They may maintain the patterns of other colonial capitalistic solutions that already drive the climate 
crisis, such as market-based offsets. 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
50
5. Conclusion
Through this analysis of the content of the PCF and the HEHE and the process by which these two plans were 
developed, we have shown that there are deeply troubling ongoing problems with climate policy and plans in 
Canada. We summarize these problems below. 
Indigenous Peoples were structurally excluded from the process of developing the PCF and the HEHE.
Though the plans seem to be getting better and better in their wording around Indigenous rights and self-
determination, the fact still stands that Indigenous Nations and communities were structurally excluded from 
the decision-making tables where the plans were developed. This exclusion happened because representatives 
from a couple of provinces actively opposed the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples at that table. They know very 
well the powerful threat posed to the extractive economy by Indigenous Peoples and our rights, resistance, 
and relations with lands and waters. It seems that it is precisely because Indigenous Peoples are such powerful 
climate leaders that we are excluded from climate policymaking in Canada. Again and again, it seems that 
climate policy in Canada is determined to maintain, rather than transform the colonial, capitalist status quo.
As one of this report’s peer reviewers, Tamra Gilbertson, states:
Indigenous Peoples were kept off the working group tables deliberately so they would not impact the 
politics of keeping fossil fuels coming out of the ground by implementing carbon pricing…Keeping 
Indigenous Peoples off the working group tables and treating Indigenous Peoples as stakeholders is 
a violation of national and international law. This gross violation impacts Indigenous sovereignty and 
blatantly clarifies the intent to reduce Indigenous Peoples to stakeholders in an attempt to coerce and 
strongarm participation in order to push through carbon pricing systems and other mechanisms that 
can violate land rights and sovereignty. (personal correspondence, 2021)
By excluding Indigenous Peoples from the decision-making tables, the PCF and the HEHE processes 
violated the rights of Indigenous Peoples. This is in direct conflict with federal commitments to Nation-to-
Nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-government relationships and the many Calls to Action emanating 
from federal inquiries and reports.
Although Indigenous Peoples and our rights, knowledge, and climate leadership were mentioned again and 
again in both plans, we were structurally excluded from the decision-making tables at which these plans were 
made. This exclusion constitutes a violation of Indigenous rights to self-determination and to free, prior and 
informed consent. Additionally, this blatant omission conflicts with the Liberal government’s commitments to 
reconciliation and to government-to-government, Inuit-Crown, and Nation-to-Nation relationships. This also 
contravenes many of the Calls to Actions emanating from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and other 
government led-inquiries, including the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples and the National Inquiry into 
Indigenous Climate Action
51
Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls. Each of those reports repeatedly indicate the need for real 
partnership between Indigenous Peoples and non-Indigenous governments. Yet within current climate change 
policy, there are again many words, but little concrete action.  
“Indigenous people have long ties to caring and protecting the lands and are 
original care takers. Indigenous people have always been here and caring of the 
land and yet have no place in making rules and restrictions for the land” 
(Beze Gray, report peer reviewer, personal correspondence, 2021)
Some of the proposed climate change solutions ignore the realities faced by Indigenous Peoples and 
discount the structural inequalities that are continually being reproduced through colonial relations and 
processes in Canada.
Section Four of this report brought forward the issue that some of the climate solutions proposed in the PCF and 
the HEHE, such as electric vehicle usage, are not feasible for many Indigenous and remote communities. Many of 
these communities do not have access to the resources needed to implement these “solutions.” This raises the 
question of whose needs and realities Canadian climate policy solutions are meant to serve.  
Furthermore, there are multiple mentions of Indigenous Peoples’ unique circumstances and increased 
“vulnerability.” Indeed, it’s repeatedly mentioned in the PCF that Indigenous communities, especially in the 
North, are particularly susceptible to and disproportionately impacted by climate change. However, there is a 
remarkable absence of any attention to the drivers of these burdens or of the ways the Canadian state and the 
extractive industry are responsible for creating and perpetuating massive racial inequality. In essence, the PCF is 
ignoring and erasing the ongoing colonial relations and structures causing and upholding inequality and uneven 
“vulnerability” to climate change in Canada.
Some of the proposed actions and initiatives proposed in the PCF and the HEHE will lead to 
disproportionate negative impacts on Indigenous Peoples and violations of Indigenous rights.
Both plans have a notable lack of initiatives to address the disproportionate burden Indigenous Peoples, 
particularly Indigenous women and 2SLGBTQIA+ folks, are bearing from both climate change and the extractive 
industry. Further, some of the policies and plans serve to reinforce and/or exacerbate systemic oppression. 
Multiple examples of the ways that some climate “solutions” could lead to disproportionately negative impacts 
on Indigenous Peoples are outlined in this report. These range from the financial impacts of regressive carbon 
taxes on Indigenous families to the ways that Nature-based Solutions can lead to new forms of land grabbing 
and violations of Indigenous rights. 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
52
These climate policies may serve to perpetuate the drivers and root causes of climate change in a variety 
of ways.
As explained in Section Two, these plans allow for the continued resource extraction and export. As shown 
in Section Four, the PCF indirectly promotes natural gas as “lower carbon fuel that will play a critical role in 
transitioning the world economy off of high carbon fuels such as coal” (2016, p. 53). Both plans rely on incentives 
to reduce fossil fuel consumption in Canada, with no regulations to actually keep carbon in the ground. This 
allows for the continued extraction, processing and export of oil and gas. The plans do nothing to constrain the 
fossil fuel industry, rather, they allow for continued subsidies to these industries. This limits the plans’ abilities 
to actually drive real climate mitigation. It also has huge implications for Indigenous rights. 
Throughout Canada’s history, Indigenous rights have been violated and Indigenous lands and territories have 
been stolen in order for state and industry to extract resources. 
“We have to actively stop extracting fossil fuels because Canada is a petrostate 
and, without conscious intervention, will blindly and zealously promote the fossil 
fuel industry despite any and all scientific, economic, or public policy rationale 
that suggests it shouldn’t” (Daniel T'seleie, report peer reviewer, personal 
correspondence, 2021).
These climate plans fail to address violations of Indigenous rights as a root cause of climate change, and instead 
perpetuate their existence. Canada would not have the massive carbon footprint that it does if Indigenous 
Peoples’ rights to self-determination and free, prior and informed consent were respected and upheld. The 
disregard of inherent, Treaty, and constitutional rights, along with the dispossession of Indigenous Peoples 
from our lands, has allowed for the Canadian state to extract resources at an alarming scale and rate. Rather 
than creating climate policy in ways that address and transform these ongoing colonial relations, the PCF and 
the HEHE were developed in ways that actively violate Indigenous Peoples’ rights to self-determination (as 
explained in detail in Section Three). 
Indigenous Climate Action
53
6. Moving Forward
This report has made clear the ways that climate policy in Canada is perpetuating colonial capitalist relations 
and structures. We offer this report not to negate the work that has been done to improve climate policy so far, 
particularly by Indigenous folks, but as a call to action for climate organizers, researchers and policy-makers to 
do better and engage in the following:
Acknowledge that the exclusion of Indigenous climate leadership and denial of our rights to self-
determination actually forecloses on some of the most powerful forces for transformative, systemic 
change in Canada
Recognize that climate policy can be made more just and effective through the meaningful and full 
inclusion of Indigenous Peoples and the upholding of our rights, knowledges, and sovereignty
Addressing the climate crisis will require the transformation and undoing of colonial relations and 
structures in Canada. This will require a deep and broad relinquishment of power from settler colonial 
structures and systems to ensure meaningful co-creation of climate policy that is rooted in Indigneous 
self-determination. 
It is clear that mainstream worldviews and economies are not equipped to lead 
the transformative change away from colonial, capitalist extractive economies, but 
Indigenous communities are.
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
54
Actively work towards climate policy in Canada that (unlike the PCF and the HEHE):
1.	 includes Indigenous communities and Nations as full partners at policy decision-making tables. National 
Indigenous Peoples Organizations are advocates for our communities and Nations and should not be 
treated as decision makers; 
2.	 raises up the leadership from Indigenous women and 2SLGBTQIA+ folks;
3.	 respects Indigenous rights to self-determination and FPIC in the process of developing policy and in the 
contents of the policies and plans, as well;
4.	 adheres to federal commitments to Nation-to-Nation, Inuit-Crown, government-to-government 
relationships;
5.	 upholds the Calls to Actions emanating from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and other 
government led-inquiries, including the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples and the National 
Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls; 
6.	 promotes climate solutions that take into account the realities faced by Indigenous communities and 
Nations, both rural and urban; 
7.	 will not disproportionately impact Indigenous Peoples, negatively;  
8.	 acknowledges and actively addresses structural inequalities that are continually being reproduced 
through colonial relation, processes, and structures in so-called Canada;
9.	 addresses the root causes of climate change (e.g. colonial capitalism and extraction); 
10.	 engages an intersectional understanding of climate to design intersectional climate solutions that reduce 
emissions while undoing systemic oppressions. 
These are some of the key principles that will guide our process going forward as we embark on Phase 2 of our 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada project. Following the release of this report, through spring and summer 
2021, Indigenous Climate Action and researcher, Rebecca Sinclair, are gathering Indigenous-led climate policy 
ideas and plans through conversations with Indigenous Peoples across the country, inviting all Indigenous folks 
to contribute to this important work. To find out more about this process or how to get involved you can contact 
Rebecca at climatepolicy@indigenousclimateaction.com.
Non-Indigenous people and organizations who would like to actively support the second phase of Decolonizing 
Climate Policy in Canada can donate to ICA on our website (IndigenousClimateAction.com/donate). 
Colonialism caused climate change. 
Indigenous rights are the solution. 
Indigenous Climate Action
55
7. Sources
Above and Beyond. (2016, August 30). Inuit voices key to Canada’s climate strategy. Arctic Journal. http://
arcticjournal.ca/inuit-forum/inuit-voices-key-to-canadas-climate-strategy/#respond 
A SHARED Future Research Team. (2019, September 26). “Decolonizing” Clean Energy Policy In Canada? 
Yellowhead Institute. https://yellowheadinstitute.org/2019/09/26/decolonizing-clean-energy-policy-in-canda/
Baijius, W., & Patrick, R. (2019). “We don’t drink the water here”: The reproduction of undrinkable water for First 
Nations in Canada. Water, 11(5), 1079. https://doi.org/10.3390/w11051079 
Barrera, J. (2019, February 13). Aboriginal rights an issue in carbon tax court battle between Ottawa and Sask., 
says First Nation. CBC. https://www.cbc.ca/news/indigenous/athabasca-chipewyan-carbon-pricing-sask-
court-1.5017648
Beddoe, R., Costanza, R., Farley, J., Garza, E., Kent, J., Kubiszewski, I., Martinez, L., McCowan, T., Murphy, K., 
Myers, N., Ogden, Z., Stapelton, K. & Woodward, J. (2009). Overcoming systemic roadblocks to sustainability: 
The evolutionary redesign of worldviews, institutions, and technologies. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 106(8), 2483-2489. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0812570106 
Bergamo, l. (2020, December 11). Greenpeace Canada reaction to the federal climate plan. Greenpeace. https://
www.greenpeace.org/canada/en/press-release/45138/greenpeace-canada-reaction-to-the-federal-climate-
plan/
Beugin, D. (2020, December 11). Canada’s new climate plan is a big deal. Here’s why. Canadian Institute for 
Climate Choices. https://climatechoices.ca/canadas-climate-plan/
Bubna-Litic, K. & Chalifour, N. J. (2012). Are climate change policies fair to vulnerable communities? The impact 
of British Columbia’s carbon tax and Australia’s carbon pricing policy on indigenous communities. Dalhousie 
Law Journal, 35(1), 127-178. 
Burck, J., Hagen, U., Marten, F., Höhne, N & Bals, C.. (2018, December). Climate Change Performance Index. CCPI. 
https://ccpi.org/download/the-climate-change-performance-index-2019/ 
Cameron, E.S. (2012). Securing Indigenous politics: A critique of the vulnerability and adaptation approach to 
the human dimensions of climate change in the Canadian Arctic. Global Environmental Change, 22(1),103-114. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.11.004 
CANRAC. (2019). Getting Real about Canada’s Climate Plan. Climate Action Network. https://
climateactionnetwork.ca/2019/06/14/getting-real-about-canadas-climate-plan/
Carlson, M., Wells, J., & Jacobson, M. (2015). Balancing the relationship between protection and 
sustainable management in Canada’s boreal forest. Conservation & Society, 13(1), 13–22. http://www.
conservationandsociety.org/text.asp?2015/13/1/13/161209 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
56
Causa, O., de Serres, A., & Ruiz, N. (2014). Growth and inequality: A close relationship? OECD. http://www.oecd.
org/economy/growth-and-inequality-close-relationship.htm
Chalifour, N. (2017). How a gendered understanding of climate change can help shape Canadian climate policy. 
In M.G. Cohen (Eds.), Climate change and gender in rich countries (pp. 233-249). Routledge.
Cheon, A. & Urpelainen, J. (2018). Activism and the fossil fuel industry. Routledge.
Clark, B., & York, R. (2005). Carbon metabolism: Global capitalism, climate change, and the biospheric rift. 
Theory and Society, 34(4), 391–428. https://www.jstor.org/stable/4501730 
Climate Action Tracker. (2019, September 19). Canada. Climate action tracker. https://climateactiontracker.org/
countries/canada/2019-09-19/ 
Coulthard, G. (2014). Red skin, white masks: Rejecting the colonial politics of recognition. University of Minnesota 
Press.
Cox, S. (2018). Breaching the peace: The site C dam and a valley’s stand against big hydro. UBC Press and On Point 
Press.
David Suzuki Foundation. (n.d.). Carbon Tax or cap-and-trade. https://davidsuzuki.org/what-you-can-do/carbon-
tax-cap-trade/
Dawson, A. (2016). Extinction: A radical history. Or Books.
Diabo, R. (2017). Pipelines, climate and Indigenous consent. Indigenous Policy Journal, 27(3). http://www.
indigenouspolicy.org/index.php/ipj/article/view/418/408 
Dillion, J. (2016, August 17). Carbon trading threatens Indigenous peoples. Kairos Canada. https://www.
kairoscanada.org/carbon-trading-threatens-indigenous-peoples
Dillon, J. (2015, December 10). Will Canada listen to Indigenous peoples on carbon offsets. Kairos Canada. https://
www.kairoscanada.org/will-canada-listen-to-indigenous-peoples-on-carbon-offsets
Douthwaite, R. (1993). The growth illusion: How economic growth has enriched the few, impoverished the many, 
and endangered the planet. Council Oak Books.
Druckman, A., Chitnis, M., Sorrel, S. & Jackson, T. (2011). Missing carbon reductions? Exploring rebound and 
backfire effects in UK households. Energy policy, 39(6), 3572-3581. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.03.058 
Dyck, T., Mahony, D., Fortier, M. & Ren, H. (2020, December 16). Government of Canada releases new federal 
climate plan. Mondaq. https://www.mondaq.com/canada/climate-change/1016788/government-of-canada-
releases-new-federal-climate-plan
Eckert, L.E., XEMŦOLTW_ Claxton, N., Owens, C., Johnston, A., Ban, N.C., Moola, F. & Darimont, C.T. (2020). 
Indigenous knowledge and federal environmental assessments in Canada: Applying past lessons to the 2019 
impact assessment act. FACETS, 5(1), 67-90. https://doi.org/10.1139/facets-2019-0039 
Indigenous Climate Action
57
Ellis, S. C. (2005). Meaningful consideration? A review of traditional knowledge in environmental decision 
making. Arctic, 58(1), 66-77. https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic390 
Energy Future Forum. (2020, November 11). Nature-based solutions: Some of the answers to climate change come 
naturally. Public policy forums. https://ppforum.ca/publications/nature-based-solutions-some-of-the-answers-
to-climate-change-come-naturally/
Forrest, M. (2018, October 23). Here’s how each province stands to be affected by the federal carbon tax. National 
Post. https://nationalpost.com/news/politics/heres-how-each-province-stands-to-be-affected-by-the-federal-
carbon-tax
Gilbertson, T. (2017, October). Carbon pricing: a critical perspective for community resistance. Indigenous 
Environmental Network and Climate Justice Alliance. https://www.ienearth.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/
Carbon-Pricing-A-Critical-Perspective-for-Community-Resistance-Online-Version.pdf
Gobby, J. (2020). More powerful together: Conversations with climate activists and Indigenous land defenders. 
Fernwood Press. 
Goldtooth, T. (2010). Carbon markets violate Indigenous Peoples’ rights and threaten cultural survival. Global 
Justice Ecology Project. https://globaljusticeecology.org/carbon-markets-violate-indigenous-peoples-rights-
and-threaten-cultural-survival/
Government of Canada. (2016). The pan-Canadian framework on clean growth and climate change. Publications.
gc.ca http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2017/eccc/En4-294-2016-eng.pdf
Government of Canada. (2019, August 28). How we’re putting a price on carbon pollution. Canada.ca https://
www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/climate-change/pricing-pollution-how-it-will-work/
putting-price-on-carbon-pollution.html 
Government of Canada. (2020). A healthy environment and a healthy economy. Canada.ca https://www.canada.
ca/content/dam/eccc/documents/pdf/climate-change/climate-plan/healthy_environment_healthy_economy_
plan.pdf 
Hankivsky, O. (Ed.). (2012). An intersectionality-based policy analysis framework. Institute for intersectionality 
research and policy. https://data2.unhcr.org/en/documents/download/46176
Howarth, R. (2015). Methane emissions and climatic warming risk from hydraulic fracturing and shale 
gas development: Implications for policy. Energy and Emission Control Technologies 3, 45-54. https://doi.
org/10.2147/EECT.S61539 
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada. (2021, February 26). United declaration on the rights of Indigenous 
Peoples. https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1309374407406/1309374458958
Indigenous Environmental Network & Climate Justice Alliance. (n.d.). Land. CO2colonialism. https://
co2colonialism.org/land/
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
58
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami. (2016a, September 28). Inuit call for meaningful consideration in federal-provincial-
territorial climate decision making. https://www.itk.ca/inuit-call-for-meaningful-consideration-in-federal-
provincial-territ-climate-decision-making/
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami. (2016b). Inuit priorities for Canada’s climate strategy: A Canadian Inuit vision for our 
common future in our homelands. https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/ITK_Climate-Change-
Report_English.pdf
Díaz, S., Settele, J., Brondízio, E., Ngo, H.T., Guèze, M, Agard, J., Arneth, A., Balvanera, P., Brauman, K., Butchart, 
S., Chan, K., Garibaldi, L.A., Ichii, K., Liu, J., Mazhenchery Subramanian, S. Midgley, G.F., Miloslavich, P., 
Molnár, Z., Obura, D., ... Zayas, C. (2019, May 29). Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report 
on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services. IPBES. https://www.ipbes.net/sites/default/files/ipbes_7_10_add.1_en_1.pdf 
Allen, M., Babiker, M., Chen, Y., de Coninck, H., Connors, S., van Diemen, R., Pauline Dube, O., Ebi, K.L. 
Engelbrecht, F., Ferrat, M., Ford, J., Forster, P., Fuss, S., Guillén Bolaños, T., Harold, J., Hoegh-Guldberg, O., 
Hourcarde, J-C., Huppmann, D., Jacob, D., … Zickfeld, K. (2018). Summary for policymakers. IPCC. https://www.
ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/05/SR15_SPM_version_report_LR.pdf 
Irwin, R. (2018, October 12). Duty to consult. The Canadian encyclopedia. https://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.
ca/en/article/duty-to-consult 
Khazzoom, J. (1980). Economic implications of mandated efficiency in standards for household appliances. 
Energy Journal, 1(4), 21‐40. https://www.jstor.org/stable/41321476 
Kimmerer, R. (2013). Braiding sweetgrass: Indigenous wisdom, scientific knowledge and the teachings of plants. 
Milkweed Editions.
Klein, N. (2014). This changes everything: Capitalism vs. the climate. Simon and Schuster.
Kohn, M., & Reddy, K. (2017, August 29). Colonialism. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. https://plato.
stanford.edu/entries/colonialism/ 
kulchyski, p. (2012, February 28). Flooded and forgotten - Hydro development makes a battleground of northern 
Manitoba. Briarpatch. https://briarpatchmagazine.com/articles/view/flooded-and-forgotten
Lee, M. (2011, February 23). Fair and effective carbon pricing: Lessons from BC. CCPA. https://www.
policyalternatives.ca/publications/reports/fair-and-effective-carbon-pricing
Lee, M. (2016, December 14). A critical guide to the pan-Canadian framework on clean growth and climate change. 
Policy note. https://www.policynote.ca/a-critical-guide-to-the-pan-canadian-framework-on-clean-growth-and-
climate-change/
Lee, M., & Mertins-Kirkwood, H. (2020, December 15). New federal climate plan hindered by commitment to fossil 
fuel production. Policy Note. https://www.policynote.ca/new-climate-plan/
Indigenous Climate Action
59
MacNeil, R. (2019). Thirty years of failure: Understanding Canadian climate policy. Fernwood Press.
Manuel, A., & Grand Chief Derrickson. (2017). Reconciliation manifesto: Recovering the land, rebuilding the 
economy. James Lorimer.
Marshall, D. (2016, December 15). The pan-Canadian climate framework: Historic and insufficient. Environmental 
Defence. https://environmentaldefence.ca/2016/12/15/pan-canadian-climate-framework-historic-insufficient/
McCarthy, J. (2020). Indigenous activists are championing nature-based solutions to climate change. Global 
Citizen. https://www.globalcitizen.org/en/content/conservation-international-indigenous-voices/
Métis National Council. (2016, September 16). Métis national council meets first ministers on climate change. Métis 
Nation. https://www.metisnation.ca/index.php/news/metis-national-council-meets-first-ministers-on-climate-
change
Meyer, C. (2020, December 11). Trudeau goes it alone with new climate plan, proposes carbon price hike. National 
Observer. https://www.nationalobserver.com/2020/12/11/news/trudeau-new-climate-plan-proposes-carbon-
price-hike
Moore, M.L., Tjornbo, O., Enfors, E., Knapp, C., Hodbod, J., Baggio, J.A., Norström, A., Olsson, P., & Biggs, D. 
(2014). Studying the complexity of change: Toward an analytical framework for understanding deliberate social-
ecological transformations. Ecology and Society, 19(4), 54. http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-06966-190454 
National Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls. (2019). Reclaiming power and place: 
The final report of the national inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls. https://www.
mmiwg-ffada.ca/final-report/
Nitah, S., & Craig, MK. (2020, July 8). Indigenous-led nature based greenhouse gas offsets: One route towards 
reconciliation in Canada. Conservation through reconciliation partnership. https://conservation-reconciliation.
ca/crp-blog/indigenous-led-nature-based-greenhouse-gas-offset-one-route-towards-reconciliation-in-canada 
O.A.G. (2018). Perspectives on climate change action in Canada - A collaborative report from auditors general. 
Office of the auditor general of Canada. https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_otp_201803_e_42883.
html
O’Manique, C. (2017, June). The fallacies of clean growth: Neoliberal climate governance discourse in Canada. 
Corporate mapping. https://www.corporatemapping.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/CMP_Fallacies-Clean-
Growth_June2017.pdf
Parks, B. & Roberts, J. (2006). Globalization, vulnerability to climate change, and perceived injustice. Society and 
Natural Resources, 19(4), 337–355. https://doi.org/10.1080/08941920500519255 
Péloffy, K., Thomas, S., Marshall, D., & Abreu, C. (2019). Setting expectations for robust equivalency agreements 
in Canada. Climate action network. https://climateactionnetwork.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/CAN-Rac-
Equivalency-Paper-2019-web.pdf 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
60
Perkins, P. (2019). Climate justice, commons, and degrowth. Ecological Economics 160, 183-190. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2019.02.005 
Pickett, K., & Wilkinson, R. (2010). The spirit level: Why equality is better for everyone. Penguin UK.
Piketty, T. (2017). Capital in the twenty-first century. Harvard University Press.
Powell, T. (2017, October 30). Is your “natural” gas actually fracked? What we know about the Cascadian gas 
supply. Sightline. https://www.sightline.org/2017/10/30/is-your-natural-gas-actually-fracked/
Quebec Native Women Inc. (2019). 2019 climate change report. https://www.faq-qnw.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/06/CC_report2019.pdf
Ratelle, M., & Paquette, F. (2019, December 2). Climate policy should reflect the resilience of northern Indigenous 
communities. The narwhal. https://thenarwhal.ca/climate-policy-should-reflect-the-resilience-of-northern-
indigenous-communities/
Ray, S. (2010). Economic growth and social cost: Need for institutional reforms. Economic and Political Weekly, 
45(14), 17-20. https://www.epw.in/journal/2010/14/commentary/economic-growth-and-social-cost-need-
institutional-reforms.html 
Rights and Resources Initiative. (2019). Indigenous + community response to IPCC report: A statement on the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) special report on climate change and land from Indigenous 
Peoples and local communities from 42 countries spanning 76% of the world’s tropical forests. Indigenous + 
Community Response to IPCC Report. https://ipccresponse.org/home-en 
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. (1996, October). Report of the royal commission on Aboriginal Peoples. 
Library and archives Canada. https://www.bac-lac.gc.ca/eng/discover/aboriginal-heritage/royal-commission-
aboriginal-peoples/Pages/final-report.aspx 
Salick, J., & Byg, A. (2007). Indigenous Peoples and climate change. Tyndall Centre Publication.
Seddon, N., Chausson, A., Berry, P., Girardin, CAJ, Smith, A., & Turner, B. (2020). Understand the value and limits 
of nature-based solutions to climate change and other global challenges. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B 375(1794). https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0120 
Scheidel, A., Del Bene, D., Liu, J., Navas, G., Mingorría, S., Demaria, F., Avila, S., Roy, B., Ertör, I., Temper, L., & 
Martínez-Alier, J. (2020). Environmental conflicts and defenders: A global overview. Global Environmental Change 
63, 102104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102104 
Silver, J. (2020 December 11). Ottawa announces new climate plan with no GHG-reduction targets. iPolitics. 
https://ipolitics.ca/2020/12/11/ottawa-announces-new-climate-plan-with-no-ghg-reduction-targets/
Simpson, L.B. (2017). As we have always done: Indigenous freedom through radical resistance. University of 
Minnesota Press.
Indigenous Climate Action
61
Six Nations Council.( n.d.) Summary analysis of federal & provincial initiatives. http://www.sixnations.ca/SN_
Federal%20Analysis_of_Federal_Provincial_Initiatives.pdf
Snively G., & Williams, W.L. (2016). Knowing home: Braiding Indigenous science with western science, Book 1. 
University of Victoria.
Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S.R., de 
Vries, W., de Wit, C.A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G.M. Persson, L.M. Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., & 
Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on a changing planet. Science, 347(6223), 
1259855. https://science.sciencemag.org/lookup/doi/10.1126/science.1259855 
Temper, L., Avila, S., Del Bene, D., Gobby, J., Kosoy, N., Le Billon, P., Martinez-Alier, J., Perkins, P., Roy, B., 
Scheidel, A., & Walter, M. (2020). Movements shaping climate futures: A systematic mapping of protests 
against fossil fuel and low-carbon energy projects. Environmental Research Letters, 15(12), 123004. https://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/abc197 
Temper, L., Walter, M., Rodriguez, I., Kothari, A., & Turhan, E. (2018). A perspective on radical transformations to 
sustainability: Resistances, movements, and alternatives. Sustainability Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-
018-0543-8 
Tokar, B., & Gilbertson, T. (Eds.). (2020). Climate justice and community renewal: Resistance and grassroots 
solutions. Routledge.
Townsend, J., Moola, F., & Craig, MK. (2020). Indigenous Peoples are critical to the success of nature-based 
solutions to climate change. FACETS, 5, 551-556.  https://doi.org/10.1139/facets-2019-0058 
Trudeau, J. (2017, June 21). Statement by the Prime Minister of Canada on national Aboriginal day. Justin 
Trudeau, Prime Minister of Canada. https://pm.gc.ca/en/news/statements/2017/06/21/statement-prime-
minister-canada-national-aboriginal-day
Truth and Reconciliation Council Commission of Canada. (2015). Truth and reconciliation council commission of 
Canada: Calls to action. http://nctr.ca/assets/reports/Calls_to_Action_English2.pdf
United Nations. (2007, September 13). United nations declaration on the rights of Indigenous Peoples. https://
www.un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/UNDRIP_E_web.pdf
Waldron, I. (2018). There’s something in the water: Environmental racism in Indigenous and Black communities. 
Fernwood Publishing.
Walker, W., Baccini, A., Schwartzman, S., Ríos, S., Oliveira-Miranda, M.A., Augusto, C., Romero, Ruiz, M., 
Soria Arasco, C., Ricardo, B., Smith, R., Meyer, C., Jintiach, J.C., & Vasquez Campos, E. (2014). Forest carbon 
in Amazonia: the unrecognized contribution of indigenous territories and protected natural areas. Carbon 
Management, 5(5–6), 479–485. https://doi.org/10.1080/17583004.2014.990680 
Decolonizing Climate Policy in Canada: Phase 1 Report
62
Wherry, A. (2020, December 12). Canada finally has a plan to meet its climate target- and maybe now there can be 
a real debate. CBC.  https://www.cbc.ca/news/politics/net-zero-carbon-climate-trudeau-1.5838736
Whyte, K. (2017). Indigenous climate change studies: Indigenizing futures, decolonizing the anthropocene. 
English Language Notes, 55(1), 153–162. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2925514 
Whyte, K. (2018). Way beyond the lifeboat: an indigenous allegory of climate justice. In D. Munshi, K.K. Bhavnani, 
J. Foran,  & P. Kurian (Eds.), Climate futures: Reimagining global climate justice. University of California Press
Whyte, K. (2020). Too late for indigenous climate justice: Ecological and relational tipping points. WIREs Climate 
Change 11(1), e603. https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.603 
Wiebe, S.M. (2019). Sensing policy: Engaging affected communities at the intersections of environmental justice 
and decolonial futures. Politics, Groups, and Identities, 8(1),181-193. https://doi.org/10.1080/21565503.2019.162
9315 
Wildcat, D. R. (2010). Red alert!: Saving the planet with indigenous knowledge. Fulcrum Publishing. 
Williams, L, A. Fletcher, Neopole, J., & Pollack, M. (2018, February). Women and Climate Change Impacts and 
Action in Canada. Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women. https://www.criaw-icref.ca/
images/userfiles/files/Women%20and%20Climate%20Change_FINAL.pdf
Wilt, J. (2016, December 13). The carbon offset question: Will Canada buy its way to the climate finish line? The 
narwhal. https://thenarwhal.ca/carbon-offset-question-will-canada-buy-its-way-climate-finish-line/
Working Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience. (2016). Working Group on Adaptation and 
Climate Resilience: Final Report. Canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/migration/cc/
content/6/4/7/64778dd5-e2d9-4930-be59-d6db7db5cbc0/wg_report_acr_e_v5.pdf
Working Group on Carbon Pricing Mechanism. (2016). Working Group on Carbon Pricing Mechanism: Final Report. 
Canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/migration/cc/content/6/4/7/64778dd5-e2d9-4930-be59-
d6db7db5cbc0/wg_report_carbon-20pricing_e_v4.pdf
Working Group on Clean Technology, Innovation and Jobs. (2016). Working Group on Clean Technology, 
Innovation and Jobs: Final Report. Canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/migration/cc/
content/6/4/7/64778dd5-e2d9-4930-be59-d6db7db5cbc0/working-20group-20on-20clean-20technology-
20innovation-20and-20jobs-20final-20report-20engl....pdf
Working Group on Specific Mitigation Opportunities. (2016). Specific Mitigation Opportunities Working Group: 
Final Report. Canada.ca. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/eccc/migration/cc/content/6/4/7/64778dd5-
e2d9-4930-be59-d6db7db5cbc0/wg_report_specific_mitigation_opportunities_en_v04.pdf
Indigenous Climate Action
63
Connect with ICA
4 ways to support Indigenous-led climate action and solutions:
1.	 Follow ICA and share our work
2.	 Volunteer with the network
3.	 Support Indigenous communities taking climate action
4.	 Donate and/or become a monthly sustainer
To learn more about Indigenous Climate Action, connect with us at:
          @IndigenousClimateAction
          @IndigenousClimateAction
          @Indigenous_ca
          Indigenous Climate Action Network
          Indigenous Climate Action
IndigenousClimateAction.com
info@IndigenousClimateAction.com
Indigenous Climate Action c/o Polaris Institute
601 - 331 Cooper St.
Ottawa, ON K2P 0G5
Unceded territories of the Algonquin, Haudenosaunee, Huron-Wendat and Anishinabek
