i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Developing Community Resilience for Climate Adaptation in 
Toronto, Ontario 
 
 
 
by 
William Nixon  
 
 
Supervised by 
Joe Mihevc 
 
 
 
A Major Paper submitted to the Faculty of Environmental and Urban Change 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master in Environmental Studies   
York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
 
 
 
July 31st, 2021 
 
 
ii 
 
Abstract 
Climate change is here and will get worse. The City of Toronto must adapt to the forecasted 
circumstances and prepare its communities to withstand the incoming stresses and shocks. This 
research paper provides policy recommendations to the City of Toronto that would build the 
adaptive capacity and community resilience of its neighbourhoods to better withstand the 
impacts of climate change. It recognizes the value of a hybrid between bottom-up and top-down 
approaches that includes local residents while aiming toward goals set by the city. It utilizes a 
literature review of relevant theory and an analysis of Toronto’s existing climate policy to 
distinguish where the recommendations could contribute value. A case study on Rotterdam, 
Netherlands, a leader in climate adaptation, and interviews with industry professionals provided 
insights on policies that the City of Toronto could pursue to improve its adaptation efforts. The 
two recommendations include the development of neighbourhood resilience plans to increase 
community adaptive capacity and resilience, as well as a resilience assessment in Toronto’s 
development review process. Each recommendation would address existing vulnerabilities in 
communities and would improve access to resources that aid residents during periods of stress 
and shocks.  
 
 
iii 
 
Foreword 
In my major paper, I examine climate change and its impacts as both a shock to and a stress for 
which cities must become resilient. My plan of study is about how urban planning is addressing 
the incoming threat of climate change, specifically how cities are preparing its residents for the 
impacts. In my mind, climate change is the greatest threat to humanity during my lifetime, so it 
was exciting to research tangible solutions for preparing urban residents for the looming threat.  
During the writing of this major paper, I was able to develop my understanding of the many 
directions that climate adaptation can take to address the issue which I addressed Learning 
Objectives 1.1 and 2.1. I believe that this captures the focus of both my major paper and Plan of 
Study. My overall approach of the major paper acknowledges the existing climate policy in 
Toronto and provides insights on where the city could improve its effort to reduce the impact of 
climate change on Torontonians. This developed into a focus on improving the policy regarding 
community resilience of neighbourhoods. Toronto’s approach to climate risk has primarily 
concentrated on the risk to physical infrastructure and land use, so addressing the community 
was a necessary addition. By expanding the scope of resilience to include communities, residents 
should be better equipped to endure climate impacts. Engaging, educating, and equipping 
residents with resources helps them to withstand difficult periods of climate stress.  
Speaking with professionals provided me with a grounded perspective of ways that plans can be 
implemented. This reflects Learning Objectives 1.2 and 2.2 of the Plan of Study as it emphasizes 
the need to not only develop strong plans for addressing urban issues, but also how they would 
integrate into the City of Toronto’s current systems. I sufficiently address these objectives 
through the use of a case study and interviews with climate adaptation professionals. The case 
study provides a precedent in the city of Rotterdam, which has had success in developing an 
effective adaptation strategy and, more importantly, has implemented its actions and learned 
from them. The interviews with relevant professionals provide first-hand experiences in relation 
with climate adaptation strategies and approaches. Learning from professionals with a variety of 
backgrounds and experiences grounds the research with a sense of practicality.  
Learning objectives 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 in my major paper while developing the focus of the 
recommendations. The recommendations focus on improving the participation of communities 
iv 
 
and addressing their needs during the decision-making process of changes to their 
neighbourhoods. The strength of the recommendations depends on the participation of the 
communities in which they are implemented. I learned that public participation can greatly vary 
with topics with complex subject matter. This is especially important for neighbourhoods with 
greater demographic compositions of marginalized and racialized residents. In these areas, there 
are likely to be more barriers for participation and sometimes less existing social infrastructure 
available to build climate-related resilience. This major paper recognizes that the City of 
Toronto’s planners must consider the demographics, present stresses, and experiences of the 
residents while developing the strategic plan for the neighbourhood’s resilience. It was important 
to recognize that there is not a one size fits all solution and each neighbourhood’s resilience plan 
would need to be adapted to fit their particular needs.  
 
 
 
 
 
v 
 
Dedication 
I would like to dedicate this work to the future. I sincerely hope that we will have done enough to 
set us on a more livable path forward.  
Acknowledgement 
The author acknowledges that in Toronto, we are on the traditional territory of many nations 
including the Mississaugas of the Credit, the Anishnabeg, the Chippewa, the Haudenosaunee and 
the Wendat peoples and is now home to many diverse First Nations, Inuit and Métis peoples. The 
author acknowledges that Toronto is covered by Treaty 13 signed with the Mississaugas of the 
Credit, and the Williams Treaties signed with multiple Mississaugas and Chippewa bands. 
 
I would like to acknowledge those around me that made this research paper possible. Foremost, I 
need to thank my partner Colleen for all of her edits and listening to me rant. Without her, I 
would not be where I am. I would also like to thank my family, Maggie, Carolyn, and Bill, and 
friends for their continued support and love as I progress through life. I’d like to thank all of the 
individuals who agreed to provide their insights and experience for the research of this work. 
Additionally, I’d like to thank the professors that taught me along the way, specifically Luisa 
Sotomayor and Laura Taylor, for going out of their way to help students succeed. Thanks to Joe 
Mihevc for being my supervisor. I appreciate you taking the time to help me through this 
process. Finally, I’d like to thank all of the people in the world who are fighting to build a better 
future for the generations to come. Your sacrifice and hard work should not go unnoticed.  
 
 
 
vi 
 
Table of Contents 
Abstract …………………………………………………………………………….…...……… ii 
Foreword ………………………………………………………………………………………. iii 
Dedication ……………………………………………………………………….……………… v 
Acknowledgement ………………………………………………………………….……………v 
Table of Contents ……………………………………………………………….…...………… vi 
List of Figures …………………………………………………………………….…...……… vii 
 
Introduction …………………………………………………………………………………….. 1 
Methodology ………………………………………………………………………………......… 5 
Structure ………………………………………………………………………………….……… 7 
 
Chapter One: Understanding the Need to Change ………………………………...………… 8 
Theory Behind Climate Adaptation ……………………………………..…………….....……… 9 
Vulnerability and the Importance of Developing Community Resilience ……..………………. 11 
Chapter Two: Why Does Toronto Need to Change? ……………………………..………… 15 
Toronto’s Context ……………………………………………………………………………… 19 
Climate Action Plans ………………………...………………………………………………… 21 
 
Chapter Three: Case Study: Rotterdam, Netherlands …...………………………………… 25 
Ideas for Toronto …………………………………………..…………………………………… 27 
 
Chapter Four: Findings and Recommendations .…………………………………………… 30 
Recommendation 1: Neighbourhood Resilience Plans ………………………………………… 31 
Recommendation 2: Resilience Assessment …………………………………………………… 37 
 
Conclusion ……………………………………………………..……………………………… 41 
 
Appendix ………………………………………………….…………………………………… 43 
References ………………………………………...…………………………………………… 52 
 
 
vii 
 
List of Figures 
Figure 1: Toronto's Climate Forecast (Climate Atlas) ………………………….…………..…… 4 
Figure 2: Income Distribution in Toronto (Resilience Strategy) ……………….……………… 15 
Figure 3: SNAP Planning Process (TRCA) ………………………………………….………… 35 
 
1 
 
During the writing of this research paper, the COVID-19 pandemic significantly affected the 
world. While it would be impossible not to reference and reflect on the impact of COVID-19, this 
research paper will not focus on the pandemic. Instead, this research paper will reference the 
similarities of global totality between the pandemic and climate change. COVID-19 has provided 
a glimpse at the preparedness of cities to handle a systemic shock, much like what may be 
witnessed with a more volatile climate.  In addition, COVID-19 has displayed the various kinds 
of responses that communities can have to an issue of this scale. COVID-19, in Canada and 
other parts of the world, has been largely an urban issue because of its spread and concentration 
in urban centres and its disruption to urban systems such as transportation, the local economy, 
and governance (Canadian Urban Institute 2020). Because the pandemic will likely emphasize 
similar systemic issues as the impact of climate change, therefore, there is a unique opportunity 
to address these issues now instead of during a future climate-related crisis. 
Introduction 
“We can delay and pay or plan and prosper” were the words of Patrick Verkooijen, the CEO of 
the Global Center on Adaptation, at the Climate Adaptation Summit 2021. Their words describe 
the situation that many cities face across the world regarding their efforts to adapt to the impacts 
of climate change. Every city will need to adapt in some way, however, the effort and investment 
into such initiatives will vary greatly. The vision of this research paper is to answer the question 
of how the City of Toronto can improve its climate adaptation policies to better prepare its 
residents for the impacts of climate change. Toronto is not currently a leader in adaptation and is 
falling behind because of a lack of investment into implementing climate related plans 
throughout the city, including those focused on community resilience. This is not to say that the 
foundations for good policy do not already exist, but that it needs to be deployed in a way that 
focuses on adaptation. While the endeavour of adapting to climate change is a steep climb and 
entails a heavy investment, to not address it would be worse.  
The purpose of this research paper is to provide the City of Toronto with recommendations of 
implementable pilot projects that would help contribute to the city’s climate adaptation efforts. 
Though there are many aspects of climate adaptation that could have been focused on, the 
recommendations of this research paper will centre around the development of community 
2 
 
resilience and adaptative capacity to climate change-related shocks and stresses. The decision to 
focus on the neighbourhood scale was based on the importance that community ties have during 
periods of distress and to address the uneven distribution of adaptive capabilities in communities 
across the City of Toronto.  
The first recommendation is the formation of neighbourhood resilience plans (NRP) for each of 
Toronto’s neighbourhoods. These plans will assess the area-specific vulnerabilities and risks 
which will guide the creation of resilience-focused initiatives. The NRP are a collaborative effort 
between the community of the neighbourhood and city officials to ensure that the needs of the 
community and city are addressed. The second recommendation is the inclusion of a resilience-
focused assessment into Toronto’s development process. This assessment would make sure that 
developers planned for future climate conditions in their development proposals and provided 
evidence that their project would continue to perform at a high level, even with more strenuous 
conditions. The second recommendation will focus on the investment into community social 
wellbeing and how it may improve the social connectivity of the development area. If 
implemented, these recommendations would provide a grounded foundation for the City of 
Toronto to further build its adaptation strategy and effort.  
This research paper developed its recommendations to be aligned with academic literature, 
guided by international best practice examples, and implementable in the context of Toronto’s 
current climate policy. The literature review develops an understanding of why adaptation is 
important and the characteristics that would benefit Toronto’s adaptation process. Next, an 
assessment of Toronto’s existing climate policy and growth forecast provides the reason why 
new policy is required to prepare the City of Toronto for climate change. Finally, a case study on 
Rotterdam, Netherlands and interviews with professionals provides tangible insight on 
implementing climate adaptation policy. The recommendations are made to be adapted and 
further developed as the understanding of the impact of climate change on Toronto changes.  
Why Toronto? 
The City of Toronto was selected for this research for a variety of reasons (including being the 
hometown of the author). Toronto is a developing metropolis that has specialized in embracing 
diversity to integrate newcomers to the city. During the time of this writing, Toronto, currently at 
3 
 
3.05 million people, is preparing for an increase in population of 450,000 (3.5 million total) by 
2030 and 700,000 (3.7 million total) by 2046 (Ontario 2021). At the same time, this population 
growth is a part of the overall Greater Golden Horseshoe Area that is forecast to grow to 15 
million people by 2051 (Growth Plan 2019, 94). In planning to accommodate such a large 
number of new future residents, the city has an opportunity to establish climate adaptation as a 
defining feature in planning to develop both new spaces and to redevelop existing spaces. 
Toronto is already home to a booming local and international economy that contributes 18.5% of 
Canada’s GDP (Toronto Global 2021). Toronto’s neighbourhoods have developed distinct 
cultures and identities, which foster strong community involvement. All of this said, Toronto has 
both a past and promising future that it needs to protect. Toronto’s strength as a city stems from 
its ability to embrace diversity. It must continue to invest in the lives of its residents. Without the 
people that fill Toronto’s street festivals or attend its sports games, there is no economic engine 
or cultural hub. Without resilient communities, Toronto will not be a flourishing city (Resilience 
Strategy 2019).  
Toronto is a part of a greater international struggle with climate change. As detailed by the 
United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the world must remain 
below a global temperature increase of 1.5 degrees Celsius in order to minimize the disastrous 
impacts of climate change (IPCC 2018). Exceeding 1.5 degrees Celsius has the potential for 
catastrophic shocks to various natural and human developed systems. These impacts will be felt 
deeply by urban residents through disruptions to local systems, such as food distribution, as well 
as more immediate impacts of a volatile climate. The interconnectivity between cities, regions, 
and nations means that the impact to one city will have a rippling effect on other areas as well. 
These are only a few examples of how climate change could impact the world; more issues may 
become known as the understanding of climate change develops.  
Toronto, like many other cities, will be pressed by days and periods of very hot weather (over 30 
degrees Celsius) and by more volatile periods of rainfall (Climate Atlas 2021). Figure 1 displays 
the current predictions of Toronto’s climate in the next 30 to 60 years, which include more 
variability and change that Toronto must address in its urban development. This new climate is 
more detrimental for vulnerable populations such as the elderly, those without adequate shelter, 
and those living in poverty, because they are more prone to be affected by the changes. Without 
4 
 
the financial, infrastructural, or community resources to reduce the resulting stressors, 
individuals could find themselves in threatening situations. Additionally, as Climate Atlas further 
describes, the “warmer climate 
may lead to more extreme 
weather, including high winds, 
flash floods, drought, ice storms, 
lightning, and even tornadoes” 
(Climate Atlas 2021). As 
demonstrated, it is highly likely 
that Toronto will witness a 
change in climate that will create 
greater strain and stress on 
existing urban systems; 
therefore, the municipal 
government must act pre-
emptively to avoid these issues 
before they manifest. 
Why Rotterdam? 
The City of Rotterdam, 
Netherlands was selected as the subject of the case study because of its commitment to and 
success in climate adaptation. Toronto has much to learn from this municipal example of global 
best practice. While Toronto is larger in population (2.93 million vs. 623,000) and currently has 
more forecast development than Rotterdam, both cities are economic and cultural hubs for their 
respective countries. Rotterdam has been internationally recognized for its adaptation projects to 
mitigate to the impacts of rising sea levels. The Dutch city has been successful because of its 
strong inclusion of residents during the planning and implementation process. Rotterdam has 
utilized a hybrid bottom-up and top-down approach by having city officials guide residents in 
community initiatives that contribute to the city’s overall goals. Rotterdam has approached 
climate change as an opportunity to form new networks and innovate. While the specific 
Figure 1: Toronto's climate forecast (Climate Atlas 2021) 
Retrieved July 31st, 2021, from climateatlas.ca 
5 
 
circumstances of the forecasted climate of the two cities are different, Toronto could learn from 
Rotterdam how to build community support and implement climate adaptation projects.  
Why focus on neighbourhoods and communities? 
The research paper’s focus on policy concerning neighbourhoods and communities over larger 
regional or national policy was to localize the response to climate change. The severity of 
climate change requires people to adapt accordingly. By centring the solutions around 
neighbourhoods, residents can more clearly imagine their impact on the environment and their 
contribution to the solutions. Additionally, addressing the needs of communities allows for other 
social issues to be tackled while preparing for climate-related shocks. This research paper 
acknowledges the difference between the understanding of ‘neighbourhood’ and ‘community’, 
with one pertaining to a place and the other to people (Booth et al. 2002, 18). However, for the 
purposes of this research paper the terms are used interchangeably because the neighbourhood 
boundaries act as the defining characteristics for the local community. The specific spatial 
distinction is necessary for the final recommendations.  
Addressing the issue on a city-wide scale may overlook the disparity between neighbourhoods 
based on varying levels of vulnerability and existing resilience (Figueiredo et al. 2018, 14). 
Assessing the issues at a neighbourhood or community scale provides a clearer assessment of 
existing vulnerabilities and barriers that decrease the area’s adaptive capacity (Figueiredo et al. 
2018, 14). Strengthening the capabilities of communities to prepare for, respond to, and recover 
from a climate-related shock or stress will have a significant effect on their wellbeing.  
Methodology: 
The methods of the research were selected to fit the research questions that are being asked. All 
of the methods have been adapted to minimize the risk of COVID-19 interfering with the data 
collection. An MES Application to Conduct Human Participants Research has been submitted to 
the EUC faculty. The structure and approach of the semi-structured interview has been 
developed with the guidance of Doing Interview-based Qualitative Research: A Learner’s Guide 
(Magnusson & Marecek 2015). 
6 
 
The methodology of this research paper includes a literature review of relevant academic articles, 
municipal documents, and reports to create an understanding of what climate adaptation needs to 
address and include to be successful. Academic articles were used to understand why cities as 
actors are crucial for adapting residents to the impacts of climate change and to develop the 
guiding principles that will help Toronto become more resilient. The research paper will then 
address Toronto’s current adaptation policy and initiatives to develop an understanding of what 
has been implemented and where new solutions would be able to fit into the current political and 
governance landscape. This is crucial because of the timely relevance of the recommendations 
for the City of Toronto. A case study on Rotterdam will provide an example of a city that has 
successfully adopted climate adaptation within its city fabric and will provide examples for 
policy and neighbourhood practice that could provide Toronto with insights. For the case study, 
government documents and third-party reports were assessed to detail a picture of how 
Rotterdam has succeeded in its adaptation process. Finally, based upon the established 
understanding of Toronto’s climate problem, the research paper will provide two 
recommendations for policies that the City of Toronto could pursue to increase its ability to 
endure the impacts of climate change. The recommendations will be based on information 
gathered during interviews with professionals and experts that have experience with climate 
adaptation. These conversations were used to reinforce and ground the information gathered 
from the academic and report literature review in a Toronto context.  
The interviews were conducted in a semi-structured format that allowed participants to discuss 
their experience with climate adaptation in Toronto. The semi-structured nature of the interview 
had some anchoring questions but allowed for additional personalized questions based on that 
participant’s experience or flexibility to accommodate for the participant’s answers (Appendix 1) 
(Magnusson & Marecek 2015, 46-57). The interviews were recorded, transcribed, and then 
summarized into notes that highlighted specific topics and details that were discussed (Appendix 
2). The interviews were not coded in a systematic way because of the varying backgrounds of the 
participants which impacted the subject matter of each interview. The gathered perspectives and 
experiences provided relevant information that guided and grounded the final policy 
recommendations.  
7 
 
For this research, industry professionals were interviewed to gain a better perspective on the 
current state of Toronto’s climate adaptation plan and to provide insight into possible policy that 
Toronto could adopt. Those interviewed come from a variety of backgrounds, but all of them 
have been focused on climate adaptation in some way. As the research proceeded, some 
participants were selected due to their specific experience and understanding of community-
focused initiatives. The conversations provided a well-rounded overview of the issues, ongoings, 
and potential projects that the city could implement to address its needs. The details of the 
conversations are presented in the appendix of this research paper (Appendix 2). Many of the 
insights that were provided by participants focused on hybrid bottom-up and top-down 
approaches that would benefit Toronto’s effort to become more resilient and prepare itself for 
climate change. These insights are reflected in the two recommendations provided by this 
research paper.  
The individuals interviewed were: 
Dan Leeming, Senior Advisor at The Planning Partnership 
Mike Layton, City of Toronto Councillor for Ward 11, University-Rosedale 
Mary Rowe, President and CEO of the Canadian Urban Institute 
Elliott Cappell, National Director of Climate Change, Resilience & Sustainability at WSP 
Lisa King, Senior Environmental Policy Planner at the City of Toronto 
Joanna Eyquem, Managing Director of Climate-Resilient Infrastructure at Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation at University of Waterloo 
David MacLeod, Senior Environmental Specialist at the City of Toronto 
Shannon Logan, Senior Program Manager of the Sustainable Neighborhood Action Program 
(SNAP) program with the Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (TRCA) 
Jeb Brugmann, Founding Principle of Resilient Cities Catalyst 
Lee Adamson, Vice Chair, Green Neighbours Network of Toronto 
Paul Antze, Vice Chair, Green Neighbours Network of Toronto 
Tim De Waele, Advisor (Water, Participation, and Climate Adaptation) at the City of Rotterdam 
Structure: 
The breakdown of this research paper is three-fold – first, it will review existing theoretical 
literature to develop an understanding of why adaptation must occur and how it should be done 
(Chapter One). Secondly, the report will assess Toronto’s climate-related situation and its 
existing climate adaptation policy to pinpoint where new policy and initiatives would benefit the 
8 
 
city (Chapter Two). Finally, through a case study (Chapter Three) and interviews with relevant 
professionals (Chapter Four), the research paper will provide recommendations of 
neighbourhood focused initiatives that Toronto can implement. Ideally, by following the 
recommendations, Toronto can better prepare itself for the present and incoming reality of 
climate change. The city must continue to lower its greenhouse gas contributions but must also 
simultaneously transition to preparing to weather the storm. Every effort that is pursued now 
could save lives, infrastructure, and money. The best predictions that are currently available 
show that cities must move swiftly to implement the necessary changes before the impacts of 
climate change further intensify.  
 
Chapter One – Understanding the need to change. 
Although climate change has been forecasted for decades, there is still a general attitude of ‘foot 
dragging’ on implementing necessary changes. This chapter reviews relevant academic literature 
and reports to develop an understanding of why cities need to adapt to climate change and also 
the impact that cities should aim for through their climate adaptation policy. To begin, it will 
explain the focus on cities and their role in the greater context of the global effort to deal with 
climate change. Further, this chapter will outline the discussion around the theory of ‘resilience’ 
and the impact of choosing a normative term as a driving principle for climate adaptation. 
Finally, the chapter will outline the concepts that are important to a city’s adaptation strategy and 
how they contribute to addressing vulnerabilities to climate change. 
Why Cities? 
When considering the massive feat that combatting climate change demands, some may ask why 
cities would be selected as the agent of change. Cities are, after all, huge polluters through their 
large amounts of vehicle congestion, waste accumulation, and energy consumption (OECD 
2021). The broadest answer is that more of the world lives in urban areas than not, at 55% (4.2 
billion) of the world’s population (United Nations 2018). It is projected that 68% of the global 
population will settle in urban areas by 2050 (United Nations 2018). Focusing on urban solutions 
9 
 
provides an opportunity to address a significant contributor, while also engaging much of the 
world in implementing viable solutions.  
An argument against cities’ ability to address climate change states that the existing inequality 
prevents an equitable distribution of resources to adequately adapt to the circumstance. This 
ability to adapt will be dependent on the existing social lines of those with access to the needed 
resources and those who do not have access, which will serve to create further social divisions 
(Davis 2010; Hodson & Marvin 2010, 300). This argument is crucial when considering how to 
address climate change because it demonstrates the importance of prioritizing ‘public affluence 
over private wealth’ (Davis 2010, 43). Due to the uneven development of cities, there needs to be 
a just response to focus on existing inequalities that all cities currently have. Some 
neighbourhoods will require a greater investment because of the lack of existing infrastructure, 
whether social, economic, or physical. Most importantly, neighbourhoods need to become more 
connected through information and resource sharing that allow projects to be adopted and 
adapted from other areas. The ability to adapt must be available to all cities and to all 
neighbourhoods in a city, and not only those that can afford it.  
While cities do not have all of the tools to address the issue of climate change, they are 
collectively developing a toolbox of initiatives that can be utilized to reduce its impact. There has 
been a focus by organizations like the Global Center on Adaptation, ICLEI, and the Rockefeller 
Foundation to develop resource-sharing networks of global cities. These networks share 
collected data and adaptation initiatives to help other cities develop their own plans based upon 
their unique situation. Since each city will witness its own struggle with climate change, the 
adopted strategies need to be adapted to the needs of the city (Bulkeley & Tuts 2013, 652). 
Developing these networks is crucial because it provides ideas, technology, and capital to less 
developed countries and cities that are at greater risk of being impacted by climate change. This 
is especially crucial because of the limited timeline that many cities face.  
The Theory Behind Climate Adaptation 
Resilience 
10 
 
The word ‘resilience’ has grown in both popularity and ambiguity. The word has widely been 
embraced because of its focus on enduring through a difficult situation. It is for this reason that 
resilience has been heavily adopted by those who advocate for climate adaptation. The need for 
resilience is because current civilization has influenced the global climate to an extent that it has 
made it less predictable, therefore, humans must accommodate for the resulting impacts and 
change (Holling 1973, 13). The Anthropocene era, or the geological epoch of human influence 
over the natural environment, has now solidified humanity’s influence on all natural habitats, 
including its own. Resilience is a normative concept that holds control over the specifics of a 
preparation or recovery period (Vale 2014, 196). Because of this, it is crucial for the definition of 
resilience to value residents over economic systems. Resilience needs to be applied 
comprehensively across municipal departments to ensure its integration into all municipal 
systems.  
Holling discusses the difference between stability and resilience, and how both concepts impact 
the direction of action. Stability is “the ability of a system to return to an equilibrium state after a 
temporary disturbance; the more rapidly it returns and the less it fluctuates, the more stable it 
would be” (Holling 1973, 14). Holling defines resilience as “a measure of the persistence of 
systems and of their ability to absorb change and disturbance and still maintain the same 
relationship between populations and state variables” (Holling 1973, 14). Resilience, or the 
ability to absorb change, occurs only during periods of disturbance, such as climate change, but 
there is no defined function during stable times. Furthermore, the resilience of a system does not 
suggest what pieces of a system continue, only that the system survives. Both of these points are 
important because it creates the need to define what needs to be able to endure the storm and 
how this will happen. Holling suggests that “periods with favourable conditions” should be 
utilized to prepare for the predicted unpredictable periods by increasing the capacity to persist 
(1973, 16). Therefore, it is crucial that adaptation efforts are started now instead of after the 
climate has changed.  
The focus on the definition of resilience in this paper establishes the actions and measures that 
will be needed to handle and absorb change. Vale (2014, 194) details the start of the decision-
making process with the dual question “for whom and against what”. These fundamental 
questions establish the focus of the policies and plans that will be put in place to lead residents 
11 
 
through turbulence. Vale states that the determination of the focus will control the approach to 
achieve resiliency and therefore change the deliberate plan of action (2014, 195). An ethical 
imperative must be included to ensure that the those who are hardest hit, or forecast to be hardest 
hit, receive the focus of the investment (Vale 2014, 195). Even though resilience is normative 
and sustains the systems that were in place before the presence of a disruption, the ethical focus 
would provide reasoning to address the systematic ethical failures that allowed the disruption to 
occur. Not addressing the systems that prevent adaptation creates the opportunity for more 
disruptions in the future. 
Instead of stretching resilience so thin that it is meaningless, it can act as a feature that unifies 
preparation efforts and embraces ‘bouncing forward’ to adapt the systems that created the setting 
for the disruption to occur (Vale 2014, 198). The roots of a problem must be addressed, instead 
of the product of an issue. For resilience to occur, there must be an aspect of review or revision 
to address where vulnerability remains. In terms of city planning, this revision needs to occur 
through vulnerability assessments and reviews when particular shocks and stressors do occur. 
Through enough research and assessment, we can adequately predict where shocks will be felt 
the hardest, and which shocks should result in action to support those neighbourhoods and 
communities. 
Vulnerability and the Importance of Developing Community Resilience 
It is common for community initiatives to emerge in the wake of a natural disaster, pandemic, 
systemic shock or stress. A ‘shock’, in this case, is an event that occurs unexpectedly, while a 
‘stress’ is an ongoing issue that impedes a city’s ability to respond to a problem (Resilience 
Strategy 2019, 20). Events such as Hurricane Sandy, the 1995 Chicago heatwave, or the COVID-
19 pandemic all produced a community-driven force to help neighbours and individuals recover 
from their horrific experiences (Dawson 2017; Klinenberg 1999; Fransen 2021). By better 
understanding where shocks and stresses will be most heavily felt, a city can better prepare its 
citizens to know what actions to take once a shock does occur.  
Vulnerability 
12 
 
‘Vulnerability’ is a fundamental term in disaster response planning because it describes the 
situation of residents who are more likely to be affected by a weather event before it occurs. 
Youngman describes ‘physical vulnerability’ as a proneness to risk because of one’s location, 
such as the proximity to a river or downhill from a mountain (2009, 178). ‘Social vulnerability’ 
is described as “pre-existing conditions rooted in social inequalities, that affect potential disaster 
victims’ ability to escape, survive, and/or ‘bounce back’ from a disaster: race, class, gender, age, 
disability, health status, etc.” (Youngman 2009, 178). Communities that have historically been 
oppressed or disenfranchised are more likely to find themselves in threatening positions. Those 
who are struggling financially or who do not have adequate housing prior to a disruption are 
likely to be more negatively affected than those who are more secure. Youngman further 
describes the significance of human capital, personal support systems, and how individuals who 
have family or community around them are more resilient (2009, 179). Addressing the 
underlying factors that increase vulnerability in a community will provide them with a better 
position to handle an unexpected occurrence in the future.  
Vulnerability is a critical term when adapting a city to a future of uncertain disruptions because 
of its universality in outlining where problems will occur. Disasters are not spontaneous, but 
rather a series of underlying economic, environmental, and/or social systemic failures that are 
magnified through a dangerous situation (Ali 2009; Bulkeley 2013, 32). As demonstrated by 
Hurricane Katrina, the greatest destruction followed lines of marginalized and racialized 
communities when compared to affluent areas (Brym 2009, 63). Toronto, too, has developed in 
an uneven manner which has and will further impact communities’ ability to adapt for climate 
change (Green et al. 2018, 26). For example, a 2018 study found that the tree canopy of a city, a 
proven benefit for mitigating the impacts of extreme heat and flooding, was heavily dependent 
on the income of a neighbourhood (Green et al. 2018). This study reflects uneven distribution of 
resources across the city which will result in a similar uneven distribution of shock from climate 
change. Access to resources, either private or communal, has a critical impact on how well 
neighbourhoods can endure shocks and stresses. Unequal access to resources requires a varied 
approach for addressing climate vulnerability. Some neighbourhoods will already have the 
existing networks and resources, while others will require those systems to be built from the 
ground up.  
13 
 
Adaptive Capacity and Community Resilience 
To address climate vulnerability, a community needs the capacity to adapt in order to become 
more resilient to change and periods of difficulty. The IPCC defines ‘adaptive capacity’ as “the 
potential or ability of a system, region, or community to adapt to the effects or impacts of climate 
change” (Smit & Pilifosova 2001, 881). However, it is also argued by some researchers that 
adaptive capacity must extend further and should address the underlying political, economic, and 
social factors that prevent communities from adapting (Smit & Pilifosova 2001; Berger et al. 
2014). Communities are only able to focus on the vulnerabilities that they have agency to 
address, and therefore they need to tackle the obstacles that prevent them from pursing adaptive 
actions (Fransen 2021, 5). Due to the significance and severity of climate change, it is imperative 
that climate adaptation is championed as a community issue (Sherrieb et al. 2010). While there is 
debate about how community initiatives are started, either through grassroots organizing or city 
official driven programs, there is a need for the opportunity to learn how they should adapt to 
climate change.  
To strengthen the adaptive capacity of a community, initiatives should increase the network and 
organizing ability, promote consistent learning and reflection, ensure policies remain flexible and 
include regular feedback loops, and use tools to plan for uncertain and unexpected events 
(Berger et. al. 2014, 24; Magis 2010, 405). Assisting communities with developing stronger 
community initiatives, while additionally providing them with options to address their issues, 
enables them to develop solutions tailored to their specific needs (Berkes & Seixes 2005). The 
more that communities, especially vulnerable ones, can strengthen their social capital, the more 
resilient they are to weathering difficult periods. Increasing the capacity for change ultimately 
leads to the presence of resilience in a community. For example, in the historic 1995 Chicago 
heat wave, neighbourhoods that had established community networks and adaptive capacity 
witnessed fewer resident deaths than areas with less social connection (Klinenberg 1999, 261). 
Through social organization, some communities increased their capacity to take care of the 
elderly, un-housed, or other vulnerable populations. While dependent on the nature of the 
disruption, social cohesion and capacity are generally strong factors for determining how well a 
community can absorb change and endure a difficult period (Sharifi & Yamagata 2016, 272).  
14 
 
Garnering participation in community organizing is crucial, yet difficult to achieve; therefore, the 
obstacles preventing participation need to be addressed (Adger et al. 2009, 337-9). More 
specifically, the technical and uncertain nature of climate science make it difficult for residents 
to understand how climate change will impact their own lives (Berke & Lyles 2013; Broto et al. 
2015, 8). Addressing the obstacles that prevent individuals from participating could lead to more 
community buy-in and therefore a more comprehensive plan (Moore & McGregor 2020). Similar 
to any other community planning initiative, plans cannot take a monolithic approach because 
every community is different with varying preconceptions around climate change and its 
subsequent solutions. Ensuring that a community committee adequately represents the diversity 
of the community would ideally create a plan that reaches and inspires a greater population of a 
neighbourhood (Moore & McGregor 2020; Saavedra et al. 2012, 8). Developing a setting that 
allows for greater participation from communities will result in stronger plans and more resilient 
communities. Climate strategies fundamentally require buy-in from residents, which requires 
community engagement and educational projects. It is imperative that vulnerable communities 
participate because they are likely to be affected to a greater extent than other non-vulnerable 
populations.  
Another important factor when considering community resilience is the structure of the 
initiatives that are established, whether the approach is top-down, bottom-up, or a hybrid of the 
two (Fransen et al. 2021, 6). The overall structure of a community initiative has an influence on 
capabilities, strength, and community support. A top-down structure relies on the resources of 
external partners for implementation, while a bottom-up structure features less hierarchy and is 
community organized (Dawson 2017). Each structure has benefits for the types of response that 
they provide. Top-down structures can provide a sustained initiative over a longer period of time, 
while a community-driven initiative can act fast but may not have the resources to continue the 
action (Fransen et al. 2021, 6; Barton et al. 2002, 8-9). Developing a hybrid strategy that features 
both is important to develop both community participation and project longevity.  
Now that the research paper has developed a basis to understand the significance of climate 
adaptation, it will apply this understanding to Toronto’s context to establish how the provided 
recommendations would benefit the city.  
15 
 
Chapter 2: Why Does Toronto Need to Change? 
This chapter is a snapshot of a moment in Toronto’s adaptation process that reflects upon what 
has come before and where it could lead. Urban policy does not occur within a vacuum and must 
acknowledge the plethora of other factors that contribute to its public support and effectiveness. 
This chapter will provide an explanation and context for the implementation of adaptation policy 
in Toronto. It begins with an overview of the significance of adaptation policy in the City of 
Toronto by providing data that show the 
need to implement solutions now instead 
of years in the future. Then, the chapter 
will provide the policy context for the 
recommendations. It is imperative that the 
recommendations provided build off of the 
existing projects and policies in the city to 
increase the support for them and the 
likelihood that they will be effective in 
their purpose. The City of Toronto already 
has the ball rolling, and this research aims 
to contribute to the work that has already 
been accomplished.  
Social Significance 
The significance of preparing for climate 
change is substantial because the 
preparations will determine the health and 
livelihoods of the current and future 
residents of Toronto. Preparing 
communities to endure change requires ensuring support is provided when needed, both socially 
and economically. Intrinsically, climate adaptation is a social justice issue because of the uneven 
impact that the changing weather will have on areas with more marginalized communities, due to 
past urban planning failures (Schrock et al. 2015; Bulkeley et al. 2013). Further, many systems 
Figure 2: Income Distribution in Toronto (Resilience Strategy)
(City of Toronto 2019;53)
16 
 
have not yet had to handle multiple disruptions at once, something that could become the norm 
with climate change. Utilizing urban planning tools that increase community capacity provides 
residents with the resources to remain resilient during troubling periods.  
The magnitude of inequality in Toronto has created a disparity between neighbourhoods; those 
that have greater access to resilience-related resources and those who do not. Figure 2, which 
was taken from the Resilience Strategy, displays the distribution of high-, middle-, and low-
income neighbourhoods in Toronto (Resilience Strategy 2019, 53). This disparity demonstrates 
how unevenly the impacts of climate change will be felt throughout Toronto.  
There are a variety of social-economic factors that make a person or community more vulnerable 
than others to the impacts of climate change. Toronto’s Resilience Strategy considers every 
equity seeking group as more vulnerable to climate change; that includes groups such as 
immigrants and refugees, persons with disabilities, persons with low income, racialized 
communities, members of the LGBTQIA2S+ community, undocumented individuals, vulnerable 
seniors, vulnerable youth, and women (Resilience Strategy 2019, 23). Based on data from the 
2016 census, 20.2% of population of the City of Toronto is considered low income, 51.5% 
identified as a visible minority, 51.2% were born outside of Canada, and 46.8% were tenants 
who spent more than 30% of their income on shelter costs (Toronto Glance 2021). Furthermore, 
Statistics Canada reported in 2018 that 11.3% of individuals in Toronto currently live in poverty 
(compared to the national rate of 11%) with roughly 8,700 individuals facing homelessness 
(2018) (StatsCan 2018; Homeless Hub 2021; City of Toronto 2021). Some of these numbers and 
percentages will likely have recently increased due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This data 
demonstrates the multitude of residents that require greater assistance to ensure they have a fair 
chance at enduring the impacts of climate change.  
Economic Significance 
To say that climate adaptation is expensive would be an understatement. Like any other urban 
transformation, such as the post-World War Two infrastructure boom, preparing cities for 
climate change will require immense economic investment. Redeveloping areas of cities to 
incorporate ideas such as more active transportation, green space, and affordable housing will be 
heavy on the budgets of many cities, especially those who are already operating with limited 
17 
 
funds. However, the cost of not adapting cities will be greater and will become more difficult if 
the changes are implemented after a systemic shock occurs. The Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities (FCM) estimates that every dollar invested into adaptation measures could save as 
much as six dollars when recovering from a disaster (FCM 2020, 7). This figure fluctuates 
depending on the location and previous adaptation provisions, but nevertheless displays the 
economic value of spending the capital now as opposed to after a shock. Moreover, the 
disruptions that climate change will cause will upend the livelihoods of local residents. The loss 
of a job, or the sickness or death of a loved one, will have destabilizing effects on the life of a 
resident. If adequate systems are not put in place prior to a shock, then the accumulation of many 
of these events could negatively impact a community. A continued and longer stress, such as 
COVID-19, also has the ability to overwhelm residents and devastate small businesses.  
Estimating the Cost of Adaptation 
While Toronto’s strategy continues to develop, there is not a clearly defined price that the 
municipal government will have to pay. The clearest estimates for the cost to Toronto come from 
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities, which provided a snapshot of the cost of adaptation. 
The findings detail that the total cost of adaptation nationally will require $5.3 billion annually1, 
or 0.26% of Canada’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (FCM 2020, 5). Overall, Canada lost an 
average of $1.8 billion annually in insured losses between 2009 and 2017, a number that will 
grow in coming decades (GCA 2020, 132). Adaptation is a process that bleeds into many aspects 
of urban life and spreads across many municipal silos. This means that the efforts do not need to 
start from the ground but can build upon already existing city initiatives, such as TransformTO, 
or the Poverty Reduction Strategy. The invested funds will need to be distributed across many of 
the City of Toronto’s divisions. 
As stated above, shocks and stresses will be costly to the municipal, provincial, and federal 
governments. Much like the east coast of Canada or Fort McMurray in Alberta, Toronto has 
already witnessed the steep cost of unexpected weather events. The costs from Toronto’s 2013 
ice storm demonstrate the immense funds required to respond to an extreme weather event. The 
 
1 This cost primarily considers physical infrastructure, including buildings, dikes, roads, green infrastructure, water 
treatment, sewer, administration, maintenance, seismic, technology and equipment, and utilities. This doesn’t 
consider the economic impact on social and environmental systems.  
18 
 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities estimates that the total cost of that event to the City of 
Toronto’s divisions, agencies, and corporation was about $107 million (FCM 2020, 54). This 
shows how costly shocks can be and the added stress they put on a municipality’s budget. These 
figures could become worse as shocks and stresses occur at the same time and systems are 
stretched to respond to them.  
Toronto’s position as a primary engine of Ontario’s and Canada’s economies means it is all that 
more important to ensure that systematic disruptions do not stall the economic drivers of the city 
for an extended period of time. The latest census data states that Toronto generated $332 billion, 
or 18.5% of Canada’s total GDP (Toronto Global 2021). Further, Toronto residents have a 
significant impact on the economies of many neighbouring municipalities that depend on 
tourism. Because of this connectivity between Toronto and other cities, domestically and 
globally, any disruption to Toronto’s economy will be economically felt elsewhere as well. 
While this should not evaluate Toronto’s situation as greater than other cities, it is important to 
reflect on the impact of economic disruption at a higher scale.  
It is imperative that cities do not fall into the trap of austerity measures to pay for the significant 
costs of climate adaptation measures. Researchers argue that cities should not cut necessary 
social services to afford new infrastructure improvements because the same social programs are 
necessary for successful adaptation and community resiliency (Bigger & Millington 2020, 605). 
Austerity measures unevenly impact marginalized individuals and communities, the same 
individuals and communities who require resources to increase their adaptive capacity and 
decrease the risk that surrounds them. The additional debt from paying for social services will 
add on to the costs of flooded basements and home repairs from climate shocks. If pursued, these 
policies could expand the wealth gap and further divide the population. The financing solution 
that is created to fund the adaptation plans needs to recognize the value of social programs and 
the inevitable costs of eliminating them. As Bigger & Millington explain, developing just green 
finance that accounts for social justice is critical for adaptation plans because if not, cities are 
privatizing adequate adaptation for the urban elite (Bigger & Millington 2020). In 2021, time is 
on Toronto’s side. The city still has years before it will witness the worst of the impacts from 
climate change, but this time must be used to develop effective policy solutions to prepare for 
impending risk in the future. 
19 
 
Toronto’s Policy Context 
Urban Growth 
The context for this research paper includes the projected growth of Toronto that will occur 
simultaneously with the period that will observe a significant change in the local climate. The 
infrastructure that is developed now must be built to withstand the climate of the future. With 
physical infrastructure having a shelf life of at least 50+ years, the longevity of the developments 
must acknowledge the issues that will be present in the future. Growth must be managed to 
ensure that the systems upon which they are built are able to sustain the population that it 
supports. Increasing the population and density on a structure or system that cannot bear its 
current load will lead to inevitable issues (MacLeod, D. Personal Interview. 2021). Toronto is 
already beginning to witness these strains on its infrastructure through unaffordable housing, 
increased poverty, and overcrowded transit options. These issues must all be addressed in 
conjunction with the increased strain from climate change, such as volatile weather, increased 
energy demand for residential cooling or heating, or social structures to support communities. 
Toronto’s development standards and assessments do consider the strain that new developments 
will have on the existing systems and structures but should be expanded to prepare local 
communities to succeed at becoming and remaining resilient. 
Adaptation vs Mitigation? 
Preparing for climate change occurs in two forms – mitigation and adaptation. Mitigation entails 
the general reduction of emissions of a city, while adaptation regards how a city will change to 
curb the impact of climate change on it. Both approaches are crucial and require a plan from 
municipal governments in order to form a successful climate strategy. It is imperative for the 
world’s stability to maintain a global temperature gain of 1.5 degrees Celsius; however, this 
increase will deliver its own challenges that must be considered. In many circumstances, 
adaptative action also mitigates impact, so the two do not have to be mutually exclusive. This 
research will touch on the important current mitigation work being pursued and accomplished by 
the City of Toronto; however, it will largely focus on adaptation strategies.   
20 
 
While both mitigation and adaptation strategies are crucial, there has been a disproportionate 
focus on mitigation efforts over adaptation efforts in Toronto and other cities around the world. 
Climate mitigation strategies and their focus on emissions reductions emphasize the need to 
develop more efficient technology, land use distribution, and development standards to reduce a 
city’s use of highly polluting energy sources. The less energy it takes to run a city, the less GHGs 
will be released, resulting in a smaller contribution to a rapidly changing climate. By nature, 
mitigation is quantifiable because it can be translated into emitted tonnes of pollution, and any 
reduction can be easily tracked and reported. Similarly, adaptation has a crucial faction of its 
effort that focuses on quantifiable tracking such as tree canopy percentage, sea water barrier, or 
rainwater collection capacity. However, the adaptation efforts also include a large focus on 
community needs and social standards, which relies on qualitative tracking that can be more 
difficult, impeding government funding for implementation. 
On October 2nd, 2019, the city council declared a climate emergency for the city. Over the past 
decade, Toronto has developed mitigation and adaptation policies to establish its plan on how it 
would reduce its impact on climate, while also reducing the impact of climate change on it. The 
plans have largely occurred in a siloed approach with various municipal departments outlining 
their individual approaches for emissions reduction. There has been a greater focus on mitigation 
efforts and planning in comparison to adaptation, which is reflected in the efforts of Toronto’s 
policies. Furthermore, as was outlined in Chapter One, the understanding of climate adaptation 
has expanded in scope to consider a greater focus on community resiliency and equity. Because 
of the broad nature of climate adaptation, this assessment will address the major initiatives of the 
city, specifically those that concern climate change.  
These policies and plans were selected because they represent the current guiding documents for 
Toronto’s climate strategy. They have built upon other climate documents such as the Change is 
in the Air: Climate Change, Clean Air, and Sustainable Energy Plan (City of Toronto 2007), 
Ahead of the Storm: Preparing Toronto for Climate Change (City of Toronto, 2008), and The 
Power to Live Green: Toronto’s Sustainability Energy Strategy (City of Toronto 2009). These 
documents will not be assessed; however, their contribution to the current state of climate policy 
in Toronto is acknowledged.  
21 
 
Climate Action Plans 
TransformTO 
TransformTO was passed in July 2017 as Toronto’s comprehensive climate action strategy and 
primarily concerns mitigation efforts of reducing the municipality’s total GHG emissions 
(TransformTO 2017). The plan aligns its goals with national efforts to meet the reductions target 
set by the 2015 Paris Agreement (TransformTO 2017, 10). Broadly, TransformTO set its 
reductions targets as 30% by 2020, 65% by 2030, and net zero by 2050 (all based on 1990 levels) 
(TransformTO 2017, 6). In 2018, Toronto has reduced its emissions 37% (from 1990s levels) 
while continuing to maintain population and economic growth (TransformTO 2017, 2). The plan 
does not currently include exclusive adaptation measures, however, there are overlapping 
principles that are adaptive and mitigative in nature. The plan underwent a consultation process 
in 2019 and actions were recommended from the Toronto Office of Recovery and Rebuild based 
upon the impacts of COVID-19. The plan will be updated based on this review in late 2021. The 
report includes a section on resilience-related recommendations that would address the equity 
issues that arose during the pandemic. Notably, the recommendations include (#66) expanding 
the access to green space for those who do not already have access to it and utilizing a ‘build 
back better’ lens to land use planning by prioritizing gentle density with an emphasis on mixed 
building types and uses (TORR 18-19). These recommendations promote collaborative strategies 
between mitigation and adaptation efforts that benefit the city in multiple ways.  
TransformTO has been pivotal for Toronto in developing, implementing, and reviewing the 
success of emissions reduction actions. The use of precise climate modeling allows the city to 
clearly speculate, calculate, and communicate how well a proposed initiative will perform if 
implemented. Initiatives such as electrifying the city’s bus fleet, pursuing renewable energy 
choices, and ensuring optimal energy performance of all publicly owned buildings have all 
contributed to Toronto’s effort to reduce its emissions. The limits of TransformTO are its 
primary focus on quantitative data for achieving its goals with little regard for qualitative 
aspects, such as community resilience or social connection. The plan largely deals with 
infrastructurally implemented changes that can easily be tracked and adjusted in a quantifiable 
way. This method has been effective in implementing quick changes that have reduced Toronto’s 
22 
 
emissions; however, this assessment will be difficult to maintain when other aspects, mainly 
those involving qualities such as adaptive capacity or community support, are required to reduce 
emissions.  
Toronto Resilience Strategy 
In May of 2019, the City of Toronto put forth Toronto’s First Resilience Strategy, a guiding plan 
for the city’s climate adaptation approach. The plan was funded in partnership with 100 Resilient 
Cities, a non-profit organization that aims to help international cities develop their own 
adaptation plans and subsequently develop a connected network of municipal governments. The 
City of Toronto appointed Elliott Cappell as the Chief Resilience Officer where he oversaw the 
planning, research, and execution of designing the Resilience Strategy. A key driver of the plan 
is its breakdown of many individual department silos in Toronto’s municipal government to 
provide an overarching approach that weaves and connects climate resilience into every aspect of 
the city. The Resilience Strategy breaks down its 10 goals and 27 actions into 3 key focus areas – 
People and Neighbourhoods, Infrastructure, and Leading a Resilient City2 (Resilience Strategy 
2019, 19). Because of the broad collaborative effort of the strategy and the significant priority of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, Toronto has not yet been able to effectively operationalize the actions 
and goals of the Resilience Strategy.  
The plan proposes a more equitable vision for Toronto’s climate adaptation strategy to replace 
the engineered approach that was featured in the 2007 Climate Change, Clean Air and 
Sustainable Energy Action Plan (2007). The strategy heavily focuses on the qualitative 
experience of Toronto residents and the importance of including community initiatives when 
preparing for climate change. Fundamentally, the plan aims to tackle the multifaceted aspects of 
climate resiliency by not only addressing its impacts but also its root causes. It heavily focuses 
on removing the barriers that marginalized groups face that make them for vulnerable to the 
 
2 People and Neighbourhoods (Toronto has resilient, safe, affordable homes; communities take action to improve resilience in 
their neighbourhoods; and poverty is eliminated, and equity is improved). Infrastructure (Toronto is more resilient to climate 
change, including the hazards of flooding and heat; infrastructure and buildings are resilient to a changing climate and reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions; Toronto has multiple reliable, affordable, and safe mobility options that reduce the amount of time 
it takes to get around). Leading a Resilient City (Civic engagement and trust in the City improve, and leadership better reflects 
Toronto’s diversity; the City prioritizes the most vulnerable people and highest risk in decision-making; Indigenous communities 
have a leadership role in building resilience; and institutionalize resilience into the City’s decision-making and take leadership 
on resilience). 
23 
 
impacts of climate change. The strategy proactively addresses issues such as housing 
accessibility and poverty rates, as key contributors to vulnerability, to urban climate issues such 
as flooding or extreme heat (Resilience Strategy 2019). This section emphasizes the importance 
of community engagement, education, and involvement in developing local climate initiatives 
and increasing adaptive capacity (Resilience Strategy 2019).  
Two action items of the plan are similar to the recommendations of this research paper. Action 
A2.1 concerns the improvement of Toronto communities’ capacity to prepare and recover from 
shocks (Resilience Strategy 2019, 84). The action emphasizes the importance of focusing on 
neighbourhoods with more vulnerable populations and the importance of creating a strong 
grassroots effort. Action B2.2 concerns further integrating resilience into the city’s development 
and land use planning (Resilience Strategy 2019, 113-4). Ensuring that resilience is integrated 
into the city fabric ensures that the physical and social infrastructures of communities are able to 
adequately handle the increased demand of growth.  
Toronto’s Resilience Strategy is a well-rounded document that addresses Toronto’s gaps that 
prevent it from becoming more resilient to climate change. The strategy’s focus on equity is 
crucial for addressing climate adaptation, specifically through a community, infrastructural, and 
governance lens. The strategy’s breakdown of departmental silos is important because of the 
focus on developing co-beneficial action plans. Because the report was developed under the 100 
Resilient Cities program, it resembles the quality of plans of many global cities. While the 
climate resilience plan is thorough, its execution and implementation in Toronto have been 
problematic. Toronto created a Resilience Office upon the completion of the Resilience Strategy; 
however, the office has not been allocated many resources to initiate plans. Because of the 
immense scale of the plan, Toronto’s Council needs to allocate budgetary funding towards a 
resilience-focused task force, either in an existing division such as the Environment & Energy 
Division or in its own separate office. Another obstruction to climate adaptation progress was 
COVID-19’s impact on the city. The pandemic strained the municipal annual budget and 
reallocated resources to aid in the relief efforts. However, COVID-19 and climate change 
adaptation share many root causes, so the recovery to the pandemic could act as a kickstart to a 
greater community resilience initiative.  
24 
 
Toronto Green Standard 
The Toronto Green Standard, as outlined in the Zero Emissions Building Framework report, are 
sustainable development standards that new private and city-owned developments must meet 
(Zero Emissions Building Framework 2018). The Toronto Green Standard is a tiered system that 
promotes sustainable site building design that aligns development to Toronto’s emissions 
reduction efforts. The Toronto Green Standard addresses focused areas such as improved air 
quality, reduced energy use and GHG emissions, reduced storm water runoff, and the diversion 
of waste to landfill (Zero Emissions Building Framework 2018, 15). Compliance with the 
standard is mandatory through the planning approval process for tier 1, however, tiers 2 through 
4 are voluntary. Adherence to the later tiers offer financial incentives and refunds on 
development charges to the city. There have been multiple versions of the Toronto Green 
Standard that increase the levels of compliance to reach lower overall emissions targets. Its 
consistent 4-year review process of the development standard and the upgrading of the 
compulsory tier of the program has been a key strength of the standard. Continuing to grow the 
standard provides developers and city officials time to gain experience in implementing the 
specifications that reduce a site’s consumption and use of greenhouse gases.  
The Toronto Green Standard have proven to be a viable tool for influencing new development in 
Toronto to have less of an impact on the environment. This standard is crucial for meeting the 
city’s overall energy reduction goals for 2030 and further to 2050. A drawback of the Toronto 
Green Standard is similar to those stated for TransformTO in that it is primarily focused on 
mitigative efforts and is missing a community resilience consideration. However, due to the 
revisionary nature of the standard, there are opportunities to expand the development standard to 
encapsulate a broader scope. Another drawback of the program is the difficulty to entice 
developers to comply to tiers higher than tier one. As stated during the interview with Dan 
Leeming, there needs to be more incentive for developers to pursue greater tiers than a refunded 
development charge which may only result in a sliver of overall costs being refunded (Leeming, 
D. Personal Interview. 2020). Leeming further explained that this could be a role for the province 
to play as “the City [of Toronto] can’t do it all on its own and the province needs to play a more 
significant and helpful role” (Leeming, D. Personal Interview. 2020). A better combination of 
25 
 
compulsory standards and incentives would encourage more developments to hit a higher 
standard earlier.  
 
Chapter Three: Case Study – Rotterdam, Netherlands 
The Netherlands is among the global leaders for adapting their cityscapes to the influence of 
climate change. Largely, this change is due to their proximity to rising water systems that 
threaten to flood the cities that are built in close proximity to, and below, ocean levels. 
Rotterdam has always been aware of its relationship with the natural environment and has 
developed its land use with the potential impact of flooding in mind. The city of Rotterdam has 
emerged as not only an international example of a city that is effectively adapting, but also as the 
international hub for idea sharing and cooperation. The Global Centre for Adaptation, founded in 
2018, is headquartered in Rotterdam. The organization aims to connect countries and cities to 
spread information and resources to provide accessible solutions that can be adapted to local 
needs. Rotterdam acknowledges the threat of climate change and is actively adapting itself to 
become more resilient to its impacts. For this reason, Rotterdam is a leader in climate adaptation 
policy implementation and can be a role model for Toronto to improve its own strategy.  
Similarities to Toronto 
Rotterdam and Toronto share some similarities in their future projected interactions with climate 
change. Both cities are forecasted to witness greater annual rainfall, periods of extreme heat 
(days above 30C), and more erratic weather patterns (Weatherwise 2019, 18; Climate Atlas 
2021). The urban implications of these changes are predicted to include greater risk of flooding 
and a worsening urban heat island effect. Because of Rotterdam’s location on a delta and its low 
elevation, flooding will be more of an issue for them. The heat island effect will be worse in 
Toronto because of the significant amount of paved area. Both cities have indicated the presence 
of vulnerable populations that are, and will continue to be, more susceptible to the climatic 
impacts.  
Rotterdam’s Approach 
26 
 
Rotterdam’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (2013) and Rotterdam Weatherwise (2019) are 
the city’s guiding policies for implementing the changes necessary to make the city ‘climate-
proof. Like other climate adaptation strategies, they provide focus areas that guide where and 
how actions should be taken. The plans set the ambitious goal of 2025 as the timeline to 
implement the strategy because of the visible proximity to the climate-related issues. These plans 
have included a wide array of stakeholders, including residents, private real estate, government, 
and non-governmental organizations, to create solutions that create opportunity while reaching 
the municipality’s goals. Key to the recommendations of this paper, Rotterdam is recognized as a 
global leader in climate adaptation because of its complete approach of investing into both its 
infrastructure and community (C40 2016, 9; Centre for Livable Cities 2020, 112; Dai et al. 2018, 
667).  
During an interview with Tim De Waele, he highlighted some of the aspects that have been 
beneficial for Rotterdam’s climate adaptation process (De Waele, T. Personal Interview. 2021). 
A key component of Rotterdam’s approach is the implementation strategy that has been laid out 
to set in motion the strategy’s actions. The strategy acknowledges that adaptation should occur 
’in tune with the rhythm of the city’ which means that new developments need to be constructed 
with sustainable measures and existing infrastructure needs to be updated when it becomes 
outdated (Rotterdam Adaptation Strategy 2013, 132). Rotterdam has included developers, 
businesses, non-government groups and residents to form solutions so that change occurs in a 
functional way. The strategy outlines a series of instruments that can be utilized in tandem 
between city planners and residents to implement the necessary changes. The adaptation 
instruments include a publicly accessible and easily understandable climate data index, a 
barometer of the progress of adaptation projects in Rotterdam, and a toolset of designs and 
projects that can be adjusted for scale and purpose (Rotterdam Adaptation Strategy 2013, 130). 
Rotterdam has made implementation a streamlined process while making public accountability a 
priority.  
Another aim of Rotterdam is to take advantage of the opportunities that planning for climate 
change provides by improving the livability of neighbourhoods, increasing biodiversity, and 
stimulating public participation and activity in the city (Rotterdam Adaptation Strategy 2013, 7). 
The Rotterdam Weatherwise programme largely focuses on establishing a robust and 
27 
 
collaborative approach to adaptation through strong public and private engagement 
(Weatherwise 2019, 48). Rotterdam approaches adaptation not as a problem, but as an 
opportunity to make new investments into the future of its residents and to become a leader for 
other delta cities and the world. Taking this approach has given the city a chance to grow as a 
community through local consultations and initiative development. Without local community 
buy-in and the subsequent impact that it has on city building, there cannot be enough adaptation 
to occur to adequately prepare the city (Weatherwise 2019, 48). Rotterdam’s policies recognize 
that the wellbeing of a local community is fundamental for the strength of the initiatives that it 
aims to deploy. Investing in its communities is paramount for reducing the impact of climate 
change in the future for Rotterdam.  
Ideas for Toronto  
Due to the City of Rotterdam’s proven success, leadership, and similar climate, forecast there are 
policy and project ideas for Toronto to adopt and adapt to its own particular environment. These 
ideas are compatible with Toronto’s current capacity and could be implemented through 
Toronto’s City Planning and other impacted divisions. The ideas focus on developing co-
beneficial projects between the physical and social infrastructure of the local community. For 
both cities, resilience to climate change is a necessary investment to accompany the financing of 
physical infrastructure and the built environment.  
Area focused implementation ideas 
The first idea that Toronto would benefit from is the neighbourhood focus on project 
implementation. The area-focused implementation process takes a hybrid top-down and bottom-
up approach which educates and engages local residents, customizing ideas from a municipal 
toolbox to fit the needs of their community. In tandem with the important climate adaptation 
features, Rotterdam is using these spaces to improve the livability and the quality of life of 
residents living there (Rotterdam Resilience Strategy 2015, 82; Centre for Livable Cities 2020, 
112). Rotterdam’s strategy utilizes a storytelling method to establish a sense of a shared burden 
to unify communities against a common adversary (Rotterdam Adaptation Strategy 2013, 126). 
Adding excitement and importance to a project increased the interest and involvement from the 
local and citywide population (De Waele, T. Personal Interview. 2021). Embracing local leaders 
28 
 
to champion the initiatives, in tandem with municipal professionals, creates a greater chance that 
the project will achieve community support (De Waele, T. Personal Interview. 2021). The 
strategy highlights the importance of reprogramming areas to serve both an active community 
benefit and a passive climate resilience benefit. This approach makes solutions more affordable 
than new development because it utilizes spaces and infrastructure that already exist.  
Highlight: Zomerhofkwartier (ZoHo) District 
Rotterdam has embraced the idea of area focused implementation through its Climate Proof 
Zomerhofkwartier (ZoHo) District project. The ZoHo area has been selected as a vulnerable area 
to climate change and has been utilized as an urban laboratory to test adaptation measures on a 
community scale (Urbanisten 2014, 19). Some of the projects that the area has pursued include: 
Benthemplain Watersquare, Polder Roof, Katshoek Rain(a)way Garden, ZoHo Rainbarrel, 
Greening Hofbogen, and ZoHo Raingardeden (Rotterdam Adaptation Strategy 2013, 41). These 
plans are primarily creative solutions for adapting existing infrastructure, such as parking 
garages, to absorb more rainwater during periods of heavy rain (Urbanisten 2014). An immense 
strength of the projects are the dual benefits they provide - community benefits through place-
making in addition to their adaptive services. The district plan heavily involves residents from 
the area such as entrepreneurs, artists, and social groups to create projects that will fit in well to 
the existing urban landscape. Developing solutions involves public engagement and education 
processes that then utilize the toolset that is outlined by the city to reach its climate goals. 
Utilizing one area as a laboratory to incubate ideas quickly builds precedent for other areas in the 
city and political confidence about the opportunity for success.  
Co-beneficial adaptation measures 
The second important takeaway from Rotterdam that Toronto could incorporate is the approach 
of developing climate adaptation infrastructure that has co-beneficial aspects for the surrounding 
community. Rotterdam’s approach, much like Toronto’s strategy, focuses on alleviating the 
pressure on the city’s water systems to reduce the possibility that the system is overloaded, in 
which damage occurs to public and private property (Rotterdam Adaptation Strategy 2013, 82-
3). The general approach involves the implementation of infrastructure to delay the release of 
water into the respective municipal water systems to prevent overloading. The two cities have 
29 
 
some similar strategies, such as the use of green infrastructure, to increase the total amount of 
water that can be absorbed naturally. Utilizing public areas as locations for water storage sites is 
something that can be incorporated into many areas of a city, with the specific design of this 
green and blue infrastructure being adapted to fit the needs of the area. The designs can either be 
passive, like the Museum Park underground water storage, or they that can provide alternative 
benefits to their area while not in use. Rainfall capturing spaces will become more crucial as the 
impacts of climate change become more apparent.  
Highlight: The Benthemplain Watersquare 
As mentioned above, water squares such as the Benthemplain Watersquare are an urban solution 
that can be useful in retaining water during periods of heavy rainfall, while also being a 
functional community space when it is not being used to collect water. The project increases the 
resilience of the neighbourhood by adapting public space to have a climate-related function 
while providing a useful and engaging communal space (Centre for Livable Cities 2020, 113). 
The square is made up of three basins: two shallower basins for normal rainfalls and a deeper 
one for periods of extended rain (Urbanisten 2014, 42-6). Technology has been incorporated into 
the design to follow weather forecasting and use remote sensing to operate in an optimal fashion. 
The 3-basin system holds rainwater and releases it, once the heavy rainfall is done, into an 
infiltration system to hydrate the nearby vegetation before the next period of forecasted heavy 
rainfall (Urbanisten 2014, 42-6). A trough system carries the water from the surrounding 
residential and commercial areas to fill the basins while limiting the accumulation of water 
elsewhere.  
Not only does the space provide climate-related benefits, but it also retains its community use as 
well. Before the area was converted into a water collection space, it was an under-utilized space 
because of its awkward connection to the surrounding high-density area (Public Square 2014). 
Benthemplain Waterquare provides sitting areas for residents and an open space for activities 
and sports. The dual feature of the infrastructure provides alternative use, and therefore added 
value, to the community while serving an additional important purpose. The design of the square 
was built upon local participation which created enthusiasm and support for the project. The 
30 
 
mixture of grey and green infrastructure creates an attractive space for residents to spend their 
time and interact with one another.  
Rotterdam’s approach of strongly incorporating the opinions, experiences, and needs of its local 
residents into climate adaptation solutions would benefit Toronto’s adaptation progress. 
Engaging residents and encouraging participation with local initiatives that contribute to the 
overall city-wide adaptation effort could help Toronto frame the work as an opportunity instead 
of a cumbersome experience. Creating excitement around a pilot project area that encourages 
residents to learn about the need for it and its benefit to the community helps establish 
precedence for other similar projects and communal understanding. Co-beneficial projects that 
provide social benefits in addition to physical adaptation benefits could help the City of Toronto 
gain the support of the public and the subsequent investment into the necessary infrastructure. 
Toronto has the capacity to become the leader for climate adaptation in Canada and should 
utilize Rotterdam as an example for its own strategy implementation.  
 
Chapter 4: Recommendations 
The literature review and policy review have painted a picture of what still needs to be done in 
Toronto to make the city more resilient. While the city has produced a good mitigation strategy 
with policies like the TransformTO strategy and the Toronto Green Standard, the 
recommendations of this research paper is that Toronto needs to increase its adaptation specific 
programing. This understanding was highlighted through the policy review and from 
professionals during their interviews. Below are two recommendations that would serve as 
adequate initial projects for a Resilience Office to establish the foundations for further growth. 
Both recommendations aim to fill current gaps in Toronto’s climate strategy while also creating 
policy that can and should grow to fit the needs of Toronto. The policies have the capability to be 
expanded to include a broader lens that encompasses more aspects of climate adaptation; 
however, for the purpose of this research paper, they will focus on their ability to improve the 
adaptive capacity and increase the resilience of a community.  
31 
 
The first recommendation is a neighbourhood-focused approach, similar to the 
Zomerhofkwartier District in Rotterdam, to establish community driven neighbourhood 
resilience plans that implement community projects under a resilience lens. This 
recommendation would not only use green and built infrastructure but would build upon the 
existing social ties to improve an area’s adaptive capacity. The adaptation measures would be 
developed with resident involvement and would be adapted to meet the needs of the local 
neighbourhood community.  
The second recommendation relates to new development in the city to address the forecasted 
continual growth in Toronto. This research paper recommends that a resilience-focused 
assessment be added to the development process in Toronto. Broadly, this assessment would 
measure how well the development prepares the building to endure the challenges of the future, 
based upon climate forecasting and risk assessments. The assessment would evaluate the 
individual development and the surrounding community to measure the social infrastructure that 
would become necessary during periods of shock. The assessment recommendation is built upon 
Toronto’s current development process, relevant literature, and other best practice methods.  
Recommendation 1: Neighbourhood Resilience Plans 
The first recommendation focuses on the need to promote the development of neighbourhood 
resilience plans (NRP), a city neighbourhood plan that focuses on reducing local vulnerabilities 
and increasing resiliency. The NRP would set resilience priorities, based on a vulnerability 
assessment and local perception of relevant issues and actions, both locally- and government-
driven, aimed to address them. The NRP would be structured to be a collaboration between the 
City of Toronto and the surrounding community with a strong focus on local initiatives. 
Interviews with Shannon Logan, and Jeb Brugmann outlined the importance of a neighbourhood-
focused initiative concentrated on reducing vulnerabilities, providing relevant resources, and 
expanding local networks centred with a resilience lens (Logan, S. Personal Interview. 2021; 
Brugmann, J. Personal Interview. 2021). A committee of interested local residents would be 
created to plan, implement, and maintain community projects while also being consulted in the 
decision-making process for new resilience-focused infrastructure. Current city strategies such as 
the Toronto Strong Neighbourhoods Strategy 2020 and the Poverty Reduction Strategy have 
32 
 
similar goals and could be adapted to incorporate a climate resilience aspect (Neighbourhood 
Strategy 2020; Poverty Reduction 2019). Overall, each NRP would contribute to the benchmarks 
and goals established by the City of Toronto through its Resilience Strategy (Resilience Strategy 
2019; 84-6). To initiate the rollout of NRP, the City of Toronto could pursue a pilot project in 
two neighbourhoods, then use the experience gained through the pilot as precedents for other 
neighbourhoods.  
The neighbourhood resilience plan would be comprised of the actions: 
- 
Set neighbourhood profile/ boundaries 
- 
Figure out risks and vulnerabilities of neighbourhood through assessments and local 
knowledge 
- 
Establish priorities  
- 
Develop action group committee of interested residents 
- 
Implement community initiatives to address both the needs of the community and climate 
adaptation 
The City of Toronto would establish community profiles based upon the existing 168 
neighbourhood profiles (Neighbourhood Profiles 2021). These profiles could serve as the 
foundation for the NRP and would provide a general understanding of the neighbourhood’s 
demographics and natural features. As stated in Action A2.1 of the Resilience Strategy, 
neighbourhoods designated Neighbourhood Improvement Areas (NIA) could be highlighted as 
areas that may require greater capacity and network establishment (2019, 84-6). It is important 
that local residents are included in the priority setting to provide a first-hand account of issues 
that face their neighbourhoods.  
Developing a neighbourhood resilience plan would provide Toronto’s residents an entry-point to 
address the specific needs of a community while also adapting to climate change. Every 
neighbourhood would fall upon a spectrum of adaptive capacity which would require varying 
levels of investment into the neighbourhood. In conversation with Councillor Mike Layton, he 
detailed the importance of engaging with communities to develop focused plans that cater to the 
needs of the community in order to increase the chance of success for the program (Layton, M. 
Personal Interview. 2020). While some neighbourhoods in Toronto already have suitable built, 
natural, and social infrastructure established, such as Bloor West Village or other affluent areas, 
33 
 
other communities in the city such as Rexdale, or Jane and Finch require more attention to 
address the potential risks and vulnerabilities. While every neighbourhood’s climate resilience 
should be addressed, some neighbourhoods will need more focus to reduce the already present 
vulnerabilities.  
A key focus of all neighbourhood resilience plans would be to establish adaptative capacity and 
community resilience through community-driven actions. The actions would depend on the 
priorities set by the neighbourhood risk profiles. This ensures that other issues related to 
resilience can be addressed, since solutions can have co-benefits. The focus on the 
neighbourhood scale provides the opportunity for a multitude of local actors to deliberate about 
the needs of the community. Through the connection with the City of Toronto and its divisions, 
such as the Social Development Finance and Administration or Environment and Energy, a 
community action group can liaison with city workers to pursue development solutions that 
contribute to the goals of the city while using local initiatives to create worthwhile community 
spaces. As was discussed in the first chapter’s literature review, it is crucial for community 
resilience initiatives to have a strong bottom-up approach to ensure greater local participation 
(Fransen et al. 2020,19). This community-driven approach could either be initiated through a 
new grassroots project or by tapping into existing community groups that may have a vested 
interest in climate resilience. Furthermore, the NRP would serve as a hub of educational 
resources for the local community. Informational sessions and materials that breakdown climate 
science and its impacts could be provided to the community to increase overall awareness of the 
issue. This too would help increase the adaptive capacity of the area since more citizens would 
be able to understand the adaptive needs of the community.  
Precedents  
The following precedents provide varying degrees of municipal investment into neighbourhoods 
to develop adaptive capacity and eventual community resilience. The City of Toronto would 
utilize the information gathered from the profile creation, risk and vulnerability assessments, and 
public consultation to determine the level of investment required for each neighbourhood. The 
level of investment is relative to the amount of existing climate vulnerability in the 
neighbourhood.  
34 
 
Similar projects have been developed worldwide to prepare cities for the reality of climate 
change, with Rotterdam’s Zomerhofkwartier District serving as a prime example of how local 
community and government can develop resilience together. Other examples include Portland’s 
Lloyd EcoDistrict or Victoria’s West Pilot (EcoDistrict 2017; Resilient Neighbourhoods 2013). 
The projects listed above serve as suitable precedents that Toronto can utilize as frameworks and 
customize to fit its individual situation. These projects all use neighbourhoods as the vehicle to 
support, organize and deliver the change needed to achieve internationally recognized climate 
goals. Equity remains fundamental to these projects to ensure that adaptation benefits are not 
unevenly distributed. Strong community involvement is imperative to the success of the 
implemented strategies.  
The proposed framework of the neighbourhood resilience plan would involve a community-
focused direction that is already present in Toronto. Initiatives such as Business Improvement 
Areas, Community Improvement, and Neighbourhood Improvement Areas are all examples of 
partnerships between government and community that aim to improve neighbourhoods. City 
officials would work closely with the communities and would provide specialized 
recommendations on how neighbourhoods could implement their ideas and projects. Fortunately, 
there are already community organizing efforts throughout Toronto that could be used as a 
starting point to find residents interested in climate action in each neighbourhood. Ideally, the 
community efforts would attract as many members as possible to spread relevant information 
most easily, however, the participation will likely vary depending on a variety of reasons like 
subject matter, time of year, or other external forces. Therefore, it is important to find local 
champions that can act as community organizers in their neighbourhoods (Antze, P. Personal 
Interview. 2021). This approach was also reflected in the conversation with Councillor Mike 
Layton. The Councillor reflected on the importance of elected and non-elected officials working 
closely with community organizers, providing insight into how community groups can influence 
change (Layton, M. Personal Interview. 2020). The actors involved with the NRP would also 
serve as community leaders during periods of shock by effectively communicating between local 
government and residents as well as connecting residents in need with needed resources.  
Fortunately, Toronto does not need to search far for existing successful precedents that can be 
adapted to fit the needs of the city. The TRCA’s Sustainable Neighbourhood Action Program 
35 
 
(SNAP) aims to work with municipalities to incorporate environmental improvements into urban 
renewal projects (TRCA 2021). This program aims to address issues already present in the 
neighbourhood while also establishing a foundational network of environmentally focused 
residents. SNAP is an example of a program catered towards neighbourhoods that require greater 
investment into the community’s adaptive capacity. The Green Neighbours Network (GNN) is a 
network of community groups that represent concerned residents that want to make Toronto a 
greener city (Green Neighbours 2021). The member groups are all different and focus on 
environmental issues that are relevant to their residents. The GNN is an example of a program 
that involves neighbourhoods or communities that already have some capacity to adapt to 
climate change. Each precedent represents a place on the spectrum of adaptive capacity on which 
every neighbourhood in Toronto would fall.  
During an interview with Shannon Logan, a Senior Program Project Manager with the TRCA, 
she discussed the impact that SNAP has had on communities (Logan, S. Personal Interview. 
2021). Currently, there are three SNAP initiatives in Toronto, Black Creek SNAP, Rexdale, and 
the Pocket SNAP. The program relies on a collaborative and thorough screening process to 
determine which neighbourhoods are suitable, and vulnerable to environmental, social, and 
economic risk, for the investment of the program’s resources. The TRCA already works closely 
with city divisions during the selection process to choose the locations for their projects.  
Because the program is resource intensive with thorough community engagement, program 
Figure 3: Snap Program Planning Process, Snap Program, Toronto and Region Conservation Authority (2021) 
36 
 
creation and implementation, the current program would be too costly for many Toronto 
neighbourhoods. Because of the locality, SNAP provides a clear framework for the City of 
Toronto to integrate into its own neighbourhood improvement initiatives.  
The neighbourhood resilience plan would incorporate a similar foundational risk and 
vulnerability assessment on the selected neighbourhood as TRCA’s SNAP. Figure 2 displays the 
breakdown of the process taken to develop their action plans. This assessment would be 
undertaken by a city official but would be expanded with the insight of local residents. This 
understanding of local threats will determine the required response and subsequent investment to 
increase the resilience of the neighbourhood. Understanding the current and forecasted risks to 
the neighbourhood will help develop better plans to adapt for climate change.  
During interviews with Lee Adamson and Paul Antze, founding co-chairs of the Green 
Neighbours Network of Toronto (GNN), they discussed their experiences participating in a 
network that promoted sustainable and resilient solutions for community members (Adamson, L. 
Personal Interview. 2021; Antze, P. Personal Interview). Both acknowledged the privileges that 
they and their communities already have that provide them the capacity to socially organize and 
increase their community’s resiliency. The groups provide neighbourhoods with a dependable 
access point for climate-related information regarding ways to adapt their home or ways that 
their actions contribute to national and international goals. Another highlighted benefit was the 
sense of community connection, an important feature that can be utilized during a period of 
stress (Adamson, L. Personal Interview. 2021; Antze, P. Personal Interview). Neighbours could 
provide support, such as checking in on elderly members or grocery shopping for those who do 
not have access to a car, during periods of extreme heat, rain, or weather. The co-founders 
described the advantages of a co-beneficial relationship between the community group and 
representation from the City of Toronto. The community-driven projects and foci ensured that 
the subject matter remained relevant and engaging to residents, while the connection with a city 
official provided a greater access to resources that would not have been available otherwise.  
The experience of the Green Neighbours Network provides insight into how neighbourhoods 
with existing capacity and networks can integrate a resilience-focused lens into community 
projects or development. The NRP would provide them with a detailed path to addressing 
37 
 
existing vulnerabilities, such as home energy or water retainment or catchment retrofits. 
Neighbourhoods with more capacity would be able to engage local leadership to drive both 
short- and long-term initiatives with less directional influence from city officials. Additionally, 
the city-wide network exhibited by the Green Neighbours Network demonstrates a functional 
decentralized idea sharing network that is able to provide precedents to other neighbourhoods. 
This network structure could be facilitated easily with the involvement of the City of Toronto 
since government officials would easily be able to connect neighbourhoods working on similar 
projects.  
Fortunately, Toronto does not need to start fresh to develop a more climate resilient population; 
however, this process will require time and financial investment. The initial financial investment 
to establish the community resilience profiles and plans would need to be costed and funded 
through the City’s Budget process. Toronto could integrate some of the community consultation 
and outreach cost into other community wellbeing initiatives currently occurring in the city to 
reduce the overall cost. It is important that this process begins soon to allow for the community 
groups to start sharing information. Developing a neighbourhood resilience plan is important but 
implementing it through actionable steps is essential.  
Recommendation 2: Resilience Assessment 
The second recommendation of this research paper is the introduction of a resilience assessment 
(RA) into the development process of Toronto. Lisa King and Jeb Brugmann discussed the idea 
of an RA in Toronto’s development process as a way of ensuring that new developments are able 
to withstand the conditions of the future and address the risks and vulnerabilities of the site and 
community (Brugmann, J. Personal Interview. 2021; King, L. Personal Interview. 2021). In 
essence, a resilience assessment is a new development’s buy-in into the future of the 
neighbourhood and its existing resilience strategy. (Sharifi & Yamagata 2014, 1493). The 
resilience assessment would consist of an acknowledgement of the existing and forecasted 
climate-related risks and vulnerabilities in the area. It would also demonstrate how the 
development will retain a high standard of performance during its shelf life and in a more 
volatile climate. Finally, the assessment will require an indication of the development’s 
contributions to Toronto’s climate initiatives, which will be broken down into 5 dimensions: 
38 
 
Materials and Environmental Resources, Social and Wellbeing, Economy, Built Environment 
and Infrastructure, and Governance and Institutions (Sharifi & Yamagata 2016, 263). Toronto’s 
Green Standard already establishes a standard on Materials and Environmental Resources and 
Built Environment and Infrastructure; therefore, this research paper will focus solely on the 
Social and Wellbeing Dimension by explaining its importance for its inclusion and how it would 
contribute to Toronto’s community resilience.  
The first two requirements for the resilience assessment primarily safeguard that the developer 
has planned for the conditions of climate change. This assessment would allow city planners to 
use the City of Toronto’s influence over land-use planning to ensure the developer has completed 
research into the present and future vulnerabilities of the site and the surrounding community.  
Incorporating an acknowledgement of climate modelling and the forecasted conditions into the 
development process would indicate that the development has a reliable performance standard 
for the entirety of its proposed shelf life. As Jeb Brugmann stated, this indication of performance 
is also an important factor for potential homebuyers as the impacts of climate change become 
more apparent (Brugmann, J. Personal Interview. 2021). It is beneficial for the current and future 
residents of Toronto to know that their home reaches an acceptable standard for enduring climate 
change. The standard, similar to the function of the Toronto Green Standard, would promote 
innovation and high-quality development to meet the needs of future generations. Introducing an 
explicit resilience-related assessment into Toronto’s development process would ensure that the 
concept is embedded into the fabric of the city. It is crucial that developers are included in 
preparing Toronto for climate change because of the immense impact they have on the city’s 
current and future growth.  
The summarization of 36 international examples displays that a resilience assessment consists of 
typically 5 dimensions: Materials and Environmental Resources, Social and Wellbeing, 
Economy, Built Environment and Infrastructure, and Governance and Institutions (Sharifi & 
Yamagata 2016, 263). Each dimension reflects attributes of Toronto’s climate policy strategy, is 
critical for achieving a full picture of climate resilience and would have its own measurable 
components that each contribute to the overall success. This recommendation will focus on the 
Social and Wellbeing dimension to provide insight on how pre-development planning can 
contribute to community resilience and adaptation. The developer would be able to innovate their 
39 
 
proposal to fit the resilience-specific needs of a community, which would then move the 
application through Toronto’s development process. Including a Social and Wellbeing dimension 
into a resilience assessment is important because of the significance that strong community 
resilience can have on enduring climate shocks such as heat waves, periods of flooding, and 
emergencies.  
The resilience assessment would have to provide clear criteria for developers to assess and 
evaluate in their project area that reflect the priorities established by Toronto’s Resilience 
Strategy (Figueiredo et al. 2018, 40; Resilience Strategy 2019). Measurable assets that contribute 
to the Social and Wellbeing dimension could include socio-economic characteristics, community 
bonds, social support, social institutions, safety and wellbeing, equity and diversity, and local 
culture and traditions (Sharifi & Yamagata 2016, 265). Each asset would be comprised of criteria 
or indicators that the City of Toronto would need to develop to reflect both the needs of the 
community and the climate goals of the city. Based on these indicators, city planners can work 
with developers to alter the development plan to provide resilience-related co-benefits. The 
added benefits could be similar to the current Community Benefit Agreement (CBA) already 
present in Toronto’s development process; however, these would require a climate resilience 
impact.  
Precedents 
Developing a completely new development assessment would be unnecessary because of the 
success and similar subject matter of Toronto Green Standard. While the Toronto Green 
Standard, in its current version 3 form, has overlap with resilience initiatives, it primarily 
focuses on mitigation efforts and prescribes to a more engineered definition of climate adaptation 
(Zero Emissions Building Framework 2018). Incorporating an RA into the Toronto Green 
Standard would allow for it to benefit from the success of the established development standard, 
namely its review process and standard improvement. The established 4-year review schedule 
would allow for the expectations from developers to gradually increase, for experience to be 
gained and relevant precedents to be established for new developments to emulate. Furthermore, 
incorporating community resilience into the Toronto Green Standard would provide a more 
streamlined integration into the development process than introducing a new assessment 
40 
 
altogether. Grouping resilience-related assessments together would better display the 
interconnectivity of the multiple dimensions of resilience, which would help developers connect 
the needs of the site to the greater needs of the community and city.  
There are limited international precedents for development-scale resilience assessments 
specifically focused on community and social wellbeing. However, assessments that evaluate a 
city’s resilience can be utilized as an example for the purposes of this research paper. The 
Rockefeller Foundation and the engineering consultant company ARUP created the City 
Resilience Index (CRI) that evaluates a city’s progress to become more resilient to climate 
change (ARUP 2014). The CRI’s relevant indicators to the Social and Wellbeing dimension are 
minimal human vulnerability, diverse livelihood and employment, effective safeguards to human 
health and life, and collective identity and mutual support. (ARUP 2014). Each of these have 
measurable categories that contribute the overall progress of the Social and Wellbeing 
dimension. While these indicators would need to be further adapted to assess Toronto’s 
communities, they provide an understanding of how the overall dimension of Social and 
Wellbeing can be broken down into categories that developers can easily follow and outline their 
contribution to improving Toronto. 
Overlap with Neighbourhood Resilience Plans 
The two recommendations could provide insights and resources for each other. The adaptation 
priorities of the neighbourhood resilience plan could be utilized by developers to innovate their 
projects to contribute to the needs of the community. Displaying an understanding not only of the 
performance of the individual development, but also of the surrounding community, incentivizes 
developers to innovate and contribute to the resilience of the neighbourhood. Community 
resilience-focused development could include more communal areas that can be adapted to the 
needs of the community. Importantly, the information gathered about the needs of the 
community provides direction for developers to follow. Developers that can demonstrate that 
their project fills the needs of a community could receive incentives such as a more streamlined 
timeline through the development process. 
The presence of a neighbourhood resilience plan also signifies to developers that risks associated 
with climate change are being addressed by the city. Brugmann explained that this de-risking 
41 
 
will influence the market to make areas where community resilience is present as a viable place 
to pursue development, where the community and city are seeking investment and development 
improvements (Brugmann, J. Personal Interview. 2021). Implementing community-focused 
initiatives will ideally make that neighbourhood more appealing to live in, which will in turn 
influence the market in a positive way. If communicated in an effective manner, residents of 
Toronto will understand the importance of resilience, which will impact their decision-making 
on where to live in the city. Ideally, this community attention to resilience-driven development 
will result in an increase in market value of the project.  
 
Conclusion  
Without community resilience, the City of Toronto will face a future with greater shocks and 
stresses from climate change. Neighbourhoods throughout the city need to be prepared to endure 
periods of turmoil with resources and social networks to support residents. The recommendations 
of this research paper provide examples of policy that could be implemented by the City of 
Toronto to integrate neighbourhood resilience into the city fabric. Neighbourhood resilience 
plans would provide guidance for the initiatives that should be taken to grow the social and 
physical infrastructures of existing neighbourhoods. It is important to include a hybrid, bottom-
up and top-down approach to address the specific needs of the community while also aiming for 
goals established by the City of Toronto. These community-driven initiatives have a multitude of 
purposes that mitigate the risks of the present, and future, while strengthening the social ties of 
the community. Adding a resilience assessment to the development process in Toronto would 
ensure that developers are engaging in thinking about the current and future risks to their sites. 
Additionally, it would help developers innovate their plans to better contribute to Toronto’s 
climate goals. It is crucial that future development in Toronto is suitable for the anticipated 
changes in climate. Developing more connected and resilient communities is a critical step in 
preparing for predicted future stresses.  
Toronto has a foundation to build upon with evolving policy like TransformTO, the Toronto 
Green Standard, and the Resilience Strategy. These plans establish the city’s commitment to 
42 
 
reducing its impact on the environment. Now that Toronto has set its goals for government-
directed plans, a natural next step is to engage and prepare the communities and neighbourhoods 
of Toronto for adaptation. It is crucial that this preparation utilizes an equitable approach and 
invests the necessary resources into neighbourhoods that do not have the same adaptive capacity 
as other neighbourhoods. The future of Toronto belongs to those that choose to live here, so 
affluence and privilege should not dictate safety and livelihood. For Toronto to continue to grow, 
thrive, and solidify its position as a world class city, it needs to adapt to the impacts of climate 
change. Great cities do not only react to periods of stress or hardship, but also anticipate and plan 
for them.  
 
 
43 
 
Appendix: 
Appendix 1: Interview questions 
Interview Questions 
- 
What is your professional experience with climate adaptation? What is your experience with land 
use planning and climate change? 
- 
How can cities incorporate mitigation and adaptation measures into their master plans and 
secondary plans?  
o Mitigation 
o Adaptation 
- 
Economically, how can cities afford the upfront costs of adaptation and mitigation motivated 
developments? 
- 
How can governance issues impede the process of adapting cities?  
- 
What land use planning tools could Toronto utilize to make the city more resilient and have less 
of an impact on climate change? 
- 
Are there any cities that Toronto could look to for inspiration for examples of best practice for 
climate change impacted development? 
- 
What are the biggest obstacles for the City of Toronto to overcome to become more resilient 
through better development? 
- 
Is there a missing initiative or approach that Toronto is not currently pursing that would make 
them better situated to endure climate change?  
 
Appendix 2: Interview breakdowns 
Dan Leeming 
Perspective Profile: 
- 
Private planning firm planner 
- 
Private development/municipal sustainability plans 
- 
Focus on connection between urban design, climate change and 
public health  
Overview 
- 
Private development is motivated by sticks and carrots with not 
much motivative from values of building more sustainably 
(Market driven) 
- 
New sustainable measures can impact affordability of housing 
- 
Carrots: incentives are currently limited under TGS, shorter 
development timelines is problematic, and awards are difficult 
- 
Stick: Tier 1 of the TGS (Stick becomes more apparent with the 
more severe of the impact of climate change) 
- 
Insurance companies are playing a part in determining who is 
covered and who isn’t.  
Specific mentions 
- 
Private/Public Relationship 
- 
Carrots/Sticks 
 
Mike Layton 
44 
 
Perspective Profile: 
- 
Elected official (City of Toronto) 
Overview 
- 
Three hats as a Councillor (Constituent 70, Legislation 20, 
Community organizer 10) 
- 
Climate adaptation needs a social justice lens 
- 
Importance with building resilience within the social structures. 
Our economy and governance structures are dependant on 
resilient social structures. Vulnerable populations need a stronger 
focus 
- 
Create local economic resilience with less big box stores 
- 
Needs more area in communities for open green space (needs 
further integration into development process) 
- 
Development charges need to increase the infrastructural support 
for the increase in density. (How can we better capture this value 
added to communities? 
- 
Inclusionary zoning creates better neighbourhoods 
- 
Biggest obstacle is aversion to change 
Specific mentions 
- 
Local economies 
- 
Social justice in climate adaptation 
- 
Social infrastructure 
- 
Aversion to change and political capital 
- 
Capturing community value with development charges 
- 
Inclusionary zoning 
 
Elliott Cappell 
Perspective Profile: 
Former Chief Resilience Officer of Toronto 
Wrote the Resilience Strategy 
Overview 
- 
Two biggest threats to Toronto – Flooding & Apartment 
Resiliency  
- 
Threat of flooding (pluvial and fluvial) needs Toronto to be a 
more absorbent city like Rotterdam. Natural infrastructure 
- 
Apartment resiliency – poor air quality, poor insulation, poor air 
conditioning. Also the issues around community gathering and 
development  
- 
Biggest obstacle to adaptation is governance. Climate change 
doesn’t respect political boundaries. There’s a need for the 
involvement of the CA because they follow natural boundaries. 
Issues in cities connect with larger issues or could be resolved by 
upstream involvement  
- 
Second issue to implementation is the lack of skills and capacity. 
Adaptation hasn’t fallen into a city department well.  
Specific mentions 
- 
Importance of Conservation Authorities 
- 
Toronto needs to become more absorbent 
- 
Flooding & Apartment Resiliency  
45 
 
 
Mary Rowe 
Perspective Profile: 
President of CUI 
Past work with New Orleans after Katrina 
Overview 
- 
Resilience Dividend 
- 
Biggest obstacle – looking beyond ward to ward decision making. 
Lack of at-large decision making 
Specific mentions 
 
 
Joanna Eyquem 
Perspective Profile: 
Applied Research Centre focused on accelerating Climate 
Adaptation in Canada 20 years experience in Environmental 
Consultancy in UK and Canada  
Overview 
- 
Urban Heat Island Effect 
- 
Importance of having actions at community scale and individual 
building scale (especially multi residential buildings)  
- 
Community ties help save individuals  
- 
Flooding currently causes more damage but we haven’t seen the 
full impact of extreme heat yet 
- 
Toronto is developed over quite a few creeks and rivers which 
will cause issues in the future 
- 
Netherlands are an example of a place actively moving back from 
their embankments 
- 
There’s a current issue with our approach because we don’t focus 
on the issue as a system. Upstream action will have implications 
upstream – farmland in the GTA could be used as water storage 
(CATCHMENT BASED SOLIDARITY) 
- 
Creek bank erosion  
- 
Municipal Natural Assets Initiative – a better valuing system for 
gauging the worth of natural assets 
- 
How can we invest in nature in the same way that we invest in the 
built environment 
Specific mentions 
- 
River embankment restoration 
- 
Catchment based solidarity 
- 
Natural assets initiative  
 
Lisa King 
Perspective Profile: 
City of Toronto (City/ Environmental Planning) 
Heads the Toronto Green Standard 
Overview 
- 
The CAs were created to address issues that exceeded municipal 
jurisdiction 
- 
Planning Approval process is disjointed because it requires some 
studies and modeling at different points in the process 
46 
 
- 
There’s been more of a focus on social equity than climate 
resilience in the development process 
- 
Resilience Assessment – consideration for future climate 
modeling (HOW CAN WE INCORPORATE THIS INTO THE 
PROCESS) 
- 
Future climate modeling should be done before the Site Plan 
- 
Resilience is subtly incorporated into the TGS already 
- 
Toronto could do this much more easily if it had its own Charter 
- 
Tree planting for sequestration is crucial for both GHG reduction 
and resilience  
- 
Biggest obstacle is literacy and capacity of planners. There’s 
many, especially those in senior roles, that don’t apply climate 
lens to the city’s development decision making 
- 
The landing spot for the resilience/climate adaptation file in 
Toronto is unknown. Potentially EED 
- 
COVID will provide an example of an issue that we must 
overcome 
Specific mentions 
- 
RESILIENCE ASSESSMENT 
- 
Planning act amendments 
 
David MacLeod 
Perspective Profile: 
- 
City of Toronto Environment and Energy Planner 
- 
Climate Program management  
Overview 
- 
Biggest obstacles are COVID and budget 
- 
Increasing density is occurring fasted than the systems that can 
support them can keep up (INFRASTRUCTURAL DEFICIT – 
green space, transportation, sewage, electrical) 
- 
New condo buildings are susceptible to the hot and cold if the 
energy grid is upset in any way – will they be able to handle the 
new climate? 
- 
Require more of a resilience assessment that considers the 
connection to local infrastructure – redundancy is good in some 
cases.  
- 
Managed Retreat – migrating away from coastlines and hot areas 
(in some cities in the Southern United States) 
- 
Resilience Precinct – grouping of businesses that work to become 
more resilient to protect their property value 
Specific mentions 
- 
RESILIENCE PRECINCT  
- 
Community Resilience Hub 
- 
Handling densification 
 
Shannon Logan 
Perspective Profile: 
TRCA (SNAP) 
47 
 
Overview 
SNAP 
- 
Neighbourhood scale 
- 
Incorporates climate, social equity, and community planning 
- 
Community involvement is fundamental 
- 
Screening process is critical for choosing the hosting 
neighbourhoods 
- 
TRCA/ gov officials are there to provide experience and guided 
recommendations on infrastructure 
- 
TRCA are able to connect neighbourhood issues to larger natural 
issues 
- 
Projects residual benefits include social capacity building, 
mitigation,  
- 
Projects can include: home retrofit, parkland revitalization, road 
transformation projects, multiunit residential building 
transformation projects, outdoor revitalization 
- 
Key Climate Project: Climate Ready County Court  
SNAP Action Plan 
- 
Based upon vulnerability and risk assessments with a special 
focus on community contribution to this understanding 
- 
Key asset assessment: What assets do the areas have and 
where/who would the community turn to in the time of an 
emergency? 
Three Phases to create action plan: 
- 
Connecting with stakeholders to get to know the involved actors 
and establish the priorities 
- 
Work with communities to understand local risks, assets, 
vulnerabilities, local actors 
- 
Developing actionable items with short term, mid term, and long 
term benefits with a focus on scale and level of effort required. 
Also develop metrics and indicators to evaluate the plan.  
Neighbourhood Pods (Toronto idea) 
- 
Development of neighbourhood areas that establish or utilize 
existing social networks.  
- 
Provide aid to participate in environmentally focus projects with 
likely co-benefits 
- 
City can provide recommendations around infrastructure projects 
that will benefit neighbourhood 
- 
Group can help develop employable skills (fundraising, project 
management, technical skills) 
- 
Lighthouse project (Emergency Hub) 
Green Gentrification 
48 
 
- 
There’s not much chance of green gentrification because of how 
involved the local community is during the process. They are in 
the drivers seat of the change.  
Specific mentions 
SNAP 
Neighbourhood Pods 
Lighthouse Project 
Urban activity zones 
 
Jeb Brugmann 
Perspective Profile: 
 
Overview 
Resilient Precinct 
- 
Resilience upgrading as a signal from government to private 
investors (developers) that the city will reduce the risk associated 
with building in an area 
- 
Similar to the redevelopment of brown fields 
- 
Market influence is crucial for stimulating private investment into 
neighbourhoods. Something that Toronto receives much of its 
income from currently  
- 
Property performance is a primary driver of resilience (making 
sure that the property will perform over its full lifespan) 
Development Standard 
- 
There should be a standard that all new development should have 
a resilience element so that private investors can communicate 
that the systems that support the development are able to do so 
now and in the future 
- 
Property development is a primary flow of funding into Toronto 
because we’re growing 
- 
The risk of climate change isn’t on the radars of developers 
because there’s more pressing issues, namely the project's profit 
and loss performance, and the company's balance sheet. 
Therefore, the city needs to explore mechanisms that would 
make it profitable--or more profitable--for investors to 
incorporate climate-related issues into their investments 
Performance Designation 
- 
LEED has served to demonstrate that increased sustainability 
performance is rewarded by higher profitability. rents, and 
tenant stability than projects that do not incorporate 
sustainability performance 
- 
For LEED – not only do people get to feel good about the better 
standards that they can’t see (building materials, energy 
consumption) but also the attributes that they can see (natural 
lighting, air quality, noise pollution) 
49 
 
- 
Brand management is crucial for success because if people don’t 
know about the importance then they are less likely to want it 
Local Risk Assessment 
- 
Assessment that measures risk and vulnerabilities in the 
immediate and local area 
- 
Takes into consideration the multitude of user groups (residents, 
area tourists) and uses of the area (attractive hub vs locals 
relaxation spot) 
Overlap with community initiatives 
- 
Overlap with investment of developer into community programs 
- 
Now goes beyond CBAs 
Specific mentions 
 
Notable quotes 
“How do we drive innovation within the property industry that is 
bringing that money to the table so that they find a way to continue 
to make money and compete by increase the performance of what 
they’re bringing to market” 
 
Lee Adamson 
Perspective Profile: 
Founding Co-Chair of the Green Neighbours Network of Toronto/ 
Steering Committee member of the Green Neighbours 21 
Overview 
Key Focus on Developing Community Network 
- 
Provided an environment in which neighbours could learn and 
develop ideas together 
- 
Largely focused on mitigative approaches 
Community Action 
- 
Garnering constant involvement was sometimes difficult. There 
needed to be an anchoring person 
Government Involvement 
- 
Enjoyed it when it wasn’t directive but more participatory as it 
allowed the group to develop their own ideas  
- 
Action needs community buy in 
Hurdles 
- 
Privilege – Only people who had the ability to volunteer could 
participate 
- 
Accessibility (Something they’d need resources from the 
government to tackle) 
- 
Financial resources – Both for members and for running 
initiatives 
Specific mentions 
Green Neighbourhood Networks 
 
Paul Antze 
Perspective Profile: 
Founding Co-Chair of the Green Neighbours Network of Toronto 
50 
 
Overview 
Adaptability is a privilege  
- 
It requires a certain amount of resources at had to be able to 
change your home, community 
Adaptability needs a strong sense for social equity and community 
building 
Government involvement 
- 
The problem is too great for the government not to be involved 
- 
Huge investment (social and economic) to make the necessary 
changes 
Hurdles 
- 
There needs to be a better way to work more closely with the city 
on these issues.  
- 
They want a one stop shop/ concierge service 
Specific mentions 
 
 
Tim De Waele 
Perspective Profile: 
Advisor with the City of Rotterdam 
Overview 
Weatherwise  
- 
Focused on further implementation and scaling solutions across 
the city 
- 
Has indicated neighbourhood-focus as an important next step 
- 
Has utilized COVID as an opportunity for implementing 
strategies 
Neighbourhood-focus 
- 
Importance assessment of demographics 
- 
What triggers interactions with local public. What do the 
neighbours deem as important and where can these plans find 
overlap with climate adaptation? 
- 
Public participation can be difficult to garner so finding co-
beneficial activities are crucial 
- 
Focusing on the needs of the community can also help integrate 
employable skill learning into the planning, construction, or 
maintenance of the project.  
Combining social activity (language classes, skill learning, 
education) and adaptation helps integrate these features into a 
community.  
- 
Local plans need local champions 
- 
Providing subsidies that breed cooperation has helped create 
community initiatives. Ex. $500 euro subsidy for 1m3 of water 
retention on a property that can be combined with community to 
create bigger community projects.  
Weatherwise Plan – Governance 
51 
 
- 
Adaptation was held within a singular department but has now 
been integrated into all municipal departments 
- 
(Started with people who were interested first then allowed for 
interest to grow as cool projects were implemented 
- 
There’s been a strong focus on working with social housing to 
ensure that adaptation/resilience measures can be integrated into 
neighbourhoods with less capacity 
- 
Every department has a different way of solving an issue so 
collaboration is necessary to minimize trade offs and maximizing 
co-benefits 
Pilot projects help with gaining attention and interest from public, 
private, and other government departments/agencies 
Challenges 
- 
Scaling solutions to ‘fit’ other neighbourhoods 
- 
Garnering support from private stakeholders (60% of land is 
privately held) 
- 
City capacity – Many of the city workers working on adaptation 
are only able to allocate a day of their week to adaptation issues 
- 
Long term challenges – spatial/land use planning and the further 
integration of adaptation into the fabric of the city 
- 
Short-term challenges – Addressing the inconsistent and uneven 
capacity of neighbourhoods, especially those living with higher 
rates of poverty. Also ensuring inclusivity into neighbourhood 
initiatives because its typically those with resources that can 
participate.  
Zoho Lessons 
- 
Created a redesign of public space precedent for other 
neighbourhoods to build on and adapt to their own needs 
- 
The precedent has helped minimize skepticism about project 
implementation 
- 
Rott has expanded the water square program to now have 9 of 
them throughout the city 
- 
Each project allows for lessons to be learned (ex. The dimensions 
of the Bent. Water Square were difficult to clean so it now 
requires hand cleaning) 
Specific mentions 
Rotterdam Weatherwise Plan 
Neighbourhood Approach 
Pilot Project Precedent Setting 
 
 
 
52 
 
References: 
Leeming, D. (2020). Personal Interview. 
Layton, M. (2020). Personal Interview. 
Rowe, M. (2020). Personal Interview. 
Cappell, E. (2021). Personal Interview. 
King, L. (2021). Personal Interview. 
Eyquem, J. (2021). Personal Interview. 
MacLeod, D. (2021). Personal Interview. 
Logan, S. (2021). Personal Interview. 
Brugmann, J. (2021). Personal Interview. 
Adamson, L. (2021). Personal Interview. 
Antze, P. (2021). Personal Interview. 
De Waele, T. (2021). Personal Interview. 
 
Adger, W. N., Dessai, S., Goulden, M., Hulme, M., Lorenzoni, I., Nelson, D. R., Naess, L. O., 
Wolf, J., & Wreford, A. (2009). Are there social limits to adaptation to climate change? 
Climatic Change, 93(3), 335–354.  
 
Aldrich D. P., Meyer, M. A. & Houston, J. B. (2015). Social capital and community resilience. 
American Behavioral Scientist, 59(2), 254-269.   
 
Ali, H. (2009). Introduction to disaster research. In Understanding the Global Environment 
(245–264). 
 
ARUP. (2016). City resilience index: Understanding and measuring city resilience. The 
Rockefeller Foundation & ARUP. Retrieved July 31st from: 
https://www.arup.com/perspectives/publications/research/section/city-resilience-index  
 
Barton, H., Grant, M., & Guise, R. (2006). Shaping neighbourhoods: For local health and global 
sustainability. Taylor and Francis.  
 
53 
 
Berger, R., Ensor, J., & Wilson, K. (2014). Adaptive capacity. In Community-Based Adaptation 
to Climate Change: Scaling it up. Routledge. 
 
Berke, P. & Lyles, W. (2013). Public risks and the challenges to climate-change adaptation: A 
proposed framework for planning in the age of uncertainty. Cityscape, 15(1), 181–208. 
 
Berke, P. R., & Stevens, M. R. (2016). Land use planning for climate adaptation: Theory and 
practice. Journal of Planning Education and Research, 36(3), 283–289.  
 
Berkes, F., & Seixas, C. (2005). Building resilience in lagoon social-ecological systems: A local-
level perspective. Ecosystems (New York), 8(8), 967–974.  
 
Bigger, P., & Millington, N. (2020). Getting soaked? Climate crisis, adaptation finance, and 
racialized austerity. Environment and Planning. E, Nature and Space (Print), 3(3), 601–623.  
 
Booth, W. C., Colomb, G. G., & Williams, J. M. (2008). The craft of research (3rd ed.). 
University of Chicago Press. 
 
Broto, V. C., Ensor, J., Boyd, E., Allen, C., Seventine, C., & Augusto Macucule, D. (2015). 
Incorporating climate change knowledge in participatory planning. In Participatory 
Planning for Climate Compatible Development in Maputo, Mozambique (1). UCL Press  
 
Building Resilient Neighbourhoods (2015) Victoria West Pilot Community. Retrieved July 31st, 
2021 from: https://www.resilientneighbourhoods.ca/victoria-west-pilot-project/  
 
Bulkeley, H., & Tuts, R. (2013). Understanding urban vulnerability, adaptation and resilience in 
the context of climate change. Local Environment, 18(6), 646–662.  
 
Brugmann, J. (2013) Building resilient cities:  From risk assessment to redevelopment. Ceres, 
The Next Practice, and the University of Cambridge Programme for Sustainability 
Leadership. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
54 
 
https://www.ceres.org/resources/reports/building-resilient-cities-risk-assessment-
redevelopment 
 
Brym, R. (2009). Hurricane Katrina and the Myth of Natural Disasters. Sociology As A Life Or 
Death Issue. 
 
C40 Cities. (2016). Climate Change Adaptation in Delta Cities. Climate Adapt. Retrieved July 
31st, 2021 from: https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/metadata/publications/climate-change-
adaptation-in-delta-cities  
 
Canadian Urban Institute (2020). COVID Signpost 100 Days. Canadian Urban Institute. 
Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: https://canurb.org/publications/covid-signpost-100-days/  
 
Centre for Livable Cities. (2020). Building climate resilience in cities worldwide: 10 principles 
to forge a cooperative ecosystem. Urban Land Institute. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
https://knowledge.uli.org/en/Reports/Research%20Reports/2021/Building%20Climate%20R
esilience%20in%20Cities%20Worldwide  
 
Climate Atlas (2021). Climate Report: Toronto. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
https://climateatlas.ca/find-local-data 
 
Davis, M. (2010). Who Will Build the Ark? New Left Review. (61)  
 
Dawson, A. (2017). Extreme cities: The peril and promise of urban life in the age of climate 
change. Verso. 
 
EcoDistrict (2017) Lloyd EcoDistrict Case Study. Eco District. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
https://ecodistricts.org/registered-districts/lloyd-ecodistrict/.  
 
55 
 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. (2020). Investing in Canada’s Future; The Cost of 
Climate Adaptation at the Local Level. Federation of Canadian Municipalities. Retrieved 
July 31st, 2021 from: https://fcm.ca/en/resources/investing-in-canadas-future  
 
Figueiredo, L., T. Honiden and A. Schumann (2018). Indicators for Resilient Cities, OECD 
Regional Development Working Papers, No. 2018/02, OECD Publishing,  
 
Folke, C., Carpenter, S. R., Walker, B., Scheffer, M., Chapin, T., & Rockstrom, J. (2010). 
Resilience thinking: Integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecology and 
Society 15(4). 
 
Fransen, J., Ochoa Peralta, D., Vanelli, F., Edelenbos, J., & Calzada Olvera, B. (2021). The 
emergence of urban community resilience initiatives during the COVID-19 Pandemic: An 
International exploratory study. In The European Journal of Development Research. 
 
Global Center on Adaptation (2020). State and trends in adaptation Report 2020. Global Center 
on Adaptation Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: https://gca.org/reports/  
 
Green Neighbours Network (2021) Our History. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
https://greenneighboursnetwork.ca/ 
 
Greene, C. S., Robinson, P. J., & Millward, A. A. (2018). Canopy of advantage: Who benefits 
most from city trees? Journal of Environmental Management, 208, 24–35.  
 
Hodson, M., & Marvin, S. (2010). Urbanism in the Anthropocene: Ecological urbanism or 
premium ecological enclaves? Routledge.14(3), 298–313.  
 
Holling, C. (1973). Resilience and stability of ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics, 4, 1–23. 
 
56 
 
Homeless Hub. (2021). Community profile: Toronto. Retrieved July 31st 2021 from: 
https://www.homelesshub.ca/community-profile/toronto  
 
IPCC (2019). Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report 
on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food 
security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo 
Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.- O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, 
R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal 
Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. In press. 
 
IPCC (2018). Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special 
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related 
global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global 
response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate 
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. 
Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. 
Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. In press.  
 
Klinenberg, E. (1999). Denaturalizing disaster: A social autopsy of the 1995 Chicago heat wave. 
Theory and Society. 28(2), 239-295. 
 
Liping Dai, Rebecca Wörner & Helena F. M. W. van Rijswick (2018) Rainproof cities in the 
Netherlands: approaches in Dutch water governance to climate-adaptive urban planning. 
International Journal of Water Resources Development, 34(4), 652-674. 
 
Magis, K. (2010). Community resilience: An indicator of social sustainability. Society and 
Natural Resources, 23(5), 401–416.  
 
Magnusson, E., & Marecek, J. (2015). Doing interview-based qualitative research: A learner’s 
guide. Cambridge University Press.  
 
57 
 
Moore, A. W., McGregor, R. M. (2020) The representativeness of neighbourhood associations in 
Toronto and Vancouver. Urban Studies. 1-16 
 
OECD. (2021). Cities and Environment. Retrieved July 31st, 2021. from: 
https://www.oecd.org/regional/cities/cities-environment.htm  
 
Ontario, Government of. (2019). Schedule 3. In A place to grow: Growth plan for the Greater 
Golden Horseshoe. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from https://www.ontario.ca/document/place-
grow-growth-plan-greater-golden-horseshoe  
 
Ontario Ministry of Finance (2021) Ontario Population Projections. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 
from: https://www.fin.gov.on.ca/en/economy/demographics/projections 
 
Public Space. (2013) “Water Square” in Benthemplein: Rotterdam (Netherlands), 2013. 
Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: https://www.publicspace.org/works/-/project/h034-water-
square-in-benthemplein 
 
Rotterdam, City of. (2013). Rotterdam Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. Retrieved July 31st, 
2021 from: http://www.urbanisten.nl/wp/?page_id=508  
 
Rotterdam, City of. (2019). Rotterdam Weatherwise. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
https://weatherwisecities.com/  
 
Saavedra, C., Budd, W. W., Lovrich, N. P. & Parker, K. F. (2012). Assessing resilience to 
climate change in US cities. Urban Studies Research, 2012, 1–10.  
 
Schrock, G., Bassett, E., & Green, J. (2015). Pursuing equity and justice in a changing climate: 
Assessing equity in local climate and sustainability plans in U.S. cities. Journal of Planning 
Education and Research, 35(3), 282–295.  
 
58 
 
Sharifi, A., & Yamagata, Y. (2014). Resilient urban planning: Major principles and 
criteria. Energy Procedia, 61, 1491–1495.  
 
Sharifi, A & Yamagata, Y. (2016). Urban resilience assessment: Multiple dimensions, criteria, 
and indicators. Urban Resilience. 259-276 
 
Sherrieb, K., Norris, F., & Galea, S. (2010). Measuring capacities for community 
resilience. Social Indicators Research, 99(2), 227–247.  
 
Smit, B. & Pilifosova, O. (2001). Chapter 18: Adaptation to climate change in the context of 
sustainable development and equity. In TAR climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability. IPCC. 
 
Statistics Canada. (2017) Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at Basic Prices, by Census 
Metropolitan Area (CMA). Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610046801 
 
Toronto, City of. (2017). TransformTO. Energy and Environment Division. Retrieved July 31st, 
2021 from: https://www.toronto.ca/services-payments/water-environment/environmentally-
friendly-city-initiatives/transformto/  
 
Toronto, City of. (2018). Toronto at a Glance. Retrieved July 31st, from: 
https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/data-research-maps/toronto-at-a-glance/ 
 
Toronto, City of. (2018). Zero Emissions Building Framework. Toronto Atmospheric Fund. 
Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: https://taf.ca/publications/zero-emissions-building-
framework/  
 
Toronto, City of. (2019). Toronto Poverty Reduction Strategy. Retrieved August 19th, 2021 from: 
https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/accountability-operations-customer-service/long-
term-vision-plans-and-strategies/poverty-reduction-strategy/  
59 
 
Toronto, City of. (2019). Resilience Strategy. Retrieved July 31st 2021 from: 
https://www.toronto.ca/services-payments/water-environment/environmentally-friendly-
city-initiatives/resilientto/  
 
Toronto, City of. (2020). Toronto Strong Neighbourhoods Strategy 2020. Retrieved August 19th, 
2021 from: https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/accountability-operations-customer-
service/long-term-vision-plans-and-strategies/toronto-strong-neighbourhoods-strategy-2020/  
 
Toronto, City of. (2021). Neighbourhood Profiles. Social Development Finance & 
Administration. Retrieved July31st, 2021 from: https://www.toronto.ca/city-
government/data-research-maps/neighbourhoods-communities/neighbourhood-profiles/  
 
Toronto, City of. (2021). Shelter System Flow Data. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from 
https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/data-research-maps/research-reports/housing-and-
homelessness-research-and-reports/shelter-system-flow-data/  
 
Toronto Global. (2021). Toronto Region Quick Facts. Retrieved July 31st from 
https://torontoglobal.ca/Discover-Toronto-region/Toronto-region-quick-facts  
 
Toronto Office of Recovery and Rebuild. (2020). COVID-19: Impacts and Opportunities Report. 
Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: https://www.toronto.ca/city-government/accountability-
operations-customer-service/city-administration/city-managers-office/key-
initiatives/recoveryto/covid-19-about-reopening-recovery-rebuild/  
 
Toronto and Region Conservation Authority. (2021). Sustainable Neighbourhood Action 
Program (SNAP). Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from https://trca.ca/conservation/sustainable-
neighbourhoods/  
 
United Nations. (2018). 68% of the World Population Projected to Live in Urban Areas by 2050, 
say UN. Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Retrieved July 31st, 2021  
 
60 
 
Urbanisten. (2014) ZOHO Climate Proof District. Retrieved July 31st, 2021 from: 
http://www.urbanisten.nl/wp/?portfolio=climate-proof-zomerhofkwartier  
 
Vale, L. J. (2014). The politics of resilient cities: Whose resilience and whose city? Building 
Research & Information, 42(2), 191–201. 
 
Youngman, N. (2009). Understanding disaster vulnerability: Floods and hurricanes. In Twenty 
Lessons in Environmental Sociology (176–190). 
