DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
i
DUE 
NORTH
FACING THE COSTS OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE FOR  
NORTHERN INFRASTRUCTURE
CANADIAN
CLIMATE
INSTITUTE
L’INSTITUT
CLIMATIQUE
DU CANADA
JUNE 2022
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
ii
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
iii

Foreword..............................................................................................................................................................................................iv
Acknowledgments...................................................................................................................................................... v
Executive summary...................................................................................................................................................vi
Infographic: Transformative Adaptations....................................................................................... x
1. Introduction................................................................................................................................................................... 1
2. Context...........................................................................................................................................................................4
The importance of infrastructure in the North........................................................................... 5
The Northern infrastructure gap..........................................................................................................9
The colonial foundations of Northern infrastructure..............................................................11
Climate change across the North...................................................................................................... 14
Adapting and preparing for climate change in the North.................................................17
3. Methods....................................................................................................................................................................... 18
Modelling impacts and costs..............................................................................................................20
Lived experiences and community impacts............................................................................ 24
4. Climate impacts on airports.......................................................................................................................... 26
5. Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads............................................................35
6. Climate impacts on buildings......................................................................................................................44
7. Northern perspectives on climate impacts...........................................................................................51
8. Conclusions and recommendations....................................................................................................... 56
Conclusions..................................................................................................................................................... 57
Recommendations....................................................................................................................................60
Glossary............................................................................................................................................................................ 65
References......................................................................................................................................................................68
CONTENTS
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
iv
ᓯᕗᒧᑦ
ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᓕᐊᕐᓇᖅ: ᑲᒪᒋᔭᕆᐊᖃᕐᓂᖅ ᓯᓚᐅᑉ 
ᐊᓯᙳᖅᐸᓪᓕᐊᓂᖓᓄᑦ ᐊᑭᓕᐅᑎᐅᔭᕆᐊᓕᖕᓂᒃ 
ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᕐᒥ ᓴᓇᔭᐅᓯᒪᔪᓂᒃ ᐱᓕᕆᐊᖃᕐᒪᑕ 
ᓇᓗᓇᐃᔭᐃᓗᑎᒃ ᖃᓄᐃᓕᐅᕈᑎᐅᔭᕆᐊᓕᖕᓂ ᐃᓄᖕᓄᑦ 
ᑲᓇᑕᐅᑉ ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᖓᓃᑦᑐᓄᑦ ᑭᓱᖃᑦᑎᐊᙱᓗᐊᕐᑎᓪᓗᒋ 
ᐅᓗᕆᐊᓇᕐᓯᕙᓪᓕᐊᑎᓪᓗᒍ ᓯᓚᐅᑉ ᐊᓯᙳᖅᐸᓪᓕᐊᓂᖓᓄᑦ.
ᐅᓇ ᒪᕐᕈᐃᓕᖓᔪᖅ ᐅᓗᕆᐊᓇᕈᑎ ᐊᒃᑐᐃᓂᖃᕋᔭᕐᓂᖓᓂᒃ 
ᐋᓐᓂᐊᖃᖅᑕᐃᓕᓂᒃᑯᑦ, ᐊᑦᑕᓇᖅᑐᒦᑦᑕᐃᓕᓂᕐᒧᑦ, 
ᑮᓇᐅᔭᓕᐅᕈᑎᐅᔪᓄᑦ, ᐊᒻᒪ ᐃᓄᐃᑦ ᐃᓕᖅᑯᓯᖓᓂᒃ 
ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᓕᒫᒥᑦ, ᐱᓗᐊᕐᑐᒥ ᓄᓇᖃᖅᑐᑐᖃᕐᓄᑦ ᐃᓄᖕᓄᑦ. 
ᐅᓂᒃᑳᓕᐅᕐᓂᕐᒧᑦ ᑎᑎᕋᖅᑎᒋᔭᐅᔪᑦ ᓄᓇᖃᖅᓯᒪᔪᑦ 
ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐃᖅᑲᓇᐃᔭᕐᓯᒪᔪᑦ ᑲᓇᑕᐅᑉ ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᖓᓂᒃ 
ᑭᓯᐊᓂᓕ ᓇᓕᐊᒃ ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᕐᒥᐅᑕᐅᙱᑦᑐᖅ.
ᓄᓇᖃᖅᑳᖅᓯᒪᓇᑕᓗ.ᑐᑭᓯᕙᓪᓕᐊᕐᓗᑎ ᐱᖁᑎᒋᔭᐅᔭᕆᐊᓖᑦ 
ᐃᒡᓗᐃᑦ 
ᐊᔾᔨᒋᙱᒻᒪᒋᑦ 
ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᕐᒥᐅᓄᑦ, 
ᐅᔾᔨᕆᓂᕐᓴᐅᕙᓪᓕᐊᑎᓪᓗᑕ ᑖᓐᓇ ᐅᖃᐅᓯᐅᔪᖅ ᓇᖕᒥᓂᖅ 
ᐅᓂᒃᑳᓕᐊᕆᔭᐅᔭᕆᐊᖃᕐᓂᖓᓂᒃ ᓴᓂᑦᑎᐊᖓᒍᑦ 
ᐃᒪᐅᑉ ᐃᓗᐊᓂ: ᓯᓚᐅᑉ ᐊᓯᙳᖅᐸᓪᓕᐊᓂᖓᓄᑦ 
ᐊᑭᓕᐅᑎᐅᔭᕆᐊᓕᖕᓂᒃ ᓯᓚᐅᑉ ᐊᓯᙳᖅᐸᓪᓕᐊᓂᖓᓄᑦ 
ᑲᓇᑕᐅᑉ 
ᐱᖁᑎᖏᓐᓂᒃ. ᐱᒻᒪᕆᐊᓘᓚᐅᕐᒪᓐ 
ᐅᕙᑦᑎᓐᓄ ᓄᓇᖃᖅᑳᖅᑐᑦ ᑎᒍᒥᐊᖅᑎᐅᓂᖏᓐᓂᒃ 
ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᕐᒥ ᐃᓚᒋᔭᐅᑎᑕᐅᓗᓂ ᐅᕙᓂ ᖃᐅᔨᓴᕐᓂᕐᒥᒃ 
ᐱᕙᓪᓕᐊᑎᑦᑎᔾᔪᑎᐅᓂᑯᓂᒃ ᑕᒪᐃᓐᓂ ᓄᓇᖃᖅᑳᖅᑐᑦ 
ᐱᓇᓱᐊᖅᑕᖏᓐᓂ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐊᑐᖅᑕᐅᔪᓐᓇᕋᔭᕐᑐᓂᒃ ᐱᖁᑎᓄᑦ 
ᐋᖅᑭᒋᐊᕈᑎᐅᔪᓐᓇᕐᑐᓂᒃ ᐱᓕᕆᐊᖃᕐᓂᕐᒧ.
ᐱᓕᕆᖃᑎᖃᕐᓯᒪᒐᑦᑕ ᐅᓄᕐᑐᓂᒃ ᓄᓇᖃᖅᑳᖅᑐᑦ 
ᐱᔪᓐᓇᐅᑎᖏᓐᓂᒃ ᑎᒍᒥᐊᖅᑎᐅᔪᓂᒃ ᐊᒻᒪ ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᕐᒥ 
ᐃᑲᔫᑎᖃᖅᑎᑦᑎᔨᐅᔪᓂᒃ ᐊᕐᕌᒎᓕᖅᑐᓂᒃ ᒪᕐᕉᖕᓂ ᑐᕌᒐᖃᖅᖢᑎᒃ 
ᐊᑐᕈᓐᓇᖅᑐᒃᑯᑦ ᐃᓱᒪᒋᔭᖏᓐᓂᒃ ᖃᐅᔨᔭᖏᓐᓂᒡᓗ 
ᐊᒻᒪ ᐱᐊᓂᒍᑎᒋᔭᖏᓐᓂᒃ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐃᓱᒪᓕᐊᕆᔭᖏᓐᓂᒃ 
ᐅᓂᒃᑳᓕᐅᕈᒪᓪᓗᑎᒃ.ᑐᓴᐅᒪᑎᑦᑎᓂᒃᑯᑦ ᐊᑐᕐᓯᒪᔭᖏᓐᓂᒃ, 
ᖃᐅᔨᒪᔭᖏᓐᓂᒡᓗ ᐊᒻᒪ ᐱᓕᕆᐊᖃᓕᒪᓂᖏᓐᓄᑦ, 
ᐱᔪᓐᓇᐅᑎᓂᒃ ᑎᒍᒥᐊᖅᑎᐅᔪ ᐊᒻᒪ ᐃᑲᔫᑎᖃᖅᑎᑦᑎᔨᐅᔪᑦ 
ᐅᕙᑦᑎᓐᓂ ᐃᑲᔪᓚᐅᕐᑐᑦ ᐋᖅᑭᒃᓱᐃᕙᓪᓕᐊᓂᕐᒥᒃ 
ᑐᑭᓯᒃᑲᓐᓂᕈᑎᓂᒃ ᒫᓐᓇ ᐅᑭᐅᕐᑕᖅᑐᕐᒥ ᐱᖁᑎᒋᔭᐅᔪᑦ 
ᐊᑯᑦᑐᔫᑎᐅᓂᖏᓐᓂᒃ ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐊᒃᑐᐃᔾᔪᑎᒃᑲᓐᓂᐅᔪᓐᓇᖅᑐᓂᒃ 
ᓯᓚ ᐅᖅᑰᓯᕙᓪᓕᐊᓂᖓᓄᑦ. 
ᖃᐅᔨᒪᔪᒍᑦ ᑐᓵᔪᓐᓇᓚᐅᕐᓂᕗᑦ ᐱᒋᐊᕈᑎᑐᐃᓐᓇᐅᓂᖓᓂᒃ, 
ᑭᓯᐊᓂᓕ ᖃᐅᔨᒪᔪᒍᑦ ᐅᓄᒃᑲᓐᓂᖅᑐᐊᓗᖕᓂ ᐅᓂᒃᑳᓂ 
ᑐᓴᕆᐊᖃᕐᓂᑦᑎᓐᓂᒃ.ᐅᒃᐱᕈᓱᒃᑲᑦᑕ ᐱᓪᓚᕆᐅᓂᖓᓂᒃ 
ᑕᒪᒃᑯᐊ ᒐᕙᒪᓕᕆᓂᒃᑯᑦ ᖃᓄᐃᓕᐅᕈᑎᐅᔪᑦ ᓄᓇᖃᖅᑳᖅᑐᑦ 
ᒐᕙᒪᖓᓂᒃ ᐅᖃᖃᑎᖃᕐᓗᑎᒃ ᑐᑭᓯᓯᒪᔪᓐᓇᕐᓂᐊᕐᒪᑕ 
ᐱᖁᑎᓄᑦ ᖃᓄᐃᓕᐅᕈᑎᐅᔭᕆᐊᖃᖅᑐᑦ ᓄᓇᓕᖕᓂ 
ᐊᒻᒪᓗ ᐱᓕᕆᖃᑎᒌᖕᓂᒃᑯᑦ ᐋᖅᑭᒃᓱᐃᓗᑎᒃ ᑕᒪᒃᑯᓄᖓ 
ᐋᖅᑭᒃᓯᔾᔪᑎᒃᓴᓂᒃ. 
Ndòo
Dii Gwits'at: Nanh Gwiniik'òo 
diinagòo’ee ejùk t'eenjaa jii 
zheh, taii, vik’iighè’ aadrii, Geenjit 
gwidaatł'oo tr'igwinah'ii nits'òo 
goo'aii gatr'igwaandak Canada Nanh 
Gwiniik'òo gwiiyeendoo diinagòo’ee 
ejùk t'eenjaa gwik'iighè' jii zheh, taii, 
vik’iighè’ aadrii, diits'atgwighàa t'igwįį'ee 
neesrigwija ̨̀hch’uh.Jii neekaii gwizhit 
srii gwandàih, gwiizuu ch'i', nits'oo 
tr'igwindaii ts'àt diinigwįį'ee Nanh 
Gwiniik'òo gwideetoh tthak, iisrits'at 
Dinjii Zhuh, Ineekaii, Teenjir Nilii kat. 
Canada Nanh Gwiniik'òo, gwideetoh jii 
juudìn kat gwidinehtł’èe’ gidinuutł'oo 
guulàt Canada Nanh Gwiniik'òo 
t'igiinch'ù' ts'àt gwitr'it t'igugwah'inh, 
gòo ihłee Nanh Gwiniik'òo gwits'at iidilii 
kwaa.Dinjii Zhuh, Ineekaii, Teenjir Nilii 
kat gàa iidilii kwaa.Gwiiyeendoo srits'àt 
gah'iidindaii zheh, taii, vik’iighè’ aadrii 
iisrits'àt ejùk Nanh Gwiniik'òo Gwidinji' 
Kat guuveenjit diits'atgwighàa go'aii, 
gwiiyeendoo ts'àt gwinaa'ii jii gwizhit 
tr'igįįkhii khè’ gwidinehtł’èe’ jii gwinjik 
Chuu T'eh: Jii diinagòo’ee ejùk t'eenjaa 
Canada kat zheh, taii, vik’iighè’ aadrii 
geenjit gwidaatł'oo. Dinjii Zhuh, 
Ineekaii, Teenjir Nilii kat gwiiyeendoo 
guuchidhaa'ee dàgwìdįį’e’ zhit Jii Nanh 
Gwiniik'oo guk'andehtr'inahtii gwizhit 
giteelyaa jii Dinjii Zhuh, Ineekaii, Teenjir 
Nilii kat kheenjit-niint'aii tr'iheelyaa 
ts'àt gwiiyeendoo gwiniint'aii ts'àt 
jii zheh, taii, vik’iighè’ aadrii gwits'àt 
tr'itr'heendal.
Dinjii Zhuh, Ineekaii, Teenjir Nilii kat leii 
dàgwìdįį’e’ Kat ts'àt Nanh Gwiniik'òo 
Gwidinji' Kat gwizhit giinlii ts'àt khaii 
neekaii gwinòo gwizhit guuvah jii 
gwidinehtł’èe’ nihkhaa Geenjit gwitr'it 
tr'igwiłtsaii łǫǫhàh agidanh gah'iidindaii 
gwizhit, gwichiilagoo’dhat leii, ts'àt 
dagwiheedya'aa gwiiniidhan.Jii nihts'àt 
nihtatr’ìndaii nihk'it tr'igwindaii zhit, 
gahtr'idandaii, ts'àt łǫǫhàh iisrits'àt 
gahdandaii, jii Kat dàgwìdįį’e’ giinlii ts'àt 
juudìn kat gwizhit giinlii kat nikhwits'àt 
gwitr'it hàh tr'iginiinjik ts'àt guuk'iighè’ 
gwiiyeendoo gah'iidindaii jii jùk Nanh 
Gwiniik'òo jii zheh, taii, vik’iighè’ aadrii 
gwitł'at ts'àt nanh gwiniidhaa hàh 
nihłi’ejùk diinagòo’ee ejùk t'igwinjih. 
Gah'iidindaii oodhidhaacheii gwiitsał 
gwidik gwizrih, gòo, tth'aih hèe 
gwindàk leii tr'ehdeetth'ak go'aii.Akòo 
gwik'iinjiidizhit adachoo nihłi’ejùk 
gwizhit kat tthak nihkhaa nihts'àt 
nit'soo go'aii gahtr'idandaii eenjit Dinjii 
Zhuh, Ineekaii, Teenjir Nilii adachoo 
kat hàh jii zheh, taii, vik’iighè’ aadrii 
diits'atgwighàa dagoonch'uu kaiik'it 
leii gwa'an ts'àt nihkhah' geenjit gwitr'it 
gwiinzii t'ugugwah'ah'aa.
nîkanasinahikêwin
kîwêtinohk-isi: kâ-mâmîskowîpahk 
ôma kîwêtinohk atoskêwin ôma 
kitâpahtamok ôma kîwêtinohk 
mâna kâ-wîkihk kânata môya mâna 
mistahi kâ-ayâhk wâwêyis ôma 
kâ-mâmiskociwîpahk mâna ôma.nîso 
ôhi mitoni pakamiskâkowak mitho-
mâcihôwinihk, mithowâthawinihk, 
atoskîwinihk, îkwa nîhithawîwinihk-isi 
ôtî kîwîtinohk, wâwêyis ithiniwak. 
kîyâm âta âtiht ôki omasinahikîwak 
kî-wîkowak mîna kî-âtoskîwak 
misiwî-kîwîtiohk kânata, môtha 
ohci kîcinâc kîwîtinohk.môtha mîna 
nîyinân ithiniwak.athîwâk ôma kâ-âti-
nanistohtamâhk ôma kâ-isi-athiman 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
v
ôma ohci ithiniwak ohci kîwîtinohk, 
nawac mâci-nistohtînân ôma ka-pîyak 
astîk mâsinahikan kotak mîna 
atâmipêhk: tânisi kâ-itakîhtêk ôma 
kâ-mâmîskociwîpahk ohci kânata.
poko mîna ka-sohkastêk ôma ôki 
ohci ithiniwak kathâtihk kîwîtinohk 
kâ-ôcîcik mîna ka-akimihcik ôma kâ-wî-
nanitonikêhk îkotî nawâc ithiniwak 
ka-nohkôtâwak ôma ka-paminisotwâw 
îkwa ka-miskwîtamâsowak ôhi ohci 
nîkânihk kâwî-nakiskâkik.
mîscît âsay pîkiskwîhâwak ôki 
ithiniwak îkwa kîwîtinohk ohci âsay 
ôtî nîso-askiya ôhi osâm môtha 
î-nôhtî-patahamihk kîkiway mîna 
kahkiyaw ka-pîtâkosit asithiniw ôma 
masinahikan, pîkiskwîwina îkwa 
tânisi î-isi-nitawihtamihk.kîpsin ôma 
ka-wîthamihk, nanistohtamowin, îkwa 
askiy pimohtîwin, ôki kâkî-mîkositwâw 
ôma askiy îkota ka-wîcihitâwak 
athiwâk nanistohtamowin ôma 
kâ-wîkihk kîwîtinohk îkwa kîkway 
î-manîsihk kîspin ôma athiwâk 
kâwî-mâmîkociwîpahk. 
nikiskithinân ôma môtha mistahi 
ôma kâ-kiskîthitamâhk, mâka, 
mistahi âcimowina îtakona ôtê nîkân.
nitâpowakîthinân ôma ôki kahkiyaw 
onîkânîwak poko ka-wîtapimâtwâw 
nîhithaw-onîkânîwak ka-nistohtâkik 
kîkwaya ôhi kâ-manîsitwâw îkwa mîna 
poko ka-mâmawi-atoskâtahkik ôhi 
ka-mitho-pathik kîkway.
Foreword
Due North: Facing the costs of climate 
change for Northern infrastructure 
seeks to describe the challenges that 
people in Northern Canada face with 
inadequate infrastructure under 
increasing threat from climate change. 
This twin threat impacts the health, 
safety, livelihoods, and cultures of 
people across the North, particularly 
Indigenous people. 
Although some of the report’s authors 
have lived and worked across Northern 
Canada, none of us are Northerners. Nor 
are we Indigenous. The more we came 
to understand the unique infrastructure 
challenges facing Northerners, the more 
we realized that the subject required 
its own dedicated report alongside 
Under Water: The costs of climate 
change for Canada’s infrastructure. 
It was important to us that Indigenous 
people as rights holders in the North 
be included in this research in a way 
that advanced both Indigenous self-
determination and durable solutions to 
infrastructure challenges.
We have actively engaged with 
many Indigenous rights holders and 
Northern stakeholders over the past 
two years with the goal of meaningfully 
amplifying their perspectives in this 
report’s findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations. By sharing their lived 
experiences, knowledge, and expertise, 
these rights holders and stakeholders 
helped us develop a more thorough 
understanding of the existing Northern 
infrastructure gap and the added 
impacts of a warming climate. 
We acknowledge that our listening 
efforts have only scratched the surface, 
however, and that there are many more 
stories that need to be heard. We believe it 
is essential that all orders of government 
engage directly with Indigenous 
governments to understand the 
infrastructure challenges communities 
are experiencing and collaboratively 
develop the needed solutions.
Pond Inlet, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Authors
Dylan G. Clark, Senior Research Associate, Canadian Climate 
Institute
Dena Coffman, Research Associate, Canadian Climate 
Institute
Ryan Ness, Adaptation Director, Canadian Climate Institute
Isabelle Bujold, Research Assistant, Canadian Climate 
Institute
Dale Beugin, Vice President Research, Canadian Climate 
Institute
Adaptation Expert Panel Report 
Working Group
Ashlee Cunsolo, Founding Dean, School of Arctic and 
Subarctic Studies, Labrador Campus of Memorial University
Brian Horton, Manager, Climate Change Research, Yukon 
University
Ian Mauro, Executive Director, Prairie Climate Centre
Deborah McGregor, Canada Research Chair, Indigenous 
Environmental Justice, York University
Enooyaq Sudlovenick, PhD Candidate, University of Manitoba
External Reviewers
Colleen Healey, Principal, Sijja Consulting, City of Iqaluit, 
Nunavut 
Antoni Lewkowicz, Professor Emeritus, Department of 
Geography, Environment and Geomatics University of Ottawa
Steve Roddick, Senior Analyst, Resilient North Consulting; 
Former City Councillor, City of Whitehorse, Yukon
Consultant Research Team
Knut Kitching, Firelight Group
Jordan Tam, Firelight Group
Catherine Baxendale, Firelight Group
Rachel Olsen, Firelight Group
Brent Boehlert, Industrial Economics, Inc.
James Neumann, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Jason Price, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Charles Fant, Industrial Economics, Inc.
Paul Chinowsky, Resilient Analytics and University of Colorado 
at Boulder
Jacob Helman, Resilient Analytics
Aurora Marstokk, Navius Research
Jotham Peters, Navius Research
Tosh Southwick, IRP Consulting
This work would not have been possible without the time and 
knowledge of the individuals that participated in interviews 
led by Firelight Group.
Production Support
Design and layout: Laurie Barnett, Graphic Designer 
Information design by Voilà: chezVoila.com 
Translation: Edgar 
Cover design: Alex Wittholz
Photos: Bird's Eye Inc.
Disclaimer: This report is the outcome of a collabora­
tive process involving staff and Expert Panelists from 
the Canadian Climate Institute, external reviewers, and 
engaged rights holders and stakeholders. It does not 
necessarily reflect the views of the individuals or organi­
zations that provided input. Any errors in this report are 
attributable to the Institute.
Creative Commons: Published under a Creative 
Commons license by the Canadian Climate Institute. 
The text of this document, with the exception of quota­
tions from interview participants, may be reproduced in 
whole or part for non-commercial purposes, with proper 
source citation. Permission from copyright holders must 
be sought before any photographs are reproduced. 
All direct quotes and data gathered from interview 
participants are the property of the participants and 
the Canadian Climate Institute and may not be used or 
reproduced without written consent of the Institute.​ 
Recommended citation: Clark, Dylan G., Dena Coffman, 
Ryan Ness, Isabelle Bujold, and Dale Beugin. 2022. Due 
North: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern 
infrastructure. Canadian Climate Institute. Ottawa, ON.
This project was undertaken with the financial support of:
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
vii
	 1  
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY 
Northern Canada faces a double threat of already-
inadequate infrastructure in a rapidly warming 
climate. Due North, the first major assessment of the 
costs of climate change to infrastructure across all 
of Northern Canada, finds that all orders of govern­
ment should set policies and make investments 
without delay to prepare for the impacts of climate 
change on Northern infrastructure.
Despite infrastructure’s crucial role in the North, 
the region already faces a significant infra­
structure gap. Inadequate infrastructure is a 
threat to health, well-being, and livelihoods 
across the North—particularly for Indigenous 
People. Housing insecurity is worse in the North 
than anywhere else in Canada. Most Northern 
communities rely on diesel generators for elec­
tricity and do not have reliable high-speed inter­
net. Advanced medical care frequently requires 
a flight to southern Canada, and prices for food 
and other goods can be two to five times higher 
than in southern Canada because of poor trans­
portation infrastructure. 
As if these challenges weren’t enough, the climate 
in Northern Canada is warming three times faster 
than the global average. The resulting permafrost 
thaw, more frequent and damaging extreme 
weather, and unpredictable snow and ice condi­
tions are amplifying existing Northern infrastruc­
ture problems, with devastating consequences 
for Northerners. 
Over the past two years, the Canadian Climate 
Institute has been working, with input from 
Northern rights holders, governments, and other 
stakeholders, to identify the costs of climate change 
impacts to Northern infrastructure. Due North 
documents the findings of our analysis, including:
	
▶
The first ever permafrost thaw projections 
for the entire North and estimates of the cost 
of damage for Northern infrastructure
	
▶
Projections of winter road viability 
	
▶
First-hand accounts of the social and cultural 
impacts of climate-related infrastructure 
failure and disrepair
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
viii
Executive summary
	
▶
Estimates of the costs and benefits of both 
incremental and transformative adaptation 
measures to prevent or delay the impacts of 
climate change
Infrastructure damage from permafrost thaw 
across Northern Canada—Yukon, Northwest 
Territories, Nunavut, Nunavik, and Nunatsiavut, 
as well as the northern regions of British Columbia, 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario—is 
increasing rapidly. Runways, roads, and building 
foundations will sustain significant damage from 
permafrost thaw, winter roads will become more 
unsafe and less viable during warmer winters, and 
sea level rise and floods will threaten the viability 
of some communities.
Our analysis shows that early investments in infra­
structure adaptation can reduce costs and prevent 
disruption of essential services. However, incre­
mental adaptations alone won’t be sufficient—the 
effects of climate change are only exacerbat­
ing decades, if not centuries, of poor planning, 
underinvestment, and neglect. Developing infra­
structure for the future of the North will require 
transformative adaptations as well as incremen­
tal adaptations. In many cases, this will mean 
following the lead of Northerners to reimagine 
the way that infrastructure services are delivered 
and support education and community knowl­
edge-sharing networks. 
We recommend four types of actions that can not 
only reduce climate change costs and impacts on 
Northern infrastructure but can also lay a path 
to more functional, appropriate, and resilient 
infrastructure.
	
▶
FUNDING: The federal government should 
dedicate new financial resources for Northern 
infrastructure and should restructure existing 
infrastructure funding programs to increase 
accessibility and usefulness to Northern 
governments.
	
▶
INFORMATION: The federal government 
should support provincial, territorial, and 
Indigenous governments in developing and 
maintaining accurate and practical informa­
tion about Northern-relevant climate risks to 
infrastructure. This data should prioritize infor­
mation that is important to Northern decision 
makers and Indigenous communities.
	
▶
INNOVATION: All orders of government 
should prioritize infrastructure replacement 
and transformative leapfrogging over repair 
and protection wherever this is found to be 
a more effective, efficient, and sustainable 
way to safeguard services. 
	
▶
REGULATION: Federal, provincial, and terri­
torial governments should update infra­
structure policies, regulations, standards, 
and codes to explicitly account for the more 
complex and severe impacts of climate 
change in the North and to ensure that new 
infrastructure is resilient.
Because colonization and racism are among 
the root causes of climate change infrastruc­
ture vulnerability, the four recommendations are 
rooted in a guiding principle of self-determina­
tion: All infrastructure development and adapta­
tion policies should be implemented in a manner 
that is consistent with the principles outlined in 
Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Report. By 
working with Indigenous Peoples through a 
process of partnership and equal collaboration, 
federal, provincial, and territorial governments 
have an opportunity to fundamentally rethink the 
way infrastructure is built in the North to better 
serve the needs of Indigenous Peoples.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
ix
Executive summary
Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine 
brought significant attention to questions of 
Northern security and national defence. Defence 
investments and policies resulting from these 
concerns have the potential to address pre-exist­
ing threats and build Northern resilience; however, 
unless Canada learns from mistakes of the past, 
such policies could also exacerbate North-south 
infrastructure inequities, disempower Indigenous 
Peoples, and increase vulnerability to climate 
change. Our analysis underscores the centrality 
of infrastructure and climate adaptation in any 
assessment of the threats facing the North.
For too long, reliable, functional, and high-quality 
infrastructure has been unavailable for many 
Northerners. With the climate changing faster in 
Northern Canada than anywhere else in North 
America, the challenge is only growing. All orders of 
government must act to help transform Northern 
infrastructure—from inadequate and vulnerable to 
appropriate and resilient—to help Northerners 
secure a safe, healthy, and prosperous future.
Groswater Bay, Nunatsiavut. Photo: Bird's Eye Inc. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
x
T
ransformative  
adaptation 
is needed to address the  
Northern infrastructure gap  
and worsening climate impacts. 
Northerners currently lack access to safe and 
reliable infrastructure that people in the rest of 
Canada take for granted. The warming climate 
creates both a need and an opportunity to 
fundamentally rethink how infrastructure  
is built in the North, for Northerners. 
Transformative adaptation, supportive policy, and 
funding can leapfrog the challenges of an existing 
infrastructure gap and worsening climate change. 
RUNWAYS are warping and cracking due to 
permafrost thaw and extreme weather.  
When permafrost erodes, runways can lose 
the ability to support an airplane’s weight.
“Here’s the runway… And this entire area is 
marshland. It’s been sinking for I don’t know 
how many years due to permafrost thaw.”
Damage from permafrost 
thaw is leading to damage to 
HOMES AND BUILDINGS and 
pipes and gas lines. 
“My house is shifting. My drywall 
has cracked. And a window 
has cracked twice. So, we’ve 
replaced it twice due to shifting 
of the house.”
More than half of WINTER ROADS could 
become unusable in the next 30 years as 
temperatures warm. Permanent roads 
are also cracking and collapsing because 
of permafrost thaw.
“The ice gets thinner and thinner. Last 
year, the year before, it barely brought in 
the fuel. The ice was not thick enough.”
 DEPENDABLE AIRPORTS 
Airports can be designed to operate in 
the changing environment and better 
support reliable delivery of health 
services and supplies.
 LIVABLE HOMES AND BUILDINGS 
Homes can be designed to withstand climate 
change with adaptations like thermosyphons 
or space-frame foundations, while reflecting 
cultural values and needs.   
 SAFE AND RELIABLE TRANSPORT 
Transport systems can be reimagined to move 
supplies to  where Northerners need them, even 
in an environment that is constantly shifting 
because of climate change impacts.
CASCADING IMPACTS: Unreliable 
transportation infrastructure can 
have a ripple effect on the availability 
and cost of store-bought food, and 
on access to country food (meat, fish, 
and berries). 
“Up until a couple of years ago, 
we had an ice cellar. It’s actually 
unusable now because it keeps 
accumulating water. Even though  
we had it boxed in, insulated.  
It just couldn’t keep food frozen.”
 THRIVING COMMUNITIES 
Communities have reliable food 
transport and storage, and access 
to country food.
All quotes from people who participated in the Firelight Report 2022 | Design by Voilà: chezVoila.com
CANADIAN
CLIMATE
INSTITUTE
L’INSTITUT
CLIMATIQUE
DU CANADA
x
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
xi
THE HEALTH 
COSTS OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE 
SPRING 2021
TIP OF THE 
ICEBERG 
FALL 2020
A closer look at health costs and adaptation 
opportunities, built around our analysis of the 
costs of heat-linked health burdens, Lyme 
disease, and air quality changes. The report 
includes a discussion of mental health impacts 
and other difficult-to-quantify health costs.
An analysis of the poor condition of Northern 
infrastructure, how it's putting communi­
ties at risk, and the need to advance policies 
and investments to better serve Northerners 
and prepare the region's infrastructure for the 
effects of climate change.
DUE NORTH
SPRING 2022
Using national macroeconomic modelling of 
potential climate change impacts to vulnera­
ble sectors and assets, this report will outline 
the implications of a changing climate on 
economic productivity and well-being.
If we think of the costs of climate change as an 
iceberg ahead, this introductory paper zooms 
in on the tip of the iceberg—the known and 
measurable hazards—as well as the contours 
of what lies below the water.
A focused analysis on infrastructure costs 
and adaptation opportunities, built around 
our modelling of climate-induced impacts 
to flooding, transportation infrastructure, 
and electricity systems. 
UNDER WATER 
FALL 2021
MACROECONOMIC
FALL 2022
2020
2023
FACING THE COSTS
INFRASTRUCTURE
Our ongoing research 
into the costs of climate 
change includes the 
following reports:
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
1
Infrastructure in Northern Canada is not just a 
vital part of daily life for Northerners, including 
Inuit, First Nations, and Métis—it can be a matter 
of life and death. In spite of infrastructure’s crucial 
role in the North, however, the region faces a 
significant infrastructure gap. And with Northern 
Canada warming at three times the global aver­
age due to accelerating climate change, the 
consequences for Northern infrastructure and 
those who depend on it could be severe. 
Preparing and repairing Northern infrastructure 
for the accelerating impacts of climate change is a 
pressing challenge for Northern, Indigenous, and 
federal governments. There are three major barri­
ers to ensuring resilient infrastructure services 
across Northern Canada: 
1.	
As a result of the Northern infrastructure gap, 
existing infrastructure across the North is 
consistently failing to serve the most basic 
needs of Northerners. Northerners do not have 
access to the same quality of infrastructure 
services as other people in Canada. For exam­
ple, housing insecurity is higher in Northern 
Canada than anywhere else in the country; most 
Northerners lack dependable health and trans­
portation infrastructure; and many communi­
ties do not have access to high-speed internet. 
2.	 Despite the cultural strength and resilience 
of the North’s many Indigenous Peoples, a 
legacy of racist and colonial harms contin­
ues to impede efforts to prepare for and 
adapt to climate change (Ford et al. 2015; 
Ready and Collings 2020). Historically, govern­
ments designed social and economic policies 
to contain and destroy Indigenous knowl­
edge and cultures (Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada 2015). To this day, crucial 
infrastructure decisions continue to be made 
in Ottawa without meaningful input and direc­
tion from Northern Indigenous Peoples.
3.	 Climate change in the North is happening 
faster and having a greater impact than in 
the rest of Canada. In the past 50 years, the 
average global temperature has increased 
by 0.8 degrees Celsius. In that time, Canada’s 
average temperature has risen 1.7 C—and the 
INTRODUCTION
1 
Pangnirtung, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
2
Introduction
North has warmed by 2.3 C, roughly triple the 
rate of the global average (Bush and Lemmen 
2019). Furthermore, the North faces unique 
climate-related hazards such as permafrost 
thaw and changes to sea ice conditions that 
could have devastating effects on Northern 
communities and livelihoods. 
This report is part of the Canadian Climate 
Institute’s Costs of Climate Change series, which 
seeks to quantify and assess some of the biggest 
costs of climate change across Canada, includ­
ing to infrastructure. Because of the urgent and 
unique challenges posed by climate change in 
Northern Canada, this report specifically addresses 
the impacts and costs for Northern infrastruc­
ture, building off of our 2021 report Under Water, 
which assesses the threats to infrastructure in 
Canada more broadly. This report focuses on 
climate change infrastructure impacts unique to 
the North, such as the effects of permafrost thaw 
on roads, airports, homes, and buildings. 
Our analysis finds that Northern infrastructure—
and as a result, Northerners—are highly exposed 
and vulnerable to climate-related hazards. 
Impacts will vary across the North. Some places 
are already experiencing infrastructure damage 
and costs from permafrost thaw. Other places that 
are further North, with cooler climates, may have 
more time to prepare but may also experience the 
most dramatic change in the long term. 
For some types of infrastructure, such as build­
ings and runways, retrofitting and replacing infra­
structure can delay or reduce costs and damages, 
ensuring that Northerners continue to have 
access to essential services. But even with signif­
icant global emissions reductions and adaptive 
measures to protect infrastructure, some existing 
Northern infrastructure may not be possible or 
practical to maintain over the long term and will 
have to be reimagined. 
As a result, Northern adaptation should empha­
size replacement of the infrastructure that is not 
practical to maintain with new technologies or 
approaches that are more durable and environ­
mentally sustainable. Federal, provincial, and terri­
torial governments will need to work closely with 
Northerners and Northern Indigenous govern­
ments to reimagine climate-resilient infra­
structure that supports long-term well-being, 
prosperity, and self-determination.
Russia’s February 2022 invasion of Ukraine and 
the increased attention it has brought to ques­
tions of Canadian security and national defence 
only add urgency to addressing the issues this 
analysis raises. Defence investments and policies 
have the potential to help address the Northern 
infrastructure gap and build Northern resilience 
to the rapidly changing climate, but they could 
also exacerbate North-south infrastructure ineq­
uities, disempowerment of Indigenous Peoples, 
and vulnerability to climate change. Our analysis 
highlights the pitfalls and opportunities that are 
at stake.
The remainder of this report is structured as 
follows:
	
▶
SECTION 2 addresses the context for this 
study, including the state of Northern infra­
structure, the anticipated consequences 
of climate change, the role of adaptation, 
and the colonial foundations of Northern 
infrastructure. 
	
▶
SECTION 3 describes our methodology, 
which uses climate and infrastructure 
models to estimate the damage and costs 
caused by a changing climate and the bene­
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
3
Introduction
fits of adaptation. It also includes descriptive 
interviews with Northerners, which provide 
a more complete picture of the implications 
of infrastructure damage and of actions that 
are being taken or should be taken to adapt 
(Firelight 2022). 
	
▶
SECTIONS 4 TO 7 present the findings of 
our analysis for each principal infrastructure 
type (roads, airports, and homes and build­
ings) and highlight the voices of Northern 
Indigenous Peoples, and Northern decision 
makers. 
	
▶
SECTION 8 summarizes our conclusions 
regarding how climate change may continue 
to impact the North, describes opportunities 
to reduce climate-related impacts through 
adaptation, and recommends policies and 
actions that can make Northern infrastruc­
ture more resilient to the ongoing impacts 
of climate change.
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
4
2 
Yukon 
British 
Columbia 
Northwest 
Territories 
Alberta 
Yellowknife 

 
Baffin Bay 
' 
Hudson Bay 
Quebec 
CONTEXT
Figure 1
The North
In this report, we define 
Northern Canada as all re­
gions north of 55 degrees 
latitude. Nearly 50 per 
cent of this area is com­
prised of Inuit Nunangat, 
which is crosshatched on 
this map.
In this report, we define the North as Yukon, 
Northwest Territories, Nunavut, Nunavik 
(Quebec), and Nunatsiavut (Newfoundland 
and Labrador), as well as the northern regions 
of British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, and Ontario (Figure 1). This follows the 
definition used by the Arctic and Northern Policy 
Framework (CIRNAC 2019). When applicable, we 
use the term Inuit Nunangat, which refers to the 
four Inuit regions in Canada: Nunavut, Nunavik, 
Nunatsiavut, and the Inuvialuit Settlement 
Region. However, we recognize that there are 
many definitions of the North, that Northern 
cultures and ecosystems are diverse, and that 
Indigenous Nations and histories transcend colo­
nial borders (Table 1).
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
5
Context
The importance of infrastructure in the North
As it does elsewhere in Canada, infrastructure 
provides many essential services across the North, 
from housing vital to people’s safety, to roads and 
trails, to functional water and electricity systems. 
When infrastructure is damaged, destroyed, or 
in need of repair, communities go without vital 
services; trade and economic activity are inter­
rupted; and human health is put in jeopardy. 
But the consequences of infrastructure failure 
are often far greater in Northern Canada (Huot 
et al. 2019). If a water treatment plant or an elec­
trical plant fails in a Northern community, there 
is seldom a backup system (Office of the Auditor 
General of Canada 2017; ITK 2020; Sohns et al. 
2019). When Northern infrastructure fails, it can 
quickly lead to life-threatening situations (Funston 
2014). Winter and all-season roads, for example, 
are essential means of accessing medical care, 
food, and fuel for many communities. Unlike 
road networks in southern Canada, the Northern 
communities that are accessible by road typically 
only have one road leading in and out. This means 
that an emergency road closure due to a landslide, 
fire, flood, or washout can quickly cascade to food 
shortages at grocery stores, medical emergencies 
with no access to care, and dwindling fuel supplies.
Northern infrastructure systems are deeply inter­
connected. When one piece of infrastructure fails, 
it can have cascading effects on other systems. 
For example, airports require more than just an 
airplane and a runway to operate safely—they 
need electricity for lights, access roads for people 
and supplies, and fuel that is often shipped into 
the community. An electrical outage or road 
disruption can create significant problems for 
the normal operations of an airport in the North. 
For example, in 2015, a fire destroyed the only 
power plant in Pangnirtung, Nunavut, and the 
short runway prevented aircraft from bringing in 
backup generators (CBC 2015). 
Sixty-eight communities across the North can 
only be reached by air year-round, and many other 
Northern communities rely heavily on air travel 
for emergency medical care, food, and essential 
supplies. Most Northern airports consist of one 
Table 1
Population of the North
Category / 
Territories
Yukon
NWT
Nunavut
Nunavik
Nunatsiavut
Northern regions 
of provinces west 
of Quebec 
Population 2016
35,874
41,786
35,944
13,188
3,189
404,743
Total number of 
communities
16
31
25
14
5
54
Number of fly-in 
communities
1
14
25
14
5
8
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
6
Context
gravel runway and do not have the required equip­
ment for planes to land when there are crosswinds 
or poor visibility (Debortoli et al. 2019). Even the 
technicians needed to fix critical infrastructure 
may face challenges accessing the community 
(Clark and Kanduth 2022). 
Because most Northern communities do not have 
a physician or an advanced medical centre, resi­
dents rely on airplanes to access medical care 
in most emergencies (Young et al. 2016). When 
an airport is not functioning because of a storm, 
power outage, or runway damage, a commu­
nity often loses access to advanced life support. 
Because of poor weather-monitoring equipment 
at airports, 29 per cent of emergency medical 
transport has been delayed or cancelled in recent 
years (Office of the Auditor General of Canada 
2017). Airports are also essential to bring physi­
cians to communities for clinics and to transport 
medical supplies such as blood products. Some 
residents in the North can use telehealth with­
out having to leave their communities, but slow, 
expensive, and unreliable internet limits access.
Homes and buildings play an enhanced role in 
Northern communities. Due to a shortage of safe 
and affordable housing in the North, one home may 
house multiple generations of a family. Furthermore, 
a substantial proportion of residents in the North live 
in non-market housing (see Box A for discussion). 
Non-residential buildings in Northern communi­
ties also frequently serve multiple vital roles. For 
example, in addition to their primary role, school 
buildings frequently serve as community gather­
ing places or emergency shelters because they are 
often the largest buildings in town. Buildings are 
also critical for the delivery of health care to multi­
ple communities in the North. The few hospitals 
that are above 55 degrees North are in regional 
hubs like Whitehorse, Yellowknife, and Iqaluit. 
These regional health hubs serve huge catchments 
with little or no redundancy in the event of damage 
or loss of access. If these buildings become unin­
habitable or unusable because of the impacts from 
permafrost thaw, flooding, or other disasters, large 
numbers of Northerners could be left many hours 
of air travel from a doctor or hospital.
Whale Cove, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
7
finances a greater share of infrastructure across Northern Canada than it 
does in southern Canada. While only two airports in Northern Canada are 
owned by the federal government (Churchill and Kuujjuaq), federal funding 
is required to maintain functional and safe airports across the North (see 
airport funding Box D). Federal financing—through the Canadian Mortgage 
and Housing Association—is also essential for public housing across the 
North. Only 13 per cent of Canadian renter households nationwide live in 
public housing. But in Nunavut, the portion is 84 per cent; in Northwest 
Territories, 41 per cent; and in Yukon, 25 per cent (Statistics Canada 2017). In 
some cases (Northern regions of provinces), Indigenous Services Canada 
provides some housing for First Nations governed by the Indian Act. As in 
southern Canada, the federal government generally provides substantial 
financing of highways in the North.
THE GOVERNMENT 
OF CANADA

Each order of government plays different roles in infrastructure development and 
maintenance in Northern Canada than in southern Canada. These differences in the 
governance and financing of infrastructure are important when considering future 
costs as well as adaptation policies. Below we outline key roles that each order of 
government tends to have for airport, roads, and buildings.
Governments have unique roles 
and responsibilities when it comes 
to Northern infrastructure
 BOX A
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
8
finance and maintain airports, housing, and roads across Northern 
regions. About 30 airports across the North are owned and operated by 
provincial governments, most of them in Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and 
Newfoundland and Labrador. Development of social housing is gener­
ally approached the same way from north to south within each province. 
However, legislation and land claim agreements in Nunavik (Quebec) and 
Nunatsiavut (Newfoundland and Labrador) delegate additional responsibil­
ity to the respective provinces to provide housing. Roads are also managed 
similarly north to south in each province, though municipalities in Northern 
regions are generally less involved in road construction and maintenance.
own and operate most airports across Yukon, Northwest Territories, and 
Nunavut, and own and maintain most roads. Territorial housing corpora­
tions develop and maintain most social housing in the territories. 
are, in some cases, major proponents in the development and maintenance 
of large infrastructure. For example, as outlined in the James Bay Agreement, 
the Kitivik Regional Government (Nunavik) is charged with the operation 
and management of airports and roads across the region. Some self-govern­
ing First Nations in Yukon manage social housing programs, like the Kwanlin 
Dün First Nation Market Housing Program. 
in Northern Canada tend to be less involved in infrastructure development 
and management than large municipalities in southern Canada. However, 
municipal and hamlet governments still serve vital functions in maintain­
ing roads and airports across the region. Several airports located in north­
ern regions of provinces are owned and operated by municipalities or local 
airport authorities. Municipalities also play a key role in land-use planning 
decisions that impact housing affordability and cost.
TERRITORIAL 
GOVERNMENTS
INDIGENOUS 
AND REGIONAL 
GOVERNMENTS 
MUNICIPAL 
AND HAMLET 
GOVERNMENTS 
PROVINCIAL 
GOVERNMENTS
Pond Inlet, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
9
Context
The Northern infrastructure gap
Generations of infrastructure plans imposed on 
the North with narrow goals and limited funding 
have created a significant Northern infrastruc­
ture gap. This gap negatively impacts the lives, 
livelihoods, health, and well-being of Northerners. 
With the North facing the accelerated threat of 
warming at three times the global average, its 
already-inadequate infrastructure will suffer 
unique and potentially devastating challenges if 
the gap is not addressed in ways that account for 
this rapid and dramatic climate change. 
Northern communities do not have the same 
quality of infrastructure and access to essential 
services as other Canadians (NAEDB 2016). This 
gap impacts every major type of infrastructure: 
	
▶
HOUSING: Throughout the North, inflated 
costs of construction and transportation, 
a short building season, high population 
growth, and extreme poverty rates have 
exacerbated housing shortages. In Nunavut, 
more than half of all households are over­
crowded—defined as each occupant not 
having their own bedroom—compared to 
a national average of less than ten per cent 
(Statistics Canada 2017). Overcrowded and 
inadequate housing has serious health 
implications for residents—rates of tuber­
culosis, for example, are 300 times higher 
among Inuit than among non-Indige­
nous people in Canada (Vachon et al. 2018; 
Patterson et al. 2018). Inadequate housing is 
also harmful to other aspects of well-being, 
including personal safety and mental health 
(Kilabuk et al. 2019; ITK 2019). 
	
▶
DRINKING WATER: Eighty per cent of 
communities in Inuit Nunangat have no 
access to piped water and rely on trucked 
water (ITK 2020). Trucked water is vulnerable 
to weather conditions and delays and can 
become contaminated during the trans­
portation process. For instance, in Igloolik, 
after water trucks failed to sufficiently filter 
the drinking water, residents endured a boil 
water advisory after finding parasites in their 
water (CBC News 2015). In Clyde River, when 
the water treatment plant broke down, the 
community’s two water trucks could not 
meet demand for water. The incident caused 
water shortages that forced the closure of the 
school and health centre (Lochead 2021). 
	
▶
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: As of 2019, no 
households in Yukon, Northwest Territories, 
or Nunavut had access to broadband internet 
that met the federal government’s univer­
sal speed target. In comparison, over 90 per 
cent of households in British Columbia and 
Quebec had access to broadband that met 
the speed target (CRTC 2020). In Nunavut, 
the digital divide is particularly acute: the 
fastest available internet service—15 mega­
bits per second—is eight times slower than 
the Canadian average (ITK 2021). 
	
▶
ENERGY: Not a single community in Nunavut, 
Nunavik, or Nunatsiavut, and only one in 
four communities in Northwest Territories, 
are connected to a regional electricity grid 
(NTI 2020; Karanasios and Parker 2017). Most 
of these off-grid communities rely on diesel 
generators, which are costly, loud, and gener­
ate substantial greenhouse gas emissions. 
The average homeowner in Northern Ontario 
pays an energy bill more than double that of 
the average Canadian household (Lovekin 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
10
Context
and Heerema 2019). Reliance on diesel gener­
ators leaves communities without emer­
gency backups, so inclement weather or 
shipping delays can leave households with­
out heat and electricity. 
	
▶
MARINE TRANSPORT: Sealifts are an essen­
tial means of transporting goods, non-per­
ishable food, and fuel to many Northern 
communities. Currently there are no 
deep-water ports in the North, although one 
is under construction in Iqaluit (Transport 
Canada 2022b). The lack of port infrastruc­
ture limits the access of northern commu­
nities and businesses to less expensive food, 
goods, and transport.
	
▶
AIRPORTS: Air travel is the only reliable, year-
round mode of transport for about half of the 
communities in the North (Government of 
Canada 2021), yet many Northern airports 
lack adequate lighting systems for low visibil­
ity conditions, which are essential for pilots to 
land safely in the dark or in inclement weather 
(Office of the Auditor General of Canada 2017). 
In Nunavut, runways are on average less 
than half the length of runways at commer­
cial airports in southern Canada, and most 
runways are unpaved, allowing only smaller 
aircraft to safely land (NTI 2020). Smaller planes 
cannot travel as far or carry as much weight 
as larger aircraft, limiting transport of critical 
supplies to remote communities. 
The Northern Infrastructure gap is widening as old 
infrastructure is retired and demand continues 
to increase because of rapid population growth 
in the North. From 2006 to 2016, the Inuit popu­
lation in Inuit Nunangat grew at a rate of 29 per 
cent—almost three times that of the Canadian 
population (ITK 2018). 
Dramatically inferior infrastructure is not an 
inevitable result of Northern settlement. Other 
circumpolar countries face similar challenges 
for infrastructure development—extreme cold, 
short building seasons, small populations spread 
out over large areas—but have sustained a higher 
quality of infrastructure and more reliable services. 
Some important examples:
	
▶
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Communities 
in other Northern countries are connected 
to faster and more reliable services such 
as fibre optic networks. Alaska’s average 
broadband speed, though the slowest in 
the United States, is still faster than the fast­
est available speed in Nunavut (NTI 2020). In 
2009, the Danish government laid fibre optic 
cables across the ocean floor to Greenland—
as a result, 93 per cent of the population in 
Greenland now has access to high-speed 
broadband (ITK 2021). 
	
▶
ENERGY: Other circumpolar states are transi­
tioning away from diesel generation in remote 
Northern communities to make energy more 
reliable, clean, and affordable. For example, the 
state of Alaska has spent more than US$250 
million over the past decade investing in 
renewable-powered microgrids (Lovekin et 
al. 2016). Greenland has five hydropower plants 
that produce 60-70 per cent of its energy 
(Mortensen et al. 2017). 
	
▶
MARINE TRANSPORT: Without deep-
water ports it is more challenging to unload 
fuel and supplies at each community. Other 
circumpolar countries like Russia, Greenland, 
Finland, and Norway all have deep-water 
ports that serve their Northern communi­
ties (Lasserre 2022). 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
11
Context
The colonial foundations of Northern infrastructure
Infrastructure in Northern Canada must be 
understood as the product of Northern history, 
geography, cultural contexts, and disputes over 
sovereignty and self-determination. Historically, 
infrastructure in the North was developed to 
support colonial expansion and resource extraction, 
not to serve the needs of Indigenous Peoples who 
have lived across the North since time immemorial 
(Cruikshank 1985; Castillo et al. 2020). The story of 
infrastructure development across the region is in 
many ways a tale of colonial expansion and racism 
(LaDuke and Cowen 2020; Baijius and Patrick 2019). 
Roads, airports, and ports in the North were largely 
developed by settlers and southern governments 
to support economic development and national 
security, while Indigenous Peoples were forcibly 
relocated to settlements with substandard infra­
structure that did not provide for their physical or 
cultural needs (Figure 2).
The legacy of racist and colonial harm lives on 
through the absence of sufficient and appropriate
infrastructure across Northern Canada. Even 
today, a lack of sufficient medical facilities means 
Northerners—particularly Indigenous Peoples—
often must leave their communities for extended 
periods for any advanced medical treatment, 
including giving birth (Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada 2015b), insufficient medi­
cal facilities in Northern communities have 
meant that residents have had to travel south to 
receive care.
To this day, Indigenous governments and commu­
nities have little control over infrastructure deci­
sions across the North. Instead, these decisions 
are often made by federal, territorial, and provin­
cial governments. This lack of control and agency 
over infrastructure decisions means that devel­
opment of new infrastructure in the North does 
not necessarily serve the needs of the North—a 
fatal flaw that must be addressed if the threat of 
climate change to Northern infrastructure is to be 
successfully met.
Pangnirtung, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
12
Beginning with the arrival of Europeans in the 17th century, settlement and 
economic development in what is now known as Northern Canada have 
ignored, exploited, or actively persecuted Indigenous Peoples and cultures. 
Land claim settlements have begun to return decision-making power to 
Indigenous communities, but the impacts of centuries of disempowerment, 
colonialism, and racism continue to this day—including inadequate 
infrastructure and inequitable decision-making processes. 
Figure 2
Important events in 
the history of colo­
nial infrastructure 
development in 
Northern Canada
 1600-1850 (approximately)
European explorers arrive in the North, 
followed by whalers, missionaries, and fur 
traders. These encounters have profound 
impacts on Indigenous Peoples, but 
there is no co-ordinated presence or 
interest in the North from imperial 
powers; many communities remain 
self-governing on their traditional land.
 1869  
The Hudson’s Bay Company sells 
Rupert’s Land to the British Crown, 
which then cedes it to Canada. This 
transaction includes parts of southern 
Nunavut, northern Ontario, Quebec, 
Manitoba, and Saskatchewan.
 1896  
Gold is discovered in Yukon, prompting 
the Klondike Gold Rush and the subse­
quent formation of Yukon Territory in 
1898. White settlers flock to the territory, 
and infrastructure such as roads and rail 
are quickly developed to support them. 
But after the Gold Rush bust around 
1905, development stalls for decades, 
leaving Indigenous communities with­
out critical infrastructure (Morse 2003). 
  1860s-1900  
Commercial whalers set up year-round 
posts in the eastern Arctic (some of 
which are still hamlets and towns 
across the region), decimating marine 
mammal populations and causing wide­
spread food insecurity and starvation 
among Inuit. 
  Early 1900s-1990s  
Residential schools are used to forc­
ibly assimilate Indigenous children. 
In the North, the residential school 
system arrives later than in the south. 
Residential schools in the south are 
widespread by 1900, but don’t reach 
the Eastern Arctic until the 1950s 
(Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
of Canada 2015a). 
  1940s
Before the Second World War, there 
were no major roads in Yukon and 
approximately 5,000 people lived in 
the territory, about half of whom were 
Indigenous. In 1942, soldiers arrived in 
Yukon to build the Alaskan Highway 
in support of the war efforts. By 1944, 
more than 34,000 men were working 
on the road in Yukon, Alaska, and north­
ern British Columbia. The population of 
Yukon’s capital, Whitehorse, grew from 
less than 1,000 to 20,000 in a few months 
(Cruikshank 1985). Many Indigenous 
people found employment during this 
boom, but most of it was short-term. 
The number of students attending day 
schools also increased as new schools 
were constructed in highway settle­
ments. From 1942 to 1949, the number 
of schools in Yukon quadrupled and 
the number of Indigenous students 
increased by eight-fold (Cruikshank 
1985). Once Indigenous children were 
integrated into the territorial school 
system, parents who wanted their 
children to live at home while they 
attended school had to move to settle­
ments where schools were located.
 1953  
Inuit from Inukjuak in Northern Quebec 
are forcibly relocated to Ellesmere and 
Cornwallis Islands—an effort by the 
Canadian government to assert sover­
eignty and establish a presence in the 
North during the Cold War. Relocated 
families are not adequately supported 
and infrastructure remains inade­
quate 70 years later (Qikiqtani Inuit 
Association 2014).
  1975-1993 
A series of Northern land claim agree­
ments are signed, including the James 
Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement 
(1975), Yukon Umbrella Final Agreement 
(1992), and Nunavut Land Claim 
Agreement (1993). These land claims 
mark a major step for Indigenous 
self-determination and rights to the 
land. Some of the agreements lay 
out financial compensation for the 
exchange of land or for resource devel­
opment, and some establish co-gov­
ernance structures. Other land claim 
agreements give Indigenous govern­
ments ownership or decision-making 
power over infrastructure development 
and maintenance.
1875
1850
1600
1950
1900
1975
1925
2000
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
13
“The federal government in 1949 told the ‘savages’ that they should become civilized—we shall 
turn them into civilized human beings, rather than being ‘savages’… Because of those issues, I'm 
worried about my grandchildren and my great-grandchildren. I have four great-grandchildren, and 
I'm worried about their livelihood.… The understanding of the land... is starting to disappear.” 
—Nunavut participant (Firelight 2022)
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
14
Context
Climate change across the North
Climate change is having more rapid and 
dramatic impacts in the North than it is in the 
rest of Canada (Bush and Lemmen 2019). Climate 
models project an average temperature increase 
across southern Canada, which is warming 
much faster than the global average, of 2.2 to 
3.1 degrees Celsius by mid-century, and 2.8 to 5.4 C 
by the end of the century compared to the refer­
ence period of 1986-2005. Temperatures across 
Northern Canada are projected to increase even 
faster than in southern Canada, with an increase of 
2.7 to 3.9 C by mid-century and 3.5 to 6.7 C by end 
of the century (Figure 3). By the year 2100, many 
Northern communities could see an increase in 
annual temperatures of 7 C above the recent aver­
age if current emissions trends continue. 
8 oc 
6 
4 
2 
0 
Low-emissions scenario 
Historic baseline 
Beginning of century 
(1986-2005) 
(2005-2039) 
Mid-century 
(2040-2069) 
End of century 
(2070-2099) 
High-emissions scenario 
Historic baseline 
Beginning of century 
(1986-2005) 
(2005-2039) 
Mid-century 
(2040-2069) 
Resolute 
Ulukhaktok 
Iqaluit 
Kuujjuaq 
Yellowknife 
Nain 
Toronto, Whitehorse 
Vancouver 
End of century 
(2070-2099) 
Source: Data was obtained from the Canadian Centre for Climate Services and is based on an ensemble of 27 global climate model projections from the Coupled Model lntercomparison 
Project Phase 5 (CMIP5). In this figure, each line reflects the projected changes in average annual temperature with respect to the reference period of 1986-2005. 
“Right now, here we are in October 14th and normally we have snow here, 
but now it’s just sunshine and plus eight right now. We haven’t had any snow here at all, 
and normally it freeze up here on the lake.”
—Northwest Territories participant (Firelight 2022)
Figure 3
Temperatures are rising faster across Northern Canada
Projected average annual temperature increases for cities in southern and Northern Canada
Dawson City, Yukon
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
15
Context
Rising temperatures are also causing major shifts in 
the weather and environment of the North, such as 
increases in extreme snow and rain (Streicker 2016). 
Indigenous Elders and Knowledge Holders have 
been observing many of these changes for decades 
(Ford et al. 2018; Simonee et al. 2021). They have 
described unprecedented shifts in weather patterns, 
such as dramatic or sudden changes in wind direc­
tion, melting sea ice, and changes to plants and 
wildlife (Huntington et al. 2017; Gearheard et al. 2011; 
Streicker 2016; Arctic Council 2016).
Weather extremes are also shifting quickly across 
the North (Underwood and Bertazzon 2020). For 
example, thunderstorms, which have historically 
been uncommon or non-existent in the high 
North, have become regular occurrences over the 
past decade (Holzworth et al. 2021). The increase 
in thunderstorms and lightning strikes is likely 
to contribute to additional wildfires in the Arctic 
(Masrur et al. 2018; Chen et al. 2021). 
Slower-onset impacts of climate change are also 
changing the landscape of the North. Permafrost 
is thawing quickly across the North, bringing new 
hazards (see Box B). Rising sea levels and sea ice 
loss are increasingly eroding and flooding coastal 
settlements, while relative sea levels are falling in 
other locations due to isostatic rebound, render­
ing ports unusable (Underwood and Bertazzon 
2020). These changes in weather extremes as 
well as slower-onset shifts are causing damage 
to infrastructure, making travel more dangerous, 
and altering the relevance of some Indigenous 
Traditional Knowledge, which is highly place-
based (Hjort et al. 2018).
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
16
What is
permafrost
thaw?
 BOX B
The ground is frozen year-round in about 50 per cent of 
Northern Canada (about 2.5 million square kilometres). This 
frozen ground is called permafrost, and in some places, it 
extends hundreds of metres below the surface and is as cold 
as -15 degrees Celsius. However, as temperatures warm and 
the amount of rain increases, Arctic permafrost is increasingly 
thawing.
When permafrost thaws, the soil, gravel, and sand that was once frozen 
solid can start to shift, slump, and slide (Radosavljevic et al. 2016; AMAP 
2019). This can significantly damage roads, buildings, airports, and other 
infrastructure, which were often built on the permafrost as a natural foun­
dation. When permafrost thaws beneath a building, the floors and walls 
can shift and crack, roads may develop sink holes or become extremely 
uneven, and runways can lose the ability to withstand an airplane’s weight 
(Melvin et al. 2016; Vogt 2021). In addition to the direct impacts on infra­
structure and communities, permafrost thaw will also profoundly disrupt 
Northern ecosystems and landscapes, with dramatic impacts to people 
who harvest and travel on the land. 
“Between my great-grandfather’s time and my generation, I would say 
50 per cent of the permafrost is kind of gone, and when it’s gone, 
all the wild tea, all the berries, all of the lichen, it turns into a swampland 
and there’s a lot of water, and it’s a lot of—everything gets sick. 
Trees died, including the vegetation. They’re all dying.… 
The birds are disappearing.”
—Ontario participant (Firelight 2022)
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
17
Context
Adapting and preparing for climate change in the North
Under both low- and high-emissions scenarios, 
accumulated greenhouse gases in the atmo­
sphere will continue to change the climate in the 
North for decades to come (Figure 3). Protecting 
Northern infrastructure from climate change 
impacts will therefore require not just reduc­
ing emissions but also adaptation, to safeguard 
Northern infrastructure services from climate-re­
lated hazards, as part of broader efforts to bolster 
resilience to future climate impacts. 
Climate change adaptation refers to actions that 
help to prevent or reduce climate change impacts 
and leverage any benefits of a changing climate 
(IPCC 2022; Smit et al. 2000). Adapting to current 
and future climate-related hazards is essential in 
order to protect people, communities, and liveli­
hoods across Canada.
Adaptation can include a range of options, from 
incremental adaptations to more transforma­
tive adaptations (Kates et al. 2012). Incremental 
adaptations aim to protect and preserve existing 
infrastructure systems. Transformative adaptations, 
on the other hand, focus on the delivery of services, 
rethinking what infrastructure and social systems 
are required to best meet the goals. Adaptation 
choices are especially important in the Northern 
context where climate change is happening rapidly 
and infrastructure is already deficient. Choosing 
the wrong path could result in both wasted 
resources and perpetuating vulnerabilities.
In the context of Northern infrastructure, exam­
ples of incremental adaptations include: 
	
▶
Using engineering practices to reinforce and 
protect infrastructure to slow damage from 
permafrost thaw
	
▶
Applying methods of passive cooling to 
prevent or slow permafrost thaw
	
▶
Updating building codes and standards to 
ensure that new infrastructure is designed 
for future climate risks
	
▶
Developing processes for monitoring and 
evaluating infrastructure to make climate-in­
formed repair and replacement decisions
Examples of transformative adaptations include: 
	
▶
Relocating infrastructure to more stable 
terrain
	
▶
Reimagining the way that infrastructure 
services are delivered
	
▶
Supporting education and community 
knowledge-sharing networks to build aware­
ness of climate hazards
Carcross, Yukon. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
18
3
METHODS
Our research consists of four components. The 
first three involve modelling the damages and 
costs associated with permafrost thaw impacts 
on airports, permafrost thaw and temperature 
impacts on permanent and winter roads, and 
permafrost thaw impacts on buildings. The 
fourth component presents stories and knowl­
edge shared through interviews with Indigenous 
people living across the North to increase under­
standing of the consequences of infrastructure 
damage from permafrost thaw and other climate 
change impacts to Indigenous cultures, liveli­
hoods, and well-being. 
Climate change is increasing the risks of infra­
structure damage and service disruption across 
the North. The damage and costs associated with 
some of these risks can be estimated, as we have 
done with the impacts to infrastructure that we 
have considered in this report. However, some risks 
can only be identified and described, but cannot 
yet be modelled or projected (Figure 4). There may 
well be other risks that are still unknown. 
Double Mer, Nunatsiavut: The body of water in front of the snowmobile is usually fully 
frozen in April; in 2021 the ice melted extremely early. Photo: Bird's Eye Inc. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
19
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
19
Impacts on Indigenous ways of life, culture, and 
knowledge from irreversible changes to land­
scapes and ecosystems
Sea level rise and coastal erosion impacts to 
coastal communities 
Increased risk of landslides due to permafrost 
thaw 
Larger and more frequent lightning, tornados, 
and heatwaves
More frequent and widespread wildfires
Impacts to health from disruption of health-care 
services, degraded housing quality, and food 
insecurity 
Increased commercial and military marine traffic 
through Northern Canada due to sea ice retreat
Climate change-induced disruptions to national 
and international supply chains, causing scarcity 
and price increases for food and fuel 
Cascading failures across interconnected infra­
structure systems, such as the impacts of a 
shorter winter road season on fuel delivery
A growing body of academic research is beginning to shed light on these risks, but it may never 
be possible to completely understand all climate change impacts. Considering this uncertainty, 
infrastructure adaptation choices need to build resilience to a wide range of potential futures and be 
flexible and adaptive to changing conditions. It is important to note that in many cases risks are better 
understood through Indigenous knowledge systems or through local knowledge than with western 
science. Information in this figure is from Streicker 2016; Arctic Council 2016; Ford et al. 2018; Bush and 
Lemmen 2019.
RISKS TO 
NORTHERN CANADA 
for which we can start 
to calculate the scale of 
impact and cost
RISKS THAT MAY HAVE MAJOR IMPACTS 
through complex interactions and 
processes and that are 
very challenging 
to predict
Damage to buildings, roads, and airports across 
the North from permafrost thaw
Reduction of winter road season or complete loss 
of winter roads
Increased frequency and severity of floods in 
some regions
Figure 4
Known and unknown infrastructure impacts in Canada: the climate costs iceberg
CLIMATE IMPACTS THAT COULD 
AFFECT THE NORTH 
but the scope and scale are 
not well understood
Methods
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
20
Methods
Modelling impacts and costs
1 The seven global climate models used were: CCSM4, GFDL-CM3, GFDL-ESM2M, HadGEM2-AO, HadGEM2-ES, MIROC-ESM-CHEM, and MRI-CG­
CM3. The Canadian Centre for Climate Services and Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium provide downscaled daily projections of temperature and 
precipitation from 2041 to 2100 on a roughly ten-kilometre-by-ten-kilometre grid for all of Canada (PCIC 2019).
To determine the focus of our analysis, we talked 
to Northern stakeholders and rights holders and 
reviewed the literature about the importance 
of different types of infrastructure across the 
North and the potential threats posed by climate 
change. Based on importance to Northerners, 
strength of evidence connecting climate change 
with economic costs, and the availability of data, 
we chose three key infrastructure types—airports, 
permanent and winter roads, and homes and 
buildings. We recognize that these are not the only 
important types of infrastructure in the North that 
are vulnerable to climate change, but because we 
have the right data and tools to analyze airports, 
roads, and buildings, we can provide an important 
window into the challenges climate change poses 
for Northern infrastructure. 
To model the impacts of climate change on 
infrastructure, we needed to understand what 
Canada’s future climate might look like. Studies of 
climate change impacts typically draw on global 
climate models that project future shifts in the 
climate caused by global greenhouse gas emis­
sions. Such models do not provide a single picture 
of the future climate under changing emissions 
levels, but rather a range of possible futures 
reflecting the complexity of the global climate 
system and the uncertainty about societal choices 
that determine greenhouse gas emissions. 
We used data from seven different climate models 
to capture a range of potential future climates 
in Canada. We obtained high-resolution outputs 
for the seven different climate models from the 
Canadian Centre for Climate Services, based on 
downscaling work undertaken by the Pacific 
Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC 2019).1 For 
each climate model, we considered two emis­
sions scenarios. Our low-emissions scenario corre­
sponds with the Representative Concentration 
Pathway (RCP) 4.5 scenario described in the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
(IPCC) fifth assessment report. This scenario 
generally reflects greenhouse gas emissions 
reduction policies announced globally in 2020, 
which would result in 2.5 degrees Celsius of global 
warming, and 4 C of warming in Canada by the 
end of the century. Our high-emissions scenario 
corresponds with the IPCC’s RCP 8.5 scenario and 
reflects a future where current rates of growth of 
global greenhouse gas emissions continue. This 
scenario projects an average temperature change 
of 7.4 C in Canada by the end of the century. 
As there are currently no comprehensive projec­
tions of permafrost thaw in Canada, we worked 
with permafrost researchers to create potential 
permafrost thaw risk projections from now to the 
year 2100 for a ten-by-ten kilometre grid across 
the North (O’Neill et al. 2020; Obu et al. 2018). We 
then calculated a risk score for each grid cell using 
daily climate model projections of future tempera­
ture change and estimates of current ground 
temperature (Smith and Riseborough 2002). We 
used these risk scores to estimate the level of 
repairs and replacements needed for infrastruc­
ture located within each grid cell. 
Finally, we used the Infrastructure Planning 
Support System (IPSS) to estimate the repair 
and replacement costs of permafrost thaw and 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
21
Methods
temperature rise on airports, roads, and build­
ings (Melvin et al. 2016; Ness et al. 2021; Resilient 
Analytics 2021). The IPSS model overlayed the 
permafrost risk data and temperature data (in 
the case of winter roads) with information about 
building, road, and airport locations and charac­
teristics (DMTI Lightbox 2020; Microsoft 2019). The 
model then analyzed the damage that exposures 
to future climate hazards could cause to specific 
infrastructure and quantified the cost of repairing 
that damage.2 
All cost estimates in our results section represent 
the change in cost from the historical average of 
costs between 1986 and 2005. All costs are in 2019 
Canadian dollars and are undiscounted. 
As building supplies and labour often cost far 
more in Northern Canada than in southern 
Canada, our cost estimates reflect this dispar­
ity. For instance, housing construction in Inuit 
Nunangat costs, on average, $250 to $530 per 
square foot, compared to $120 to $195 elsewhere 
in Canada (ITK 2019). To estimate the cost of infra­
structure repair and replacement in the Northern 
context, we developed a cost index to scale the 
cost of construction and materials at various loca­
tions using data on the costs of food in differ­
ent areas across the North (Nutrition North 2020; 
Statistics Canada 2016). The Industrial Economics 
Inc. technical report provides additional details 
on the methodology. 
2 The IPSS model was developed at the University of Colorado and has been used for similar analysis by the State of Alaska and in the Institute’s 
report, Under Water.
Our analysis for winter roads differs slightly from the 
analyses of airports, roads, and buildings because 
winter roads are primarily impacted by overall 
warming, not permafrost thaw. We modelled the 
effects of climate change on future winter road 
viability by using projections of daily air tempera­
ture to estimate the length of time a winter road 
would be viable. To capture uncertainty due to water 
salinity and movement, snow cover, and wind, we 
used two different thresholds to estimate winter 
road viability. Under the low-sensitivity threshold, a 
road was not viable if there were no months during 
a year that consistently had a four-month moving 
average temperature below -5 degrees Celsius. 
The high-sensitivity threshold deemed a road ‘non-
viable’ if the temperature of a two-week moving 
average exceeded -5C (Boehlert et al. 2021).
In addition to modelling impacts associated with 
two different global greenhouse gas emissions 
scenarios, we also examined the benefits and 
potential cost savings of implementing adapta­
tion actions to protect infrastructure from perma­
frost thaw and other climate change impacts (see 
Box C). The specific adaptations we modelled 
varied by infrastructure type and their applica­
tion is described in more detail in the discussion 
of results. The adaptations we modelled are not 
the only viable options, of course. These particular 
adaptations were selected because they represent 
commonly used practices across the circumpolar 
North and can be modelled with confidence. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
22
In some locations, cooling the ground—called passive cooling—is an 
effective approach to prevent or slow permafrost thaw. We modelled two 
approaches to passive cooling: embankment cooling for roads and runways 
and thermosyphons for buildings.
Embankment cooling practices are used in the North to prevent perma­
frost from thawing underneath roads and runways. Air cooled embankment 
systems use highly porous materials such as boulders or cobble to construct 
the road embankments. This approach helps keep the sides of roads and 
runways cooler through natural air flow during winter months (Doré et al. 
2016). Removing snow from the side of the roads or runways during winter 
months further prevents thawing by allowing the air to continue to flow 
through the embankment.
Thermosyphons are refrigeration devices that draw heat from the ground 
and release it into the air. Sealed pipes are installed vertically or in an 
L-shaped configuration, with one end below ground and the other above 
ground. When the ground is warmer than the air, the liquid at the bottom 
of the tube turns into a gas and rises—moving heat from the ground into 
Infrastructure adaptations 
for thawing permafrost
There are a number of engineered adaptation measures 
that can help alleviate the impacts of permafrost thaw and 
protect infrastructure that is constructed on it or in it—at least 
temporarily.
 BOX C
Arctic Bay, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
23
the air (Standards Council of Canada 2020). The Northern Infrastructure 
Standardization Initiative (NISI) includes thermosyphons as an important 
adaptation tool for buildings in permafrost regions.
When preventing permafrost thaw is not practical or is cost prohibitive due 
to the speed of climate warming or because of the amount of infrastruc­
ture exposed, infrastructure can be stabilized by changing the approach to 
constructing foundations. We modelled one of these techniques, known as 
base layer reinforcement, for roads and runways where moderate ground 
shifting and slumping were projected. Base layer reinforcement tends to 
be less expensive than thermosyphons.
Base layer reinforcement is a method that involves building embankments 
with multiple layers of permeable fabrics that help to reinforce, protect, 
and drain soil, helping infrastructure resist the structural consequences of 
permafrost degradation (Doré et al. 2016). 
While these adaptation measures have been successful at preserving perma­
frost and stabilizing infrastructure in Northern regions, their installation 
and operation costs are often extremely high because they require virtually 
complete reconstruction of the infrastructure they are designed to protect. 
Currently, they are generally used only for existing infrastructure that is 
extremely vulnerable, or in new construction of larger commercial and public 
buildings, highways, and runways. There are no adaptation measures avail­
able for Northern infrastructure to significantly reduce the risk of permafrost 
thaw while maintaining the existing infrastructure in place. 
Double Mer, Nunatsiavut. Photo credit: Bird's Eye Inc. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
24
Methods
Our modelling provides a useful high-level esti­
mate of the potential impacts and costs of perma­
frost thaw on infrastructure. However, to complete 
our analysis, we needed to make a number of 
simplifying assumptions. 
Notably, there are large gaps in information about 
the extent and characteristics of permafrost as well 
as the costs of repairing infrastructure in Northern 
Canada. As a result, our permafrost thaw damage 
index estimated permafrost characteristics based 
on other climate information, and our cost calcu­
lations used data from previous studies in Alaska. 
Therefore, our analysis provides useful projections 
of national and regional level costs but does not 
provide detailed estimates of impacts and costs for 
each municipality and community that is affected. 
Furthermore, our costing estimates are based on 
impacts to the existing stock of infrastructure in 
Northern Canada, and do not attempt to predict 
where infrastructure will be built in the years to 
come—including the significant amount of infra­
structure that is needed to close the Northern 
infrastructure gap. This omission is a common 
assumption of many studies that look at the 
economic impacts of climate change, but because 
population growth is presently higher in the North 
than in any other region of Canada, our results are 
almost certainly conservative. Therefore, the costs 
of climate change-induced damage will likely be 
substantially more than our estimates, as will the 
benefits of adaptation.
Additional information about our modelling 
methods is available in the accompanying tech­
nical report (Boehlert et al. 2021). 
Lived experiences and 
community impacts
There are many climate-related infrastruc­
ture impacts that are impossible to model or 
assign a dollar value to—the impacts to people’s 
well-being and to the social fabric of commu­
nities, damage to cultures, threats to food 
security, and loss of treasured ecosystems and 
landscapes. To better convey these impacts, we 
collaborated with Firelight Group, an Indigenous-
owned consulting firm that has worked with 
many communities across the North, to exam­
ine how permafrost thaw and other climate-re­
lated impacts to infrastructure are affecting life 
for Indigenous Peoples. This work is based on 
interviews conducted in six different commu­
nities across the North from September 2021 to 
October 2021 (Firelight 2022).
We used the findings of Firelight’s research to 
better understand the potential social, cultural, 
and economic impacts of the climate change-in­
duced infrastructure damage in the North that 
Arctic Bay, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
25
Methods
we modelled. We highlighted Firelight’s findings 
throughout this report, using quotes from inter­
views that convey important perspectives from 
people who are living through climate change in 
the North. Firelight’s analysis can be found in their 
companion report (Firelight 2022). 
The Firelight findings in this report and the 
companion report are not intended to speak to 
the experiences of all Indigenous Peoples across 
the North. Because of the diversity in lived experi­
ences and cultures across the North and the small 
sample size, the participants’ experiences do not 
reflect all the ways that climate change will affect 
Northern infrastructure, nor do they capture all 
the ways that infrastructure damage may impact 
well-being and ways of life. 
Finally, while this report focusses on the impacts 
of climate change on infrastructure, it is import­
ant to note that there are many other ways 
that climate change is affecting people across 
Northern Canada. Despite these limitations, 
Firelight’s research still helps to demonstrate 
the breadth of losses and the indirect effects of 
permafrost thaw beyond just the costs of repair­
ing and replacing infrastructure.
Our results are presented in four sections: one 
for each of the three types of infrastructure we 
assessed—airports, roads, and homes and build­
ings—followed by a discussion of what we heard 
from Northerners through Firelight’s findings and 
through our engagement with decision makers, 
rights holders, and stakeholders. 
“Often, I think of the changes I have seen and it [climate change] really alters everything, 
not only the environment, it changes the landscape, it changes the habitat.… changes everything—
caribou, geese, and we also have a species of trees that we haven’t seen before.… I think there’s 
all of the changing landscape—it’s changing everything.”
—Ontario participant (Firelight 2022)
Rigolet, Nunatsiavut. Photo: Bird's Eye Inc. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
26
Airports are essential infrastructure for commu­
nities across the North and are relied on for travel, 
delivery of fresh food, and services like medical 
care. For the 68 fly-in communities in the North, 
airports are particularly important. Most of these 
fly-in communities are in the eastern Arctic (Table 1), 
while in the western Arctic, most communities are 
connected by roads. In Nunavut, all communities 
are fly-in, while in Yukon, all but one community 
have all-season roads. 
Our airport analysis focused on the impacts of 
permafrost thaw and rising temperatures on 
runways. In total, we estimated the impacts and 
costs of climate change on 149 runways across the 
North. We have also integrated some discussion of 
climate impacts on other components of air trans­
portation systems, such as safety equipment and 
weather forecasting.
We analyzed impacts on both paved and gravel 
runways. Most of the runways in the North, and 
most of the runways we assessed in this report, 
are gravel (Table 2). Paved runways are more costly 
to build than gravel but can accommodate larger 
aircraft that carry more cargo and people. The few 
paved runways in Northern Canada are found in 
the northern regions of British Columbia, Alberta, 
CLIMATE IMPACTS 
ON AIRPORTS
Table 2
Northern airport runways analyzed in this report
Province or territory
Number of airports*
Gravel
Paved
Nunavut
23
2
Northwest Territories
22
6
Yukon
14
2
Nunavik
13
1
Nunatsiavut
5
0
Northern regions of provinces west of Quebec
29
32
*Numbers reflect the airports analyzed in our analysis, not the total number of airports in the North. Private airstrips are 
not included. 
4
Pangnirtung, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
27
Climate impacts on airports
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario, and in the 
capitals and regional hubs in the territories. 
All Northern airports face climate change impacts 
to runways. Some airports in the North are already 
experiencing damage from permafrost thaw. 
Prominent examples include: 
	
▶
The Government of Northwest Territories is 
spending $22 million to protect the Inuvik 
airport from the impacts of climate change 
and reduce ground settlements from 
permafrost thaw that have already occurred 
(Infrastructure Canada 2019).
	
▶
The Royal Canadian Air Force is no longer 
able to regularly land large planes such as 
the C-130 at some northern Nunavut airports 
due to runway slumping and degradation. 
	
▶
The Iqaluit International Airport recently 
underwent $300 million worth of improve­
ments, including extensive repairs to runways 
that had cracked and warped due to perma­
frost thaw (Wallace 2019). 
Without adaptation, national costs from perma­
frost thaw damages to runways are likely to 
continue to rise for the next 20 to 30 years and then 
remain high throughout the rest of the century. We 
project a median cost of $7 million per year in 2040 
alone (Figure 5). 
In the near term, costs are likely to be highest in 
Northwest Territories (Figure 6), where permafrost 
is thawing more quickly and where more airports 
are on ground that thaws in the summer and 
refreezes in the winter (there are fewer airports 
built on permafrost in Yukon). We project that 
without adaptation, the permafrost damage to 
runways in Northwest Territories could increase by 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
28
Climate impacts on airports
$10 
$5 
$0 
Recent past 
Low-emissions scenario 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
b) Nunavut
$10 
$5 
$0 
Low-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
High-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
High-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
a) Northwest Territories
Figure 6
Costs of runway damage related to climate change vary across the North
Projected annual costs of runway damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
29
Climate impacts on airports
$3 million per year above the costs in the late 20th 
century in the near term—approximately 35 per 
cent of the Northwest Territories’ current average 
annual capital expenditures for air transportation 
(Statistics Canada 2019).
Under a high-emissions scenario the permafrost 
will thaw rapidly in Northwest Territories, leading 
to the near-complete thaw of top layers by the end 
of the century. Although costs under a high-emis­
sions scenario might be lower than in a low-emis­
sions scenario in some places due to a more rapid 
loss of permafrost (see Figure 4), our analysis 
does not include the significant cost of damage 
from other climate change hazards to runways. 
These hazards include increased temperature 
and precipitation, which would be more intense 
and costly under the high-emissions scenario. We 
discuss some of these risks in the following section. 
Airports in the high Arctic may not experience 
severe damage until later in the century. Although 
Nunavut has more airports than any other region, 
it also has the coldest average temperatures in 
Canada and the permafrost will take longer to 
thaw. Our analysis projects that costs in Nunavut 
will therefore remain low until the end of the 
century under a low-emissions scenario. Under a 
Parry Channel, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
30
Climate impacts on airports
high-emissions scenario, Nunavut will only begin 
to see significant impacts in the latter half of the 
century. Once Nunavut starts to see those impacts, 
however, resulting damages could cost an esti­
mated $5 million annually (Figure 6). 
There is also a high level of uncertainty around 
the extent of temperature change later in the 
century. As a result, there is a wide range of possi­
ble impacts. One of the climate models we used 
results in estimates of cost increases of about $10 
million per year for Nunavut, while another results 
in estimates of negligible impacts and costs.
Northern airports face 
many climate-related threats 
beyond permafrost thaw
Beyond permafrost thaw, changes in weather 
patterns—including to temperature, precipita­
tion, and wind direction—will also affect airport 
maintenance costs and reliability. 
Increases in rain and snow in the North will intro­
duce many new maintenance costs. There may 
be increased demand for snow removal and the 
re-gravelling of runway surfaces because of more 
frequent snow and ice clearing (Government of 
Nunavut 2014). As the North experiences warmer 
winters, temperatures will start to hover around 
zero degrees Celsius rather than well below it, 
leading to more frequent freeze-thaw cycles caus­
ing gravel and paved runways to degrade more 
quickly (Allard et al. 2012). 
Warmer temperatures will also necessitate longer 
runways to handle the same types of planes 
currently used in the North (Coffel et al. 2017). 
Warmer air is less dense, so airplanes need to 
take off at a higher speed to obtain the same lift 
as in colder weather. To reach this higher speed, 
planes need a longer runway. Because runways 
across the North are already significantly shorter in 
length than those in the south, they may need to 
be extended, often at significant cost. Planes could 
also be forced to reduce the number of passengers 
or amount of cargo they can carry on hot days.
Climate change is also shifting the dominant wind 
direction in some Northern regions. Wind makes 
it more difficult to control aircraft during take­
off and can increase weather delays (Zhao and 
Sushama 2020). Over time, changes in wind direc­
tion are expected to make some runways, such 
as those at Iqaluit’s airport, less reliable due to 
increasing crosswinds. In other Northern regions, 
icing conditions could become more frequent 
over the coming decade as the moisture in the 
atmosphere increases with warming. Airports 
could thus be required to invest in new equip­
ment to combat the ice, and the use of anti-icing 
sprays can increase runway maintenance costs 
and accelerate permafrost thaw. 
“Here’s the runway.… Built by military, of course.… And this entire area… is marshland.… 
It’s been sinking for I don’t know how many years due to permafrost [thaw].”
—Nunavut participant (Firelight 2022)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
31
Climate impacts on airports
Climate change could increase the frequency of 
extreme weather events such as thunderstorms, hail, 
and even tornados, and Northern aviation equip­
ment is not well prepared for the growing threats 
posed by these storms (Brown et al. 2020; Chen et al. 
2021). Currently, there is no weather radar coverage 
in the North, and many airports lack critical safety 
equipment such as lights. More frequent extreme 
weather, coupled with limited capacity for forecast­
ing, could result in more unplanned airport outages, 
inhibiting the movement of people and goods.
Adaptations can reduce costs and 
ensure that communities have
 reliable airports 
Our analysis considered adaptations such as base 
layer reinforcement and embankment cooling, 
which are widely used for Northern airports. Other 
important adaptations to consider, however, that 
were not part of our analysis, include planned fail­
ure, relocating airports, building gravel instead of 
paved runways, and improving weather forecast­
ing, radar, navigation systems, and safety equip­
ment. In practice, all the adaptation approaches 
mentioned below will need to be site-specific.
Base layer reinforcement and embankment cooling 
can play a role in reducing the impacts and costs of 
permafrost thaw on airports (see Box C), although 
cost savings from these adaptation measures vary 
across the North. In Nunavik, where permafrost 
thaw is likely to occur earlier, incremental adapta­
tions could reduce annual net costs by 74 to 88 per 
cent on average, depending on the global green­
house gas emissions trajectory. We found similar 
levels of cost savings in Northwest Territories and 
Yukon (Table 3). In Nunavut, where damages will 
occur later in the century, base layer reinforcement 
and embankment cooling could reduce damage 
costs by more than half by the end of the century 
in a high-emissions scenario. The cost savings 
are lower, especially in a low-emissions scenario, 
because some savings will be realized after 2100. This 
parallels findings from some site-specific studies 
that show positive return on investments for incre­
mental adaptation measures (Brooks et al. 2017). 
Table 3
Airports across the North and potential cost savings from adaptation
Region
Number of airports
Adaptation cost savings per year (millions $)
Low emissions
High emissions
Yukon
16
1.48
0.93
NWT
28
2.43
2.06
Nunavut
25
0.01
1.95
Nunavik
14
1.17
1.65
Nunatsiavut
5
0 (negligible permafrost)
0 (negligible permafrost)
Northern regions of 
provinces west of Quebec
61
1.74
1.17
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
32
Climate impacts on airports
Several adaptation measures outside the scope 
of our analysis, including planned failure, relocat­
ing airports, and building gravel instead of paved 
runways, can also be useful tools. Case studies 
in Nunavik and northern Saskatchewan indicate 
that these options also have potential to reduce 
direct and indirect costs (George 2006; Uzarowski 
et al. 2018). In practice, adaptation approaches will 
need to be site-specific and will likely use a variety 
of incremental and transformative adaptations as 
well as other practices.
There are also adaptations that can fix current 
deficiencies and safety issues at Northern airports. 
For example, improvements to weather fore­
casting, radar, navigation systems, and safety 
equipment can all help airports better withstand 
future climate-related hazards (Bouchard 2020). 
However, current airport funding structures are a 
major obstacle to implementing such adaptation 
measures (Box D). 
Adaptation actions can reduce the risk of airport 
service interruptions, bolster regional security, and 
ensure that the fundamental needs of Northern 
communities are being met (Dorough et al. 2021). 
The costs and savings we modelled only reflect 
direct damages, and do not factor in the value of 
other social and economic benefits from infra­
structure, including access to critical medical care, 
food security, economic activity, and the transport 
of essential equipment. 
Whale Cove, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
33
Northern governments struggle to maintain airports and 
prepare runways and terminals for climate-related hazards, 
and the challenge is due, at least in part, to deficiencies in 
funding structures. 
Over the past 30 years, the federal government has transferred ownership of 
most airports to provincial and territorial governments. In 1995, most public 
airports in the North were owned and managed by the federal government. 
As of 2022, only two Northern airports are still federally owned, and the rest are 
operated by provincial and territorial governments (Transport Canada 2022a). 
Transport Canada is still responsible for promoting safe and secure air trans­
portation, even though the federal government no longer owns and oper­
ates most airports across the North (Office of the Auditor General of Canada 
2017). In 2017, the Office of the Auditor General assessed the Government of 
Canada’s delivery and leadership over Northern air transportation. The audit 
found that despite knowing about critical infrastructure needs, Transport 
Canada “had not taken a leadership role in addressing these needs by lead­
ing efforts and working collaboratively with its provincial, territorial, and 
industry partners to enhance the safety and improve the accessibility and 
efficiency of remote northern airports.” 
Northern governments face barriers 
in securing airport funding
 BOX D
Akuvalik Airport, Akulivik, Nunavik.
Akuvalik Airport, Nunavik.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
34
As an example of the issue raised by the audit, the Airports Capital Assistance 
Program run by Transport Canada—a primary funding source for small 
airport capital costs—has been perennially underfunded. Since 1995, Canada 
has contributed $1.1 billion to eligible airports, an average of about $30 
million per year across all small airports in Canada (most of which are in 
southern Canada). However, the Auditor General notes that over $100 million 
is needed in a three-year period in the North alone (Transport Canada 2021; 
Office of the Auditor General of Canada 2017). 
Even where funding programs exist, they are not accessible to many of 
the territorial and municipal governments that own and operate Northern 
airports. Only airports that are certified by Transport Canada—indicat­
ing that they meet certain safety thresholds—or airports that are close to 
being granted this certification are eligible to apply for funding through 
the federal program. We found that 30 per cent of airports across the North 
have not yet been certified. This funding requirement creates a catch-
22: Northern governments need money to make safety improvements, 
but because their airports do not meet safety requirements, they cannot 
access the funding. 
Rigolet, Nunatsiavut. Photo: Bird's Eye Inc.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
35
CLIMATE IMPACTS ON 
PERMANENT ROADS 
AND WINTER ROADS
All-season and winter roads connect communi­
ties across the North to medical care, food, and 
fuel. Roads are also essential for servicing one 
of the North’s largest industries: mining (Box E). 
Across the North, mining companies maintain 
many winter roads to move supplies and prod­
uct. In some regions, residents and community 
members also use these roads. 
Roads play a wide variety of roles across the 
North. In Yukon, all-season roads connect every 
community in the territory except Old Crow, and 
the majority are paved (Table 4). In the Northwest 
Territories, paved roads are less common, and 
fewer communities are connected to all-season 
road networks. In the eastern Arctic—Nunavut, 
Nunavik, and Nunatsiavut—roads are almost 
entirely located within municipal limits, with no 
all-season roads connecting communities.
In our analysis of winter roads, we modelled the 
impacts and costs of damage induced by perma­
frost thaw on paved and gravel roads across the 
North and examined the impacts of warming on 
winter road viability. We included both publicly 
maintained winter roads and some winter roads 
that are maintained by mining companies. 
Without adaptation, major road 
damage and disruption will 
persist for decades
Permafrost thaw can cause roads to degrade, 
crack, or even collapse, making them unusable 
in some cases. 
“The pavement, especially the new pavement, it gets hot and melts 
what’s underneath it, and then it just collapses. There’s a few roads in 
town where you could tell a section of the road has collapsed.… You 
have that all over town.”
—Nunavut participant (Firelight 2022)
	 5
Dempster Highway at Tombstone Territorial Park, Yukon.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
36
“The government[s] that build these roads 
want to make sure that they have a return 
once… their project is completed. And I know 
up here in the North we do have a lot of 
potential for mining.… We do have the mine 
just 50 kilometres north of Whatì, and that’s 
been there for quite a while now. I mean, 
they did need the road to take their product 
out, and I understand it’s a junior company 
that requires some investors.… But the 
government looks at these and that way… you 
know, it’s worth building a road.”
—Northwest Territories participant (Firelight 2022)
Climate change 
is threatening 
mine infrastructure 
across the North
Mining is prevalent across Northern 
Canada and contributes significantly to 
regional economies. In Yukon, the mining 
sector makes up almost 10 per cent of the 
territory’s gross domestic product (GDP) 
and contributes about 1,500 jobs (Yukon 
Bureau of Statistics 2020; NRCan n.d.). 
Mining operations in Nunavut—which are some 
of the largest in the North and import more labour 
from southern Canada than other Northern terri­
tories—generate about 25 per cent of the territo­
ry’s GDP, while mining in Northwest Territories 
generates about 30 per cent of the territory’s GDP 
(Statistics Canada 2021a).
Roads, airports, ports, and electricity systems are 
all important infrastructure for mining operations. 
Although Northern mine development has histori­
cally prompted governments to expand infrastruc­
ture networks, poor infrastructure continues to 
limit the viability of mining in many places. 
Climate change is shifting how and where 
resources can be mined safely across Northern 
Canada. Permafrost thaw is not only affecting the 
transportation networks used to move equipment 
and ore, but it also introduces new risks of large-
scale environmental contamination in cases where 
the infrastructure to contain mine waste, such as 
tailings ponds, is not built appropriately (Golder 
2021). Changes in winter road seasons are limiting 
when mines can operate at full capacity and which 
routes are used for exports. Climate-related impacts 
to electricity systems and freshwater resources are 
also prompting closer analysis of the environmental 
and social effects of mining. 
 BOX E
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
37
Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads
Table 4
Northern permanent roads and winter roads analyzed in this report
Region
Kilometres of permanent roads analyzed 
(paved and gravel)
Kilometres of winter roads analyzed
Yukon
8,400
<10
Northwest Territories
3,800
2,000
Nunavut
500
100
Nunavik
200
0
Nunatsiavut
25
0
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
38
Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads
Across Canada, the rapid temperature increases 
projected in the high-emissions scenario will 
cause costs to rise quickly, with a more exagger­
ated peak, before costs decline toward the end of 
the century (Figure 7). This is because in most of 
the North (Yukon, southern Northwest Territories, 
Nunavik, and the northern regions of provinces), 
faster warming caused by higher emissions will 
cause the upper layer of permafrost to thaw 
almost completely over the next 80 years. Without 
adaptation, these rapid spikes in damage and 
costs will be challenging to manage—in terms of 
both capital costs and necessary repairs to keep 
roads open.
Our analysis suggests that damage to gravel roads 
will cost less per kilometre than those for paved 
roads; gravel roads are usually easier to repair 
or regrade when damaged by permafrost thaw, 
while paved roads generally need to be replaced 
or retired more quickly.
Of all the infrastructure types we modelled, 
damage to all-season roads and winter roads 
created the highest costs for Yukon and 
Northwest Territories (Figure 8). In Yukon, we 
project that, without adaptation, the average cost 
of permafrost damage to both paved and gravel 
roads will be between $73 million and $85 million 
per year for the next two decades. To put these 
$200 
$100 
$0 
Low-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
High-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
Figure 7
Costs of Northern road repair and replacement remain high until the end of the century
Projected annual costs of road damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
39
Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads
Figure 8
Costs of road damage could exceed $50 million annually in Northwest Territories 
and $70 million in Yukon
Projected annual costs of road damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
40
Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads
figures in context, the projected costs of road 
damages for Yukon represent 75 to 90 per cent of 
current total annual spending on roads (Statistics 
Canada 2019). By the 2060s, the costs of perma­
frost damage to roads could surpass the current 
budget by 26 per cent, even in a low-emissions 
scenario. In Northwest Territories, we found 
that, without adaptation, the projected cost of 
damages to paved and gravel roads is approx­
imately $55 million per year for the next few 
decades—about 15 per cent of 2020 infrastruc­
ture capital expenditures for the Government of 
Northwest Territories (Government of Northwest 
Territories 2020). 
We expect costs to accelerate at higher lati­
tudes as temperatures continue to increase. 
Although there are fewer roads across Northwest 
Territories and Nunavut, damage will continue 
until later in the century, particularly under a 
low-emissions scenario in which permafrost 
would thaw more slowly. 
Adaptations for paved and gravel 
roads  can save money and reduce 
 the risk of service disruptions 
Our modelling shows that base layer reinforce­
ment and embankment cooling can reduce the 
costs of road repair and replacement in some 
conditions by delaying permafrost thaw. 
In a low-emissions scenario, if base layer rein­
forcement and embankment cooling are used 
on paved roads, they could reduce costs by 38 to 
42 per cent on average in Yukon and Northwest 
Territories, depending on the location. For gravel 
roads, these adaptations could reduce net costs 
by 27 per cent in Yukon. 
However, in a high-emissions scenario, there 
would be significant adaptation investments 
required by mid-century, which could reduce 
damage costs by 23 per cent but do not provide a 
positive return on investments. 
In short, base layer reinforcement and embank­
ment cooling have practical limitations. These 
adaptations can delay permafrost thaw, but in a 
high-emissions scenario, temperatures in many 
areas will rise so high that these adaptations 
cannot prevent thawing and damage. 
Our model also indicates that in a high-emissions 
scenario, base layer reinforcement and embank­
ment cooling could actually increase the annual 
costs of maintaining gravel roads by about 25 per 
cent. In these cases, practices like pre-thawing 
permafrost and rebuilding the road may be more 
cost effective while better protecting services 
(Connor et al. 2020). 
There are financial limits to these types of adapta­
tions for roads on permafrost. Embankment cool­
ing and base layer reinforcement are expensive 
to implement and are generally only deployed by 
highway departments at the most critical loca­
tions. In our analysis, for example, the adaptation 
scenario assumes that air-cooled embankments 
are only applied to the most critical 11 per cent of 
primary and secondary gravel roads situated on 
permafrost. Broader application would result in 
greater costs than benefits. 
Despite their limitations, incremental adapta­
tion measures such as base layer reinforcement 
and embankment cooling could still be worth 
implementing on Northern roads, as they can 
prevent social and economic disruptions from 
road damage in the short term. However, these 
methods would have to be considered alongside 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
41
Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads
transformative adaptation measures such as exca­
vating permafrost and phasing out and relocat­
ing roads, as these adaptations may be better 
long-term investments. Incremental adaptations 
are more effective in a low-emissions scenario, 
while more transformative adaptations such as 
pre-thawing permafrost (which involves inten­
tionally thawing the permafrost prior to building a 
section of road, a runway, or a building) may prove 
to be better long-term investments if a high-emis­
sions scenario plays out.
Winter roads are becoming less 
viable across Northern Canada, 
and adaptation opportunities 
are limited
When lakes and rivers in the North freeze over for 
the winter, the ice is often thick enough to allow 
vehicles to drive over it for a few months of the 
year. These winter roads connect communities 
that are reachable only by plane or boat for the 
remainder of the year. But winter roads require 
consistent below-freezing temperatures for the 
ice to remain safe for vehicles, and climate change 
threatens to make winter road seasons shorter or, 
in some places, entirely unviable. 
When winter roads are closed, communities 
that depend on them risk running out of critical 
supplies such as food and fuel and losing access 
to essential services (Hori et al. 2018). People who 
live in communities connected by winter roads 
often plan travel around the winter road season to 
stock up on many months’ worth of food, supplies, 
and household essentials (Firelight 2022; Hori et al. 
2018). If winter roads become unusable, communi­
ties will be forced to rely on air and sea transporta­
tion, or to build very expensive all-season roads, all 
of which will leave individuals and governments 
with much higher costs for transportation, food, 
fuel, and other goods (CBC 2011; Maracle et al. 2018; 
Brockman and Beers 2018). 
Across the North, most winter roads could become 
unviable by mid-century. In the Northwest 
Territories—where a quarter of Canada’s Northern 
winter roads are located—more than half of winter 
roads could become unusable by 2050 and nearly 
all could be unusable by 2080 (Figure 9). We found 
similar levels of winter road loss in the Northern 
regions of Ontario and Manitoba. Most winter 
roads are in the Northwest Territories, Northern 
Ontario, and Manitoba, with a small number in 
Yukon and Nunavut. 
To illustrate the economic implications of winter 
roads becoming inoperable, we estimated the costs 
of replacing winter roads by building all-season 
roads. We found that over the next 20 years it could 
cost at least $2 billion for Northwest Territories to 
build permanent roads—an unprecedented level of 
infrastructure spending in that territory. Moreover, 
in many locations, building all-season roads is not 
physically possible, so even if funds can be found 
they are not a practical replacement for the historic 
winter road network. 
Some adaptation measures can extend the 
viability of winter roads, such as using weather 
monitoring and traffic management (Barrette 
and Lawrence Charlebois 2018), spraying the ice 
surface to increase thickness more rapidly, and 
laying booms across rivers to aid ice formation 
(Barrette et al. 2018). 
Ultimately, however, even in a low-emissions 
scenario, and no matter what adaptation actions 
are taken to prolong road life, most winter roads 
will become unviable everywhere except the high 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
42
“The ice is not really thick every year, the ice gets thinner and thinner. 
Like last year, the ice here was 18, 19, 20 inches, that’s all. Before, it 
was four feet deep, six feet deep when we were growing up. Last year, 
the year before, it just barely brought in the fuel because of the ice not 
thick enough.… Well, us, we’ve got to, the road’s got to be open by end 
November here, right? Going to deliver fuel to the community. So, if they 
can’t bring the fuel in on the winter road, I guess they got to fly in, and 
it’s going to cost more, right?”
—Northwest Territories participant (Firelight 2022) 

“Last year we didn’t have a winter road because the—it was too warm… 
all these things that are happening with the climate change is really 
affecting us.… The main things that are disrupting our way of life with 
the melting, permafrost… bringing goods.”
—Northern Ontario participant (Firelight 2022)
“Construction is all pretty well almost complete [on the Tlicho All Season 
Road], and I’m hearing that it might be opening.... So, if it does happen… 
[the community] really would be happy that they don’t have to pay too 
much of a price on the food and whatnot.”
—Northwest Territories participant (Firelight 2022)
Dettah Ice Road. Great Slave Lake, Northwest Territories.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
43
Climate impacts on permanent roads and winter roads
Arctic by mid-century. Adaptations for winter 
roads must therefore move beyond incremental 
adaptation solutions to rethinking the design and 
development of transportation infrastructures. 
Communities and governments will need new 
ways of transporting fuel, food, and other supplies, 
and some supply chains may need to incorporate 
more locally produced products or reduce demand 
on difficult-to-transport products such as fossil 
fuels. Climate mitigation measures like replacing 
diesel generators with clean microgrids and electri­
fying Northern transportation could thus also help 
to meet Northern adaptation goals. 
8000 
4000 
0 
Low-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
High-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
Figure 9
More than half of winter roads could become unviable in the next 30 years
Projected annual length of winter roads retired (in kilometres)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
44
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
44
CLIMATE IMPACTS 
ON BUILDINGS
Permafrost thaw can have catastrophic impacts 
on buildings. Thawing permafrost underneath a 
building or home can cause foundations to crack, 
can lead to failure of the internal building struc­
ture, and can damage pipes and gas lines. And 
once permafrost thaw begins to affect a building’s 
structural integrity, repairing and maintaining 
the structure can become prohibitively expen­
sive. These damages could be extremely costly for 
governments as they own many homes and build­
ings in the North. Business owners and individu­
als who own their homes will also have to pay for 
more frequent and extensive repairs, which may 
not be covered by insurance. 
We analyzed the impact of permafrost thaw on 
the repair and replacement cost of more than 
200,000 commercial and residential buildings 
across Northern Canada. Of these buildings, about 
90,000—45 per cent—are currently in permafrost 
zones. These buildings are mostly located in the 
Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Nunavik. Our 
analysis did not include northern regions of prov­
inces (except Nunavik and Nunatsiavut), as they 
have relatively few or no buildings on permafrost. 
Costs were estimated based on a range of repair 
and replacement decisions for each scenario and 
do not include any other drivers of building wear 
and degradation (see Table 5).
Permafrost thaw impacts on 
buildings will vary throughout 
the North and will shift northward 
throughout the century as 
temperatures rise
Without adaptation, total costs of damage to build­
ings across the North could reach $30 to $38 million 
per year by mid-century and $38 to $76 million 
per year by end of century. Our analysis shows 
	6
Yellowknife, Northwest Territories.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
45
Climate impacts on buildings
“The biggest impact that permafrost thaw has had on me is probably my house shifting, and 
that’s... the foundation is still sound. But my drywall, especially around my windows, has 
cracked. And actually, a window on my north side of my house has cracked twice. So, we’ve 
replaced it twice... due to shifting of the house. Yeah, it’s—that’s how much it has moved.... 
And it’s not too bad where I am, right? So, there is people that are, you know, drilled, their 
piles are right in bedrock. But I think mine has a little bit of ground until it reaches bedrock.... 
But yeah, the insurance doesn’t cover it, and how I just deal with it, I just make the repairs.” 

—Nunavut participant (Firelight 2022)
Table 5
Building exposure to permafrost thaw across Northern Canada
Emissions scenario
Building manager response
2050s average buildings 
per category
2080s average buildings 
per category
Low emissions scenario
Minimal repairs
94%
93%
Foundation repairs
6%
7%
Rebuild or relocate
0
0
High emissions scenario
Minimal repairs
93%
88%
Foundation repairs
7%
9%
Rebuild or relocate
0
3%
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
46
Climate impacts on buildings
that faster warming and permafrost thaw under 
the high-emissions scenario will cause a more 
rapid increase in costs and damages than under 
the low-emissions scenario (Figure 10). Under the 
high-emissions scenario, near-surface perma­
frost in many areas will thaw entirely by the end of 
the century, resulting in an eventual decrease in 
costs and damages in some regions. On average, 
however, damages and costs throughout the North 
will continue to increase through the century. 
Nunavut and the Northwest Territories will see 
the greatest overall impacts and costs because 
they have the most homes and buildings built on 
permafrost. All other Northern regions have very 
few buildings on permafrost. 
Building adaptations could  prevent 
 costs and damages 
Adapting buildings, including homes, to perma­
frost thaw by installing thermosyphons can 
prevent critical foundation failures and reduce 
the need for repairs (see Box C). 
Our analysis shows that using thermosyphons 
in targeted ways can significantly reduce costs. 
We modelled thermosyphons for buildings with 
projected critical foundation damage where the 
only foreseeable solution is rebuilding. Across the 
North, this adaptation can provide direct savings 
of $127 million and reduce damage costs by 
$200 
$100 
$0 
Low-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
High-emissions scenario 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
Figure 10
Costs from damages to buildings will rise across the North
Projected annual costs of building damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
47
Climate impacts on buildings
78 per cent this century in a low-emissions scenario 
and save $33 million and reduce damage costs by 
33 per cent in a high-emissions scenario.
In Nunavut, for example, adaptation could be partic­
ularly effective at reducing damages to buildings, if 
measures are implemented in the near term (Figure 
11). Under the low-emission scenario, reconstruct­
ing buildings and installing thermosyphons could 
significantly reduce the risk of worst-case costs—
the maximum projected costs of damage to build­
ings—in many areas. In a high-emissions scenario, 
more investments in adaptation will be needed to 
prevent critical damages because of rapid tempera­
ture increases. Even if adaptations are implemented 
in the near term, in the high-emissions scenario the 
costs of adaptation will initially exceed the costs of 
maintenance and repairs; however, by the end of the 
century adaptation will reduce the median costs of 
damage from permafrost thaw by 52 per cent. 
High-tech adaptations such as the installation of 
thermosyphons may not be cost effective in some 
areas. Other incremental adaptations (which are 
outside the scope of our analysis) such as reinforc­
ing foundations with pilings or using space-frame 
scaffolding to support buildings may be more 
cost-efficient solutions. In areas at high risk of 
permafrost thaw, adaptations such as pre-thaw­
ing permafrost, scaffolding foundation designs, 
and planning for infrastructure failure may be 
better long-term investments.
Adaptation to protect homes 
and community buildings from 
permafrost thaw  provides benefits 
to health, well-being, and culture 
Permafrost thaw can threaten the safety and 
diminish the viability of homes and commu­
$150 
$100 
$50 
$0 
Low-emissions scenario 
.. 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
High-emissions scenario 
No 
adaptation 
Proactive 
adaptation 
Recent past 
Near term 
Mid-century 
End of century 
Figure 11
Adaptation can prevent damages and reduce costs of permanent thaw for buildings 
in Nunavut
Projected annual costs of building damage in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
48
Climate impacts on buildings
nity buildings. The first sign of permafrost thaw 
is often doors and windows not closing properly. 
Unless the foundation is levelled or the rate of 
thaw reduced, this damage can cause the whole 
structure to become unstable or even collapse. 
Damage from permafrost thaw also has knock-on 
effects on heating, moisture, and pipes. Cold air 
incursions and the formation of mould can have 
negative impacts on indoor air quality and health. 
Adaptations such as thermosyphons (discussed 
above), can slow permafrost impacts on homes 
and community buildings and protect the health 
and well-being of people. 
The North already faces an acute shortage of 
adequate housing. Even without the added pres­
sure of climate change on buildings, the inflated 
cost of construction, labour, and transportation 
has created a shortage of housing stock and a 
backlog of housing repairs. In Nunavut, 3,500 
public housing units are needed to eliminate 
overcrowding—equivalent to 30 per cent of the 
existing 11,500 dwellings in the territory (ITK 2019; 
NTI 2020). Additional damage to existing housing 
from permafrost thaw will make addressing this 
deficit even more challenging because the hous­
ing stock will need to increase at an even faster 
pace amid insufficient labour and construction 
equipment supplies in the region. Implementing 
adaptation measures to avoid damages could 
help curb this prevailing gap.
Community buildings provide vital infrastruc­
ture as places to share Indigenous knowledge 
and host community gatherings. Damage from 
permafrost thaw could pose a significant threat 
to these activities if public buildings become 
unusable due to damage to foundations. And, of 
course, permafrost is not the only climate-related 
threat to housing (Box F).
“When you look at housing and how expensive it is, I mean, there’s no one thing that makes it 
expensive, it’s all the, it’s everything that makes it expensive. So, the pile driving, the import 
of material, import of the workforce. The [cost of] transportation has gone up significantly. So, 
building materials associated with fuel costs of transport. And when you just add all those things 
up, it just makes housing that much more unattainable.”

—Nunavut participant (Firelight 2022)
Dawson City, Yukon.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
49
Flooding is another hazard that 
threatens housing across the North
“We got more floods at the mouth of the river.… Elders would say 
there would be a flood every 30 years in Winisk, but now I think since we 
moved, there’s been about four floods in Winisk now.”
—Ontario participant (Firelight 2022)
As temperatures rise, floods are projected to become more 
frequent, severe, and unpredictable in many places across 
the North. 
Coastal communities in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region are seeing their 
shorelines retreat as sea levels rise, bringing hazards like storm surges closer 
to buildings (Hatcher and Forbes 2015). In other communities, rising tempera­
tures are changing patterns of precipitation, ice break up, and snowmelt, 
resulting in floods that threaten buildings, roads, and drainage infrastruc­
ture (Lamoureux et al. 2015). 
We analyzed the number of buildings at risk of inland flooding in Northwest 
Territories, Nunavut, Yukon, and Nunavik (Table 6). We used publicly avail­
able building and flood data from JBA Risk Management—data that are 
frequently used by the insurance industry to evaluate the flood risk of policy 
holders. Of the regions we analyzed, we found that Yukon has the highest 
percentage of buildings (including homes) in a present-day 100-year flood­
plain for inland flooding, followed by Northwest Territories. More informa­
tion about flood costs across the North can be found In the Institute’s Under 
Water report (Figure 12). 
 BOX F
Longliner near Rigolet, Nunatsiavut. Photo: Bird's Eye Inc.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
50
Region
Total Buildings
Percentage in 100-year flood zones
Northwest Territories
 13,235 
13%
Nunavik
 29,530 
7%
Nunavut
 2,788 
6%
Yukon
 12,219 
17%
Floods and sea level rise could damage housing, which is already in short 
supply in many communities, as well as sites of historical and cultural signif­
icance for Indigenous Peoples, like Herschel Island in Yukon (Radosavljevic 
et al. 2016). Although sea level rise is not a risk for many communities, 
there are a handful of low-lying communities that are extremely exposed. 
Communities like Tuktoyaktuk and Ulukhaktok are at risk of complete costal 
inundation given that they are on thawing permafrost, potentially requiring 
hundreds of millions of dollars for coastal protection or managed retreat. 
Across Canada, flood risk is poorly understood. The deficit of accurate flood 
risk information across the North presents a significant obstacle for adap­
tation. Maps are limited and out of date, and rarely consider the impacts 
of future climate change (Ness et al. 2021). This data gap is even more 
pronounced in the North (see Figure 4). Communities across the North will 
need accurate, up-to-date flood hazard data to better prepare for and adapt 
to the potential impacts to infrastructure. 
Low-emissions scenario 
High-emissions scenario 
$40 
$20 
$0 
Present 
Mid-century 
End of century 
Present 
Mid-century 
End of century 
Table 6: 
Percentage 
of buildings at 
risk of flooding 
according 
to insurance 
industry data
Figure 12
Inland flood damage could increase rapidly across the territories
Projected annual costs of inland flooding in millions of dollars (2019 CAD)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
51
7	
NORTHERN 
PERSPECTIVES 
ON CLIMATE IMPACTS
Numbers only tell part of the story. In this section 
we explore key concerns related to Northern 
infrastructure and adaptation that emerged 
from Firelight’s community-level research and 
from our engagement sessions with rights hold­
ers and stakeholders. We also draw on literature 
to expand on Firelight’s findings and explore a 
broader geographic scope. 
Engagement with stakeholders and deci­
sion makers is a part of the process of every 
major research project at the Climate Institute. 
Engagement has been particularly important for 
this report, because the experiences of Northern 
rights holders and stakeholders with infrastructure 
and climate change are different than those in the 
rest of Canada. It was important for us to learn from 
rights holders, stakeholders, and experts who are 
living with and dealing with the impacts of climate 
change on infrastructure to understand more 
about the problem and about potential solutions.
This summary cannot do justice to all communities’ 
experiences. While we had discussions and received 
feedback from all territorial governments and many 
Indigenous governments, we were not able to 
engage with all Indigenous governments across 
the North. Furthermore, the Firelight Group’s quali­
tative research could only reflect a small segment of 
perspectives and knowledge of the North’s diverse 
Indigenous Peoples and communities.
Northerners with whom we engaged noted that 
the North is not uniform—its landscapes, cultures, 
histories, and governance are diverse. The func­
tions that infrastructure such as roads, airports, 
and buildings serve differ significantly from region 
to region. Governmental roles and responsibilities 
regarding infrastructure and climate change 
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
52
Northern perspectives on climate impacts
adaptation also vary widely among regions. 
Regional economies are different from east to 
west across the North, and the private sector plays 
a much larger role in building and maintaining 
infrastructure in some places than others. Policies 
and actions that address infrastructure needs 
and climate change risks will therefore need to 
be attentive to regional differences.
What follows are four themes that emerged 
strongly from our research and engagement.
Northern Indigenous and municipal 
leaders are concerned about the 
cascading impacts of climate 
change on more than just 
infrastructure 
Food security is an already visible impact of climate 
change and is a growing concern for Northern 
leaders. Firelight’s work describes the effects that 
permafrost damage to transportation infrastruc­
ture can have on the availability and cost of store-
bought food. Northerners have identified that 
shorter seasons for winter roads mean that in many 
communities, store-bought food and supplies 
have to be brought in by air, driving up food prices 
(Human Rights Watch 2020). 
For Indigenous Peoples, climate change is also 
increasingly affecting the availability of country 
food (meat, fish, and berries) and the safety of travel 
across the land and sea ice (Ford et al. 2019; Neufeld 
and Richmond 2017; Naylor et al. 2021). Researchers 
have found that impacts on transportation systems 
and buildings inflict knock-on damage to country 
food systems. Although country food harvesting 
practices vary across the North and among First 
Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities, most people 
depend on snowmobiles, ATVs, and boats to partici­
pate in these subsistence activities. They also rely on 
sea lifts, roads, and airports to bring in fuel, equip­
ment, and parts to enable them to spend time on 
the land. Fuel shortages or disruptions to sea lifts 
reduce access to country food (Clark et al. 2016). 
Permafrost thaw is also affecting how people store 
and share food. Many people use underground 
food cellars dug into the permafrost to keep 
food frozen during the summer. As one partici­
pant from Inuvialuit describes, Northerners are 
increasingly relying on generators and electri­
cal appliances to keep food cool. Food sharing 
networks—an important practice that helps feed 
communities and strengthen social ties for Inuit 
and many First Nations and Métis communities—
are being disrupted by road outages, flight inter­
ruptions, and challenges for food storage. 
“Up until a couple of years ago, I mean, we had an [underground] ice cellar at our cabin.... 
Well, we got two, we got one in the Mackenzie Delta cabin, and we clean that out every few 
years, add fresh snow. And the one at the coast is actually unusable anymore because it keeps 
accumulating water.… Even though we had it boxed in, insulated. It just couldn’t keep food 
frozen anymore, or to a certain temperature, just because of the fluctuation of the temperature.” 
—Inuvialuit Settlement Region participant (Firelight 2022)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
53
Northern perspectives on climate impacts
Northern Indigenous governments, municipali­
ties, and some territorial governments noted that, 
in fact, direct costs of repairing and replacing infra­
structure are only a small subset of the total costs 
of climate-related infrastructure impacts. Indirect 
costs from damaged or inadequate infrastructure, 
including business disruption, healthcare costs, 
and impacts to productivity, could be even more 
expensive. Additionally, many associated impacts, 
such as food insecurity and lost access to places of 
cultural significance, cannot be assigned a dollar 
value at all. To better manage both the indirect 
and incalculable costs, people described a need 
for governments to move beyond traditional cost/
benefit analysis (Samson 2021). 
Northern governments are having 
trouble accessing the funding, 
resources, and capacity needed to 
improve and adapt infrastructure 
We heard that federal infrastructure funding 
programs are not designed in a way that Northern 
(territorial, Indigenous, and municipal) governments 
can access them. Cost sharing arrangements are 
a significant barrier for Indigenous and territorial 
governments, particularly when money is required 
up front to develop proposals or conduct feasibility 
studies. Many Indigenous and territorial govern­
ments do not have the capacity to develop extensive 
funding proposals or work through lengthy appli­
cation processes. Program timelines for design 
and implementation do not reflect the realities 
and importance of Indigenous engagement, the 
short season for Northern construction, or limited 
government capacity. As a result, Northern govern­
ments often miss out on much-needed infrastruc­
ture funding, or they lose out in competitive funding 
programs where they are up against larger provin­
cial governments or southern municipalities. 
Northerners also told us that funding programs 
rarely promote development of Northern capac­
ity and retention of technical skills (for example, 
construction, engineering, mechanics, planners). 
Historically, infrastructure funding has not been 
stable or predictable, meaning that when fund­
ing dries up, skilled jobs disappear. Northerners 
with technical training and skills often find it diffi­
cult to secure stable employment in the North in 
their field. As a result, when cyclical federal fund­
ing is available, the technical skills sometimes 
aren’t, meaning labour must be imported from 
the south, which makes infrastructure projects 
more expensive due to travel costs.
The municipalities and Indigenous governments we 
engaged with suggested that federal, provincial, and 
territorial governments do not consistently involve 
them in prioritizing infrastructure investments and 
developments. Furthermore, local and Indigenous 
knowledge is not always reflected in infrastructure 
design, resulting in infrastructure designs that are 
often less suited to local and cultural needs and are 
more vulnerable to climate-related hazards.
Territorial governments we engaged with 
expressed that the federal government does not 
consistently involve them in infrastructure prior­
itization and funding decisions. Examples raised 
include the development of relevant strategies 
and policy frameworks and the design of funding 
calls and strategic infrastructure projects. 
Many people we engaged with noted that climate 
change poses unique risks in Northern Canada, 
including permafrost thaw, sea level decreases (in 
the Hudson Bay region), and winter road access. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
54
Northern perspectives on climate impacts
Because hazards and vulnerabilities are different 
in Northern Canada than southern Canada, the 
climate risk information needed to support adap­
tation is different. Many territorial governments, 
municipalities, and Indigenous governments do not 
currently have the resources required to produce 
climate data relevant to them. Existing climate data 
is seldom downscaled (calculated for local levels) 
for the North, so it is difficult to assess communi­
ty-level risks. This means that people, businesses, 
and governments are often unaware of potential 
climate risks to infrastructure. Furthermore, infra­
structure codes, standards, and design practices 
do not always reflect Northern climate change risks. 
Northern innovation is already 
driving new approaches 
Indigenous Peoples and other Northerners have 
always adapted to environmental changes, and they 
are adapting to the climate changes already occur­
ring in the North (Wenzel 2009; Ford et al. 2015). As 
one participant from Ontario describes, Northerners 
are gardening and growing food locally to reduce 
their reliance on expensive, shipped-in and store-
bought food (Ritchie 2021). Others are changing 
their patterns of hunting and harvesting on the land, 
trying new locations and different times of year. 
Researchers and Inuit have found that technology 
and equipment (such as GPS devices or ice-monitor­
ing equipment) can help people continue to spend 
time on the land safely (Aporta et al. 2005; Clark et al. 
2016). People also share information about environ­
mental changes through their community networks 
and ties (Fox et al. 2020; Bell et al. 2014). These adap­
tations could be better supported and resourced by 
governments, such as through harvester support 
programs, improved weather monitoring, and facili­
tating information-sharing in culturally appropriate 
ways (Clark et al. 2016). 
Northerners are rethinking how critical services are 
delivered to adapt to climate change impacts and 
challenges. To overcome barriers around health­
care access across the North, for example, a team 
of physicians and researchers has been developing 
tools to provide remote high-quality medical care. 
Trials have included the use of remote-controlled 
robots to assist with patient assessments (Jong et 
al. 2019; Adams et al. 2021; Ellis et al. 2020). 
Northerners are also rethinking the design of infra­
structure to make it more resilient and appropriate 
for their needs. For example, in close collabora­
tion with Inuit stakeholders, a team of researchers 
and architects has been exploring how Northern 
airports and buildings are designed (White et 
al. 2010). One conceptual design of airports in 
Nunavut integrates the community health centre 
with the airport in recognition of the importance of 
air travel to Northern healthcare (White et al. 2010). 
The team has also proposed new ways of thinking 
about Elder care centres in order to re-centre Inuit 
culture and holistic approaches to well-being into 
building design (Lola Sheppard et al. 2017). 
“I’m experimenting with gardening, so we don’t have to buy our food from 
California or Mexico.... And it’s kind of a—I have to have a science to it because 
everything up here is peat, … and you just can’t grow anything.… And then next year 
I’m buying chickens, so we don’t have to buy eggs.”
—Ontario participant, (Firelight 2022)
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
55
Northern perspectives on climate impacts
Successful adaptation requires transformative shifts that address 
root causes of infrastructure vulnerability
From industry representatives to the public sector 
to Indigenous governments, we heard frequently 
that transformative changes will be needed in 
order to address the infrastructure gaps in the 
North and protect people and communities from 
climate hazards.
Education and skill training is one key area 
where transformative changes may be needed 
to build resilience and address the infrastructure 
gap. We heard that access to both technical and 
higher educational programs are limited in most 
communities. Until Yukon College became Yukon 
University in 2020, there was no university in the 
North. In Nunavut, students only have access to 
university education through partnerships with 
universities outside the region (NTI 2020). Online 
and remote education is an emerging option, but 
slow internet speeds prevent many Northerners 
from accessing online education opportunities. 
Researchers and Northerners have observed that 
education and skills gaps often result in industry 
and governments importing labour from the south, 
limiting capacity to build and maintain infrastruc­
ture in the North. Unpredictable federal infrastruc­
ture spending and boom-and-bust sectors like 
mining perpetuate the skills deficit, as the skills 
and certifications required to build and repair infra­
structure are difficult to sustain in many Northern 
communities. Underinvestment in education infra­
structure (including schools, high-speed internet, 
and water and food security) further exacerbates 
this cycle by increasing the barriers to training. 
Rights holders and stakeholders also identified 
other important root causes of infrastructure gaps 
and climate change vulnerability, such as imme­
diate health crises taking up government band­
width, high turnover of staff in some Northern 
governments, and a small economic tax base. 
Many of the root causes identified speak to the 
ongoing impacts of colonialism and racism.
Pond Inlet, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
56
8
CONCLUSIONS AND 
RECOMMENDATIONS
With the North warming at an accelerated rate, 
climate change is already impacting the lives of 
Northerners through infrastructure failures and 
service disruptions. Historic and present-day poli­
cies have placed Northern communities at a major 
disadvantage in preparing for and adapting to 
climate impacts. For Indigenous Peoples, this 
disadvantage is further underscored by legacies 
of colonialism, southern paternalism, and racism. 
It is time to give the North its due. Our analysis 
shows that all orders of government need to set 
policies and make investments without delay to 
prepare for the impacts of climate change on 
Northern infrastructure.
Photo: Bird's Eye Inc.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
57
Conclusions and recommendations
Conclusions
Five overarching insights emerge from our assessment of climate impacts on Northern infrastructure. 
Without specific and targeted interventions, climate 
change will further widen the existing gaps in basic 
infrastructure service across the North
Even leaving aside future climate change impacts, insufficient infrastructure 
means that Northerners—especially Indigenous Northerners—already lack 
access to essential services.
There are enormous financial, cultural, health, and well-being costs when infra­
structure fails in the North, and, as our analysis shows, Northern infrastructure 
failures will accelerate as the climate continues to change. Our modelling 
showed that the direct costs of this damage could amount to billions of dollars 
in damage to airports, roads, and buildings alone over the next three decades. 
We also highlight that there are many other costs that cannot be modelled 
but that could bring even larger costs and damages. Shortages in safe and 
affordable housing across the North exacerbated by climate change, for exam­
ple, could lead to major health impacts. Climate-induced damage to airport 
infrastructure can threaten people’s ability to access emergency medical care. 
Even without climate change, the Northern infrastructure gap is self-reinforcing. 
For example, a lack of ports, roads, and airports to bring in construction supplies 
drives up the cost of shipping materials to build and maintain infrastructure. A 
lack of education facilities means that few Northerners have the technical skills 
to work on infrastructure development—and the housing crisis makes it difficult 
and expensive to bring in southern labour. Closing the Northern infrastructure 
gap requires immediate and ongoing investment in resilient infrastructure. 
Otherwise, the gap will continue to grow, worsening the inequity in infrastruc­
ture service delivery between Northern and southern communities and making 
it even more costly to build functional infrastructure in the years ahead.
Neither the Northern infrastructure gap nor the climate threat to Northern 
infrastructure can be solved alone—each reinforces the other, and so both 
must be addressed together. Investments in adaptation can close the 
Northern infrastructure gap by designing, locating, and building infrastruc­
ture that is functional, reliable, and resilient in a warming climate.
1
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
58
Conclusions and recommendations
Northern Indigenous Peoples face unique and elevated 
threats from impacts of failing infrastructure
In the North, Indigenous Peoples have adapted to their changing environ­
ment since time immemorial and have exhibited extraordinary resilience in 
the face of colonization and dispossession. But the climate is changing more 
rapidly now than any previous generation has experienced. 
Colonization and racism have deeply affected the adaptive capacity of 
Indigenous Peoples across the North in the face of infrastructure failures and 
deficits. Historically, governments designed social and economic policies to 
destroy Indigenous cultures, deeply damaging the social fabric, knowledge, 
and institutions that are essential for climate change adaptation (Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada 2015). Years of systemic underinvest­
ment and southern neglect have undermined Indigenous health, well-being, 
and culture. And countless Northern policies and programs have systemat­
ically excluded the input of Indigenous Peoples, resulting in infrastructure 
that does not reflect their values, cultures, or the reality of their lives. 
To this day, infrastructure decision making processes often do not involve the 
full participation of Northern Indigenous rights holders and governments. 
The lack of Northern Indigenous participation continues to affect the way 
funding programs are designed and the prioritization of infrastructure that 
fails to meet people’s most immediate needs.
Northern infrastructure failures due to climate change 
will prove costly and put critical services at risk
Northern infrastructure is increasingly exposed to the impacts of climate 
change. Runways and roads are cracking from permafrost thaw, winter roads 
are becoming unsafe or impossible to build, building foundations are break­
ing apart, and sea level rise and flooding are threatening the very existence 
of some Northern communities. 
When Northern infrastructure is damaged or destroyed, it puts critical 
services at risk. Infrastructure systems are uniquely sensitive to climate 
change impacts across the North because there is frequently no backup 
and because services are already chronically deficient. When one piece of 
infrastructure fails—such as a diesel power station outage or damage to a 
runway—it can quickly sever healthcare delivery and access to food.
2
3
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
59
Conclusions and recommendations
Northern infrastructure failures are also costly. This is in part because the 
direct costs of replacing and repairing infrastructure in the North can be 
many times the costs in southern Canada. But damage to Northern infra­
structure is also more costly due to broad, cascading impacts and disruptions. 
These cascading impacts and costs were on full display in the City of Iqaluit 
in 2021, when the city’s water supply was contaminated with fuel. This multi-
month emergency not only disrupted drinking water access for most of the 
town, but also caused surgeries to be delayed at the hospital and affected 
food availability.
A lack of co-ordination between multiple orders of 
government is undermining infrastructure resilience
All orders of government have a role in setting policy and taking action to 
reduce the risk of critical service failures. To date, there is no framework that 
self-governing Inuit and First Nations governments, territorial governments, 
and the federal government have agreed on to support infrastructure and 
climate change adaptation decisions. Instead, different orders of govern­
ment have inconsistent and uncoordinated infrastructure strategies and 
adaptation initiatives. 
Incremental adaptations alone are insufficient to safe­
guard infrastructure services against climate change
Given both the current Northern infrastructure gap and the pace of climate 
change impacts, transformative adaptations can sometimes offer larger 
returns than incremental adaptations alone. Our analysis shows that incre­
mental adaptations can slow or delay costs in some cases but often only 
prolong inevitable infrastructure failure. 
Transformative adaptations are a clear opportunity to fundamentally change 
infrastructure systems that are no longer working—or have never worked—
for Northerners and Indigenous Peoples by leapfrogging to new infrastruc­
ture technologies that deliver better, more appropriate, and more resilient 
services. However, transformative adaptation is not yet a part of mainstream 
thinking about climate change adaptation in the North. 
4
5
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
60
Conclusions and recommendations
Recommendations
Climate change is a massive threat to Northern lives, livelihoods, health, and security. The best way to 
minimize that threat is through a co-ordinated approach to both closing the Northern infrastructure gap 
and bolstering Northern infrastructure resilience. There is a clear opportunity to realign Northern infra­
structure policies with the collective vision of Canada’s Arctic and Northern Policy Framework—“strong, 
self-reliant people and communities working together for a vibrant, prosperous, and sustainable Arctic 
and northern region” (CIRNAC 2019). The ultimate success of efforts to prepare and repair Northern infra­
structure for climate change will be measured by the ability of Northerners to access reliable infrastructure 
services and achieve equitable well-being and quality of life even in the face of worsening climate impacts. 
Failure to adapt, on the other hand, could lead to rapidly growing costs for the North and for Canada as a 
whole—not only from infrastructure damage and destruction but also from impacts to community and 
individual health and ways of life. 
Moving forward, new infrastructure should be built across the North to fill service gaps, keep pace with 
growing populations, prepare for climate hazards, and respond to geopolitical changes. And because 
historically, infrastructure in the North has not been built for the needs of Indigenous Peoples, infra­
structure decisions, economic development processes, and climate change adaptation strategies 
moving forward must respect Indigenous Peoples’ right to self-determination. 
We outline four recommendations that will help build resilience in the North through better infrastructure 
decisions. Because colonization and racism are key root causes of climate change infrastructure vulner­
ability, all four recommendations are rooted in a guiding principle of self-determination and should be 
implemented through that lens. 
The ultimate success of efforts 
to prepare and repair Northern 
infrastructure for climate change 
will be measured by the ability 
of Northerners to access reliable 
infrastructure services and achieve 
equitable well-being and quality of 
life even in the face of worsening 
climate impacts.
Arviat, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
61
Conclusions and recommendations
GUIDING PRINCIPLE: 

All infrastructure development and adaptation policies should be 
implemented in a manner that is consistent with the principles 
outlined in Canada’s Truth and Reconciliation Report. 
Federal, provincial, and territorial governments should engage Indigenous govern­
ments and communities in equal partnership to ensure Northern Indigenous 
communities have reliable and equitable infrastructure services that meet their 
expressed needs.
Climate change adaptation is an opportunity to renew and transform Northern infra­
structure so that it better serves Indigenous Peoples. Federal, provincial, and territorial 
governments must develop infrastructure through more equitable and collaborative 
processes, working closely with self-governing Indigenous governments and regional 
Indigenous organizations. 
By definition, Indigenous governments and communities—each with distinct and 
diverse needs and priorities—must have power over how infrastructure decisions 
are made. Federal, provincial, and territorial governments must therefore listen to, 
engage with, and follow the lead of Indigenous governments and communities from 
the initiation of infrastructure projects across the North through to their construction, 
operation, and ongoing adaptation. 
Pangnirtung, Nunavut. Photo: Dylan Clark.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
62
Conclusions and recommendations
	 1. 	 FUNDING: The federal government should dedicate new financial resources for 	
	
	 Northern infrastructure and restructure existing infrastructure funding programs to 	
	
	 increase accessibility and usefulness to Northern governments.
Existing infrastructure funding programs are not working for Northern (territorial, municipal, 
regional, and Indigenous) governments as they do not reflect the physical, economic, or social 
realities of building and maintaining infrastructure in the North. Timelines do not account for 
short building seasons or the complexities of transporting materials, application processes can 
overburden the limited capacity of local governments, and funding is intermittent. Furthermore, 
the amount of funding currently available to Northern governments is insufficient to close the 
Northern infrastructure gap, adapt existing infrastructure, and maintain current infrastructure, 
let alone to support measures to adapt infrastructure to a warming climate. 
The federal government should dramatically restructure funding programs so that Northern 
governments can benefit from them. This requires:
	
▶
Funding that is stable and predictable with a multi-year horizon to align with infrastructure 
prioritization, planning, and construction timelines. 
	
▶
Programs that provide funding for full-time jobs alongside capital funding to help fill 
Northern government capacity gaps. 
	
▶
Greater flexibility in funding programs, including mechanisms like rollover funding and 
stacking. Territorial governments should also give municipalities the latitude to rollover infra­
structure funding for multiple years to save funds for larger capital upgrades.
	
▶
Increased federal funding for existing Northern infrastructure programs and new funding 
programs to support climate adaptation of existing infrastructure.
	 2.	 INFORMATION: The federal government should support provincial and territorial
	
	 governments in developing and maintaining accurate and practical information
	
	 about 	Northern-relevant climate risks to infrastructure. This data should prioritize 
	
	 information that is important to Northern decision makers and Indigenous communities.
A lack of data on the climate risks that threaten Northern infrastructure makes it challenging 
to account for climate change in the design of new infrastructure or the adaptation of exist­
ing infrastructure. Northern (territorial, municipal, regional, and Indigenous) government lack 
detailed data about current and future climate- and weather-related risks to infrastructure such 
as roads, airports, buildings, utilities, and ports. This includes a lack of ongoing monitoring and 
projections of permafrost thaw, wildfires, changes to wind, and thunderstorms. 
The federal government should provide the financial and technical support for the collection of 
data on changing climatic conditions and climate risks, and for projection of future risks. However, 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
63
Conclusions and recommendations
it is important that Northern and Indigenous governments have input into, and in some cases 
control over, how data is collected, modelled, downscaled, managed, and stored.
	
▶
The federal government should provide long-term funding that is stable and predictable to 
ensure that communities can track long-term climate-related impacts. Long-term climate 
data is essential to making cost-effective decisions about infrastructure. Climate and risk 
data that is not consistently tracked for many years has minimal utility. 
	
▶
Funding should include education, training, and skills development so that communities 
can build capacity to monitor and collect the data they need.
	
▶
Provincial and territorial governments should work closely with Northern and Indigenous 
communities to determine their climate risk data needs and research priorities. 
	
▶
Data should be at a scale that is relevant to Northern and Indigenous communities. This 
includes downscaling climate projections and detailed maps of climate change risk at the 
community level. Furthermore, governments should ensure that the data is accessible (both 
culturally appropriate and available with Northern internet) to Northerners. 
	
▶
Climate information to support Northern adaptation should draw from western and 
Indigenous ways of knowing to benefit from the strengths of each (ECCC 2020). 
	 3.	 INNOVATION: All orders of government should prioritize infrastructure
	
	 replacement and transformative leapfrogging over repair and protection wherever 
	
	 this is a more effective, efficient, and sustainable way to safeguard services. 
It is going to be challenging to keep up with the speed at which climate change impacts infra­
structure across the North, even with additional resources. Permafrost thaw is affecting more 
buildings, winter roads are quickly becoming inoperable, and transportation systems are not 
able to deliver the services that people depend on.
To deliver the best infrastructure services possible with limited resources, all orders of government 
will need to make data-informed infrastructure decisions—including developing infrastructure 
asset management systems that consider climate change in long-term operations, maintenance, 
and replacement decisions (Federation of Canadian Municipalities 2018). This includes identify­
ing where existing infrastructure can be adapted to reduce the cost and disruption of frequent 
repairs, but it also includes identifying existing infrastructure that is no longer worth repairing 
or protecting in the face of accelerating impacts from climate change. In such cases, it may be 
both more cost-effective and less disruptive to build replacement infrastructure that is designed 
for future climate conditions rather than to continually repair current infrastructure that is not. 
	
▶
Territorial and federal governments should increase the use of incremental adaptations (for 
example, thermosyphons, embankment cooling, and base-layer reinforcement) to protect 
infrastructure from permafrost thaw and other climate changes. However, decisions to use 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
64
Conclusions and recommendations
incremental adaptations should consider long-term costs and benefits and, if implemented, 
should be monitored to determine when they are no longer cost-effective. 
	
▶
Governments should seek out opportunities for transformative adaptation by developing 
next-generation infrastructure systems that leapfrog historical infrastructure models. Such 
opportunities might include investing in renewable microgrids—instead of rebuilding a 
diesel plant—to help close electricity service gaps and make Northern communities more 
resilient to less reliable roadways for shipping fuel, or improving remote presence and tele­
health to reduce reliance on planes and airports to fly patients south to see specialists.
	
▶
In select cases, planned failure or managed retreat may be the most cost-effective option 
because the cost of maintaining current infrastructure in present locations can be far more 
expensive than rebuilding elsewhere or delivering services by other means. It is essential 
that Northerners make these decisions. In circumstances where planned failure is deemed 
the best course, there may be prime opportunities for transformative adaptation. 
	 4. 	 REGULATION: The federal, provincial, and territorial governments should update
	
	 infrastructure policies, regulations, standards, and codes to explicitly account for the
	
	 more complex and severe impacts of climate change in the North and to ensure that 
	
	 new infrastructure is resilient. 
Infrastructure across the North is still being built for yesterday’s climate. In the coming years, a 
great deal of new infrastructure will need to be built in the North to ensure people have access to 
basic services like clean drinking water, housing, and access to medical care. Regulatory changes 
can ensure this infrastructure is built to withstand future climate change. 
	
▶
Internal government decision making and legislative processes should include analysis of phys­
ical climate risks. For example, governments and regulatory bodies should ensure that envi­
ronmental impact assessments include physical climate risk disclosures. Governments should 
account for future flood, sea level rise, and permafrost thaw risks in their land use planning. They 
should also integrate physical climate risks into capital infrastructure planning processes and 
investment decisions, such as flood and permafrost risk analysis of all large infrastructure projects.
	
▶
Territorial and provincial governments should develop clear plans to mandate use of stan­
dards and codes, such as those developed under the Northern Infrastructure Standardization 
Initiative, for all public and private infrastructure that provides critical services. 
	
▶
Standards, codes, and regulations should reflect the best available climate data and should 
be informed by both western and Indigenous knowledge systems.
	
▶
Governments should apply adaptive management for codes and standards updates to ensure 
that regulations keep pace as understanding of climate change risks continues to improve.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
65
GLOSSARY
Adaptation: Actions that reduce damage and loss 
from actual or expected climate change, while 
taking advantage of potential new opportunities. 
Adaptive capacity: The strengths, attributes, and 
resources available to an individual, community, 
society, or organization that can be used to adapt 
to climate change.
Base layer reinforcement: A method that involves 
building embankments with multiple layers of 
permeable fabrics that help to reinforce, protect, 
and drain soil, helping infrastructure resist the struc­
tural consequences of permafrost degradation
Climate: The average weather in a place over an 
extended period, typically 30 years or longer. 
Climate change: Changes in the Earth’s climate, 
predominantly caused by the burning of fossil 
fuels, that add heat-trapping gases to Earth’s 
atmosphere. It manifests as overall global warm­
ing but also in sea level rise, melting of previ­
ously permanent snow and ice fields, and more 
extreme weather. 
Climate model: A climate simulation based on 
well-documented physical processes. Climate 
models, also known as general circulation models 
(GCMs), use mathematical equations to charac­
terize how energy and matter interact in different 
parts of the ocean, atmosphere, and land. 
Climate projections: A simulated response of the 
climate system to a scenario of future emission or 
concentration of greenhouse gases and aerosols, 
derived using climate models. Climate projec­
tions are distinguished from climate predictions 
by their dependence on the emission, concen­
tration, or radiative forcing scenario used, which 
is in turn based on assumptions concerning, for 
example, future socioeconomic and technological 
developments that may or may not be realized.
Climate-related hazards: The potential occur­
rence of a climate-related physical event that may 
cause loss of life, injury, or damage and loss to 
property, infrastructure, service provision, and 
environmental resources. Due to climate change, 
frequencies of some hazards are expected to 
continue to increase.
Colonialism: The practice of acquiring full or 
partial political control over another nation, occu­
pying it with settlers, and exploiting it economi­
cally. In Canada, colonialism is an ongoing process 
that continues to have destructive impacts on 
Indigenous Peoples’ education, cultures and 
languages, health, child welfare, the administra­
tion of justice, and economic opportunities and 
prosperity. 
Embankment cooling: Practices used to protect 
permafrost from thawing underneath road infra­
structures. Embankment cooling often refers to 
air cooled embankment (ACE) which uses highly 
porous materials such as boulders or cobble to 
construct the embankment of roads. Removing 
snow from the side of the roads, runways, or build­
ing pads during winter months further prevents 
thawing by allowing the air to cool surface grounds.
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
66
Glossary
Exposure: The presence of people; livelihoods; 
environmental services and resources; infrastruc­
ture; or economic, social, or cultural assets in places 
that could be adversely affected by climate change.
Impacts: Effects on natural and human systems. 
In this report, the term is used to refer to the 
effects on natural and human systems of physi­
cal events, disasters, and/or climate change. 
Incremental adaptation: An adaptation strategy 
that aims to protect and preserve existing systems. 
Common examples include physical risk disclosure 
regulations, flood walls and dikes, and fire suppres­
sion. In the case of infrastructure, incremental adap­
tations focus on preserving existing infrastructure 
systems as opposed to innovative new ways to 
deliver services (see transformative adaptation)
Indigenous knowledge holders: Individuals who 
encompass generations of knowledge embedded 
within the unique cultures, languages, governance 
systems, and experiences of Indigenous Peoples.
Infrastructure gap: In this report, the term infra­
structure gap is used specifically to refer to the 
infrastructure deficit in Northern Canada when 
compared to southern Canada. The Northern 
infrastructure gap results in inadequate stock of 
infrastructure in the North, sparse and unequal 
investments in infrastructure, and unequal 
access to infrastructure services—especially when 
compared to southern Canada.
Inuit Nunangat: The Inuit homeland, encom­
passing the four Inuit regions of Canada: the 
Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Nunavut, Nunavik, 
and Nunatsiavut.
Leapfrog: When a nation or region bypasses 
traditional stages of development to either jump 
directly to the latest technologies or take an alter­
native path of development involving emerging 
technologies or knowledge with new benefits and 
new opportunities.
Managed retreat: A strategic relocation of people, 
structures, and buildings in the face of natural 
hazard risks. Managed retreat often occurs in 
response to sea-level rise, floods, and wildfires. 
But it can also involve a strategic abandonment 
of land to allow for natural environments to be 
re-established.
Northern Canada: Yukon, Northwest Territories, 
Nunavut, Nunavik, and Nunatsiavut, as well as 
the northern regions of British Columbia, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario. The north­
ern regions of provinces have been defined as 
land north of 55 degrees of latitude. In this report, 
Northern Canada is used primarily to refer to areas 
that currently have permafrost. However, we 
acknowledge that there are many different defi­
nitions of the North, that its cultures and ecosys­
tems are diverse, and that traditional land use and 
occupancy of Indigenous communities are not 
limited to these bureaucratic boundaries.
Northerner: Resident of the North. This term is 
inclusive of both Indigenous Peoples living in the 
North as well as settlers.
Permafrost: Ground that remains below zero 
degrees Celsius for at least two consecutive years. 
Planned failure: An adaptation approach where 
asset managers strategically allow infrastructure 
to fail and become unserviceable. Prior to infra­
structure being decommissioned asset managers 
build an alternative and more resilient means of 
delivering services. 
Resilience: The ability of a physical, social, or ecolog­
ical system and its component parts to anticipate, 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
67
Glossary
absorb, accommodate, or recover from the effects 
of a disaster in a timely and efficient manner.
Risk: The potential for consequences where some­
thing of value is at stake and where the outcome is 
uncertain. Risk is often represented as probability 
of the occurrence of hazardous events or trends, 
multiplied by the potential impacts if these events 
or trends occur. Risk results from the interaction of 
vulnerability, exposure, and hazard. In this report, 
the term risk is used primarily to refer to the risks 
of impacts related to climate change.
Self-government: The formal structure through 
which Indigenous communities control the 
administration of their people, land, resources, and 
related programs and policies. Self-governance 
recognizes the inherent rights of Indigenous 
Peoples to maintain and implement their own 
institutions, laws, and governing bodies.
Thermosyphons: Refrigeration devices designed 
to keep permafrost cold by drawing heat from the 
ground and releasing it into the air. Typically, ther­
mosyphons are sealed pipes containing a pressur­
ized fluid that is partly liquid and partly gas. The 
tubes are installed vertically, with one end below 
ground and the other above ground.
Transformative adaptation: An adaptation 
strategy that aims to reduce the root causes of 
vulnerability to climate change in the long term. 
Transformative adaptation is often character­
ized by system-wide changes in anticipation of 
climate change and its impacts. In the case of 
infrastructure, transformative adaptations focus 
on innovative ways to deliver services as opposed 
to preserving existing infrastructure systems (see 
incremental adaptation)
Vulnerability: The degree to which a system is 
susceptible to, or unable to cope with, negative 
effects of climate change, including climate vari­
ability and extremes.
Winter road: A seasonal road only used in winter—
and manually rebuilt each year—that typically 
crosses land, frozen lakes, and rivers. 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
68
REFERENCES
Adams, Scott J., Paul Babyn, Brent Burbridge, Rachel Tang, and Ivar Mendez. 2021. “Access to Ultrasound Imaging: A Qualitative Study 
in Two Northern, Remote, Indigenous Communities in Canada.” International Journal of Circumpolar Health 80 (1). https://doi.org/1
0.1080/22423982.2021.1961392 
Allard, Michel, Mickaël Lemay, Carl Barrette, Emmanuel L’Hérault, Denis Sarrazin, T. Bell, and G. Doré. 2012. “Permafrost and Climate 
Change in Nunavik and Nunatsiavut: Importance for Municipal and Transportation Infrastructures.” In Nunavik and Nunatsiavut: 
From Science to Policy. An Integrated Regional Impact Study (IRIS) of Climate Change and Modernization, edited by Michel Allard 
and Mickaël Lemay, 171–197. ArcticNet Inc.
AMAP (Artic Monitoring and Assessment Programme). 2019. Arctic Climate Change Update 2019: An Update to Key Findings of Snow, 
Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA) 2017. https://www.amap.no/documents/doc/amap-climate-change-update-2019/1761 
Aporta, Claudio, Eric Higgs, David Hakken, Lisa Palmer, Mark Palmer, Robert Rundstrom, Bryan Pfaffenberger, George Wenzel, and 
Thomas Widlok. 2005. “Satellite Culture: Global Positioning Systems, Inuit Wayfinding, and the Need for a New Account of Technol­
ogy.” Current Anthropology 46 (5): 729–753.
Arctic Council. 2016. Arctic Resilience Report. Edited by Marcus Carson and Garry Peterson. Stockholm Environment Institute and 
the Stockholm Resilience Centre. Stockholm. http://www.arctic-council.org/arr 
Arnaquq-Baril, Alethea. 2016. Angry Inuk. National Film Board of Canada. Toronto, ON.
Baijius, Warrick, and Robert J Patrick. 2019. “‘We Don’t Drink the Water Here’: The Reproduction of Undrinkable Water for First 
Nations in Canada.” Water 11 (5). https://doi.org/10.3390/w11051079 
Barrette, Paul D., Sean Ferguson, Vahid Pilechi, and Naveed Khaliq. 2018. The Yukon River at Dawson City: Assessment of Factors 
Influencing Freeze-up and Ice Bridge Construction. National Research Council Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://nrc-publications.canada.
ca/eng/view/ft/?id=787e9ae1-15f2-4cf9-849d-801e0d4aa974
Barrette, Paul D., and Lawrence Charlebois. 2018. Winter Roads and Climate Adaptation: Prospective Solutions through R&D. National 
Research Council Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://nrc-publications.canada.ca/eng/view/ft/?id=1b84a91c-edb6-4640-ada1-0126dd04f2b0
Basky, Greg. 2021. “Equity in Focus: Iqaluit Water Contaminated, Tuberculosis on the Rise, Blood Ban Easing.” CMAJ 193 (44): E1706–
E1707. https://doi.org/10.1503/CMAJ.1095970 
Bell, Trevor, Robert Briggs, Ralf Bachmayer, and Shuo Li. 2014. “Augmenting Inuit Knowledge for Safe Sea-Ice Travel—The SmartICE 
Information System.” In 2014 Oceans-St. John’s, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1109/OCEANS.2014.7003290 
Boehlert, Brent, James E. Neumann, Jason Price, Charles Fant, Paul Chinowsky, Jacob Helman, Kenneth M. Strzepek, and Jacqueline 
Willwerth. 2021. Costing Climate Change Impacts on Canada’s Infrastructure. Prepared for the Canadian Climate Institute (formerly 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices).
Bouchard, Christina. 2020. Arctic Airports and Aerodromes as Critical Infrastructure. North American and Artic Defence and Secu­
rity Network.
Brockman, Alex, and Randi Beers. 2018. “N.W.T. Gov’t Commits to Airlifting Some Cargo Affected by Barge Cancellation.” CBC News, 
October 5. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/nwt-barge-cancellation-airlift-1.4853166 
Brooks, Heather, Guy Doré, and Chantal Lemieux. 2017. Quantitative Risk Assessment of the Iqaluit International Airport, Iqaluit, 
Nunavut. Transport Canada. 
Brown, Daniel M., Bohdan Kochtubajda, and Ryan K. Said. 2020. “A Severe Thunderstorm Outbreak North of 70°N Over the Canadian 
Arctic Islands with Unusual Lightning Characteristics.” Atmosphere-Ocean 58 (4): 231–242. https://doi.org/10.1080/07055900.2020.1792405 
Bush, Elizabeth, and Donald S. Lemmen, eds. 2019. Canada’s Changing Climate Report. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://
changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/ 
Castillo, Victoria Elena, Christine Schreyer, and Tosh Southwick. 2020. “Highways and Social Change.” In ECHO: Ethnographic, Cultural 
and Historical Overview of Yukon’s First Peoples. Institute for Community Engaged Research Press.
CBC (Canadian Broadcast Corporation). 2011. “Hercules Charter Means ‘Christmas’ in Old Crow.” CBC News, February 28. https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/hercules-charter-means-christmas-in-old-crow-1.1053336 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
69
References
CBC (Canadian Broadcast Corporation). 2015. “Teamwork Helps Pangnirtung Residents Pull through Power Outage.” CBC News, 
April 11. https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/teamwork-helps-pangnirtung-residents-pull-through-power-outage-1.3029395 
Chen, Yang, David M Romps, Jacob T Seeley, Sander Veraverbeke, William J Riley, Zelalem A Mekonnen, and James T Randerson. 
2021. “Future Increases in Arctic Lightning and Fire Risk for Permafrost Carbon.” Nature Climate Change 11 (5): 404–410. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41558-021-01011-y 
CIRNAC (Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada). 2019. “Canada’s Arctic and Northern Policy Framework.” Govern­
ment of Canada. https://www.rcaanc-cirnac.gc.ca/eng/1560523306861/1560523330587 
Clark, Dylan, and Anna Kanduth. 2022. Enhancing the Resilience of Canadian Electricity Systems for a Net Zero Future. Canadian 
Climate Institute (formerly Canadian Institute for Climate Choices). https://climatechoices.ca/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Resil­
iency-scoping-paper-ENGLISH-Final.pdf
Clark, Dylan G., James D. Ford, Tristan Pearce, and Lea Berrang-Ford. 2016. “Vulnerability to Unintentional Injuries Associated with 
Land-Use Activities and Search and Rescue in Nunavut, Canada.” Social Science and Medicine 169: 18–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2016.09.026 
Coffel, Ethan D., Terence R. Thompson, and Radley M. Horton. 2017. “The Impacts of Rising Temperatures on Aircraft Takeoff Perfor­
mance.” Climatic Change 144 (2): 381–388. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10584-017-2018-9/FIGURES/3 
Connor, Billy, Douglas J. Goering, Mikhail Kanevskiy, and Erin Trochim. 2020. Roads and Airfields Constructed on Permafrost: A 
Synthesis of Practice. https://dot.alaska.gov/stwddes/research/assets/pdf/000S927.pdf
CRTC (Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission). 2020. Communications Monitoring Report, 2020. Govern­
ment of Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2020/crtc/BC9-9-2020-eng.pdf 
Cruikshank, Julie. 1985. The Gravel Magnet: Some Social Impacts of the Alaska Highway on Yukon Indians. Vancouver, BC. https://
trid.trb.org/view/231861 
Debortoli, Nathan S., Dylan G. Clark, James D. Ford, Jesse S. Sayles, and Emilia P. Diaconescu. 2019. “An Integrative Climate Change Vulner­
ability Index for Arctic Aviation and Marine Transportation.” Nature Communications 10 (1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-10347-1 
DMTI Lightbox. 2020. “CanMap GIS Data for GIS Mapping Software - DMTI Spatial.” https://www.dmtispatial.com/canmap/ 
Doré, Guy, Fujun Niu, and Heather Brooks. 2016. “Adaptation Methods for Transportation Infrastructure Built on Degrading Perma­
frost.” Permafrost and Periglacial Processes 27 (4): 352–364. https://doi.org/10.1002/PPP.1919 
Dorough, Dalee S., Bridget Larocque, Kaviq Kaluraq, Daniel Taukie, David Sproule, and Whitney Lackenbauer. 2021. Voices from the 
Arctic: Diverse Views on Canadian Arctic Security. https://www.naadsn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/20-nov-ArcticVoicesProceed­
ings-upload.pdf 
ECCC (Environment and Climate Change Canada). 2020. Climate Science 2050: Advancing Science and Knowledge on Climate 
Change. Gatineau, QC. https://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2020/eccc/En4-414-2020-eng.pdf 
Ellis, Michael J., Ivar Mendez, and Kelly Russell. 2020. “Preliminary Clinical Algorithm to Optimise Remote Delivery of Paediatric Concus­
sion Care in Canada’s North.” International Journal of Circumpolar Health 79 (1). https://doi.org/10.1080/22423982.2020.1832390 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. 2018. “Guide: How to Develop an Asset Management Policy and Strategy.” https://fcm.ca/en/
resources/mamp/guidebook-how-develop-asset-management-policy-and-strategy 
Firelight (The Firelight Group). 2022. The Impacts of Permafrost Thaw on Northern Indigenous Communities. Firelight Research 
Inc. Vancouver, BC. Prepared for the Canadian Climate Institute (formerly Canadian Institute for Climate Choices).
Ford, James D., D. Clark, T. Pearce, L. Berrang-Ford, L. Copland, J. Dawson, M. New, and S. L. Harper. 2019. “Changing Access to Ice, 
Land and Water in Arctic Communities.” Nature Climate Change 9 (4): 335–339. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-019-0435-7 
Ford, James D., Nicole Couture, Trevor Bell, and Dylan G. Clark. 2018. “Climate Change and Canada’s North Coast: Research Trends, 
Progress, and Future Directions.” Environmental Reviews 26 (1): 82–92. https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2017-0027 
Ford, James D., Graham McDowell, and Tristan Pearce. 2015. “The Adaptation Challenge in the Arctic.” Nature Climate Change 5: 
1046–1053. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2723 
Fox, Shari, Esa Qillaq, Ilkoo Angutikjuak, Dennis Joseph Tigullaraq, Robert Kautuk, Henry Huntington, Glen E. Liston, and Kelly Elder. 
2020. “Connecting Understandings of Weather and Climate: Steps towards Co-Production of Knowledge and Collaborative Environ­
mental Management in Inuit Nunangat.” Arctic Science 6 (3): 267–278. https://doi.org/10.1139/as-2019-0010 
Funston, Bernard. 2014. Emergency Preparedness in Canada’s North: An Examination of Community Capacity. http://www.mun.
ca/harriscentre/Emergency_Preparedness.pdf 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
70
References
Gearheard, Shari, Claudio Aporta, Gary Aipellee, and Kyle O’Keefe. 2011. “The Igliniit Project: Inuit Hunters Document Life on the Trail 
to Map and Monitor Arctic Change.” Canadian Geographer 55 (1): 42–55. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-0064.2010.00344.x 
George, Jane. 2006. “Climate Change Hits Roads and Airports in Nunavik.” Nunatsiaq News, September 8. https://nunatsiaq.com/
stories/article/climate_change_hits_roads_and_airports_in_nunavik/ 
Golder. 2021. Guide on Climate Change Adaptation for the Mining Sector. The Mining Association of Canada. https://mining.ca/
resources/guides-manuals/guide-on-climate-change-adaptation-for-the-mining-sector/ 
Government of Canada. 2021. “Nutrition North Canada: Eligible Communities.” https://www.nutritionnorthcanada.gc.ca/eng/1415
540731169/1415540791407#tpc2 
Government of Northwest Territories. 2020. Capital Estimates 2021-2022. https://www.fin.gov.nt.ca/sites/fin/files/resources/2021-22_
capital_estimates.pdf 
Government of Nunavut. 2014. Nunavut Airports 20 Year Infrastructure Needs Assessment 2014 - 2034. Iqaluit, NU. http://
assembly.nu.ca/sites/default/files/TD%2096-4(3)%20EN%20Nunavut%20Airports%2020-year%20Infrastructure%20Needs%20
Assessment%202014-2034.pdf 
Hatcher, Scott V., and Donald L. Forbes. 2015. “Exposure to Coastal Hazards in a Rapidly Expanding Northern Urban Centre, Iqaluit, 
Nunavut.” Source: Arctic 68 (4): 453–471. https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic4526 
Hjort, Jan, Olli Karjalainen, Juha Aalto, Sebastian Westermann, Vladimir E Romanovsky, Frederick E Nelson, Bernd Etzelmüller, 
and Miska Luoto. 2018. “Degrading Permafrost Puts Arctic Infrastructure at Risk by Mid-Century.” Nature Communications 9 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07557-4
Holzworth, Robert H., James B. Brundell, Michael P. McCarthy, Abram R. Jacobson, Craig J. Rodger, and Todd S. Anderson. 2021. 
“Lightning in the Arctic.” Geophysical Research Letters 48 (7). https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL091366 
Hori, Yukari, William A. Gough, Benita Tam, and Leonard J.S. Tsuji. 2018. “Community Vulnerability to Changes in the Winter Road 
Viability and Longevity in the Western James Bay Region of Ontario’s Far North.” Regional Environmental Change 18 (6): 1753–1763. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10113-018-1310-1 
Human Rights Watch. 2020. “My Fear Is Losing Everything”: The Climate Crisis and First Nations’ Right to Food in Canada. https://
www.hrw.org/report/2020/10/21/my-fear-losing-everything/climate-crisis-and-first-nations-right-food-canada 
Huntington, Henry P, Shari Gearheard, Lene Kielsen Holm, George Noongwook, Margaret Opie, and Joelie Sanguya. 2017. “Sea 
Ice Is Our Beautiful Garden: Indigenous Perspectives on Sea Ice in the Arctic.” In Sea Ice, edited by David N. Thomas, 583–599. 
John Wiley & Sons. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118778371.ch25 
Huot, S., H. Ho, A. Ko, S. Lam, P. Tactay, J. MacLachlan, and R. K. Raanaas. 2019. “Identifying Barriers to Healthcare Delivery and Access 
in the Circumpolar North: Important Insights for Health Professionals.” International Journal of Circumpolar Health 78 (1). https://doi.
org/10.1080/22423982.2019.1571385 
Infrastructure Canada. 2019. “Canada Helps Protect Inuvik Mike Zubko Airport from Impacts of Climate Change.” Government of 
Canada. Ottawa, ON. https://www.canada.ca/en/office-infrastructure/news/2019/06/canada-helps-protect-inuvik-mike-zubko-air­
port-from-impacts-of-climate-change.html 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2022. Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribu­
tion of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Edited by H-O Pörtner, 
D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, et al. Cambridge University Press. In Press. Cambridge.
ITK (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami). 2018. Inuit Statistical Profile 2018. https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/Inuit-Statisti­
cal-Profile.pdf 
ITK (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami). 2019. Inuit Nunangat Housing Strategy. https://www.itk.ca/inuit-nunangat-housing-strategy/ 
ITK (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami). 2020. Access to Drinking Water in Inuit Nunangat. ITK Quarterly Research Briefing, Issue no. 2. https://
www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/ITK_Water_English_07.pdf 
ITK (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami). 2021. The Digital Divide: Broadband Connectivity in Inuit Nunangat. ITK Quarterly Research Briefing, 
Issue no. 3. https://www.itk.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/ITK_Telecomms_English_08.pdf 
Jong, Michael, Ivar Mendez, and Robert Jong. 2019. “Enhancing Access to Care in Northern Rural Communities via Telehealth.” 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health 78 (2). https://doi.org/10.1080/22423982.2018.1554174 
Karanasios, Konstantinos, and Paul Parker. 2017. “Recent Developments in Renewable Energy in Remote Aboriginal Communities, 
NWT, Canada.” Papers in Canadian Economic Development 16: 41–53.
Kates, Robert W., William R. Travis, and Thomas J. Wilbanks. 2012. “Transformational Adaptation When Incremental Adaptations 
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
71
References
to Climate Change Are Insufficient.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109 (19): 
7156–7161. https://doi.org/10.1073/PNAS.1115521109 
Kilabuk, Elaine, Franco Momoli, Ranjeeta Mallick, Deborah Van Dyk, Christopher Pease, Alice Zwerling, Sharon Edmunds Potvin, and 
Gonzalo G. Alvarez. 2019. “Social Determinants of Health among Residential Areas with a High Tuberculosis Incidence in a Remote 
Inuit Community.” J Epidemiol Community Health 73 (5): 401–406. https://doi.org/10.1136/JECH-2018-211261 
Labbé, Jolène, James D. Ford, Malcolm Araos, and Melanie Flynn. 2017. “The Government-Led Climate Change Adaptation Landscape 
in Nunavut, Canada.” Environmental Reviews 25 (1): 12–25. https://doi.org/10.1139/er-2016-0032 
LaDuke, Winona, and Deborah Cowen. 2020. “Beyond Wiindigo Infrastructure.” South Atlantic Quarterly 119 (2): 243–268. 
https://doi.org/10.1215/00382876-8177747 
Lamoureux, Scott, Donald L Forbes, Trevor Bell, Gavin K Manson, A C A Rudy, J Lalonde, M Brown, I R Smith, T S James, and N J Couture. 
2015. “The Impact of Climate Change on Infrastructure in the Western and Central Canadian Arctic.” In From Science to Policy in the 
Western and Central Canadian Arctic: An Integrated Regional Impact Study (IRIS) of Climate Change and Modernization, edited 
by G.A. Stern and A Gaden, 301–341. ArcticNet. Quebec, QC.
Lasserre, Frédéric. 2022. “Canadian Arctic Marine Transportation Issues, Opportunities and Challenges.” The School of Public Policy 
Publications. http://dx.doi.org/10.11575/sppp.v15i1.72626 
Lochead, David. 2021. “Not Just Iqaluit: Clyde River Experiencing Water Problems.” Nunatsiaq News, November 26. https://nunatsiaq.
com/stories/article/not-just-iqaluit-clyde-river-experiencing-water-problems/
Lovekin, Dave, Barend Dronkers, and Ben Thibault. 2016. Power Purchase Policies for Remote Indigenous Communities in Canada: 
Research on Government Policies to Support Renewable Energy Projects. Pembina Institute. https://www.pembina.org/reports/
power-purchase-policies-for-remote-indigenous-communities.pdf 
Lovekin, Dave, and Dylan Heerema. 2019. “Diesel, Renewables, and the Future of Canada’s Remote Communities.” Pembina Institute. 
https://www.pembina.org/blog/remote-microgrids-intro 
Maracle, Tobi Jeans, Glenna Tetlichi, Norma Kassi, and David Natcher. 2018. “Caribou and the Politics of Sharing.” In When the Cari­
bou Do Not Come: Indigenous Knowledge and Adaptive Management in the Western Arctic, edited by Brenda Parlee and Ken J 
Caine. UBC Press. Vancouver.
Masrur, Arif, Andrey N. Petrov, and John DeGroote. 2018. “Circumpolar Spatio-Temporal Patterns and Contributing Climatic Factors 
of Wildfire Activity in the Arctic Tundra from 2001–2015.” Environmental Research Letters 13 (1): 014019. https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/aa9a76 
Melvin, April M., Peter Larsen, Brent Boehlert, James E. Neumann, Paul Chinowsky, Xavier Espinet, Jeremy Martinich, et al. 2016. 
“Climate Change Damages to Alaska Public Infrastructure and the Economics of Proactive Adaptation.” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 114 (2): E122–E131. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1611056113 
Microsoft. 2019. “Microsoft Releases 12 Million Canadian Building Footprints as Open Data.” Microsoft Bing Blogs [Media release], 
March 13. https://blogs.bing.com/maps/2019-03/microsoft-releases-12-million-canadian-building-footprints-as-open-data 
Morse, Kathryn. 2003. The Nature of Gold: An Environmental History of the Klondike Gold Rush. University of Washington Press. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/25443112
Mortensen, Lucia, Anne Merrild Hansen, and Alexander Shestakov. 2017. “How Three Key Factors Are Driving and Challenging 
Implementation of Renewable Energy Systems in Remote Arctic Communities.” Polar Geography 40 (3): 163–185. https://doi.org/1
0.1080/1088937X.2017.1329758 
Murray, Nick. 2021. “Iqaluit’s Water Crisis Has Cost the City $1.5 Million so Far.” CBC News, November 4. https://www.cbc.ca/news/
canada/north/iqaluit-water-crisis-costs-city-1.6237366 
NAEDB (National Aboriginal Economic Development Board). 2016. Recommendations on Northern Infrastructure to Support 
Economic Development. http://www.naedb-cndea.com/reports/recommendations-on-northern-infrastructure.pdf 
Naylor, Angus W., James D. Ford, Tristan Pearce, David Fawcett, Dylan Clark, and James van Alstine. 2021. “Monitoring the Dynamic 
Vulnerability of an Arctic Subsistence Food System to Climate Change: The Case of Ulukhaktok, NT.” PLoS ONE 16 (9 September). 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0258048 
Ness, Ryan, Dylan G. Clark, Julien Bourque, Dena Coffman, and Dale Beugin. 2021. Under Water: The Costs of Climate Change for 
Canada’s Infrastructure. Canadian Climate Institute (formerly Canadian Institute for Climate Choices). https://climatechoices.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Infrastructure-English-FINAL-jan17-2022.pdf 
Neufeld, Hannah T., and Chantelle A. M. Richmond. 2017. “Impacts of Place and Social Spaces on Traditional Food Systems in South­
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
72
References
western Ontario.” International Journal of Indigenous Health 12 (1): 93–115. https://doi.org/10.18357/ijih112201716903 
NRCan (Natural Resource Canada). n.d. “Minerals Sector Employment.” https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/science-data/science-research/
earth-sciences/earth-sciences-resources/earth-sciences-federal-programs/minerals-sector-employment/16739#s2 
NTI (Nunavut Tunngavik Ink). 2020. Nunavut’s Infrastructure Gap. Iqaluit, NU. https://www.tunngavik.com/files/2020/10/2020.10.20-Nun­
avuts_Infrastructure_Gap_Report_vf.pdf 
Nutrition North. 2020. “Cost of the Revised Northern Food Basket in 2019-2020.” https://www.nutritionnorthcanada.gc.ca/eng/161
0462030814/1610462073967 
Obu, Jaroslav, Sebastian Westermann, Andreas Kääb, and Annett Bartsch. 2018. “Ground Temperature Map, 2000-2016, Northern 
Hemisphere Permafrost.” Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, PANGAEA. 
https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.888600 
Office of the Auditor General of Canada. 2017. Civil Aviation Infrastructure in the North. Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON.
O’Neill, H. Brendan, Stephen A. Wolfe, and Caroline Duchesne. 2020. Ground Ice Map of Canada. Geological Survey of Canada, Open 
File 8713, (version 1). Natural Resources Canada. https://doi.org/10.4095/326885 
Patterson, M., S. Flinn, and K. Barker. 2018. “Addressing Tuberculosis among Inuit in Canada.” Canada Communicable Disease 
Report 44 (3/4): 82–85. https://doi.org/10.14745/CCDR.V44I34A02 
PCIC (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium). 2019. “Statistically Downscaled Climate Scenarios.” University of Victoria. Victoria, B.C. 
https://www.pacificclimate.org/data/statistically-downscaled-climate-scenarios 
Qikiqtani Inuit Association. 2014. Qikiqtani Truth Commission: Community Histories 1950-1975. Inhabit Media Incorporated. Iqaluit, NU.
Radosavljevic, Boris, Hugues Lantuit, Wayne Pollard, Paul Overduin, Nicole Couture, Torsten Sachs, Veit Helm, and Michael Fritz. 2016. 
“Erosion and Flooding—Threats to Coastal Infrastructure in the Arctic: A Case Study from Herschel Island, Yukon Territory, Canada.” 
Estuaries and Coasts 39 (4): 900–915.
Ready, Elspeth, and Peter Collings. 2020. “‘All the Problems in the Community Are Multifaceted and Related to Each Other’: Inuit 
Concerns in an Era of Climate Change.” American Journal of Human Biology n/a (n/a): e23516. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajhb.23516 
Resilient Analytics. 2021. “What Is IPSS?” https://resilient-analytics.com/ipss 
Ritchie, Haley. 2021. “Na-Cho Nyak Dun Farm Wins Arctic Inspiration Prize.” Yukon News, February 27. https://www.yukon-news.com/
news/na-cho-nyak-dun-farm-wins-arctic-inspiration-prize/ 
Samson, Rachel. 2021. “Cost-Benefit Analysis Is the Wrong Tool for Tackling Climate Change.” Policy Options, November 1. 
https://policyoptions.irpp.org/magazines/november-2021/cost-benefit-analysis-is-the-wrong-tool-for-tackling-climate-change/
Sheppard, Lola, Mason White, Alex Bodkin, and Sarah Gunawan. 2017. “Eldercare Centre.” Lateral Office. http://lateraloffice.com/
NU-ELDERCARE-CENTRE-2016-17
Simonee, Natasha, Jayko Alooloo, Natalie Ann Carter, Gita Ljubicic, and Jackie Dawson. 2021. “Sila Qanuippa? (How’s the 
Weather?): Integrating Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit and Environmental Forecasting Products to Support Travel Safety around 
Pond Inlet, Nunavut in a Changing Climate.” Weather, Climate, and Society, August. https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-20-0174.1 
Smit, Barry, Ian Burton, Richard J.T. Klein, and J. Wandel. 2000. “An Anatomy of Adaptation to Climate Change and Variability.” Climatic 
Change 45 (1): 223–251. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1005661622966
Smith, Mike W., and Daniel W. Riseborough. 2002. “Climate and the Limits of Permafrost: A Zonal Analysis.” Permafrost and Peri­
glacial Processes 13 (1): 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1002/PPP.410 
Sohns, Antonia, James D. Ford, Mylene Riva, Brian Robinson, and Jan Adamowski. 2019. “Water Vulnerability in Arctic Households.” 
Arctic 72 (3): 300–316. https://doi.org/10.14430/arctic68884 
Standards Council of Canada. 2020. “Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative: Building a Climate-Resilient Future with 
Northern Standards.” https://www.scc.ca/en/nisi
Statistics Canada. 2016. “Index of Remoteness.” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/catalogue/17260001 
Statistics Canada. 2017. “2016 Census. Statistics Canada Catalogue No. 98-316-X2016001.” 2016 Census. Ottawa.
Statistics Canada. 2019. “Table 23-10-0264-01 Detailed Provincial and Territorial Transportation Expenditures, by Mode of Transpor­
tation, Transport Canada (x 1,000,000).” Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=2310026401 
Statistics Canada. 2021a. “Table 36-10-0402-01 Gross Domestic Product (GDP) at Basic Prices, by Industry, Provinces and Territories.” 
Government of Canada. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3610040201 
Statistics Canada. 2021b. “ Table 17-10-0005-01 Population Estimates on July 1st, by Age and Sex.” https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
73
References
tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1710000501 
Streicker, John. 2016. Yukon Climate Change Indicators and Key Findings 2015. Northern Climate Exchange, Yukon Research Center, 
Yukon College. https://www.yukonu.ca/sites/default/files/inline-files/Indicator_Report_Final_web.pdf 
Transport Canada. 2021. “Airports Capital Assistance Program.” Government of Canada. https://tc.canada.ca/en/programs/
airports-capital-assistance-program 
Transport Canada. 2022a. “List of Airports Owned by Transport Canada.” Government of Canada. https://tc.canada.ca/en/aviation/
operating-airports-aerodromes/list-airports-owned-transport-canada 
Transport Canada. 2022b. “List of Ports Owned by Transport Canada.” https://tc.canada.ca/en/marine-transportation/ports-harbours-an­
chorages/list-ports-owned-transport-canada 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 2015a. Canada’s Residential Schools: The Inuit and Northern Experience: The Final 
Report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada. 2015b. Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada: Calls to Action. https://
www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/british-columbians-our-governments/indigenous-people/aboriginal-peoples-documents/calls_to_
action_english2.pdf 
Underwood, Fox, and Stefania Bertazzon. 2020. “The Impacts of Climate Change on Health and Development in Canadian Arctic 
and Sub-Arctic Communities in the Twenty-First Century: A Systematic Review.” In Extreme Weather Events and Human Health, 
edited by Rais Akhtar, 27–40. Springer. Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-23773-8_3 
Uzarowski, Ludomir, Mark Musial, and Rabiah Rizvi. 2018. “Challenge of Permafrost Degradation Impact on Airport and Road Pavements.” 
In Transportation Association of Canada Conference - Innovation and Technology: Evolving Transportation, TAC 2018.
Vachon, J, V Gallant, and W Siu. 2018. “Tuberculosis in Canada, 2016.” Canada Communicable Disease Report 44 (3/4): 75–81. 
https://doi.org/10.14745/CCDR.V44I34A01 
Vogt, Nina. 2021. “Influence of Permafrost Characteristics on Vegetation Change in Yukon and Northwest Territories, Canada.” Master’s 
thesis. University of Alberta. https://doi.org/10.7939/r3-pjcm-aj83 
Wallace, Kenyon. 2019. “Beyond Frozen.” The Star, July 4. https://projects.thestar.com/climate-change-canada/nunavut/ 
Wenzel, George. 2009. “Canadian Inuit Subsistence and Ecological Instability—If the Climate Changes, Must the Inuit?” Polar 
Research 28 (1): 89–99. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-8369.2009.00098.x 
White, Mason, Ceara Allen, Nikole Couchard, and Joseph Yau. 2010. “Health Hangars.” Lateral Office. Toronto, ON. http://lateraloffice.
com/HEALTH-HANGARS-2010 
Young, T. Kue, Susan Chatwood, and Gregory P. Marchildon. 2016. “Healthcare in Canada’s North: Are We Getting Value for Money?” 
Healthcare Policy 12 (1): 59–70.
Yukon Bureau of Statistics. 2020. Yukon Employment Historical Data 2011 — 2020. Whitehorse, YT. https://yukon.ca/en/yukon-em­
ployment-historical-data-2011-2020 
Zhao, Yijie, and Laxmi Sushama. 2020. “Aircraft Takeoff Performance in a Changing Climate for Canadian Airports.” Atmosphere 11 
(4): 418. https://doi.org/10.3390/atmos11040418  
DUE NORTH: Facing the costs of climate change for Northern infrastructure
74
Introduction
MARKING THE WAY: 
How legislating climate milestones 
clarifies pathways to long-term goals 
11 WAYS TO MEASURE 
CLEAN GROWTH: 
Unlocking prosperity through progress 
on climate change, economic and 
social goals 
UNDER WATER: 
The costs of climate change for 
Canada's infrastructure
TIP OF THE ICEBERG: 
Navigating the known and unknown 
costs of climate change for Canada 
THE HEALTH COSTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE: 
How Canada can adapt, prepare, 
and save lives
CANADA’S NET ZERO FUTURE: 
Finding our way in the global transition 
MORE PUBLICATIONS FROM 
THE CLIMATE INSTITUTE:     
INFRASTRUCTURE
climateinstitute.ca
