A toolkit for understanding and addressing climate scepticism
Matthew J. Hornsey1, Stephan Lewandowsky2,3
1UQ Business School, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia 4059
2School of Psychological Science, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, BS8 1QU
3School of Psychological Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 6009
Abstract
Despite over 50 years of messaging about the reality of human-caused climate change, 
significant portions of the population remain sceptical. Furthermore, many sceptics remain 
unmoved by standard science communication strategies such as myth-busting and evidence-
building. To understand this, we examine psychological and structural reasons why climate 
change misinformation is prevalent. First, we review research on motivated reasoning: how 
interpretations of climate science are shaped by vested interests and ideologies. Second, we 
examine climate scepticism as a form of political followership. Third, we examine infrastructures 
of disinformation: the funding, lobbying, and political operatives that lend climate scepticism its 
power. Guiding this review are two principles: (1) to understand scepticism one must account 
for the interplay between individual psychologies and structural forces, and (2) global data are 
required to understand this global problem. In a spirit of optimism, we finish by describing six 
strategies for reducing the destructive influence of climate scepticism.
Decades ago, scientists reached consensus that human activities are changing the Earth’s 
climate, and that these changes will have dramatic, largely negative consequences. This 
message has been a prominent and persistent feature of the global conversation, occupying 
policy makers at all levels. Nonetheless, a sizeable – and frequently vocal – minority of the 
population continues to argue that the scientists are wrong. At the turn of the century, the 
main contrarian claim was that temperatures are not rising1. A sequence of record-breaking 
global temperatures during the next two decades forced a shift in the narrative of climate 
sceptics: yes, temperatures are rising, but human activities are not a primary cause of it2. 
Over time, new elements were added to the spectrum of arguments: that climate change 
will be benign, that the issue has been exaggerated, or that known mitigation methods are 
ineffective2,3. What unites these arguments is three features: (1) they defy the overwhelming 
scientific consensus, (2) they slow our collective ability to respond to the climate crisis, and 
(3) the number of people who hold them is too big to ignore. For example, in Australia (a 
world-leading exporter of coal) and the U.S. (the second biggest carbon emitter in the world) 
roughly a third of the population maintains that climate change is not predominantly caused 
Correspondence to: Matthew J. Hornsey.
Corresponding author: Prof. Matthew Hornsey, UQ Business School, Joyce Ackroyd Building, 37 Blair Drive, St Lucia, University of 
Queensland, m.hornsey@uq.edu.au, T: +61 412964690. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Hum Behav. 2022 November 01; 6(11): 1454–1464. doi:10.1038/s41562-022-01463-y.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
by humans4–6. Surveys from South America indicate wide variability in levels of scepticism 
across nations, but 40-50% of respondents in Honduras, Dominican Republic, and Ecuador 
agreed with the statement “Climate change is not a problem”7.
In trying to understand this phenomenon, one line of thought subscribes to a deficit 
argument: perhaps climate change scepticism is due to lack of education or scientific 
literacy. Research suggests a kernel of truth in this argument, and there is a long history 
of finding positive effects of interventions designed to address information deficits8,9. 
However, the effects of education and science literacy are relatively modest10,11, and 
“classic” science communication strategies —ones that rely on myth-busting or easily 
digestible distillations of scientific conclusions – have had limited effects on sceptics12,13. 
On that basis, scholars have long understood that facts alone would not be sufficient 
to dispel climate scepticism: what is needed is a broader set of understandings of the 
psychology of climate scepticism.
This paper aims to de-mystify two urgent questions: why are so many people sceptical 
of climate science, and what can be done about it? First, we focus on climate scepticism 
as motivated reasoning: how people’s interpretations of evidence are influenced by 
underlying vested interests, ideologies, and worldviews. Second, we examine climate 
scepticism as an intergroup phenomenon: an expression of political followership. Third, 
we examine the infrastructure of disinformation that lends climate scepticism its power: the 
funding, lobbying, and campaigning that has super-sized climate scepticism from being an 
“argument” into being a movement. In the final section —and in a spirit of optimism — we 
examine strategies for reducing the damage associated with climate scepticism.
Before beginning, we note that we use the term “scepticism” to include what some scholars 
refer to as “denial”9. The difference between terms is largely about tone and politics: 
climate science contrarians believe the term “denier” is stigmatising and resent the fact that 
it presumes an objective truth which they dispute. Many climate change scholars resent 
that the term “sceptic” is being appropriated by people with rigid and non-sceptical belief 
systems, used in opposition to a scientific method that is inherently sceptical and inquisitive 
about truth14,15. Although our sympathies lie with the latter argument, we use the term 
“climate scepticism” in this paper in acknowledgement of the fact that it has a broader and 
more flexible implication, incorporating a range of views from outright rejection of climate 
trends to more nuanced arguments about the effectiveness of mitigation measures.
Furthermore, this paper construes climate scepticism as a multi-level belief system: one 
that resides “under the skull” of individual community members but also one that is 
manufactured at the macro-level of media, industry, political operatives, and government. 
In this review we toggle between the micro- and the macro-level of understanding, but we 
emphasise that these levels are interdependent and mutually reinforcing (see Fig. 1 for an 
articulation of how collective-level and individual-level factors reinforce each other to shape 
climate scepticism).
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 2
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Climate scepticism as motivated reasoning
Classically, human reasoning was thought to operate something like this: a person gathers all 
the evidence they can find and assimilates it in an unbiased and dispassionate way. Once that 
process is complete (and only then), the person reaches a conclusion. Indeed, most people do 
their best to follow a rational process, and ensure that their reasoning process is directed by 
the goal to be accurate.
For the last 50 years, however, social science research has revealed important exceptions to 
this rule. Rather than drawing conclusions after examining data, in some cases the causal 
order is reversed: people reach conclusions first, and then select, critique, and remember 
evidence in a biased way with the goal of buttressing their conclusion (more like a cognitive 
lawyer than a cognitive scientist)16–18. When Simon and Garfunkel sang “a man hears what 
he wants to hear and disregards the rest”, they were describing motivated reasoning.
The notion of motivated reasoning – as a process of rationalising conclusions already 
reached – is transformative because it changes the critical question. Rather than asking 
“Why do people reject climate science?” the more important question becomes “Why would 
people want to reject climate science”? Any answer to that question helps understand the 
climate scepticism problem, as well as providing clues on how to solve it.
One pragmatic answer to the question is vested interests: for some, climate change is an 
“inconvenient truth” in that it implies painful sacrifice19. It is psychologically unrealistic 
to expect that anybody could appraise climate science with perfect objectivity, but it might 
be especially unrealistic when change is painful (e.g., for individuals whose livelihood is 
reliant on fossil fuel industries, or for people with a large carbon footprint that is costly to 
shrink). Rather than engaging with solutions that are painful, it may be easier to reject the 
science20 by embracing slivers of scientific dissent, clinging to baseless conspiracy theories, 
or shifting standards of proof as a function of how convenient the evidence is. This escape 
into denial from painful solutions is widely discussed in the climate change literature21, and 
the principle has also been documented elsewhere: smokers are more likely to deny science 
on the negative health effects of smoking22,23 and coffee-drinkers are more likely to deny 
science on the negative health effects of caffeine24.
For others, climate change is an inconvenient truth not because it costs them materially, 
but because the implications of the science upset their ideological worldview20,25,26. Meta-
analyses of the predictors of accepting anthropogenic climate change10 show that the biggest 
correlates are not education (r = .12, i.e., modest positive association between education 
and acceptance), self-reported science literacy (r = .18) or personal experiences of extreme 
weather events (r = .05), but rather values-driven ideologies that ostensibly have nothing 
to do with science or climate. This includes where one stands on the extent to which 
individual freedoms should be prioritised over the interests of the collective (r = -.28, 
i.e., negative association between prioritising individual freedoms and accepting climate 
science), tolerance for status and power hierarchies (r = -.26) and belief in the sanctity of 
the free market (r = -.30). These associations likely reflect the fact that mitigating climate 
change is often construed as requiring Big Government solutions designed to regulate the 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 3
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
freedoms of individuals and businesses27,28. Rather than aligning with solutions people find 
ideologically objectionable, the temptation is to reject science that suggests these solutions 
are necessary (a phenomenon referred to as “solution aversion”)20.
Climate scepticism as political followership
Climate change beliefs are situated within broader intergroup contexts, reflecting and 
creating societal schisms29. The contested, “them-against-us” nature of the climate change 
debate exists in many forms, but the societal faultline that has attracted by far the most 
research attention (and seems deepest, particularly in fossil fuel reliant countries) is around 
political identity.
In a study that was conducted well before political polarisation became a zeitgeist topic, 
Cohen30 showed political partisans in the U.S. a draft welfare policy. Although all 
participants received the same policy, they were told it was drafted by either Republicans or 
Democrats. Participants responded as one might expect: when the welfare policy was drafted 
by their own political ingroup they evaluated it more positively than when the same policy 
was drafted by the outgroup. What was striking, though, was the magnitude of the effects. 
Depending on whose policy they thought they were reading, participants veered dramatically 
between presuming the policy would be effective or ineffective; moral or immoral.
The notion that perceptions of reality are filtered through the lens of group loyalties 
is not surprising to social identity theorists31,32. When intergroup identities are salient, 
people internalise the “party line” through processes that are both cognitive (psychological 
assimilation to ingroup attitudes and values; psychological contrasting with those of the 
outgroup) and motivational (the desire to preserve a positive identity that is distinct from 
rival outgroups). So when a scientific issue gets drawn into the culture wars – one that 
differentiates between political identities – that issue can get sucked into a self-reinforcing 
feedback loop of political polarisation. Once this has occurred, beliefs may reflect more of 
an identity-expressive motive than an accuracy motive, and so “facts” become rubbery and 
subjective.
In some countries, climate science has had the misfortune of being drawn into these 
culture wars. In their historical analysis of the scrambling of climate science in the U.S., 
Oreskes and Conway33 highlighted that the original contrarians were nuclear scientists who 
themselves had strong conservative (anti-communist) attitudes. Their minority views were 
amplified by conservative think tanks, which in turn were financially supported by elements 
of the fossil fuel industry34. Drawn to the ideological implications of climate scepticism – a 
commitment to free markets, economic growth, and individual freedoms – the message was 
adopted by some conservative politicians and by elements of the conservative media.
By the 2000s, a degree of climate scepticism became “baked in” to the cluster of arguments 
that describe and prescribe one’s political loyalties as conservative in some countries. In 
the 2015 Republican primaries, only a minority of the candidates were on the record 
as accepting the reality of human-caused climate change35. The winner, Donald Trump, 
explicitly embraced the language of climate denial, referring to climate change as a hoax 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 4
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
invented by China36. In Australia, two conservative Prime Ministers in the 2010s expressed 
their distaste for action on climate, either verbally (describing climate science as “absolute 
crap”) or symbolically (carrying a chunk of coal into Parliament and admonishing MPs 
not to be afraid of it). Within weeks of taking office, Brazil’s conservative President Jair 
Bolsonaro dismantled several government divisions dedicated to climate change and named 
openly climate-sceptical Cabinet members37.
It should not be surprising, then, that political conservatism is one of the most-replicated 
and most-discussed predictors of climate scepticism in the literature4,25,38–42. Meta-analyses 
show that the biggest demographic predictor of climate scepticism is whether people plan 
to vote for the Left or the Right; far more so than age, sex, race, and education10. People’s 
beliefs and attitudes about climate science became a shorthand way of signalling political 
loyalty. This raises the possibility that people are not always making up their mind about 
climate science themselves but are rather “taking their cues” from elites within the political 
party with which they identify.
Consistent with this notion, longitudinal analyses showed that climate concern in the U.S. 
shifted reliably as a function of elite cues, such as whether a respondent’s Congressional 
representative had joined the Tea Party Caucus, press releases on climate change issued 
by Republicans and Democrats, and Fox News coverage43-46. In Australia, data from 
2009-2019 show that climate scepticism ebbed and flowed reliably as a function of political 
support for conservative political parties4.
There are three interesting sidenotes to the literature on political identification and climate 
scepticism. First, as elaborated later, there are dramatic differences internationally in the 
extent to which political conservatism is associated with people’s climate change beliefs, 
and in fact the relationship is robust in only a subset of nations.
Second, in the U.S. in particular, evidence for political polarisation is greater among 
respondents who are more educated and science-literate47-52. On one hand, this seems 
surprising: one might think that education and science literacy would give people the 
analytic skills to look beyond group loyalties and appraise evidence objectively. But from 
a psychological point of view, the pattern is not so surprising. Equipped with the scientific 
nous to know how to find convenient truths – and to dismiss inconvenient truths – the 
highly educated are better equipped to engage in motivated reasoning, curating their own 
informational reality53. Furthermore, the highly educated are more attuned to ideological 
and policy differences between political parties, making them more sensitive to elite cues48.
Third, historical analyses suggest that the conservative turn against climate science (and 
science in general) is a relatively recent phenomenon. In the early 1970s, conservatives 
in the U.S. had greater trust in science than liberals11 and in the 1990s, highly educated 
conservatives were more likely than highly educated liberals to believe there was scientific 
consensus about anthropogenic climate change52. After climate change started to be 
represented in the media as a partisan issue, both trends dramatically reversed40,54,55. To 
further understand this process, one needs to move beyond the notion of climate scepticism 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 5
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
being solely an individual’s failure to appraise evidence, and to examine the extent to which 
individuals are responding to organized campaigns of disinformation.
Climate scepticism as organized disinformation
The European landscape
There is overwhelming evidence that disinformation about climate change is disseminated in 
a co-ordinated manner through well-funded, often global networks. Several recent reviews 
provided detailed analyses of the American landscape9,56. Highlights of this landscape 
include the findings that: (a) most environmentally sceptical books are published or financed 
by conservative think tanks57,58, (b) funding of climate-denying think tanks and advocacy 
organizations is approximately $900 million annually59, and (c) the fossil fuel industry was 
aware of the anticipated consequences of climate change as early as 1965 but continued 
to deny its existence in public for decades, as revealed by a comparison of ExxonMobil’s 
internal and external communications60.
By comparison, there has been less research on organized climate denial in Europe and 
we know of no reviews of those efforts. Analysing contrarian efforts in Europe is of 
particular interest because of the striking differences between the American and European 
political scenes and public opinion landscapes. Although there is considerable heterogeneity 
among European countries, these societies are generally less politically polarised than 
the U.S. In most European countries, all mainstream political parties subscribe to the 
scientific consensus on climate change, and at least until recently, rejection of climate 
science represented a “fringe” opinion61. This is particularly true in Germany, Europe’s 
biggest economy, which is considered a leader in the energy transition from fossil fuels to 
renewables62.
One consequence of the broad acceptance of climate science across the European 
mainstream is that explicit denial groups are more marginalised63. This marginalisation 
has softened somewhat since the recent electoral successes of far-right parties across Europe, 
which has created space for the public expression of climate scepticism. For example, the 
fraction of the German public who disagreed that the climate is changing has risen from 7% 
in 2011 to 16% in 201761. This increase coincided with the success of fossil fuel groups in 
removing feed-in tariffs for solar energy in the second half of the 2010s62. Intriguingly, the 
key players engaged in lobbying against climate-friendly policies (such as feed-in tariffs) 
tend to nominally embrace the reality of climate change and limit their arguments to 
politics and policies64. This is unlike the U.S., where organizations that oppose specific 
climate policies are also typically rejecting and misrepresenting the science65. Rejection and 
misrepresentation of science in Europe is confined to a small but vocal set of organizations 
whose influence is modest63.
One such organization, the German-based EIKE, is a think tank with close links to the 
Heartland Institute in the U.S. and to the far-right AfD party in Germany61. Although 
EIKE claims to be funded only through voluntary contributions, it refuses to reveal funders 
and several investigations have pointed at financial support from equivalent American 
organizations66. EIKE has contributed to hearings about climate science in the German 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 6
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
parliament at the invitation of the AfD, thus establishing a “counter-public” by creating the 
appearance of a scientific debate using “expert” testimony. Analysis of EIKE’s public-facing 
outputs (more than 1,000 texts between 2015-2018) reveals that most texts seek to discredit 
scientists and climate campaigners so as to undermine their message66.
The strategies employed by EIKE are mirrored by similar organizations across Europe. 
An examination of 8 major European think tanks in 6 countries found that they used 
counter-frames that mainly questioned the science of climate change (50% of the time) 
and the legitimacy of the IPCC (30%)63. The aggressive rhetoric of these European 
organizations parallels that of their American counterparts, although unlike the U.S. their 
political influence is limited61.
Political influence in Europe is instead exercised by institutions that, like most of their 
corporate funders, at least pay lip service to the reality of climate change and the need 
for mitigation67. Instead of denying the science, public-relations and lobbying activities 
therefore focus on diluting effective climate policies or cloaking climate-harming activities 
with a green sheen67. For example, the gas industry has successfully positioned itself as a 
“transition fuel”, which the European Union has mainly accepted. Similarly, carbon capture 
technologies have attracted considerable public funding even though they have yet to deliver 
meaningful climate mitigation67.
At a cross-European level, Plehwe62,64 has identified the Center for European Policy as 
a notable player in eroding confidence in the transition to renewable energy. This Center 
focuses on European stipulations and was instrumental in creating doubt about the legality 
of (the highly successful) feed-in tariffs for solar energy in Germany. Plehwe62 lists several 
other transnational institutions that pursue industry-friendly positions to undermine the 
transition to renewables. Several of those organizations are part of the global Atlas network, 
which is also at the core of American climate sceptic organisations56.
In Germany, marginalisation of climate scepticism and sizable opposition to fossil-fuel 
driven capitalism has forced the energy industry and its allies to move away from 
pure status-quo protection and embrace modest reformism62. This position nominally 
acknowledges the need to transition to renewable energy but in reality seeks to slow the 
transition by opposing effective policies. The organisations involved in those efforts keep 
their distance from explicit denial organisations and the far right, and instead court or 
co-opt reputable academic institutions to develop alternative policy proposals and narratives. 
Those narratives claim to improve the transition with greater efficiency and savings in 
cost (e.g., by introducing market-based mechanisms rather than set feed-in tariffs) but in 
effect have slowed the transition for several years64. This is not surprising given that purely 
market-based solutions have a history of being less effective than their proponents claim68.
Global perspectives on climate scepticism
As reflected in Fig. 2, there are wide differences globally in the extent to which members of 
different nations perceive climate change to represent a threat to their country69. Despite 
this, the vast majority of research on climate scepticism has emerged from so-called 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 7
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
WEIRD samples (i.e., from Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich, Democratic nations), 
with reviews revealing that approximately half of studies were conducted in the U.S., UK., 
and Australia alone10,70. This disproportionate emphasis on the highly industrialised West 
may simply reflect a broader problem within the social sciences, where non-Western voices 
remain under-represented. Another possibility is that, because Western wealth construction 
is one of the biggest contributors to climate change, researchers considered the Western 
response to the challenge as particularly critical to the construction of effective solutions. 
However, given that it is in the Global South that the effects of climate change will 
be most severe, the marginalisation of non-WEIRD voices in the literature is especially 
unfortunate71.
Having said that, there is important work that has taken a cross-national approach to 
understanding climate change attitudes, and in so doing provides a more global perspective 
on this global problem. Early commentary in this space focused on the so-called post-
materialism hypothesis: the notion that richer nations are the ones that are most likely to 
embrace progressive social movements such as environmentalism because they are more 
likely to have satisfied their material needs for physical and economic security72. Contrary 
to this hypothesis, some international surveys suggest that concern about climate change is 
greater in nations with relatively low GDP per capita73,74 and with relatively low per capita 
carbon emissions75.
Another approach to examining international patterns relies on content analyses of print 
media. These analyses suggest that it is only in a handful of countries that the media 
had distorted the scientific consensus around climate change into an ideologically charged 
“debate”: most strikingly in Australia, the U.S., and the U.K.76,77. Newspaper analysis of 
27 nations indicated that media coverage of climate change (regardless of whether it was 
sceptical or not) was particularly pronounced in fossil fuel-producing nations that had made 
commitments under the Kyoto Protocol77. In other words, media coverage of the issue 
appears to be greatest among the nations for which there are strongest vested interests at 
play (i.e., the economic costs of decarbonisation are particularly acute).
Fossil fuel reliance also appears to be a factor in understanding the role of political ideology 
in shaping climate scepticism. In a correlational study among 25 nations, the relationship 
between conservatism and climate scepticism was strongest in the U.S. and second strongest 
in Australia78. For several countries – such as Brazil and Canada – the effects were still 
reliable but weaker and more variable. But for approximately three-quarters of nations 
(including China) the relationship was not statistically reliable at all. Interestingly, the role 
of conservatism in determining climate attitudes increased in lockstep with per capita carbon 
emissions of the nation, an index that is strongly geared toward fossil fuel production. This 
suggests that the link between political conservatism and climate scepticism only emerges 
when the stakes of decarbonising are high.
Secondary analyses of international data sets have also revealed interesting patterns 
involving education. In nations who are low- to mid-ranking on the Human Development 
Index there is a “common sense” education effect such that more educated respondents 
are less climate sceptical. In countries ranking highly in the Human Development Index, 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 8
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
however, this relationship is attenuated by right-wing ideology, suggesting that ideology 
trumps education51. This adds to the general global picture; that in less affluent nations 
(and/or in nations with a less active fossil fuel industry), acceptance of climate change is less 
prone to ideological influence.
As datasets become more global over time, it is inevitable that these broad-brush 
understandings of international patterns will be supplemented by more nuanced, country-
specific analyses. One interesting pattern already emerging is that conventional left-right 
political identification predicts climate change attitudes more in Western European countries 
than in Central and Eastern European countries79-81. Analysis of former Communist 
countries, in particular, indicates that not all left-wing contexts are aligned with pro-
environmental orientations82.
In seeking new, global understandings of how political ideology might influence climate 
change attitudes, some researchers have focused on the international rise of populism. 
Although these analyses have typically focused on right-wing populist parties, the notion 
of populism transcends left-right distinctions to describe a political worldview defined by 
institutional distrust and a binary good-versus-evil division between “ordinary people” (who 
are pure and virtuous) and malevolent “elites” or the “establishment” (corrupt, amoral). To 
the extent that scientists or environmentalists are characterised as elites, this worldview 
provides a platform for discrediting climate science, often with the help of elaborate 
conspiracy theories. These dynamics have been described across several case studies (e.g., 
in Scandinavia)83 and empirically, it is well-established that scepticism is higher among 
supporters of European right-wing populist parties84,85. Analyses in Austria confirm that the 
link between populism and climate scepticism is explained in part by generalised distrust of 
science and political institutions86.
Interventions for reducing damage caused by climate scepticism
In this review we canvassed (a) individual factors that render people susceptible to rejecting 
climate science, and (b) organized dissemination of misinformation and contrarian lobbying 
efforts. Any interventions must target those two levels. Although the solutions to politically-
motivated opposition must also be political—and hence is largely beyond our scope—the 
recommendation by Michaels and Ainger67 that the revolving door between lobbyists 
and governments or the EU must be shut seems an obvious first step. The World Health 
Organization successfully created an explicit firewall between health policy making and the 
tobacco industry in 200767, and the creation of a similar firewall between fossil-fuel interests 
and climate policy making is an advisable political goal for the 2020s.
Other structural interventions are already underway. In some carbon-intensive sectors, 
reluctant organizations are being corralled into action by international trade regulations 
such as the European Climate Law. For governments and fossil-fuel industries, there is 
the growing threat of climate change-related litigation87, with everything that implies both 
legally and in terms of personal and corporate legacies. Powerful activist investors are 
creating real change from within organizations to improve environmental performance88 
and there is evidence that firms meeting expectations around environmental responsibility 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 9
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
perform better and receive more investment money89. Note that these drivers of change are 
not necessarily driven by a sea-change in community attitudes and do not rely on the notion 
of “converting” sceptics to the cause. Rather, they are the results of politicians, regulators, 
judges, and policy makers wielding hard power.
Turning to the individual level, interventions range from the long-term mission to build 
critical literacy in the population90 to a variety of short-term communication techniques. 
Because climate change is a time-sensitive crisis, long-term educational efforts are 
insufficient and scholars have been forced to think flexibly about strategies to reduce the 
damage associated with climate scepticism, both before and after misinformation takes 
seed in people’s minds. Below, we highlight six strategies for doing so (see Table 1 for a 
summary). Note that we only consider communication strategies that adhere to the TARES 
principles of ethical communication91; that is, the strategy must exhibit Truthfulness of the 
message, Authenticity of the messenger, Respect for the recipient, Equity and fairness of 
communication, and Social responsibility for the common good.
Appealing to sceptics through value-based frames
As discussed earlier, many people embrace climate scepticism as an expression of 
ideological concern rather than as a result of cognitive reflection on evidence or arguments. 
Because sceptics nonetheless give the impression that they are talking about evidence (albeit 
in a flawed way92,93) the communication landscape is confusing and requires an indirect 
approach. Rather than focusing on the “surface” attitudes and beliefs that sceptics express – 
discussing solar flares and so forth – scholars have argued that it is preferable to attend to 
the underlying motivations for wanting to embrace those arguments (the so-called “attitude 
roots”)19. If climate messages are aligned with sceptics’ underlying attitude roots, they are 
more likely to be listened to, and more likely to shape attitudes and behaviour. Strategies like 
this have been described using various terms such as values-based frames, attitude matching, 
and jiu jitsu persuasion.
Given that climate scepticism has been reliably traced back to conservative worldviews 
in fossil-fuel reliant countries such as the U.S., U.K., and Australia, the implication is 
simple: when addressing sceptics, the need to mitigate climate change might be best framed 
in a way that resonates with conservative worldviews. Consistent with this, sceptics are 
indeed more likely to embrace the need for pro-environmental action when the fight against 
climate change is expressed using traditionally conservative values: as a way of protecting 
national security, as a way of protecting a traditional way of life, as a patriotic act, or as 
an expression of individual responsibility94–100. Conservatives are also more likely to accept 
climate science if the solutions are designed to be compatible with free markets20,101. Once 
convinced that mitigation does not necessarily require the Big Government regulations to 
which they ideologically object, conservatives’ motivation to reject the science diminishes.
Appealing to sceptics through co-benefits
Fundamentally, sceptics do not accept that humans are the primary cause of climate change, 
so messages that focus on the importance of action – or the dangers of inaction – can 
be easily dismissed. Furthermore, attempts to explain the link between human action and 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 10
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
climate change are likely to meet the ideological headwinds just discussed. This has led 
some scholars to advocate for a suite of arguments that do not rely on accepting that 
climate change is real and important102,103. According to this approach, positive change can 
flow by articulating the co-benefits of working to mitigate climate change, independently 
of whether these efforts actually influence the climate. Examples of these co-benefits 
include improving social conditions (e.g., promoting green jobs, stimulating technological 
innovation, maintaining public health, reducing pollution)104–109 and promoting a smarter 
and more benevolent society110.
A 24-nation dataset from all inhabited continents confirmed that perceptions of these 
co-benefits are strong predictors of willingness to act pro-environmentally, and that the 
relationships are similarly strong regardless of whether participants believed climate change 
was an important issue102. Compared to traditional evidence-based messages, co-benefit 
frames tend to be at least as effective – and often more effective - in shifting pro-
environmental intentions among self-reported sceptics110,111.
Leveraging climate-friendly actors within the conservative movement
The above strategies focus on optimising the content of climate messages. However, 
research on communication in intergroup contexts suggest that the messenger is often more 
important than nuances of the message112. Specifically, people are influenced by ingroup 
members more so than by outsiders who deliver the same message113. This is largely 
because people work from the assumption that insiders have their best interests at heart, 
whereas outsiders do not114.
An implication of this for the current analysis is that sceptics will be more influenced by 
messengers that share salient identities with them: rural people will be more influenced 
by rural messengers, conservatives will be more influenced by conservatives, and so forth. 
This is a challenging message for many climate activists because it underscores how their 
identification as “green” or “left” can be enough to render their voices impotent when 
it comes to influencing sceptics. It is also threatening because it emphasises how little 
evidence, sophisticated argument and impassioned advocacy can matter if one finds oneself 
on the other side of a polarised intergroup debate114.
The optimistic upside of this equation, however, is that there are non-traditional climate 
activists – such as the conservative-leaning, U.S.-based Climate Leadership Council – 
for whom real influence among conservatives is within reach. In a field study, Goldberg 
and colleagues115 tested the effectiveness of a one-month advertising campaign about 
climate change to potential voters in the U.S. states of Missouri and Georgia. The videos 
were crafted to appeal to Republicans, drawing on spokespeople with strong conservative 
credentials who referred to action on climate change as consistent with their conservative 
values. The campaign increased Republicans’ understanding of the existence and causes of 
climate change by several percentage points, providing evidence that the strategy is effective 
in the field as well as in the laboratory.
Leveraging climate-friendly actors within the conservative movement not only has the 
power to influence traditionally hard-to-reach populations, but it also has the potential to 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 11
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
reconfigure the intergroup dynamic that has done so much damage to our ability to respond 
to climate change in the first place. Survey experiments in Australia revealed that when 
partisans learn that opposing leaders converged on a common policy proposal, it had a 
harmonising effect on respondents’ climate-related attitudes, leading to greater consensus 
and less polarisation (i.e., people took their “elite cues”116). Extracting climate science from 
the culture wars would be game-changing in terms of our ability to unite in the face of the 
climate crisis117.
Establishing norms
The term “norms” refers to two related perceptions: the perception that society (or important 
others) want you to behave in a certain way and the perception that the population (or 
important others) actually behave in a certain way. Both sets of norms – the prescriptive 
and descriptive – are consistently associated with behaviour, particularly when they align118. 
This is partly because norms increase conformity pressures around a behaviour: people fear 
judgement or negative attention for behaving in a non-normative way. Relatedly, norms 
signal whether a behaviour is the correct course of action; a form of social proof (the 
“consensus implies correctness” heuristic119). Once established, norms constrain behaviour 
in such a subtle and automatic way that people often remain unaware of their influence120. 
For example, one field study showed that normative information influenced energy-efficient 
behaviours more so than appeals to values and to economic self-interest, even though 
participants themselves reported the normative appeal as being relatively ineffective121.
Examined in a diverse range of contexts – both in the laboratory and in the field – norms 
have become a favoured tool for shaping public behaviour to solve collective challenges122. 
In relation to climate change, norms are a strong predictor of pro-environmental 
intentions123,124, and framing normative information in particular ways can influence 
people’s willingness to behave pro-environmentally121,125–131. Relevant to the current 
analysis, norms have power because they appeal to our social nature – the universal need 
to belong and be liked – and so do not rely on an internalised sense of concern for the 
environment.
Importantly, norm-based interventions can also be effective beyond the individual level. For 
example, elected officials tend to underestimate the climate beliefs of their constituents, 
so correcting those misperceptions (e.g., with survey data) can be a helpful intervention. 
Correcting inaccurate perceptions about what the public thinks has proved useful in the past 
in reducing distorted perceptions of polarisation132.
Consensus messaging
Using descriptive norms in communication relies on the existence of a popular consensus 
that can be leveraged. In cases where there is no community consensus, or the 
prevailing consensus runs counter to the intended message, it may instead be necessary 
to communicate the consensus in a specific reference group, such as scientists or experts. 
In the case of climate change, messaging would emphasise the fact that 97% of climate 
scientists agree on the fundamental principles of anthropogenic climate change133.
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 12
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Some theorists have invested considerable hope in this 97% heuristic as a persuasion tool, 
describing it as a gateway belief: should communicators successfully communicate this fact, 
concern for the environment and urgency to enact change should follow. There is some 
support for this: in experiments, those who are exposed to the 97% heuristic are typically 
more likely than those in control conditions to accept the existence of human-caused climate 
change and, in turn, to support policy interventions28,134–137. Two recent meta-analyses 
have confirmed the power of highlighting consensus among (climate) experts138,139, and 
consensus information has been shown to be effective among sceptics28,140.
Embedding climate-friendly actions in social practice
Much behavioural science works on the implicit assumption that individual actions are 
a result of mindful consideration; a planned process during which costs and benefits are 
consciously weighed. However, many behaviours occur while we are in an automatic 
and unthinking state. In the pragmatic language of “nudging” and consumer psychology, 
this is referred to as habit141,142. In practice theory (which emerged from sociology and 
anthropology), a similar point is made about the routinised nature of action but with an 
ideological overlay. From this perspective, asking for individual change is unrealistic at best 
and sinister at worst; a process of “responsibilisation”, cultivated as a neoliberal strategy to 
deflect attention from the structural causes of climate change, which can ultimately cause 
resentment143,144.
Regardless, both perspectives converge to make a similar point: positive action is more likely 
if those actions are embedded in a network of social practices, so that it becomes part of the 
flow of one’s day and part of one’s social life. As a practical example of what this means, 
consider the example of recycling. When recycling is inconvenient, the decision to do so 
will be based on a conscious algorithm of costs and benefits, one that is partly captive to 
identity. But when recycling is made readily available and becomes routinised in daily life, it 
becomes a practice that sits outside of values, identities, and cost-benefit analyses.
Conclusion
The first scientific article to draw connections between fossil fuel combustion and climate 
change dates back more than 120 years145 and it has been over 30 years since George Bush 
Snr. said: “Those who think we are powerless to do anything about the greenhouse effect 
forget about the 'White House effect'; as President, I intend to do something about it.”146 
However, neither scientific knowledge nor political rhetoric has thus far resulted in global 
commitments that are sufficient to address the climate crisis.
We have reviewed some of the reasons for this gridlock. The politically motivated operations 
to undermine or delay climate mitigation cannot be undone by better communication tools 
alone. However, we have shown that a suite of ethical communication techniques is at our 
disposal to accelerate any meaningful climate mitigation that might arise from political 
solutions to the political problem of climate scepticism.
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 13
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Dieter Plehwe for helpful discussions and pointers to relevant literature.
Acknowledgement of Funding
MH acknowledges funding support from the Australian Research Council Discovery scheme (DP220101566).
SL acknowledges financial support from the European Research Council (ERC Advanced Grant 101020961 
PRODEMINFO) and the Humboldt Foundation in Germany through a research award.
References
1. Washington, H, Cook, J. Climate change denial: Heads in the sand. Routledge; 2011. 
2. Whitmarsh L. Scepticism and uncertainty about climate change: Dimensions, determinants and 
change over time. Global Environmental Change. 2011; 21: 690–700. 
3. Capstick SB, Pidgeon NF. What is climate change scepticism? Examination of the concept using a 
mixed methods study of the UK public. Global Environmental Change. 2014; 24: 389–401. 
4. Hornsey MJ, Chapman CM, Humphrey JE. Climate skepticism decreases when the planet gets 
hotter and conservative support wanes. Global Environmental Change. 2022; 74 102492 
5. Hamilton LC, Hartter J, Lemcke-Stampone M, Moore DW, Safford TG. Tracking public beliefs 
about anthropogenic climate change. PLOS ONE. 2015; 10 e0138208 [PubMed: 26422694] 
6. Egan PJ, Mullin M. Climate change: US public opinion. Annual Review of Political Science. 2017; 
20: 209–227. 
7. Polino, C. Cambio climático y opinión pública en América Latina. Buenos Aires: 2019. 57–66. 
8. Ecker UKH, et al. The psychological drivers of misinformation belief and its resistance to 
correction. Nature Reviews Psychology. 2022; 1: 13–29. 
9. Lewandowsky S. Climate change, disinformation, and how to combat it. Annual Review of Public 
Health. 2021; 42: 1–21. 
10. Hornsey MJ, Harris EA, Bain PG, Fielding KS. Meta-analyses of the determinants and outcomes 
of belief in climate change. Nature Climate Change. 2016; 6: 622–626. 
11. Gauchat G. Politicization of science in the public sphere: A study of public trust in the United 
States, 1974 to 2010. American Sociological Review. 2012; 77: 167–187. 
12. Diamond E, Bernauer T, Mayer F. Does providing scientific information affect climate change and 
GMO policy preferences of the mass public? Insights from survey experiments in Germany and 
the United States. Environmental Politics. 2020; 29: 1199–1218. 
13. Hart PS, Nisbet EC. Boomerang effects in science communication: How motivated reasoning 
and identity cues amplify opinion polarization about climate mitigation policies. Communication 
Research. 2012; 39: 701–723. 
14. Lewandowsky S, Mann ME, Brown NJL, Friedman H. Science and the public: Debate, denial, and 
skepticism. Journal of Social and Political Psychology. 2016; 4: 537–553. 
15. Ellerton P. Climate sceptic or climate denier? It's not that simple and here's 
why. 2019. <https://theconversation.com/climate-sceptic-or-climate-denier-its-not-that-simple-and-
heres-why-117913>
16. Lewandowsky S, Oberauer K. Motivated rejection of science. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science. 2016; 25: 217–222. 
17. Kunda Z. The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological Bulletin. 1990; 108: 480–498. 
[PubMed: 2270237] 
18. Haidt J. The emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to moral judgment. 
Psychological Review. 2001; 108: 814–834. [PubMed: 11699120] 
19. Hornsey MJ, Fielding KS. Attitude roots and Jiu Jitsu persuasion: Understanding and overcoming 
the motivated rejection of science. American Psychologist. 2017; 72: 459–473. [PubMed: 
28726454] 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 14
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
20. Campbell TH, Kay AC. Solution aversion: On the relation between ideology and motivated 
disbelief. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2014; 107: 809–824. [PubMed: 25347128] 
21. Hornsey MJ, Fielding KS. Understanding (and reducing) inaction on climate change. Social Issues 
and Policy Review. 2020; 14: 3–35. 
22. Kassarjian HH, Cohen JB. Cognitive dissonance and consumer behavior. California Management 
Review. 1965; 8: 55–64. 
23. Mata A, Sherman SJ, Ferreira MB, Mendonça C. Strategic numeracy: Self-serving reasoning about 
health statistics. Basic and Applied Social Psychology. 2015; 37: 165–173. 
24. Kunda Z. Motivated inference - self-serving generation and evaluation of causal theories. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology. 1987; 53: 636–647. 
25. Lewandowsky S, Oberauer K. Worldview-motivated rejection of science and the norms of science. 
Cognition. 2021; 215 104820 [PubMed: 34218027] 
26. Kahan DM. Ideology, motivated reasoning, and cognitive reflection. Judgment & Decision 
Making. 2013; 8: 407–424. 
27. Heath Y, Gifford R. Free-market ideology and environmental degradation: The case of belief in 
global climate change. Environment and Behavior. 2006; 38: 48–71. 
28. Lewandowsky S, Gignac GE, Vaughan S. The pivotal role of perceived scientific consensus in 
acceptance of science. Nature Climate Change. 2013; 3: 399–404. 
29. Fielding KS, Hornsey MJ. A social identity analysis of climate change and environmental attitudes 
and behaviors: Insights and opportunities. Frontiers in Psychology. 2016; 7 
30. Cohen GL. Party over policy: The dominating impact of group influence on political beliefs. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2003; 85: 808–822. [PubMed: 14599246] 
31. Turner, JC. Social influence. Thomson Brooks / Cole Publishing Co; 1991. 
32. Hornsey MJ. Social identity theory and self-categorization theory: A historical review. Social and 
Personality Psychology Compass. 2008; 2: 204–222. 
33. Oreskes, N, Conway, EM. Merchants of doubt. Bloomsbury Publishing; 2010. 
34. Farrell J. Corporate funding and ideological polarization about climate change. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences. 2016; 113: 92–97. 
35. Kaplan R, Uchimiya E. Where the 2016 Republican candidates stand on climate change. 2015. < 
www.cbsnews.com/news/where-the-2016-republican-candidates-stand-on-climate-change>
36. Matthews D. Donald Trump has tweeted climate change skepticism 115 times Here’s all 
of it. 2017. <https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/6/1/15726472/trump-tweets-global-
warming-paris-climate-agreement>
37. Escobar H. Brazil’s new President has scientists worried Here’s why. 2019. <https://
www.science.org/content/article/brazil-s-new-president-has-scientists-worried-here-s-why>
38. Fielding KS, Head BW, Laffan W, Western M, Hoegh-Guldberg O. Australian politicians’ beliefs 
about climate change: political partisanship and political ideology. Environmental Politics. 2012; 
21: 712–733. 
39. Dunlap RE. Clarifying anti-reflexivity: conservative opposition to impact science and scientific 
evidence. Environmental Research Letters. 2014; 9 021001 
40. Dunlap RE, McCright AM, Yarosh JH. The political divide on climate change: Partisan 
polarization widens in the U.S. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development. 
2016; 58: 4–23. 
41. McCright AM, Dunlap RE. Cool dudes: The denial of climate change among conservative white 
males in the United States. Global Environmental Change. 2011; 21: 1163–1172. 
42. McCright AM, Dunlap RE. Anti-reflexivity: The American conservative movement’s success in 
undermining climate science and policy. Theory Culture & Society. 2010; 27: 100–133. 
43. Brulle RJ, Carmichael J, Jenkins JC. Shifting public opinion on climate change: An empirical 
assessment of factors influencing concern over climate change in the U.S., 2002-2010. Climatic 
Change. 2012; 114: 169–188. 
44. Carmichael JT, Brulle RJ. Elite cues, media coverage, and public concern: An integrated path 
analysis of public opinion on climate change, 2001-2013. Environmental Politics. 2017; 26: 232–
252. 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 15
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
45. Mildenberger M, Leiserowitz A. Public opinion on climate change: Is there an economy-
environment tradeoff? Environmental Politics. 2017; 26: 801–824. 
46. Gustafson A, et al. The development of partisan polarization over the Green New Deal. Nature 
Climate Change. 2019; 9: 940–944. 
47. Kahan DM, et al. The polarizing impact of science literacy and numeracy on perceived climate 
change risks. Nature Climate Change. 2012; 2: 732–735. 
48. Drummond C, Fischhoff B. Individuals with greater science literacy and education have more 
polarized beliefs on controversial science topics. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2017; 114: 9587–9592. 
49. Hamilton LC. Education, politics and opinions about climate change evidence for interaction 
effects. Climatic Change. 2011; 104: 231–242. 
50. Ballew MT, Pearson AR, Goldberg MH, Rosenthal SA, Leiserowitz A. Does socioeconomic 
status moderate the political divide on climate change? The roles of education, income, and 
individualism. Global Environmental Change. 2020; 60 102024 
51. Czarnek G, Kossowska M, Szwed P. Right-wing ideology reduces the effects of education on 
climate change beliefs in more developed countries. Nature Climate Change. 2021; 11: 9–13. 
52. Tesler M. Elite domination of public doubts about climate change (not evolution). Political 
Communication. 2018; 35: 306–326. 
53. Hornsey MJ. The role of worldviews in shaping how people appraise climate change. Current 
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences. 2021; 42: 36–41. 
54. McCright AM, Dunlap RE. The politicization of climate change and polarization in the American 
public’s views of global warming, 2001-2010. The Sociological Quarterly. 2011; 52: 155–194. 
55. Jones JM. Democratic, Republican confidence in science diverges. 2021. <https://news.gallup.com/
poll/352397/democratic-republican-confidence-science-diverges.aspx>
56. Brulle RJ, Hall G, Loy L, Schell-Smith K. Obstructing action: Foundation funding and US climate 
change counter-movement organizations. Climatic Change. 2021; 166: 17. 
57. Dunlap RE, Jacques PJ. Climate change denial books and conservative think tanks: Exploring the 
connection. American Behavioral Scientist. 2013; 57: 1–33. 
58. Jacques PJ, Dunlap RE, Freeman M. The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and 
environmental scepticism. Environmental Politics. 2008; 17: 349–385. 
59. Brulle RJ. Institutionalizing delay: Foundation funding and the creation of U.S. climate change 
counter-movement organizations. Climatic Change. 2014; 122: 681–694. 
60. Supran G, Oreskes N. Assessing ExxonMobil’s climate change communications (1977-2014). 
Environmental Research Letters. 2017; 12 084019 
61. Ruser, A. Civil Society: Concepts, Challenges, Contexts. Hoelscher, M, List, R, Ruser, A, Toepler, 
S, editors. Springer; 2022. 349–358. 
62. Plehwe D. Reluctant transformers or reconsidering opposition to climate change mitigation? 
German think tanks between environmentalism and neoliberalism. Globalizations. 2022; doi: 
10.1080/14747731.2022.2038358 
63. Almiron N, Boykoff M, Narberhaus M, Heras F. Dominant counter-frames in influential climate 
contrarian European think tanks. Climatic Change. 2020; 162: 2003–2020. 
64. Plehwe D. Whither Energiewende? Strategies to manufacture uncertainty and unknowing to 
redirect Germany’s Renewable Energy Law. International Journal of Public Policy. 2022. 
65. Oreskes N. Systematicity is necessary but not sufficient: On the problem of facsimile science. 
Synthese. 2019; 196: 881–905. 
66. Moreno JA, Kinn M, Narberhaus M. A Stronghold of climate change denialism in Germany: 
Case study of the output and press representation of the think tank EIKE. International Journal of 
Communication. 2022; 16: 267–288. 
67. Michaels, L, Ainger, K. Climate Change Denial and Public Relations: Strategic Communication 
and Interest Groups in Climate Inaction. Xifra, Jordi; Almiron, Núria, editors. Routledge; 2019. 
159–177. 
68. Best J. Varieties of ignorance in neoliberal policy: or the possibilities and perils of wishful 
economic thinking. Review of International Political Economy. 2022; 29: 1159–1182. 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 16
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
69. Lloyd’s Register Foundation World Risk Poll. 2021. < https://wrp.lrfoundation.org.uk/>
70. Björnberg KE, Karlsson M, Gilek M, Hansson SO. Climate and environmental science denial: A 
review of the scientific literature published in 1990-2015. Journal of Cleaner Production. 2017; 
167: 229–241. 
71. Simpson NP, et al. Climate change literacy in Africa. Nature Climate Change. 2021; 11: 937–944. 
72. Guha, RA, Alier, JM. Varieties of Environmentalism: Essays North and South. Routledge; 1997. 
73. Kim SY, Wolinsky-Nahmias Y. Cross-national public opinion on climate change: The effects of 
affluence and vulnerability. Global Environmental Politics. 2014; 14: 79–106. 
74. Lee TM, Markowitz EM, Howe PD, Ko C-Y, Leiserowitz AA. Predictors of public climate change 
awareness and risk perception around the world. Nature Climate Change. 2015; 5: 1014–1020. 
75. Tranter BK, Booth KI. Scepticism in a changing climate: A cross-national study. Global 
Environmental Change. 2015; 33: 154–164. 
76. Painter J, Ashe T. Cross-national comparison of the presence of climate scepticism in the print 
media in six countries, 2007-10. Environmental Research Letters. 2012; 7 044005 
77. Schmidt A, Ivanova A, Schäfer MS. Media attention for climate change around the world: A 
comparative analysis of newspaper coverage in 27 countries. Global Environmental Change. 2013; 
23: 1233–1248. 
78. Hornsey MJ, Harris EA, Fielding KS. Relationships among conspiratorial beliefs, conservatism 
and climate scepticism across nations. Nature Climate Change. 2018; 8: 614–620. 
79. Poortinga W, Whitmarsh L, Steg L, Böhm G, Fisher S. Climate change perceptions and their 
individual-level determinants: A cross-European analysis. Global Environmental Change. 2019; 
55: 25–35. 
80. McCright AM, Dunlap RE, Marquart-Pyatt ST. Political ideology and views about climate change 
in the European Union. Environmental Politics. 2016; 25: 338–358. 
81. Smith EK, Mayer A. Anomalous Anglophones? Contours of free market ideology, political 
polarization, and climate change attitudes in English-speaking countries, Western European and 
post-Communist states. Climatic Change. 2019; 152: 17–34. 
82. Birch S. Political polarization and environmental attitudes: A cross-national analysis. 
Environmental Politics. 2020; 29: 697–718. 
83. Vihma A, Reischl G, Nonbo Andersen A. A climate backlash: Comparing populist parties’ climate 
policies in Denmark, Finland, and Sweden. The Journal of Environment & Development. 2021; 
30: 219–239. 
84. Kulin J, Johansson Sevä I, Dunlap RE. Nationalist ideology, rightwing populism, and public views 
about climate change in Europe. Environmental Politics. 2021; 30: 1111–1134. 
85. Huber RA. The role of populist attitudes in explaining climate change skepticism and support for 
environmental protection. Environmental Politics. 2020; 29: 959–982. 
86. Huber RA, Greussing E, Eberl J-M. From populism to climate scepticism: The role 
of institutional trust and attitudes towards science. Environmental Politics. 2021; doi: 
10.1080/09644016.2021.1978200 
87. Higham, JSC. Global trends in climate change litigation: 2021 snapshot. The Centre for Climate 
Change Econcomics and Policy; 2021. 
88. Clark CE, Crawford EP. Influencing climate change policy: The effect of shareholder pressure and 
firm environmental performance. Business & Society. 2012; 51: 148–175. 
89. Flammer C. Corporate social responsibility and shareholder reaction: The environmental awareness 
of investors. The Academy of Management Journal. 2013; 56: 758–781. 
90. Motta M. The enduring effect of scientific interest on trust in climate scientists in the United 
States. Nature Climate Change. 2018; 8: 485–488. 
91. Baker S, Martinson DL. The TARES Test: Five principles for ethical persuasion. Journal of Mass 
Media Ethics. 2001; 16: 148–175. 
92. Benestad R, et al. Learning from mistakes in climate research. Theoretical and Applied 
Climatology. 2016; 126: 699–703. 
93. Lewandowsky S, Ballard T, Oberauer K, Benestad R. A blind expert test of contrarian claims about 
climate data. Global Environmental Change. 2016; 39: 91–97. 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 17
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
94. Feinberg M, Willer R. The moral roots of environmental attitudes. Psychological Science. 2013; 
24: 56–62. [PubMed: 23228937] 
95. Wolsko C. Expanding the range of environmental values: Political orientation, moral foundations, 
and the common ingroup. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2017; 51: 284–294. 
96. Wolsko C, Ariceaga H, Seiden J. Red, white, and blue enough to be green: Effects of moral 
framing on climate change attitudes and conservation behaviors. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology. 2016; 65: 7–19. 
97. Feygina I, Jost JT, Goldsmith RE. System justification, the denial of global warming, and the 
possibility of “system-sanctioned change”. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 2010; 36: 
326–338. [PubMed: 20008965] 
98. Kidwell B, Farmer A, Hardesty DM. Getting liberals and conservatives to go green: Political 
ideology and congruent appeals. Journal of Consumer Research. 2013; 40: 350–367. 
99. Whitmarsh L, Corner A. Tools for a new climate conversation: A mixed-methods study of language 
for public engagement across the political spectrum. Global Environmental Change. 2017; 42: 
122–135. 
100. Feldman L, Hart PS. Climate change as a polarizing cue: Framing effects on public support for 
low-carbon energy policies. Global Environmental Change. 2018; 51: 54–66. 
101. Dixon G, Hmielowski J, Ma Y. Improving climate change acceptance among U.S. conservatives 
through value-based message targeting. Science Communication. 2017; 39: 520–534. 
102. Bain PG, et al. Co-benefits of addressing climate change can motivate action around the world. 
Nature Climate Change. 2016; 6: 154–157. 
103. Moser, SC, Dilling, L. Creating a Climate for Change: Communicating Climate Change and 
Facilitating Social Change. Cambridge University Press; 2007. 
104. Nemet GF, Holloway T, Meier P. Implications of incorporating air-quality co-benefits into climate 
change policymaking. Environmental Research Letters. 2010; 5 014007 
105. West JJ, et al. Co-benefits of global greenhouse gas mitigation for future air quality and human 
health. Nature Climate Change. 2013; 3: 885–889. 
106. Thurston GD. Health co-benefits. Nature Climate Change. 2013; 3: 863–864. 
107. Maibach EW, Nisbet M, Baldwin P, Akerlof K, Diao G. Reframing climate change as a public 
health issue: An exploratory study of public reactions. BMC Public Health. 2010; 10: 299. 
[PubMed: 20515503] 
108. Myers TA, Nisbet MC, Maibach EW, Leiserowitz AA. A public health frame arouses hopeful 
emotions about climate change. Climatic Change. 2012; 113: 1105–1112. 
109. Petrovic N, Madrigano J, Zaval L. Motivating mitigation: When health matters more than climate 
change. Climatic Change. 2014; 126: 245–254. 
110. Bain PG, Hornsey MJ, Bongiorno R, Jeffries C. Promoting pro-environmental action in climate 
change deniers. Nature Climate Change. 2012; 2: 600–603. 
111. Bernauer T, McGrath LF. Simple reframing unlikely to boost public support for climate policy. 
Nature Climate Change. 2016; 6: 680–683. 
112. Fielding KS, Hornsey MJ, Thai HA, Toh LL. Using ingroup messengers and ingroup values to 
promote climate change policy. Climatic Change. 2020; 158: 181–199. 
113. Hornsey MJ, Esposo S. Resistance to group criticism and recommendations for change: Lessons 
from the intergroup sensitivity effect. Social and Personality Psychology Compass. 2009; 3: 
275–291. 
114. Esposo SR, Hornsey MJ, Spoor JR. Shooting the messenger: Outsiders critical of your group are 
rejected regardless of argument quality. British Journal of Social Psychology. 2013; 52: 386–395. 
[PubMed: 23316747] 
115. Goldberg MH, Gustafson A, Rosenthal SA, Leiserowitz A. Shifting Republican views on climate 
change through targeted advertising. Nature Climate Change. 2021; 11: 573–577. 
116. Kousser T, Tranter B. The influence of political leaders on climate change attitudes. Global 
Environmental Change. 2018; 50: 100–109. 
117. Hornsey MJ, Chapman CM, Fielding KS, Louis WR, Pearson S. A political experiment may have 
extracted Australia from the climate wars. Nature Climate Change. 2022; 12: 695–696. 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 18
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
118. Smith JR, et al. Congruent or conflicted? The impact of injunctive and descriptive norms on 
environmental intentions. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2012; 32: 353–361. 
119. Cialdini RB, Goldstein NJ. Social influence: Compliance and conformity. Annual Review of 
Psychology. 2004; 55: 591–621. 
120. Aarts H, Dijksterhuis A. The silence of the library: Environment, situational norm, and social 
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2003; 84: 18–28. [PubMed: 12518968] 
121. Nolan JM, Schultz PW, Cialdini RB, Goldstein NJ, Griskevicius V. Normative social influence 
is underdetected. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 2008; 34: 913–923. [PubMed: 
18550863] 
122. Nyborg K, et al. Social norms as solutions. Science. 2016; 354: 42–43. [PubMed: 27846488] 
123. Fielding KS, McDonald R, Louis WR. Theory of planned behaviour, identity and intentions to 
engage in environmental activism. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2008; 28: 318–326. 
124. Rees JH, Bamberg S. Climate protection needs societal change: Determinants of intention to 
participate in collective climate action. European Journal of Social Psychology. 2014; 44: 466–
473. 
125. Goldstein NJ, Cialdini RB, Griskevicius V. A room with a viewpoint: Using social norms to 
motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research. 2008; 35: 472–
482. 
126. Cialdini RB, Reno RR, Kallgren CA. A focus theory of normative conduct: Recycling the concept 
of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 1990; 
58: 1015–1026. 
127. Kormos C, Gifford R, Brown E. The influence of descriptive social norm information on 
sustainable transportation behavior: A field experiment. Environment and Behavior. 2014; 47: 
479–501. 
128. Schultz PW. Changing behavior with normative feedback interventions: A field experiment on 
curbside recycling. Basic and Applied Social Psychology. 1999; 21: 25–36. 
129. Allcott H. Social norms and energy conservation. Journal of Public Economics. 2011; 95: 1082–
1095. 
130. Cialdini RB. Crafting normative messages to protect the environment. Current Directions In 
Psychological Science. 2003; 12: 105–109. 
131. Schubert C. Green nudges: Do they work? Are they ethical? Ecological Economics. 2017; 132: 
329–342. 
132. Ruggeri K, et al. The general fault in our fault lines. Nature Human Behaviour. 2021; 5: 1369–
1380. 
133. Cook J, et al. Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of consensus estimates on human-caused 
global warming. Environmental Research Letters. 2016; 11 048002 
134. Cook J, Lewandowsky S, Ecker UKH. Neutralizing misinformation through inoculation: 
Exposing misleading argumentation techniques reduces their influence. PLOS ONE. 2017; 12 
e0175799 [PubMed: 28475576] 
135. Goldberg MH, et al. The experience of consensus: Video as an effective medium to communicate 
scientific agreement on climate change. Science Communication. 2019; 41: 659–673. 
136. Imundo MN, Rapp DN. When fairness is flawed: Effects of false balance reporting and weight-of-
evidence statements on beliefs and perceptions of climate change. Journal of Applied Research in 
Memory and Cognition. 2021; 11: 258–271. 
137. van der Linden S, Leiserowitz A, Maibach E. Scientific agreement can neutralize politicization of 
facts. Nature Human Behavior. 2018; 2: 2–3. 
138. Rode JB, et al. Influencing climate change attitudes in the United States: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2021. 101623 
139. van Stekelenburg A, Schaap G, Veling H, Van’t Riet J, Buijzen M. Scientific consensus 
communication about contested science: A preregistered meta-analysis. Psychological Science. 
2022. 
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 19
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
140. van der Linden S, Leiserowitz A, Maibach E. Perceptions of scientific consensus predict later 
beliefs about the reality of climate change using cross-lagged panel analysis: A response to Kerr 
and Wilson 2018. Journal of Environmental Psychology. 2018; 60: 110–111. 
141. Harvey AG, Armstrong CC, Callaway CA, Gumport NB, Gasperetti CE. COVID-19 prevention 
via the science of habit formation. Current Directions in Psychological Science. 2021; 30: 174–
180. 
142. White K, Habib R, Hardisty DJ. How to SHIFT consumer behaviors to be more sustainable: A 
literature review and guiding framework. Journal of Marketing. 2019; 83: 22–49. 
143. Gonzalez-Arcos C, Joubert AM, Scaraboto D, Guesalaga R, Sandberg J. “How do i carry all this 
now?” Understanding consumer resistance to sustainability interventions. Journal of Marketing. 
2021; 85: 44–61. 
144. Eckhardt GM, Dobscha S. The consumer experience of responsibilization: The case of Panera 
Cares. Journal of Business Ethics. 2019; 159: 651–663. 
145. Arrhenius S. XXXI. On the influence of carbonic acid in the air upon the temperature of the 
ground. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science. 
1896; 41: 237–276. 
146. Hudson M. George Bush Sr could have got in on the groundfloor of climate action – history 
would have thanked him. 2018. <https://theconversation.com/george-bush-sr-could-have-got-in-
on-the-ground-floor-of-climate-action-history-would-have-thanked-him-108050>
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 20
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 1. The interplay between individual and collective influences on climate scepticism
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 21
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 2. 
Perceptions of the level of threat climate change presents to each nation, as reported 
in Lloyd’s Register Foundation World Risk Poll (2021). Darker shades represent greater 
perceived threat (scores from the poll were reversed such that 1 = not a threat at all, 2 = 
somewhat serious threat, 3 = very serious threat).
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 22
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Hornsey and Lewandowsky
Page 23
Table 1
Six strategies for reducing the damaging effects of climate scepticism
Strategy
Description
Appealing to sceptics 
through value-based 
frames
In many nations, climate scepticism is particularly strong among conservatives. For this subset of the population, 
climate change messages will be more effective if they are framed in ways that are congenial to conservative 
values (e.g., as reinforcing energy security, as a way of maintaining a way of life, as an expression of individual 
responsibility).
Appealing to sceptics 
through co-benefits
Given that they dispute humans are causing climate change, sceptics may not be influenced by traditional 
messages that focus on the importance of action to save the environment. However, they may be influenced by 
arguments that focus on the co-benefits of action in terms of promoting green jobs, stimulating technological 
innovation, or maintaining public health.
Leveraging climate-
friendly actors within 
the conservative 
movement
Conservatives are more likely to be persuaded about the reality and urgency of climate change if those messages 
are presented by respected figures within the conservative movement.
Establishing norms
People are more likely to act in a certain way if they perceive – or are told – that valued others are acting in that 
way. Because they appeal to our social nature, norms-based interventions can have positive effects independent of 
political persuasion.
Consensus messaging
97% of climate scientists agree that climate change is happening and is largely caused by humans. Successfully 
communicating that consensus message has positive downstream influences on climate-friendly attitudes, beliefs, 
and behaviours.
Embedding climate-
friendly actions in social 
practice
Positive action is more likely if those actions are embedded in a network of social practices, so that it becomes 
part of the flow of one’s day and part of one’s social life.
Nat Hum Behav. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 December 01.
