Impacts of climate change on the future of biodiversity
Céline Bellard#1, Cleo Bertelsmeier#1, Paul Leadley1, Wilfried Thuiller2, and Franck 
Courchamp1
1Ecologie, Systématique & Evolution, UMR CNRS 8079, Univ. Paris Sud, Orsay Cedex 91405, 
France.
2Laboratoire d’Ecologie Alpine (LECA), UMR-CNRS 5553, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble 1, 
38041 Grenoble Cedex 9, France
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Many studies in recent years have investigated the effects of climate change on the future of 
biodiversity. In this review, we first examine the different possible effects of climate change that 
can operate at individual, population, species, community, ecosystem and biome scales, notably 
showing that species can respond to climate change challenges by shifting their climatic niche 
along three non-exclusive axes: time (e.g., phenology), space (e.g., range) and self (e.g., 
physiology). Then, we present the principal specificities and caveats of the most common 
approaches used to estimate future biodiversity at global and sub-continental scales and we 
synthesize their results. Finally, we highlight several challenges for future research both in 
theoretical and applied realms. Overall, our review shows that current estimates are very variable, 
depending on the method, taxonomic group, biodiversity loss metrics, spatial scales and time 
periods considered. Yet, the majority of models indicate alarming consequences for biodiversity, 
with the worst-case scenarios leading to extinction rates that would qualify as the sixth mass 
extinction in the history of the earth.
Keywords
Biodiversity; climate change; species extinctions
1. Introduction
Predicting the response of biodiversity to climate change has become an extremely active 
field of research (e.g., Dillon et al. 2010; Gilman et al. 2010; Pereira et al. 2010; Salamin et 
al. 2010; Beaumont et al. 2011; Dawson et al. 2011; McMahon et al. 2011). Predictions 
play an important role in alerting scientists and decision makers to potential future risks, 
provide a means to bolster attribution of biological changes to climate change and can 
support the development of proactive strategies to reduce climate change impacts on 
Corresponding author: Franck Courchamp, Labo ESE – UMR CNRS 8079, Bat 362 – Université Paris Sud, 91 405 Orsay Cedex 
France. 0033/1 691556850033/1 69155696franck.courchamp@u-psud.fr.
Contributions by authors: all authors wrote the review.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
Published in final edited form as:
Ecol Lett. 2012 April ; 15(4): 365–377. doi:10.1111/j.1461-0248.2011.01736.x.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
biodiversity (Pereira et al. 2010; Parmesan et al. 2011). Although there is relatively limited 
evidence of current extinctions caused by climate change, studies suggest that climate 
change could surpass habitat destruction as the greatest global threat to biodiversity over the 
next several decades (Leadley et al. 2010). However, the multiplicity of approaches and the 
resulting variability in projections make it difficult to get a clear picture of the future of 
biodiversity under different scenarios of global climatic change (Pereira et al. 2010). Hence, 
there is an urgent need to review our current understanding of the effects of climate change 
on biodiversity and our capacity to project future impacts using models. To this end, we 
have reviewed both the ranges of possible impacts of climate change that operate at 
individual, population, species, community, ecosystem and biome scales and the different 
responses that could occur at individual, population or species levels. We then present the 
principal specificities and caveats of the most common approaches used to model future 
biodiversity at global and sub-continental scales and we synthesize their results focusing on 
how model combinations are used to project the impacts of climate change on species loss. 
Finally, we highlight several challenges for future research, from theoretical (e.g., emerging 
models) and applied (e.g. population conservation and exploitation) realms.
2. Biodiversity and climate change: effects and responses
Climate change effects on biodiversity
The multiple components of climate change are anticipated to affect all the levels of 
biodiversity, from organism to biome levels (Figure 1, and reviewed in detail in, e.g., 
Parmesan 2006). They primarily concern various strengths and forms of fitness decrease, 
which are expressed at different levels, and have effects on individuals, populations, species, 
ecological networks and ecosystems. At the most basic levels of biodiversity, climate 
change is able to decrease genetic diversity of populations due to directional selection and 
rapid migration, which could in turn affect ecosystem functioning and resilience (Botkin et 
al. 2007) (but, see Meyers & Bull 2002). However, most studies are centred on impacts at 
higher organizational levels, and genetic effects of climate change have been explored only 
for a very small number of species.
Beyond this, the various effects on populations are likely to modify the “web of 
interactions” at the community level (Gilman et al. 2010; Walther 2010). In essence, the 
response of some species to climate change may constitute an indirect impact on the species 
that depend on them. A study of 9,650 interspecific systems, including pollinators and 
parasites, suggested that around 6,300 species could disappear following the extinction of 
their associated species (Koh et al. 2004). In addition, for many species, the primary impact 
of climate change may be mediated through effects on synchrony with species’ food and 
habitat requirements (see below). Climate change has led to phenological shifts in flowering 
plants and insect pollinators, causing mismatches between plant and pollinator populations 
that lead to the extinctions of both the plant and the pollinator with expected consequences 
on the structure of plant-pollinator networks (Kiers et al. 2010; Rafferty & Ives 2010). Other 
modifications of interspecific relationships (with competitors, prey/predators, host/parasites 
or mutualists) also modify community structure and ecosystem functions (Lafferty 2009; 
Walther 2010; Yang & Rudolf 2010).
Bellard et al.
Page 2
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
At a higher level of biodiversity, climate can induce changes in vegetation communities that 
are predicted to be large enough to affect biome integrity. The Millenium Ecosystem 
Assessment forecasts shifts for 5 to 20% of Earth’s terrestrial ecosystems, in particular cool 
conifer forests, tundra, scrubland, savannahs, and boreal forest (Sala et al. 2005). Of 
particular concern are “tipping points” where ecosystem thresholds can lead to irreversible 
shifts in biomes (Leadley et al. 2010).
A recent analysis of potential future biome distributions in tropical South America suggests 
that large portions of Amazonian rainforest could be replaced by tropical savannahs (Lapola 
et al. 2009). At higher altitudes and latitudes, alpine and boreal forests are expected to 
expand northwards and shift their tree lines upwards at the expense of low stature tundra and 
alpine communities (Alo & Wang 2008). Increased temperature and decreased rainfall mean 
that some lakes, especially in Africa, might dry out (Campbell et al. 2009). Oceans are 
predicted to warm and become more acid, resulting in widespread degradation of tropical 
coral reefs (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2007). The implications of climate change for genetic 
and specific diversity have potentially strong implications for ecosystem services. The most 
extreme and irreversible form of fitness decrease is obviously species extinction. To avoid 
or mitigate these effects, biodiversity can respond in several ways, through several types of 
mechanisms.
Biodiversity responses to climate change
Because of climate changes, species may no longer be adapted to the set of environmental 
conditions in a given region and could therefore fall outside its climatic niche. As other 
components of the ecological niche of species are not supposed to change directly, we will 
hereafter refer only to climatic niches of species (i.e., the climatic components of the n-
dimensional hypervolume sensu Hutchinson). In order to persist, individuals, populations or 
species must produce adaptive responses, which can be of several types, and are provided by 
two categories of mechanisms.
Response mechanisms: plastic versus genetic—One of the crucial questions in the 
debate on ecological effects of climate change is whether species will be able to adapt fast 
enough to keep up with the rapid pace of changing climate (Lavergne et al. 2010; Salamin et 
al. 2010). Whatever the type of adaptive responses, underlying mechanisms are either due to 
micro-evolution (i.e., species can genetically adapt to new conditions through mutations or 
selection of existing genotypes Salamin et al. 2010; Olofsson et al. 2011) or plasticity, 
which provides a means of very short-term response (within individual’s lifetimes, 
Charmantier et al. 2008). It may involve intraspecific variation in morphological, 
physiological or behavioural traits, which can occur on different time scales within the 
populations’ spatial range (Botkin et al. 2007; Chevin et al. 2010). Empirical evidence 
suggests that plastic contribution is often more important than genetic contribution, as 
observed in birds and marmots (Hoffman & Sgro 2011). On the other hand, there is 
increasing empirical evidence that evolution can be very rapid (Lavergne et al. 2010). This 
is the case for many introduced species, for which selection-driven phenotypic changes have 
enhanced the invasive potential (e.g., Phillips 2009). Recent experiments on evolutionary 
rescue also confirm that rapid evolution through mutation and selection could allow species 
Bellard et al.
Page 3
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
with rapid life cycles to adapt very severe and rapid environmental changes (Bell & 
Gonzalez 2009).
Responses: along three axes—Whatever the mechanisms involved in response to 
climate change, species can in theory change, and changes have already been observed, 
along three distinct but non-exclusive axes (Figure 2): spatial, temporal or self. The first two 
axes correspond to easily observable and well-documented responses to global warming 
(Parmesan 2006). “Self” corresponds to less visible physiological and behavioural changes 
that allow species to adapt to the new climatic conditions in the same spatial and temporal 
frame.
Spatial: First, species can track appropriate conditions in space and follow them. This is 
typically done through dispersion, but spatial changes are not limited to this: shifts to a 
different habitat at the local or micro-habitat levels are also relevant. One of the best-
documented responses – from both paleontological records and recent observations - is a 
spatial shift of species tracking suitable climatic conditions at the regional scale. Latitudinal 
and altitudinal range shifts have already been observed in more than 1,000 species – 
especially those with high dispersal capacities like birds, insects and marine invertebrates 
(Parmesan 2006), leading to a reduction in range size particularly in polar and mountaintop 
species (Forero-Medina 2010). However, individuals shift their distribution in order to stay 
in quasi-equilibrium with the climatic conditions they are adapted to, but they may not be 
adapted to other abiotic variables such as photoperiod or novel biotic interactions (Visser 
2008). In these cases, micro-evolution may be needed for them to persist (Visser 2008).
Temporal: In order to keep up with changing abiotic factors that show cyclic variation over 
time, such as temperature on a daily or yearly period, individuals can also respond to climate 
change through a shift in time (on a daily to seasonal basis). Phenology, i.e., the timing of 
life cycle events such as flowering, fruiting and seasonal migrations, is one of the most 
ubiquitous responses to 20th century climate warming. It has already been documented in 
many species (Parmesan 2006; Charmantier et al. 2008). In a meta-analysis of a wide range 
of species including animals and plants, the mean response across all species responding to 
climate change was a shift in key phenological events of 5.1 days earlier per decade over the 
last 50 years (Root et al. 2003). Flowering has advanced by more than 10 days per decade in 
some species (Parmesan 2006). These phenological changes can help species keep 
synchrony with cyclical abiotic factors. Yet, they can also be disruptive, by increasing 
asynchrony in predator-prey and insect-plant systems (Parmesan 2006), which may lead to 
species extinction. Temporal shifts may also occur at a small temporal scale, e.g. with 
activity patterns adjusted in daily activity rhythms, or behaviours adjusted in length to match 
changes to costs due to a different climatic condition.
Self: Last, species can cope with changing climatic conditions by adapting themselves to the 
new conditions in their local range, rather than by tracking their current optimal conditions 
in space or time. For lack of a better term, we refer to these in situ changes that are not 
related to spatial or temporal changes, as changes in “self”. Species can move along this 
third, “self” axis by physiological alterations that allow tolerance to warmer or drier 
Bellard et al.
Page 4
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
conditions or by behavioural modifications of their diet, activity and energy budget, for 
example. Although they are often less obvious than changes in time or space, some 
physiological responses have already been reported (Johansen & Jones 2011) during the 20th 
century climate change, especially from many ectotherms, as their locomotion, growth, 
reproduction and sex determination are temperature sensitive (Tewksbury et al. 2008). 
However, for many traits, plastic phenotypic responses should reach a physiological limit 
and ‘saturate’ in extreme environments. For example, body size or metabolic rate cannot 
increase or decrease indefinitely under sustained environmental change (Chevin et al. 2010). 
In this case, strong selection is needed to cope with climate change. As they remain in the 
same spatial and temporal frame, thereby limiting alterations of interspecific relationships, 
changes in self also have different consequences for ecosystem responses than do changes in 
time and space.
Failing to adapt along one or several of these three axes, population or species will go 
extinct locally or globally. There is thus a multitude of possible responses for species to 
cope with climate change, and in fact relatively few taxa went extinct following climate 
change during the Quaternary period (Botkin et al. 2007). This should help temper 
catastrophist predictions regarding the global effects of the current climate change on 
biodiversity. However, the responses of many populations are likely to be inadequate to 
counter the speed and magnitude of the current climate change. In addition, unlike in past 
periods of climate change, species have now to cope with additional threats, some of which 
may act in synergy with climate change (Botkin et al. 2007). As we are already facing an 
irrefutable biodiversity crisis, the number of species that may go extinct following climate 
change has become a major concern over last few years.
3. Assessing the future of global biodiversity
Our understanding of the effects of global climate change on biodiversity and its different 
levels of response is still insufficiently well developed. Yet, it is enough to raise serious 
concern for the future of biodiversity. The most pressing issue is to quantitatively assess the 
prospects for biological diversity in the face of global climate change. Although several 
methods exist to draw inferences, starting with existing paleontological or recent data, 
experiments, observations, and meta-analyses (e.g., Lepetz et al. 2009), ecological 
modelling is the most commonly used tool for predictive studies. Progress in this field is 
characterised by both an extremely high pace and a plurality of approaches. In particular, 
there are three main approaches to projecting species loss, concentrating either on future 
changes in species range or species extinction or changes in species abundance. However, 
all three modelling approaches have so far largely focused on one axis of response (change 
in space), largely overlooking the importance of the other aspects. In addition, they seldom 
account for the mechanisms of these responses (plasticity and evolution). We briefly discuss 
here the basic principles and the weakness of the models that are the most widely used at 
global or at large regional scales in this context, focusing on representative examples of 
recent work. Table 1 summarizes the specific advantages and limitation of each model type.
Bellard et al.
Page 5
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Biodiversity range models components
Studies modelling species’ range shifts are generally based on the assumption that species 
niches are defined by a small set of environmental variables, i.e. the species’ “climate 
niche”, defines the suitable climatic habitat for that particular species. These Bioclimatic 
Envelope Models, or BEMs, relate current species ranges to multiple climatic variables and 
thereby define the climatic niche (envelope) for each species. It is then possible to project 
this niche for different future climate scenarios in order to determine the potential 
redistribution of the suitable climate space of the species. The extinction risks can then be 
calculated in different ways using species-area relationships (Thomas et al. 2004) or IUCN 
status (Thuiller et al. 2005). Despite a number of limitations (lack of biological process as 
well as methodological and theoretical issues, Soberon & Nakamura 2009), species 
distribution models still constitute the bulk of studies in this domain (Sinclair et al. 2010).
Shifts in distinct vegetation types, often referred to as biome or habitat shifts, are often 
simulated with Dynamic Vegetation Models (DVM). These models forecast shifts in 
vegetation and associated biogeochemical and hydrological cycles in response to climate 
change. DVMs use time series of climate data (e.g., temperature, precipitation, humidity, 
sunshine days) and take into account constraints of topography and soil characteristics in 
order to simulate monthly or daily dynamics of ecosystem processes. Plant species are 
represented as groups with similar physiological and structural properties, termed Plant 
Functional Types (PFTs), which are designed to represent all major types of plants (Sitch et 
al. 2008). PFT distributions can then be used to estimate changes in biome or habitat ranges. 
Currently, DVMs are of limited use for projecting responses in biodiversity directly (i.e., the 
absence of animals and the limitation to ca. 10 PFTs exclude direct utilization). However, 
coupled with extinction models, they allow extinction risk for species to be estimated at the 
regional or global scale (e.g., van Vuuren et al. 2006).
Species loss models components
The simplest method for calculating extinction risk is to assume that species go extinct when 
they no longer have any suitable habitat (Jetz et al. 2007). This may underestimate 
extinctions because species often enter an “extinction vortex” well before they loose their 
entire habitat. Yet, it could also substantially overestimate extinctions because many species 
have weak habitat specificity (Malcolm et al. 2006; Willis & Bhagwat 2009).
The Species Area Relationship (SAR), an empirical relationship between the number of 
species and the land area of a region, is often used to estimate extinction risk (Thomas et al. 
2004). Species extinctions are calculated as a direct function of habitat loss or climate 
induced range contraction based on the observation that extinction risk increases with 
decreasing range and population size. SAR methods may over or underestimate species 
extinction risk depending on the capacity of species to persist in small populations or adapt 
to novel environments, and they also fail to provide a time frame in which extinctions are 
likely to occur (Chevin et al. 2010) because the extinction debt is not accounted for (Pereira 
et al. 2010). The relevance of using this relationship to project biodiversity loss is still hotly 
debated (He & Hubbell 2011).
Bellard et al.
Page 6
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
The IUCN has developed criteria to assess species extinction risk for their Red List of the 
conservation status of plant and animal species (Baillie et al. 2004). These include 90 
biological traits identified as enhancing species’ vulnerability (e.g., habitat specialisation, 
narrow environmental tolerance, dependence on specific environmental triggers, dependence 
on inter-specific interactions or poor ability to disperse to or colonize a new range, Foden et 
al. 2008). Recent attempts at projecting climate change impacts on biodiversity have used 
the IUCN status metric to obtain estimates of extinction rates based on projected range shifts 
(Thuiller et al. 2005), although the use of IUCN status for this purpose has also been 
questioned (Akcçakaya et al. 2006).
In Dose Response Relationship (DRR) models, observational data and experiments can be 
employed to generate empirical relationships between the relative importance of global 
drivers (dose) and changes in species loss (response).
Most models focus on species extinctions, which are only the last step of a decline in 
abundance and are a less immediate (although dramatic) impact of climate change. This fact 
has led to the development of new models that attempt to quantify the impact of human 
activities on species abundance (i.e., an equivalent of DRR for species abundance). Impacts 
on biodiversity are estimated using biodiversity indicators including Mean Species 
Abundance (MSA, Alkemade et al. 2009) and Biodiversity Intactness Index (Biggs et al. 
2008). For example, the GLOBIO model uses a matrix of changes in mean local species 
abundances following conversion between two land use or land cover categories, derived 
from empirical studies (Leadley et al. 2010). These types of models use species abundances 
in pristine ecosystems as a baseline, and thereby provide a measure of the distance from 
“naturalness” of plant and animal communities following human disturbance. Species 
abundance models based on plant traits and abiotic characteristics can also provide evidence 
of changes in ecosystem services (Lavorel et al. 2011).
There are, however, several major limitations to these models, especially concerning the 
indices of biodiversity derived from DRR applied to species abundance. They depend 
largely on the quality of the input data (of which much more is needed than in most other 
models), uncertainty cannot be taken into account, and they are difficult to relate to 
commonly used biodiversity indices (Alkemade et al. 2009).
Model combinations
Current modelling techniques usually incorporate a succession of one (or several) future 
socio-economic scenario(s), one (or several) extinction driver(s), one habitat or species 
range model (Figure 3). They then express their projections in terms of various extinction 
metrics. This has generated a variety of “model combinations” leading to a wide range of 
projections that are not straightforward to compare, as the underlying assumptions differ 
greatly. We have synthesized in Figure 4 the results of all such projections made at a global 
scale either geographically or taxonomically. Despite important differences and some bias 
(e.g., marine biodiversity is still poorly represented), these models generally indicate that 
many species can be expected to decline rapidly at a global scale.
Bellard et al.
Page 7
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Projections of species loss
The field of climate change biology has thus followed several distinct and independent lines 
of model development (Figure 3). This is potentially advantageous, as the convergent 
predictions can be regarded as an indication of robustness. In essence, the results show that 
local species extinctions cover an extremely large range, with some areas experiencing 
virtually no losses and others facing nearly complete loss of current species. High local 
losses can concern relatively large areas; for example, Bakkenes et al. (Bakkenes et al. 
2002) estimated the more than 16% of European landmass would have local species losses 
exceeding 50% by 2050. This must be distinguished from projections of species extinctions 
at the global level, which are unsurprisingly lower than at the local level, since local 
extinctions do not necessarily lead to global extinctions. Nevertheless, even these global 
estimates suggest major losses of biodiversity due to global climate change that are 
generally higher than current rates of loss and far higher than rates of species extinctions 
documented in the fossil record (Pereira et al. 2010; Barnosky et al. 2011). For example, one 
of the earliest global studies estimated that by 2050 15-37% of species are committed to 
extinction under intermediate climate warming (Thomas et al. 2004). Birds are projected to 
be particularly sensitive to climate change. Two studies have calculated losses by 2100 due 
to climate change: these range from less than 0.3% of the world’s 8,750 species of land birds 
would be committed to extinction (Jetz et al. 2007) and up to 30% of the 8,400 land bird 
species in the Western Hemisphere could go extinct (Sekercioglu et al. 2008). Regarding the 
vulnerability of 25 major biodiversity hotspots, Malcolm and colleagues suggested that the 
extinctions of endemic species could reach 39-43% under in worst-case scenarios, 
representing the potential loss of 56,000 endemic plant species and 3,700 endemic vertebrate 
species (Malcolm et al. 2006).
Studies based on changes in species abundance generally predict an erosion of biodiversity 
in the same order of magnitude as species extinction models do, i.e., losses of 11 to 17% of 
mean species abundance by the end of the century (Alkemade et al. 2009). Using data from 
9,856 birds, 6,222 amphibians and 799 coral reefs, the IUCN forecasted that about 35% of 
the world’s birds, 52% of amphibians and 71% of warm-water reef-building corals are 
particularly susceptible to climate change (Foden et al. 2008). Variability in local 
extinctions is significantly higher than in global extinctions projections. Indeed, in some 
regions the species composition will not change at all and in others almost all species will be 
lost following climate change. Estimated losses of riverine fish richness at a local scale vary 
considerably between 0 and 75% according to the river considered (Xenopoulos et al. 2005). 
Similarly, estimated local losses of plant diversity in Europe range from 2 to 84% of species 
lost per pixel (Thuiller et al. 2005).
Overall, the diversity of taxonomic groups studied, of biodiversity loss metrics, of spatial 
scales and time periods render complex and uncertain comparisons between these studies. In 
addition, the large array of modelling techniques further complicates the comparisons. 
Moreover, several studies assess the combined effects on future biodiversity of both climate 
change and land use, making it difficult to distinguish the effect of each. Finally, there is 
growing concern that the underlying assumptions of all of these models could lead to large 
over- or underestimations of potential species losses (Pereira et al. 2010; Dawson et al. 
Bellard et al.
Page 8
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
2011). These are summarized Figure 5 (see also below). As an example, a recent study 
suggests that the realized effects of climate change might far exceed the current predictions 
(Maclean & Wilson 2011). Based on a global multi-taxon meta-analysis of recorded 
ecological responses, they estimated that the mean observed extinction risk by 2100 is 
systematically higher than the mean predicted extinction risk across the theoretical studies 
considered in the meta-analysis: 12.6% in plants (vs. 4% predicted), 9.4% in invertebrates 
(vs. 7,2 % predicted) and 17.7% in vertebrates (vs. 12.4 % predicted). Overall, these 
estimates of biodiversity loss are obviously a major concern.
4. What further improvements are needed?
Climate change ecology is still in its infancy, and tremendous improvements are made 
rapidly in virtually all aspects of this emerging field. Critical requirements to be able to 
predict future trends include the need to study a much larger part of biodiversity, to 
overcome several major model limitations, to account for co-extinctions and other major 
drivers of biodiversity loss and to validate models by comparing projections with 
observations. These limitations are detailed below. Figure 5 provides a summary of the 
directions in which each of these weaknesses is likely to affect the current projections on 
biodiversity loss, as well as the major types of challenges that have to be faced to overcome 
these uncertainties.
Climate scenarios
Climate scenarios depend on a wide range of socio-economic storylines for greenhouse gas 
emissions in the future, including the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) 
Millenium Assessment and Global Biodiversity Outlook scenarios (Pereira et al. 2010), and 
on a broad suite of General Circulation Models used to calculate climate change for given 
trajectories of greenhouse gas emissions. This means that the projections of species loss can 
yield highly contrasting results depending on the choice of combinations of emissions 
scenarios and climate models, independently of the model of biodiversity response that is 
used (Beaumont et al. 2008). In addition, internal climate model variability could result in 
greater differences in projected species’ distributions than variability between climate 
models (Beaumont et al. 2007). In addition, 4% to 39% of the world’s landmass will 
experience combinations of climate variables that do not currently have equivalent values 
anywhere on the globe (so called no-analog climates, Williams et al. 2007). One key 
challenge is to provide robust and credible uncertainty intervals for all model outcomes and, 
if possible, to reduce them.
Scale choice
The choice of the spatial resolution scale is probably one of the most important factors 
generating variability. For example, a coarse, European-scale model (with 10′×10′ grid 
cells) predicted a loss of all suitable habitats during the 21st century, whereas a model using 
local-scale data (25×25 m grid cells) predicted persistence of suitable habitats in up to 100% 
of plant species (Randin et al. 2009). These differences are probably explained by the failure 
of coarser spatial scale models to capture both local topographic diversity and habitat 
heterogeneity (Luoto & Heikkinen 2008; Randin et al. 2009). On one hand, global models 
Bellard et al.
Page 9
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
can be used for a large number of species but focus on one type of species’ response and 
lack therefore biological realism. On the other hand, population or species models provide 
insight into a very limited range of species, typically at regional scales (i.e., adaptation 
phenology, dynamic population) but cannot provide global scale trends. This is a classical 
trade-off between precise small-scale models and coarse large-scale models that lack 
biological realism (Thuiller 2003).
Positive effects
Climatic changes could also have positive effects on biodiversity. For instance, more 
clement temperatures and increased CO2 are likely to be beneficial to many plants, resulting 
in an acceleration of biomass production. Milder winters might increase survival of many 
currently threatened species in temperate regions. Increased precipitation may also benefit 
some plant communities and species depending on them. Moreover, several studies reported 
detrimental effects of climate change on biological invasions (e.g., Peterson et al. 2008). 
Although few studies report beneficial effects of global changes on biodiversity, they 
certainly exist and add to the difficulty of getting a clear overview of the effects of climate 
changes on the biodiversity of our planet.
Biodiversity measures
Even in the most ambitious studies, the range of species studied always represents a small 
percentage of known biodiversity. All studies are taxonomically biased, as they generally 
concentrate on a few conspicuous taxonomic groups such as plants, mammals and birds 
(Thuiller et al. 2011), with a particularly strong bias towards terrestrial vs. marine 
biodiversity. However, it is generally recognized that the vast majority of biodiversity in 
terms of species richness, evolutionary divergence, biomass and even ecosystem functioning 
is represented by “cryptic biodiversity”, especially micro-organisms and insects (Esteban & 
Finlay 2010). Similarly, there are important biases in data collection both across regions and 
ecosystems (McMahon et al. 2011). Furthermore, most studies focus on species richness, 
because it is thought to influence the resilience and resistance of ecosystems to 
environmental change. However, a few studies have explored the impact of climate change 
on functional (Thuiller et al. 2006) and phylogenetic diversity (Thuiller et al. 2011), and the 
effects on genetic diversity are only beginning to be explored. Moreover, it is likely that 
different levels of diversity are affected differently by climate change, so these should be 
evaluated in parallel in order to provide a broad picture of biodiversity response to climate 
change (Devictor et al. 2010).
In addition, there are different indicators of biodiversity change, such as the number of 
species “committed” to extinction (Thomas et al. 2004; Pereira et al. 2010), extinction risk 
(Thuiller et al. 2005), or change in abundances (Alkemade et al. 2009; Leadley et al. 2010). 
The number of species “committed” to extinction is probably not the most appropriate 
metric to forecast the future of biodiversity because the extinction debt could vary from 
decades to centuries (Kuussaari et al. 2009). A complementary metric of biodiversity can be 
changes in Mean Species Abundance, which is an index defined as the mean abundance of 
original species relative to their abundance in undisturbed ecosystems. As extinction is only 
the last step in the process of species decline, the MSA can provide a metric to evaluate 
Bellard et al.
Page 10
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
ecosystem degradation. In addition, we need new approaches to predict the impacts of 
climate change at the community level (i.e., Mokany & Ferrier 2011). Currently, neither the 
estimates of species losses nor of the qualitative impacts on ecosystem functioning and 
services are satisfactory to give a global overview of the impacts of climate change (Dale et 
al. 2010).
Limitations of predictive tools
Each of the modelling approaches reviewed has methodological, spatial and temporal 
limitations that constrain their predictive power (e.g., McMahon et al. 2011). In general, 
models do not take into account the multiple responses of species to climate change, but 
rather focus mainly on one axis, spatial shifts of potential habitat (Figure 2). The temporal 
and the physiological responses are generally overlooked, as are the genetic and plastic 
capacity of species (Lavergne et al. 2010; Salamin et al. 2010). In addition, species are 
commonly considered as static and independent entities, although their dynamics and their 
role in ecological networks are both known to be essential. However a new generation of 
models is emerging that focuses on more realistic biological hypotheses and meets some of 
the challenges posed by each limitation (e.g., Thuiller et al. 2008 ; Brook et al. 2009; 
Gallien et al. 2010).
Species responses
Current global extinction models make very coarse assumptions about species responses. 
For example, the dispersal capability is a major issue for projections of future biodiversity. 
Until recently, models often addressed dispersal issues by using two extreme assumptions of 
either unlimited or no species dispersal (Thomas et al. 2004). This is clearly convenient for 
practical purposes, but most species are between these extremes. In addition, exceptional 
occurrences of long-distance dispersal are thought to have helped past species surmount 
prehistoric climate changes (Dawson et al. 2011 and references therein). Although rare, 
these events are of crucial significance in the current context, as they could in many cases 
make the difference between species survival and extinction, especially as human mediated 
long-distance dispersion is now common for many organisms.
Inherent differences in vulnerability are not always taken into account when making large-
scale correlative predictions of the future of biodiversity. Indeed, most models work under 
the very strong hypotheses that species currently live in an optimal climatic niche and that 
they cannot survive if there is a change in the climatic conditions that contribute to define 
this niche. Such a hypothesis amounts to overlook the potential of adaptability of species. 
Numerous studies have shown that species are capable of fast responses through phenotypic 
plasticity or microevolution (Lavergne et al. 2010). Before being able to forecast species 
trajectories with some credibility, we therefore need to assess properly the vulnerability of 
species (including exposure, sensitivity, adaptive capacity and migration potential), habitats 
and regions to different components of climate change (Dawson et al. 2011; McMahon et al. 
2011). Despite growing evidence for rapid adaptive evolution in response to climate change, 
the consequences of such evolution on species persistence remain to be explored (Lavergne 
et al. 2010). Currently, more flexible models of micro-evolutionary processes combine 
population based information with phylogenetic comparative methods to provide an 
Bellard et al.
Page 11
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
estimation of the evolutionary potential (Salamin et al. 2010). Moreover, populations can be 
locally adapted to specific climatic conditions and therefore, models treating a species as a 
single homogeneous unit might be flawed. Consequently, studying under which 
circumstances losses in genetic and species diversity at local to regional scales occurred in 
the past could improve models outputs (Dawson et al. 2011; McMahon et al. 2011).
Population and metapopulation dynamics
An inherent property of current global extinction models is that they do not take into account 
population or metapopulation dynamics that determine species distributions, population 
structure and extinction risk at a local scale. Models are often based on habitat reduction and 
do not offer a mechanism by which the species’ fitness is reduced and ultimately led to 
extinction. Recently, new mechanistic niche models have endeavoured to estimate key 
fitness components such as survival, growth, development and reproduction as a function of 
species attributes (i.e., physiology, phenology, behaviour) that vary with climatic conditions 
(Kearney et al. 2010).
Currently the probability of extinction is based on a projection of suitable habitats entirely 
lost (species will be committed to extinction) or partially lost (species will increase their 
extinction risk), although it possible to combine niche models and abundance data (Iverson 
& Prasad 1998). In fact, on one side some species are more likely to go extinct because they 
consist of small and disconnected populations and on the other side, some species have 
shown compensatory changes in demographic rates following climate change (Doak & 
Morris 2010). The approach of Population Viability Analysis (PVA) in this context could 
provide a good alternative. It is used to estimate the likelihood of a population’s extinction 
within a given number of years through the species’ demographic characteristics and 
environmental variability, instead of species range shifts. Only a few studies have used PVA 
to predict the effects of climate change on extinction risks (Keith et al. 2008; Anderson et al. 
2009), in part because this approach requires data on population dynamics that are not 
available for most species.
In addition, physio-demo genetic models could provide the most realistic method to forecast 
the future of key species, as they consider simultaneously demographic (e.g., growth, rate of 
survival and reproduction, migration processes, environmental stochasticity), physiological 
(e.g., metabolic rate) and genetics parameters (heritability and norm of reaction). However, 
studies using physio-demo genetic models to evaluate the impacts of climate changes remain 
scarce (Kramer et al. 2010).
Co-extinctions
Whether centred on a single species or taking into account large taxonomic groups, most 
studies and all models have disregarded interspecific relationships such as competition, 
facilitation or mutualism. Beyond single-species extinctions, both direct and indirect 
processes can lead to cascading and catastrophic co-extinctions, also called “chains of 
extinction” (Brook et al. 2008). Despite the importance of interspecific interactions, these 
relationships are exceptionally difficult to model; this is especially cogent in the context of 
lack of data on population dynamics and trophic webs (McMahon et al. 2011). As each 
Bellard et al.
Page 12
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
species comes with its cortege of specific parasites and symbionts, as well as many trophic 
relationships, the consequences of global change on biodiversity might be substantially 
underestimated when focusing on species-specific extinction rates (Koh et al. 2004; Yang & 
Rudolf 2010). There is an urgent need not only to go beyond the single species approach, 
but also to get past the species richness approach and to consider interspecific interactions, 
trophic webs and ecological networks (Bascompte 2009).
Synergies between extrinsic drivers of extinction
Research on future species extinctions has so far mostly considered a limited set of the 
predicted changes. For example, sea level rise has seldom been considered, although the 
most recent scenarios projecting up to 2 meters of rise by 2100 are raising new concerns for 
coastal and insular biodiversity (Grinsted et al. 2009). In addition, studies have mainly 
focused on the sole impact of climate change, sometimes considering a single additional 
driver (e.g., land use change). These limitations may often lead to overly optimistic 
estimates. Indeed, other components of global change, such as habitat fragmentation, 
pollution, overexploitation and biological invasions have all been documented as major, 
additional threats for the future of biodiversity, with possible synergies, or reinforcing 
feedbacks between them (Sala et al. 2000). For instance climate-induced facilitation of 
invasions can occur at all stages of the invasions process (Walther et al. 2009; Bradley et al. 
2010). In an experimental context, habitat fragmentation and overfishing combined with 
global warming have led to a decline in rotifer populations up to 50 times faster than when 
either threat acts alone (Mora et al. 2007). In this case, dose response relationship models 
could offer a powerful approach because they could simulate the impacts of many drivers of 
biodiversity.
Overall, despite important uncertainties and much conflicting imprecision, both under- and 
overestimating species loss, the very large underestimations due to co-extinctions, synergies 
and tipping points are extremely worrisome for the future of biodiversity (Figure 5). Given 
the attractiveness of quantitative projections from mathematical models, it is tempting to 
underestimate their limits. To minimize this risk, it is crucial to use a variety of 
complementary approaches, ranging from observational studies (paleontological data, 
phenological responses, adaptive capacity) to field and laboratory experiments (on genetic, 
species and ecosystem levels) (Dawson et al. 2011).
5. Biodiversity management
The large variation of responses of different species necessitates the use and integration of 
multiple approaches in order to further our understanding of the impacts climate change can 
have on biodiversity (Dawson et al. 2011). Similarly, our responses in terms of biodiversity 
management ought to transcend disciplines. Beyond this, global climate change prompts 
several methodological issues and the implications for conservation and management of 
biodiversity and of ecosystem services.
Bellard et al.
Page 13
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Conservation of species and ecosystems
The large projected impacts of climate change on biodiversity at all levels mean that 
ecologists must quickly rise to the challenge of providing scientific guidance for the 
development of conservation strategies (Pressey et al. 2007; Araùjo et al. 2011; Dawson et 
al. 2011). A major role of conservation planning is to design reserve networks that protect 
biodiversity in situ. Currently few studies have attempted to use modelling for conservation 
purposes (Araùjo et al. 2011). It is increasingly important to protect the heterogeneity of 
habitats as well as genetic diversity within a species in order to sustain the capacity of a 
species to adapt. Also, the characteristics of protected areas, where planning has to be done 
decades in advance (Hansen et al. 2010), need to be reviewed under climate change. Climate 
modelling can help to re-evaluate the current set of protected areas, their places, size, layout 
and design (Araùjo et al. 2011). In particular, protection should be prioritized for places that 
minimize the effects of climate change – like forests, which contribute strongly to local 
climatic conditions – as well as for climate refuges for biodiversity (Carnaval et al. 2009). 
Finally, model predictions of where, when, and how future risks may affect species, biomes 
or ecosystems could assist in identifying the most appropriate conservation measures. For 
instance, species or ecosystem projected to be primarily affected by climate change may 
require adapted measures compared to species negatively affected by land-use change that 
could persist through protection of their remaining natural habitat (Hannah et al. 2007). In 
many cases there may no longer be any overlap between a species’ current range and its 
possible future range. As this situation will lead to extinction, climate change has been a 
major argument for the proponents of human-assisted colonisation (Loss et al. 2011). In this 
increasingly hot debate, case-by-case decisions have been advocated, based on the balance 
between threatened status of a species and threat of that species for the recipient ecosystem, 
as well as the socioeconomic context in which conservation is taking place (Richardson et 
al. 2009; Dawson et al. 2011). A widespread view is that an important strategy is to enhance 
landscape connectivity to enable species to move through a matrix of interconnected habitats 
in order to favour escapes from unsuitable climatic conditions (Hannah et al. 2007).
It is also essential to shift from a species centred focus to a holistic view encompassing 
species interaction networks, and other aspects of biodiversity such as functional and 
phylogenetic diversities (Devictor et al. 2010). Beyond these various strategies, there is a 
growing call to go past the predictive focus and start aiming for an integrated and unified 
framework to identify species vulnerability and adapt biodiversity management 
interventions (Dawson et al. 2011). In this regard, preventive actions are of foremost 
importance. For example, it should be remembered that the proportion of species extinction 
is a power function of the expected global warming (Hansen et al. 2010). Minimizing global 
warming could therefore have non-linear effects in the preservation of species from 
extinction, with each tenth of degree avoided saving an increasing number of species 
(Hansen et al. 2010). Acting to reduce global warming itself, and not only its effect on 
biodiversity, should remain a priority in conservation sciences. In addition, reducing other 
global change drivers could increase overall resilience of biodiversity in the face of climate 
change (Hughes et al. 2003).
Bellard et al.
Page 14
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Ecosystem services
Other aspects of biodiversity management will be affected by global change and will need 
adapting, including wildlife exploitation (e.g., forestry, (Dale et al. 2010) or fisheries, 
(Stram & Evans 2009)), agronomy (Howden et al. 2007), pest and invasive species control 
(Ziska et al. 2011) or human and wildlife disease management (Harvell et al. 2002). For 
example, major challenges in agronomy include the need to shift to species or varieties 
better adapted to particular components of climate change or to rethink strategies to control 
invasive and pest outbreaks, finding solutions in the increasing competition for water 
between the natural and the agricultural ecosystems, improving infrastructures and adapting 
cropping systems to meet future demands of a growing population living on poorer 
biodiversity resources (Howden et al. 2007).
Given the tremendous ecological impact of alien invasive species, and the expected 
exacerbation of invasion due to climate change (Walther et al. 2009), it is urgent to increase 
predictive power in this field. It is also crucial to move beyond predictions (Dawson et al. 
2011) and to strengthen risk assessment, protocols of screening and of early detection, 
vector control and integrated management in area and/or of invasive species that will 
become at higher risk following climate change. Similar efforts are imperative for other 
drivers of biodiversity loss, such as overexploitation or habitat destruction.
6. Conclusion
Ecologists are developing a better understanding of the mechanisms by which species and 
ecosystems can be impacted by climate change. The timing of species’ life cycle events is 
expected to be further altered, species distributions will change radically, trophic networks 
will be affected and ecosystem functioning may be severely impaired, leading in the worst 
cases to countless species extinctions. Over the past decades, some of this understanding has 
been effectively translated into mathematical models that can be used to forecast climate 
change impacts on species distributions, abundance, and extinctions. These models are 
characterized by their high diversity of underlying structures and assumptions, with 
predictions differing greatly depending on the models used and species studied. Most of 
these models indicate alarming consequences for biodiversity with worst-case scenarios 
leading to extinction rates that would qualify as the sixth mass extinction in the history of 
the earth (Barnosky et al. 2011). However, all current approaches have serious weaknesses. 
An evaluation of known mechanisms of climate impacts on biodiversity suggests that the 
lack of several key mechanisms in models may lead to either very large underestimations or 
overestimations of risks for biodiversity. Improvements in existing models and, in particular, 
a new generation of models must address the shortcomings of current models in order to 
reduce uncertainties. It is also crucial to improve our understanding of the vulnerability of 
biodiversity to climate change, to develop other predictive approaches and to go beyond 
predictions.
Crucially, the diversity of approaches, methods, scales and underlying hypotheses used has 
led to an ensemble of global quantitative predictions that can seldom be compared. 
Consequently, we are left with a mosaic of information that cannot provide a quantitative, 
coherent picture of future biodiversity loss. Yet, standardization of future studies (of 
Bellard et al.
Page 15
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
taxonomic groups, methods, time horizon, scale, etc…), which might help decrease 
uncertainty, would do so at the expense of the breath of knowledge and of a much needed 
innovation in this field. In this regard, a solution may come from a collective effort in 
conducting large meta-studies that would encompass many components of variability 
(biodiversity, time and space scale, models, …) in order to both infer similarities and assess 
sources of inconsistency. Given its scale, such an ambitious endeavour needs an enduring 
cooperative effort from coordinated research groups. The long awaited Intergovernmental 
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (Perrings et al. 2011) could provide the 
impetus for building such national and international efforts. A major near-term target to 
substantially improve our understanding, predictive capacity and reactive potential will be to 
contribute to this new IPCC-like assessment for biodiversity and ecosystem services.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
References
Akcçakaya H, Butchart SHM, Mace GM, Stuart SN, Hilton-Taylor C. Use and misuse of the IUCN 
Red List Criteria in projecting climate change impacts on biodiversity. Global Change Biology. 
2006; 12:2037–2043.
Alkemade R, van Oorschot M, Miles L, Nellemann C, Bakkenes M, ten Brink B. GLOBIO3: A 
Framework to Investigate Options for Reducing Global Terrestrial Biodiversity Loss. Ecosystems. 
2009; 12:374–390.
Alo CA, Wang GL. Potential future changes of the terrestrial ecosystem based on climate projections 
by eight general circulation models. Journal of Geophysical Research-Biogeosciences. 2008; 
113:16.
Anderson BJ, Akcakaya HR, Araujo MB, Fordham DA, Martinez-Meyer E, Thuiller W, Brook BW. 
Dynamics of range margins for metapopulations under climate change. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B-Biological Sciences. 2009; 276:1415–1420.
Araùjo MB, Alagador D, Cabeza M, Nogues-Bravo D, Thuiller W. Climate change threatens European 
conservation areas. Ecology Letters. 2011; 14:484–492. [PubMed: 21447141] 
Baillie, JEM.; Hilton-Taylor; C.; Stuart, SN. 2004 IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Assessment. 
AGS. , editor. IUCN; Gland, Switzerland: 2004. 
Bakkenes M, Alkemade JMR, Ihle F, Leemans R, Latour JB. Assessing effects of forecasted climate 
change on the diversity and distribution of European higher plants for 2050. Global Change 
Biology. 2002; 8:390–407.
Barnosky AD, Matzke N, Tomiya S, Wogan GOU, Swartz B, Quental TB, Marshall C, McGuire JL, 
Lindsey EL, Maguire KC, Mersey B, Ferrer EA. Has the Earth’s sixth mass extinction already 
arrived? Nature. 2011; 471:51–57. [PubMed: 21368823] 
Bascompte J. Disentangling the Web of Life. Science. 2009; 325:416–419. [PubMed: 19628856] 
Beaumont LJ, Hughes L, Pitman AJ. Why is the choice of future climate scenarios for species 
distribution modelling important? Ecology Letters. 2008; 11:1135–1146. [PubMed: 18713269] 
Beaumont LJ, Pitman A, Perkins S, Zimmermann NE, Yoccoz NG, Thuiller W. Impacts of climate 
change on the world’s most exceptional ecoregions. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2011; 108:2306–2311.
Beaumont LJ, Pitman AJ, Poulsen M, Hughes L. Where will species go? Incorporating new advances 
in climate modelling into projections of species distributions. Global Change Biology. 2007; 
13:1368–1385.
Bell G, Gonzalez A. Evolutionary rescue can prevent extinction following environmental change. 
Ecology Letters. 2009; 12:942–948. [PubMed: 19659574] 
Bellard et al.
Page 16
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Biggs R, Simons H, Bakkenes M, Scholes RJ, Eickhout B, van Vuuren D, Alkemade R. Scenarios of 
biodiversity loss in southern Africa in the 21st century. Global Environmental Change-Human and 
Policy Dimensions. 2008; 18:296–309.
Botkin DB, Saxe H, Araujo MB, Betts R, Bradshaw RHW, Cedhagen T, Chesson P, Dawson TP, 
Etterson JR, Faith DP, Ferrier S, Guisan A, Hansen AS, Hilbert DW, Loehle C, Margules C, New 
M, Sobel MJ, Stockwell DRB. Forecasting the effects of global warming on biodiversity. 
Bioscience. 2007; 57:227–236.
Bradley BA, Blumenthal DM, Wilcove DS, Ziska LH. Predicting plant invasions in an era of global 
change. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2010; 25:310–318. [PubMed: 20097441] 
Brook BW, Akcakaya HR, Keith DA, Mace GM, Pearson RG, Araujo MB. Integrating bioclimate with 
population models to improve forecasts of species extinctions under climate change. Biology 
Letters. 2009; 5:723–725. [PubMed: 19625300] 
Brook BW, Sodhi NS, Bradshaw CJA. Synergies among extinction drivers under global change. 
Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2008; 23:453–460. [PubMed: 18582986] 
Campbell, A.; Kapos, V.; Scharlemann, JPW.; Bubb, P.; Chenery, A.; Coad, L.; Dickson, B.; Doswald, 
N.; Khan, MSI.; Kershaw, F.; Rashid, M. Review of the Literature on the Links between 
Biodiversity and Climate Change: Impacts, Adaptation and Mitigation. In: Diversity SotCoB. , 
editor. CBD Technical Series n°42. Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity; 
Montreal: 2009. p. 124
Carnaval AC, Hickerson MJ, Haddad CFB, Rodrigues MT, Moritz C. Stability Predicts Genetic 
Diversity in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest Hotspot. Science. 2009; 323:785–789. [PubMed: 
19197066] 
Charmantier A, McCleery RH, Cole LR, Perrins C, Kruuk LEB, Sheldon BC. Adaptive phenotypic 
plasticity in response to climate change in a wild bird population. Science. 2008; 320:800–803. 
[PubMed: 18467590] 
Chevin L-M, Lande R, Mace GM. Adaptation, Plasticity and Extinction in a Changing Environment: 
Towards a Predictive Theory. PLoS Biol. 2010; 8:e1000357. [PubMed: 20463950] 
Dale VH, Tharp ML, Lannom KO, Hodges DG. Modeling transient response of forests to climate 
change. Science of The Total Environment. 2010; 408:1888–1901. [PubMed: 20163827] 
Dawson TP, Jackson ST, House JI, Prentice IC, Mace GM. Beyond Predictions: Biodiversity 
Conservation in a Changing Climate. Science. 2011; 332:53–58. [PubMed: 21454781] 
Devictor V, Mouillot D, Meynard C, Jiguet F, Thuiller W, Mouquet N. Spatial mismatch and 
congruence between taxonomic, phylogenetic and functional diversity: the need for integrative 
conservation strategies in a changing world. Ecology Letters. 2010; 13:1030–1040. [PubMed: 
20545736] 
Dillon ME, Wang G, Huey RB. Global metabolic impacts of recent climate warming. Nature. 2010; 
467:704–706. [PubMed: 20930843] 
Doak DF, Morris WF. Demographic compensation and tipping points in climate-induced range shifts. 
Nature. 2010; 467:959–962. [PubMed: 20962844] 
Esteban GF, Finlay BJ. Conservation work is incomplete without cryptic biodiversity. Nature. 2010; 
463:293–293. [PubMed: 20090730] 
Foden, W.; Mace, G.; Vié, J-C.; Angulo, A.; Butchart, SHM.; DeVantier, L.; Dublin, H.; Gutsche, A.; 
Stuart, S.; Turak, E. Species susceptibility to climate change impacts. In: Vié, J-C.; Hilton-Taylor, 
C.; S.N., S., editors. The 2008 Review of the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. IUCN; Gland, 
Switzerland: 2008. p. 1-12.
Forero-Medina G, Joppa L, Pimm SL. Constraints to Species’ Elevational Range Shifts as Climate 
Changes. Conservation Biology. 2010; 25:163–171. [PubMed: 21198846] 
Gallien L, Munkemuller T, Albert CH, Boulangeat I, Thuiller W. Predicting potential distributions of 
invasive species: where to go from here? Diversity and Distributions. 2010; 16:331–342.
Gilman SE, Urban MC, Tewksbury J, Gilchrist GW, Holt RD. A framework for community 
interactions under climate change. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2010; 25:325–331. [PubMed: 
20392517] 
Grinsted A, Moore JC, Jevrejava S. Reconstructing sea level from paleo and projected temperatures 
200 to 2100 AD. Climate dynamic. 2009
Bellard et al.
Page 17
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Hannah L, Midgley G, Andelman S, Araujo M, Hughes G, Martinez-Meyer E, Pearson R, Williams P. 
Protected area needs in a changing climate. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment. 2007; 
5:131–138.
Hansen L, Hoffman J, Drews C, Mielbrecht E. Designing Climate-Smart Conservation: Guidance and 
Case Studies. Conservation Biology. 2010; 24:63–69. [PubMed: 20121842] 
Harvell CD, Mitchell CE, Ward JR, Altizer S, Dobson AP, Ostfeld RS, Samuel MD. Ecology - 
Climate warming and disease risks for terrestrial and marine biota. Science. 2002; 296:2158–2162. 
[PubMed: 12077394] 
He F, Hubbell SP. Species–area relationships always overestimate extinction rates from habitat loss. 
Nature. 2011; 473:368–371. [PubMed: 21593870] 
Hoegh-Guldberg O, Mumby PJ, Hooten AJ, Steneck RS, Greenfield P, Gomez E, Harvell CD, Sale 
PF, Edwards AJ, Caldeira K, Knowlton N, Eakin CM, Iglesias-Prieto R, Muthiga N, Bradbury RH, 
Dubi A, Hatziolos ME. Coral reefs under rapid climate change and ocean acidification. Science. 
2007; 318:1737–1742. [PubMed: 18079392] 
Hoffman AA, Sgro CM. Climate change and evolutionary adaptation. Nature. 2011; 470:479–485. 
[PubMed: 21350480] 
Howden SM, Soussana JF, Tubiello FN, Chhetri N, Dunlop M, Meinke H. Adapting agriculture to 
climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America. 2007; 104:19691–19696. [PubMed: 18077402] 
Hughes TP, Baird AH, Bellwood DR, Card M, Connolly SR, Folke C, Grosberg R, Hoegh-Guldberg 
O, Jackson JBC, Kleypas J, Lough JM, Marshall P, Nystrom M, Palumbi SR, Pandolfi JM, Rosen 
B, Roughgarden J. Climate change, human impacts, and the resilience of coral reefs. Science. 
2003; 301:929–933. [PubMed: 12920289] 
Iverson LR, Prasad AM. Predicting abundance of 80 tree species following climate change in the 
eastern united states. Ecological Monographs. 1998; 68:465–485.
Jetz W, Wilcove DS, Dobson AP. Projected Impacts of Climate and Land-Use Change on the Global 
Diversity of Birds. Plos biology. 2007; 5:1211–1219.
Johansen JL, Jones GP. Increasing ocean temperature reduces the metabolic performance and 
swimming ability of coral reef damselfishes. Global Change Biology. 2011; 17:2971–2979.
Kearney MR, Wintle BA, Porter WP. Correlative and mechanistic models of species distribution 
provide congruent forecasts under climate change. Conservation Letters. 2010; 3:203–213.
Keith DA, Akcakaya HR, Thuiller W, Midgley GF, Pearson RG, Phillips SJ, Regan HM, Araujo MB, 
Rebelo TG. Predicting extinction risks under climate change: coupling stochastic population 
models with dynamic bioclimatic habitat models. Biology Letters. 2008; 4:560–563. [PubMed: 
18664424] 
Kiers ET, Palmer TM, Ives AR, Bruno JF, Bronstein JL. Mutualisms in a changing world: an 
evolutionary perspective. Ecology Letters. 2010; 13:1459–1474. [PubMed: 20955506] 
Koh LP, Dunn RR, Sodhi NS, Colwell RK, Proctor HC, Smith VS. Species coextinctions and the 
biodiversity crisis. Science. 2004; 305:1632–1634. [PubMed: 15361627] 
Kramer K, Degen B, Buschbom J, Hickler T, Thuiller W, Sykes MT, de Winter W. Modelling 
exploration of the future of European beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) under climate change-Range, 
abundance, genetic diversity and adaptive response. Forest Ecology and Management. 2010; 
259:2213–2222.
Kuussaari M, Bommarco R, Heikkinen RK, Helm A, Krauss J, Lindborg R, Ockinger E, Partel M, 
Pino J, Roda F, Stefanescu C, Teder T, Zobel M, Steffan-Dewenter I. Extinction debt: a challenge 
for biodiversity conservation. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2009; 24:564–571. [PubMed: 
19665254] 
Lafferty KD. The ecology of climate change and infectious diseases. Ecology. 2009; 90:888–900. 
[PubMed: 19449681] 
Lapola DM, Oyama MD, Nobre CA. Exploring the range of climate biome projections for tropical 
South America: The role of CO2 fertilization and seasonality. Global Biogeochem. Cycles. 2009; 
23
Bellard et al.
Page 18
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Lavergne S, Mouquet N, Thuiller W, Ronce O. Biodiversity and Climate Change: Integrating 
Evolutionary and Ecological Responses of Species and Communities. Annual Review of Ecology, 
Evolution, and Systematics, Vol 41. 2010; 41:321–350.
Lavorel S, Grigulis K, Lamarque P, Colace MP, Garden D, Girel J, Pellet G, Douzet R. Using plant 
functional traits to understand the landscape distribution of multiple ecosystem services. Journal of 
Ecology. 2011; 99:135–147.
Leadley, P.; Pereira, HM.; Alkemade, R.; Fernandez-Manjarrés, JF.; Proença, V.; Scharlemann, JPW.; 
Walpole, MJ. Biodiversity Scenarios: Projections of 21st century change in biodiversity and 
associated ecosystem services. In: Diversity SotCoB. , editor. Secretariat of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity. Montreal: 2010. p. 132Technical Series no. 50132 pages
Lepetz V, Massot M, Schmeller DS, Clobert J. Biodiversity monitoring some proposals to adequately 
study species’ responses to climate change. Biodiversity Conservation. 2009; 18:3185–3203.
Loss SR, Terwilliger LA, Peterson AC. Assisted colonization: Integrating conservation strategies in 
the face of climate change. Biological Conservation. 2011; 144:92–100.
Luoto M, Heikkinen RK. Disregarding topographical heterogeneity biases species turnover 
assessments based on bioclimatic models. Global Change Biology. 2008; 14:483–494.
Maclean IMD, Wilson RJ. Recent ecological responses to climate change support predictions of high 
extinction risk. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2011; 108:12337–12342. [PubMed: 21746924] 
Malcolm JR, Liu CR, Neilson RP, Hansen L, Hannah L. Global warming and extinctions of endemic 
species from biodiversity hotspots. Conservation Biology. 2006; 20:538–548. [PubMed: 
16903114] 
McMahon SM, Harrison SP, Armbruster WS, Bartlein PJ, Beale CM, Edwards ME, Kattge J, Midgley 
G, Morin X, Prentice IC. Improving assessment and modelling of climate change impacts on 
global terrestrial biodiversity. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2011; 26:249–259. [PubMed: 
21474198] 
Meyers LA, Bull JJ. Fighting change with change: adaptive variation in an uncertain world. Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution. 2002; 17:551–557.
Mokany K, Ferrier S. Predicting impacts of climate change on biodiversity: a role for semi-
mechanistic community-level modelling. Diversity and Distributions. 2011; 17:374–380.
Mora C, Metzger R, Rollo A, Myers RA. Experimental simulations about the effects of 
overexploitation and habitat fragmentation on populations facing environmental warming. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences. 2007; 274:1023–1028.
Olofsson J, THickler T, Sykes MT, Araujo MB, Balletto E, Berry PM, Bonello S, Cabeza M, Dubuis 
A, Guisan A, Kujala H, Piper J, Rounsevell M, Settele J, Thuiller W, Kuhn I. Climate change 
impacts on European biodiversity - rates of recent observed responses broadly matches projected 
future rates. Biological Reviews. 2011 In press. 
Parmesan C. Ecological and evolutionary responses to recent climate change. Ecology Evolution. 
2006; 37:637–669.
Parmesan C, Duarte CM, Poloczanska E, Richardson AJ, Singer MC. Overstretching attribution. 
Nature Climate Change. 2011; 1
Pereira HM, Leadley PW, Proenca V, Alkemade R, Scharlemann JPW, Fernandez-Manjarres JF, 
Araujo MB, Balvanera P, Biggs R, Cheung WWL, Chini L, Cooper HD, Gilman EL, Guenette S, 
Hurtt GC, Huntington HP, Mace GM, Oberdorff T, Revenga C, Rodrigues P, Scholes RJ, Sumaila 
UR, Walpole M. Scenarios for Global Biodiversity in the 21st Century. Science. 2010; 330:1496–
1501. [PubMed: 20978282] 
Perrings C, Duraiappah A, Larigauderie A, Mooney H. The Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services 
Science-Policy Interface. Science. 2011; 331:1139–1140. [PubMed: 21330488] 
Peterson AT, Stewart A, Mohamed KI, Araujo MB. Shifting Global Invasive Potential of European 
Plants with Climate Change. PLoS ONE. 2008; 3
Phillips BL. The evolution of growth rates on an expanding range edge. Biology Letters. 2009; 5:802–
804. [PubMed: 19605384] 
Pressey RL, Cabeza M, Watts ME, Cowling RM, Wilson KA. Conservation planning in a changing 
world. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2007; 22:583–592. [PubMed: 17981360] 
Bellard et al.
Page 19
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Rafferty NE, Ives AR. Effects of experimental shifts in flowering phenology on plant– pollinator 
interactions. Ecology Letters. 2010; 14:69–74. [PubMed: 21078034] 
Randin CF, Engler R, Normand S, Zappa M, Zimmermann NE, Pearman PB, Vittoz P, Thuiller W, 
Guisan A. Climate change and plant distribution: local models predict high-elevation persistence. 
Global Change Biology. 2009; 15:1557–1569.
Richardson DM, Hellmann JJ, McLachlan JS, Sax DF, Schwartz MW, Gonzalez P, Brennan EJ, 
Camacho A, Root TL, Sala OE, Schneider SH, Ashe DM, Clark JR, Early R, Etterson JR, Fielder 
ED, Gill JL, Minteer BA, Polasky S, Safford HD, Thompson AR, Vellend M. Multidimensional 
evaluation of managed relocation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America. 2009; 106:9721–9724. [PubMed: 19509337] 
Root BA, Price JT, Hall K. Fingerprints of global warming on wild animals and plants. Nature. 2003; 
421:47–60.
Sala, OE.; van Vuuren, D.; Pereira, HM.; Lodge, D.; Alder, J.; Cumming, G.; Dobson, A.; Wolters, V.; 
MA, X.; Zaitsev, A.; Polo, M.; Gomes, I.; Queiroz, C.; JA, R. Millenium Ecosystem Assesment. 
Millenium Ecosystem Assesment; 2005. Chap 10: Biodiversity across Scenarios; p. 375-408.
Sala OE, Chapin FS, Armesto JJ, Berlow E, Bloomfield J, Dirzo R, Huber-Sanwald E, Huenneke LF, 
Jackson RB, Kinzig A, Leemans R, Lodge DM, Mooney HA, Oesterheld M, Poff NL, Sykes MT, 
Walker BH, Walker M, Wall DH. Global biodiversity scenarios for the year 2100. Science. 2000; 
287:1770–1774. [PubMed: 10710299] 
Salamin N, Wüest RO, Lavergne S, Thuiller W, Pearman PB. Assessing rapid evolution in a changing 
environment. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 2010; 25:692–698. [PubMed: 20961648] 
Sekercioglu CH, Schneider SH, Fay JP, Loarie SR. Climate Change, Elevational Range Shifts, and 
Bird Extinctions. Conservation biology. 2008; 22:140–150. [PubMed: 18254859] 
Sinclair SJ, White MD, Newell GR. How useful are species distribution models for managing 
biodiversity under future climates ? Ecology and Society. 2010; 15:8.
Sitch S, Huntingford C, Gedney N, Levy PE, Lomas M, Piao SL, Betts R, Ciais P, Cox P, 
Friedlingstein P, Jones CD, Prentice IC, Woodward FI. Evaluation of the terrestrial carbon cycle, 
future plant geography and climate-carbon cycle feedbacks using five Dynamic Global Vegetation 
Models (DGVMs). Global Change Biology. 2008; 14:2015–2039.
Soberon J, Nakamura M. Niches and distributional areas: Concepts, methods, and assumptions. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2009; 
106:19644–19650. [PubMed: 19805041] 
Stram DL, Evans DCK. Fishery management responses to climate change in the North Pacific. Ices 
Journal of Marine Science. 2009; 66:1633–1639.
Tewksbury JJ, Huey RB, Deutsch CA. Ecology - Putting the heat on tropical animals. Science. 2008; 
320:1296–1297. [PubMed: 18535231] 
Thomas CD, Cameron A, Green RE, Bakkenes M, Beaumont LJ, Collingham YC, Erasmus BFN, de 
Siqueira MF, Grainger A, Hannah L, Hughes L, Huntley B, van Jaarsveld AS, Midgley GF, Miles 
L, Ortega-Huerta MA, Townsend Peterson A, Phillips OL, Williams SE. Extinction risk from 
climate change. Nature. 2004; 427:145–148. [PubMed: 14712274] 
Thuiller W. BIOMOD - optimizing predictions of species distributions and projecting potential future 
shifts under global change. Global Change Biology. 2003; 9:1353–1362.
Thuiller W, Albert C, Araújo MB, Berry PM, Cabeza M, Guisan A, Hickler T, Midgley GF, Paterson 
J, Schurr FM, Sykes MT, Zimmermann NE. Predicting global change impacts on plant species’ 
distributions: Future challenges. Perspectives in Plant Ecology, Evolution and Systematics. 2008; 
9:137–152.
Thuiller W, Lavergne S, Roquet C, Boulangeat I, Lafourcade B, Araujo MB. Consequences of climate 
change on the tree of life in Europe. Nature. 2011; 470:531–534. [PubMed: 21326204] 
Thuiller W, Lavorel S, Araújo MB, Sykes MT, Prentice IC. Climate change threats to plant diversity in 
Europe. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2005; 
102:8245–8250. [PubMed: 15919825] 
Thuiller W, Lavorel S, Sykes MT, Araújo MB. Using niche-based modelling to assess the impact of 
climate change on tree functional diversity in Europe. Diversity and Distributions. 2006; 12:49–
60.
Bellard et al.
Page 20
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
van Vuuren DP, Sala OE, Pereira HM. The future of vascular plant diversity under four global 
scenarios. Ecology and Society. 2006; 11
Visser ME. Keeping up with a warming world; assessing the rate of adaptation to climate change. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences. 2008; 275:649–659.
Walther G-R, Roques A, Hulme PE, Sykes MT, Pysek P, Kühn I, Zobel M, Bacher S, Botta-Dukát Z, 
Bugmann H, Czúcz B, Dauber J, Hickler T, Jarosík V, Kenis M, Klotz S, Minchin D, Moora M, 
Nentwig W, Ott J, Panov VE, Reineking B, Robinet C, Semenchenko V, Solarz W, Thuiller W, 
Vilà M, Vohland K, Settele J. Alien species in a warmer world: risks and opportunities. Trends in 
Ecology & Evolution. 2009; 24:686–693. [PubMed: 19712994] 
Walther GR. Community and ecosystem responses to recent climate change. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences. 2010; 365:2019–2024.
Williams JW, Jackson ST, Kutzbacht JE. Projected distributions of novel and disappearing climates by 
2100 AD. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 
2007; 104:5738–5742. [PubMed: 17389402] 
Willis KJ, Bhagwat SA. Biodiversity and Climate Change. Science. 2009; 326:806–807. [PubMed: 
19892969] 
Xenopoulos MA, Lodge DM, Alcamo J, Marker M, Schulze K, Van Vuuren DP. Scenarios of 
freshwater fish extinctions from climate change and water withdrawal. Global Change Biology. 
2005; 11:1557–1564.
Yang LH, Rudolf VHW. Phenology, ontogeny and the effects of climate change on the timing of 
species interactions. Ecology Letters. 2010; 13:1–10. [PubMed: 19930396] 
Ziska LH, Blumenthal DM, Runion GB, Hunt ER, Diaz-Soltero H. Invasive species and climate 
change: an agronomic perspective. Climatic Change. 2011; 105:13–42.
Bellard et al.
Page 21
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 1. 
Summary of some of the predicted aspects of climate change and some examples of their 
likely effects on different levels of biodiversity.
Bellard et al.
Page 22
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 2. 
The three directions of responses to climate change through phenotypic plasticity or 
evolutionary responses : moving in space (dispersing to areas with suitable habitat or 
changing location on a microhabitat scale), shifting life history traits in time (adjusting life 
cycle events to match the new climatic conditions, including phenology and diurnal 
rhythms), or changing life history traits in its physiology to cope with new climatic 
conditions. Species can cope with climate change by shifting along one or several of these 
three axes.
Bellard et al.
Page 23
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 3. 
Examples on successive combinations of socio-economic scenarios, projections of 
extinction drivers, habitat or species range models and extinction models and biodiversity 
metrics, leading to projections of biodiversity losses following climate change. Numbers 
correspond to references (see Appendix S2 for details and reference list).
Bellard et al.
Page 24
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 4. 
Projections of loss of biodiversity due to climate change, for different taxonomic, temporal 
and spatial scales. The width of the box illustrates three levels of generality: global scale and 
several taxonomic groups (
), global scale and only one taxonomic group, continental scale 
and only one taxonomic group. The box is delimited by the upper and lower boundaries of 
the intermediate scenario, while maximum and minimum values of the whiskers indicate the 
highest and lowest biodiversity losses across all projections. This figure illustrates that the 
different studies (i) generally predict significant biodiversity loss and (ii) use a combination 
of different biodiversity metrics, taxonomic groups and spatial scale and time horizon, 
making generalisations difficult. Numbers correspond to references (see Appendix S2 for 
details and references).
Bellard et al.
Page 25
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 5. 
Issues and challenges for climate change driven biodiversity loss. Examples of each are 
presented and discussed in the main text. The issues are in the first box, which represents the 
main factors of uncertainty and the direction of the likely current bias (green factors and 
arrow down is a likely overestimation, while red factors and arrow up is a likely 
underestimation; both can occur simultaneously, according to the approach taken in different 
studies; black factors and question marks are for unknown direction of mis-estimation; 
double arrow means very large expected effect). Challenge types range from quantitative 
(such as increasing the number of studies and the quantity of available data, or extend the 
focus of studies to include more factors) to more qualitative ones (developing new tools and 
progressing in resolving complexity).
Bellard et al.
Page 26
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Bellard et al.
Page 27
Table 1
Advantages and disadvantages of the two components of major modelling approaches used to estimate loss of 
biodiversity due to climate change. See Figure 3 for illustrations of how the two components can be combined 
to estimate biodiversity loss.
Advantages
Disadvantages
Key
references
Biodiversity range
model component
• Bioclimatic
 Envelope Models
 (BEM)
-can be applied to a large number
of species and a variety of
taxonomic groups
- implicitly capture many ecological
processes in the relationship
between occurrence data and
spatial information
- require few data
- do not explicitly account for
mechanisms that mediate species range
- may handle novel climates poorly
- lack temporal dynamics
- assume that the current distribution of
a species is a good indicator of
favourable climate
(3, 5, 6, 11,
12, 15, 16,
17)
• Dynamic
 Vegetation
 Models (DVMs)
- include the dynamics of plant
growth, competition and, in a few
cases, migration
- allow the identification of future
trends in ecosystem function and
structure
- can be used to explore feedbacks
between biosphere and
atmospheric processes
- require detailed physiological data
- do not include plant interactions with
other taxonomic groups
- limit biodiversity to a very small number
of plant functional types.
- do not take into account fine scale
spatial heterogeneity
- are not adapted for predicting species
extinctions at local scales
(1, 4, 7, 17,
18, 19)
Species loss model
component
• Species Area
 Relationships
 (SAR)
- are easy to couple with
distribution models because they
are based on range or habitat loss
- can be applied to a variety of
taxonomic groups
- require few data
- use values of key parameters that are
not well constrained
- lack empirical evidence concerning
applicability of SAR for climate change or
at species range level
- lack temporal dynamics
- don’t account for processes influencing
extinction rates (e.g., population
dynamics, adaptive responses)
(3, 18, 20, 21)
• IUCN status
 methods
- use a widely accepted measure
of threat
- are simple to couple with
distribution models because partly
based on criteria of range or
habitat loss
- depend on thresholds that are
somewhat arbitrary
- rely on sole criteria of declining range
size in most studies
- often don’t respect time frame for
declines (i.e., 10 years or 3 generations in
most cases)
(3, 5, 22)
• Dose response
 relationships
- are anchored in measured
responses of biodiversity to global
change drivers
- can assess the impact of a wide
range of global change factors
alone or their cumulative effects
- can include time lags
- “undisturbed” ecosystems used as
baseline are difficult to define
- inadequately account for interactions
between global change drivers.
- lack validation at large regional or
global scales
- use metrics that are difficult to relate to
common biodiversity indices
(7, 8)
Ecol Lett. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 January 04.
