ICLEI Canada
401 Richmond St W #204
Toronto, ON M5V 3A8
Equitable 
Climate 
Adaptation: 
Considerations for Local 
Governments
2
1.0        ABOUT THIS RESOURCE
1.0        ABOUT THIS RESOURCE
1
2
Introduction 
to ICLEI
ICLEI Canada is part of a global network 
working to achieve tangible sustainability 
results through cumulative local actions. 
We support local governments by providing 
them with expertise and resources to take 
action in their communities. To do this, we 
bring together a wide-variety of stakeholders 
across government, industry, academia and 
the NGO community to build more sustainable, 
low-carbon, biodiverse, and climate-ready 
communities.
PURPOSE OF THIS RESOURCE
This resource is intended to address the 
barriers preventing local governments from 
taking action to support climate change 
adaptation in a way that centers equity and 
community engagement. The resource will 
both create a case for this approach as well 
as offer a toolkit of tangible, actionable ideas 
and tools for partners in local government. 
The three goals of this resource are to: 
1. Understand and address primary barriers 
preventing municipalities from centering 
equity and engagement in climate change 
adaptation.
2. Provide replicable and inspiring 
case studies of local governments and 
partnerships that have had relevant success.
3. Highlight tangible and applicable tools 
for centering equity and engagement in 
adaptation efforts. 
METHOD AND ATTRIBUTIONS
•	
Review of existing resources on equitable 
engagement and equitable climate 
adaptation
•	
Review of promising practices and projects 
employing them
•	
Conversations with stakeholders involved 
in promising practices
•	
Interviews with municipal staff who work on 
climate change initiatives and take part in 
ICLEI’s Advancing Adaptation program
•	
Interviews with equity specialists, 
representatives of equity-focused 
advocacy groups, and/or individuals from 
equity-deserving and under-represented 
perspectives
This resource is intended to provide a high-
level look at the ways in which it is essential 
for equity to be centred in climate adaptation, 
via examples and promising practices. This 
resource is not intended to be:
• A prescriptive guide for how to engage 
with individuals or communities on climate 
adaptation. Each person and community is 
different. While we can learn from examples, 
individual needs, historic and present barriers 
and inequities will look different across 
communities. 
• All-encompassing in terms of who to engage 
with, and what climate adaptation projects 
should entail
• A comprehensive guide to equity-focused 
engagement practices. There are a wealth 
of resources with significant time invested 
in reviewing effective processes for 
engagement.
In recognizing that this resource just covers 
the tip of the iceberg on a range of important 
topics, additional resources have been 
included in Section 4 to suggest next steps 
for further learning.
1.0 About This 
Resource
WHAT THIS RESOURCE IS NOT
2
1.0        ABOUT THIS RESOURCE
1.0        ABOUT THIS RESOURCE
3
2
How to use this resource
The resource includes four sections that provide different 
foundations for taking on equity-centred climate adaptation 
work. These sections include:
You are here! This section provides an 
overview of the framework that this resource 
is working within and highlights its limits. This 
section also provides information on how the 
resource was informed and built.
This section provides foundational 
information and tools that are worth 
considering across all types of projects. This 
includes:
•	
History and context about the systems 
we’re working in
•	
Examples of privilege and inequity
•	
Building the case for equity in climate 
adaptation
•	
Foundational considerations for 
partnership and engagement
Throughout this resource, there are 
consideration checklists that offer 
reflections to spark changes in process by 
posing questions that may be forgotten in the 
typical project delivery.
 
•	
A description of the project type
•	
Examples of climate adaptation projects
•	
An overview of common project phases
•	
A considerations checklist for each 
phase of the project
•	
Spotlights of projects that used 
promising practices to center equity in 
climate adaptation initiatives
The consideration checklist offers 
questions for each phase of the project. 
Considerations rather than prescriptive 
actions acknowledge that every project and 
every community is unique and that equity-
focused actions are not one-size-fits-all. 
The considerations were compiled based 
on interviews with individuals and groups 
that work with or are members of equity-
deserving and under-represented groups, 
spotlights, and cited resources.
About this Resource
Foundations for Centring Equity
Considerations by Project Type 
There are links to other resources 
throughout this guide. This section holds all 
references and links to other resources in 
one place, grouped by subject.
Additional Resources
1
2
3
4
This section addresses examples and 
considerations that are specific to different 
types of projects: infrastructure projects, 
plans and policies, and programs. Each 
section provides:
There are key foundational considerations 
to consider across all project types before 
a project is initiated. We would recommend 
referring to the Foundations for Centring 
Equity section before reviewing phase-
specific considerations.
Thank you to individuals who 
contributed to this guide through 
interviews including Julius Lindsay 
(Director, Sustainable Communities, 
David Suzuki Foundation and Co-
Founder, Black Environmentalist 
Alliance), Hetxw’ms Gyetxw (Brett 
Huson) (Author & Knowledge 
Keeper), Heliya Babazadeh-Oleghi 
(City of Mississauga), Karina 
Richters (City of Windsor), Jennifer 
Babin-Fenske (City of Greater 
Sudbury), Andrea McDowell (City of 
Hamilton), and Caitlin Pierzchalski 
(Project Watershed). The resources 
that have informed this Guide have 
been referenced throughout.
This project was done in partnership with 
5
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
4
1.0        ABOUT THIS RESOURCE
4
The systems we are in
The Limitations and Continued History of Local 
Governments and Equity-Deserving Groups
Before taking action, 
it is essential to 
recognize and build 
an understanding 
of the history and 
continued role of 
local governments in 
denying equity.
 
Local governments, as well as the 
professions that support them, 
such as Planning, Architecture, 
and Engineering, have long denied 
the rights, needs, and experiences 
of equity-seeking groups. The 
removal of Black and racialized 
communities across Canada (for 
example, Africville in Halifax and 
Hogan’s Alley in Vancouver) under 
the guise of “slum clearance” and 
“urban renewal” are examples of 
this approach.
2.0 Foundations for
Centring Equity
6
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
7
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
Resource: USDN Guide to Equitable Community-Driven Climate Preparedness Planning Pg. 15: 
How structural and institutional racism is perpetuated through government processes
It is important to recognize that, for 
individuals who experience and benefit 
from privilege in different areas of their 
identity, the process of learning about and 
acknowledging personal and organizational 
privilege and harm is uncomfortable. The 
process may also evoke discomfort about 
not wanting to get it wrong as you move 
into putting learning into action. It is worth 
reflecting on whether discomfort and fear 
of making mistakes are preventing you from 
making any changes at all. This resource is 
intended as a support for this process.
•	
Internal decolonizing – Where local 
governments hold and see themselves as 
being in the power it is important to reflect 
on situations where they should be giving 
power back to the community. Examples of 
activities staff from local governments can 
explore include:
•	
Internal trainings, workshops, and 
knowledge-building opportunities such 
as anti-oppression, anti-racism, cultural-
safety and decolonization.
•	
Reading the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada Calls to Action as 
well as other books and videos (Section 
4 provides a jumping-off point).
•	
Learning about the history of your region 
as it pertains to Indigenous peoples, 
Black and People of Colour, and other 
equity-deserving groups. 
•	
Understand how to properly 
acknowledge the lands that you are on. 
Band offices may be able to provide the 
wording and protocols with which to 
reference their ancestral lands.  
•	
Learn about the ecology of the lands 
you are on, that have been stewarded by 
Indigenous peoples.
•	
Professional reform – Staff from local 
governments can push for improved 
education (or may themselves, be 
instructors who can implement education) 
and professional standards relating to 
equity-deserving groups.
The typical municipal engagement processes continue to centre the voices of individuals 
with privilege, including those with time, resources, and power. The history of planning 
practices have treated the public, especially equity-denied groups, as needing to be 
placated. These practices may have eroded trust in the local government, impacting the 
ability to conduct effective and genuine engagement. With an understanding of the harm 
inflicted by local governments, we can focus on the need for trust-building, harm reduction 
and a restorative-justice-focused approach to begin moving forward.
While it is important that local governments as a whole address their legacy, organizations 
are at different stages of acknowledgement and action. As an individual working in a local 
government, there are actions you can take to get started. For example:
Tools: 
Understanding Types 
of Equity Objectives 
within a System1
The USDN Guide to Equitable Community-
Driven Climate Preparedness recognizes 
three primary equity objectives. 
Resource: The USDN Guide to Equitable Community-Driven Climate Preparedness also includes a 
framework for institutionalization of racism, advancing racial equity through government operations, 
and more.
•	
Creating fair, transparent, and inclusive processes for 
developing and implementing any program, plan, or policy
•	
Ensure that people are being treated equitably
•	
Increase engagement opportunities for communities 
disproportionately impacted by climate change
•	
Equitably distribute resources, benefits, and burdens
•	
Prioritize resources for communities experiencing the 
greatest impacts, inequities, and unmet needs
•	
Commit to correcting past harms and preventing future 
unintended consequences
•	
Address underlying structural and institutional systems at 
the root of inequities
Procedural
Distributional
Structural
Recognizing which objectives your work has the power to 
address can help tailor the strategies used. It is important 
that each of the three objectives is part of building equity 
and creating systemic change.
This can be used as a tool to identify where you, your 
department, and your institution have the ability to 
influence equity objectives. As you embark on projects, 
try identifying where your projects fit within the equity 
objectives in terms of the project goal and your 
opportunities for change.
8
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
9
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
The Wheel of Power and Privilege is a tool to help identify how you and the people and 
communities that you work with experience different privileges and inequalities - including 
access to municipal services and impacts of climate change. This wheel can be used 
while considering the impact of climate change, to understand ways that inequities will 
compound the effects of climate change, putting certain groups at greater risk.
Specific examples of how equity-deserving groups experience disproportionate effects 
of climate change are included in the Building the Case for Centering Equity in Climate 
Adaptation section.
The privilege wheel shown provides examples of factors and identities that impact 
one’s privilege and may impact their access to municipal services. It is not a complete 
or conclusive list, and it is important to reflect on the unique factors that exist in the 
communities that you live and work in.
Resource: Beyond Inclusion – Equity in Public Engagement (SFU Morris J. Wosk Centre for Dialogue + 
IAP2).  Page 7 provides definitions to key terms including intersectionality.
Figure 1: Wheel of Power 
and Privilege 2
Examples of Privilege 
and Inequity
Tools: 
Building the Case 
for Centering  Equity 
in Climate Change 
Adaption
PURPOSE OF BUILDING THE CASE:
This tool can be used to make the case for investing 
in and pursuing climate adaptation policy changes, 
programs, and infrastructure development that prioritizes 
equity. It provides examples of how climate change will 
disproportionally impact equity-denied groups and the 
necessity for local government to centre equity in climate 
adaptation. Opportunities for these conversations occur 
with elected officials, internal departments, funding 
partners and the public.  The tool summarizes how a range 
of social issues which local governments may interact with, 
are connected to and impacted by climate change to help 
you develop effective messages for your audience.
10
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
11
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
This may change throughout your project. 
For example, you may need to first build 
the case for other local government staff, 
followed by council and the public.
Resource Link: For more facts about how climate change disproportionately impacts equity-
deserving groups, check out the International Institute for Sustainable Development’s Deep Dive on 
Equity, diversity, and inclusion in Canada’s National Adaptation Strategy: 
www.iisd.org/articles/social-inclusion-climate-adaptation
Identify your audience.
1
Identify their priorities and 
concerns. 
2
3
EXAMPLES OF CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON 
EQUITY ISSUES 
Flooding, extreme heat, and wildfires are examples of climate-related events that will 
increase housing insecurity.
Considerations:
•	
Are there statistics about the number of people who are experiencing housing insecurity, 
core housing need, and homelessness in your community? If so, use these to communicate 
this population’s need for greater engagement and supports in adapting to climate change.
•	
What groups are present in your community that may experience intersecting barriers 
(such as race, Indigenous identity, LGBTQ+ identity) to housing and the effects of climate 
change? If so, use this to guide who your engagement program targets, and the supports 
you provide to make engagement both accessible and beneficial to the involved groups.
•	
Do studies of climate change impacts look at intersecting barriers experienced by equity-
deserving communities? (I.e., flood plain mapping and income level). If they do, how can you 
communicate this information to prioritize support for equity-deserving communities. What 
communities do you require data from and what institutions could you partner with to build 
this information?
Housing and Homelessness
Poor quality housing, housing insecurity and lower insurance coverage can 
increase individuals’ vulnerability to the effects of climate change.  Being 
homeless or precariously housed increases vulnerability to weather extremes, 
which climate change will put further strain on.  
Extreme heat, extreme cold and severe weather such as winter storms are examples of 
climate-related events that will exacerbate energy insecurity.
Considerations:
•	
Does your community or region have data on energy security?  If so, this information can be 
used to communicate the need for greater levels of engagement and supports in adapting 
Energy Security
As climate change increases weather extremities, more energy will be required 
for warming and cooling. This presents an issue on energy supply and equitable 
access. Rising energy prices will put an even greater strain on households 
in low socioeconomic status, many of whom are women, visible minorities, 
racialized immigrants, seniors, and people with disabilities.
Three Steps to 
Building the Case:
To connect their priorities with equity and 
climate change adaptation. Use existing 
information and studies to develop relevant 
facts and examples. For example, 
•	
People with low socioeconomic 
status, people of colour, (racialized) 
immigrants, people with disabilities, 
people experiencing homelessness, 
and other equity-deserving groups are 
more susceptible to climate change in 
Canada.3  
•	
Mobility-related disabilities can endanger 
an individual during disasters wherein 
evacuation is necessary. A 2013 global 
survey by the United Nations Office for 
Disaster Risk Reduction found that only 
21% of persons with disabilities believed 
they could evacuate without difficulty.4
•	
Climate-related disasters can place 
LGBTQ2+ people at greater risk of 
violence and discrimination.5
Your audience will likely have other priority 
issues that you can relate to equity. Identify 
where connections between a social issue, 
equity, and climate adaptation can be made 
to address their priorities. For example, your 
audience could be:
•	
Financially motivated, in which case they 
need to understand the cost of inaction. 
•	
Focused on a specific social issue (such 
as homelessness or food security) but 
have not yet made the connection to 
climate change adaptation. 
•	
Focused on climate change but do not 
understand the connection to equity and 
social issues.
Identify facts and examples 
12
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
13
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
Food security is impacted by extreme heat, severe weather, and water quality and quantity 
exacerbated   by climate change.
Considerations:
•	
Does your community or region have plans, policies, and programs that focus on food 
security?  If so, these can help communicate the need to focus on food security from an 
equity lens. 
Food Security
Climate change directly impacts agricultural production, processing, 
distribution, and consumption which affect human health. Climate change will 
increase the cost of food which will have significant effects on people as well 
as social stability.6  Food security disproportionately impacts equity-deserving 
groups, including Indigenous and racialized people, and remote communities in 
Canada. 
Considerations:
Do public space and green infrastructure plans in your community look at intersecting barriers 
experienced by equity-deserving communities? (I.e., tree canopy cover and income). If they 
do, how can you communicate this information to prioritize support for equity-deserving 
communities? If you do not have this information, what communities could you draw data 
from to apply to your community and what institutions could you partner with to build this 
information?
Green Infrastructure and Public Space 
Public spaces and green infrastructure have significant benefits to mental 
health and inclusion. Areas with a higher percentage of tree canopy 
cover provide a higher level of benefits from trees including stormwater 
management, pulling particulates from the air, improving human mental and 
physical health, storing greenhouse gases, and cooling their environments. 
Many equity-deserving communities live in areas with limited green 
infrastructure and access to public greenspace.
•	
to climate change to populations that are energy insecure.
•	
Are there examples from other communities taking action in addressing energy insecurity. If 
so, use these case studies as successful example to share with your audience.
Individuals and communities without access to green space will experience greater risks 
associated with climate change-related events including poor air quality, extreme heat, 
and flooding.
Tools: 
Foundational 
Considerations 
for Engagement 
and Partnership in 
Climate Adaptation 
Projects
PURPOSE OF ENGAGEMENT AND 
PARTNERSHIP
Collaborative problem-solving leads to improved outcomes.  
Local governments can begin or enhance community-
engaged work on climate change adaptation as effective 
partners in ways that involve equity-deserving groups 
throughout a project. The considerations in this tool apply 
across all projects. There are additional checklists in 
Section 3 with considerations that are unique to different 
types of projects. Many of the considerations draw heavily 
from the interviews with individuals and groups that work 
with or are members of equity-deserving and under-
represented groups, spotlights, and cited resources.
The checklist offers considerations rather than prescriptive actions in 
acknowledgement that every project and every community is unique and that equity-
focused actions are not one-size-fits-all. The considerations are intended to spark a 
change in process by posing questions that may be forgotten in the typical phases of 
project delivery.
There are existing guides on equitable and effective engagement that include in-depth 
concepts and considerations for engaging with communities. This checklist is not a 
complete list – it is important to learn from existing resources (which are referenced 
throughout and after the checklist) which focus entirely on equitable engagement.
13
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
14
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
15
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
Based on who will be impacted, 
whose voice needs to be included?
Consider the climate change impact 
and the location to ensure that those 
experiencing or feeling the effects 
are heard from.
Representation without relationships, 
power, and information is tokenism.
PROJECT INITIATION 
Have you developed staff, 
community, and political readiness 
with an understanding of why the 
project must centre equity and 
climate adaptation?8
Developing staff, community, and 
political readiness through education 
can help to reduce negative 
feedback that could halt or de-rail 
the project and negatively impact 
the equity-deserving communities 
involved.
Are partners from equity-deserving 
groups brought into the project 
in a way where the relationships, 
power, and direction to follow 
and implement their direction are 
available?
Have you helped prepare 
communities to be engaged? 
Have you identified who the best 
organization or group Is to do the 
engagement?
Planning to support individuals 
with greater barriers and lived 
experience in participating in a way 
where it provides benefits to them. 
It is important to consider that the 
local government may not have 
sufficient trust to conduct effective 
engagement with equity-deserving 
communities. In these cases, other 
intermediaries may be engaged to 
conduct the engagement. These 
could be non-profit groups, social 
purpose consultants, community 
leaders, religious groups, and more.
Have you considered selecting or 
prioritizing your projects based 
on the objectives and priorities of 
equity-deserving communities?
Climate adaptation projects can have 
many co-benefits, and sometimes 
can be selected and prioritized 
starting with the other benefits 
rather than from a climate lens. 
Consider engaging equity-deserving 
communities to understand their 
priorities and then identifying or 
prioritizing climate resilience projects 
that contribute to achieving the 
community’s priorities. For example, if 
a community’s priority Is employment, 
identify projects that achieve 
employment while building climate 
resilience.
It is important to understand 
the history of the community’s 
engagement prior to starting the 
project, specifically the ways that 
past processes have exacerbated 
mistrust and further marginalized 
equity-deserving communities.
Do you understand the degree 
that equity-deserving groups 
were engaged in and impacted 
by past programs from your local 
government? 
Have you built and maintained 
relationships with communities 
that will disproportionally face the 
effects of climate change before 
their formal engagement is needed 
on a project?
Building relationships and trust 
outside of essential work tasks can 
make engagement and partnerships 
possible and positive.
Who will be impacted and how? 
Have you identified how the climate 
change impacts related to the 
project may disproportionately 
impact different and intersecting 
identities and experiences? Have you 
identified gaps in your knowledge on 
the impacts to these individuals?
Lived experiences of equity-deserving 
individuals and projections of future 
conditions and impacts can help 
prioritize locations and project 
phases.
BEFORE PROJECT INITIATION 
Have you reflected on who is being 
heard by your local governments’ 
current engagement processes? 
Centring equity in climate change 
requires a shift in the engagement 
mechanisms currently relied on 
by local governments. The base-
level required engagement is not 
effectively engaging equity-denied 
communities
Engagement can be approached as an 
attempt to gain a stamp of approval. 
This is specifically harmful to equity-
deserving groups. Asking questions 
and attempting to engage, especially 
if there is no potential to benefit 
those individuals is detrimental to 
those individuals (i.e., requiring time 
and capacity, degrading trust.
Before engaging, have you assessed 
whether the project and associated 
engagement have the potential 
to benefit equity-deserving 
communities? 
16
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
17
2.0        FOUNDATIONS FOR CENTRING EQUITY
Have you identified leaders, 
grassroots organizations, and 
community hubs to partner with on 
the project in the communities you 
are targeting for involvement? Have 
you allocated and clearly defined 
funding to these partners?
By identifying leaders, grassroots 
organizations, and community hubs 
to partner with you can develop a full 
understanding of how climate change 
is impacting a community and what 
action is already being taken or could 
be taken.
PROJECT DELIVERY
Are you using methods to lower 
barriers to engagement?9  
For example, you can lower barriers 
to engagement by paying people 
for their time and lived experiences, 
paying for childcare, transportation, 
and meals, and communicate using a 
language of choice.
Are you regularly reporting back to 
the communities you have engaged 
with? 
By communicating project directions 
and reflections and sharing how 
results inform ongoing project 
development  the community has 
the opportunity for continued 
engagement.
Are you regularly checking in with 
your partners to make sure the 
project has mutual or community-
focused benefits? 
For example, are you creating 
opportunities for the community to 
develop skills and capacities that 
they have identified as being useful?
Resource: Beyond Inclusion – Equity in Public Engagement (SFU Morris J. Wosk Centre for Dialogue + 
IAP2). Use this resource to inform your engagement methods in working with equity-deserving groups.
Do you have a plan to investigate and 
report on failures?
If a project that centred equity 
failed, in-part or in totality, review 
the process and use it to learn 
and improve in the future. Projects 
could be written off due to their 
failed end results, when the issue 
was situational and solely related 
to the project implementation 
and/or delivery – the initiative may 
represent a promising practice that 
could be applied successfully in a 
different context.  
Consider using California 
Environmental Justice 
Alliance’s five considerations 
to identify impacts:7
Evaluate Adaptive Capacity
the ability of the population 
to resist or recover from 
the effects of the hazards 
under current conditions. 
Can address state of critical 
infrastructure and see what 
needs to be strengthened, 
and added to enhance 
resilience.
Identify Hazards
climate-related hazards in the 
frontline community under 
current and future conditions 
and how they might change 
over time
Identify Populations
specific groups present in 
the frontline community that 
may experience additional 
effects of the hazards, i.e. 
consider age, physical and 
mental health, employment, 
citizenship status, and other 
socioeconomic factors.
Analyze Potential Impacts
using scientific research 
and insight from frontline 
community members, assess 
how severe each effect will be 
for different demographics of 
the population.
Identify Vulnerabilities & 
Impacts 
based on the gathered 
information. and how they 
might change over time
19
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
3.0 Considerations 
for Three Project 
Types
Centring Equity 
In Infrastructure 
Adaptation Projects
Infrastructure projects, such as new and upgraded 
municipal infrastructure, are an important part of 
climate adaptation. 
 
These projects tend to be big financial investments, have long lifespans, and can have long 
lasting impacts on surrounding communities – both positive and negative. Including equity 
in these projects from the outset can help ensure that project benefits are maximized and 
the negative impacts that can’t be eliminated are mitigated.
EXAMPLES OF INFRASTRUCTURE CLIMATE 
ADAPTATION PROJECTS 
•	
Nature-based infrastructure, such as bioswales and green roofs that increase 
resilience to flooding and urban heat island effect
•	
Enhanced pumping, piping and storage infrastructure and drainage systems to protect 
from intense urban flooding
•	
Adjustments to transportation routes and construction
•	
Incorporating climate considerations into existing infrastructure upgrades
•	
Urban tree planting or creek restoration
•	
Purchasing or dedicating land for conservation purposes
Adaptation Infrastructure Projects
Adaptation Plans and Policies
Programming for Climate Adaptation
20
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
21
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT PHASES  
PROJECT IDENTIFICATION 
Have you allocated and clearly defined funding and 
decision-making power to your partners?
Tools: 
Considerations 
for Infrastructure 
Projects
Have you secured the necessary funding for 
effective and meaningful engagement in the 
remaining project phases?
How will the funding mechanism of the project impact equity-deserving groups? 
For example, will local-area Improvement taxes be unaffordable to some? Will 
grant timelines impact the ability to effectively engage with equity-deserving 
groups? Are there ways to offset any negative impacts?
How is equity considered in the project identification and prioritization phase? Do 
project cost-benefit analyses incorporate an understand of benefits (or potential 
negative impacts) to equity-deserving groups?
22
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
23
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
CONSTRUCTION AND 
COMMISSIONING
Do you have effective 
communication channels with the 
equity-deserving groups whom this 
project will impact to address any 
new concerns or issues, and ensure 
their needs are being met?  
For example, communicating ongoing 
construction impacts through multiple 
languages and formats to ensure the 
information is received by those who need it. 
Providing contact information for people to 
provide feedback or ask questions.
Have you created a plan with the 
communities where the project is 
sited, specifically equity-deserving 
groups, to mitigate any temporary 
disturbances?
For example, relocating a bus stop closed 
due to construction impacts.
What procurement opportunities 
exist to benefit equity-seeking 
groups? 
How can you monitor impacts of 
the project during and following 
commissioning? Are these impacts 
the same or different from what was 
expected?
ONGOING OPERATIONS 
AND MAINTENANCE
Have you secured funding, support, 
and community buy-in to maintain 
the infrastructure?  
Spotlight 
Project Watershed: 
Kus-Kus-Sum
Location: Courtenay, British Columbia
Partners: K’ómoks First Nation, Project Watershed, and the City of Courtenay
Climate Change Issues(s): Flooding and Stormwater Management
Description: The Kus-kus-sum project is a three-way partnership between Project 
Watershed, K’ómoks First Nation and the City of Courtenay which will create a vibrant and 
productive habitat along a major fish bearing stream and a connection to Hollyhock Flats, 
one of the most productive areas in the K’ómoks Estuary. The project will remove 8.3 acres 
of concrete, recontour and replant the area with native species, and eventually repatriate 
the lands to K’ómoks First Nation.
The partnership involved in the project is a unique one and has been essential in meeting 
the project’s goals. Project Watershed has supported Kus-kus-sum’s coordination, 
fundraising, and management of restoration efforts. Project Watershed also has long-
standing involvement and connection to the community which has supported effective 
engagement. The City’s involvement was able to support permitting, tax exemptions, 
financing and fundraising, project planning and providing regional context. The City of 
Courtenay and K’ómoks First Nation will co-manage the project after initial restoration 
is complete and before the land is fully restored to the Nation. K’ómoks First Nation also 
supported fundraising, culturally informed and advised on the project, and is actively 
involved in the plans, cultivation, restoration and monitoring, and ongoing management of 
the property. Coordinators note that the dedication of all partners to the project coming 
to fruition has been essential. The partners continue to come to the table; once per 
month elected officials and staff from across the partnership meet to discuss progress, 
challenges, and solutions. 
In project delivery, Kus-kus-sum is utilizing the economic development opportunities 
created through the infrastructure development with purchasing and services focused 
locally, within the community and Nation. 
Beyond the project structure, the process of engagement embodies the values of equity 
with regular, open and transparent engagement sessions and annual town halls that
Have you considered unintended 
consequences such as 
gentrification, displacement, and 
safety issues that may arise for 
individuals from equity-seeking 
groups as a result of your project?13 
FEASIBILITY AND DESIGN 
Have you considered the social and 
political history of the site where 
your proposed initiative will take 
place?12 
Local governments have histories of 
locating large infrastructure projects 
in neighbourhoods where they 
displace and harm equity-deserving 
residents (review Section 1 for 
examples and more information).
23
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
24
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
25
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
focus on low-barrier engagement. The project team has also created a broad range of 
volunteer opportunities for everyone, beyond restoration work which has limited physical 
accessibility. 
The name, Kus-kus-sum was dedicated to the project when 
K’ómoks First Nation was brought on to the partnership, and 
means “very very slippery”, being the name of a past village site 
from across the river where the project takes place.
Key takeaways from the project: 
•	
The Kus-kus-sum project has been ongoing for over a decade and has in some cases 
required deadlines to be extended. An innovative model can be one of many factors 
leading to the project going long. It is important for municipalities to commit to long-
term projects and set expectations that they often will not happen quickly in order to 
be delivered effectively and allow necessary dialogue. 
•	
Partnerships with non-profits and Indigenous communities can support more effective 
engagement. 
•	
The involvement of non-profits can support significant focus on a project over shorter 
timespans as non-profits are often able to evolve their work focus more nimbly, in 
comparison to local governments.
•	
Infrastructure projects can create economic development opportunities focused in 
Indigenous communities through partnership with First Nations.
•	
Repatriating lands to Indigenous communities can be integrated into infrastructure 
projects.
Visit kuskussum.ca to learn more and stay updated on the Kus-kus-sum project.
In creating this guide, an important element was the inclusion of spotlights on equity-
focused climate adaptation in practice. The focus was not on providing spotlights that 
were perfect, but rather, to spotlight projects that focused on equity as a core objective, 
employed innovative practices in local government settings, and had success in some 
project phases. The process of identifying infrastructure projects highlighted the lack 
of infrastructure project centring equity, to date, specifically in Canada. While the Kus-
kus-sum project is not yet finished, it provides a hopeful example of promising practices 
being put into action. The lack of projects to date, speaks to the goal of this resource, 
to support staff in local governments to advance equity-focused climate adaptation 
infrastructure.  
Reflections: Gaps In Infrastructure Projects That Center 
Equity In Climate Adaptation.
Centring Equity in 
Adaptation Plans and 
Policies
Plans and policies set direction for local governments. 
Local governments are increasingly developing climate 
change plans which chart the course of the government to 
contribute to mitigation and adapt to the effects of climate 
change. Such plans are important in laying the groundwork 
for action on climate change. However, they are not the 
only planning documents that must take climate change 
adaptation into account. There is a need to implement 
climate action into nearly all plans and policies (often called 
mainstreaming). In essence, all plans can address climate 
change. Knowing that climate change will disproportionally 
impact equity-deserving groups, it is essential that plans 
and policies also focus on equity from start to finish. 
Examples of Plans and Policies 
•	
Climate Action Policy and Plans (including mitigation and 
adaptation)
•	
Greenspace and Park Plans 
•	
Neighbourhood/Community Plans and By-laws 
•	
Emergency Evacuation Plans
•	
Asset Management Plans 
•	
Official Plans and Land Use Policies
•	
Stormwater Management Plans
•	
Transportation Plans
•	
Zoning and By-law amendments that limit development in 
areas at risk of flooding
•	
Eliminating regulatory barriers, creating policy 
requirements or incentives to install living shorelines and 
naturalized watercourse buffers
24
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
26
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
27
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
PLAN AND POLICY PHASES   
The following outlines a typical process for a mid to large-scale 
plan or policy development or update process. The process will 
vary between local governments.
Resource: Beyond Inclusion – Equity in Public Engagement (SFU Morris J. Wosk Centre for Dialogue + 
IAP2). Page 7 provides definitions to key terms including intersectionality.
PRE-PLANNING AND INITIATION
If you are building upon, updating or reviewing an existing plan or policy, have 
you assessed and understood the consequences of current plans / policies on 
individuals experiencing poverty / socio-economic barriers? 
Poverty and socio-economic barriers are often intersectional issues.
Resource:  Intersectionality is a term coined by 
Kimberlé Crenshaw. “Intersectionality is an analytical 
lens that recognizes how power structures and 
individual lived experiences are influenced by 
multiple aspects of an individual’s identity and social 
location, including their gender, race, socioeconomic 
background, age and disability. These intersecting 
factors may magnify experiences of discrimination 
and disadvantage, and create unique circumstances 
that impact accessibility, safety, inclusion and equity in 
public engagement processes.”
28
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
29
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
Have you considered the social 
and political history of the [areas / 
communities] where your proposed 
initiative will take place?14
Are you taking steps to actively 
contribute to reconciliation with 
communities, specifically where 
involved sites have history of the 
local government inflicting harm on 
equity-deserving communities?
DEVELOPMENT 
Have you developed staff, 
community, and political readiness 
with an understanding of why the 
project must centre equity and 
climate adaptation?
The levels of engagement required 
by your local government’s charter 
/ formal requirements set out a 
minimum standard for engagement. 
These standards will rarely be 
sufficient for engagement, 
particularly with equity-deserving 
groups.
This could include empowering (the 
part of the IAP2 spectrum that offers 
the public the highest level of impact) 
the impacted communities with the 
decision-making power over the site. 
IAP2 Spectrum of Public Participation: https://iap2canada.ca/foundations
Have you considered unintended 
consequences such as 
gentrification, displacement, and 
safety issues that may arise for 
individuals from equity-seeking 
groups as a result of your project?15  
Will the plan or policy transfer 
problems from one location to 
another? Specifically, from areas 
with more equity-deserving 
communities?
When reviewing options and drafting, 
have you ensured that the additional 
responsibilities or impacts of the 
plan / policy are placed on those 
with greater wealth and privilege? 
EVALUATION
AND APPROVAL 
Have you developed staff, 
community, and political readiness 
with an understanding of why the 
project must centre equity and 
climate adaptation?
It is important to consider the 
point at which you are asking for 
engagement. Asking for engagement 
at this phase in the project if 
engagement has not yet been 
meaningful may cause further harm 
and degrade trust.  
Have you reported the outcome(s) 
back to the communities you have 
engaged with? Have you provided 
support and continued commitment 
if these decisions did not address 
concerns and issues faced by 
individuals engaged?
Have you accurately represented the 
degree that you have empowered, 
collaborated with, involved, and 
consulted equity-deserving groups 
when presenting the plan / policy? 
IMPLEMENTATION
AND MONITORING
Have you reported outcomes 
back to the communities you have 
engaged to reflect engagement 
directions and share how results 
inform ongoing plan and policy 
development? 
Considerations for 
Plans and Policies 
30
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
31
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
Spotlight 
Lived Experience of 
Extreme Heat in British 
Columbia
Location: Commissioned by the BC Climate Action Secretariat, Run by the Provincial 
Extreme Heat Response Framework Working Group
Partners: Developed by Shift to a Better World and URSUS – Resilient Strategies Inc.
Climate Change Issues(s): Extreme Heat
The program conducted a series of engagements with equity-deserving groups with 
experience of extreme heat events. The program was based on the knowledge that 
the effects of extreme heat are not experienced equally across populations, and that 
heatwaves will become increasingly common with climate change. The BC Climate Action 
Secretariat commissioned the project to inform future planning and policy development.
The program centered lived experiences from priority populations and identified applicable 
recommendations. The program also utilized leading methods to center equity-denied 
groups in policy and planning exercises.
Key takeaways from the project: 
The program was not run by a municipality but showcases a number of important 
techniques that can be applied to local governments:
•	
Centering individuals with lived experience in informing and identifying issues and 
potential actions
•	
Partnerships with organizations that are based in/knowledgeable about the community 
being served
•	
Prioritizing engagement before action to reduce harm
In Canada, the need to address re-occurring, longer-term extreme heat is a relatively new 
issue that will be exacerbated by additional climate change. Focusing the first step of this 
issue around understanding the need of equity-denied groups experiencing increased 
risk, is an important foundation, to be followed by policy, programs and infrastructure. This 
process could be applicable to local governments of all sizes.
Spotlight 
Mississauga Climate 
Change Action Plan 
Engagement
Location: The City of Mississauga, Ontario
Partners: Escape from the 6, Many Feathers, Blackwood Gallery at University of Toronto.
Climate Change Issues(s): All / General Climate Mitigation and Adaptation
The City of Mississauga used unique engagement and outreach 
methods to inform and educate the community on the process 
to create the Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP).
The City’s CCAP engagement included:
•	
The Imagine 2050 Escape Room – a non-traditional community engagement with an 
immersive, interactive climate change-themed escape room. 
•	
The After Dark Earth Market – which brought thousands of residents together for a 
climate-themed market partnered with Many Feathers to engage residents on the topic 
of climate change and provide information on the City’s Climate Change Project.
•	
Work of Wind: Air, Land, Sea – in partnership with the Blackwood Gallery at the University 
of Toronto, Mississauga held a ten-day climate change themed public art exhibit to 
share about climate change through art.
•	
An estimate of 90% of the people who took part in the escape room event would 
not have otherwise participated in the CCAP. A number of factors contribute to lack 
of engagement, particularly for equity-deserving communities – such as lack of 
historical support from local governments, lack of time and energy, lack of results from 
governments.
30
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
31
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
32
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
33
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
Key takeaways from the project:
•	
Consider who typical municipal engagement activities empower and work for 
•	
Break norms of municipal engagement (e.g., public hearings) and go above and 
beyond the engagement that is required 
•	
Go where people are rather than asking them to take the time to come to you
•	
Do what people want to do 
•	
Create benefits for the communities you want to work with (these benefits can be 
offering fun activities)
•	
Ask questions your intended stakeholders are willing to answer
•	
In order to get people who wouldn’t usually participate, you need to host something 
cool, something that people want to do
Centring Equity in 
Municipal Programming 
for Climate Adaptation
Programming is used by local governments to deliver services and implement priorities 
identified in plans and policies. 
Examples of Municipal Programming to Advance Climate Adaptation Priorities
•	
Opening cooling / warming / clean air facilities in response to heat waves, wildfire, or 
intense storms
•	
Home retrofit programs
•	
Renewable energy installation and supplements
•	
Social connectedness programs (increased social connections can increase resilience)
•	
Emergency preparedness and evacuation trainings 
•	
Educational programs run with schools 
•	
Adapted infrastructure operations, such as additional gutter and culvert cleaning to reduce 
likelihood of flooding
•	
Incentive programs such as heat pump installation or urban tree preservation on private 
property
33
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
32
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
34
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
35
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
PROJECT PHASES   
Considerations 
for Programs
INITIATION
Have you identified existing 
community-led/grassroots initiatives 
that overlap with or relate to your 
program? 
If they exist, how can you work 
together and achieve mutual goals, 
and not re-create a new program or 
compete for resources.
Have you identified a need for 
the program with the potential 
program beneficiaries? Do you 
have the capacity to support their 
ongoing engagement in the program 
development process, and to use 
their guidance?
DESIGN 
Have you ensured that incentives 
and benefits are accessible and 
usable to individuals in equity-
deserving groups?
For example, does your program 
primarily target and benefit 
homeowners rather than renters?
Does project leadership / guidance / 
advisory reflect the community you 
are collaborating with and serving?16 
Does staffing reflect the community 
you are collaborating with and 
serving? 
IMPLEMENTATION
Review Section 2 for engagement and 
partnership considerations that can be 
applied to this phase.
EVALUATION AND 
ONGOING WORK
Have you created program 
performance metrics that prioritize 
equity and social wellbeing?17
36
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
37
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
Spotlight 
A Guide to Talking to 
People in Your Life 
About Climate Change
Link: https://pub-richmondhill.escribemeetings.com/filestream.ashx?DocumentId=41009
Location: City of Richmond Hill, Ontario
Partners: The Public Studio + citizens
Climate Change Issues(s): All / General Climate Impacts and Communication
Program description from the toolkit: “In late 2020 and early 2021, the City partnered 
with The Public Studio and a group of citizens over a series of workshops. In our work 
together, we identified the need to bring more people into this work in ways that are 
inclusive and accessible; that speak to the specifics of Richmond Hill and meet our diverse 
communities where they’re at. We are attempting to do this in ways that are simultaneously 
compassionate and data-driven; in ways that work towards uniting our municipality in 
engaging in climate action.”with regular, open and transparent engagement sessions and 
annual town halls that
A representative involved with the municipality at the time the program was administered 
highlighted that in addition to the useful product created, the project followed an 
important and unconventional process for working with equity-deserving individuals and 
the public: empowerment. The guide was created by a group of community members who 
were empowered to create something - anything – that they thought would be useful. The 
representative highlighted this as an under-represented type of partnership: partnering 
from an equal or subservient relationship. 
Resource: IAP2 Spectrum of Public Participation: https://iap2canada.ca/foundationsIAP2). Empowering 
in part of the IAP2 spectrum that offers the public the highest level of impact by giving the impacted 
communities the decision-making power.
Key takeaways from the project:
•	
Create all documents at an accessible reading level and translate them into other 
languages based on who lives in your municipality
•	
Focus on climate actions that can uplift and reduce hardships on equity-deserving 
communities and consider those that may create further hardships and harm (e.g., 
promoting electric vehicles – which are more costly)
•	
Look for opportunities to empower stakeholder and partners from equity-deserving groups 
by supplying resources and decision-making power
•	
How can we shift more programs towards the far side of the IAP2 spectrum, in contrast to 
typical municipal actions which inform and consult? 
36
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
37
3.0        CONSIDERATIONS BY PROJECT TYPE
38
4.0        ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
39
4.0        ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
Additional Resources
Conducting Equitable and Inclusive Engagement
·     Beyond Inclusion – Equity in Public Engagement (SFU Morris J. Wosk Centre for Dialogue + 
IAP2)
	
·      Definitions of common equity-related terms
·      COO
	
·      Steps for internal preparation for local governments undertaking equity work (Pg. 10)
Understanding Equity & Climate Change
·      Guide to Equitable Community-Driven Climate Preparedness Planning (Urban 
Sustainability Directors Network)
	
·      Diagram with Root Causes and Factors affecting Sensitivity to Climate Change (Pg. 12)
	
·      Equity objectives: procedural, distributional, and structural equity (Pg. 17)
·      Resource: Integrating Equity, Diversity And Inclusion Into Municipal Climate Action (ICLEI 
- Local Governments for Sustainability and the Federation of Canadian Municipalities)
Taking Action on Climate Adaptation
·      ASAP Living Guide to the Principles of Climate Change Adaptation
	
·      Principles for quality and effective climate adaptation work (Pg. 5)
	
·      Strategies for gaining traction and maximizing the effects of climate adaptation 
                    (Pg. 9)
Understanding Governments’ Role in Equity 
·     Guide to Equitable Community-Driven Climate Preparedness Planning (Urban 
Sustainability Directors Network)
	
·      How structural and institutional racism is perpetuated through government
                    processes (Pg. 15)
Cultivating Hope and Evoking Cultural Change Within Government Institutions
•	
Hope Matters by Dr. Elen Kelsey (Book)
•	
Braiding Sweetgrass and Gathering Moss by Robin Wall Kimmerer (Book)
•	
Commanding Hope: The Power We Have to Renew a World in Peril by Thomas Homer-Dixon 
(Book)
4.0 Additional 
Resources
40
4.0        ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
41
4.0        ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
End Notes
1 Adapted from the USDN Guide to Equitable Community-Driven Climate Preparedness.
2 Graphic from Tessa Watkins (tessawatkins.com/wheel-of-privilege), adapted from Sylvia 
Duckworth, Canadian Council for Refugees, and Olena Hankivsky, PhD.
3 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/275035333_Adapting_to_climate_change_an_
introduction_for_Canadian_municipalities
4 https://www.unisdr.org/2014/iddr/documents/2013DisabilitySurveryReport_030714.pdf
5 https://www.iisd.org/articles/social-inclusion-climate-adaptation
6 https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/16/14/2531
7 Adapted from California Environmental Justice Alliance’s SB 1000 Toolkit and Making Equity Real 
in Climate Adaptation and Community Resilience Policies and Programs: A Guidebook
8 USDN Guide to Equitable Community-Driven Climate Preparedness
9 Adapted from Beyond Inclusion – Equity in Public Engagement, SFU Morris J. Wosk Centre for 
Dialogue and IAP2
10 Adapted from Beyond Inclusion – Equity in Public Engagement, SFU Morris J. Wosk Centre for 
Dialogue and IAP2
11 Examples adapted from the American Society of Adaptation Professionals Living Guide to the 
Principles of Climate Adaptation
12 HCI Equity Guidance, Jay Pitter Placemaking
13 HCI Equity Guidance, Jay Pitter Placemaking
14 HCI Equity Guidance, Jay Pitter Placemaking
15 Consideration from Healthy Communities Initiative Equity Guidance, Jay Pitter Placemaking
16 HCI Equity Guidance, Jay Pitter Placemaking
17 HCI Equity Guidance, Jay Pitter Placemaking
Equitable Climate Adaptation: 
Considerations for Local Governments
