A Guide to Application
Equity and Climate Lenses
Dufferin
county
3
2
This lens prompts us to consider whether our policies, plans, and projects will affect the climate, through 
the production of greenhouse gas emissions, or be affected by climate, through variables such as 
temperature or precipitation. By considering climate change in our decision-making processes, we can 
identify opportunities to reduce emissions (mitigation), enhance climate resilience (adaptation), and 
contribute to a more sustainable future in alignment with the County’s Climate Emergency Declaration, 
the Dufferin Climate Action Plan, and the Dufferin Climate Adaptation Strategy. The simultaneous 
application of a climate and equity lens enables us to disrupt a cycle in which climate risks exacerbate 
existing inequities which, in turn, result in greater exposure and vulnerability to climate change. 
We understand that the application of these lenses will require staff to think about and approach their 
work differently. To help with these changes, additional resources and training will be provided to support 
staff engage in conversations about and apply both lenses with confidence.
Introduction
Dufferin County’s 2023-2026 Corporate Strategic Plan reflects the County’s shared vision, mission, and 
values and outlines our key priority areas, goals and initiatives for the next four years and beyond. As 
part of this plan, for the first time, we are adopting Equity and Climate lenses that will be applied across 
the entire County administration through our day-to-day operations, decision making processes and 
policy design. These lenses will help us understand and evaluate the impacts of new or changing County 
policies, programs and services, ensuring that we are making decisions with social and environmental 
considerations foregrounded and in alignment with our long-term objectives. 
This foundational resource will provide greater understanding into the interconnectedness of climate 
and equity and will position employees from all departments to make decisions that result in 
transformational change and outcomes. Further, through the process of applying equity and climate 
lenses, the County will be able to identify and plan for additional required human, financial, and physical 
resources.
Both the climate crisis and inequities experienced by people globally is a result of intersecting forms of 
oppression derived from white supremacy, capitalism, and patriarchy. Through the use of various 
modalities, including the application of equity and climate lenses, we seek to break down silos and 
transform institutional culture through transformational, anti-racist and anti-oppressive experiences, 
policy processes, learning communities, and innovative ways of thinking and doing that center the needs 
of people experiencing marginalization. 
Appendix A. provides a summary of key terms and concepts to support you in the application of equity 
and climate lenses.
What is a Climate Lens?
An equity lens is a process for analyzing or diagnosing the impact of the design and 
implementation of policies and programs on under-served individuals and groups 
that experience marginalization, and to identify, mitigate and potentially eliminate 
systemic barriers.
It is explicit in drawing attention to the inclusion of marginalized populations, typically racialized 
communities, Indigenous peoples, 2SLGBTQ+ communities, persons with disabilities etc., and can be 
adapted to focus on other communities. The results of the Equity Audit and Supplemental Review 
indicate that there are disparities in how staff belonging to groups that are marginalized are experiencing 
the organization. Using an equity lens helps to disrupt and challenge the idea that policies, procedures, 
practices and organizational culture are neutral. It forces us to ask critical questions that examine power 
and privilege, and requires that we center the needs, impact and outcomes on individuals experiencing 
marginalization so that disparities are not further perpetuated.
A climate lens is a mechanism to systematically analyze the relationship between 
a municipal decision and climate change. 
What is an equity lens?
5
4
When Should I apply Equity and Climate lenses?
County staff at all levels and departments are required to routinely apply equity and climate lenses as it 
applies to their sphere of work. This includes but is not limited to policy development and implementation, 
budget proposals, program operations and service delivery. It should be applied at the earliest stages of 
all planning and decision-making processes and throughout the development and implementation 
process. Recognizing that processes are not always linear, staff are encouraged to apply the lens 
continuously and iteratively as their work evolves and reflect back on outcomes to identify opportunities 
for future growth.
Equity and climate lenses can and should be customized based on department specific decisions. 
However, the general questions in the worksheets below are examples to get you thinking about equity 
and climate from the start of a planning or decision-making process that will result in outputs and 
outcomes that are more equitable and climate robust than they would have been otherwise.
MANDATORY APPLICATION OF LENSES 
To advance and deliver upon our organization’s equity and climate commitments, the formal submission 
of an Equity and Climate Lens Assessment will be required for projects and initiatives that fall under one 
or more of the following categories: 
•	
Projects identified in the Corporate Strategic Plan 
•	
Project or initiative that is community facing and impacts residents 
•	
Corporate wide initiative 
•	
Project expenditure over $50,000
How to apply Equity and Climate lenses? 
Applying equity and climate lenses to the County’s day to day operations and services will be easier at 
times than others. Barriers such as budget constraints and/or provincial and federal legislation may 
inhibit progress towards advancing equity and climate considerations in project outcomes. And while we 
may not be able to overcome these barriers, it’s important that staff still use the Climate and Equity Lens 
Tool iteratively throughout the project lifecycle as doing so enables a post-project analysis of lessons 
learned and individual skill development by shifting the way staff make decisions and think about their 
work. 
The submission of an Equity and Climate Lens Assessment will ensure potential climate and equity 
considerations and integrated into decision-making processes. The following steps provide an overview 
of the assessment process.
PHASE 1 
Step 1: Complete Phase 1 the Equity and Climate Lens Assessment  
Complete the questions listed under Phase 1 of the attached Equity and Climate Lens Assessment in the 
earliest stages of project planning. Collaborate with relevant teams and stakeholders as necessary to 
provide an in-depth analysis of the initiative’s climate and equity implications.  
Step 2: Project Sponsor Review 
Share the draft assessment with the Project Sponsor. Gather their feedback and incorporate any necessary 
revisions or improvements to strengthen the assessment. Once refined, the Project Sponsor will approve 
and sign-off on the assessment. 
PHASE 2 
Step 1: Implementation and Monitoring 
Use the assessment findings to inform decision-making and project planning. Regularly reflect on the 
Equity and Climate Lens Assessment to monitor the project’s progress and reassess to ensure continued 
alignment with equity and climate commitments. 
Step 2: Complete Phase 2 of the Equity and Climate Assessment 
Complete the questions listed under Phase 2 of the attached Equity and Climate Lens Assessment in the 
reporting stages of a project. Collaborate with relevant teams and stakeholders as necessary to cultivate 
a deep understanding of opportunities for future improvements.  
Step 3: Project Sponsor Approval 
Share the completed Equity and Climate Lens Assessment with the Project Sponsor to review, sign, and 
provide additional comments if needed.  
Step 4: Submit Equity and Climate Lens Assessment 
Provide a copy of the signed and completed Equity and Climate Lens Assessment to [CONTACT]. 
[CONTACT]. 
Assessments will be filed and used to inform the development of future training and resources. The 
outcomes of the application of the Equity and Climate Lens Assessment will be communicated through 
[REPORTING MECHANISM].
[REPORTING MECHANISM].
SUPPORT
For questions about the equity lens, please contact Kareema Sookdeo or Rohan Thompson.
For questions about the climate lens, please contact Sara MacRae.
What is a project sponsor?
A project sponsor is accountable for project progress and outcomes. This individual provides 
guidance and resources to the project team and manager.
7
6
Equity Lens Assessment: Phase 1
Project Name:
Project Manager:
Project Sponsor:
Start Date:
2. What group(s) experience disparities related to this policy, program or decision? Are they at the table? 
(If not, why?)
3. How might the policy, program or decision affect the negatively impacted group(s) identified in 
question 2? How might it be perceived by the group(s)? 
1. What is the policy, program or decision under review?
4. Does the policy, program or decision improve, worsen, or make no change to existing disparities? 
5. Does the change result in systemic change that addresses systemic discrimination?  
6. Does the policy, program, or decision produce any intentional benefits or unintended consequences 
for the negatively impacted group(s)? 
8. Have you conducted an environmental scan to see what promising equity practices or case studies 
exist related to this project/policy/program? If so, please include website links, and/or key points below. 
If not, why?
7. Who or what groups benefit the most from the current practice?
9. Based on the above responses, what are the possible revisions to the policy, program, or decision 
under review or being developed? 
9
8
10. What additional resources are required to implement the proposed revisions?  
11. If present, what systemic barriers may limit the application of the proposed revisions?
12. What revisions will you move forward with and why? What revisions will you not move forward with 
and why? 
PHASE 1 | PROJECT SPONSOR SIGN-OFF
Phase 1 assessment is approved 
Phase 1 assessment is approved, pending revisions noted (below) 
Phase 1 assessment is not approved, for reasons noted (below) 
Comments:
Project Sponsor Name
Project Sponsor Signature
Date
Equity Lens Assessment: Phase 2
2. Were there any challenges or limitations encountered? If so, how were they overcome or how did they 
impact project outcomes? 
3. What lessons can be learned for future applications of an equity lens? 
1. How did the equity lens shape the project’s final decisions and outcomes?
PHASE 2 | PROJECT SPONSOR SIGN-OFF
Phase 2 assessment is approved 
Phase 2 assessment is approved, pending revisions noted (below) 
Phase 2 assessment is not approved, for reasons noted (below) 
Comments:
Project Sponsor Name
Project Sponsor Signature
Date
11
10
2. Does the policy, program, or decision result in the production of greenhouse gas emissions? If yes, can 
the measure be adjusted to reduce greenhouse gas emissions? 
3. Are there opportunities to influence greenhouse gas reductions indirectly through the measure (e.g. 
development standards, encouraging active transportation, enhacement of natural assets, e.t.c.)?
1. What is the policy, program or decision under review?
4. What climate impact(s) is the policy, program, or decision vulnerable to (e.g., temperature, precipitation, 
or extreme weather)?  Explore the Dufferin Climate Adaptation Strategy for local climate projections.
5. Does the measure inadvertently increase the vulnerability of human, built, or natural systems to 
climate change? (e.g. fragmentation of ecological corridor, increase exposure to extreme heat, or flood 
hazards)
9. Based on the above responses, what are the possible revisions to the policy, program, or decision 
under review or being developed? 
6. How can the measure be modified to better address the risks posed by climate change?
8. Does the policy, program or decision improve, worsen, or make no change to climate inequities? How 
might the measure be modified to advance environmental and climate justice? 
Climate Lens Assessment: Phase 1
Project Name:
Project Manager:
Project Sponsor:
Start Date:
7. Have you conducted an environmental scan to see what promising practices or case studies exist 
related to this project/policy/program? If so, please include website links, and/or key points below. If 
not, why?
13
12
10. What additional resources are required to implement the proposed revisions?  
11. If present, what systemic barriers may limit the application of the proposed revisions?
12. What revisions will you move forward with and why? What revisions will you not move forward with 
and why? 
PHASE 1 | PROJECT SPONSOR SIGN-OFF
Phase 1 assessment is approved 
Phase 1 assessment is approved, pending revisions noted (below) 
Phase 1 assessment is not approved, for reasons noted (below) 
Comments:
Project Sponsor Name
Project Sponsor Signature
Date
Climate Lens Assessment: Phase  2
2. Were there any challenges or limitations encountered? If so, how were they overcome or how did they 
impact project outcomes? 
3. What lessons can be learned for future applications of a climate lens? 
1. How did the climate lens shape the project’s final decisions and outcomes?
PHASE 2 | PROJECT SPONSOR SIGN-OFF
Phase 2 assessment is approved 
Phase 2 assessment is approved, pending revisions noted (below) 
Phase 2 assessment is not approved, for reasons noted (below) 
Comments:
Project Sponsor Name
Project Sponsor Signature
Date
15
14
Appendix A. Key Concepts
Anti-oppression  
Strategies, theories, and actions that challenge social and historical inequalities/injustices that 
have become part of our systems and institutions and allow certain groups to dominate over 
others (Canadian Race Relations Foundation). 
Anti-racism  
A process, a systematic method of analysis, and a proactive course of action rooted in the 
recognition of the existence of racism, including systemic racism. Anti-racism actively seeks to 
identify, remove, prevent, and mitigate racially inequitable outcomes and power imbalances 
between groups and change the structures that sustain inequities (Government of Ontario). 
Equity 
Equity aims to give everyone what they need to be successful, unlike equality which treats 
everyone the same. Equity recognizes that everyone is different and has unique needs that must 
be met so they are able to meaningfully participate and achieve their full potential (Findings 
Report, 40; Supplemental Report, 106). 
Patriarchy  
The norms, values, beliefs, structures, and systems that grant power, privilege, and superiority to 
men, and thereby marginalize and subordinate women. While patriarchy does privilege men, this 
privilege does not automatically extend to all men—i.e. men of colour, Indigenous men, gay/
bisexual men, men living in poverty, or differently abled men—given the intersecting operation of 
racism, heterosexism, classism, and ableism (Government of Canada, Department of Defence). 
Power 
All power is relational, and the different relationships either reinforce or disrupt one 
another. The importance of the concept of power to anti-racism is clear: racism cannot be 
understood without understanding that power is not only an individual relationship but a 
cultural one, and that power relationships are shifting constantly. Power can be used malignantly 
and intentionally, but need not be, and individuals within a culture may benefit from power that 
they are unaware of (Alberta Civil Liberties Research Centre). 
Privilege  
Unearned power, benefits, advantages, access, and/or opportunities based on membership or 
perceived membership in a dominant group (Government of Canada, Department of Defence). 
Systemic Discrimination  
Consists of patterns of behaviour, policies, or practices that are part of the social or administrative 
structures of an organization, and which create or perpetuate a position of relative disadvantage 
for racialize persons. These appear neutral on the surface but have an exclusionary impact on 
racialized persons (Government of Canada, Department of National Defence). 
White Supremacy 
The idea that white people and the ideas, thoughts, beliefs, and actions of white people are 
superior to people of colour and their ideas, thoughts, beliefs, and actions. White supremacy 
expresses itself interpersonally as well as structurally (through our governments, education 
systems, food systems, etc.) (Government of Canada, Department of National Defence).
EQUITY
CLIMATE
Adaptation
Includes any initiatives or actions in response to actual or projected climate change impacts and 
which reduce the effects of climate change on built, natural and social systems.
Climate Change
Climate change refers to changes in long-term weather patterns caused by natural phenomena 
and human activities that alter the chemical composition of the atmosphere through the build-
up of greenhouse gases which trap heat and reflect it back to the earth’s surface.
Climate Impact
The effects of existing or forecast changes in climate on built, natural, and human systems. One 
can distinguish between potential impacts (impacts that may occur given a projected change in 
climate, without considering adaptation) and residual impacts (impacts of climate change that 
would occur after adaptation).
Environmental Justice
Environmental justice is the fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless 
of race, color, national origin, or income, with respect to the development, implementation, 
and enforcement of environmental laws, regulations, and policies (United States Environmental 
Protection Agency). Born from the concept of environmental justice, climate justice means 
creating solutions to the climate crisis that are fair for everyone by considering climate change 
through political, social, cultural, racial, environmental, and economic lenses.
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and 
anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of 
thermal infrared radiation, emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. 
Human activities such as the use of fossil fuels or land-use change increases the concentration of 
greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere and contribute to climate change. 
Mitigation
The promotion of policy, regulatory and project-based measures that contribute to the 
stabilization or reduction of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere. Renewable 
energy programs, energy efficiency frameworks and substitution of fossil fuels are examples of 
climate change mitigation measures.
Resilience
The capacity of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to adapt, by resisting or 
changing in order to reach and maintain an acceptable level of functioning and structure. 
Resilience is not simply the ability to bounce back, but rather refers to bouncing forward – 
to transform and enhance the capacities of the community to prepare and respond to future 
climate impacts.
Vulnerability
The sensitivity or predisposition to be adversely affected by climate change. Vulnerability 
encompasses a variety of concepts and elements including sensitivity or susceptibility to harm 
and lack of capacity to cope and adapt. 
