CLIMATE RISK MATRIX
Dr. Blair Feltmate
Natalia Moudrak
Kathryn Bakos
Brian Schofield
GENEROUSLY SUPPORTED BY:
March 2020
FACTORING 
CLIMATE 
RISK 
INTO 
FINANCIAL 
VALUATION
ABOUT THE INTACT CENTRE ON CLIMATE ADAPTATION
The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) 
is an applied research centre at the University 
of Waterloo. The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 
with a gift from Intact Financial Corporation, Canada’s 
largest property and casualty insurer. The Intact Centre 
helps homeowners, communities and businesses to 
reduce risks associated with climate change and extreme 
weather events. For additional information, visit: 
www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca
ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY OF WATERLOO
The University of Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation 
university. With more than 41,000 full and part-time 
students (Fall 2019), the university is home to the world’s 
largest co-operative education system of its kind. 
The university’s unmatched entrepreneurial culture, 
combined with an intensive focus on research, powers 
one of the top innovation hubs in the world. For 
additional information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca
ABOUT THE GLOBAL RISK INSTITUTE
The Global Risk Institute is the premier organization 
that defines thought leadership in risk management for 
the financial industry globally. It brings together leaders 
from industry, academia, and government to draw 
actionable insights on emerging risks globally. For more 
information, visit: https://globalriskinstitute.org/
ABOUT SCOTIABANK
Scotiabank is a leading bank in Canada and a leading 
financial services provider in the Americas. We are 
here for every future. We help our customers, their families 
and their communities achieve success through a broad 
range of advice, products and services, including personal 
and commercial banking, wealth management and private 
banking, corporate and investment banking, and capital 
markets. With a team of more than 100,000 employees 
and assets of over $1 trillion (as at October 31, 2019), 
Scotiabank trades on the Toronto Stock Exchange (TSX: 
BNS) and New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: BNS). For 
more information, please visit www.scotiabank.com and 
follow us on Twitter @ScotiabankViews.
ABOUT INTACT FINANCIAL CORPORATION
Intact Financial Corporation (TSX:IFC) is the largest 
provider of property and casualty (P&C) insurance in 
Canada and a leading provider of specialty insurance 
in North America, with over $11 billion in total 
annual premiums. The Company has approximately 
16,000 employees who serve more than five million 
personal, business and public sector clients through offices 
in Canada and the U.S. In Canada, Intact distributes 
insurance under the Intact Insurance brand through a 
wide network of brokers, including its wholly-owned 
subsidiary BrokerLink, and directly to consumers through 
belairdirect. Frank Cowan brings a leading MGA platform 
to manufacture and distribute public entity insurance 
products in Canada. In the U.S., OneBeacon Insurance 
Group, a wholly-owned subsidiary, provides specialty 
insurance products through independent agencies, brokers, 
wholesalers and managing general agencies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Intact Centre thanks GRI, Scotiabank and IFC for 
their support of the report. We are grateful to Ernest 
Wiebe who offered substantial insight into producing the 
list of key T&D climate risk and mitigation measures, 
and to stakeholders across Canada who provided expert 
input to development of the T&D and CRE matrices.
CITATION
Feltmate, B., Moudrak, N., Bakos, K. and B. Schofield. 2020. 
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation. Prepared 
for the Global Risk Institute and Scotiabank. Intact Centre 
on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
	
For information about this report, contact 
Kathryn Bakos: kathryn.bakos@uwaterloo.ca
	
DISCLAIMER
The information stated in this report has, to the best of our 
knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible. The 
Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees of any kind, as to the 
completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of the data provided 
in the report. This report has been prepared for general guidance on 
matters of interest only and does not constitute professional advice. 
You should not act upon the information contained in this publication 
without obtaining specific professional advice. No representation 
or warranty (express or implied) is given as to the accuracy or 
completeness of the information contained in this publication, and 
Intact Centre employees and affiliates do not accept or assume any 
liability, responsibility or duty of care for any consequences to you or 
anyone else acting, or refraining to act, in reliance on the information 
contained in this report or for any decision based upon it.
1
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
Executive Summary	
p. 3
Introduction	
p. 4
Growing Cost of Climate Change	
p. 6
Method: Developing Climate Risk Matrices	
p. 8
Results	
p. 9
Climate Change, Extreme Weather Risk and Financial Valuation	
p. 11 
CASE STUDY:	
p. 14
Extreme Weather Impacts Applied To Financial Valuation
Role of Subject Matter Experts	
p. 18
Beneficiaries of Climate Risk Matrices	
p. 19
• Securities Commissions	
p. 19
• Credit Rating Agencies	
p. 19
• Boards of Directors	
p. 19
Next Steps	
p. 20
References	
p. 21
Appendix	
p. 23
TABLE OF 
CONTENTS
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
2
3
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
“	 The framework presented in this report provides a solid 
and practical way to assess and value physical climate 
risks, supporting improved disclosure and better pricing 
of  climate risks.”
Tiff Macklem
	Chair, Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance
Climate Risk Matrices, presented herein for two industry 
sectors, identify the top 1-2 physical climate risk impacts 
that portfolio managers should prioritize as most 
material to affect performance of companies within 
a given sector. These 1-2 impacts reflect the expert 
advice of operations officers or similarly experienced 
subject matter experts within industry sectors – based 
on their collective experience, these practitioners are 
best positioned to identify a short list of material means 
by which flood, drought, fire, wind, etc., may convey 
risk to companies within a specific sector. Within this 
paper, climate risk reflects the magnitude of an impact, 
juxtaposed to its probability of occurrence (which 
includes tail risk). Prioritized impacts presented within 
Climate Risk Matrices provide standardized guidance to 
portfolio managers, in user-friendly language, which can 
be used to determine if, and how, issuers are mitigating 
climate change and extreme weather risk satisfactorily.
Two Climate Risk Matrices – Electricity Transmission & 
Distribution (T&D), and Commercial Real Estate (CRE) 
– presented in this paper, illustrate the user-friendly and 
interpretable information that a portfolio manager would 
receive. The protocols used to develop both the T&D 
and CRE Climate Risk Matrices are transferable to any 
industry sector.
Guidance is presented to help ensure that issuers profile 
climate risk data, relative to each industry sector, in 
a manner that is readily predisposed to five common 
financial valuation methods: (1) Ratio Analysis, (2) 
Discounted Cash Flow, (3) Rules of Thumb Valuation, 
(4) Economic Value Added (EVA®), and (5) Option 
Pricing Models. Utilizing these methods, a quantitative 
case study is presented whereby climate risk impact on 
share price is presented for a publicly traded issuer, thus 
illustrating that so-called “non-financial” measures of 
performance are predisposed to valuation.
Relative to next steps, all major industry sectors were 
reviewed (utilizing publicly available climate risk/
ESG reports) to determine which offer the greatest 
predisposition to develop additional industry-specific 
Climate Risk Matrices going forward. Those sectors 
were determined to include (1) Materials, (2) Energy, 
(3) Utilities, (4) Industrials, and (5) Real Estate (See 
Appendix 1).
Although the utility of Climate Risk Matrices 
discussed herein focuses on institutional investors, the 
matrices offer value to securities commissions (to guide 
expectations on climate risk related disclosure), credit 
rating agencies (to identify a borrower’s key climate risk 
liabilities) and Boards of Directors (to set a framework 
for Board members to ask appropriate climate risk 
related questions of management).
Time is not a luxury in reference to applying climate risk 
to portfolio management. The development of industry-
specific Climate Risk Matrices offers an immediately 
executable and practical means to incorporate climate 
risk into portfolio management now, which in turn will 
drive GLOBAL preparedness to arrest the future impact 
of irreversible and largely debilitating climate change.
The Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), and the Expert Panel 
on Sustainable Finance (EPSF), both advised that climate change and extreme weather 
risk should factor into institutional portfolio management. This paper offers a practical means to 
execute on that advice, that conforms well with the risk management protocols that have become convention 
since the financial crisis (2008).
EXECUTIVE 
SUMMARY
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
4
A warming climate (IPCC 2019) and 
associated extreme weather risks (e.g., flood, 
drought, fire, hail, wind, extreme heat, storm 
surge/sea level rise, permafrost loss) will 
be more challenging across Canada, and 
globally, as described in Canada’s Changing 
Climate report (ECCC 2019):
“There is overwhelming evidence that the 
Earth has warmed during the Industrial Era 
and that the main cause of this warming is 
human influence. The observed warming 
and other climate changes cannot be 
explained by natural factors, either internal 
variations within the climate system or 
natural external factors such as changes in 
the sun’s brightness or volcanic eruptions. 
Only when human influences on climate are 
accounted for… can these observed changes 
in climate be explained.
This warming is effectively 
irreversible.”
INTRODUCTION
>
>
“ Climate change and extreme weather risks can represent 
challenges for capital markets. This report provides practical 
guidance that will help the financial sector to better incorporate 
climate risk into financial valuation.” 
Brian Porter
President and Chief Executive Officer, Scotiabank
5
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
In response to irreversible climate change, global 
warming, and exacerbated extreme weather events, 
many companies spanning most (if not all) industry 
sectors will suffer disruptions to the continuity of their 
operations due to physical climate change induced 
impacts (Krueger et al. 2019, Roman 2019, Macklem 
et al. 2019, TCFD 2018). When these disruptions are 
material – for example, if an extreme weather event 
resulted in flooding that truncated supply chain, which 
subsequently impacted a company’s long-term cash flow 
– fiduciary duty would require that this information be 
disclosed, as it could affect the decision of an investor to 
buy/hold/sell stock in the company (Bank of Canada 
2019, Giuzio et al. 2019, Tooze 2019).
The fiduciary logic of the above scenario is straightforward 
– however, there are practical limitations that prohibit 
corporations, spanning virtually all industry sectors, from 
disclosing climate-related risk that may be material to 
an investor. As articulated by Macklem et al. (2019) and 
CSA (2019), the challenge is this:
“ Institutional investors are dissatisfied 
with the state of corporate climate-related 
reporting in Canada, noting a general 
inability to determine whether non-
disclosure reflects legitimate immateriality 
or a lack of internal focus. Investors are 
turning to third-party providers that face 
the same information barriers, making 
assurance difficult.”
Building on this observation, Krueger et al. (2019) 
highlight that despite growing empirical evidence that 
investors should consider climate stress, integrating 
climate risk into investment management can prove to 
be challenging, as investment tools and best practices 
are not yet well established. However, a few studies 
are beginning to record the direct financial impacts of 
extreme weather on valuation – for example, Addoum 
et al. (2019) have shown that extreme temperatures can 
adversely affect corporate earnings, and Kruttli et al. 
(2019) document that extreme weather can be reflected 
in stock and option market prices.
The primary purpose of this paper is to present 
a protocol and framework that, if applied across 
industry sectors, will alleviate the dissatisfaction felt by 
institutional investors regarding reporting relative to 
climate risks. The framework prioritizes the top 1-2 means 
by which each category of extreme weather (e.g., flood, 
fire, wind, etc.) may negatively impact each industry sector, 
while simultaneously identifying the action that an investor 
could expect a company to take to mitigate prioritized 
risks (including probable risk and tail risk). The framework 
of risk prioritization is profiled in an easily interpretable 
industry-specific Climate Risk Matrix. Furthermore, by way 
of a case study, the translation of extreme weather risk into 
impact on share price is calculated using standard financial 
valuation methods.
Although the target audience for the Climate Risk 
Matrix is institutional investors, the matrix will also be 
of value to securities commissions calling for material 
climate risk disclosure by issuers (e.g., CSA Staff Notice 
51-358 2019). In Canada, it is within the mandate of 
corporations to disclose climate risk, as directed by the 
Canadian Securities Administrators, beginning with 
CSA Staff Notice 51-333, Environmental Reporting 
Guidance (2010). Until the release of the Phase I 
Report of the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosures (TCFD 2016), this notice did not draw 
appropriate attention by issuers across Canada.
The Climate Risk Matrix also offers utility to credit 
rating agencies, under circumstances where extreme 
weather events might impact the capacity of a borrower 
to repay a loan. As suggested by Tigue (2019):
“Credit ratings, much like individual credit scores, assess 
how likely it is that a borrower will repay debt. Those 
ratings can affect how much governments and companies 
are able to borrow and how much it will cost them. Just 
the threat of a lower credit rating can pressure cities 
and companies to be more proactive in taking steps to 
mitigate risks, and now those risks are starting to include 
climate change.”
In sum, a concise encapsulation of industry-specific 
climate change and extreme weather risks, presented in 
standardized user-friendly form, would be of primary 
benefit to aforementioned institutional investors, 
secondarily to securities commissions and credit rating 
agencies, and to a growing extent Boards of Directors 
that need concise guidance on the physical manifestation 
of climate change risk.
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
6
In this study, two industry sectors – Electricity Transmission 
& Distribution (“T&D”) and Commercial Real Estate 
(“CRE”) – are profiled to illustrate how climate change and 
extreme weather risk can be incorporated into portfolio 
management by institutional investors. T&D and CRE 
were appropriate to serve as “model sectors”, based on 
three requisite criteria (TCFD 2019):
•	 Operational Impacts: T&D and CRE are experiencing 
substantial impacts due to climate change and extreme 
weather events (e.g., Bienert 2016, Burillo 2018);
•	 Mitigation Actions: relative to T&D and CRE, 
means to mitigate climate change and extreme weather 
risks are reasonably well understood (e.g., CSA 2019, 
BOMA 2019); and
•	 Geographical Range: climate change and extreme 
weather risks (e.g., flood, fire and wind) can impact T&D 
and CRE in virtually any populated region of Canada.
Before describing the framework to establish the Climate 
Risk Matrix, it is necessary to first describe how climate 
risk will continue to become more severe, and thus of 
greater relevance to institutional investors and more 
broadly the capital markets.
GROWING COST OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE
The term “new normal” is often used to describe 
weather that today is more extreme than was 
commonplace prior to 2010 (Moore 2019) – however, 
caution should be exercised relative to this terminology, 
as it can instill a sense of complacency with institutional 
investors that could unintentionally add risk to their 
investment decisions. Extreme weather, driven in concert 
with a changing climate, will continue to evolve and 
become increasingly severe over time, thus generally 
rendering greater costs across industry sectors. Otherwise 
stated, there will be nothing normal about the weather 
of the future (GCA 2019). Investors must, therefore, be 
vigilant and cognizant of the increasing potential for 
severe weather to impact investments over time.
There is no better witness to the financial costs associated 
with extreme weather than the Property and Casualty 
(“P&C”) insurance sector, where the impacts of a flood, 
fire, wind, etc., can be tallied almost instantly (Moudrak 
et al. 2017). Recognizing that the impact of extreme 
>
7
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
weather would not be restricted to one area of business 
(Bloomberg 2014), the P&C sector should be viewed 
as a proxy for the growing cost of climate change that 
will impact, to varying degrees, most if not all industry 
sectors going forward.
In Figure 1, which profiles annual catastrophic insurable 
loss claims for Canada (i.e., a “cat loss” is any event 
such as a flood, fire, hail storm, etc., that triggers $25 
million or more in insurable losses), there is a discernable 
upward trend in losses since 1983. Note that the losses 
presented in the figure are normalized for inflation to 
$2018, and for per capita wealth accumulation – thus 
the horizontal axis presents a comparison of “apples to 
apples”. The trend of increasing costs associated with 
extreme weather events should concern any investor 
as a predictor of growth in climate change risk that is 
pervasive across industry sectors.
As a cautionary note, the upward claims trend in Figure 
1 is not solely due to escalations in extreme weather 
events. For example, compounding factors that can 
affect flood claims include loss of permeable areas and 
natural habitats due to development (i.e., the loss of the 
natural “sponge” capacity of wetlands and green spaces 
to absorb water/reduce flooding), aging municipal 
infrastructure and housing construction practices that 
did not incorporate flood-resilience considerations 
adequately in the past (Moudrak and Feltmate 2019).
Further evidence of the growing costs associated 
with extreme weather is evident in escalating Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) payments 
made by the Federal Government of Canada – these are 
funds that are transferred from the federal to provincial 
or territorial governments, principally to provide relief 
when the costs associated with natural catastrophes 
are exceptional. According to Public Safety Canada, 
the number of natural disasters for which provinces 
and territories were granted assistance under DFAA 
increased nearly tenfold from 2005 – 2014 as compared 
to the previous decade. Going forward, the annual costs 
borne by DFAA will average $902 million, with $673 
million attributable to flood relief. The $902 million 
Source: IBC Facts Book, PCS, CatIQ , Swiss Re, Munich Re & Deloitte. Values in $2018 CAN; total losses are normalized by 
inflation and per-capita wealth accumulation
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
$CAD Billions
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Quebec
Floods
Ontario
Wind & Rain
Slave Lake
Fire
Alberta & Toronto
Floods
Fort McMurray Fire
Eastern
Ice Storm
Loss & Loss Adjustment Expenses
Estimated Trend 
Figure 1: Catastrophic Insured Losses in Canada (1983 – 2018)
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
8
projection is substantially in excess of the nominal DFAA 
program budget of $100 million (PBOC 2016).
Escalating insurance claims, combined with substantial 
increases in DFAA transfer payments, presage the 
growing risk that climate change and extreme weather 
will present to institutional investors. The discussion 
now turns to a practical means to prioritize risks in 
user-friendly format that managers may factor into 
portfolio management.
METHOD: DEVELOPING 
CLIMATE RISK 
MATRICES
The method to construct Climate Risk Matrices, for both 
electricity T&D and CRE, is described below. Where the 
protocol applied to T&D vs. CRE varies, such differences 
are described. The protocol applied to establish climate 
risk for T&D and CRE would be applicable to virtually 
all industry sectors.
The method to establish a Climate Risk Matrix was 
based on two axioms. First, that insight to identify and 
prioritize climate change and extreme weather risk 
resides within the collective intelligence and consensus 
of operating officers, or similarly experienced senior 
persons, who have worked in specific industry sectors 
for an extended period of time (i.e., which in this study 
was deemed to be > 20 years of service). Second, that 
six-to-eight “subject matter experts”, each with at least 
20 years of experience, thus representing total “person 
years of experience” of 120 - 160 years, would have 
collective insight to identify and prioritize physical 
climate change risks, if any, relative to their respective 
industry sectors.
In this paper, there is also an assumption that the 
manifestation of extreme weather would be in the 
direction of risk to an issuer, more so than benefit.
Based on the above criteria, subject matter experts, with 
at least one representative drawn from eastern, central, 
western and northern regions of Canada, were engaged 
in the following generalized protocol to help create a 
Climate Risk Matrix for each of T&D and CRE: 
1)	 each expert was asked to identify physical climate 
change risks/hazards they deemed to be most 
material to their business operation (e.g., flood, fire, 
wind, etc.);
2)	 each expert was asked to describe up to 5 ways in 
which their operations could be impacted by each of 
the identified hazards (e.g., service disruption, power 
outage, equipment damage, etc.); and
3)	 experts were brought together for an in-person 
meeting to determine the most material hazards and 
associated operational challenges impacting industry 
as a whole (accomplished vis-à-vis a voting exercise, 
where only 2-3 operational challenges were allowed to 
be kept per hazard).
Once the climate change and extreme weather concerns 
were established, subject matter experts performed three 
additional tasks:
1)	 identify what action, if any, could be reasonably taken 
to limit the identified risk/hazard;
2)	 provide a question the portfolio manager could 
present to a company or issuer to determine if the 
issuer was aware of the risk; and
3)	 provide direction as to what would constitute an 
“excellent response” or “good response” by the issuer 
in reference to risk mitigation.
Following the generalized protocol profiled above, 
Climate Risk Matrices were completed for the T&D and 
CRE sectors.
In addition to subject matter input received from 
experts in T&D, information was also drawn from 
NRC – CSA Group Canadian Electrical Code (CE Code), 
Climate Change Adaptation Project (CSA Group 2019), 
and additional insight was received from Ernest Wiebe 
(Innovative Solutions Engineering Inc., personal communication, 
2019). Similarly, input into CRE drew upon expert 
advice from members of  the Building Owners 
Management Association (BOMA Canada), Real 
Property Association of  Canada (REALPAC), and 
Moudrak and Feltmate (2019).
>
9
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
>
RESULTS
Material presented below has not been field tested 
for ease of use/user-friendliness by multiple portfolio 
managers – accordingly, direction in the tables is not 
final, but rather penultimate (practitioner feedback 
would fine tune future versions).
Table 1 considers climate risk from the perspective of 
electricity T&D.
Flood
Fire
Wind Storm
Ice and Snow 
Loading
Thawing Permafrost
Key Climate 
Risk 
Impacts
Flood-induced high 
water levels result in 
inadequate electrical 
clearances below lines 
that are hazardous to 
the public
Fire along 
transmission corridors 
can cause outages 
if corridors are not 
adequately clear of 
brush
Vegetation/tree 
contacts with 
transmission lines 
can cause arcing, 
fires and outages
Vegetation/tree 
branches can fall onto 
T&D lines causing 
outages
T&D lines can be 
brought down by wind 
forces
T&D lines and 
structures can 
collapse under 
heavy ice loading
Thawing/ 
discontinuous 
permafrost can 
displace transmission 
tower foundations, 
causing structural 
collapses and outages
Mitigation 
Measures
Ensure structures 
are tall enough for 
safe clearance under 
foreseeable flood 
levels, or lines are 
installed underground
Conduct patrols 
(visual inspection of 
utility equipment 
and structures) in fire 
prone areas
Clear vegetation 
along transmission 
corridors
Clear vegetation along 
transmission corridors
Install anti-galloping 
devices on conductors 
and ensure structures 
are designed to 
withstand winds
Install visual 
monitors to detect 
ice loading. Before 
ice loads build, 
boost current to 
melt ice (i.e., short 
the line)
Modify structure/ 
designs to readily 
permit adjustment 
of towers when 
line patrols identify 
permafrost thaw 
displacement
Key 
Questions to 
Determine 
Readiness 
to Mitigate 
Climate Risk
What percentage of 
T&D lines in flood- 
prone areas have 
sufficient clearance to 
safely accommodate 
a 1:200 year flood 
without de-energizing 
the line?
What percentage 
of total length 
of overhead 
transmission lines 
in wildfire-possible 
areas are closer 
than 10 metres 
horizontally to tree 
branches?
What percentage of 
total length overhead 
Transmission lines 
in treed areas are 
closer than 10 metres 
horizontally to tree 
branches that are 
higher than the 
conductors?
Are overhead lines 
that are susceptible 
to icing monitored 
by cameras that 
observe icing on 
the conductors?
Are your transmission 
structures, in 
discontinuous 
permafrost areas, of 
a design where the 
structured footings can 
be adjusted without de- 
energizing the line?
Excellent 
Answer
> 75%
None
< 5%
Yes
Yes
Good Answer
50% or higher
< 10%
< 25%
Yes, the most recent 
ones
Table 1: Climate Risk Matrix - Electricity Transmission and Distribution (material highlighted in red reflects 
prioritized areas of  focus applied to portfolio management)
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
10
Flood
Fire
Wind Storm
Ice and Snow 
Loading
Thawing Permafrost
Key Climate 
Risk 
Impacts
Flooding can lead 
to property damage, 
potential for life 
loss and business 
disruption
Property damage 
and business 
continuity 
disruptions 
increase if critical 
equipment 
is damaged 
or rendered 
unworkable
Wildfire can lead to 
property damage, 
potential for life 
loss and business 
disruption
Smoke from wildfires 
contains fine 
particulate matter and 
gases such as carbon 
monoxide and carbon 
dioxide, which when 
concentrated impact 
respiratory health and 
may aggravate pre- 
existing heart and lung 
conditions
High winds 
can loosen the 
perimeter flashing 
of the roof leading 
to roof detachment 
or “peel off”
Windborne debris can 
shatter windows
Snow and ice can 
accumulate on flat 
roofs, increasing 
the risk of roof 
collapses
As snow and ice melt 
on the roof, leaks can 
cause water damage 
and mould
Outdoor pipes and 
pipes in unheated areas 
such as basements, 
garages and crawl 
spaces can burst under 
extreme cold
Thawing permafrost 
can lead to structural 
building collapses
Mitigation 
Measures
Emergency 
Management Plan, 
including flood 
procedures, is tested 
annually with operations 
staff and tenants
Elevators are equipped 
with water sensors to 
automatically return to 
higher floors if water is 
in the basement or the 
underground parking
Critical equipment 
such as HVAC, 
electrical and 
communication 
systems and server 
rooms are elevated 
above expected 
flood levels. If not 
feasible to elevate, 
these systems are 
wet flood-proofed
“Fire-resistant zone” 
is established within 
10 metre perimeter of 
property
Roofs and gutters kept 
free of combustible 
materials, and 
openings and vents are 
equipped with non-
combustible screen 
mesh
HEPA/Activated 
Carbon filters are 
installed on HVAC 
system to cleanse air 
from wildfire smoke
Roof is reinforced 
and additional 
fasteners are applied 
at the perimeter and 
corners
Impact-resistant glass 
is installed to prevent 
shattering from debris
Snow and ice is 
proactively removed 
from roofs
Snow removal items 
are available (e.g., 
heating cables and 
chemical deicers) and 
snow/ice removal 
contractors are 
secured
Thermal imaging 
cameras are installed 
to detect leaks and 
prevent mould
Outdoor pipes and 
pipes in unheated 
areas are insulated
Building foundations 
are strengthened with 
piles, backfilled with 
coarse-grained soil 
under the foundation
Key 
Questions to 
Determine 
Readiness 
to Mitigate 
Climate Risk
Are HVAC, 
electrical, 
communication 
systems and server 
rooms elevated or 
otherwise flood 
protected?
Does HVAC system 
have capacity to cleanse 
air from smoke?
Is roof reinforced 
for severe wind 
around upper 
perimeter and 
corners?
Is snow and ice 
proactively removed 
from roofs?
Are measures present 
to limit damage 
where permafrost loss 
may affect structural 
integrity?
Excellent 
Answer
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Good Answer
> 50% of facilities
> 50% of facilities in 
high snowfall regions
Table 2: Climate Risk Matrix – Commercial Real Estate (material highlighted in red reflects prioritized areas of  focus 
applied to portfolio management)
Table 2 considers climate risk from the perspective of CRE.
11
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
As is evident based on a review of Tables 1 and 2, 
interpretation of climate change and extreme weather 
risks does not require depth of technical expertise. 
Almost any large cap portfolio manager – with or 
without expertise in T&D and CRE – could utilize 
the information presented in both tables.
In addition to the non-technical nature of information 
in Tables 1 and 2, the short time-frame within which 
a portfolio manager could review the table would be 
advantageous. Under conditions whereby many portfolio 
managers are addressing climate risk analytics for the 
first time, a readily accessible review would engage them 
more than a dense/time consuming process.
Once portfolio managers and analysts appreciate 
the risks associated with climate change and extreme 
weather risks, the next point for consideration is how 
that risk translates to impact financial valuation and 
share price performance – key considerations in this 
regard follow below.
CLIMATE CHANGE, 
EXTREME WEATHER 
RISK AND FINANCIAL 
VALUATION
Once climate change and extreme weather risks have 
been identified, the question to consider from the 
perspective of financial valuation is this – can these 
non-financial measures be translated into impact on 
share price? The short answer is yes, as illustrated in 
this section and the next. However, there are some 
precautionary steps to be taken to maximize translation 
of risk into valuation.
More specifically, recognizing that Climate Risk Matrix 
data will increasingly become available to investors by 
corporations, either within Annual Reports, Annual 
Information Form (AIF) filings, and/or voluntary 
Environmental, Social and Corporate Governance (ESG) 
Reports, it is critical to establish guidance now to ensure 
that such data will be of value to financial analysts going 
forward (Economist 2015). There is an important lesson 
of admonishment in this regard, drawn from the area 
of ESG and sustainability reporting which began in 
earnest starting about 2000, but that nonetheless remains 
problematic for financial analysts today (Paisley and 
Nelson 2019).
Amongst the first reports to document limitations in 
sustainability reporting was the sdEffect™ (NRTEE 
2006), which focused on calculating sustainability 
valuation utilizing such tools as Ratio Analysis, 
Discounted Cash Flow (DCF), “Rules of Thumb” 
valuations, Economic Value Added (EVA®) (Ehrbar 
1998), and Option Pricing Models (OPM). The problem 
in applying these various analyses was lack of data – 
reporting on sustainability practices by issuers tended 
to be anecdotal and non-quantitative. When data was 
available, it frequently lacked key information related to 
such simple measures as the timeframe over which data 
applied, or the geographic range of operations under 
consideration (WBCSD 2018).
To help ensure that climate change and extreme weather 
data appear in industry specific reports in a form readily 
predisposed to financial valuation, Table 3 provides high- 
level guidance to issuers.
>
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
12
Description of Financial Valuation Method
For Consideration by Issuers - Key Climate Specific 
Information Applicable to Valuation Method
Ratio 
Analysis
Valuation of a company’s common equity price or the entire 
enterprise value is established as a ratio of measurable 
factors in a company’s operations such as:
•	 Price/Earnings
•	 Price/Cash Flow
•	 Price/Book Value of Equity
Ratios are compared to peers to determine relative valuation 
and likelihood that the company is over or undervalued.
These techniques are useful to establish relative valuation, 
but less so to establish absolute valuation.
•	 Have earnings/cash flow been impacted by a climate 
event – e.g., flood, fire, shoreline impact?
•	 What was the financial impact on earnings/cash flow that 
year/quarter?
•	 What is the probability of repeat impact (low, medium, 
high) over the next 5 years?
Sectors Predisposed to Ratio Analysis
•	 Mining, Forestry, Petroleum, Utilities, 
Telecommunications, Auto
Sectors Less Predisposed to Ratio Analysis
•	 Financials, Legal, Life & Health
Discounted 
Cash Flow 
(DCF)
Absolute valuation of a company is achieved through a 
DCF analysis. DCF starts with a forecast of a company’s 
future after-tax cash flows. These are adjusted to reflect 
capital expenditures necessary to sustain the business. This 
stream of cash flows is then discounted back to the present 
time using a discount rate which reflects the risk adjusted 
weighted average cost of capital of the company. The result 
is an estimate of the total enterprise value of a company.
•	 Have future cash flow projections been impacted 
(negatively or positively), relative to initial value, by a 
climate change/extreme weather event?
•	 Is $ spread between current and future values increasing 
or decreasing since climate event?
•	 Have appropriate discount rates been selected – 
accounting for risk of return – i.e., what is the likelihood 
of repeat impact to risk variables?
Sectors Predisposed to DCF
•	 Well established companies with steady growth and 
consistent levels of capital expenditures
•	 Defensive Industries: Utilities, Oil, Gas, Banking, 
Telecommunications
Sectors Less Predisposed to DCF
•	 Small/start-up companies exposed to economic cycle
•	 Cyclical Industries: Raw Materials, Consumer 
Discretionary
Rules of 
Thumb 
Valuation
Many industries are valued using “rules of thumb” specific 
to their business. For example, in the electricity sector, the 
frequency and duration of electricity outages is an industry 
comparable.
•	 Did business realize climate related impacts more/less 
than peers?
•	 Relative to peer group (industry association) what 
precautions will ensure continuity of business operations?
•	 What aspects of operations are vulnerable to business 
disruption relative to peers?
Table 3: Guidance to Issuers, to Optimize the Utility of  Climate Risk Reporting Relative to Five Financial Valuation Methods 
>
13
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
Description of Financial Valuation Method
For Consideration by Issuers - Key Climate Specific 
Information Applicable to Valuation Method
Economic 
Value Added 
(EVA®)
EVA® is the difference between a company’s net operating 
profits and its total cost of invested capital over a given 
time period. The capital charge is necessary to compensate 
providers of debt and equity for use of their capital, at a 
rate adequate for the risk incurred. If EVA® is positive, the 
company has created value. The market value of a company 
is equivalent to its invested capital plus the sum of all future 
EVA®. From this relationship, a company’s enterprise value 
can be determined from a forecast of its EVA®.
•	 Were positive returns realized following an extreme 
weather event?
•	 Have liabilities increased since the extreme weather event? 
– higher operating costs, lower profits?
•	 Has debt/equity ratio increased/decreased for companies 
that implemented adaptation measures?
•	 Was average rate of return higher/lower compared to 
peers after climate event?
Sectors Predisposed to EVA®
•	 Applies to asset-intensive companies/ industries that are 
generally stable
•	 Utilities, Mining, Industrials
Sectors Less Predisposed to EVA®
•	 Applies to those with intangible assets
•	 Information Technology
Option 
Pricing 
Models 
(OPM)
Certain business activities create value for companies by 
providing alternatives or choices for the future. These 
choices or “options” do not necessarily have discrete cash 
flows but do provide tangible value for a company. Option 
pricing methods can be applied to these situations to 
provide a quantitative way to estimate and communicate the 
economic value of these choices. The technique is also useful 
when uncertainty of outcomes exists and more than one 
result is possible.
•	 Have underlying assets been impacted due to an extreme 
weather event?
•	 Has intrinsic value increased/decreased due to an extreme 
weather event – i.e., is the strike price “in the money”?
•	 After an extreme weather event, does extrinsic value 
(time value) exceed intrinsic value (financial advantage of 
exercising option)?
Sectors Predisposed to OPM
•	 High Option Value companies - high time values produce 
significant stock price movements – i.e., high volatility 
potentially generates higher returns
•	 Information Technology
Sectors Less Predisposed to OPM
•	 Low Option Value companies - falling time values 
produce less movement in stock price - i.e., low volatility/ 
beta generate lower premiums
•	 Utilities, Energy, Banking
Table 3 Continued 
From the perspective of portfolio management, there is 
no doubt that climate change and extreme weather risks 
can and should factor into business valuation. The rate 
at which these risks are included in financial analyses 
will be affected by ongoing and more severe weather 
impacting businesses spanning multiple industry sectors. 
As climate risks transition from short to longer-term
adjustments on stock price, presumably the capital 
markets will continue to pay increasing attention (TCFD 
2019). The irreversibility of climate change effectively 
guarantees this realization (ECCC 2019) – i.e., it is not 
a matter of “if ”, but rather “when”.
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
14
In 2017, just over 15% of S&P 500 companies disclosed 
an impact on earnings from an unforeseen weather 
effect, but only 4% quantified the effect – for those that 
did, the impact on earnings averaged 6% (S&P Global 
2018). As argued by TCFD and the EPSF, the impact 
of these variances should be identified, quantified and 
factored into corporate valuation, or simply, stock price. 
The value of a company is ultimately the present value 
of the stream of cash flows that can be produced in the 
future. In this regard, the three pertinent factors that 
are relevant are the size of the cash flows, the timing 
of the cash flows and the risk associated with achieving 
those cash flows. Extreme weather – and preparation to 
limit risk through the operationalization of adaptation – 
would have a direct impact on all three factors.
As mentioned, the impacts of climate risks are being 
recognized by a small but growing number of companies 
spanning a range of industry sectors (see Appendix 1), 
with disclosure in public documents improving to a level 
that translation of risk to stock valuations is possible.
To demonstrate how climate risk can be valued as part of 
overall stock price analysis, reference is made to TransAlta 
Corporation (an electricity power generator and wholesale 
marketing company headquartered in Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada ) public disclosure material from 2018 and 2019. 
TransAlta is on the leading edge of disclosure and 
provides detailed reviews of its operations and 
exposure to climate/weather risks. It is not surprising 
that TransAlta focuses on these risks, as its production of 
electricity from coal, gas and wind in Canada, USA and 
Australia is predisposed to extreme weather events. 
In 2018, the Climate Disclosure Program (CDP) – an 
international not-for-profit that documents information 
for investors, companies, cities, provinces, states and 
regions – completed an in-depth survey of TransAlta’s 
operations relative to climate change. In this survey, 
TransAlta disclosed that climate related impacts were 
evaluated on a “six-month or more frequent” basis, 
future impacts were projected beyond six years, and such 
impacts “are discussed at every quarterly board meeting”. 
For TransAlta, climate related risks are substantive 
financial risks as they have a direct and measurable 
impact on the expected production and distribution 
of electricity from their various facilities. In particular, 
“where we are unable to produce sufficient quantities 
of output in relation to contractually specified volumes, 
we may be required to pay penalties or purchase 
replacement power in the market (TransAlta 2018).” 
In Example 1 (below), the impact on financial valuation 
caused by incremental capital costs and expenses to 
adapt to extreme weather is calculated. TransAlta 
prepared for the likely impact that the increased 
severity of weather events would have on their facilities, 
particularly from cyclones and floods, by increasing 
“sustaining and productivity capital” by $214 million in 
2017.* These expenditures are required on a sustaining 
and routine basis and thus have been assumed to 
continue each year for 5 years (although each year’s 
capital budget for this unique category will vary).
CASE STUDY: 
Extreme Weather Impacts Applied 
to Financial Valuation
Climate risks can impact revenues, costs and risk profiles of companies, generally 
in a negative direction, causing earnings and cash flow to vary from expectations 
with growing regularity.
*	 Note: all TransAlta sustaining capital and productivity capital would not be 
directed towards climate resilience.
15
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
EXAMPLE 1: VALUE OF SUSTAINING CAPITAL 
EXPENDITURES FOR EXTREME WEATHER 
PREPAREDNESS/CLIMATE RESILIENCE
Event: Capital expenditures related to ensuring plants 
and operating facilities are available to meet market 
demand and are prepared for extreme weather elements. 
These expenditures are pro-active and can-be-planned.
Translation: Additional capital investment and 
expenses = $214 million per year commencing in 2017
Valuation:
Discounted Cash Flow
i) 	 Cost of Capital – 7.65% (Jarvi and Primak 2019)
ii) 	 Cash Flow to be value = -$214 million/year over 5 
years (forecast)
iii) 	Present Value = PMT X [(1-(1/(1+r)n))/r]
Where:
PMT = the annual costs of Climate Resilience 
expenditures
r = the discount rate
n = the number of periods the costs will be incurred 
(5 years)
Present Value = $862 million
iv)	 Convert to Per Share Valuation
Shares outstanding in 2017	
=	
288 million
Per share valuation impact	
=	
$862 million/ 
	
	
288 million
	
=	
$3.00 per share
	
	
(rounded)
v)	 Conclusion: The capital expenditures and costs 
associated with extreme weather preparedness 
has up to a $3.00 per share negative impact on 
stock price. Furthermore, even if the expenditures 
incurred in 2017 were “one-time” only, the impact 
would be $0.74 per share.
TransAlta has provided guidance regarding the impact 
of lost production on net earnings (CDP 2018). They 
indicate that “a 1% increase or decrease in production 
(MWh) has an approximate impact on net earnings 
of (+/-) $12 million.” In 2018, total net earnings at 
TransAlta was negative $90 million, indicating that a 1% 
variance in power production would have a 13% impact 
on earnings. Although the valuation of specific extreme 
weather events will come later, the general impact of any 
event causing a 1% impact on production is calculable. 
EXAMPLE 2: VALUE OF AN EXTREME WEATHER 
EVENT THAT IMPACTS PRODUCTION BY 1%
Event: Any extreme weather event causing a 1% loss in 
production
Translation: The impact of a 1% production loss is 
+/- $12 million in net earnings
Valuation:
Price/Cash Flow multiple
a)	 Given that TransAlta was not profitable in 2018, 
assume that impacts on net earnings are effectively 
equivalent to a direct cash flow impact.
b)	 Price/Cash Flow (2018) = 6.5 X (Jarvi and Primak 
2019)
c)	 Convert to Per Share valuation impact
Price impact	
= 6.5 X $12 million/shares outstanding
	
= $72 million/287 million
	
= $0.25 per share
Conclusion: A 1% variance in production can impact 
the share price valuation by $0.25 per share. Given that 
the average price of TransAlta stock in 2018 was $6.98, 
this translates to a 3.6% impact on stock value.
Extreme weather impacts on TransAlta are acutely 
impactful on electricity production and pricing when 
they occur unexpectedly. For example, in 2019, 
Canadian coal and wind assets “benefited from higher 
power prices…reflecting the impact of extreme cold 
weather during the first quarter of 2019.” 
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
16
For the first half of 2019, average electricity prices 
increased to $63 per MWh from $45 per MWh in 2018.*
The positive impact on earnings before interest, tax, 
depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) from this 
increased pricing was estimated at approximately $100 
million. Using the methodology of Example 2, it can 
be estimated that the extreme cold of 2019 impacted 
TransAlta by over $2.00 per share. 
The extreme cold of the winter of 2019, however, did 
not just provide an opportunity for elevated electricity 
pricing. TransAlta’s US Coal team experienced “a tail 
event” due to “cold weather and strong demand in 
the Pacific Northwest from extremely high natural gas 
prices” (caused by pipeline constraints in part linked 
to extreme weather). “The Company incurred cash 
losses of $25 million on its day ahead hedging position 
(TransAlta 2019).” 
The “tail event” resulted in EBITDA being down $35 
million compared to 2018. Combining all impacts 
(positive and negative) of the extreme cold, the first 
half of 2019 produced free cash flow that was “$33 
million lower … for six months ending June 30, 
2019 … compared with the same period in 2018” 
(TransAlta 2019). 
EXAMPLE 3: VALUE OF UNEXPECTED EXTREME 
COLD WEATHER IN THE FIRST HALF OF 2019
Event: Extreme cold weather in North America in 2019
Translation: The net effect of positive and negative 
cash flow impacts estimated by the company at -$33 
million.
Valuation:
Price/Cash Flow multiple
a)	 Price/Cash Flow (2019) = 7.0 X (Jarvi and Primak 
2019)
b)	 Convert to Per Share valuation impact
Price impact	
 = 7.0 X - $33 million/shares 
	
	outstanding
	
	= -$231 million/282 million
	
	= $0.82 per share
Conclusion: The extreme cold weather of 2019 has 
had an impact on share price valuation of $0.82 per 
share – relative to a share price of TransAlta (November 
2019) of $8.49, this is equivalent to a 10% impact on 
share valuation.
Overall, extreme weather has impacted TransAlta’s share 
price through both predictable preparedness costs and 
through volatility caused by operational disruptions – as 
illustrated, each of these isolated effects can be valued 
individually using conventional valuation methods. 
In the previous examples, we demonstrated numerically 
how investment in extreme weather preparedness, or 
response to extreme weather events, has direct and 
measurable impact on share valuation. Even more 
meaningful is recognizing that not only is climate 
change altering the current risk profile of entire business 
operations, but it will continue to do so in the future. In 
other words, the predictability of future cash flows will 
have diminished and increasing volatility that should be 
valued into the overall investment merits of companies.
The increase in risk has a large and quantifiable impact 
on the value of future cash flows. The Discounted Cash 
Flow (“DCF”) method calculates present value of future 
cash flows that a business produces. This is based upon a 
discount rate determined from cost of capital inputs and 
risk profile of the company. 
*	 Note: higher power prices in 2019 vs. H1 2018 may have been affected by 
cold weather and additional factors
17
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
Previous examples demonstrate that individual extreme 
weather events can impact share valuation by 5-10% 
on a case-by-case basis. Therefore it is reasonable to 
assume that Beta, cash flow volatility compared to the 
overall market or a diversified portfolio, should likely be 
increased by 5-10% to represent a recognition of the 
new risk profile.
EXAMPLE 4: VALUATION IMPACT ON 
TRANSALTA’S OVERALL BUSINESS DUE TO 
INCREASED RISK
Event: Overall current and future occurrences of 
extreme weather on cash flows.
Translation: The impact of a 7.5% increase in Beta 
(mid-point of 5-10%) of TransAlta’s overall DCF 
calculation.
Valuation: a) Adjust Cost of Equity to reflect increased 
risk
	
Cost of Equity = Rf + β (Rm - Rf)
	
Rf = Risk free rate = 3.50%
	
(Rm - Rf) = Market risk premium = 7.00%
	
β = unsystematic risk = 1.0 (current)
	
(all values from Jarvi and Primak 2019)
	
β new = unsystematic risk with extreme 
	
weather adjustment
	
β new = 1.0 * (1.075)
	
β new = 1.075
	
Cost of Equity (current) = 10.50%
	
Cost of Equity (new) = 3.5% + 1.075 (7.0%)
	
	
= 11.03%
b) 	 Calculate new Weighted Average Cost of Capital 
with new Cost of Equity
WACC new = Cost of Equity new X Equity Weight + 
Cost of Debt X Debt Weight + Cost of Preferred Shares 
X Preferred Share Weight

WACC new = 11.03% X 52% + 5.75% X 38% + 
5.75% X 10%
WACC new = 8.50%
c)	 Calculate DCF Valuation for increased WACC
i. 	 PV of 10 Years Cash Flows new = $3,827 million
ii. 	 PV of Terminal Value new
 = 	 [FCF 10th year X (1 + g) / (WACC new – g)] / 
(1 + WACC new)10
where;
FCF 10th year = final year cash flow from step i)
g = terminal growth rate = 0.83%
PV of Terminal Value new = $3,254
DCF Valuation new 	= value from i) + value from ii)
	
= $3,827 million + $3,254
	
	 million
	
= $7,081 million
1)	 Calculate Share Price 
NPV to Common Equity = DCF – Debt – Pref – 
Minority Interest
NPV to Common Equity = $7,081 – 2,669 – 942 – 
1,610
Common Equity = $1,860 million
Per Share Value new	
 = $6.62
Previous DCF Share value = $9.64
Conclusion: The overall inclusion of extreme weather 
risk in the DCF Valuation of TransAlta reduces the stock 
value estimate from $9.64 per share to $6.62 per share. 
The discussion now turns to the need to identify climate 
change and extreme weather impacts that may affect 
financial valuation, as informed by industry specific 
subject matter experts.
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
18
ROLE OF SUBJECT 
MATTER EXPERTS
Subject matter experts, who generally reside within 
industry associations, are key to advancing the 
inclusion of climate change and extreme weather risk 
into institutional portfolio management. Material risks are 
best identified by industry members with “on the ground” 
experience – these are professionals with decades of field 
experience on an individual basis, and hundreds of years 
of experience collectively. Subject matter experts, although 
not infallible, can draw upon their experience, with insight 
unmatched through any other means, to identity material 
expressions of how flood, fire, ice loading, wind, etc. affect 
business operations/continuity.
As climate change continues to affect virtually all business 
sectors, it would be prudent for industry associations 
to engage their membership to develop Climate Risk 
Matrices – subsequently, as this information becomes 
available, financial analysts could utilize this information. 
Subject matter experts from across industry sectors must 
work hand-in-hand with the capital markets/financial 
analysts if recommendations by TCFD (2019) and 
Macklem et al. (2019) are to become commonplace. It is in 
the interest of industry sectors to contribute their expertise 
to risk identification, as financial specialists, left on their 
own with limited operational experience, can easily end 
up chasing the wrong “climate risk rabbit”.
There is a fortuitous predisposition within industry sectors 
that could lead to the creation of Climate Risk Matrices 
with relative ease. When industry associations meet, 
annually or bi-annually, they could create “climate risk 
committees” to create Climate Risk Matrices similar to 
Tables 1 and 2 (see pages 9 and 10).
Within many industry sectors, climate related information 
is publicly available through industry associations and/or 
professional associations. For those sectors that have a high 
percentage of associations reporting on climate change, 
they may be prime candidates to pursue the creation of 
Climate Risk Matrices (e.g., as per Appendix 1, these 
include: Materials – 100%; Energy – 100%; Utilities – 
87%; Industrials – 67%; Real Estate – 63%).
A solid foundation for industry sectors to develop Climate 
Risk Matrices has been established in some spheres: for 
example, the chemical sector (WBCSD – Chemical 2019) 
and electric utilities (WBCSD – Electric 2019).
>
19
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
BENEFICIARIES 
OF CLIMATE RISK 
MATRICES
Beyond the utility that Climate Risk Matrices would 
convey to institutional investors, other stakeholders 
would also benefit from climate change and extreme 
weather risk guidance.
Securities Commissions: Relative to enforcement 
of a “comply-or-explain” mandate for issuers reporting 
on climate risk (sensu Macklem et al. 2019), securities 
commissions have limited guidance as to what would 
constitute acceptable disclosure, per industry sector, 
relative to multiple forms of climate impact (Evain et 
al. 2018).
Climate Risk Matrices would provide securities 
commissions with a prioritized baseline of acceptable 
industry-specific climate risk disclosure – i.e., the 
“explain” part of comply-or-explain – that would help 
to empower commissions to enforce their mandate.
Credit Rating Agencies: The impacts of climate 
change and extreme weather risk could affect a 
borrower’s capacity to repay a lender (Moody’s 2017, 
Tigue 2019). As such, credit rating agencies should 
incorporate climate risk into credit rating assignments. 
Growing recognition of the importance of climate 
risk to credit rating agencies is reflected in Moody’s 
Corporation purchasing a controlling stake in Four 
Twenty Seven, a California-based company that 
measures a range of hazards, including extreme rainfall, 
hurricanes, heat stress and sea level rise, and tracks their 
impact on 2,000 companies and 196 countries (Flavelle 
2019). This acquisition signifies a meaningful step toward 
financial institutions committing to the realization that 
climate risk should enter into any evaluation of the 
financial strength of any government or company and 
their ability to repay debt.
Access to Climate Risk Matrices would help inform 
credit rating agencies such as Moody’s, Standard & 
Poor’s, DBRS and Fitch Ratings (Tigue 2019).
Boards of Directors: From the perspective of 
fiduciary oversight, it is incumbent upon Boards to 
ensure that management is directing appropriate 
attention to climate change and extreme weather 
risk (CPA 2017, Wylnco and Musulin 2019, Geneva 
Association 2019). Upon recognition of risk that may be 
material, a Board must be satisfied that management is 
appropriately engaged to address that risk. The difficulty 
for Boards in executing on this direction may be a 
combination of (a) the appropriate expertise may not 
exist amongst Board members to assess climate-related 
risk, and/or (b) Boards not having appropriate guidance 
that would enable them to ask the appropriate questions 
of management in reference to climate related risk. 
Boards could hire expertise to gain insight into risk, but 
even that expertise may be nascent or poorly informed 
(Tooze 2019, Geretto and Jacques-Brissette 2019).
Climate Risk Matrices could fill this risk awareness 
void by concisely conveying to Board members, in 
user-friendly format, material risks pertaining to 
climate change and extreme weather that could inform 
a dialogue with management. By simply asking well 
informed questions to management on the subject 
of climate risk, Boards would signal that they attach 
importance to the issue, and they would demonstrate 
due diligence that could serve them well if a material 
risk were to manifest itself (Wylynko and Musulin 2019).
>
Climate Risk Matrices could fill a risk awareness void by concisely conveying to 
Board members, in user-friendly format, material risks pertaining to climate 
change and extreme weather that could inform a dialogue with management.”
“
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
20
>
NEXT STEPS
Time is not on the side of institutional investors 
regarding irreversible climate change (ECCC 2019), as 
the magnitude of extreme weather risks guarantees to 
challenge all industry sectors going forward. Accordingly, 
institutional investors, securities commissions and credit 
rating agencies must adapt their businesses to this 
unrelenting risk.
The capital markets must acknowledge that there is no 
such thing as “not deciding” relative to climate risk – 
deciding to ignore climate risk is effectively a decision to 
select for the status quo (i.e., business as usual), whereas 
incorporating climate risk into financial valuation is 
adaptive management that will limit future beta/risk 
(Economist 2015).
The development of Climate Risk Matrices offers a 
practical, accessible, cost-effective and user-friendly 
standardized method to incorporate physical climate 
change risk into institutional portfolio management. 
Climate risks are predisposed to translation to impact on 
valuation and share price, using a variety of standardized 
financial valuation methods, as demonstrated in this report.
Future incarnations may see climate risk calculated 
using such sophisticated means as artificial intelligence, 
machine language or similarly advanced technologies – 
however, for the present, Climate Risk Matrices offer a 
viable early stage solution to incorporate climate risk 
into portfolio management almost immediately.
The next step to create Climate Risk Matrices requires 
major institutional investors reaching out to subject 
matter experts, who would be most easily accessed 
and assembled into working groups through industry 
associations – by combining the skill sets of investors 
and subject matter experts (neither can succeed alone), 
the scaled production of Climate Risk Matrices, across 
sectors, can begin. Sectors best positioned for Climate 
Risk Matrix development, based on self-reported and 
readily available climate change data, are Materials, 
Energy, Utilities, Industrials and Real Estate.
In sum, financial value is at increasing risk due to 
the irreversibility of climate change. Recognizing the 
enormity of this risk, Mark Carney admonished that 
“climate disclosure must become comprehensive, climate 
risk management be transformed, and sustainable 
investing must go mainstream” (Green 2019). Climate 
Risk Matrices offer a readily deployable means 
to act on Carney’s admonition, NOW.
21
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
REFERENCES
Addoum, J.M., Ng, D., and A. Ortiz-Bobea. 2019. 
Climate Shocks and Earnings News, Working Paper, 
RFS Climate Finance Initiative.
Bienert, S. 2016. Climate Change Implications for Real 
Estate Portfolio Allocation. Industry Perspective. Urban 
Land Institute.
Bank of Canada. 2019. Researching the Economic 
Impacts of Climate Change – available at: 
https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2019/11/researching-
economic-impacts-climate-change/
BOMA Canada (Building Owners and Managers 
Association of Canada). 2019 Resilience Brief – Is Your 
Building Ready? BOMA Canada.
Bloomberg, M.R. 2014. Interview for Risky Business 
Project, June 17, 2014 – available at http://www. 
riskybusiness.org
Burillo, D. 2018. Effects of Climate Change in Electric 
Power Infrastructures. DOI: 10-5772/intecopen.82146
CDP (Climate Disclosure Program). 2018. Climate 
Change Request Disclosure – TransAlta Corporation.
CSA (Canadian Securities Administrators). 2010. 
CSA Staff Notice 51-333 – Environmental Reporting 
Guidance. Canadian Securities Administrators.
CSA (Canadian Securities Administrators). 2019. CSA 
Staff Notice 51-358 – Reporting of Climate Change- 
Related Risks. Canadian Securities Administrators.
CSA (Canadian Standards Association). 2019. NRC 
– CSA Group Canadian Electrical Code (CE Code) 
Climate Change Adaptation Project. CSA Group, 
Toronto, Ontario.
CPA (Chartered Professional Accountants) Canada. 
2017. Climate Change Briefing: Questions for Directors 
to Ask: https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/business-and- 
accounting-resources/strategy-risk-and-governance/ 
corporate-governance/publications/climate-change- 
questions-directors-should-ask
ECCC (Environment and Climate Change Canada). 
2019. Canada’s Changing Climate Report – Executive 
Summary.
Economist (The). 2015. The Cost of Inaction: 
Recognising the Value at Risk from Climate Change. 
Intelligence Unit.
Ehrbar, A. 1998. Stern Stewart’s EVA (Economic Value 
Added) – The Real Key to Creating Wealth. John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. New York, New York.
Evain, J., Cardona, M. and M. Nicol. 2018. Article 
173: Climate Brief No. 59. Article 173: Overview of 
Climate-Related Financial Disclosure after Two Years of 
Implementation. Institute for Climate Economics.
Flavelle, C. 2019. Moody’s Buys Climate Data Firm, 
Signaling New Scrutiny of Climate Risks. The New York 
Times, June 24, 2019.
GCA (Global Commission on Adaptation). 2019. 
Adapt Now: A Global Call for Leadership on Climate 
Resilience. Global Center on Adaptation/World 
Resources Institute.
Geneva Association (The). 2019. Insurers Take Decisive 
Step in Climate Risk Modelling Through Cross-Sectoral 
Mobilisation. The Geneva Association – 
https://www. genevaassociation.org/
Geretto, G. and C. Jacques-Brissette. 2019. Time to 
Act: Facing the Risks of a Changing Climate. Canadian 
Institute of Actuaries.
Giuzio, M., Krusec, D., Levels, A., Melo, A.S., 
Mikkonen, K. and P. Radulova. 2019. Climate Change 
and Financial Stability. European Central Bank.
Green, M. 2019. BOE’s Carney Urges Financial Sector 
to Transform Management of Climate Risk. Reuters, 
September 23, 2019.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 
2019. Global Warming of 1.5 oC. UNEP.
Jarvi, M. and Primak, O. 2019. Institutional Equity 
Research, CIBC. TransAlta Corporation – Coal Boost 
Slight Positive; No Change to Long-Term Outlook. 
Earning Update. 
Krueger, P., Sautner, Z. and L. Starks. 2019. The 
Importance of Climate Risks for Institutional Investors. 
ECGI Working Papers in Finance. Working Paper No. 
610/2019.
Kruttli, M., Roth Tran, B. and S. Watugala. 2019. 
Pricing Poseidon: Extreme Weather Uncertainty and 
Firm Return Dynamics, Working Paper, Board of 
Governors of Federal Reserve System and Cornell 
University.
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
22
Macklem, T., Chisholm, A., Thomassin, K. and B. Zvan. 
2019. Final Report of the Expert Panel on Sustainable 
Finance – Mobilizing Finance for Sustainable Growth.
Environment and Climate Change Canada. Cat. No.: 
En4-350/2-2019E-PDF.
Moody’s Investors Service. 2017. Environmental Risks – 
Evaluating the Impact of Climate Change. Accessed at: 
www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate- 
change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf.
Moore, F. 2019. Climate Change is the New Normal 
but We Don’t Seem to Notice. New Scientist. Article 
2195471.
Moudrak, N. and B. Feltmate. 2019. Ahead of the 
Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for 
Canada’s Commercial Real Estate. Prepared for 
REALPAC and BOMA Canada. Intact Centre on 
Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H. and H. Osman. 
2018. Combatting Canada’s Rising Flood Costs: Natural 
Infrastructure is an Undervalued Option. Prepared for 
Insurance Bureau of Canada. Intact Centre on Climate 
Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
Moudrak, N., Hutter, A.M. and B. Feltmate. 2017. 
When the Big Storms Hit: the Role of Wetlands to Limit 
Urban and Rural Flood Damage. Prepared for Ontario 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry. Intact 
Centre on Climate Adaptation, University of Waterloo.
NRTEE (National Round Table on the Environment 
and the Economy). 2006. The SDEffect™: Translating 
Sustainable Development into Financial Valuation 
Measures – A Pilot Analytical Framework. Yachnin & 
Associates, Corporate Knights, Sustainable Investment 
Group.
Paisley, J. and M. Nelson. 2019. Climate Risk 
Management at Financial Firms – Challenges and 
Opportunities. GARP Risk Institute (Global Association 
of Risk Professionals).
PBOC (Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer). 
2016. Estimate of the Average Annual Cost for Disaster 
Financial Assistance Arrangements due to Weather 
Events. Ottawa, Canada.
Roman, K. 2019. Climate Change Threatens Both 
the Economy and the Financial System, Says Bank of 
Canada. CBC News.
S&P Global. 2018. S&P Global Ratings. Resilience 
Economics. Ratings Direct. The Effects of Weather 
Events on Corporate Earnings are Gathering Force. 
TCFD (Task Force on Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosures). 2019. Task Force on Climate-Related 
Financial Disclosures: Status Report.
Tigue, K. 2019. Climate Change Becomes an Issue for 
Ratings Agencies. Inside Climate News, August 5, 2019.
TransAlta. 2018. TransAlta Corporation. 2018 Annual 
Integrated Report. 
TransAlta. 2019. TransAlta Corporation. Second 
Quarter Report for 2019.
Tooze, A. 2019. Why Central Banks Need to Step Up on 
Global Warming. Foreign Policy.
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development – Chemical). 2019. TCFD Chemical 
Sector Preparer Forum. Climate-Related Financial 
Disclosure by Chemical Sector Companies: 
Implementing the TCFD Recommendations. WBCSC, 
in collaboration with AKzoNobel, BASF, DSM, Solvay, 
Sumitomo Chemical.
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development - Electric). 2019. TCFD Electric Utilities 
Preparer Forum. Disclosure in a Time of Transition: 
Climate-Related Financial Disclosure and the 
Opportunity for the Electric Utilities Sector. WBCSD, 
in collaboration with CLP, EDF, EDP, ENBW, ENEL, 
Iberdrola.
WBCSD (World Business Council for Sustainable 
Development). 2018. Communicating Sustainable 
Development and Reporting to Stakeholders – Group 
Projects – Class of 2018. WBCSD Leadership Program 
2018.
Wylynko, B. and C. Musulin. 2019. Disclosing Your 
Climate Risks: ASIC Sets Out Its Guidance for 
Directors. Clayton UTZ, August 22, 2019.
23
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
Sector/Subsector
Industry Associations
Publicly Available Climate 
Information – Disclosed/Not 
Disclosed
Sector: 
Communication 
Services
Subsectors:
Telecommunication 
Services, Media & 
Entertainment
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 23.5%
Sector Associations: 
1)	 Canadian Communication Association
2)	 Canadian Communication Systems Alliance (CCSA)
Subsector Associations: 
3)	 Canadian Wireless Telecommunications Association
4)	 Canadian Media Producers Association
5)	 News Media Canada 
6)	 Travel Media Association of Canada
7)	 Canadian Association of Journalists 
8)	 Canadian Ethnic Media Association
9)	 Women in Communications and Technology
10)	Association of Canadian Advertisers
11)	Association of Canadian Publishers
12)	Canadian Association of Broadcasters
13)	Canadian Public Relations Society Inc. 
14)	Canadian Authors’ Association
15)	Canadian Digital Media Network
16)	Entertainment Software Association of Canada
17)	Motion Picture Association of Canada
1)	 Not Disclosed 
2)	 Not Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed
4)	 Disclosed
5)	 Not Disclosed 
6)	 Not Disclosed 
7)	 Disclosed
8)	 Articles on CC
9)	 Not Disclosed 
10)	Not Disclosed 
11)	Not Disclosed
12)	Not Disclosed
13)	Not Disclosed 
14)	Not Disclosed
15)	Articles on CC
16)	Not Disclosed
17)	Disclosed 
Sector: 
Consumer 
Discretionary 
Subsectors: 
Automobiles & 
Components, 
Consumer Services, 
Consumer Durables & 
Apparel, Retailing
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 54.2%
Sector Associations
1)	 Consumers’ Association of Canada 
Subsector Associations
2)	 Auto Parts Manufacturers Association
3)	 Automotive Industries Association of Canada
4)	 Automotive Parts Manufacturers’ Association
5)	 Canadian Automobile Dealers Association
6)	 Canadian Automotive Partnership Council
7)	 Canadian Manufacturers and Exporters
8)	 Canadian Vehicle Manufacturers’ Association
9)	 Global Automakers of Canada
10)	Japan Automobile Manufacturers’ Association of Canada
11)	North American Automobile Trade Association
12)	The Association for the Work Truck Industry (NTEA)
13)	Used Car Dealers Association of Ontario
14)	Atlantic Marine Trades Association (AMTA)
15)	Boating BC Association (BBA)
16)	National Marine Manufacturers Association (NMMA)
17)	Apparel Connexion (formerly known as the Apparel Human 
Resources Council) 
18)	CTT Group
19)	The Canadian Apparel Federation (CAF)
20)	Canadian Sporting Goods Association
21)	The Canadian Home Furnishings Alliance (CHFA)
22)	Canadian Kitchen Cabinet Association (CKCA)
23)	The Quebec Furniture Manufacturers Association (QFMA)
24)	Canadian Printing Industries Association (CPIA)
1)	 Disclosed 
2)	 Articles on CC
3)	 Disclosed 
4)	 Disclosed
5)	 Disclosed 
6)	 Disclosed 
7)	 Disclosed
8)	 Disclosed 
9)	 Disclosed 
10)	Articles on CC
11)	Not disclosed 
12)	Disclosed 
13)	Not Disclosed 
14)	Not Disclosed 
15)	Disclosed
16)	Disclosed 
17)	Not Disclosed 
18)	Disclosed 
19)	Not Disclosed 
20)	Not Disclosed 
21)	Not Disclosed
22)	 Disclosed 
23)	Not Disclosed 
24)	Not Disclosed  
Appendix 1: Industry Sector Disclosure/Non-Disclosure on Climate Change*, Available Publicly Through Industry 
Associations and Professional Organizations (* includes any aspect of  climate change discussion. Source: Intact Centre review 
of  public documents as of  12/23/19.) 
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
24
Sector/Subsector
Industry Associations
Publicly Available Climate 
Information – Disclosed/Not 
Disclosed
Sector: 
Energy 
Subsectors:
Energy Services 
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 100%
Sector Associations
1)	 Energy Services Association of Canada 
2)	 Ontario Energy Association 
3)	 Community Energy Association 
4)	 Ontario Energy Board
Energy/Utilities
5)	 Canadian Energy Pipeline Association 
6)	 Ontario Sustainable Energy Association
1)	 Disclosed 
2)	 Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed
4)	 Disclosed

5)	 Disclosed
6)	 Disclosed
Sector: 
Financials 
Subsectors: 
Insurance, Banks, 
Diversified Financials
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 47.8%
Sector Associations
1)	 Canadian Consumer Finance Association
2)	 The Canadian Association of Financial Institutions in Insurance 
3)	 Canadian Bankers Association 
4)	 Investment Industry Association of Canada
5)	 Investment Industry Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC)
6)	 The Financial Advisors Association of Canada 
7)	 Canadian Finance and Leasing Association of Canada 
8)	 The Association for Financial Professionals
9)	 CFA Society Canada  
10)	Insurance Brokers Association of Canada
11)	Insurance Bureau of Canada 
12)	Financial Services Commission of Ontario 
13)	Insurance Brokers Association of Ontario 
14)	Registered Insurance Brokers of Ontario 
15)	Alberta Insurance Council
16)	Insurers Brokers Association of Alberta
17)	New Brunswick Insurance Board 
18)	Insurance Brokers Association of New Brunswick 
19)	Consumer Advocate for Insurance 
20)	Insurance Brokers Association of Newfoundland 
21)	Insurance Brokers Association of Nova Scotia
22)	Financial Executives International Canada
23)	Sustainable Investment Organization
1)	 Not Disclosed 
2)	 Disclosed
3)	 Disclosed
4)	 Disclosed 
5)	 Letter from SIO regarding 
KYC and ESG guidelines 
6)	 Not Disclosed 
7)	 Not Disclosed
8)	 Articles on CC 
9)	 Articles on CC 
10)	Disclosed 
11)	Disclosed 
12)	Articles on CC 
13)	Disclosed 
14)	Not Disclosed 
15)	Not Disclosed 
16)	Not Disclosed 
17)	Not Disclosed 
18)	Disclosed
19)	Not Disclosed 
20)	Disclosed
21)	Disclosed
22)	Disclosed
23)	Disclosed
Sector: 
Health Care 
Subsector: 
Health Care 
Equipment & Services, 
Pharmaceuticals, 
Biotechnology & 
Life Sciences
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 51.3%
Sector Associations 
1)	 Canadian Institute for Health Information
2)	 BC Health Information Management Professionals Society
3)	 Canadian College of Health Leaders
4)	 The Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care
5)	 Canadian Cancer Society 
6)	 Canadian Health Information Management Association
7)	 Canadian Home Care Association
8)	 Canadian Medical Association
9)	 Canadian Medical Protective Association
10)	Canadian Mental Health Association
11)	Canadian Nurses Association
12)	Canadian Patient Safety Institute
13)	Canadian College of Health Leaders 
14)	Canadian Pharmacists Association
15)	Digital Health Canada
16)	Heart and Stroke Foundation 
17)	Institute for Safe Medication Practices Canada (ISMP Canada)
1)	 Disclosed 
2)	 Not Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed  
4)	 Disclosed 
5)	 Disclosed 
6)	 Disclosed 
7)	 Not Disclosed 
8)	 Disclosed 
9)	 Not Disclosed 
10)	Not Disclosed 
11)	Disclosed 
12)	Disclosed 
13)	Disclosed 
14)	Disclosed 
15)	Not Disclosed 
16)	Articles on CC
17)	Articles on weather and health
25
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
Sector/Subsector
Industry Associations
Publicly Available Climate 
Information – Disclosed/Not 
Disclosed
Sector: 
Health Care 
(Continued)
18)	ITAC Health – Information Technology Association of Canada
19)	JDRF
20)	MedicAlert Foundation Canada
21)	Ontario Telemedicine Network
22)	Patients Canada
23)	Patients for Patient Safety Canada
24)	The Lung Association (Ontario)
25)	BIOTECanada
26)	Canadian Generic Pharmaceutical Association
27)	Innovative Medicines Canada
28)	Consumer Health Products Canada
29)	LifeSciences British Columbia
30)	BioAlberta
31)	Life Science Association of Manitoba
32)	Ontario Bioscience Innovation Organization
33)	Life Sciences Ontario
34)	BIOQuébec (French only)
35)	BioNova
36)	PEI BioAlliance
37)	Newfoundland and Labrador Association of Technology Industries
38)	Association of Cooperative Counselling Therapists of Canada
39)	HealthCareCAN
18)	Disclosed 
19)	Articles on weather and health
20)	Not Disclosed 
21)	Not Disclosed 
22)	Not Disclosed 
23)	Not Disclosed 
24)	Disclosed 
25)	Disclosed 
26)	Not Disclosed 
27)	Not Disclosed 
28)	Articles on CC
29)	Not Disclosed 
30)	Disclosed
31)	Disclosed
32)	Not Disclosed 
33)	Disclosed  
34)	Not Disclosed 
35)	Disclosed
36)	Disclosed 
37)	Disclosed
38)	Not Disclosed 
39)	Disclosed 
Sector: 
Industrials 
Subsector: 
Commercial & 
Professional Services, 
Transportation, 
Capital Goods
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 66.7%
Sector Associations
1)	 Transportation Association of Canada
2)	 Canadian Transportation Equipment Association
3)	 Canadian Urban Transit Association
4)	 Alberta Transportation 
5)	 Department of Transportation and Works (NB)
6)	 Transportation and Infrastructure Renewal (NFL) 
7)	 Department of Transportation, Infrastructure and Energy (PEI)
8)	 Canadian Manufacturing Coalition
 
9)	 Canadian Trucking Alliance 
10)	Canadian International Freight Forwarding Association 
11)	Ontario Trucking Association 
12)	Association of Professional Canadian Consultants
13)	Canadian Bar Association 
14)	Association of Canadian Advertisers 
15)	Ontario Association of Architects  
16)	Chartered Professional Accountants Canada
17)	Professional Engineers Ontario
18)	Canadian Association of Management Consultants 
1)	 Disclosed
2)	 Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed 
4)	 Disclosed 
5)	 Disclosed 
6)	 Disclosed 
7)	 Disclosed 
8)	 Articles on CC – redirects to 
members that disclose 
9)	 Disclosed
10)	Not Disclosed – redirects to 
government websites
11)	Articles – same as#9
12)	Not Disclosed
13)	Disclosed
14)	Not Disclosed
15)	Disclosed
16)	Disclosed
17)	Disclosed – Environmental 
Site Assessment Subcommittee
18)	Not Disclosed
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
26
Sector/Subsector
Industry Associations
Publicly Available Climate 
Information – Disclosed/Not 
Disclosed
Sector: 
Information 
Technology 
Subsector: 
Technology Hardware 
& Equipment, 
Semiconductors 
& Semiconductor 
Equipment, Software & 
Services
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 16.7%
Sector Associations
1)	 Information Technology Association of Canada 
Subsector Associations
2)	 Canada’s Association of I.T. Professionals
3)	 Information and Communications Technology Council 
4)	 Canadian Information Processing Society 
5)	 Canadian Technology Immigration Network
6)	 Alliance of Technology and Science Specialists of Toronto Inc. (ATSS)
1)	 Disclosed 

2)	 Articles on CC
3)	 Not Disclosed
4)	 Not Disclosed
5)	 Not Disclosed 
6)	 Not Disclosed – redirects to 
sustainable members
Sector: 
Materials 
Subsectors: 
Materials
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 100%
Sector Associations
1)	 Canadian Plastics Industry Association
2)	 Natural Resource Canada
3)	 Tire and Rubber Association of Canada
4)	 Canadian Association of Recycling Industries
5)	 Grain Growers of Canada (consumer staples?)
6)	 Forest Products Association 
7)	 APA-The Engineered Wood Association
8)	 The Mining Association of Canada 
1)	 Disclosed
2)	 Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed
4)	 Disclosed
5)	 Disclosed
6)	 Disclosed
7)	 Disclosed
8)	 Disclosed
Sector: 
Real Estate 
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 62.5%
Sector Associations 
1)	 Canadian Real Estate Association
2)	 Real Estate Institute of Canada 
3)	 Ontario Real Estate Association 
4)	 REALPAC
5)	 British Columbia Real Estate Association
6)	 New Brunswick Real Estate Association
7)	 Manitoba Real Estate Association  
8)	 Canadian National Association of Real Estate Appraisers
1)	 Disclosed
2)	 Not Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed 
4)	 Disclosed
5)	 Disclosed
6)	 Disclosed
7)	 Articles on CC
8)	 Not Disclosed 
Sector: 
Utilities 
Subsectors: 
Electrical, Oil, Gas 
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 86.8%
Sector Associations
1)	 Canadian Electricity Association
2)	 Canadian Gas Association
3)	 Canadian Heavy Oil Association 
4)	 Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers
5)	 Canadian Propane Association
6)	 Canadian Water &Wastewater Association
7)	 Newfoundland & Labrador Public Utilities Board 
8)	 Nova Scotia Utility and Review Board 
9)	 Clean Energy Association of Canada 
10)	Canadian Council on Renewal Electricity
11)	Canadian Wind Association  
12)	Independent Electricity Systems Operator
13)	BC Hydro 
14)	SaskPower 
15)	Nova Scotia Power
16)	Toronto Hydro 
1)	 Disclosed
2)	 Disclosed
3)	 Not Disclosed – members are 
environmental specialists 
4)	 Disclosed 
5)	 Disclosed
6)	 Disclosed
7)	 Disclosed 
8)	 Fire Disclosed 
9)	 Disclosed 
10)	Disclosed 
11)	Disclosed
12)	Disclosed 
13)	Disclosed 
14)	Disclosed 
15)	Disclosed 
16)	Disclosed 
27
Factoring Climate Risk into Financial Valuation
Sector/Subsector
Industry Associations
Publicly Available Climate 
Information – Disclosed/Not 
Disclosed
Sector: 
Utilities
(Continued)
17)	Maritime Electric 
18)	PEMBINA
19)	Electro-Federation Canada (EFC)
20)	Canadian Energy and Utility Regulations
21)	Canadian Communication Systems Alliance
22)	The Heating, Refrigeration and AC Institute of Canada 
23)	Alberta Land Surveyor’s Association
24)	Canadian Association Geophysical Contractors (CAGC)
25)	Canadian Association of Oilwell Drilling Contractors (CAODC)
26)	Canadian Association of Petroleum Landmen
27)	Canadian Energy Pipeline Association 
28)	Canadian Fuels Association
29)	Canadian Global Exploration Forum
30)	Canadian Society of Exploration Geophysicists
31)	Canadian Society of Petroleum Geologists
32)	Canadian Society for Unconventional Resources (CSUR)
33)	Canadian Well Logging Society
34)	Clean Resource Innovation Network (CRIN)
35)	Explorers and Producers Association of Canada (EPAC)
36)	Gas Processing Association Canada
37)	Petroleum Technology Alliance of Canada (PTAC)
38)	Society of Petroleum Engineers – Canada Region
17)	Disclosed 
18)	Disclosed  
19)	Disclosed
20)	Disclosed
21)	Not Disclosed  
22)	Disclosed
23)	Disclosed 
24)	Disclosed
25)	Disclosed
26)	Disclosed
27)	Disclosed 
28)	Disclosed
29)	Case studies  – must be a 
member to view
30)	Disclosed
31)	Disclosed 
32)	Disclosed 
33)	Not Disclosed 
34)	Disclosed 
35)	Articles on CC and/or 
redirects to government 
website
36)	Disclosed
37)	Disclosed 
38)	Disclosed 
Sector: 
Consumer Staples  
Subsectors: 
Food & Staples 
Retailing, Household & 
Personal Products, Food 
Beverage & Tobacco
Total % of listed 
Sector/Subsectors 
that disclose: 53.3%
Sector Associations 
1)	 Consumers’ Association of Canada 
2)	 Canadian Health Food Association 
3)	 Food & Consumer Products of Canada
4)	 Food & Beverage Canada
5)	 Imperial Tobacco Canada 
6)	 Baking Association of Canada
7)	 Consumer Health Products Canada
8)	 Cosmetic Alliance Canada 
9)	 Canadian Natural Products Association 
10)	Canadian National Millers Association
11)	Canadian Pasta Manufactures Association
12)	Canadian Pastry Chefs Guild
13)	Beer Canada
14)	Canadian Beverage Association
15)	Canadian Bottled Water Association
1)	 Disclosed 
2)	 Disclosed 
3)	 Disclosed 
4)	 Not Disclosed
5)	 Not Disclosed 
6)	 Not Disclosed 
7)	 Disclosed – Plastic action 
plan
8)	 Articles on CC but must be 
member to login
9)	 Not Disclosed  
10)	Disclosed 
11)	Not Disclosed 
12)	Not Disclosed 
13)	Disclosed
14)	Disclosed 
15)	Disclosed 
“The framework presented in this report provides a solid and practical way to assess and value 
physical climate risks, supporting improved disclosure and better pricing of climate risks.”
Tiff Macklem, Chair, Expert Panel on Sustainable Finance
“Climate change and extreme weather risks can represent challenges for capital markets. 
This report provides practical guidance that will help the financial sector to better incorporate 
climate risk into financial valuation.”
Brian Porter, President and Chief Executive Officer, Scotiabank
“Understanding the financial impacts of climate change necessitates the building of new data 
bridges between asset owners and the companies they invest in. This framework demonstrates 
how we can use new climate-related data about company risks with existing valuation models to 
get decision-ready results.”
Sonia Baxendale, President and CEO, Global Risk Institute
“We need to better understand the impacts of climate change on the financial performance of 
companies. This report provides a practical framework for how businesses should disclose, 
and how investors should evaluate physical climate risks to help us build a more prosperous 
and resilient society.”
Charles Brindamour, Chief Executive Officer, Intact Financial Corporation
“The climate related tools in this report conform well with the risk management protocols 
that have become convention since the financial crisis.”
Mike Pedersen, Chair of the Board of Business Development Bank of Canada
“This report establishes a framework for institutional investors to ask issuers industry-specific 
questions regarding their vulnerability to climate change induced risk.”
Marcia Moffat, Managing Director, BlackRock Canada
“Identification of industry-specific physical climate risks, through the process presented in this 
report, may provide practical input to assist credit rating agencies.”
Douglas Turnbull, Vice-Chairman, Country Head, Canada, DBRS
“Climate change is a global challenge that has presented—and will continue to present—risks 
for businesses and communities around the world.”
 Jamie Dimon, Chairman and CEO, JPMorgan Chase & Co.
For further information about the report, please contact:
Kathryn Bakos
Director, Climate Finance and Science
Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation
Faculty of Environment, University of Waterloo
EV3 4334 – 200 University Avenue West
Waterloo, ON, Canada  N2L 3G1
E.	 kathryn.bakos@uwaterloo.ca
T.	 519 572 1463
“WHEN THE WELL’S DRY, WE KNOW THE WORTH OF WATER.”
 Benjamin Franklin
