Purdue University
Purdue e-Pubs
Department of Political Science Faculty
Publications
Department of Political Science
5-2010
Fixing Recovery: Social Capital in Post-Crisis
Resilience
Daniel P. Aldrich
Purdue University, daniel.aldrich@gmail.com
Follow this and additional works at: http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/pspubs
This document has been made available through Purdue e-Pubs, a service of the Purdue University Libraries. Please contact epubs@purdue.edu for
additional information.
Aldrich, Daniel P., "Fixing Recovery: Social Capital in Post-Crisis Resilience" (2010). Department of Political Science Faculty
Publications. Paper 3.
http://docs.lib.purdue.edu/pspubs/3
1 
 
Fixing Recovery: Social Capital in Post-Crisis Resilience 
 
Daniel P. Aldrich1 
 
Forthcoming, Journal of Homeland Security, June 2010 
 
 
Abstract:  Disasters remain among the most critical events which impact residents and their 
neighborhoods; they have killed far more individuals than high salience issues such as terrorism. 
Unfortunately, disaster recovery programs run by the United States and foreign governments 
have not been updated to reflect a new understanding of the essential nature of social capital and 
networks.  I call for a re-orientation of disaster preparedness and recovery programs at all levels 
away from the standard fixes focused on physical infrastructure towards ones targeting social 
infrastructure. The reservoirs of social capital and the trust (or lack thereof) between citizens in 
disaster-affected communities can help us understand why some neighborhoods in cities like 
Kobe, Japan, Tamil Nadu, India, and New Orleans, Louisiana displayed resilience while others 
stagnated.  Social capital – the engine for recovery - can be deepened both through local 
initiatives and interventions from foreign agencies.   
 
Introduction 
In the wake of the disastrous Haitian earthquake which killed at least 230,000 people and 
the Chilean earthquake which killed more than 700 residents, images of the tragedy and pleas for 
donations have captured world-wide attention. While the aid that has flooded into these countries 
will no doubt do much good, decision makers and NGOs have overlooked the real route to 
revitalization both in Haiti, Chile, and other crisis-struck communities around the world.  
Recovery from natural and other disasters does not depend on the overall amount of aid received 
nor on the amount of damage done by the disaster; instead, social capital - the bonds which tie 
citizens together – functions as the main engine of long term recovery. 
                                                          
1 Daniel P. Aldrich is assistant professor of public policy at Purdue University and the author of the book SITE 
FIGHTS: Divisive Facilities and Civil Society in Japan and the West (Cornell University Press 2008) along with a 
number of other peer-reviewed articles and writings for the general public.  Research for this project was carried out 
while on an Abe Fellowship from the Center for Global Partnership and the Social Science Research Council.  He 
can be reached at daniel.aldrich[at]gmail.com. 
2 
 
Formal and informal ties coordinate action and diffuse information among citizens and 
policymakers as they seek to solve social problems.  While most recognize the value of social 
networks in our everyday lives, disaster recovery policies often overlook and at times upset these 
resources in their efforts to deliver necessary physical and material aid to victims.  Here I am not 
repeating the oft-voiced criticisms of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), USAID, the Department of Defense (DOD), and 
other agencies which handle disasters at home and abroad - namely that they are underfunded, 
understaffed, and underprepared for major catastrophes. Rather, based on a new cross-national 
research project on neighbors struck by disaster, I call for a re-orientation of disaster recovery 
programs at all levels – local, national, and international - away from the standard ―fixes‖ 
focused on physical infrastructure towards ones targeting social infrastructure. 
 
Typical Approaches to Disaster Recovery 
Most coverage on natural disasters focuses understandably on the extent of physical 
damage:  lives lost, buildings destroyed, and infrastructure ruined.  Many intuitively believe that 
the extent of the damage determines the speed of the recovery (Kates and Pijawka 1977:12; Dacy 
and Kunreuther 1969: 72; Haas, Kates, and Bowden 1977); similarly, it seems obvious that the 
more assistance and money flowing in, the better off victims will be (cf. Caputo 2010).   As a 
result of these approaches, governmental and NGO response to disasters has been premised on 
the idea that moving more money, supplies, and experts into affected areas will result in a faster 
recovery.  Local and national government bureaus and volunteer organizations like the Red 
Cross and the Salvation Army envision their mission as progressing from search and rescue to 
mass care to infrastructure recreation.  FEMA coordinates the removal of debris, delivery of ice 
3 
 
and water, repair of damaged roofs, and the creation of temporary housing.  Overseas, military 
personnel work alongside other organizations to deliver food, water, and tent cities to survivors.  
Once order is restored, agencies may rebuild basic infrastructure (bridges, power lines, roads) 
and buildings. 
Three recent disasters provide telling evidence that social networks – and not aid or 
damage levels – create efficient recoveries.  Comparison of the one-year anniversaries of the 
Kobe Earthquake, Hurricane Katrina, and the Indian Ocean Tsunami demonstrates that recovery 
is linked neither to the scale of destruction nor to the amount of financial assistance that flows 
into the country. Though the 1995 Kobe earthquake killed 6,500 and made 300,000 homeless, 
within a year the city restored all utilities and resumed trade and exports at 80% and 
manufacturing at 80% of pre-disaster levels.  One year after the 2004 tsunami which caused 
8,000 deaths and left 310,000 homeless, the Tamil Nadu region of India rebuilt almost all of its 
schools, fixed 75% of the damaged housing stock, and put most of its fishermen back to work.  
In New Orleans, however, one year after Hurricane Katrina, which killed 1,600 and left 250,000 
homeless, some neighborhoods remained apparently untouched from the time waters struck, less 
than half of the schools, restaurants, and stores were open across the city, and employment 
hovered at less than two-thirds its pre-storm level.  In some fields, such as public transportation, 
hospital openings, and child care centers, rebuilding all but ground to a halt.   
These cases contravene traditional explanations.   Kobe experienced the most damage -- 
$180 billion to New Orleans’ $150 billion and India’s $3 billion.   New Orleans and Kobe had 
more financial resources with per capita incomes of $28,000 and $27,000 respectively to just 
$700 per person in Tamil Nadu.   FEMA provided $16 billion and India distributed $2.1 billion 
to survivors, while Japan, under its ―no compensation‖ policy, gave nothing.   Despite clear 
4 
 
material advantages, few dispute that New Orleans has recovered slower than its Asian 
counterparts.   While poor governance may be a culprit, intra-city variation in recovery suggests 
that community characteristics, such as trust and social capital, better explain the 
differences.  New Orleans’ Vietnamese neighborhood of Village de L’Est, for example, 
recovered quickly due to its dense community networks and high levels of trust, while other 
neighborhoods lacking these characteristics stagnated (Chamlee-Wright 2010). 
A social capital deficit may explain why New Orleans as a whole did not witness the 
vibrant recovery seen in Kobe or Tamil Nadu despite its significant material advantages.   Like 
two individuals exposed to the same disease, recovery may have more to do with the quality of 
the host than the nature of the illness.  Communities with more trust, civic engagement, and 
stronger networks can better bounce back after a crisis than fragmented, isolated ones (Aldrich 
2008).  We can measure social resources through proxies such as levels of trust (in fellow 
citizens and in government officials), the propensity to expend time and energy on civic duties 
(such as voting in local, regional, and national elections), and the ability of citizens to mobilize 
cooperatively (through demonstrations, neighborhood cleanup days, and other collective action).  
Citizens in Kobe and India – despite vastly different levels of income – showed stronger 
propensity to mobilize as a community (in informal networks and through caste councils in India 
and through voting and creating self-help groups in Kobe) than those in New Orleans.  Across 
the Big Easy, some neighborhoods – such as Village de L’Est – displayed strong ties among 
residents, creating clearinghouses of recovery information and tools while working collectively 
to clean up damaged housing; others showed little, if any broad scale cooperative activity 
(LaRose 2006; Faciane 2007).   Field hospitals, water, and food are certainly important and often 
5 
 
life-saving resources for survivors, but without social capital these programs and other schemes 
which focus solely on physical infrastructure in no way guarantee resilience or effective recovery. 
 
The Role of Social Capital 
 
Social capital – the networks and social resources available to us – matters immediately 
following crisis (the emergency response phase) and in the long period of recovery afterwards 
(restoration).  When disaster strikes, the first responders are not trained emergency personnel but 
rather local residents and neighbors (Perrow 2007). In disaster after disaster we have seen 
parents find and pull their children from the rubble and residents struggle with shovels to 
extricate elderly neighbors from collapsed houses.  By the time domestic or international rescue 
personnel arrive on the scene, many victims are already rescued by locals or are dead.  While 
foreign rescue teams pulling survivors out a week after an earthquake makes front page headlines, 
it is the exception, not the norm.  After the Kobe earthquake, when narrow streets and debris 
prevented official aid from reaching victims, local citizens formed bucket brigades and searched 
the debris to find survivors (Tsuji 2001: 56; Shaw and Goda 2004: 21).   Similarly, after Katrina, 
local rescuers with deep knowledge of the local terrain arrived well before the National Guard 
troops were on the scene.   
 
In the months and years of rebuilding that follow disasters, social networks continue to be 
a critical resource in three ways.  First, social ties can serve as ―informal insurance,‖ providing 
victims with information, financial help, and physical assistance (Beggs, Haines, and Hurlbert 
1996).  Rather than a market based type of formal insurance in which members pay premiums to 
a corporation in exchange for health or life insurance, informal insurance involves friends and 
neighbors providing information, tools, living space, and help.  After disasters, individuals who 
6 
 
are better connected to more individuals receive more assistance post-disaster than less-
connected people (Hurlbert, Haines, and Beggs 2000: 594).  Free housing, child care assistance, 
short term loans, and information are readily available from core network members in post-crisis 
times when it may not be accessible from organizations such as the local government, 
professional childcare services, and other institutions.  Following the Kobe earthquake, many 
survivors went to live with family and friends who provided a spare bedroom or cleaned out 
unoccupied space for their new boarders rather than seeking long term shelter in government 
provided housing.  Survivors of tornadoes in the Midwest need to borrow water, chainsaws, 
diesel generators, and other equipment that they do not own and are not available due to the 
closure of stores.  Neighbors and friends – not government agencies or NGOs - provide the 
necessary resources for recovery after disaster.   
Information and signals from civil society – such as ―who is coming back when and what 
services will be provided‖ – are critical to decision-making processes of survivors, and cannot be 
replaced by government pronouncements (Chamlee-Wright and Rothschild 2007: 2).  Survivors 
of Katrina did not want to return to be the only household on their blocks, as this could be risky 
due to both crime and a lack of social support.  While New Orleans city officials could regularly 
update the status of electrical and gas utilities, schools, and other facilities, such top-down 
memos and press releases about broader ―Building Back Plans‖ held little useful information to 
homeowners who were more interested in hearing if their neighbors also planned on returning 
(Chamlee-Wright 2010).  Similarly, research on post-war Japan underscored how regional social 
networks collaborated with the national government to speed up reconstruction by providing 
information and facilitating implementation of recovery plans (Kage forthcoming).     
7 
 
 
Second, organized communities can better mobilize and overcome barriers to collective 
action (Olson 1965).  While survivors may agree that temporary housing, debris clearing, and the 
reconnection of utilities are critical, they may not be able to coordinate their efforts to bring 
about these desired outcomes.  Neighbors with greater levels of social capital share information 
about bureaucratic procedures and upcoming deadlines, monitor public space to prevent dumping, 
and deter looting in their community (Dow 1999; DeFilippis 2001).  Following the Kobe 
earthquake, for example, local residents in some neighborhoods organized to plan cooperative, 
fireproof housing while other areas waited for guidance from city officials (Olshansky 
forthcoming).  Survivors of the Haiti earthquake spontaneously organized watch committees to 
guard belongings from theft and individuals from harm.  Social capital can assist individuals in 
attracting and controlling resources, as better organized and mobilized regions can more 
successfully access the loans, supplies, and other resources.  In New Orleans, when 500 
signatures were needed to prompt Entergy – the local utility - to restore electrical power to the 
neighborhood, more than 1000 residents of the neighborhood of Village de L’Est were able to 
sign on by the end of the day.  Even with grant money, low social capital communities may find 
it difficult to recover. The neighborhood of Mikura in Kobe, could not coordinate debris removal 
because no one volunteered to organize written agreements from property owners (Evans 2001: 
177; Yasui 2007: 227).  
 
Third, and finally, survivors have difficult choices to make following a disaster.  They 
could leave the community – an option economists call ―exit‖ – or they can stay and use their 
―voice‖ to call for assistance, changes to rebuilding plans, and accountability from elected 
representatives (Hirschman 1970).  Strong social networks raise the cost of exit from a 
community and increase the probability that residents will exercise voice to join rebuilding 
8 
 
efforts and seek to improve their lot.  Private citizens with a long-term stake in the community 
will most be the most motivated to rebuild and possess the greatest capacity to do so while 
isolated individuals will be less likely to do either (Chamlee-Wright and Rothschild 2007).  In 
fact, citizens bound by fewer ties to their neighbors are more likely to engage in illegal and 
disruptive acts which impede recovery efforts, neutralizing positive efforts at rehabilitation 
efforts (Varshney 2001; Lee and Bartkowski 2004).   To paraphrase an old platitude, a rebuilt 
bridge or refurbished home does not a community make. 
 
 
The current situation parallels 1950s-era beliefs about investment and foreign aid for 
developing nations.  For years, Western bureaucrats and donors imagined that large capital 
investments would jumpstart developing economies in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.  Study 
after study showed that these bridges, roads, and other facilities did little to alter the productivity, 
skills, or entrepreneurial behavior of local residents (Ahn and Ostrom 2008: 89).  As scholars 
pointed out, ―It soon became clear, however, that merely pumping physical and financial 
resources into poor countries was having, at best, a marginal positive impact‖ (Woolcock and 
Radin 2008: 415).  In fact, aid – whether for development or disaster recovery – often created 
perverse incentives in the recipient population which further undermined broader attempts at 
economic and social growth (Gibson, Andersson, Ostrom, and Shivakumar 2005). In the mid 
1990s, the World Bank began to recognize the need to invest in social infrastructure.  Through a 
new perspective focused on building local trust, interconnectedness, and networks, the World 
Bank moved beyond physical infrastructure to a new focus on the role of social infrastructure.  
Trust magnified the effectiveness of foreign aid; societies with more of it could better use the 
new infrastructure to improve factor productivity, educational levels, and so on (Woolcock 2002). 
9 
 
The Way Forward: New Policies and Programs 
Given the importance of social resources, what should be done in future disaster recovery 
policies?  First, government decision makers and nonprofit sectors must recognize the critical 
role of social capital and social resources.  At best, social capital and local networks are 
mentioned peripherally by disaster planners, if they are mentioned at all. For example, grants are 
available for post-disaster mental health programs in the U.S. through the Crisis Counseling 
Assistance and Training Program, but these activities focus on individuals experiencing 
psychological distress, not on maintaining, restoring, or developing their social networks.  The 
United Nations Team for Tsunami Recovery Support openly recognized the need for ―social 
reintegration‖ of survivors but provided few details for how to do so. 
A number of post-disaster plans, such as the random assignment of survivors to nearby 
temporary shelters or permanent housing, actually damage existing stocks of social capital.  
While recovery coordinators may imagine that quick evacuation of survivors would somehow 
save more lives than a more methodical mass departure plan, their assumptions are often 
mistaken.  Following the Kobe earthquake, for example, the placement of many senior citizens in 
huge, Soviet-style apartment blocks resulted in a number of ―lonely deaths,‖ where elders passed 
away without anyone even knowing of the event.  Many argued that these deaths were 
completely preventable; had they been placed near friends, acquaintances, or old neighbors, 
these seniors would have felt connected to the broader community and had something to live for.  
Following the tsunami, local residents bitterly complained that their random resettlement severed 
connections to friends and family who often provided child care, informal job assistance, and 
help in daily living.  Without these resources, tsunami survivors found themselves struggling to 
resume their normal lives.  The buses in New Orleans headed for temporary shelters out of town 
10 
 
did not post signs which would have let survivors know where they were heading.   Providing 
this simple information could have allowed New Orleans survivors to travel to cities and towns 
where they had family and friends.  More broadly, preserving communities – either through 
placement in the same shelter or through the provision of email, cell phone, and texting devices - 
in post-disaster housing is only the start. 
A handful of innovators have taken notice of social infrastructure in post crisis 
environments and sought to use it in their policies.   In 2002, the United States Department of 
Agriculture put out a report entitled Homeowners, Communities, and Wildfire: Science Findings 
from the National Fire Plan.  In that document, planners recognized the need to integrate social 
capital in plans for improving community preparedness for wildfires ((Jakes 2002).  Japanese 
law enforcement personnel have written openly about the critical role post-crisis for local 
volunteers who better know disaster-struck neighborhoods and can respond more efficiently than 
centralized planners (Araki 2003).  Seattle, Washington has set up a disaster response plan 
entitled Seattle Neighborhoods Actively Prepare which provides explicit roles for local 
homeowners and residents.  USAID has provided $140 million for the Iraq Community Action 
Program to mobilize local citizens for decision making processes and strengthen governance at 
the local level.  Archaeologists have struggled to protect national treasures from looters and 
describe how local community members – not centralized law enforcement personnel – can most 
effectively combat pillaging at archaeological sites in Peru, Iraq, and elsewhere (Atwood 2009).   
What can governmental decision makers involved in disaster planning do?  They must 
first recognize that social capital – like other fungible assets – can be increased (or decreased) 
through policy.  Next, thanks to GIS (geographical information systems), we can identify 
socially vulnerable locations, especially the communities of the Gulf Coast and slums and 
11 
 
villages in developing nations locations (Cutter and Emrich 2006; Cutter and Finch 2008).  The 
next goal is to build up the trust and networks in these areas and in cities and towns.  Scholars 
such as Anirudh Krishna (2007) have demonstrated that trust, interactions, and informal 
networks can develop and strengthen over time because of self-initiated local organizations and 
local leaders.  Further, external programs – not just locally initiated ones – can strengthen 
existing civil society and create new bonds between citizens.   Studies carried out in Nicaragua 
and in South Africa showed that locally-tailored programs can improve both local trust and civic 
participation even in areas with low incomes and little education (Brune and Bossert 2009; 
Pronyk, Harpha, Busza, Phetla, Morison, Hargreaves, Kim, Watts, and Porter 2008).   
Other, currently experimental methods for increasing social capital include policies 
which create incentives for local community participation.  In some programs in Japan and the 
United States, volunteers receive scrip that can be exchanged for goods and services from local 
merchants (Lietaer 2004).   Encouraging citizens to serve food or assist the weak at elder hostels, 
serve as Big Brothers, or work together on building new homes can increase stores of social 
capital and deepen trust (Doteuchi 2002; Richey 2007).  Another way to increase social capital in 
vulnerable or disrupted areas is through the creation of local-level organizations – such as 
children’s halls and play schools – which provide parents with new sources of relevant 
information along with links to external agencies (Ono 1998;  Kobayashi 2006; Small 2009).  
Urban and suburban infrastructure design itself can also influence levels of social capital; we 
must alter the layout of new communities to increase interaction among residents.  Walkable, 
mixed-use neighborhoods (Leyden 2003) along with intentional communities and co-housing 
(Poley and Stephenson 2007) encourage the development of bonds among neighbors.  Most 
broadly, social capital thrives in an environment where residents believe in their efficacy as 
12 
 
citizens and have trust in each other and their representatives; when failing states such as Haiti 
undergo tragedy, donors and UN personnel should help overhaul governance mechanisms to 
build new institutions that will positively interact with social resources.  All of these possibilities 
must be on the table if policy designers want to move beyond the outdated structures which 
continue to define our response to crises at home and abroad. 
 
Thanks to decades of studies on social capital, we have come to recognize its role in 
building up responsive governance, increasing innovation and business growth, and promoting 
better health.  Disasters remain among the most critical shocks which impact residents and their 
neighborhoods around the world; they have killed far more than high salience issues such as 
terrorism.  While large scale crises such as the Indian Ocean tsunami and Haiti’s and Chile’s 
2010 earthquakes captured media attention, numerous smaller-scale floods, typhoons, 
earthquakes, and mudslides killed hundreds of thousands of victims around the world and 
affected far more.   Researchers have confirmed an upward trend in the number in the number of 
disasters, individuals affected by them, and their economic costs over the past two decades.  
Scientists predict that the global cost of disaster, both in terms of lives and property damage, will 
only increase with the progression of global warming.  Ensuring that social capital is on the 
agenda for decision makers will create future plans that will be more effective and generate 
better recoveries. 
13 
 
Sources: 
Ahn, T.K. and Ostrom, Elinor. (2008). Social Capital and Collective Action. In Dario Castiglione, 
Jan W. van Deth, and Guglielmo Wolleb, eds. The Handbook of Social Capital.  New York: 
Oxford University Press, pp. 70-100. 
 
Aldrich, Daniel P. (2008). The crucial role of civil society in disaster recovery and Japan’s 
emergency preparedness. Japan aktuell [Journal of Current Japanese Affairs] Vol. 3 September 
pp. 81 - 96. 
 
Beggs, John, Haines, Valerie, and Hurlbert, Jeanne. (1996). Situational Contingencies 
Surrounding the Receipt of Informal Support.  Social Forces, Vol. 75, No. 1. pp. 201-222. 
 
Brune, Nancy and Bossert, Thomas. (2009).  Building social capital in post-conflict 
communities: Evidence from Nicaragua.  Social Science & Medicine Vol. 68 pp. 885–893. 
 
Caputo, Marc. (2010). New Orleans is recovering, and offering lessons for Haiti. February 21 
Miami Herald. 
 
Chamlee-Wright, Emily. (2010). The Cultural and Political Economy of Recovery: Social 
learning in a post-disaster environment.  New York: Routledge. 
 
Chamlee-Wright, Emily and Rothschild, Daniel. (2007). Disastrous Uncertainty: How  
Government Disaster Policy Undermines Community Rebound. Mercatus Policy Series  Policy 
Comment No. 9. 
 
Cutter, Susan and Emrich, Christopher. (2006). Moral Hazard, Social Catastrophe: The Changing 
Face of Vulnerability along the Hurricane Coasts. Annals of the American Academy of Political 
and Social Science. Vol 604 pp. 102-112. 
 
Cutter, Susan and Finch, Christina. (2008). Temporal and spatial changes in social vulnerability 
to natural hazards. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Vol. 105  No. 7   pp 2301–
2306. 
 
Dacy, Douglas and Kunreuther, Howard. (1969).  The Economics of Natural Disasters: 
Implications for Federal Policy.  New York: The Free Press. 
 
DeFilippis, James. (2001). The Myth of Social Capital in Community Development. Housing  
Policy Debate Vol. 12 Issue 4 pp. 781 – 806. 
 
Doteuchi, Akio. (2002). Community Currency and NPOs—A Model for Solving Social Issues in 
the 21st Century. NLI Research Paper No. 163. 
 
Dow, Kirstin. (1999). The Extraordinary and the Everyday in Explanations of Vulnerability to an 
Oil Spill.  Geographical Review, Vol. 89, No. 1 pp. 74-93. 
14 
 
Evans, Neil. (2001). Community Planning in Japan: The Case of Mano, and its Experience in the 
Hanshin Earthquake. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation for  School of East Asian Studies, 
University of Sheffield. 
 
Faciane, Valerie. (2007). Vietnamese Community Thriving in eastern N.O. Times Picayune 23 
April. 
 
Gibson, Clark C., Andersson, Krister, Ostrom, Elinor and Shivakumar, Sujai. (2005).  The 
Samaritan’s Dilemma: The Political Economy of Development Aid. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 
Haas, J. Eugene, Kates, Robert W., Bowden, Martyn J., eds.  (1977). Reconstruction following 
Disaster. Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press. 
 
Hirschman, Albert. (1970). Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Responses to Decline in Firms, 
Organizations, and States.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
Hurlbert, Jeanne S., Haines, Valerie A., Beggs, John J. (2000). Core Networks and Tie 
Activation: What Kinds of Routine Networks Allocate Resources in Nonroutine Situations? 
American Sociological Review, Vol. 65, No. 4. pp. 598-618. 
 
Kage, Rieko. (Forthcoming). Civic Engagement in Postwar Japan. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.  
 
Kates, Robert and Pijawka, David. (1977).  From Rubble to Monument: The Pace of 
Reconstruction. In J. Eugene Haas, Robert Kates, and Martyn Bowden, eds., Reconstruction 
Following Disasters.  Cambridge MA: MIT Press, pp. 1-23. 
 
Kobayashi, Masahiro. (2006).  Kantō Daishinsai go no Shōgakkō Kenchiku – ―Fukkō Shōgakkō‖ 
no Zenyō to Tōkyōshi Kenchikukyoku ni yoru Gakkō Sekkei [A Study on the Buildings of 
Elementary Schools after the Great Kanto Earthquake: A Broader View of the ―Reconstructed 
Elementary School‖ and Its Planning by the City of Tokyo Construction Bureau]. Bulletin of The 
Graduate School of Education, The University of Tokyo, Vol. 46 pp. 21-30. 
 
Krishna, Anirudh. (2007).  How Does Social Capital Grow? A Seven-Year Study of Villages in 
India.  Journal of Politics Vol. 69 No. 4 pp. 941-956. 
 
LaRose, Greg. (2006). Asian businesses drive eastern New Orleans recovery. New Orleans City 
Business 2 October. 
 
Lee, Matthew and Bartkowski, John. (2004). Love Thy Neighbor? Moral Communities, Civic 
Engagement, and Juvenile Homicide in Rural Areas. Social Forces Vol. 82, No. 3 pp. 1001-1035. 
 
Leyden, Kevin. (2003).  Social Capital and the Built Environment: The Importance of Walkable 
Neighborhoods. American Journal of Public Health Vol. 93 No. 9 pp. 1546-1551. 
15 
 
Lietaer, Bernard. (2004). Complementary Currencies in Japan Today:  History, Originality and 
Relevance. International Journal of Community Currency Research Vol.8 pp.1-23. 
 
Olshansky, Robert. (Forthcoming). Reconstruction after the Kobe Earthquake. In Olshansky, 
Johnson, Topping, eds., Disaster Recovery.  Illinois: University of Illinois. 
 
Olson, Mancur. (1965).  The logic of collective action; public goods and the theory of groups.  
Cambridge:  Harvard University Press. 
 
Ono, Masāki. (1998). Kantō daishinsai to Gakkō no Fukkō – Tōkyōshi no Fukkō Katei wo Jirei 
to shite [The restoration of schools and the Great Kanto Earthquake: A Case Study of the Process 
of Rebuilding Tokyo].  Bulletin of Universities and Institutes, Institute of Humanities and Social 
Sciences, Nihon University Vo. 56 pp. 119-135. 
 
Perrow, Charles. (2007).  The Next Catastrophe.  Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 
Poley, Lisa and Stephenson, Max. (2007). Community and the Habits of Democratic Citizenship: 
An Investigation into Civic Engagement, Social Capital and Democratic Capacity-Building in 
U.S. Cohousing Neighborhoods. Paper prepared for the 103rd annual meeting of the American 
Political Science Association, Chicago, Illinois. 
 
Pronyk, Paul M.,  Harpham, Trudy,  Busza, Joanna, Phetla, Godfrey, Morison, Linda A, 
Hargreaves, James R., Kim, Julia C.,Watts, Charlotte H. and Porter, John. (2008). Can social 
capital be intentionally generated? A randomized trial from rural South Africa. Social Science & 
Medicine Vol. 67 pp. 1559–1570. 
 
Richey, Sean. (2007). Manufacturing Trust: Community Currencies and the Creation of Social 
Capital. Political Behavior Vol. 29 pp. 69-88. 
 
Shaw, Rajib and Goda, Katsuhiro. (2004). From Disaster to Sustainable Civil Society: The Kobe 
Experience. Disasters Vol. 28 No. 1 pp. 16 -40. 
 
Small, Mario Luis. (2009). Unanticipated Gains: Origins of Network Inequality in Everyday Life. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 
Tsuji, Katsuji. (2001). Saigai Katei to Saisei Katei: Hanshin-Awaji Daishinsai no Shōjojishi 
[The Course of Disaster and Recovery: A Short Epic about the Hanshin Awaji Earthquake].  
Kyoto: Kōyō Shobō Publishers. 
 
Varshney, Ashutosh. (2001). Ethnic Conflict and Civil Society: India and Beyond. World 
Politics. Vol. 53 No. 3 pp. 362-398. 
 
Woolcock , Michael. (2002). Social Capital in Theory and Practice: Reducing Poverty by 
Building Partnerships between States, Markets and Civil Society.  In Social Capital and Poverty 
16 
 
Reduction: Which role for civil society organizations and the State?  France: UNESCO, pp.20-
44. 
 
Woolcock, Michael and Radin, Elizabeth. (2008). A Relationship Approach to the Theory and 
Practices of Economic Development. In Dario Castiglione, Jan W. van Deth, and Guglielmo 
Wolleb, eds.  The Handbook of Social Capital.  New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 411-437. 
 
Yasui, Etsuko. (2007).  Community Vulnerability and Capacity in Post Disaster Recover: The 
Cases of Mano and Mikura Neighborhoods in the Wake of the1995 Kobe Earthquake. 
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation for the University of British Columbia. 
 
