United States Department of Agriculture


Forest 
Service
Northern 
Research Station
General Technical 
Report NRS-87-2 
Major Revision
September 2016
Forest Adaptation Resources: 
Climate Change Tools and Approaches 
for Land Managers, 2nd edition
ABSTRACT
Forests across the United States are expected to undergo numerous changes in 
response to the changing climate. This second edition of the Forest Adaptation 
Resources provides a collection of resources designed to help forest managers 
incorporate climate change considerations into management and devise adaptation 
tactics. It was developed as part of the Climate Change Response Framework and 
reflects the expertise, creativity, and feedback of dozens of direct contributors and 
hundreds of users of the first edition over the last several years. Six interrelated chapters 
include: (1) a description of the overarching Climate Change Response Framework, 
which generated these resources; (2) a brief guide to help forest managers judge or 
initiate vulnerability assessments; (3) a “menu” of adaptation strategies and approaches 
that are directly relevant to forests of the Northeast and upper Midwest; (4) a second 
menu of adaptation strategies and approaches oriented to urban forests; (5) a workbook 
process with step-by-step instructions to assist land managers in developing on-the-
ground climate adaptation tactics that address their management objectives; and 
(6) five real-world examples of how these resources have been used to develop
adaptation tactics. The ideas, tools, and resources presented in the different chapters
are intended to inform and support existing decisionmaking processes of multiple
organizations with diverse management goals.
Quality Assurance
This publication conforms to the Northern Research Station’s Quality Assurance 
Implementation Plan which requires technical and policy review for all scientific 
publications produced or funded by the Station. The process included a blind technical 
review by at least two reviewers, who were selected by the Assistant Director for 
Research and unknown to the author. This review policy promotes the Forest Service 
guiding principles of using the best scientific knowledge, striving for quality and 
excellence, maintaining high ethical and professional standards, and being responsible 
and accountable for what we do.
Cover Photo
A forest containing red pine and northern red oak trees. Photo by Maria Janowiak, 
U.S. Forest Service and Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science.
The use of trade or firm names in this publication is for reader information and does 
not imply endorsement by the U.S. Department of Agriculture of any product or service.
Published by:	
For additional copies, contact:
USDA FOREST SERVICE	
USDA Forest Service
11 CAMPUS BLVD., SUITE 200	
Publications Distribution
NEWTOWN SQUARE, PA  19073-3294	
359 Main Road	
Delaware, OH  43015-8640
September 2016	
Fax: 740-368-0152
Manuscript received for publication January 2016
Visit our homepage at: http://www.nrs.fs.fed.us/
Forest Adaptation Resources: 
Climate Change Tools and Approaches 
for Land Managers, 2nd edition
Christopher W. Swanston, Maria K. Janowiak, Leslie A. Brandt, 
Patricia R. Butler, Stephen D. Handler, P. Danielle Shannon,  
Abigail Derby Lewis, Kimberly Hall, Robert T. Fahey, Lydia Scott, 
Angela Kerber, Jason W. Miesbauer, Lindsay Darling, 
Linda Parker, and Matt St. Pierre
AUTHORS
CHRISTOPHER W. SWANSTON is the director of 
the Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science, 
U.S. Forest Service, 410 MacInnes Drive, Houghton, 
MI 49931, cswanston@fs.fed.us.
MARIA K. JANOWIAK is the deputy director of the 
Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science, U.S. 
Forest Service, 410 MacInnes Drive, Houghton, MI 
49931, mjanowiak02@fs.fed.us.
LESLIE A. BRANDT is a climate change specialist 
with the Northern Institute of Applied Climate 
Science, U.S. Forest Service, 1992 Folwell Avenue, 
St. Paul, MN 55108, lbrandt@fs.fed.us.
PATRICIA R. BUTLER is a climate change outreach 
specialist with the Northern Institute of Applied 
Climate Science, Michigan Technological University, 
School of Forest Resources and Environmental 
Science, 1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton, MI 
49931, prbutler@mtu.edu.
STEPHEN D. HANDLER is a climate change 
specialist with the Northern Institute of Applied 
Climate Science, U.S. Forest Service, 410 MacInnes 
Drive, Houghton, MI 49931, sdhandler@fs.fed.us.
P. DANIELLE SHANNON is the coordinator of the
USDA Northern Forests Climate Hub, Northern
Institute of Applied Climate Science, Michigan
Technological University, School of Forest
Resources and Environmental Science,
1400 Townsend Drive, Houghton, MI 49931,
dshannon@mtu.edu.
ABIGAIL DERBY LEWIS is a senior conservation 
ecologist in the Keller Science Action Center 
at the Field Museum of Natural History, 
1400 S. Lake Shore Drive, Chicago, IL 60605, 
aderby@fieldmuseum.org. 






KIMBERLY HALL is a climate change ecologist  
with The Nature Conservancy, and an adjunct  
faculty member at Michigan State University, 
Department of Forestry, Natural Resources Building, 
480 Wilson Road, Room 126, East Lansing, MI 
48824-1222, kimberly.hall@tnc.org.
ROBERT T. FAHEY is an assistant professor at the 
University of Connecticut, Department of Natural 
Resources and the Environment, and the Center for 
Environmental Sciences and Engineering,  
1376 Storrs Road, Storrs, CT 06269,  
robert.fahey@uconn.edu.
LYDIA SCOTT is director of the Chicago Region 
Trees Initiative, located at the Morton Arboretum, 
4100 Illinois Route 53, Lisle, IL 60532,  
lscott@mortonarb.org.
ANGELA KERBER is a wetland specialist and 
certified arborist with the Stormwater Department 
of DuPage County, 421 N. County Farm Road, 
Wheaton, IL 60187, angela.levernier@dupageco.org.
JASON W. MIESBAUER is an arboriculture scientist 
with the Morton Arboretum, 4100 Illinois Route 53, 
Lisle, IL 60532, jmiesbauer@mortonarb.org.
LINDSAY DARLING is a geographic information 
systems analyst with the Morton Arboretum,  
4100 Illinois Route 53, Lisle, IL 60532,  
ldarling@mortonarb.org.
LINDA PARKER is a forest ecologist with the U.S. 
Forest Service, Chequamegon-Nicolet National 
Forest, 1170 4th Avenue So., Park Falls, WI 54552, 
lrparker@fs.fed.us.
MATT ST. PIERRE is a natural resources staff 
officer with the U.S. Forest Service, Chequamegon-
Nicolet National Forest, 500 Hanson Lake Road, 
Rhinelander, WI 54501, mstpierre@fs.fed.us.
Contents
Introduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: 
                  Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: 
                  a Brief Guide for Forest Managers  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Strategies and Approaches .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
Literature Cited .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Appendix 1. Synthesis of Adaptation Strategies and Approaches .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 128
Appendix 2. List of Common and Scientific Names of Species 
                    Mentioned in this Document .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Appendix 3. Lead Authors and Other Contributors to Chapter 4 .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 136
Appendix 4. Adaptation Workbook: Short Version .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 138
Appendix 5. Adaptation Workbook: Blank Worksheets .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Appendix 6. Adaptation Workbook: Example Worksheets  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
Page intentionally left blank
1
Introduction
The second edition of Forest Adaptation Resources: 
Climate Change Tools and Approaches for Land 
Managers, like its predecessor, is intended to 
provide perspective, information, and tools to 
land managers considering how to adapt forest 
ecosystems to a changing climate. Broadly, 
adaptation includes all adjustments, both planned 
and spontaneous, in natural and human systems 
in response to climatic changes and subsequent 
effects (Parry et al. 2007). In this document, 
however, we focus on planned, ecosystem-based 
adaptation activities that use a range of strategies 
and approaches for sustainable management, 
conservation, and restoration of forests in order 
to maintain ecosystem integrity and provide 
environmental benefits to people. 
In this document we present a set of interrelated 
chapters, each of which serves as a resource to help 
managers incorporate climate change considerations 
into management and devise adaptation tactics that 
can be used to respond to climate change (Fig. 1). 
These resources are designed to be used across a 
wide diversity of ecosystems, scales, and values. 
They do not make recommendations or set policy, 
but rather provide information, ideas, and processes 
for evaluating climate change as one component of 
management (Box 1). 
Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: 
Overview of the Climate Change Response 
Framework describes the Climate Change Response 
Framework, summarizes the project components and 
subsequent outcomes, and provides a background for 
later chapters.
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability 
Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers 
is a guide for judging available vulnerability 
assessments, or even initiating a vulnerability 
assessment. Vulnerability assessments help users 
understand what ecosystem components may be at 
risk, which informs choices about adaptation. 
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches 
synthesizes a wide range of reports and peer-
reviewed publications on climate change adaptation 
and provides a “menu” of adaptation actions that are 
relevant to the upper Midwest and Northeast. Expert 
feedback was used to further refine the synthesis of 
existing literature and provide examples of specific 
adaptation actions.
Figure 1.—Components of the Forest Adaptation 
Resources. The Adaptation Strategies and Approaches 
and the Adaptation Workbook can be used together 
to develop management tactics to adapt forests to the 
anticipated effects of climate change.

Introduction
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Strategies and 
Approaches follows the same intent and format 
as Chapter 3, but is specific to the challenges and 
opportunities of managing forests in urban natural 
areas and developed sites.
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook outlines 
a process for incorporating climate change 
considerations into management planning and 
activities, while also complementing existing 
processes and procedures for making decisions. 
It uses a workbook approach to provide step-by-
step instructions for land managers to translate the 
Adaptation Strategies and Approaches (Chapters 3 
and 4) into on-the-ground management tactics that 
help forest ecosystems adapt to climate change.
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations provides 
real-world examples of how the Adaptation 
Strategies and Approaches and the Adaptation 
Workbook can be used together to develop 
adaptation tactics (Fig. 1). 
Box 1
About the Forest Adaptation Resources
The Forest Adaptation Resources can: 
•	 Help managers incorporate climate change 
considerations into management and devise 
adaptation actions that can be used to 
respond to climate change.
•	 Be used by a variety of land management 
organizations, including both private and 
public entities.
•	 Be approached, read, and used flexibly. 
Although arranged as a single document, 
the chapters are designed to both support 
each other and be used independently of 
each other. 
•	 Be applied across multiple scales in different 
places, through 
-	
A broad framework for responding to 
climate change (Chapter 1)
-	
A brief guide to considering climate 
change vulnerability assessments 
(Chapter 2)
-	
A “menu” of many adaptation strategies 
and approaches for forest ecosystems 
(Chapters 3 and 4)
-	
An Adaptation Workbook, which can be 
applied to a variety of ecosystems at 
multiple scales to help land managers 
integrate climate change considerations 
into management activities (Chapter 5).
•	 Describe practical applications of the 
process through “adaptation demonstrations” 
of how climate change was considered in 
real-world management situations using 
the other resources within this document 
(Chapter 6).
The resources in this document do not: 
•	 Recommend management actions or policy. 
•	 Replace institutional or legal processes. 
These resources are not intended to replace 
existing decisionmaking processes, but 
may augment them at an organization’s 
discretion.

Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: 
Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
As ecosystems continue to respond to the pressures 
of a changing climate, individuals and organizations 
tasked with managing these ecosystems will benefit 
from reexamining their priorities, objectives, and 
tactics. Some land managers may ultimately decide 
not to make any near-term changes in priorities or 
tactics, even after considering climate pressures on 
forests. Others may choose to accommodate forest 
change even as they attempt to ensure continued 
value from the ecosystem in question. In other 
words, as forests adapt naturally, organizations need 
to decide if they intend to play a role in adaptation 
through land management and how to play that role 
most effectively. This is easier said than done, of 
course, as land managers struggle to keep up with 
“traditional” challenges, not to mention the daunting 
complexities of climate change. 
The U.S. Forest Service launched a community 
effort called the Climate Change Response 
Framework (CCRF) to address the major challenges 
that land managers face when considering how to 
integrate climate change into their planning and 
management. The Forest Adaptation Resources 
contains a description of the overall CCRF process 
in addition to specific tools used within the 
community. It is one of the major products of the 
CCRF, and both this edition and the first edition 
(Swanston and Janowiak 2012) have been shaped 
by broad community feedback and testing. This 
chapter describes the CCRF and how it is designed 
to address four substantial challenges commonly 
identified by forest managers. 
The Climate Change 
Response Framework
The CCRF grew from the recognition that a 
focused effort was needed to compile and create 
climate impacts information relevant to resource 
management, and also to draw upon the collective 
experience of the forestry community to devise 
management responses to the changing climate. 
The Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science 
(NIACS) began this process in 2008 by providing 
climate change education, scoping activities, and 
discussion with land managers from across the upper 
Midwest and Northeast. The Chequamegon-Nicolet 
National Forest in Wisconsin was designated as a 
“test landscape” in 2009 as part of the CCRF pilot 
project (Swanston and Janowiak 2012), and its staff 
provided expertise, perspective, and a wide network 
of partners in northern Wisconsin to help create the 
CCRF. Four major issues were repeatedly raised in 
regionwide scoping discussions, and the means of 
addressing these issues became the core components 
of the emerging CCRF (Table 1).
The overall CCRF process is designed to continually 
incorporate new information, ideas, and lessons 
learned into the products and activities. It was 
conceived as a model for collaborative management 
and climate change response across large and 
diverse landscapes (Butler et al. 2011). In fact, the 
success of the initial pilot spurred expansion beyond 
Wisconsin to the Northwoods in 2010, the Central 
Hardwoods in 2011, the Central Appalachians in 

Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
Table 1.—Major adaptation issue or challenge repeatedly identified by natural resource managers, and 
corresponding component of the Climate Change Response Framework (CCRF)
Issue identified by managers
CCRF component addressing issue
Climate change is too big and too complex
Partnerships, which increase the capacity of organizations to cope with 
the overwhelming nature of the problem
Climate research is not relevant enough
Vulnerability assessments, which compile credible, relevant information 
about projected future climate conditions and forest responses and 
vulnerability 
One-size-fits-all answers are insufficient
Forest adaptation resources, which help land managers and 
landowners devise adaptation actions to meet their objectives 
There are not enough real-world examples
Adaptation demonstrations, which are on-the-ground examples of 
adaptation planning and implementation 
2012, the Chicago Metropolitan Area and New 
England in 2013, and the Mid-Atlantic in 2014. 
These six CCRF ecoregional projects are designed to 
accommodate the natural distribution of ecosystems 
across the landscape and reflect how people organize 
themselves and interact with the ecosystems (Fig. 2).
The CCRF follows a basic process of engagement 
and activity (Fig. 3). With a region in mind, a critical 
step is to reach out to the people who live, work, and 
conduct research in the regional forests. These are 
the people who will ideally use CCRF products and 
can contribute critical information and perspectives 
Figure 2.—Climate Change Response Framework ecoregional project areas.
5
Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
Figure 3.—Diagram of the iterative approach used by the Climate Change Response Framework to help natural resource 
professionals integrate climate change considerations into management planning and activities, and the resulting four 
project components.
to the creation of these products. Different groups 
may take part in all, or just some, aspects of the 
CCRF, depending on their skills, interests, and 
capacity. Many of these partners will collaborate 
to define critical forest ecosystems and assess 
their vulnerability to climate change. Likewise, 
regional partners are instrumental in compiling 
and considering adaptation strategies relevant 
to the places where they work and do research. 
Finally, the CCRF connects with partners willing 
to apply this information on their lands using the 
Forest Adaptation Resources to develop adaptation 
plans, and then share their stories of planning and 
implementation as adaptation demonstrations. 
The CCRF process generates numerous products 
and activities, which are grouped into four major 
components: partnerships, vulnerability assessments, 
forest adaptation resources, and adaptation 
demonstrations. The character of each component 
can be tailored to individual regions or even 
ownerships. NIACS frequently evaluates the need 
for adjusting components based upon feedback from 
land managers in federal, state, tribal, nonprofit, and 
private organizations. In many ways, the grouping 
of products and activities into these components 
evolved in response to several issues that land 
managers consistently identified as key challenges in 
NIACS workshops and meetings. These issues—and 
the CCRF project components that address them—
are described next.
6
Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
“Climate change is too big 
and too complex”
Productive partnerships increase the capacity of 
organizations to cope with the overwhelming nature 
of climate change and ensure relevance, credibility, 
and usefulness of CCRF products. 
Both individuals and organizations may be reluctant 
to address climate change directly because the 
issue is so complex and pervasive. Careful land 
stewardship already draws upon an enormous 
array of information and experience, including 
how climate has historically interacted with forest 
ecology and land management. At the same time, 
the potential for interaction of a range of plausible 
future climates with forest stressors, ecology, and 
management further magnifies the complexity of 
forest planning and decisionmaking. This added 
complexity can essentially be beyond the capacity of 
some organizations to integrate into their planning 
and operations, leading to an “uncertainty paralysis” 
in responding to climate change. 
In coordinating the CCRF, NIACS reaches out to 
organizations and networks to learn about the people 
who live and work in a particular place, how they 
value and view their lands, and what skills and 
knowledge they might be willing to contribute to 
CCRF products and activities. By drawing upon 
the combined expertise, experience, and capacity 
of the broader forest sector and climate science 
communities, the CCRF can help meet climate-
related needs of organizations and landowners 
while effectively reducing the burden on any single 
organization. This cross-ownership and cross-
discipline collaboration also increases the overall 
rate of learning. Further, collaboration helps ensure 
that information generated by the community-
based CCRF meets the needs of forest stewards in 
the region. The resulting partnerships within the 
CCRF are many and varied. For example, partners 
contribute expertise to vulnerability assessments, 
develop and review place-based adaptation 
strategies, serve as hosts and instructors at climate 
adaptation workshops, and share information about 
management goals and adaptation actions.
“Climate research is 
not relevant enough”
Forest vulnerability assessments created by the 
CCRF compile credible, relevant information about 
projected future climate conditions and forest 
responses and vulnerability. 
Forest managers seeking to pursue science-based 
management often need to invest significant 
time sorting through a tremendous number of 
research publications on climate and its effects 
to find information that is credible, relevant, and 
understandable. They are frequently frustrated by the 
large spatial scales and long time frames of climate 
projections, which are typically much broader than 
those of forest planning and activities. Additionally, 
academic research uses an often bewildering 
assortment of climate scenarios, climate models, 
downscaling algorithms, time scales, and ecological 
models to project potential effects of climate change 
on forests. Many organizations simply cannot 
dedicate the time required to comprehensively 
review and synthesize this information, even if they 
have the multidisciplinary expertise. 
The CCRF addresses this information challenge by 
creating a standardized series of forest ecosystem 
vulnerability assessments written specifically for 
land managers. Each assessment in the series is 
informed at the outset by regional experts, including 
both scientists and land managers. The series spans 
several ecoregions (Box 2) and uses the same suite 
of climate scenarios and models, vegetation impact 
models, and chapter templates (contemporary 
landscape, climate primer, past climate, climate 
projections, climate impacts, ecosystem 
vulnerability, and management implications). 
These assessments are place-based, meaning that 
information in the assessment about climate and 
ecology is rooted in the region, and interpreted and 
reviewed by regional experts. The actual assessment 
of ecosystem vulnerability takes place through a 
transparent consensus-building process with a panel 
of ecologists, modelers, and practitioners that work 
in the region (Brandt et al. 2016). The result is a 
highly credible product meeting the needs of many 
partners, but largely beyond the capacity of any 
single partner to create.

Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
Box 2
Vulnerability Assessment and Synthesis Reports
NIACS has worked with the CCRF community 
to develop a series of ecosystem vulnerability 
assessments. We created a pilot assessment 
in northern Wisconsin and then applied lessons 
learned from that effort to create a standardized 
vulnerability assessment process and template. 
The objective of this assessment process is to 
determine vulnerability to climate change among 
forest community types within an ecological 
province (broad geographic areas that share 
climate, glacial history, and vegetation types). The 
assessment process uses a range of downscaled 
climate projections that are incorporated into 
dynamic and species distribution modeling to 
determine future habitat suitability of tree species. 
A comprehensive literature review provides a 
summary of the effects of climate change on 
disturbance processes, hydrology, and associated 
forest species in the area. A panel of experts then 
uses this information to assess climate change 
impacts on the drivers, stressors, and dominant 
species of forest communities in each ecoregion. 
These assessments are:
•	 Central Hardwoods Ecosystem Vulnerability 
Assessment and Synthesis: a Report from 
the Central Hardwoods Climate Change 
Response Framework Project (Brandt et al. 
2014) 
•	 Chicago Wilderness Region Urban Forest 
Vulnerability Assessment and Synthesis 
(Brandt et al., in review)
•	 Mid-Atlantic Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability 
Assessment and Synthesis: a Report from 
the Mid-Atlantic Climate Change Response 
Framework Project (Butler et al., in 
preparation)
•	 Central Appalachians Forest Ecosystem 
Vulnerability Assessment and Synthesis: 
a Report from the Central Appalachians 
Climate Change Response Framework 
Project (Butler et al. 2015)
•	 Michigan Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability 
Assessment and Synthesis: a Report from 
the Northwoods Climate Change Response 
Framework Project (Handler et al. 2014b)
•	 Minnesota Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability 
Assessment and Synthesis: a Report from 
the Northwoods Climate Change Response 
Framework Project (Handler et al. 2014a)
•	 New England Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability 
Assessment and Synthesis: a Report from 
the New England Climate Change Response 
Framework Project (Janowiak et al., in 
review) 
•	 Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability Assessment 
and Synthesis for Northern Wisconsin and 
Western Upper Michigan: a Report from 
the Northwoods Climate Change Response 
Framework Project (Janowiak et al. 2014a)
•	 Ecosystem Vulnerability Assessment and 
Synthesis: a Report from the Climate 
Change Response Framework Project in 
Northern Wisconsin (Swanston et al. 2011)  
“One-size-fits-all answers 
are insufficient”
The CCRF includes forest adaptation resources, with 
a menu of adaptation strategies and an adaptation 
workbook, to help land managers and landowners 
devise adaptation actions to meet their objectives. 
Even with relevant and clarified information about 
climate change available, finding practical ways to 
consider and apply this information within existing 
decisionmaking processes, management practices, 
and operational constraints can be a considerable 
burden. This burden is made yet heavier by the 

Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
expectation that there is a “right” way to pursue 
climate adaptation even as fundamental questions 
persist: What exactly is adaptation and how should 
its success be judged? Should adaptation occur 
through promotion of biodiversity or structural 
diversity? Does it require transition to nonnative 
species or abandonment of restoration goals? Is it 
compatible with existing forest planning? Does it 
require adoption of new management practices or 
goals? These and similar questions can make climate 
adaptation planning seem unrelated to current 
values, objectives, experience, and constraints, 
which typically drive the choice of on-the-ground 
actions. But it is critical that managers or landowners 
consider these questions when choosing adaptation 
actions, and the CCRF approach reflects the 
importance of doing so. The fundamental goal of the 
CCRF is to help landowners and managers identify 
acceptable ways to meet their own needs.
The CCRF Adaptation Workbook (Chapter 5) 
provides a structured process that draws upon broad-
scale vulnerability assessment. A menu of strategies 
and approaches helps identify on-the-ground 
adaptation actions that tier to forest management 
goals. The strategies and approaches are the product 
of a synthesis of academic literature and widespread 
input from the forestry community. The Adaptation 
Workbook was developed as a practical adaptation 
planning tool. Users start with their management 
objectives, step down broad assessments to local 
scales, list opportunities and barriers to meeting 
management objectives given climate change, and 
then identify adaptation actions that increase the 
likelihood of meeting objectives. The Adaptation 
Workbook integrates consideration of climate 
pressures into management plans and activities while 
fundamentally grounding users in their original 
objectives, experience with local forests, and 
willingness to accept risk. In cases where meeting 
original objectives appears impractical or too high-
risk, the user may decide to reconsider the original 
objectives. The result across a wide range of users 
is a diversity of approaches to climate adaptation 
linked to equally diverse values and objectives. 
“There are not enough 
real-world examples”
The CCRF shares the stories of adaptation 
demonstrations, which are real-world examples 
of how land managers have considered ecosystem 
vulnerabilities and adaptation strategies in choosing 
actions to meet their management objectives. 
The literature on climate adaptation has been 
expanding rapidly for several years, but much of it 
is still theoretical or principles-oriented in spite of a 
large demand for actual examples of on-the-ground 
forest adaptation. The interest in these adaptation 
demonstrations not only reflects the traditional 
desire of resource managers to see how a plan looks 
when implemented in an ecosystem, but also grows 
from their struggles with other climate-related 
challenges. Namely, the implementation actually 
integrates the various ways in which an organization 
or landowner dealt with all the challenges. Likewise, 
each adaptation demonstration illustrates the full 
process of the CCRF as it plays out in real-world 
examples of ecosystem management. To date, 
the CCRF has generated more than 185 on-the-
ground examples of organizations using the menu 
of strategies and approaches with the Adaptation 
Workbook to plan and implement adaptation actions 
(Fig. 4). These examples represent a wide range 
of forest ecosystems and a variety of management 
goals and objectives. 
The willingness of individual organizations to share 
their stories is a key aspect of partnership within 
the CCRF. The forest sector is on a steep learning 
curve with climate adaptation; the pressure to 
learn and adapt quickly will almost certainly grow 
through time. The current diversity of approaches 
to management, and of risk-tolerance levels, 
will probably lead to a comparable diversity of 
approaches to adaptation. Pursuing a diversity of 
approaches can be an excellent strategy for rapid 
learning by generating numerous examples of 
forest response across the landscape. Although the 
approaches may not be coordinated, sharing the 
intent and results of adaptation actions with the 
wider management community will help propel the 
rate of learning.

Chapter 1. Adapting to a Changing Climate: Overview of the Climate Change Response Framework
Figure 4.—Adaptation demonstration locations representing projects where natural resource managers used the 
Adaptation Workbook to integrate climate change considerations into their management.
Summary
The CCRF is a partnership-based approach for 
responding to climate change that was developed 
to help land managers cope with the challenges of 
integrating climate change considerations into land 
management. The CCRF groups its activities and 
products into four major components: partnerships, 
vulnerability assessment, forest adaptation resources, 
and adaptation demonstrations. It has grown over 
several years to cover the major forested areas of the 
upper Midwest and Northeast with more than 
100 participating groups and many more individuals. 
As it has grown, the CCRF has also evolved to 
better meet the needs of partners, as well as integrate 
their ideas and experience. The CCRF has created 
numerous major products and compiled more real-
world adaptation demonstrations than virtually 
any other single effort. The CCRF will continue 
to evolve as it works with yet more groups and 
ecosystems, but will continue its focus on meeting 
landowner needs and supporting diverse approaches 
to climate adaptation. 
10
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: 
a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
What is a vulnerability assessment? In the context 
of climate change and natural resource management, 
vulnerability assessments “synthesize and integrate 
scientific information, quantitative analyses, and 
expert-derived information in order to determine the 
degree to which specific resources, ecosystems, or 
other features of interest are susceptible to the effects 
of climate change, including climate variability and 
extremes” (Joyce and Janowiak 2011). Vulnerability 
assessments are essentially tools to help you identify 
what resources are at risk due to climate change, and 
why they are vulnerable to climate change (Glick et 
al. 2011). Vulnerability assessments can be important 
tools in adapting to a changing climate, but it is up to 
each individual decisionmaker to assess whether to 
prioritize the most at-risk resources, those at lowest 
risk, or some combination.
Vulnerability can be defined as the degree to which 
a system is susceptible to and unable to cope with 
adverse effects of climate change (Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] 2007). Although 
many different definitions exist, most of the natural 
resource management community breaks down 
vulnerability into three main elements: exposure, 
sensitivity, and adaptive capacity (Glick et al. 2011, 
Stein et al. 2014). Exposure (the degree of stress 
on a system) and sensitivity (the degree to which 
a resource will be affected by that stress) are often 
combined into what is called potential impacts 
(Fig. 5). Potential impacts are the direct and indirect 
consequences of climate change on your resource. 
Adaptive capacity can be defined as the ability of 
a resource to accommodate or cope with potential 
climate change impacts with minimal disruption 
(IPCC 2007). Some people in the natural resource 
community focus on the biological or ecological 
aspects of adaptive capacity, whereas others broaden 
the definition to include human dimensions such as 
organizational capacity and economics (Glick et al. 
2011, Nicotra et al. 2015). 
Figure 5.—The components of vulnerability. Modified from Glick et al. (2011).
11
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Organizations are developing vulnerability 
assessments for a wide variety of purposes. The 
nature of the assessments undertaken depends 
largely on the types of management decisions they 
are intended to inform and the resource areas of 
focus. Some assessment frameworks are based 
on complex quantitative approaches that require 
specific expertise (Lexer and Seidel 2009, Nitschke 
and Innes 2008). Other frameworks use a numerical 
index approach (Comer et al. 2012, Manomet Center 
for Conservation Sciences and National Wildlife 
Federation 2013). Others are more qualitative in 
nature (Brandt et al. 2016). 
Before undertaking a new vulnerability assessment, 
it is best to evaluate what information already 
exists and identify gaps that may need to be filled. 
Many assessments of climate change impacts and 
vulnerability have already been completed, and will 
probably cover many of your resources of interest. 
Then, you can decide whether it is worthwhile to 
undertake a new vulnerability assessment or just fill 
in a few gaps in an already prepared assessment or 
combination of documents. 
This brief guide provides one approach to help 
forest managers evaluate existing vulnerability 
assessments. It also provides some tips if you 
choose to develop a new one. We highlight key 
components that make vulnerability assessments 
effective in informing management decisions using 
the best available science (see checklist on p.28). 
Many vulnerability assessments will be missing 
some of these components, so you may still need to 
decide what is most important for your purposes. We 
provide “do it yourself” (DIY) boxes throughout the 
chapter to help you evaluate an existing assessment 
or start your own if one is not available to meet 
your needs. For each step, we also offer examples 
of how we have approached each component in 
vulnerability assessments through the Climate 
Change Response Framework (CCRF; Chapter 1). 
If you are starting a vulnerability assessment from 
scratch, this guide can also be a good launching 
point, but you may need additional resources. For 
additional guidance on developing assessments, 
as well as more examples of existing assessments, 
see Scanning the Conservation Horizon: a Guide 
to Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment by the 
National Wildlife Federation (NWF) (Glick et al. 
2011). Also refer to Chapter 6 of NWF’s Climate-
Smart Conservation: Putting Adaptation Principles 
into Practice (Gross et al. 2014) and Chapter 2 of the 
Department of the Interior (DOI) Northeast Climate 
Science Center’s Integrating Climate Change into 
the State Wildlife Action Plans (Staudinger et al. 
2015). 
Scope and Geographic Scale
Scope and Scale Checklist
The assessment:
	 focuses on your resource of interest
 	 is at a geographic scale relevant to 
management of your resource 
Why this is Important 
Vulnerability assessments are meant to help inform 
decisions. Therefore, they are most effective if their 
scope covers the resources you are managing and 
their geographic scale is relevant to those resources.
Scope
Vulnerability assessments are developed for a 
variety of reasons. They can focus on individual 
species, ecological communities, water resources, 
infrastructure, specific industries, human 
populations, or a combination of topics. No 
vulnerability assessment will cover everything, 
so it is important to identify the scope that best 
suits specific management questions of interest. If 
you are undertaking a large project with multiple 
objectives that include vegetation, water resources, 
infrastructure, and recreation, you may need to rely 
on several assessments that focus on each of these 
areas to encompass the entire scope of your project 
(Box 3). 
12
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Geographic Scale
Once you have identified the appropriate scope, 
you will then need to figure out if the information is 
available at a scale that is appropriate for informing 
your decisions. This will partially depend on the 
scope of your issue and the questions you wish 
to answer. Several factors may limit the spatial 
resolution of vulnerability assessments, such as 
the resolution of past and projected climate data. 
Assessments that cover major regions of the 
country (e.g., the Midwest) or larger scales (e.g., 
the United States, North America) will probably 
be too broad to be useful for many on-the-ground 
forest management decisions. However, they can 
be helpful in finding relevant literature at finer 
scales and gaining a broad overview of likely 
climate change impacts. They can also be helpful 
for multi-state planning efforts, such as those led 
by Landscape Conservation Cooperatives. For most 
management and planning decisions, assessments 
that cover a state, ecoregion, or climatic zone and 
provide detailed information within that area are 
likely to be the most useful. 
Vulnerability assessments are becoming more 
common, but it can sometimes be difficult to 
track down assessments that are specific to your 
needs. Below are some vulnerability assessments 
that showcase many of the principles that are 
highlighted throughout this document:
•	 Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment of 
Species of Concern in West Virginia (Byers 
and Norris 2011)
•	 A Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment 
for Focal Resources of the Sierra Nevada 
(EcoAdapt 2014) 
•	 Assessing the Vulnerability of Watersheds to 
Climate Change: Results of National Forest 
Watershed Vulnerability Pilot Assessments 
(Furniss et al. 2013)
•	 Climate Change and Massachusetts 
Fish and Wildlife—Volume 2: Habitat and 
Species Vulnerability (Manomet Center for 
Conservation Sciences and Massachusetts 
Division of Fisheries and Wildlife 2010b)
Box 3
DIY: Finding Vulnerability Assessments
•	 A Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment 
for British Columbia’s Managed Forests 
(Morgan and Daust 2013) 
•	 Integrating Climate Change into the State 
Wildlife Action Plans, Chapter 2: Northeast 
and Midwest Regional Species and Habitats 
at Greatest Risk and Most Vulnerable to 
Climate Impacts (Staudinger et al. 2015)
•	 Ecosystem Vulnerability Assessment and 
Synthesis: a Report from the Climate 
Change Response Framework Project in 
Northern Wisconsin (Swanston et al. 2011)
More examples can be found in the Related 
Resources section at forestadaptation.org, 
the Climate Registry for the Assessment of 
Vulnerability (nccwsc.usgs.gov/crave), and the 
virtual library at EcoAdapt’s Climate Adaptation 
Knowledge Exchange (www.cakex.org). The 
vulnerability assessment literature is constantly 
evolving, so it is best to contact a local climate 
change expert for the latest scoop on vulnerability 
assessments that are being undertaken in your 
area. 
For vulnerability assessments associated with 
the Climate Change Response Framework, we 
focused on forest ecosystems and their dominant 
tree species (Box 2). We selected the scope of 
Example: Scope and Scale
the assessment based on the needs expressed 
by the partners involved (state, federal, and 
nongovernmental organizations that focus on forest 
management) and available information. Early 
13
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Box 3 (continued)
project meetings delineated several perceived 
needs, including understanding changes in 
forest tree species, hydrology, and wildlife. Of 
those needs identified, we chose to focus first on 
changes in forest ecosystems and tree species 
because this was one of the areas of greatest 
need, and there were sufficient information 
and expertise available. We expect that further 
assessments (which we or others may develop) will 
help address the other information needs identified. 
The scale of CCRF vulnerability assessments 
varied by region. In the Northwoods, we conducted 
individual assessments for each of three states 
within the Laurentian Mixed Forest Province 
(Handler et al. 2014a, 2014b; Janowiak et al. 
2014a). In the Central Hardwoods (Brandt et al. 
2014) and Central Appalachians (Butler et al. 
2015), we did one assessment for several states 
within a single province. Both approaches to 
assessments provided information at the same 
resolution, however. Each approach had unique 
advantages. Conducting individual assessments 
for each state allowed us to tailor information 
specifically to that state and use classification 
systems that were the most familiar to people 
working within them. Combining assessment 
efforts across states was more cost-effective and 
ensured that a consistent classification system was 
used across states.
Core Assessment Team 
Assessment Team Checklist
The assessment team has knowledge and 
expertise in:
 	 management of your resource of interest
 	 the social, biological, or physical science of 
your resource of interest 
 	 the effects of climate change on your resource 
of interest
 	 the interaction of the above
Why this is Important
It is important that the information in vulnerability 
assessments is unbiased and clearly reflects the best 
available science. This is especially the case when 
vulnerability information is used in decisionmaking. 
Ideally, a team of experts undertakes vulnerability 
assessments that cover a range of disciplines relevant 
to the scope of the assessment. 
Types of Expertise Needed
A vulnerability assessment team ideally consists of 
people who understand both resource management 
and the likely climate impacts on the biological, 
social, or physical drivers of a resource (Box 4). A 
well-rounded vulnerability assessment team will 
probably include several members from both the 
management and scientific communities. Managers 
from public, private, and nongovernmental 
organizations understand how decisions are made on 
the lands they manage and will be able to identify 
how climate change may affect these decisions. 
Scientists from universities, government agencies, 
and nongovernmental organizations are likely to 
have the best understanding of the latest scientific 
information that can inform the assessment. It is 
especially valuable for team members to have a good 
understanding of both science and management 
regarding your resource of interest and to be able to 
communicate those links. 
The ideal team size will vary with the scope and 
scale of the project. Assessments that cover several 
resources and a large geographic area will require 
a larger team than those focused on a particular 
resource in a narrow geographic range. A good 
assessment will include at least one scientist and 
manager, and ideally, there will be several managers 
and scientists. 
14
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
If you are starting a new vulnerability assessment, 
it can be a daunting task to figure out who should 
be involved in the process. A good place to start 
is by contacting a “boundary spanner” who works 
at the intersection of science and management. 
People in these positions are often connected to 
both the science and management communities, 
and will have a broad understanding of the 
expertise available in a region. The boundary 
spanner can work with you to identify scientists 
and managers who fit your needs. A few places to 
look for boundary spanners are:
Cooperative Extension offices 
DOI Climate Science Centers
DOI Landscape Conservation Cooperatives 
Habitat Joint Ventures 
Manomet Center for Conservation 
Joint Fire Science Consortia 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA) Regional Integrated 
Science Assessments
The Nature Conservancy
Box 4
DIY: Assembling Your Team
We assembled a small team of nine people for the 
northern Wisconsin vulnerability assessment, with 
equal representation from science, management, 
and technology transfer related to forests and 
climate change. We gradually expanded our 
teams to gain more diversity in management 
and science expertise as we moved forward 
with additional assessments, while still keeping 
assessment teams at a manageable size of about 
Example: Assessment Teams
Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Climate 
Hubs 
U.S. Forest Service threat assessment centers
Wildlife Conservation Society. 
If you are still struggling to find the right people 
for your assessment team, you may need to do a 
broader search. One approach is to contact people 
who are lead authors on other assessments or 
publications that are relevant to your assessment. 
You can also make use of groups and discussion 
boards associated with Landscape Conservation 
Cooperatives, the directory on EcoAdapt’s CAKE 
Web site, the community page on the Conservation 
Biology Institute’s DataBasin Climate Data Center, 
Griffin Groups, and LinkedIn groups such as the 
Adaptability Climate Adaptation Network.
If team members need more training on how to 
conduct vulnerability assessments, several courses 
are available through the National Conservation 
Training Center (https://training.fws.gov).
15 to 25 people. In selecting team members, we 
sought representation from multiple organizations 
(e.g., national forests, state agencies, tribes, 
conservation organizations) and disciplines (e.g., 
fire ecology, forest pathology, and hydrology). 
Another consideration was to include a mix 
of generalists and specialists. We have found 
this expertise has been extremely beneficial in 
informing assessments. 
15
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Comprehensive Literature Review 
Literature Review Checklist
The peer-reviewed and gray literature are 
reviewed and cited to describe: 
	 current conditions of your resource
 	 past changes in climate in your geographic 
area
	 projected changes in climate in your 
geographic area
	 projected impacts of climate change on your 
resource
Why this is Important
A comprehensive review of the peer-reviewed 
and gray literature can ensure that an assessment 
reflects the best available science. You will need 
this information to develop a clear synthesis of 
existing knowledge on the resource, determine 
the vulnerability of your resource, and evaluate 
uncertainty. 
Peer-reviewed Literature
Peer-reviewed literature that is up-to-date and 
cited throughout will enhance the credibility of the 
statements made in an assessment. A comprehensive 
vulnerability assessment will include a literature 
review on the past changes, current conditions, and 
projected changes for your resource and past and 
projected changes in climate. 
It is highly likely that other organizations have 
already developed literature reviews that address the 
impacts of climate change on your region. Some of 
these reviews will be published in scientific journals, 
and some will be in the gray literature (see next 
section). 
When reviews are unavailable, or perhaps slightly 
out of date, scientific journals that focus on the 
science and management of your resource are an 
excellent source of information on current conditions 
and impacts. Scientific journals specializing in 
atmospheric sciences and climate can provide 
needed information on past and projected climate 
change. 
If you must undertake a new literature review, 
most relevant peer-reviewed literature on these 
subjects can be found through interdisciplinary 
journal databases such as ISI Web of Knowledge 
(webofknowledge.com; requires subscription) 
or Google™ Scholar (scholar.google.com; free 
access). In addition, some tools have been designed 
specifically for finding peer-reviewed literature 
on climate change and forests. The Template for 
Assessing Climate Change Impacts and Management 
Options (TACCIMO; www.taccimo.sgcp.ncsu.edu) 
and the Climate Change Resource Center’s Library 
(www.fs.usda.gov/ccrc) are two great resources. 
Because climate change science is constantly 
evolving, it is also helpful to set up electronic alerts 
for the latest articles (see Box 5). 
Gray Literature
The gray literature can also play an important role 
in vulnerability assessments by adding technical, 
social, and policy information and social and policy 
context that may not be of academic interest but 
are nonetheless useful. Gray literature includes 
government reports, strategy documents, doctoral 
theses, white papers, conference proceedings, and 
pre-publication manuscripts that have not gone 
through a formal review and publication process. 
Vulnerability assessments themselves are often 
considered gray literature. These documents are 
often more recent than the peer-reviewed literature 
because they can be published more quickly and 
may only be available electronically.
The gray literature can be more difficult to find 
than peer-reviewed scientific publications. A Web 
search is sometimes the most effective method to 
find documents in this category, but requires careful 
filtering of irrelevant or unreliable information. In 
addition, a number of key Web sites post relevant 
gray literature specific to forests and climate change:
16
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
•	 The Products and Related Resources sections 
on the Climate Change Response Framework 
Web site provide links to literature and 
other sources specific to midwestern and 
northeastern forests (www.forestadaptation.
org). 
•	 The DOI Northeast Climate Science Center’s 
library has a searchable database of both peer-
reviewed and gray literature for the Midwest 
and Northeast (necsc.umass.edu/library). 
•	 The U.S. Forest Service’s Climate Change 
Resource Center contains a library with 
links to briefings, factsheets, Web sites, 
and government reports in addition to peer-
reviewed literature (www.fs.usda.gov/ccrc).
•	 EcoAdapt’s Climate Adaptation Knowledge 
Exchange Virtual Library provides links to 
peer-reviewed and gray literature related to 
climate change adaptation and vulnerability 
across a wide variety of sectors (www.cakex.
org/virtual-library).
•	 The Climate Registry for the Assessment of 
Vulnerability is a community resource that 
houses information on assessments of the 
vulnerability of various natural and human 
resources to a changing climate (https://
nccwsc.usgs.gov/crave).
The scientific and gray literature is constantly 
evolving, but several key documents may be 
particularly helpful to a broad range of natural 
resource managers in the Midwest and Northeast:
•	 Documents associated with the National 
Climate Assessment
▪ Climate Change Impacts in the United 
States: the Third National Climate 
Assessment (Melillo et al. 2014) 
▪ Effects of Climatic Variability and Change 
on Forest Ecosystems: a Comprehensive 
Science Synthesis for the U.S. Forest Sector 
(Vose et al. 2012)
▪ Impacts of Climate Change on Biodiversity, 
Ecosystems, and Ecosystem Services: 
Technical Input to the 2013 National 
Climate Assessment (Staudinger et al. 
2012)
▪ Regional technical input reports 
•	 Climate Change in the Midwest:
a Synthesis Report for the National 
Climate Assessment (Hatfield et al. 
2014)
•	 Northeast (Horton et al. 2014).
•	 USDA Climate Hubs regional vulnerability 
assessments
▪ Northeast and Northern Forests Regional 
Climate Hub Assessment of Climate 
Change Vulnerability and Adaptation and 
Mitigation Strategies (Tobin et al. 2015)
▪ USDA Midwest and Northern Forests 
Regional Climate Hub: Assessment 
of Climate Change Vulnerability and 
Adaptation and Mitigation Strategies 
(Hatfield et al. 2015).
17
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Box 5
DIY: Keeping Up with New Information
Keeping current on a subject as broad and 
rapidly evolving as climate change can seem 
overwhelming. But there are simple things you can 
do to make your life easier.
1.	 Subscribe to newsletters. Several organizations 
are tracking the literature so you don’t have 
to. The Northern Institute of Applied Climate 
Science and the Northeast Climate Science 
Center deliver regular newsletters that are 
focused on climate change science delivery for 
land managers in the Midwest and Northeast. 
Other national newsletters like ClimateWire can 
also be helpful in discovering new literature. 
2.	 Set up email alerts. Many journal databases 
such as Web of Knowledge have a feature 
that allows you to receive an email alert when 
articles you select are cited or when new 
articles show up in a saved search. For general 
Web searches, Google Alerts performs a similar 
function. For example, you could set up an 
email alert for a search on “climate change,” 
“forests,” and “Illinois.” You can easily set up 
a free Google alert here: https://www.google.
com/alerts.
3.	 Subscribe to RSS feeds on your favorite 
Web sites. RSS stands for Really Simple 
Syndication. It allows you to regularly gather 
information from Web sites without actually 
visiting them by delivering the information to 
your computer as a “feed.” Web sites like the 
Climate Change Resource Center will often 
post the latest publications and tools relevant 
to forests and climate change. You can find out 
what’s new by subscribing to an RSS feed. You 
can learn more about RSS feeds and how to set 
them up at www.fs.fed.us/ccrc/whatis_rss.shtml. 
4.	 Subscribe to Twitter feeds. Twitter is rapidly 
becoming a reliable source for learning about 
the latest scientific discoveries. You can follow 
scientific organizations that are doing work on 
climate change and forests. You can find out 
more about Twitter at https://about.twitter.com/.
Organizations to follow include:
•	 Government agencies that focus on climate 
change, natural resources research, or both 
(U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Forest Service 
Research and Development, U.S. Global 
Change Research Program)
•	 Popular and scientific publications (Science 
Magazine, Nature, Scientific American)
•	 Organizations specifically focused on climate 
change communication (ClimateCentral, 
ClimateCommunication, Climate Reality).
Alternatively, you can search for hashtags 
related to your subjects of interest, such as 
#climatechange, #adaptation, #climate, and 
#forest. 
If you take these steps, you’re likely to be on top 
of the majority of the literature relevant to your 
assessment! 
Example: Literature Review
We reviewed a combination of peer-reviewed 
and gray literature in all of the vulnerability 
assessments undertaken for the Climate Change 
Response Framework. We started by reviewing 
relevant synthesis documents that covered 
our geographic areas, such as state forest 
assessments, regional ecological assessments, 
and regional climate change assessments. We 
also did primary literature searches using Web 
of Knowledge and Google Scholar. We searched 
for keyword combinations of climate change and 
topics of interest such as fire, invasive species, 
and specific forest community types. We further 
filtered by geography using keywords such as state 
names, ecological region names, or geographic 
regions like “Midwest” or “Appalachians.” In 
addition to searches specific to climate change, 
we searched for articles pertaining to the general 
ecology, management, and climate of each region 
and climate-related keywords such as temperature, 
precipitation, snow, and tornadoes. We further 
supplemented these searches with “snowball 
searches,” where we found articles that cited or 
were cited by the articles we found. This method 
turned up hundreds of articles that were topically 
and geographically relevant to the assessment. 
Members of the core assessment team and 
other contributors also recommended helpful 
references during the revision process. We then 
used a citation manager (EndNote®; Thomson 
Reuters, Philadelphia, PA; www.endnote.com) to 
organize literature and links to digital versions of 
these publications and added more keywords and 
groupings for easier sorting. 
18
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Observed Trends 
and Future Projections
Why this is Important
If you do not understand past and projected climate 
changes in your area, you cannot accurately assess 
the vulnerability of your resources to climate 
change. An understanding of changes in climate 
in the recent and more distant past can help you 
understand how your resource has responded to 
previous shifts in climate. Examining a range of 
projected future changes, or an average projection 
along with a statistical confidence estimate, will 
allow you to understand where projections offer 
more or less certainty. Trends and projections are 
the most useful if they are regionally specific and 
at a resolution sufficient for informing management 
decisions. 
Trends in Climate 
Although vulnerability assessments often focus on 
future projected changes, understanding past change 
provides an important historical context and can help 
you understand whether your resource may already 
be experiencing impacts from a changing climate. 
It is helpful to evaluate past changes in climate over 
multiple decades in the historical record to give the 
clearest indication of past change. Many decades of 
data (30 or more years) need to be analyzed in order 
to detect trends in temperature and precipitation 
Trends and Projections Checklist
The assessment evaluates trends in:
 	 the climate of your assessment area
	 your resource of interest
The assessment evaluates projections of:
	 the climate of your assessment area across a 
range of possible futures 
	 your resource of interest across a range of 
possible futures
because climate is a long-term average. It is also 
helpful if trends are evaluated with multiple starting 
dates to avoid bias. For example, examining changes 
in temperature since the 1970s could overestimate 
the rate of change in an area because the 1970s were 
cooler than the long-term average across the United 
States, and starting in the 1930s could underestimate 
the rate of change because that period was warmer 
than the long-term average in many parts of the 
United States. A good assessment will present the 
information in an unbiased way across the entire 
historical record, using maps and graphs to show 
spatial and temporal variation. It is important to 
note that future conditions may have no historical 
analog. Therefore, although the past is informative 
for understanding how much change has occurred 
already, the future changes may be on a different 
trajectory.
Future Climate Projections
Global climate models—mathematical 
representations of the physical, biological, and 
chemical processes that control Earth’s climate—
can help us project the future. Just as with past 
trends, it is more informative to evaluate future 
projections of climate over multiple decades. How 
far to project climate into the future will depend on 
the resources evaluated and the types of decisions 
for which the assessment will be used. For long-
lasting infrastructure like bridges, a 100-year time 
horizon can be helpful. For short-lived organisms 
or infrastructure that needs to be replaced more 
frequently, a shorter time horizon (30–50 years) will 
often be sufficient. For long-lived organisms like 
trees, it may be helpful to use projections for both 
the short and long term, to encompass both short-
term management actions and long-term growth. 
It is important that assessments include some 
estimate of the variation and uncertainty in climate 
change projections. One approach is to apply a range 
of possible futures by using multiple models and 
greenhouse gas emissions scenarios. Another is to 
calculate a probability distribution or confidence 
range around a mean. 
19
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Global climate models operate at spatial resolutions 
that are much too coarse for most decisionmaking 
needs. Therefore, they are often downscaled to a 
geographic scale that is more useful. Experts from a 
variety of organizations have developed downscaled 
climate datasets that are available free online (see 
Box 6). Each uses slightly different techniques at 
slightly different spatial and temporal scales. If you 
are unfamiliar with climate models, greenhouse 
gas emissions scenarios, and downscaling, Climate 
Projections FAQ (Daniels et al. 2012) can be a 
helpful resource. It is important to keep in mind, 
however, that even though downscaled climate data 
may be helpful, the additional step in data processing 
can add biases and uncertainty to your estimates. 
Whether you intend to supplement an existing 
vulnerability assessment or start one from scratch, 
finding climate data to suit your needs can be 
challenging. When possible, it’s best to consult 
with experts in climate science, such as staff at 
DOI Climate Science Centers and the NOAA 
Regional Integrated Science and Assessments 
program. Below are a few sources we have 
found useful that you can select based on your 
experience and comfort level. 
Novice: Use these sources when you have 
minimal or no experience working with geographic 
information systems (GIS), you are new to climate 
data, or you need a quick snapshot of projections 
and trends. These resources provide mapped 
trends and projections that you can view on the 
Web: 
•	 The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) National 
Climate Change Viewer includes downscaled 
historical and future climate projections from the 
most recent IPCC assessment report, the Fifth 
Assessment Report (www.usgs.gov/climate_
landuse/clu_rd/nccv.asp).
•	 ClimateWizard, developed by The Nature 
Conservancy, the University of Washington, 
and the University of Southern Mississippi, 
is a user-friendly Web-based map viewer of 
downscaled past and projected climate change 
from the IPCC Fourth Assessment (www.
climatewizard.org).
Box 6
DIY: Finding and Using Climate Data
•	 University of Wisconsin’s Center for Climatic 
Research offers statistically downscaled climate 
projections from the IPCC Fourth Assessment 
for the eastern United States, which includes 
snowfall and extreme weather events (http://
nelson.wisc.edu/ccr/resources/visualization-
and-tools.php). 
Expert: Use these when you have advanced skills 
in GIS, statistical analysis, or processing spatial 
and temporal data, or you require specific data as 
inputs into impact models: 
•	 The PRISM Climate Group provides 
downloadable gridded historical climate data 
from 1895 to present for the continental U.S. 
(prism.oregonstate.edu).
•	 NOAA’s Climate Data Online provides free 
access to the archive of global historical 
weather and climate data collected by the 
National Centers for Environmental Information 
(formerly the National Climatic Data Center) 
(ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/).
•	 The USGS Geo Data Portal project provides 
scientists and environmental resource 
managers access to downscaled climate 
projections and other data resources that are 
otherwise difficult to access and manipulate 
(cida.usgs.gov/gdp).
20
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Box 6 (continued)
Example: Climate Trends and Projections
When undertaking vulnerability assessments for 
the Climate Change Response Framework, we 
were confronted with many potential options for 
information on climate trends and projections. 
We narrowed down potential options based on 
the need for consistency across the geographic 
areas where we were working, the needs of the 
impact modelers with whom we were working, the 
need to show a range of models and emissions 
scenarios, and how easily we could access and 
use the data. For past climate trends and baseline 
data, we relied on the ClimateWizard Custom tool 
(which is no longer available; Girvetz et al. 2009). 
This tool used a gridded historical dataset (PRISM; 
Gibson et al. 2002) and allowed us to visualize 
changes over space and time. It also provided 
us with a measure of statistical confidence for 
observed trends. We examined linear trends in 
annual, seasonal, and monthly mean, maximum, 
and minimum temperature and total precipitation, 
beginning in 1901, 1951, and 1971 through 
the present. We reported the information both 
temporally and spatially, and also reported which 
trends were statistically significant. 
For future climate projections, we chose 
downscaled climate data that were made available 
on the USGS Geo Data Portal (Stoner et al. 2012). 
This dataset provided a consistent source of 
future climate projections for all of our vulnerability 
assessments. This dataset operates on daily time 
steps, has a good range of climate models and 
emissions scenarios, and a long time horizon. 
However, it lacked solar radiation projections 
needed for some impact models and had a steep 
learning curve. We chose two climate model–
scenario combinations to give a range of possible 
futures that were used as inputs into all of the 
forest impact models. For a high end of the range, 
we chose a climate model that was relatively 
sensitive to greenhouse gas changes, GFDL 
(Delworth et al. 2006), coupled with a scenario 
that projects a large increase in greenhouse gas 
emissions, A1FI. At the lower end of the range, 
we chose a climate model that was less sensitive 
to greenhouse gas changes, PCM (Washington 
et al. 2000), coupled with a scenario that projects 
a stabilization and decline in greenhouse gas 
emissions, B1. We expressed changes in future 
annual and seasonal mean, maximum, and 
minimum temperature and total precipitation as the 
difference between a projected 30-year average 
(2010–2039, 2040–2069, and 2070–2099) and the 
average for the last 30 years of the 20th century. 
We expressed uncertainty by showing the range of 
future projections both spatially and over time.
Trends in Your Resource 
It is also helpful if an assessment examines observed 
changes in your resource of interest. Although 
these changes may not directly relate to climate, it 
can help you determine if your resource is already 
experiencing adverse impacts that may be affected 
by changes in climate. For example, if an assessment 
focuses on coldwater fish, long-term monitoring data 
on fish populations and stream temperature would be 
very helpful. Often, however, long-term monitoring 
data are patchy, unavailable, or difficult to interpret 
for trends. Therefore, trends in your resource can be 
considered an added bonus rather than an absolute 
requirement. When an assessment lacks long-term 
monitoring trends, local knowledge and expertise 
from managers or traditional ecological knowledge 
can help you fill information gaps. 
Projected Impacts on Your Resource 
When available, models that specifically address 
the impacts of climate change on your resource of 
interest can be extremely useful. Impact models 
21
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
generally come in two main categories: statistical 
models and process models. Statistical models use 
observed data to determine relationships between 
climate and other factors and the distribution or 
behavior of a resource. Researchers can then predict 
future distributions based on these relationships 
and future climate projections. Process models 
use mathematical representations of physical, 
biological, or social processes to simulate changes 
in the resource in the future. Both approaches can be 
useful. Statistical models are less computationally 
intensive, so this approach can usually be applied 
to more resources (e.g., more species or more 
habitats), more climate scenarios, or larger areas. 
Process models can provide additional information 
on migration, disturbances, management, or 
interactions among multiple factors, but are 
more computationally intensive and thus usually 
limited to smaller areas or fewer resources. Not all 
vulnerability assessments will have impact model 
projections, but when they do, projections will 
ideally be transparent about their degree of certainty. 
This can be expressed as a range of climate models 
and emissions scenarios or as an average with a 
probability distribution or other confidence measure. 
In addition, impact model projections are most 
useful when their time frames are in line with the 
planning horizon of that resource.
Example: Forest Trends and Projections
We derived baseline data and observed trends in 
forest resources in each of our six Climate Change 
Response Framework vulnerability assessments 
from data collected by the U.S. Forest Service’s 
Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) program (U.S. 
Forest Service 2015). This monitoring program 
goes through strict quality control and uses a 
consistent methodology across the country, 
ensuring that comparisons can be made over 
space and time. 
Many impact models are available to project the 
impacts of climate change on forest ecosystems. 
Our approach to incorporating impact model 
results into CCRF vulnerability assessments was 
to focus on models that could provide consistency 
across all five vulnerability assessments while 
examining projected changes from a variety of 
approaches. We relied upon the Climate Change 
Tree Atlas as a statistical model because it 
covered the entire eastern United States, it was 
based on FIA data, and results were already 
available for more than 100 tree species (Iverson 
et al. 2008, Landscape Change Research Group 
2014). We used LANDIS-II (Duveneck et al. 2014, 
Scheller et al. 2007) or LANDIS Pro (Wang et al. 
2013) as process models. We chose these models 
because data were available over large areas 
that lined up within our assessment areas, and 
they provided a useful contrast to the Tree Atlas in 
simulating movement and growth of species over 
time. In some assessments, we made use of the 
PnET-CN (Aber et al. 1997, Peters et al. 2013) or 
LINKAGES-II (Wullschleger et al. 2003) models 
as additional forest process models to understand 
ecosystem responses to climate change such as 
nutrient cycling and ecosystem productivity. We 
also used results from the VIC model, a hydrologic 
model, to understand how climate change may 
affect soil moisture, evapotranspiration, streamflow, 
and runoff for some assessment areas when 
data were available. All modeling teams used the 
same set of climate projections as input data. In 
all cases, the main factors that we considered 
when deciding whether to use a model were the 
usefulness of the results in informing decisions, 
confidence in the quality of the information, 
availability of willing scientific collaborators, and 
spatial coverage. 
22
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Vulnerability Determinations
Vulnerability Elements Checklist
The assessment qualitatively or quantitatively 
determines vulnerability of my resource. Most 
vulnerability assessments will include these main 
components: 
 	 Potential impacts
	
•	 Exposure
	
•	 Sensitivity
	  Adaptive capacity
Why this is Important
Many vulnerability assessments rank or prioritize 
vulnerability by using various methods (e.g., indices, 
decision trees, expert consensus, or mathematical 
models). Regardless of the method used, being 
explicit about what makes a resource vulnerable 
will help managers identify actions they can take to 
reduce vulnerability. 
Potential Impacts
Good assessments will clearly delineate potential 
impacts on your resources of interest, either 
separately as exposure and sensitivity elements, or 
combined. 
Exposure
Exposure is the sum of climate and climate-related 
changes that may affect your resource. These 
changes could be a stressor for your resource, be 
beneficial to your resource, or not influence your 
resource at all. When evaluating exposure, good 
assessments will consider the suite of direct and 
indirect changes that may occur in the area where 
your resource is located. Ideally, the assessments 
will help you understand how multiple changes may 
interact or build on each other. This can include 
exacerbation of current stressors or changes in 
ecological drivers to your ecosystem. 
Below are examples of exposure factors you may 
wish to consider, ranging from more direct to more 
indirect:
•	 Temperature: means, seasonal patterns, 
temperature extremes, growing season length
•	 Precipitation: annual and seasonal totals, 
heavy rain events, type of precipitation (rain 
vs. snow)
•	 Drought: frequency, length, or spatial extent 
•	 Wind disturbance: frequency, severity, type 
•	 Winter conditions: snow depth, duration of 
snow cover, soil freeze/thaw
•	 Hydrologic changes: soil moisture, 
streamflow, flood duration and depth, runoff 
•	 Fire: frequency, severity, and seasonality
Sensitivity
Sensitivity is a measure of how responsive a 
resource is to changes in climate. Sensitivity 
includes how much a species, ecosystem, or built 
structure may respond to exposure to changes (such 
as the factors listed above). This response could be 
negative or positive, depending on the resource or 
the type of exposure factors considered. Negative 
sensitivity responses could occur if exposure 
exceeds a threshold where a species is no longer 
able to survive or reproduce. Positive sensitivity 
responses could result if the growth rate or number 
of reproductive cycles of a species increases with 
longer growing seasons and milder temperatures. 
Below are examples of sensitivity factors:
•	 Sensitivity of the phenology of plants and 
pollinators to warmer springs or falls
•	 The degree to which growth or reproductive 
rates of species are helped or hindered 
by increased temperature or changes in 
precipitation 
•	 Susceptibility of roads to erosion from heavy 
rains or buckling under extreme heat 
23
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Putting it Together
Many vulnerability assessments will combine 
exposure and sensitivity into an overall estimate 
of potential impacts. When available, quantitative 
approaches using impact models can be extremely 
useful for assessing potential impacts. Impact 
models generally combine mathematical 
representations of exposure and sensitivity into a 
statistical or simulation model in order to project the 
likely changes in that resource in the future. They 
may combine elements of exposure such as changes 
in seasonal temperature, growing season length, and 
precipitation with elements of sensitivity such as a 
species’ metabolic or photosynthetic rate. 
However, no impact model can possibly include a 
comprehensive analysis of all elements of exposure 
or sensitivity. For example, most impact models 
do not account for interactions among multiple 
disturbances that are likely to affect ecosystems, 
such as insect outbreaks, wildfire, and flooding. 
Therefore, additional qualitative or semiquantitative 
analyses of impacts, such as expert judgment or 
vulnerability indices, are needed to account for 
these factors. The analysis could be something as 
simple as rating the impacts on a scale from very 
positive to very negative, or a more complex rating 
system with multiple factors. Some examples 
include NatureServe’s Climate Change Vulnerability 
Index (Young et al. 2010) or the U.S. Forest 
Service System for Assessing Vulnerability of 
Species (SAVS; Bagne et al. 2011). For habitats, 
the NEAFWA Habitat Vulnerability Assessment 
Model (Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences 
and NWF 2013) or NatureServe’s Habitat Climate 
Change Vulnerability Index (Comer et al. 2012) are 
good examples. For some resources, no quantitative 
impact models will be available, and all evaluations 
of exposure and sensitivity will rely on a qualitative 
approach. 
Adaptive Capacity
Different disciplines, even within the natural 
resource management community, define adaptive 
capacity differently. In assessments that focus 
primarily on species or ecosystems, adaptive 
capacity is often characterized by biological or 
ecological characteristics that would allow a species 
or system to respond to change, such as the diversity 
of genotypes, species, or age classes, or the ability 
to tolerate large-scale disturbances (Beever et al. 
2015, Nicotra et al. 2015). However, in assessments 
that focus primarily on social factors like the tourism 
industry, adaptive capacity may include things like 
wealth or organizational capacity. Organizational 
adaptive capacity can also be applied to managers’ 
ability to respond (Klausmeyer et al. 2011). Adaptive 
capacity can mean different things to different 
people, so it is helpful if the assessment provides a 
clear definition. Quantitative models that evaluate 
adaptive capacity are rare; therefore adaptive 
capacity is often evaluated by using a numerical 
score or qualitative ranking (e.g., high, medium, 
low).
Overall Vulnerability
Impacts and adaptive capacity are often evaluated 
separately and then combined into an overall 
assessment of vulnerability. Because most 
quantitative models do not include an assessment 
of adaptive capacity, most determinations of 
vulnerability will be index-based or qualitative, 
such as those described in Box 7. In an index-based 
assessment, for example, low sensitivity to flooding 
might receive a score of 1 while high sensitivity 
to flooding might receive a score of 3. Similar 
scores are assigned for sensitivity to other factors, 
for exposure, and for adaptive capacity, and then 
summed or averaged. Another approach is to use 
more qualitative rankings of high, medium, or low 
impacts and adaptive capacity based on an overall 
impression of how different factors may influence 
a resource. Regardless of the method chosen, good 
assessments will describe the information that was 
considered in the final determination of vulnerability 
for that resource in a way that is transparent to the 
reader.  
24
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Box 7
DIY: Vulnerability Determination Methods
Many researchers have developed methods for 
evaluating the components of vulnerability, so 
you don’t have to create your own method from 
scratch. Below are examples of methods being 
used by various groups to determine overall 
vulnerability.
If you are assessing the vulnerability of species:
•	 The NatureServe Climate Change Vulnerability 
Index is one of the most widely used tools for 
assessing the vulnerability of plant and animal 
species (Young et al. 2010). 
•	 The System for Assessing Vulnerability 
of Species was developed by U.S. Forest 
Service researchers to specifically address the 
vulnerability of terrestrial vertebrate species 
(Bagne et al. 2011).
•	 The Forest Tree Genetic Risk Assessment 
System was developed by North Carolina 
State University and the U.S. Forest Service 
specifically for tree species (Devine et al. 2012). 
If you are assessing the vulnerability of ecosystems 
or habitats:
•	 The NatureServe Habitat Climate Change 
Vulnerability Index is a companion to 
NatureServe’s species index and was recently 
applied to the desert Southwest (Comer et al. 
2012). 
•	 The NEAFWA (Northeastern Association of Fish 
and Wildlife Agencies) Model was developed by 
the Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences 
to assess habitat vulnerability in the Northeast 
(Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences 
and NWF 2013). 
•	 The process developed for the Climate Change 
Response Framework (see the following 
example) can be applied to a variety of forest 
types and natural communities. 
Example: Vulnerability Determination
In our recent series of vulnerability assessments 
for the Climate Change Response Framework, 
we developed a consistent process for assessing 
vulnerability using a panel of experts who formed 
our assessment team (Brandt et al. 2016). For 
each assessment, we organized a panel of about 
20 scientists and managers. This group met in 
person to assess the vulnerability of forest systems 
in the assessment area to climate change over the 
next century. 
At the beginning of the meeting, the panel 
received a series of introductory presentations on 
observed and projected climate, as well as impact 
model results (Fig. 6). This helped to ensure 
that all panelists were operating with the same 
understanding of the range of potential impacts 
on forest ecosystems. The panel then assessed 
the potential impacts for individual forest systems 
based on the presented information coupled with 
their own expertise. We asked the panelists to 
consider the important drivers, dominant species, 
and stressors for each forest system. Impacts on 
drivers were considered positive if they would alter 
system drivers (e.g., fire regime, soil moisture) 
in a way that would be more favorable for that 
community type, or negative if they would create 
less favorable conditions for that community type. 
Impacts on stressors were considered negative if 
they increased the influence of that stressor (e.g., 
invasive species, pathogens) on the community 
type, or positive if they decreased the influence of 
that stressor on the community type. 
Panelists also assessed adaptive capacity based 
on their knowledge of the community types in 
the assessment area. The panel focused on 
these factors: whether dominant species had 
high dispersal ability; the species, functional, and 
genetic diversity of the community; and the ability 
of the community to tolerate or recover from a wide 
variety of disturbances. The panelists were directed 
to base these characteristics on the current 
condition of the system, given past and current 
management regimes, and with no consideration 
of potential management changes (adaptation) that 
could influence future adaptive capacity. 
25
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Box 7 (continued)
Panelists were directed to mark their rating of 
each vulnerability component in two-dimensional 
space on an individual worksheet and on a group 
poster (Fig. 7). Individual ratings were discussed 
to arrive at a group determination. In many cases, 
the group determination was at or near the mean of 
all individual determinations. However, sometimes 
the group determination deviated from the mean 
because further discussion caused some group 
members to alter their original response.
This approach to evaluating vulnerability was 
flexible enough to be used across multiple 
community types, ecoregions, and classification 
systems and easy for panelists to learn. The 
individual determinations by each expert 
also helped gauge the level of consensus on 
the vulnerability of a system. Finally, it gave 
decisionmakers what they were looking for: a 
ranking of relative vulnerability. 
Figure 6.—Expert panel discussion of forest vulnerability. 
Photo by Leslie Brandt, U.S. Forest Service.
Figure 7.—Example vulnerability determination for a forest ecosystem during a vulnerability assessment 
conducted through the Climate Change Response Framework. Each expert panelist provides an individual 
determination of ecosystem vulnerability (circles). The group then comes to a consensus on vulnerability through 
discussion (square).
26
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Evaluating Uncertainty
Uncertainty Checklist
The assessment qualitatively or quantitatively 
evaluates the uncertainty of: 
 	 projected changes in climate
	 projected impacts on your resource
	 the vulnerability of your resource to climate 
change
Why this is Important
If you are going to adjust management decisions 
in light of projected changes in climate, you want 
to have some confidence that change is likely to 
occur. Unfortunately, the future is never certain, 
and managers need to make decisions even when 
there is high uncertainty. Explicitly stating the 
relative level of certainty about projected impacts, 
adaptive capacity, and overall vulnerability can help 
decisionmakers identify those areas where there is 
higher confidence that an outcome is likely to occur. 
This can be useful for identifying areas of focus 
for further research and for helping decisionmakers 
gauge the level of risk they are willing to take. 
Uncertainty can be described in qualitative terms, 
quantitative terms, or a combination thereof (see 
Box 8).
Quantitative Uncertainty
Quantitative measures of uncertainty can include 
the probability of an event occurring or standard 
deviations around a mean. Sometimes, quantitative 
probabilities are translated into a verbal description 
of likelihood, such as the likelihood scale that the 
IPCC uses (Fig. 8). For assessments or components 
of assessments that rely primarily on quantitative 
information, such as observational data, statistical 
models, and simulations, it may be possible to 
convey a quantitative measure of uncertainty. 
Quantitative estimates of uncertainty can also be 
made by conducting formal surveys of experts.
Qualitative Uncertainty
Qualitative measures of uncertainty are often 
necessary for vulnerability assessments due to the 
lack of quantitative estimates of many vulnerability 
components, such as adaptive capacity. Qualitative 
estimates of uncertainty can include an evaluation of 
the extent of evidence and the amount of agreement 
among that evidence, such as the confidence scale 
that the IPCC uses (Fig. 8). Either individual experts 
or panels of experts can make qualitative estimates 
of uncertainty. 
Figure 8.—Examples of a quantitative likelihood scale (left) and a qualitative confidence scale, as used by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. From Mastrandrea et al. (2010).
27
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
Box 8
DIY: Evaluate Uncertainty
There are a number of ways that uncertainty 
can be evaluated in a vulnerability assessment. 
Many vulnerability assessments may even use a 
combination of approaches. Below are examples 
of how uncertainty can be addressed.
Qualitative
•	 Using text to describe disagreements in the 
scientific literature or sources of error, or when 
there is insufficient information
•	 Evaluating multiple scenarios for a range of 
potential changes
•	 Assigning a qualitative ranking, such as the 
confidence determination used by the IPCC
Semiquantitative 
•	 Giving each component of vulnerability a 
numerical uncertainty score that is summed or 
averaged for an overall score of confidence or 
uncertainty 
Quantitative
•	 Using statistical tests or Monte Carlo 
simulations to arrive at a confidence interval or 
p-value
•	 Formal expert elicitation methods that arrive at 
a quantitative probability determination
Example: Evaluating Uncertainty
In our vulnerability assessments developed for the 
Climate Change Response Framework, a panel 
of experts qualitatively determined confidence for 
each vulnerability rating based on the framework 
developed for the IPCC (Fig. 9) (Mastrandrea et 
al. 2010). Confidence determinations took place 
at the in-person meetings during the discussion 
of each individual forest system in an assessment 
area. Panelists were asked to individually 
evaluate the amount of evidence that supported 
their vulnerability determination and the level of 
agreement among that evidence. In this fashion, 
evidence and agreement are two components of 
overall confidence in a vulnerability determination. 
Panelists evaluated confidence individually and 
as a group in a similar fashion to the vulnerability 
determination (Fig. 9). 
Figure 9.—Example confidence determination for a forest ecosystem during a vulnerability assessment 
conducted through the Climate Change Response Framework. Each expert panelist provides an individual 
determination of confidence in his or her vulnerability determination (circles). The group then comes to a 
consensus on confidence through discussion (square).
28
Chapter 2. Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: a Brief Guide for Forest Managers
A Few Final Words
A good vulnerability assessment will be helpful in 
aiding management decisions. We have provided a 
few key factors to help you determine the quality 
and potential utility of existing assessments. 
However, managers and decisionmakers will 
ultimately determine whether the assessment is 
indeed useful for their planning or projects. If gaps 
remain, you can use the DIY boxes as a launching 
point to filling in those gaps. 
We designed this as a brief guide to capture the key 
components of vulnerability assessments. If you are 
undertaking a new vulnerability assessment for a 
resource without much existing information, it may 
be helpful to reach out to experts for assistance. 
Once you have a vulnerability assessment, what do 
you do with it? Chapters 3 and 4 offer strategies 
and approaches for climate adaptation in rural and 
urban forests. The Adaptation Workbook (Chapter 5) 
included in this set of Forest Adaptation Resources 
can walk you through the process of integrating 
climate change considerations into management 
plans and activities.
The assessment’s scale and scope:
	 focuses on your resource of interest
	 is at a geographic scale relevant to management 
of your resource
The assessment team has knowledge and expertise 
in:
	 management of your resource of interest
	 the social, biological, and physical science of 
your resource of interest 
	 the effects of climate change on your resource of 
interest
	 the interaction of the above components
The peer-reviewed and gray literature are reviewed 
and cited to describe: 
	 past changes in climate in your geographic area
	 projected changes in climate in your geographic 
area
	 current conditions of your resource
	 projected impacts of climate change on your 
resource
The assessment evaluates trends in:
	 the climate of your assessment area
	 your resource of interest
The assessment evaluates future projections of:
	 the climate of your assessment area across a 
range of possible futures 
	 your resource of interest across a range of 
possible futures
The assessment qualitatively or quantitatively 
determines vulnerability of your resource. Most 
vulnerability assessments will include these three 
main components: 
	 exposure
	 sensitivity
	 adaptive capacity
The assessment qualitatively or quantitatively 
evaluates the uncertainty of: 
	 projected changes in climate
	 projected impacts on your resource
	 the vulnerability of your resource to climate 
change
Checklist for Vulnerability Assessment Evaluation
29
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
One of the major challenges of adapting forest 
ecosystems to climate change is translating broad 
concepts into specific, tangible actions. This 
chapter addresses that challenge by providing 
a comprehensive synthesis of strategies and 
approaches, and a tiered structure that organizes 
this information. These strategies and approaches 
are designed to serve as stepping stones to enable 
natural resource managers to translate broad 
concepts into targeted and prescriptive actions 
for implementing adaptation (Box 9). Ten broad 
strategies and 36 more-specific approaches were 
synthesized from dozens of scientific papers that 
discussed adaptation actions at a variety of scales 
and locations. The strategies and approaches were 
reviewed by a diverse pool of natural resource 
professionals across the Midwest and Northeast, 
and are broadly applicable across a diversity of 
forests and other ecosystems. The strategies and 
approaches are presented as a menu of adaptation 
actions, which can then be adjusted and refined into 
tactics that help to achieve a specific management 
objective in a specific location. The Adaptation 
Workbook (Chapter 5) describes a structured process 
to help land managers use the menu and develop 
their own specific adaptation tactics. Example tactics 
are provided in this chapter primarily to illustrate 
a level of specificity; they are not comprehensive, 
but represent a few of the many possible tactics that 
could be used in forest ecosystems in the Midwest 
and Northeast.
Box 9
Using the Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
The adaptation strategies and approaches can 
provide:
•	 A full spectrum of possible adaptation 
actions that can help sustain healthy forest 
ecosystems and achieve management goals 
in the face of climate change
•	 A menu of adaptation actions from which 
managers select actions best suited to their 
specific management goals and objectives
•	 A platform for discussing climate change-
related topics and adaptation methods
•	 Examples of tactics that could potentially be 
used to implement an approach, recognizing 
that specific tactics will be designed by the 
land manager. 
The adaptation strategies and approaches 
do not:
•	 Make recommendations or set guidelines for 
management decisions. It is up to the land 
manager to decide how this information is 
used.
•	 Express preference for any strategies or 
approaches within an ecosystem type, 
location, or situation. Rather, a combination 
of location-specific factors and manager 
expertise is needed to inform the selection 
of any strategy or approach.
30
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
About the Adaptation Strategies 
and Approaches
Information on how to adapt natural ecosystems to 
the anticipated effects of climate change is rapidly 
growing as increasing numbers of land managers 
and researchers engage with the topic (Cross et al. 
2012, Groves et al. 2012, Littell et al. 2012, Morelli 
et al. 2012, Schmitz et al. 2015, Staudinger et al. 
2015, Stein et al. 2014). Until recently, adaptation 
literature was broad and generic, providing 
insufficient detail to enable natural resource 
managers to identify specific actions that facilitate 
adaptation while meeting management goals and 
objectives. At the same time, a flexible approach 
(rather than specific guidelines or recommendations) 
is needed to accommodate diverse management 
goals, geographic settings, local site conditions, and 
other management considerations. For these reasons, 
this set of adaptation strategies and approaches 
serves as a menu of potential adaptation actions. 
It helps natural resource managers identify their 
adaptation intention and supports them in developing 
and implementing their own specific adaptation 
actions. Managers can use this menu to choose the 
approaches that are most suitable to a particular 
management goal and ecosystem type. Although 
menu items can be applied in various combinations 
to achieve desired outcomes, not all items on the 
menu will work together. Furthermore, actions that 
work well in one ecosystem type may not work 
in another; it is up to the land manager to select 
appropriate actions for a specific project and specific 
goals.
Importantly, the adaptation strategies and approaches 
presented in this chapter are intended to build upon 
current management actions that work to sustain 
and conserve ecosystems over the long term. Many 
sustainable forest management and conservation 
activities already promote ecosystem health and 
resilience. Likewise, many adaptation actions are 
consistent with sustainable management (Innes et al. 
2009, Ogden and Innes 2008) and efforts to restore 
ecosystem function and integrity (Harris et al. 2006, 
Millar and Brubaker 2006, Morelli et al. 2012, Stein 
et al. 2014). A changing climate may compel some 
managers to adopt new practices, but it can also 
underscore the importance of sustainable practices 
that are currently being used.
The adaptation strategies and approaches are part 
of a continuum of adaptation actions ranging 
from broad, conceptual application to practical 
implementation (Fig. 10). This continuum builds 
upon the adaptation framework described by Millar 
et al. (2007). The concepts of resistance, resilience, 
and transition serve as the fundamental options for 
managers to consider when responding to climate 
change:
•	 Resistance actions improve the defenses of 
an ecosystem against anticipated changes 
or directly defend the ecosystem against 
disturbance in order to maintain relatively 
unchanged conditions. Resistance may be 
appropriate when there is a desire or mandate 
to maintain a resource with high economic, 
cultural, or ecological value. Although this 
option may be effective in the short term (mid-
century or sooner), it is likely that supporting 
persistence of the existing ecosystem will 
require greater resources and effort over the 
long term as the climate shifts further from 
historical norms. This option may also be most 
effective in ecosystems with low sensitivity 
to climate change (see Chapter 2), or in areas 
that are buffered from severe climate change 
impacts (e.g., refugia). As an ecosystem 
persists into an unfavorable climate, the risk 
of the ecosystem undergoing irreversible 
change (such as through a severe disturbance) 
increases over time.
•	 Resilience actions accommodate some degree 
of change, but encourage a return to near-prior 
conditions after a disturbance, either naturally 
or through management. Resilience can be 
fostered by the effects of periodic disturbance 
on a system, and the system’s ability to persist 
after those disturbances, albeit with sometimes 
fluctuating populations (Holling 1973). 
Resilience actions enhance the ability of the 
system to bounce back from disturbance and 
tolerate changing environmental conditions, 
31
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
and may be most effective in systems that can 
already tolerate a wide range of environmental 
conditions and disturbance (i.e., high 
adaptive capacity; see Chapter 2). Like the 
resistance option, this option may be most 
effective in the short term and may be subject 
to increasing risk over time. Resilience is 
effective until the degree of change exceeds 
the ability of a system to cope, resulting in 
transition to another state. 
•	 Transition actions (also referred to as 
“response” actions) intentionally anticipate 
and accommodate change to help ecosystems 
to adapt to changing and new conditions. 
Whereas resistance and resilience actions 
foster persistence of the current ecosystem, 
transition actions intentionally facilitate the 
transformation of the current ecosystem 
into a different ecosystem with clearly 
different characteristics. These actions may 
be considered appropriate in ecosystems 
assessed as highly vulnerable across a range 
of plausible future climates, such that the 
risk associated with resistance and resilience 
actions is judged to be too great (see Chapter 
2). Transition actions are typically designed 
for long-term effectiveness. They are often 
phased into broader management plans that 
predominantly have a shorter-term focus on 
resilience actions.
These options of resistance, resilience, and transition 
serve as the broadest level in a continuum of 
adaptation responses to climate change (Janowiak 
et al. 2011). Along this continuum, actions for 
adaptation become increasingly specific. Adaptation 
strategies are abundant in recent literature and 
illustrate more-specific ways that adaptation 
options could be employed (Fig. 11). Strategies are, 
Figure 10.—A continuum of adaptation actions available to address needs at appropriate scales and levels of 
management (top four boxes) and examples of each level of action (in shaded boxes).
32
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
however, still very broad and can be applied in many 
ways across a number of landscapes and ecosystems. 
The 10 adaptation strategies are generally arranged 
to start with ideas that focus on the “resistance” 
adaptation option and then continue on to ideas 
that focus more on “transition,” although this 
arrangement does not indicate preference or priority. 
Adaptation approaches are even more specific, 
describing in greater detail how strategies could 
be employed. Differences in application among 
specific ecosystem types and management goals 
start to become evident. Ultimately, tactics are the 
most specific adaptation response on the continuum, 
providing prescriptive direction about what actions 
can be applied on the ground, and how, where, and 
when. Tactics can be developed only in relation 
to a species, the ecosystem type, site conditions, 
management objectives, and other factors. We have 
provided examples of tactics for each approach, 
but do not intend that they be implemented without 
due consideration of all relevant factors. The 
Adaptation Workbook (Chapter 5) is a structured 
process designed to be used in conjunction with 
vulnerability assessments and adaptation strategies 
and approaches to generate site-specific adaptation 
actions that meet explicit management and 
conservation objectives under a range of potential 
future climates. The Adaptation Workbook also 
Figure 11.—Climate change adaptation strategies, which work to achieve three broad adaptation options: resistance, 
resilience, and transition. Strategies may be used under one or more options, and are generally arranged with strategies 
under resistance and resilience options first, and those under transition options last. A solid line indicates a strong 
relationship between an option and a strategy, whereas fading indicates that the strategy relates to that option under some 
circumstances. Although a strategy may work under multiple options, the implementation is likely to be achieved through 
very different approaches and tactics.
33
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
provides a method to explicitly consider the benefits 
and drawbacks of potential adaptation tactics. 
The remainder of this chapter provides a more 
detailed description of the 10 adaptation strategies 
and 36 more-specific approaches (Box 10). This 
menu was synthesized from a comprehensive 
literature review of adaptation actions at numerous 
scales and locations. Feedback from experts, 
including scientists, ecologists, and managers, 
was used to refine the adaptation strategies and 
approaches, as well as to provide examples 
of potential tactics in forests of the Midwest 
and Northeast (see Appendix 1 for methods). 
Additionally, although these adaptation strategies 
and approaches were designed to assist land 
managers, many adaptation actions will require 
or benefit greatly from planning, education 
and outreach, research, or changes in policy or 
infrastructure (Box 11). The body of literature 
on adaptation is continually growing, so land 
managers and conservation professionals who are 
more focused on wildlife habitat, infrastructure, 
or fisheries may find similar lists of adaptation 
actions specific to their needs (Furniss et al. 2010, 
Staudinger et al. 2015, Stein et al. 2014). Common 
and scientific names of all species mentioned in this 
report are given in Appendix 2.
Forest on a fall day in the Upper Peninsula, Michigan. Photo by Kailey Marcinkowski, Michigan Technological University, 
used with permission.
34
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Box 10
Menu of Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Strategy 1: Sustain fundamental ecological 
functions.
1.1. Reduce impacts to soils and nutrient cycling.
1.2. Maintain or restore hydrology.
1.3. Maintain or restore riparian areas. 
1.4. Reduce competition for moisture, nutrients, 
and light.
1.5. Restore or maintain fire in fire-adapted 
ecosystems.
Strategy 2: Reduce the impact of biological 
stressors.
2.1. Maintain or improve the ability of forests to 
resist pests and pathogens.
2.2. Prevent the introduction and establishment 
of invasive plant species and remove existing 
invasive species. 
2.3. Manage herbivory to promote regeneration of 
desired species.
Strategy 3: Reduce the risk and long-term 
impacts of severe disturbances.
3.1. Alter forest structure or composition to reduce 
risk or severity of wildfire. 
3.2. Establish fuelbreaks to slow the spread of 
catastrophic fire. 
3.3. Alter forest structure to reduce severity or 
extent of wind and ice damage. 
3.4. Promptly revegetate sites after disturbance.
Strategy 4: Maintain or create refugia. 
4.1. Prioritize and maintain unique sites. 
4.2. Prioritize and maintain sensitive or at-risk 
species or communities.
4.3. Establish artificial reserves for at-risk and 
displaced species. 
Strategy 5: Maintain and enhance species and 
structural diversity.
5.1. Promote diverse age classes.
5.2. Maintain and restore diversity of native 
species. 
5.3. Retain biological legacies. 
5.4. Establish reserves to maintain ecosystem 
diversity. 
Strategy 6: Increase ecosystem redundancy 
across the landscape. 
6.1. Manage habitats over a range of sites and 
conditions. 
6.2. Expand the boundaries of reserves to increase 
diversity.
Strategy 7: Promote landscape connectivity. 
7.1. Reduce landscape fragmentation. 
7.2. Maintain and create habitat corridors through 
reforestation or restoration.
Strategy 8: Maintain and enhance genetic 
diversity.
8.1. Use seeds, germplasm, and other genetic 
material from across a greater geographic 
range. 
8.2. Favor existing genotypes that are better 
adapted to future conditions. 
Strategy 9: Facilitate community adjustments 
through species transitions. 
9.1. Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be adapted to future conditions. 
9.2. Establish or encourage new mixes of native 
species.
9.3. Guide changes in species composition at early 
stages of stand development.
9.4. Protect future-adapted seedlings and saplings.
9.5. Disfavor species that are distinctly 
maladapted.
9.6. Manage for species and genotypes with wide 
moisture and temperature tolerances.
9.7. Introduce species that are expected to be 
adapted to future conditions.
9.8. Move at-risk species to locations that are 
expected to provide habitat. 
Strategy 10: Realign ecosystems after 
disturbance.
10.1. Promptly revegetate sites after disturbance. 
10.2. Allow for areas of natural regeneration to test 
for future-adapted species.
10.3. Realign significantly disrupted ecosystems to 
meet expected future conditions.
35
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Box 11
Adaptation Strategies for Planning and Policy
The Adaptation Strategies and Approaches for 
land managers have been designed for natural 
resource managers to use in planning on-the-
ground management activities. However, many 
adaptation actions will require or benefit greatly 
from planning, education and outreach, research, 
or changes in policy or infrastructure. These 
higher-level actions may be vital for effective 
climate change adaptation across large scales, but 
they are beyond the scope of this document. Some 
examples of these actions are:
Planning
•	 Including risk management in forest plans 
and developing enhanced capacity for risk 
management (Johnston et al. 2006, Kellomaki 
et al. 2005, Ohlson et al. 2005) 
•	 Documenting clear plans for how to respond 
to more frequent or severe disturbances in 
advance to allow for a faster, more thoughtful, 
better-coordinated response (Joyce et al. 2009) 
•	 Using landscape-level planning and 
partnerships to identify and acquire high-priority 
areas for conservation or to share resources, 
expertise, and actions across jurisdictional 
boundaries (Anderson et al. 2012, D’Antonio et 
al. 2004, Mawdsley et al. 2009)
•	 Incorporating predicted climate change impacts 
into species and land management plans, 
programs, and activities (Mawdsley et al. 2009, 
Peterson et al. 2011, Swanston and Janowiak 
2012)
•	 Increasing flexibility of planning goals and 
objectives to address dynamic processes, 
unexpected occurrences, and uncertainty 
(Millar et al 2008, Ogden and Innes 2007, 
Spies et al. 2010)
•	 Realigning management of significantly 
altered ecosystems to meet expected future 
environmental conditions (Groves et al. 
2012, Millar et al. 2008, Morelli et al. 2012, 
Spittlehouse 2005)
•	 Linking adaptation planning to larger regional 
and national guidance documents that outline 
emerging principles for ecosystem-based 
adaptation (Manomet Center for Conservation 
Sciences and National Wildlife Federation 
2013, Peterson et al. 2011).
Policy
•	 Reviewing and amending laws, regulations, 
or policies to improve their ability to support 
adaptation actions (Cross et al. 2012, Johnston 
et al. 2006, Mawdsley et al. 2009, Morelli et al. 
2012, Peterson et al. 2011, Spittlehouse 2005) 
•	 Managing populations of native herbivores 
(e.g., deer and moose), grazers (e.g., cattle), 
or invasive animals (e.g., feral hogs) by using 
landscape-level and cross-disciplinary planning 
•	 Reevaluating seed zone sizes and rules 
governing the movement of seed stocks (Millar 
et al. 2007, Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003, 
Stein et al. 2013).
Infrastructure and Institutional Capacity
•	 Improving infrastructure and resources for 
species regeneration (e.g., nurseries) that 
focuses on providing a diversity of genetic 
material (Millar et al. 2007) 
•	 Developing a gene management program to 
maintain diverse gene pools (Halofsky et al. 
2011) 
•	 Evaluating and diversifying the forest economy 
(e.g., timber sales and forest products) in 
response to changes in the market (Ogden and 
Innes 2008)
•	 Evaluating and improving road construction 
standards and stream crossings to minimize 
negative impacts on forest communities 
(Groves et al. 2012).
Research
•	 Bridging the gap between academic research 
and implementation by identifying current 
science and research needs (Swanston and 
Janowiak 2012)
•	 Creating climate change vulnerability 
assessments for a wide range of ecosystems 
and geographies (Swanston and Janowiak 
2012)
•	 Developing decision-support tools that 
incorporate climate change information into 
management plans (National Fish Wildlife and 
Plants Climate Adaptation Partnership 2012, 
Stein et al. 2013, Swanston and Janowiak 
2012).
36
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Box 11 (continued)
Research (continued)
•	 Staging management activities as experiments 
to measure the effects or success of adaptation 
actions (Hemery 2008)
•	 Supporting and coordinating monitoring 
programs to track impacts of climate change 
and adaptation actions on ecosystems (Brandt 
et al. 2012, Cross et al. 2012, Morelli et al. 
2012, National Fish Wildlife and Plants Climate 
Adaptation Partnership 2012, Swanston and 
Janowiak 2012) 
•	 Including climate variables in growth-yield 
models (Kellomaki et al. 2005).
Education and Outreach
•	 Increasing the knowledge and experience 
of natural resource professionals, including 
decisionmakers and planners, so that they can 
better integrate climate change considerations 
into their projects and work plans (Groves et al. 
2012, Morelli et al. 2012, National Fish Wildlife 
and Plants Climate Adaptation Partnership 
2012, Stein et al. 2014, Swanston and Janowiak 
2012) 
•	 Creating training opportunities and communities 
of practice (National Fish Wildlife and Plants 
Climate Adaptation Partnership 2012, Swanston 
and Janowiak 2012)
•	 Preparing the public for adaptation principles 
through outreach (Groves et al. 2012, National 
Fish Wildlife and Plants Climate Adaptation 
Partnership 2012).
Adaptation Strategies and 
Approaches
Strategy 1: Sustain fundamental 
ecological functions 
Climate change will have substantial effects on a 
suite of ecosystem functions, such as carbon storage, 
nutrient cycling, habitat, or water provisioning. As a 
result, many management actions will need to work 
both directly and indirectly to maintain the integrity 
of ecosystems in the face of climate change. This 
strategy seeks to sustain fundamental ecological 
functions, especially those related to soil and 
hydrologic conditions. 
Approaches:
1.1. Reduce impacts to soils and nutrient 
cycling 
Maintaining both soil quality and nutrient cycling 
are already common tenets of sustainable forest 
management (Burger et al. 2010, Oliver and 
Larson 1996) and can help improve the capacity of 
ecosystems to persist under new conditions. Physical 
and chemical changes can result from a variety 
of forest management and recreation activities, as 
well as from climate-related processes including 
fire, drought, and flooding. Examples of physical 
impacts to soil are compaction, mixing of soil layers, 
removal of organic layers, rutting, erosion, and 
landslides. Complex interactions among climate, 
vegetation, and landforms can result in changes in 
nutrient cycling, including the leaching or fixation 
of nutrients and changes in soil biota. Many existing 
guidelines and best management practices describe 
actions that can be used to reduce impacts to soil 
and water; many of these actions are also likely to 
be beneficial in the context of adaptation, either in 
their current form or with modifications to address 
potential climate change impacts. 
37
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
•	 Altering the timing of forest operations to 
reduce potential impacts on water, soils, and 
residual trees, especially in areas that rely on 
particular conditions for operations that may 
be affected by a changing climate (e.g., frozen 
soil, or dry conditions)
•	 Modifying forest operations techniques and 
equipment (e.g., using pallets, debris mats, or 
float bridges) to minimize soil compaction, 
rutting, or other impacts on water, soils, and 
residual trees 
•	 Retaining coarse woody debris to maintain 
moisture, soil quality, and nutrient cycling 
•	 Restricting recreational access in areas that 
show signs of excessive wear on natural 
resources in order to allow for revegetation or 
soil stabilization
•	 Using soil amendments to restore or improve 
soil quality (e.g., using lime to increase base 
cations in the soil profile in areas affected by 
long-term acid deposition) 
•	 Restoring native herbaceous groundcover 
following management activities in order to 
retain soil moisture and reduce erosion. 
1.2. Maintain or restore hydrology 
Projected changes in precipitation and temperature 
are expected to alter hydrologic regimes 
through changes in streamflow, snowpack, 
evapotranspiration rates, soil moisture, surface 
runoff, infiltration, flooding, and drought 
(Jones 2011). Hydrologic changes could occur 
gradually or rapidly through extreme events. 
Some ecosystems are very susceptible to stress 
from drought, which may increase in frequency, 
severity, duration, or extent as a result of changing 
precipitation patterns. Other ecosystems are 
susceptible to flooding and ponding. Maintaining 
sufficient water levels and flow patterns is critical 
to ecosystem function. Hydrology can be altered 
by infrastructure (e.g., dams, roads, and other 
impervious surfaces), excessive groundwater 
extraction, stream channelization, and even invasive 
plants (Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and 
Wildlife 2006). Existing infrastructure that diverts 
water, or otherwise alters hydrology, may need to 
be reevaluated to compensate for changes in water 
levels or flows (Brandt et al. 2012, Furniss et al. 
2010, Galatowitsch et al. 2009). Infrastructure will 
also need to be designed to accommodate greater 
hydrologic extremes in the future. It is important 
to keep in mind that modifications to maintain 
hydrology at one site may have negative impacts on 
hydrology at another site.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Upgrading culvert size and cleaning culverts 
regularly to accommodate changes in peak 
flow and thus reduce damage to infrastructure 
and the environment during heavy rain 
events. This example may also incorporate 
ecologically based stream crossing designs 
that allow passage for aquatic organisms.
•	 Reducing or eliminating agricultural drainage 
improvements near wetlands 
•	 Reducing groundwater withdrawals in 
recharge areas of calcareous fens
•	 Installing berms or dikes to divert surface 
water to a lowland area affected by decreased 
precipitation 
•	 Removing or modifying dams, especially as 
they become defunct, and if they have little 
hydroelectric or irrigation value 
•	 Decommissioning or temporarily closing roads 
to reduce erosion and sedimentation and to 
restore permeability and soil hydrology. 
1.3. Maintain or restore riparian areas 
Forests located within riparian areas serve important 
ecosystem functions, such as decreasing soil erosion, 
filtering water, and storing and recycling organic 
matter and nutrients (Barling and Moore 1994, 
Brandt et al. 2012, Castelle et al. 1994). Trees in 
riparian areas also provide shade, which helps to 
buffer stream temperatures. Forested riparian areas 
can serve as corridors for wildlife and plant species 
migrating across otherwise fragmented landscapes 
(Heller and Zavaleta 2009). Many of these functions 
and benefits may be degraded if riparian forests 
undergo decline or exacerbated stress from climatic 
shifts and extreme events. The use of protective 
38
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
guidelines, such as best management practices and 
riparian management zones, can be used to avoid 
damage or additional stress to riparian areas during 
management activities. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Restoring or promoting a diversity of tree 
and plant species to increase stream shading, 
provide a source of woody debris, stabilize the 
soil, and provide habitat and connectivity for 
wildlife 
•	 Anchoring with fabric, wire, or natural 
materials in order to stabilize eroding stream 
banks
•	 Creating buffers along riparian areas with 
reduced or no harvest based on the landform, 
hydrology, and vegetation of the riparian 
zone in addition to any recommended buffer 
distance
•	 Restoring or reforesting riparian areas adjacent 
to agricultural areas in order to reduce erosion 
and nutrient loading into adjacent water bodies
•	 Managing water levels to supply proper 
soil moisture to vegetation adjacent to the 
stream during critical time periods, either 
by manipulation of existing dams and water 
control structures or restoration of natural 
dynamic water fluctuations
•	 Reconnecting floodplains to rivers and 
restoring natural floodplain conditions and 
associated native habitats (e.g., bottomland 
forest, wetlands, and wet prairie and other 
grasslands) in order to restore fluvial 
processes.
1.4. Reduce competition for moisture, 
nutrients, and light
Competition for resources between plants is 
established as one of the main mechanisms in 
plant succession and evolution (Weiner 1990). 
Competition occurs aboveground as plants compete 
for light, and belowground as they compete for 
water and mineral nutrients (Casper and Jackson 
1997). Climate change is expected to affect many of 
the competitive relationships in forest ecosystems. 
Productivity may increase because of the positive 
effects of carbon dioxide (CO2) fertilization and 
longer growing seasons. But not all species will be 
able to take equal advantage of these positive effects 
(Evans and Perschel 2009). Reducing competition 
for resources can enhance the persistence of desired 
species and increase the ability of ecosystems 
to cope with the direct effects (drought stress, 
temperature increases) and indirect effects (increased 
damage from pests and disease) of climate change 
(Dwyer et al. 2010, Evans and Perschel 2009). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using herbicide or mechanical thinning 
to prevent the encroachment of woody 
competitors and invasive species, especially 
after disturbance
•	 Thinning forest stands to remove crowded, 
damaged, or stressed trees in order to reduce 
competition for light, nutrients, and water
•	 Using prescribed fire to maintain growing 
space for fire-tolerant species or to increase 
nutrient turnover 
•	 Fertilizing or amending soil to address 
nutrient deficiencies. Although the benefit is 
faster growth, there could be consequences 
from nutrient leaching, such as stream 
eutrophication. 
•	 Controlling beech suckers, sprouts, and brush 
with herbicides or mechanical treatment in 
areas affected by beech bark disease in order 
to reduce competition with the regeneration of 
other species.
1.5. Restore or maintain fire in fire-adapted 
ecosystems 
Long-term fire suppression leads to shifts in 
ecosystem structure and composition, which 
may disproportionately favor certain species and 
reduce biodiversity (Nowacki and Abrams 2008). 
Restoring fire regimes that attempt to mimic natural 
disturbance in fire-adapted systems can enhance 
regeneration and encourage stronger competition 
by fire-dependent and fire-tolerant species (Abrams 
1992). These actions can simultaneously foster 
more complex ecosystem structure and reduce the 
risk of severe wildfire. Projecting the effects of 
39
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
climate change on fire regimes in forest ecosystems 
is an area of active research. The wildfire season is 
expected to lengthen in much of the Midwest and 
Northeast, and wildfires may occur more frequently 
(Flannigan et al. 2009a, 2009b; Guyette et al. 2014; 
Moritz et al. 2012; Tang et al. 2014). Helping fire-
adapted ecosystems tolerate these potential changes 
may be the focus of adaptation actions. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using prescribed fire to reduce ladder fuels, 
invasive species, and understory competition 
•	 Promoting fire- and drought-adapted species 
and ecosystems in areas that are expected to 
have increased fire risk as a result of climate 
change 
•	 Using natural or prescribed fire to restore the 
open character of oak woodlands and glades
•	 Shifting prescribed burn seasons to align with 
projected seasonal precipitation changes, 
thereby reducing the risk of unintended 
wildfire conditions.
Strategy 2: Reduce the impact of 
biological stressors 
Biological stressors such as insects, pathogens, 
invasive species, and herbivores can act individually 
and in concert to amplify the effects of climate 
change on ecosystems. Forest managers already 
work to maintain the ability of forests to resist 
stressors. As an adaptation strategy, these efforts 
receive added effort and focus, with an emphasis on 
anticipating and preventing increased stress before 
it occurs. Climate change has the potential to add to 
or intensify the impact of many biological stressors, 
such as forest pests and invasive plant species, which 
heightens the importance of responding to these 
issues. Dealing with these existing stressors is a 
relatively high-benefit, low-risk strategy for climate 
change adaptation, in part because of the existing 
body of knowledge about their impacts and solutions 
(Climate Change Wildlife Action Plan Work Group 
2009). 
Approaches:
2.1. Maintain or improve the ability of forests 
to resist pests and pathogens 
Even modest changes in climate may cause 
substantial increases in the distribution and 
abundance of many insect pests and pathogens, 
potentially leading to reduced forest productivity 
or increased tree stress and mortality (Ayres and 
Lombardero 2000, Dukes et al. 2009). Impacts 
may be exacerbated where site conditions, climate, 
other stressors, and interactions among these 
factors increase the vulnerability of forests to these 
agents (Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). Actions 
to manipulate the density, structure, or species 
composition of a forest may reduce susceptibility to 
some pests and pathogens (Spies et al. 2010). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Thinning to reduce the density of a pest’s host 
species in order to discourage infestation, 
based on the knowledge that species are 
especially susceptible to pests and pathogens 
at particular stocking levels 
•	 Adjusting rotation length to decrease the 
period of time that a stand is vulnerable 
to insect pests and pathogens, based on 
the knowledge that species are especially 
susceptible to pests and pathogens at particular 
ages
•	 Creating a diverse mix of forest or community 
types, age classes, and stand structures to 
reduce the availability of host species for pests 
and pathogens
•	 Using pesticides or biological control methods 
to manage pest populations (e.g., gypsy moth, 
Asian longhorned beetle, or hemlock woolly 
adelgid) in heavily infested areas 
•	 Restricting harvest and transportation of logs 
near stands already heavily infested with 
known pests or pathogens 
•	 Using impact models and monitoring data to 
anticipate the arrival of pests and pathogens 
and prioritize management actions. 
40
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
2.2. Prevent the introduction and 
establishment of invasive plants and 
remove existing invasive species
Hundreds of nonnative invasive plant species are 
currently present in the Midwest and Northeast 
(Chornesky et al. 2005, Natural Resources 
Conservation Service 2012). Climate change is 
expected to increase habitat for many of these 
species, which may be poised to outcompete 
native species (Chornesky et al. 2005, Millar et al. 
2007). Current methods for controlling nonnative 
invasive species emphasize early detection and rapid 
response to new infestations (Hellmann et al. 2008). 
Management of highly mobile nonnative invasive 
species may require increased coordination across 
property boundaries and over larger geographic 
areas, and is likely to require an increasing budget 
for eradication efforts. As a resistance or resilience 
strategy, this approach may work for a while. Over 
the long term, limitations in available resources 
may require managers to prioritize which species 
to eradicate and which species to allow to occupy 
a site.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Increasing monitoring for known or potential 
invasive species to ensure early detection, 
especially at trailheads, along roads, and along 
other pathways known for infestation
•	 Eradicating existing populations or seed 
sources (e.g., upstream) of invasive plants 
through physical or chemical treatments
•	 Cleaning equipment prior to forest operations 
in order to prevent the spread of invasive 
plants during site preparation, harvesting, or 
other activities
•	 Maintaining closed-canopy conditions to 
reduce the ability of light-loving invasive 
species to enter the understory
•	 Educating staff and volunteers on 
identification and eradication of current and 
potential invasive species.
2.3. Manage herbivory to promote 
regeneration of desired species 
Climate change has the potential to exacerbate many 
forest stressors and alter regeneration patterns. 
Additionally, climate change will probably have 
direct and indirect effects on populations of forest 
herbivores such as moose (generally expected to 
decrease) and white-tailed deer (generally expected 
to increase). Because herbivores preferentially 
browse on particular species, it may be increasingly 
important to protect regeneration of desired species 
from deer, moose, and other herbivores. Much 
of the available information on forest herbivores 
focuses on white-tailed deer and moose, which are 
considered keystone species capable of dramatically 
altering forests across the Midwest and Northeast 
(Frerker et al. 2014, Horsley et al. 2003, Mladenoff 
and Stearns 1993, Rooney and Waller 2003, 
Stromayer and Warren 1997). Managing herbivory 
alone may not promote desired species. Thus, this 
approach may be combined with other approaches 
that release advance regeneration or stimulate new 
regeneration.
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
•	 Applying repellant or installing fences, bud 
caps, and other physical barriers to prevent 
herbivory
•	 Promoting abundant regeneration of multiple 
species in order to supply more browse than 
herbivores are expected to consume
•	 Using tree tops from forest harvest or 
plantings of nonpalatable tree species as 
locations for “hiding” desirable species from 
herbivores to reduce browse pressure
•	 Partnering with state wildlife agencies to 
monitor herbivore populations or reduce 
populations to appropriate levels.
41
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Strategy 3: Reduce the risk and long-
term impacts of severe disturbances 
Climate change is projected to increase the potential 
for severe disturbance events, such as wildfire, 
extreme wind, and ice storms (Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] 2012, Moritz et al. 
2012, Uriarte and Papaik 2007). These disturbances 
have the ability to alter community composition and 
structure over large landscapes. Disturbances can 
interact with other stressors (Papaik and Canham 
2006). For example, extreme wind events can 
cause tree damage and mortality, which increase 
the risk of pest outbreaks or wildfire (Gandhi et al. 
2007, Woodall and Nagel 2007). Even as trends 
continue to emerge, management will need to adjust 
appropriately to the changes in natural disturbance 
dynamics (Heller and Zavaleta 2009). 
Approaches:
3.1. Alter forest structure or composition to 
reduce risk or severity of wildfire 
Forest structure and composition may interact with 
longer and drier growing seasons to increase the 
risk of wildfire. Mortality from climate-related 
disturbances can lead to increases in fuel loading, 
which can increase the risk or severity of fire. 
Although some forest types are tolerant of or 
dependent on fire, extremely hot fires can destroy 
seed banks, sterilize soils, induce hydrophobic soil 
conditions, or cause tree mortality (Nitschke and 
Innes 2008, Noss 2001). Management actions to 
alter species composition or ecosystem structure 
may reduce susceptibility to these threats (Hulme 
2005, Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using prescribed fire and thinning to reduce 
surface fuels, increase height to live crown, 
decrease crown closure, and create a more 
open forest structure that is expected to be less 
vulnerable to severe wildfire
•	 Using prescribed fire to maintain open 
conditions in ecosystems at lower elevations 
as a means of reducing fuels and the risk of 
wildfire in ecosystems at higher elevations 
•	 Promoting fire-resistant species, such as 
hardwoods, in buffer zones between more-
flammable conifers to slow the movement of 
wildfires
•	 Physically removing dead or dying trees or 
other vegetation to reduce surface and ladder 
fuels, while minimizing exposure to invasive 
plants, pests, or pathogens.
3.2. Establish fuelbreaks to slow the spread 
of catastrophic fire 
Projected increases in fire occurrence as a result of 
climate change are expected to increase demand on 
fire-fighting resources and may force prioritization 
of fire suppression efforts to targeted areas (Millar et 
al. 2007, Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). Managers 
may seek to reduce the spread or intensity of fire by 
using a fuelbreak, which is a physical barrier such 
as a road, bulldozer line, or water body. Establishing 
fuelbreaks can be complementary with actions to 
reduce the fuel load of the forest itself (Agee et 
al. 2000). Fuelbreaks can be created to lessen fire 
spread and intensity in specific areas, such as the 
wildland-urban interface, but also have the potential 
to increase fragmentation. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using prescribed fire or mechanical thinning 
to lower the volume of dense vegetation and 
reduce flammability within a buffer zone of 
appropriate size for the landscape 
•	 Creating fire lines (i.e., areas where all 
vegetation is removed down to mineral soil) 
between a flammable stand and the wildland-
urban interface or a fire-intolerant stand
•	 Establishing fuelbreaks along roads, power 
lines, and other existing features in order to 
reduce the spread of wildfire while minimizing 
additional fragmentation
•	 Replacing vegetation with nonflammable 
materials (e.g., replacing vegetation with local 
rocks) around high-priority areas
•	 Removing edge vegetation and lower branches 
of perimeter trees of flammable stands (e.g., 
pine islands) to arrest the path of fire from the 
ground surface to the tree crown.
42
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
3.3. Alter forest structure to reduce severity 
or extent of wind and ice damage 
Wind disturbance is a fundamental process in 
many forest ecosystems across the Midwest and 
Northeast (Frelich 2002, Seymour et al. 2002). 
Wind events and the ensuing effects on forests are 
expected to become more frequent and severe under 
climate change (Fischlin et al. 2009, Frelich and 
Reich 2010), although there are many challenges in 
predicting the size, frequency, and intensity of these 
events. Some stands may have structures poorly 
suited to withstand projected increases in storm 
intensity. Silvicultural techniques exist to alter forest 
composition and structure for increased resistance 
to blowdown or ice damage, or to avoid sudden 
exposure of retained trees to wind (Burton et al. 
2008, Everham and Brokaw 1996, Mitchell 2013). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Retaining trees at the edge of a clearcut or 
surrounding desirable residual trees to help 
protect trees that have not been previously 
exposed to wind 
•	 Conducting forest harvest over multiple entries 
in order to gradually increase the resistance of 
residual trees to wind
•	 Using directional felling, cut-to-length 
logging, and other harvest techniques that 
minimize damage to residual trees 
•	 Creating canopy gaps that have an orientation 
and shape informed by the prevailing winds in 
order to reduce the risk of windthrow.
3.4. Promptly revegetate sites after 
disturbance 
Potential increases in the frequency, intensity, 
and extent of large and severe disturbances may 
disrupt regeneration and result in loss of forest 
cover, productivity, or function in the long term. 
Prompt revegetation of sites following disturbance 
helps reduce soil loss and erosion, maintain water 
quality, and discourage invasive species in the 
newly exposed areas. These efforts can also provide 
an opportunity to promote natural regeneration or 
foster species that may be better adapted to future 
conditions. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Planting species expected to be adapted to 
future conditions and resistant to insect pests 
or present pathogens 
•	 Creating suitable physical conditions for 
natural regeneration through site preparation, 
for example by chaining after a burn to 
promote seed establishment 
•	 Monitoring areas of natural regeneration on a 
more frequent basis, and prioritizing planting 
or seeding where natural regeneration is slow 
to succeed
•	 Planting larger individuals (saplings versus 
seedlings, or containerized versus bare-root 
stock) to help increase survival in sites where 
dry conditions are expected. 
Tamarack cones in the fall in the Upper Peninsula, Michigan. Photo by Kailey Marcinkowski, Michigan Technological 
University, used with permission.
43
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Strategy 4: Maintain or create refugia 
Refugia are areas that have resisted ecological 
changes occurring elsewhere, often providing 
suitable habitat for relict populations of species 
that were previously more widespread (Keppel 
et al. 2012, Millar et al. 2007). Climate refugia 
are often formed by topography (e.g., north sides 
of slopes, or sheltered ravines), proximity to 
large water bodies, or connection to groundwater 
(Ashcroft 2010, Dobrowski 2011). During previous 
periods of rapid climate change, at-risk populations 
persisted in refugia that avoided extreme impacts 
(Keppel et al. 2012, Millar et al. 2007, Noss 2001). 
These populations allowed species to persist until 
more favorable climatic conditions returned and 
species were able to expand into newly available 
habitats. This strategy seeks to identify and maintain 
ecosystems that: (1) are on sites that may be better 
buffered against climate change and short-term 
disturbances, and (2) contain communities and 
species that are at risk across the greater landscape 
(Millar et al. 2007, Noss 2001). 
Approaches:
4.1. Prioritize and maintain unique sites 
Some sites host a higher diversity of species than 
adjacent sites, have many endemic species, have 
a sheltered topographic position, or have retained 
species through past periods of climate change 
(Keppel et al. 2012). These potential refugia are 
formed through spatial, geophysical, and biological 
variation on the landscape and may be identified as 
unique sites that are expected to be more resistant 
to change. These sites may provide the best chance 
to retain habitat for native species under future 
climate change (Anderson et al. 2012). Species at 
these sites are not necessarily sensitive or at-risk, 
although they may face increased stress under future 
climate on some landscape positions. Committing 
additional resources may be necessary to ensure that 
the characteristic site conditions are not degraded 
by invasive species, herbivory, fire, or other 
disturbances. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Identifying and managing cooler and wetter 
locations that are expected to be more 
resistant to changes in climate as refugia for 
maintaining native plant communities into the 
future
•	 Limiting harvest or management-related 
disturbance in areas that may be buffered 
from climate change (e.g., spring-fed stands 
sheltered in swales or valleys) 
•	 Identifying and protecting a network of 
sheltered mountain slopes, valleys, or forests 
with continuous shading canopy 
•	 Identifying areas with a high diversity of 
geology, landform, vegetation, or soils for 
increased protection or conservation
•	 Protecting areas that have been generally 
undisturbed by humans, such as those within 
old-growth forest, peatlands, barrens, or 
prairie, in order to preserve a reference 
condition or legacy.
4.2. Prioritize and maintain sensitive or at-
risk species or communities 
Many species are projected to decline as a result of 
climate change. For example, northern and boreal 
species are widespread in northern portions of the 
Midwest and Northeast, but are likely to lose habitat 
because they are already at the southern extent of 
their range (Swanston et al. 2011). Other species 
may be more vulnerable due to their dependence on 
a narrow range of site conditions. Identifying and 
maintaining sensitive or at-risk species as long as 
possible may help them persist until new long-term 
sites can be located and populated. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using impact models and monitoring data to 
identify and prioritize management of species 
expected to decline under future conditions 
•	 Retaining individuals of a priority species 
across many diverse sites representing various 
environmental conditions or within differing 
forest types 
44
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
•	 Rerouting roads or trails away from at-risk 
communities to reduce damage from traffic or 
reduce the risk of introducing invasive species
•	 Minimizing harvest and other disturbances to 
species with dispersal or migration barriers, 
such as high-elevation or lowland conifer 
species, in order to protect viable populations 
where they currently occur
•	 Monitoring regeneration to detect migration of 
plant populations or communities to adjacent 
areas.
4.3. Establish artificial reserves 
for at-risk and displaced species 
Species already exist outside their natural habitats 
in nurseries, arboretums, greenhouses, botanical 
gardens, and urban environments around the world. 
These highly controlled environments may be used 
to support individuals or genetic lineages that are 
no longer able to survive in their former location, or 
to serve as interim refugia for rare and endangered 
plant species that have specialized environmental 
requirements and low genetic diversity (Fiedler and 
Laven 1996, Havens et al. 2006, Millar 1991, Vitt et 
al. 2010). These artificial reserves may in some cases 
maintain species until they can be moved to new 
suitable habitat. Although a controlled environment 
would probably require substantial resources, this 
approach may be critical for at-risk species (Coates 
and Dixon 2007). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using an existing artificial reserve to cultivate 
species after suitable habitat has shifted and 
when they face considerable lag time before 
new habitat may become available 
•	 Collecting seeds and other genetic material 
of at-risk species to contribute to a genetic 
repository
•	 Planting individuals in a protected location 
expected to provide suitable habitat in a 
natural setting, such as a stand on a partner’s 
property
•	 Planting individuals in a controlled setting, 
such as a climate-controlled arboretum or 
botanical garden. 
Strategy 5: Maintain and enhance 
species and structural diversity 
Land managers already work to increase structural 
and species diversity in many cases, and as an 
adaptation strategy this general goal receives added 
effort and focus (Mooney et al. 2009). Structural and 
species diversity may buffer a community against 
the susceptibility of its individual components 
to climate change (Peterson et al. 1998). In other 
words, a community may still experience stress 
as individual components fare poorly, but the 
redundancy of particular roles and variability among 
all species’ responses contribute to the resilience 
of the community (Elmqvist et al. 2003). Although 
a forest is often defined by its dominant or most 
abundant species, even rare species can act as 
keystone species or contribute to the suppression 
of invasive exotic plants (Mooney et al. 2009). 
Approaches:
5.1. Promote diverse age classes 
Species are vulnerable to stressors at different stages 
in their life cycle. Even-aged stands are often more 
vulnerable to insect pests and diseases, many of 
which are likely to increase in range and severity as 
a result of climate change. In uneven-aged systems, 
a smaller proportion of the population may be 
exposed to a particular threat at any one time, which 
can increase the resistance or resilience of a stand to 
a wider range of disturbances (O’Hara and Ramage 
2013). Maintaining a mix of ages, sizes, or canopy 
positions will help buffer vulnerability to stressors 
of any single age class, as well as increase structural 
diversity within stands or across a landscape (Noss 
2001).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Emulating aspects of disturbances through 
forest management techniques such as 
variable-density treatments or irregular 
return intervals in order to encourage the 
development of multiple age cohorts 
•	 Focusing salvage operations on creating 
desired residual stand structures following 
disturbance, even if less merchantable timber 
is removed as a result
45
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
•	 Using site scarification, planting, or other 
techniques to support adequate regeneration
•	 Maintaining a variety of age classes of a given 
forest type across a larger landscape.
5.2. Maintain and restore diversity 
of native species 
Diverse communities may be less vulnerable to 
climate change impacts and disturbances because 
they distribute risk among multiple species, reducing 
the likelihood that the entire system will decline 
even if one or more species suffer adverse effects. 
This may be especially important in communities 
with low diversity; even small increases in diversity 
may increase resilience without greatly altering 
species composition (Anderson and Chmura 2009, 
Cadotte et al. 2012, Wilkerson and Sartoris 2013). 
Forests with higher levels of species diversity are 
also expected to be less vulnerable to declines in 
productivity due to climate change (Duveneck et al. 
2014). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using silvicultural treatments to promote and 
enhance diverse regeneration of native species 
•	 Transitioning plantations to more complex 
systems by underplanting or promoting 
regeneration of a variety of native species 
expected to do well under future conditions
•	 Planting desired native species within an 
area that is otherwise expected to regenerate 
naturally in order to add diversity 
•	 Restoring native vegetation on areas that 
have been severely altered by anthropogenic 
activities, such as abandoned agricultural areas 
or surface mines
•	 Planting species with diverse timing of 
phenological events (e.g., flowering, fruiting, 
leaf out, leaf drop) to provide necessary 
resources over a longer time frame to forest-
dependent wildlife species.
5.3. Retain biological legacies 
Biological legacies are organisms, structures, or 
patterns inherited from a previous ecosystem and 
often include mature trees, snags, and down logs 
remaining after natural disturbance or harvesting 
(Society of American Foresters 2008). Biological 
legacies can enhance species and structural diversity, 
serve as a seed source, or provide nurse logs for 
seed germination (Gunn et al. 2009). Mature trees 
can often survive through periods of unfavorable 
climate, even while conditions become unsuitable 
for seedling establishment (Brubaker 1986). In a 
changing climate, biological legacies may play a 
critical role in a species’ persistence or colonization 
of new habitat (Gunn et al. 2009). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Retaining the oldest and largest trees with 
good vigor during forest management 
activities 
•	 Retaining survivors of pest or disease 
outbreaks, droughts, windthrow events, or 
other disturbances during salvage or sanitation 
operations 
•	 Retaining individual trees of a variety of 
uncommon species to maintain their presence 
on the landscape.
5.4. Establish reserves to maintain 
ecosystem diversity 
Some areas with exemplary combinations of 
soil, hydrologic, and climatic variation support a 
correspondingly high degree of species diversity. 
Ecosystems in the areas may be protected through 
the establishment of reserves. Reserves are 
traditionally defined as natural areas with little to 
no harvest activity that do not exclude management 
of fire or other natural disturbance processes 
(Halpin 1997). However, the use and definition 
of reserves may need to be evaluated within the 
context of changing climate and forest response. 
It may be valuable to retain explicit flexibility in 
management practices, so long as management 
directly supports the justifications and goals for 
establishing the reserve. This approach may also be 
used as a “control” for monitoring adaptation actions 
implemented in other forest stands. 
46
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Identifying areas with high diversity or other 
desirable attributes that can be set aside as a 
reserve on an existing ownership 
•	 Setting a minimum requirement for percentage 
of land in reserve 
•	 Prioritizing areas where riparian corridors 
connect core areas to other reserves and 
habitats
•	 Providing a large reserve based on a species’ 
known optimum conditions in order to 
preserve a species.
Strategy 6: Increase ecosystem 
redundancy across the landscape 
Some losses are inevitable, whether due to 
catastrophic events or unforeseen interactions of 
management, climate change, and forest response. 
Increasing ecosystem redundancy attempts to lower 
the overall risk of losing a species or community by 
increasing the extent, number of occurrences across 
the landscape, and diversity of regeneration stages 
(Akçakaya et al. 2007). This strategy may benefit 
greatly from developing partnerships with other 
land management organizations and coordinating 
landscape-scale conservation practices. 
Approaches:
6.1. Manage habitats over a range 
of sites and conditions 
The suitable site conditions for a community or 
species may shift on the landscape as climate 
changes, resulting in new combinations of locations 
and species aggregations. This may increase 
opportunities for successful regeneration and the 
likelihood of persistence of a species or community 
(Joyce et al. 2009, Millar et al. 2007, The Nature 
Conservancy 2009). Species currently covering a 
large extent may provide many options for retaining 
redundancy across the landscape.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Restoring or increasing a community type on 
a variety of soil types and across a range of 
topographic positions 
•	 Implementing a variety of forest management 
activities or silvicultural prescriptions 
across multiple stands or areas with similar 
starting conditions in order to diversify forest 
conditions and evaluate different management 
approaches
•	 Coordinating with partners to manage an 
at-risk species or community existing on a 
variety of suitable sites.  
Northern white-cedar trunk in the Upper Peninsula, 
Michigan. Photo by Kailey Marcinkowski, Michigan 
Technological University, used with permission.
47
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
6.2. Expand the boundaries of reserves to 
increase diversity 
Approaches 4.1 and 5.4 describe protecting and 
maintaining climate refugia and reserves to maintain 
ecosystem diversity and legacy. Expanding existing 
reserve boundaries may buffer and replicate the 
diversity within the core of the reserve, but more 
importantly, may also increase the overall species 
diversity within the expanded reserve (Akçakaya 
et al. 2007). This approach may be more effective 
over the long term if focused on reserves that also 
encompass climate refugia. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Restoring or conserving land directly adjacent 
to established reserves
•	 Developing a network of reserves with 
adjacent landowners with shared conservation 
goals
•	 Designating buffer zones of low-intensity 
management around core reserve areas and 
between different land uses. 
Strategy 7: Promote landscape 
connectivity 
Species migration is a critical factor in the 
maintenance of ecosystem function in a changing 
climate, but fragmentation of landscapes and loss 
of habitat may restrict species movement and gene 
flow (Davis and Shaw 2001, Iverson et al. 2004a). 
Managing the landscape for connectivity may 
allow for easier species movement, reduce lags in 
migration, and enhance the flow of genetic material. 
The current rate of climate change coupled with 
contemporary land use, however, creates unique 
challenges to migration. Many species are not 
expected to be able to migrate at a rate sufficient to 
keep up with climate change and associated range 
shifts (Davis and Shaw 2001, Iverson et al. 2004a). 
Therefore, it may be beneficial to combine the 
approaches under this strategy with efforts to create 
refugia or relocate species (i.e., assisted migration). 
But connectivity may also increase movement of 
invasive species and insect pests, thereby increasing 
the need to prevent introduction of these species.
Approaches:
7.1. Reduce landscape fragmentation 
The fragmentation of contiguous forest habitats is 
a primary driver of biodiversity loss and reduced 
productivity through exposure to disturbance, 
obstruction of migration pathways, and overall 
lowered resilience (Fischer and Lindenmayer 2007). 
Protecting large areas from fragmentation will 
require a concerted effort to create partnerships, 
agreements, and other mechanisms for land 
protection and management across property 
boundaries. Strategic acquisition of high-priority 
conservation areas, conservation easements, 
certification programs, restoration projects, and 
other efforts to increase the size and connectivity 
of forest ecosystems will foster a landscape-level 
response to counter the widespread effects of climate 
change (Anderson et al. 2012, Millar et al. 2007, 
Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). This approach may 
be facilitated by approach 5.4, which focuses on 
establishing new reserves. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using geospatial information to identify new 
and existing migration corridors
•	 Restoring native vegetation and vegetation 
structure in degraded areas within the forested 
matrix
•	 Establishing partnerships and coordinating 
acquisition of conserved forest lands or 
riparian areas to achieve common management 
goals 
•	 Establishing or expanding reserves adjacent 
to other forest blocks to form a connective 
network of a few large reserves, many small 
reserves along a climatic gradient, or a 
combination of large and small reserves close 
to each other
•	 Promoting or participating in conservation 
easement programs that retain forest cover and 
achieve landscape-scale connectivity. 
48
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
7.2. Maintain and create habitat corridors 
through reforestation or restoration 
The presence of both small and large corridors on 
the landscape may help species to migrate without 
additional assistance (Heller and Zavaleta 2009). 
Corridors oriented in any direction may be useful 
to facilitate genetic mixing, but corridors arranged 
along climatic or elevational gradients may be more 
useful if the goal is to allow for species movements 
along the gradient. Reforestation or restoration 
of riparian areas may help retain species on the 
landscape longer while providing a forested corridor. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Establishing or restoring forest cover along 
rivers or ridges to build on natural linear 
features that connect larger forests
•	 Setting aside a connected network of 
conservation easements
•	 Eradicating invasive species within a corridor 
in order to minimize competition with desired 
species
•	 Working with partners on the landscape to 
identify high-priority sites to protect for 
landscape-scale corridors or habitat. 
Strategy 8: Maintain and enhance 
genetic diversity 
Greater genetic diversity may help species adjust to 
new conditions or sites by increasing the likelihood 
that some individuals within a species will be able 
to withstand climate-induced stressors. Current 
guidelines for management of tree genes generally 
promote the conservation of local gene pools, restrict 
transfer of germplasm, and define small seed zones 
to minimize contamination between pools (Millar 
et al. 2007). A changing climate may require new 
guidelines that accommodate shifting seed zones 
and promote more options for increasing genetic 
diversity. Actions to enhance genetic diversity could 
be timed to occur after large-scale disturbances to 
take advantage of regeneration and establishment 
phases. Approaches under this strategy are best 
implemented with great caution, considering 
the uncertainties inherent in climate change, the 
sparse record of previous examples, the ecological 
and social suitability of particular locations, and 
continued uncertainties of forest response. 
Approaches:
8.1. Use seeds, germplasm, 
and other genetic material 
from across a greater geographic range 
Planted seedlings typically have greater survival 
when they originate from local seed sources, but 
local seed sources may no longer produce the best 
adapted seedlings if the governing environmental 
factors change (Vitt et al. 2010). Using seed zones 
that change over time and are based on regional 
analyses of climate change data may provide better 
seed sources than static seed zones (Erickson 
and Navarrete-Tindall 2004, Millar et al. 2007, 
Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). This may entail 
importing genetic stock from locations ranging from 
nearby to substantially distant in order to introduce 
plants that are expected to be better adapted to 
current or future climatological conditions. At the 
same time, ecoregional and political boundaries may 
continue to restrict the distance from which new 
species or genotypes may be imported (McKenney 
et al. 2009, Pedlar et al. 2012). This strategy may 
require communicating with policy-makers to 
reevaluate seed zone sizes and rules governing the 
movement of seed stocks. It is important to note that 
although many environmental factors may match 
seedlings to geographic areas, limitations such as 
cold tolerance may remain (Millar et al. 2007). It is 
also important to take the necessary precautions to 
avoid introducing a new invasive species (Vitt et al. 
2010).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using mapping programs to match seeds 
collected from a known origin to planting sites 
based on climatic information 
•	 Identifying and communicating needs for new 
or different genetic material to seed suppliers 
or nurseries 
•	 Planting seedlings germinated from seeds 
collected from various locations throughout a 
species’ native range. 
49
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
8.2. Favor existing genotypes that are better 
adapted to future conditions 
As populations experience cumulative changes in 
climate, or short-term extremes in climate, new 
selective pressures on populations may result in 
changes in phenotypic expression and genotypic 
evolution responses (Reed et al. 2011). Some 
genotypes may be better adapted to future conditions 
or changing conditions because of pest resistance, 
broad physiological tolerances, short regeneration 
times, or other characteristics (Millar et al. 2007, 
Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). Identifying and 
managing these future-adapted genotypes during 
various life stages may allow a population to 
persist where it may otherwise fail. However, the 
use of this approach may be currently limited by 
the uncertainty about precise future conditions and 
which genotypes are best suited to these conditions 
(Breed et al. 2013). It is also possible that genotypes 
from other sites could interfere with the adaptation 
of local populations, if the imported resources 
are not adapted to withstand local pressures (e.g., 
frost tolerance or pathogen resistance). Availability 
of source material may also limit the use of this 
approach. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Planting stock from seeds collected from 
local trees that exhibit drought tolerance, pest 
resistance, or other desirable qualities 
•	 Planting stock from seeds collected from 
healthy trees in warmer or drier locations in 
the region 
•	 Retaining some survivors of a dieback 
event, such as drought-induced mortality 
or pathogenic blight, rather than salvage 
harvesting all trees in an affected area 
•	 Creating and monitoring areas of natural 
regeneration in order to identify and promote 
well-adapted phenotypes
•	 Planting disease-resistant chestnut in order 
to reestablish a form of this species on the 
landscape.
Strategy 9: Facilitate community 
adjustments through species 
transitions 
Species composition in many forest ecosystems is 
expected to change as species adapt to a new climate 
and transition into new communities (Iverson et 
al. 2004b). This strategy seeks to maintain overall 
ecosystem function and health by gradually enabling 
and assisting adaptive transitions of species and 
communities in suitable locations. This may result 
in slightly different species assemblages than those 
present in the current community, or an altogether 
different community in future decades. This strategy 
includes aggressive actions to promote ecosystem 
change rather than an unchanging community 
or species mix. Many of the approaches in this 
strategy attempt to mimic natural processes, but may 
currently be considered unconventional management 
responses. In particular, some approaches 
incorporate assisted migration, which remains a 
challenging and contentious issue (McLachlan et 
al. 2007, Ricciardi and Simberloff 2009). It is not 
suggested that managers attempt to introduce new 
species without thoroughly investigating potential 
consequences to the native ecosystem (Ricciardi 
and Simberloff 2009). This approach is best 
implemented with great caution, incorporating due 
consideration of the uncertainties inherent in climate 
change, the sparse record of previous examples, and 
continued uncertainties of forest response. Outcomes 
from early efforts to transition communities can 
be evaluated to provide both information on future 
opportunities and specific information related to 
methods and timing. 
Approaches:
9.1. Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be adapted to future conditions 
There are many cases where native species may 
be well adapted to the future range of climatic and 
site conditions (Landscape Change Research Group 
2014, Walk et al. 2011). Using management to 
favor native species in a community or forest type 
that are expected to fare better under future climate 
change can facilitate a gradual shift in the forest 
composition. Establishing or emphasizing future-
50
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
adapted species now may create opportunities to 
fill the niche left by species that decline. Where 
communities are dominated by one or a few species, 
this approach will probably lead to conversion to a 
different community type, albeit with native species. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Underplanting a variety of native species on 
a site to increase overall species richness and 
provide more options for future management
•	 Favoring or establishing oak, pine, and other 
more drought- and heat-tolerant species on 
narrow ridge tops, south-facing slopes with 
shallow soils, or other sites that are expected 
to become warmer and drier 
•	 Seeding or planting drought-resistant 
genotypes of commercial species (e.g., 
loblolly pine) where increased drought stress 
is expected.
9.2. Establish or encourage new mixes 
of native species 
Repeated periods of warming and cooling over the 
last 15,000 years have resulted in large shifts in 
species composition (Davis 1983, Jacobson et al. 
1987, Shuman et al. 2002). Novel combinations of 
climatic and site conditions are expected to continue 
to affect individual species in different ways. 
Although some species may not occur in a forest or 
community type as currently defined, they may have 
been together previously. Novel mixing of native 
species may lead to the dissolution of traditional 
community relationships and result in conversion to 
a newly defined or redefined forest or community 
type (Davis et al. 2005, Root et al. 2003).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Planting or seeding a mixture of native 
species currently found in the area that are not 
typically grown together but may be a suitable 
combination under future conditions 
•	 Underplanting with eastern white pine to 
diversify the conifer component of a stand that 
has had no eastern white pine
•	 Intensifying site preparation in a northern 
hardwoods stand to promote the establishment 
of oak from an adjacent stand 
•	 Allowing a species native to the region (e.g., 
black locust) to establish where it was not 
historically present, if it is already encroaching 
and likely to do well there under future climate 
conditions. 
9.3. Guide changes in species composition 
at early stages of stand development 
Long-term ecosystem function may be jeopardized 
if existing and newly migrated species fail to 
regenerate and establish. Active management of 
understory regeneration may help transition forests 
to new and better-adapted compositions more 
quickly by promoting desired species and reducing 
competition from undesirable, poorly adapted, or 
invasive species. Natural disturbances often initiate 
increased seedling development and genetic mixing, 
and can be used to facilitate adaptation (Joyce et al. 
2009). Silvicultural prescriptions can mimic natural 
disturbance to promote regeneration in the absence 
of natural disturbance. Under drier conditions 
and increased stress, promoting regeneration 
and discouraging competitors may require more-
intensive site preparation, including prescribed fire, 
soil disturbance, and herbicide use. When forests are 
dominated by one or a few species, this approach 
may lead to conversion to a different forest type. 
Examples of adaptation tactics under this approach 
are: 
•	 Preventing and removing undesired species, 
including invasive nonnative or aggressive 
native species, in order to reduce competition 
for moisture, nutrients, and light
•	 Controlling beech suckers, sprouts, and brush 
by using herbicide or mechanical treatment in 
areas affected by beech bark disease in order 
to reduce competition with the regeneration of 
other species
•	 Planting or seeding sufficient stocks of desired 
species before undesirable species have the 
chance to establish or compete
•	 Performing timber stand improvement to favor 
and promote the growth of desirable growing 
stock. 
51
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
9.4. Protect future-adapted seedlings 
and saplings 
As climate change increases both direct and 
indirect stressors on forest ecosystems, it becomes 
increasingly important to ensure the adequate 
regeneration of tree species in order to maintain 
forest or woodland conditions. Seedlings and 
saplings are generally more sensitive than 
older growth stages to changes in moisture and 
temperature, physical disturbance, herbivory, and 
other stressors (Walck et al. 2011). For this reason, 
protecting seedlings or saplings of existing or newly 
migrated species can strongly shape the ways in 
which communities adapt (The Nature Conservancy 
2009). Further, tending regeneration by protecting it 
from herbivory, removing competition, or otherwise 
reducing damage to seedlings and saplings helps to 
promote the transition to desired future conditions 
and functions.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using repellent sprays, bud caps, or fencing to 
prevent browsing on species that are expected 
to be well adapted to future conditions 
•	 Using tree tops from forest harvest or 
plantings of nonpalatable tree species as 
locations for “hiding” desirable species from 
herbivores to reduce browse pressure
•	 Preventing and removing undesired species, 
including invasive nonnative or aggressive 
native species, in order to reduce competition 
for moisture, nutrients, and light
•	 Restricting recreation or management 
activities that may have the potential to 
damage regeneration 
•	 Partnering with state wildlife agencies to 
monitor herbivore populations or reduce 
populations to appropriate levels. 
9.5. Disfavor species that are 
distinctly maladapted 
A species is considered maladapted when its 
environment changes at a rate beyond the species’ 
ability to adapt and accommodate those changes 
(Johnston 2009). Species at the southern or highest 
elevational extent of their geographic range are 
especially vulnerable to habitat loss, and some 
of these species are expected to decline rapidly 
as conditions change (Iverson 2002, Iverson and 
Prasad 1998). Monitoring or inventory data for some 
species may already show evidence of decline at 
a particular site, although their decline may not be 
attributed to a single cause, but to a combination 
of causes that may include varying degrees of 
interaction with climate change. Models that 
incorporate climate change and species’ life history 
characteristics may identify other species that are 
likely to decline (Landscape Change Research Group 
2014, Wang et al. 2014). Species declines may 
require rapid and aggressive management responses 
to maintain forest cover and ecosystem function 
during periods of transition. In ecosystems where the 
dominant species are likely to decline substantially 
or disappear, this may mean dramatically altering the 
species assemblage through active or passive means. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Removing unhealthy individuals of a declining 
species in order to promote other species 
expected to fare better. This does not imply 
that all individuals should be removed, and 
healthy individuals of declining species can be 
retained as legacies.
•	 Anticipating and managing rapid decline of 
species with negative prognoses in both the 
short and long term (e.g., hemlock) by having 
adequate seed stock of a desired replacement 
species expected to do well under future 
climate conditions
•	 Protecting healthy legacy trees that fail 
to regenerate while deemphasizing their 
importance in the mix of species being 
promoted for regeneration.
9.6. Manage for species and genotypes with 
wide moisture and temperature tolerances 
Inherent scientific uncertainty surrounds climate 
projections at finer spatial scales (Schiermeier 2010), 
making it necessary to base decisions upon a wide 
range of predictions of future climate. Managing for 
a variety of species and genotypes with a wide range 
of moisture and temperature tolerances may better 
52
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
distribute risk than attempting to select species with 
a narrow range of tolerances that are best adapted 
to a specific set of future climate conditions (The 
Nature Conservancy 2009). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
•	 Favoring species that are currently present 
that have wide ecological amplitude and can 
persist under a wide variety of climate and site 
conditions
•	 Planting or otherwise promoting species 
that have a large geographic range, occupy a 
diversity of site conditions, and are projected 
to have increases in suitable habitat and 
productivity 
•	 Promoting long-lived conifers with wide 
ecological tolerances, such as eastern white 
pine
•	 Identifying and promoting species that 
currently occupy a variety of site conditions 
and landscape positions.
9.7. Introduce species that are expected to 
be adapted to future conditions
Maintaining ecosystem function or transitioning 
to a better-adapted system may involve the active 
introduction of species or genotypes to areas that 
they have not historically occupied, often described 
as assisted migration, assisted colonization, or 
managed relocation (Hoegh-Guldberg et al. 2008, 
Hunter 2007, McLachlan et al. 2007, Ricciardi and 
Simberloff 2009). One type of assisted migration, 
sometimes called forestry assisted migration, focuses 
on moving species to new locations in order to 
maintain forest productivity and health under climate 
change (Pedlar et al. 2012, Seddon 2010). Given the 
uncertainty about specific climate conditions in the 
future, the likelihood of success may be increased by 
relocating species with a broad range of tolerances 
(e.g., temperature, moisture) from across a wide 
range of provenances. This approach is generally 
considered less risky than species-rescue assisted 
migration (described in the next section) because it 
moves species to new habitats within their current 
range or over relatively short distances outside their 
current range, and focuses on widespread species 
for which much is known about their life history 
traits (Pedlar et al. 2012). However, there are still 
risks associated with moving any species, such as 
introducing new pests or diseases, the potential for 
hybridization with other closely related species, and 
genetic bottlenecks if the introduced seed source is 
not adequately diverse (Aubin et al. 2011). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Planting oaks, pines, and other drought-
tolerant species on sites within the current 
range that are expected to become drier and 
that have not been historically occupied by 
those species 
•	 Planting flood-tolerant species, such as swamp 
white oak and silver maple, on sites that are 
expected to become more prone to flooding 
and that are currently not occupied by flood-
tolerant species
•	 Planting southern species, such as shortleaf 
pine, north of its current range on suitable sites 
based upon its projected range expansion 
•	 Planting disease-resistant cultivars of elm or 
chestnut where they are likely to have suitable 
habitat.
9.8. Move at-risk species to locations that 
are expected to provide habitat
The climate may be changing more rapidly than 
some species can migrate, and the movement of 
species may be restricted by land use or other 
impediments between areas of suitable habitat 
(Davis and Shaw 2001, Iverson et al. 2004a). This 
can be particularly challenging for species that 
are already rare or threatened. Another subset of 
assisted migration, sometimes called species-rescue 
assisted migration, focuses on avoiding extinction of 
species threatened by climate change (Pedlar et al. 
2012). If current habitat occupied by those species 
is expected to become (or already is) unsuitable, 
assisted migration to potential new suitable habitat 
may be the best option to ensure survival of the 
species (Vitt et al. 2010). Because such species 
are often extremely rare, this type of assisted 
migration can also potentially cause declines in 
the donor populations through removal of seeds or 
53
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
individuals (Aubin et al. 2011). This approach is best 
implemented with great caution, incorporating due 
consideration of the uncertainties inherent in climate 
change, the sparse record of previous examples, and 
continued uncertainties of forest response (Ricciardi 
and Simberloff 2009).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Planting or seeding a rare or threatened plant 
species that is at risk for extinction to a newly 
suitable habitat outside its current range 
•	 Assisting the migration of wildlife around 
barriers from low elevations to higher 
elevations by trapping and releasing in newly 
suitable locations 
•	 Moving plants or animals from a mountaintop 
to another mountaintop north of their current 
range. 
Strategy 10: Realign ecosystems 
after disturbance 
Ecosystems may face significant impacts as a result 
of climate change-related alterations in disturbances, 
including fire, drought, invasive species, and severe 
weather events (Dale et al. 2001). Disturbances 
are primary drivers of many ecosystems, but 
changes in the frequency, intensity, and duration 
of disturbance events may create significant 
management challenges (Lawler 2009). Although 
it is often not possible to predict a disturbance 
event, it is possible to increase overall preparedness 
for large and severe disturbances and prioritize 
rapid response. Many of the best opportunities for 
addressing disturbance-related impacts may occur 
immediately after the disturbance event; having a 
suite of preplanned options in place may facilitate 
an earlier and more flexible response and prevent 
maladaptive responses. In the future there are likely 
to be more frequent situations where a disturbance 
exceeds the resilience of an ecosystem, such that 
even intensive management may be insufficient to 
return the ecosystem to a prior condition. In these 
cases, it may be necessary to reevaluate and adjust 
management goals, which can involve realigning 
the ecosystem to better match new climate and 
environmental conditions (Millar et al. 2007). This 
strategy involves consideration of the full range of 
potential impacts and planning to respond to severe 
ecosystem disturbance and disruption. 
Approaches:
10.1. Promptly revegetate sites after 
disturbance 
Potential increases in the frequency, intensity, and 
extent of large and severe disturbances may disrupt 
regeneration and result in loss of forest cover, 
productivity, or function in the long term. Changing 
conditions are expected to threaten regeneration 
processes for some species, and may result in 
failure of natural regeneration of desired species. 
Prompt revegetation of sites following disturbance 
helps reduce soil loss and erosion, maintain water 
quality, and discourage invasive species in the newly 
exposed areas. These efforts can also provide an 
intervention point for promoting species and systems 
that may be better adapted to future conditions. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Planting a variety of future-adapted species 
during revegetation efforts to ensure diverse 
regeneration and provide options for future 
management 
•	 Creating suitable physical conditions for 
natural regeneration through site preparation 
(e.g., chaining after a burn to promote seed 
establishment) 
•	 Monitoring areas of natural regeneration on a 
more frequent basis, and prioritizing planting 
or seeding where natural regeneration is slow 
to succeed 
•	 Coordinating with the public and other 
organizations to avoid conflicting or 
misguided responses. 
10.2. Allow for areas of natural regeneration 
to test for future-adapted species 
Although many areas may be replanted after severe 
disturbance, some areas can be set aside to allow 
for natural regeneration as a means to identify the 
well-adapted species and populations (Joyce et al. 
2009). The use and monitoring of test or “control” 
54
Chapter 3. Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
areas of natural revegetation following disturbance 
may help managers identify (1) species that are well 
adapted to the changing climate and environmental 
conditions and (2) potential threats in the form of 
invasive species or poor regeneration of desirable 
species. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Using modeling and remote sensing to identify 
areas at low risk for erosion, flooding, or 
other threats that could be set aside for natural 
regeneration
•	 Monitoring naturally revegetated areas for 
changes in species composition, productivity, 
and other factors
•	 Controlling competition from undesirable 
tree species and invasive species to enhance 
regeneration of desired tree species 
•	 Removing small-diameter residual trees to 
reduce competition, increase sunlight, and 
improve seed germination potential
•	 Creating conditions that will be favorable 
for regeneration of desired species, for 
example by removing the duff layer to allow 
germination and sprouting of shortleaf pine.
10.3. Realign significantly disrupted 
ecosystems to meet expected future 
conditions
Some ecosystems may experience such significant 
disruption and decline that desired conditions or 
management objectives appear to be no longer 
feasible. This situation may occur if most species 
in the ecosystem are projected to decline as climate 
changes. Management of these systems may be 
adjusted to create necessary changes in species 
composition and structure to better adapt forests to 
current and anticipated environments, rather than 
to historical predisturbance conditions (Millar et al. 
2007, Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). Developing 
clear plans that establish processes for realigning 
significantly altered ecosystems before engaging in 
active management will allow for more thoughtful 
discussion and better coordination with other 
adaptation responses. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
•	 Allowing a transition in forest type by planting 
future-adapted species within a stand that is 
already declining or is expected to decline 
(e.g., planting jack pine and tamarack in a 
failing white spruce stand, or underplanting 
eastern white pine in the next regeneration cut 
of quaking aspen)
•	 Planting species expected to be better adapted 
to future conditions, especially where natural 
regeneration in forests affected by disturbance 
is widely failing
•	 Allowing nonnative invasive or aggressive 
native species to remain as part of a novel 
mix of species, rather than eradicating these 
species
•	 Creating novel communities “from scratch” 
in areas that have been severely affected 
by natural or human disturbance as part of 
intensive remediation efforts.
55
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies 
and Approaches
Forest management spans a continuum of forests, 
from closed-canopy forests to more open woodlands 
and savannas and barrens, and also includes the 
management of urban forests. Urban forests are an 
integral aspect of green infrastructure, which can 
be defined as “an interconnected network of green 
space that conserves natural ecosystem values and 
functions and provides associated beneﬁts to human 
populations” (Benedict and McMahon 2006: 5). 
Urban forests include more developed “urban” sites 
such as street and yard trees, parks, cemeteries, 
school grounds, corporate campuses, and unmanaged 
green spaces, as well as more “natural” areas such 
as forest preserves and larger urban parks. The 
vitality and interconnectedness of these urban forests 
are critical for many landscape-scale ecological 
processes (such as migration, pollination, and carbon 
sequestration) and the long-term ecological function 
of urban landscapes (Rudnick et al. 2012). This 
chapter puts the adaptation strategies, approaches, 
and tactics laid out in the previous chapter into an 
urban context by recognizing the unique pressures 
placed upon urban forests, such as pollution, 
restricted rooting conditions, and altered soils 
(Box 12). 
This chapter is organized in a similar manner to 
the previous chapter, with broad strategies linked 
to more specific approaches and tactics. The 10 
adaptation strategies are generally arranged to 
start with ideas that focus on resistance adaptation 
options and continue on to ideas that focus more 
on transition, although this arrangement does 
not indicate preference or priority (Chapter 3). 
Approaches are still broad enough that managers 
will need to evaluate and tailor them to meet 
individual management goals. Not all approaches 
can or should be used in every location or situation. 
Tactics are prescriptive actions with specific site 
conditions and objectives in mind. 
Input and feedback on the urban strategies and 
approaches in this chapter came from more 
than 35 members of the Chicago Wilderness1 
Climate Change Task Force and Trees and Green 
Infrastructure Task Force. The lead authors and other 
contributors to this chapter are listed in Appendix 3. 
Members of the task forces include professionals in 
the fields of forest ecology, climate change ecology, 
urban forestry, soil science, urban land management, 
urban ecology, wildlife management, ecological 
restoration, and hydrology. The Chicago Wilderness 
team also provided generalized examples of tactics 
to highlight some possible ways in which each 
approach may be applied in urban forests. 
The menu of tiered urban forestry adaptation 
actions (Box 12) provides practical, relevant 
concepts that can be incorporated into planning 
and decisionmaking. The menu is intended to be 
used in conjunction with the Adaptation Workbook 
(Chapter 5). The example tactics that are provided 
for each adaptation approach are not meant to be 
implemented directly; rather, they are meant to 
provide a sense of how managers could develop 
specific tactics for their management goals and 
site conditions. Additionally, although the urban 
adaptation strategies and approaches were designed 
to directly assist managers, many adaptation actions 
will require or benefit greatly from planning, 
education and outreach, research, or changes in 
policy or infrastructure (Box 13). 
1 Chicago Wilderness is a regional alliance of more 
than 300 nonprofit and Corporate Council member 
organizations that work together to restore local nature 
and improve the quality of life for all living things by 
protecting the lands and waters on which we all depend. 
Learn more at www.chicagowilderness.org.
56
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Box 12
Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches 
Strategy 1. Sustain or restore fundamental 
ecological functions. 
1.1. Maintain or restore soils and nutrient cycling in 
urban areas.
1.2. Maintain or restore hydrology.
1.3. Maintain or restore riparian areas. 
1.4. Reduce competition for moisture, nutrients, 
and light.
1.5. Restore or maintain fire in fire-adapted 
ecosystems.
Strategy 2. Reduce the impact of biological 
stressors.
2.1. Maintain or improve the ability of forests to 
resist pests and pathogens.
2.2. Prevent the introduction and establishment of 
invasive plants and remove existing invasive 
species.
2.3. Manage herbivory to promote regeneration, 
growth, and form of desired species. 
Strategy 3. Reduce the risk and long-term 
impacts of severe disturbances.
3.1. Alter forest structure or composition to reduce 
risk or severity of wildfire. 
3.2. Maintain trees and remove hazards to reduce 
severity or extent of wind and ice damage. 
Strategy 4. Maintain or create refugia.
4.1. Prioritize, maintain, and restore unique sites. 
4.2. Prioritize and maintain sensitive or at-risk 
species or communities.
4.3. Establish artificial reserves for at-risk and 
displaced species.
Strategy 5. Maintain and enhance species and 
structural diversity.
5.1. Promote diverse age structure.
5.2. Maintain and restore diversity of native 
species.
5.3. Retain biological legacies.
5.4. Establish reserves to maintain ecosystem 
diversity. 
Strategy 6. Increase ecosystem redundancy 
across the landscape.
6.1. Manage habitats over a range of sites and 
conditions.
6.2. Expand or buffer the boundaries of reserves to 
increase diversity.
Strategy 7. Promote landscape connectivity.
7.1. Reduce landscape fragmentation.
7.2. Maintain and create habitat corridors through 
reforestation or restoration.
Strategy 8. Maintain and enhance genetic 
diversity.
8.1. Use seeds, germplasm, and other genetic 
material from across a greater geographic 
range.
8.2. Favor existing genotypes that are better 
adapted to future conditions.
8.3. Use new genotypes that are better adapted to 
future threats and conditions.
Strategy 9. Facilitate composition adjustments 
through species transitions.
9.1. Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be adapted to future conditions.
9.2. Establish or encourage new mixes of native 
species.
9.3. Select tree species to match current and future 
site conditions. 
9.4. Protect future-adapted seedlings and saplings.
9.5. Disfavor species that are distinctly 
maladapted.
9.6. Manage for species or genotypes with wide 
moisture and temperature tolerances.
9.7. Introduce species that are expected to be 
adapted to future conditions.
9.8. Move at-risk species to locations that are 
expected to provide habitat.
Strategy 10. Realign urban ecosystems after 
disturbance. 
10.1. Promptly revegetate sites after disturbance.
10.2. Prioritize remediation of remaining trees 
following disturbance. 
10.3. Realign significantly disrupted ecosystems to 
meet expected future conditions.
57
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Box 13
Adaptation Strategies for Planning and Policy
The Adaptation Strategies and Approaches for land 
managers have been designed for implementation 
by land managers and project planning teams. 
However, some strategies and approaches 
require (or are facilitated by) planning, education 
and outreach, research, or changes in policy 
or infrastructure. Some of the most applicable 
strategies and approaches that fall into this area 
are listed below:
•	 Limiting use of known invaders in horticultural 
plantings in and around natural areas through 
partnerships with homeowners, municipalities, 
and park districts
•	 Working with local nurseries and growers’ 
associations to draw attention to potential 
impacts and offer alternative species to those 
that may be potentially harmful or invasive
•	 Promoting at-risk species currently used in the 
horticultural trade and developing sources and 
markets for additional at-risk species where 
appropriate, especially southern species at the 
northern edge of their range 
•	 Developing cultivars of native tree species that 
are well adapted to different (or a variety of) 
urban sites, working with nurseries and retailers 
to make them readily available, and promoting 
their use in urban plantings
•	 Prioritizing creation of new parks, easements, 
or natural areas centered on areas that have 
high levels of biological legacies.
Urban Adaptation Strategies and 
Approaches
Strategy 1: Sustain or restore 
fundamental ecological functions 
The changing climate may alter the complex 
interactions among climate, vegetation, and 
landforms, resulting in changes in hydrology, 
soil quality, and nutrient cycling. Urban areas 
often involve further complications because of 
the greater likelihood that human activities have 
already significantly altered ecosystem functioning 
and will continue to do so. Urban conditions are 
often characterized by difficult growing conditions, 
including impermeable surfaces, air and water 
pollution, frequent human interaction, and small soil 
volumes. Existing guidelines and best management 
practices for forest management describe actions 
that can be used to reduce or reverse impacts to soil 
and water. Many of these actions are also likely to 
be beneficial in the context of adaptation, although 
additional effort may be required to maintain 
ecosystem function in urban areas. 
Approaches: 
1.1. Maintain or restore soils and nutrient 
cycling in urban areas
Most urban tree problems are related to poor soils 
or growing conditions (Patterson and Mader 1982), 
which could exacerbate stresses induced by climate 
change. Urban soils are often highly disturbed, 
lack essential nutrients, and commonly include 
detrimental elements such as chemicals, concrete, 
asphalt, and other foreign matter that limit the 
long-term viability of a tree. Trees are dependent 
on adequate soil characteristics such as rooting 
volume, organic matter content, drainage capacity, 
and nutrient availability to achieve healthy maturity. 
Prior to planting a tree, soil and site analyses can be 
conducted to determine if the soil content, texture, 
or volume would meet the long-term needs of a 
growing healthy tree.
58
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Removing invasive species that have negative 
impacts on soil processes or undesirable 
feedbacks to nutrient inputs (e.g., European 
buckthorn; Heneghan et al. 2006)
•	 Adding organic soil amendments (e.g., mulch, 
biochar) to urban sites undergoing restoration 
or revegetation.
Developed urban sites
•	 Providing and developing adequate soil 
volume, texture, structure, and organic matter 
to support healthy tree growth (e.g., Watson 
and Himelick 2013)
•	 Removing and replacing the soil if toxicity or 
chemical levels are too high 
•	 Amending soil with organic or structural 
material to improve drainage, pH, and rooting
•	 Installing a layer of mulch over the root zone 
of the tree to help retain moisture and mimic a 
natural growing environment.
1.2. Maintain or restore hydrology
Changes in climate may increase runoff during 
heavy storm events in some areas. Impermeable 
surfaces are more common in the urban setting 
and direct water into water bodies through storm 
sewers. Stormwater thus bypasses vegetation and 
other natural features that could slow water flow 
and reduce pollution. Vegetation and associated 
ecosystem features can filter, intercept, and absorb 
stormwater, reducing runoff and improving the 
quality of water reaching streams and lakes. Water 
is intercepted by the tree canopy and held by the 
root systems of herbaceous and woody plants and 
associated soil organic material. In highly developed 
areas where large areas of vegetation are not 
feasible, engineered features can also be used to 
increase permeability and help redistribute water. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Restoring natural hydrology where appropriate 
by removing drain tiles or other remnant 
hydrological modifications
•	 Restoring native communities and ecosystem 
components (e.g., natural groundcover, litter 
layer, coarse woody debris) in riparian areas
•	 Adjusting trail location and design to 
minimize erosion under more intense surface 
runoff.
Developed urban sites
•	 Directing runoff into natural features with 
herbaceous and woody plant cover to reduce 
runoff and nonpoint source pollution, while 
still providing outflow for excess water 
•	 Connecting natural features such as planting 
beds, bioswales, rain gardens, and sequential 
stormwater treatments to other natural systems
•	 Using permeable paving, suspended surfaces, 
or Silva Cells (Deeproot Green Infrastructure, 
San Francisco, CA) to enable runoff to collect 
and water trees. 
1.3. Maintain or restore riparian areas 
Much of the forest cover in urban regions is located 
in riparian areas. Forests located within riparian 
areas serve important ecosystem functions, such as 
decreasing soil erosion, filtering water, and storing 
and recycling organic matter and nutrients (Barling 
and Moore 1994, Brandt et al. 2012, Castelle et al. 
1994). Trees in riparian areas also provide shade, 
which helps to buffer stream temperatures. Forested 
riparian areas can serve as corridors for wildlife and 
plant species migrating across otherwise fragmented 
landscapes (Heller and Zavaleta 2009). The use 
of protective guidelines, such as best management 
practices and riparian management zones, can 
help to prevent damage to riparian areas during 
management activities. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Restoring or promoting a diversity of tree 
and plant species in order to increase stream 
shading, provide a source of woody debris, 
stabilize the soil, and provide habitat and 
connectivity for wildlife 
•	 Restoring or reforesting riparian areas adjacent 
to developed areas in order to reduce erosion 
and nutrient loading into adjacent water bodies
59
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
•	 Managing water levels to supply proper 
soil moisture to vegetation adjacent to the 
stream during critical time periods, either 
by manipulation of existing dams and water 
control structures or restoration of natural 
dynamic water fluctuations.
Developed urban sites
•	 Reclaiming developed sites and restoring or 
reforesting riparian areas in order to reduce 
erosion and nutrient loading into adjacent 
water bodies.
1.4. Reduce competition for moisture, 
nutrients, and light
Climate change will alter competitive dynamics 
among species and is likely to result in changes 
in species composition and mortality patterns. 
Reducing competition for resources can enhance the 
persistence of desired species and increase the ability 
of ecosystems to cope with the direct and indirect 
effects of climate change (Dwyer et al. 2010, Evans 
and Perschel 2009). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Managing buffer areas adjoining natural 
sites to limit potential impacts from invasive 
species that could have an adverse competitive 
impact on existing species
•	 Selecting species that will be strong 
competitors on restored or reclaimed sites. 
Developed urban sites
•	 Removing mowed turf from the rooting zone 
of trees and replacing it with organic mulch 
or other plants that require lower water and 
nutrient inputs
•	 Removing nonnative invasive species to 
reduce competition, and to improve native 
species diversity.
1.5. Restore or maintain fire in fire-adapted 
ecosystems
Fire management can be difficult in urban settings 
due to potential impacts to the built environment 
and public health. Where possible, fire can be 
an important management strategy in supporting 
ecosystem function and resilience. Where ecological 
or social constraints limit the application of 
prescribed fire, alternative management strategies 
(i.e., fire surrogates) can provide similar benefits. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas 
•	 Using prescribed fire to maintain fire-adapted 
ecosystems and reduce risk of fire spread into 
the wildland-urban interface
•	 Using prescribed fire during suitable 
conditions (periods of low air pollution, low 
winds, low temperatures) to avoid negative 
impacts and potential for unwanted spread 
•	 Incorporating understory thinning, mowing, or 
other fire surrogate strategies to support native 
ecosystems where fire management is not 
possible. 
Developed urban sites
•	 Managing fire-adapted urban trees and 
ecosystems using fire-surrogate treatments 
such as mowing, hand weeding, and applying 
herbicide. 
Strategy 2: Reduce the impact of 
biological stressors
Climate change may result in increases in biological 
stressors such as pests, pathogens, and invasive 
plant species. Urban areas are especially prone to 
attacks by nonnative pests and pathogens. Pests 
that are currently limited by cold temperatures or 
growing season (e.g., hemlock woolly adelgid in 
New England) could also affect urban areas sooner 
than surrounding rural areas due to the effects of the 
urban heat island. Reducing or eliminating stressors 
that might make a tree more susceptible to new or 
existing pests or pathogens will be important to 
maintaining forests in urban areas (Urban 2008). 
Approaches: 
2.1. Maintain or improve the ability of forests 
to resist pests and pathogens
Many forest pests and pathogens are expected 
to expand or shift their ranges under climate 
change, and climate change may also increase the 
susceptibility of urban forests to damage from pests 
60
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
and pathogens through increased stress. Avoiding 
the introduction of pests is often not possible, but 
certain tactics may increase resistance of trees and 
forests to these stressors. The tactics are similar to 
those outlined for nonurban forests. The primary 
difference is likely to be a much greater ability and 
incentive to manage individual trees in urban forests.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Developed urban sites
•	 Selecting species and cultivars that are less 
susceptible to pests and pathogens 
•	 Treating susceptible trees with pesticides and 
fungicides when appropriate and feasible.
All urban sites
•	 Promoting diversity across taxonomic levels 
by reducing the concentration of any one 
genus, species, or cultivar in order to reduce 
the risk from a selective pest or pathogen 
•	 Increasing age diversity to help avoid large 
concentrations of declining trees that may be 
more susceptible to certain pests or pathogens
•	 Monitoring for new invaders so action can be 
taken before the pest or pathogen becomes 
established
•	 Encouraging the use of best management 
practices that limit the spread or level of 
damage caused by pests or pathogens
•	 Participating in a rapid response system for 
pest and pathogen detection including training 
volunteers and local organizations to assist 
with identifying pests and pathogens.
2.2. Prevent the introduction and 
establishment of invasive plants and remove 
existing invasive species
Climate change is likely to increase the rate of 
spread of invasive species (Chornesky et al. 2005, 
Millar et al. 2007). Early detection and rapid 
response will be very important as opportunities 
for new invaders increase. Urban areas are 
especially susceptible to introduction and spread of 
invasives because of horticultural practices, nutrient 
loading, high levels of disturbance, and moderated 
microclimate.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Managing and monitoring natural area buffers 
to limit access of invasive plants to high-
quality areas
•	 Limiting the spread of invasive species 
introduced through recreational activities (e.g., 
boot brushes at trailheads). 
All urban sites
•	 Responding rapidly with stewards and 
volunteers to limit the spread of invasive 
species upon introduction
•	 Limiting use of known invaders in 
horticultural plantings (especially in and 
around natural areas) through partnerships 
with homeowners, municipalities, and park 
districts
•	 Training local land managers, landowners, 
volunteers, and organizations to recognize 
possible threats and to report them to 
appropriate agencies such as the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture or Cooperative 
Weed Management Areas 
•	 Working with local resources such as master 
gardener programs to educate the public about 
potential impacts and how to report them to 
the appropriate agencies.
2.3. Manage herbivory to promote 
regeneration, growth, and form of desired 
species 
Urban areas can be heavily populated with 
mammalian herbivores such as rabbits and deer. 
These herbivores can hinder regeneration and 
growth of desired plant species, and populations of 
some herbivorous species may grow in some areas 
as winters become less severe. Protecting desired 
species from herbivory has the obvious benefit of 
directly reducing grazing damage, but can also be 
important in fostering resilience to other stressors, 
which are expected to be exacerbated by climate 
change. This approach may be combined with other 
approaches that release advance regeneration or 
stimulate new regeneration.
61
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
All urban sites
•	 Applying repellant or installing fences, bud 
caps, and other physical barriers to prevent 
herbivory
•	 Promoting abundant regeneration of multiple 
species in order to supply more browse than 
herbivores are expected to consume.
Strategy 3: Reduce the risk and long-
term impacts of severe disturbances
Climate change may increase the likelihood and risk 
of severe disturbances, which will have significant 
effects on urban trees. Urban tree failures can cause 
severe property damage, electric outages (Simpson 
and Van Bossuyt 1996), and injuries or fatalities to 
human beings. From 1995 to 2007, there were 407 
tree-related human fatalities in the United States 
(Schmindlin 2009). In developed urban sites, these 
potential impacts make it essential for risk to be 
managed at the individual tree level. Factors such 
as tree form, size, condition, species, wind speed, 
pruning, and wood material properties affect tree 
resistance to storm damage (Duryea et al. 2007, 
Francis 2000, King 1986, Putz et al. 1983). Urban 
foresters must balance the risk of tree failure, 
including the danger to people and property, with 
the loss of benefits when shade trees are removed. 
This is especially important for large trees, which 
provide greater benefits and take a long time to 
replace (Miller 1997). Priorities are somewhat 
different in urban natural areas, where avoiding risk 
is more associated with minimizing disturbances 
that are potentially devastating to tree communities, 
especially those that could affect urban populations 
and the built environment (e.g., fires spreading from 
natural areas). 
Approaches:
3.1. Alter forest structure or composition to 
reduce risk or severity of wildfire 
Risk of wildfire is likely to increase in urban 
natural areas in much the same fashion as in 
nonurban forests. However, due to their location 
in the wildland-urban interface, these areas are of 
especially high priority in risk reduction. Developed 
landscapes in the wildland-urban interface may 
incorporate somewhat different principles of risk 
reduction through altering forest structure and 
composition, such as the Firewise methods of 
creating defensible space around structures and 
using less-combustible landscaping (see http://www.
firewise.org).
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
Urban natural areas
•	 Using prescribed fire (where possible) or 
fire-surrogate treatments to manage the woody 
understory to reduce the risk of catastrophic 
wildfire
•	 Cooperating with and training municipal 
firefighting authorities to respond quickly and 
appropriately to fires in natural areas.
Developed urban sites
•	 Avoiding highly flammable species in 
plantings near natural areas
•	 Avoiding the use of highly flammable 
landscape materials (e.g., pine straw, shredded 
bark mulch) near buildings located near 
natural areas.
3.2. Maintain trees and remove hazards to 
reduce severity or extent of wind and ice 
damage 
Storm damage from wind and ice can be particularly 
problematic in urban areas because of the risk to life 
and property, and both could become more severe 
because of changes in climate. When an urban forest 
undergoes severe disturbances such as strong wind 
and ice storms, downed limbs and trees can result 
in loss of electric service, displacement of families 
and businesses, and blockage of emergency vehicles. 
Structural pruning can mitigate these safety and 
infrastructure issues by fostering mechanically 
strong branch structure (American National 
Standards Institute 2008). Although intensive hazard 
management is common in developed areas, it 
may also take place in urban natural areas where 
individual tree management is necessary or possible, 
such as in high-use areas or near infrastructure. 
Even when trees are maintained, however, some 
limb and tree failure can occur. Promptly removing 
62
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
these hazards can help mitigate the severity of the 
disturbance and associated negative public reaction. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Monitoring for hazard trees near the stand 
edge and removing them if there is a target 
(e.g., a playground, hiking paths, or road) 
present
•	 “Softening” stand edges (i.e., reducing the 
edge influence at regenerating edges and 
minimizing abrupt transitions) to reduce 
susceptibility to wind damage. 
Developed urban sites
•	 Maintaining trees on a regular pruning cycle 
and using American National Standards 
Institute A300 (2008) standards and best 
management practices as guidelines for tree 
care and maintenance
•	 Removing hazard trees as quickly as possible.
Strategy 4: Maintain or create refugia
Refugia are areas that have resisted ecological and 
climatic changes occurring elsewhere; these areas 
often provide suitable habitat for relict populations 
of species that were previously more widespread 
(Keppel et al. 2012, Millar et al. 2007). Despite their 
rarity in urban areas, refugia can still be important 
for species of conservation concern. For many 
taxa, they may offer the best chances for survival 
under climate change. Identification of refugia is an 
important first step toward their conservation under 
climate change in urban areas (Keppel et al. 2012).
Approaches:
4.1. Prioritize, maintain, and restore 
unique sites 
In urban areas, many forests and natural ecosystems 
have been degraded or developed into other land 
uses. As a result, forest ecosystems are relatively 
uncommon on the landscape and may already act 
as refugia by providing habitat for species lost from 
surrounding areas due to human-caused disturbance. 
Sites may be of particular interest for one or more 
reasons. They may currently support high levels of 
biodiversity. They may contain a diverse range of 
geophysical diversity that is likely to sustain and 
promote species diversity over the long term. Or 
they may have a combination of high biological 
and geophysical diversity. Sites with several 
topographically related microclimates and local 
permeability may provide the best chance for species 
responding to climate change (Anderson et al. 2012). 
Restoration or reclamation projects may be needed 
to increase the representation of these habitats on the 
landscape.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Protecting existing habitat remnants from 
disturbance, particularly if they are in areas 
that may provide future climate refugia
•	 Restoring unique habitats that may be less 
susceptible to climate change or using 
reclamation efforts to create new patches of 
such habitats on suitable sites
•	 Identifying and protecting areas of high 
geophysical or topographic diversity with 
the expectation that these areas may provide 
a range of climatic options to species with 
diverse requirements.
Developed urban sites
•	 Identifying urban plantings that could serve as 
refugia.
4.2. Prioritize and maintain sensitive or at-
risk species or communities
Maintenance of sensitive and at-risk species or 
communities in situ as long as possible could 
help the species or communities persist until new 
long-term sites can be located and populated. 
Restoring and protecting historical remnant areas 
of ecologically significant species or communities 
may be helpful in some urban natural areas. More 
developed urban areas often contain engineered 
habitats for a variety of native and nonnative species, 
and can also play an important role in providing 
habitat. Artificial reserves are addressed in 
approach 4.3. 
63
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Maintaining species and structural elements 
that provide habitat for at-risk species
•	 Increasing buffer areas to protect at-risk 
communities from disturbance and invasion
•	 Rerouting roads or trails away from at-risk 
communities in order to reduce damage from 
traffic or reduce the risk of invasive species 
introduction.
Developed urban sites 
•	 Establishing and supporting development and 
management ordinances and regulations that 
protect and reduce impacts to high-quality 
remnants and features. 
4.3. Establish artificial reserves for at-risk 
and displaced species
At-risk species are often incorporated into urban 
reserves (botanical gardens, arboretums, and 
municipal parks) and urban plantings (e.g., street 
trees, backyard gardens), and could in some cases 
be included in restoration or reclamation projects 
(e.g., urban riverways). Some uncommon to rare 
tree species, such as Kentucky coffeetree, blue ash, 
and American yellowwood, are already included 
in some urban plantings. Additional at-risk species 
(or species that provide habitat for at-risk species) 
could be added to urban planting lists to increase 
their representation in the landscape. Providing new 
artificial habitat for at-risk species could help sustain 
them under climate change. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Collecting seeds and other genetic material 
of at-risk species to contribute to a genetic 
repository
•	 Including at-risk species (or habitat for at-risk 
species) in restoration or reclamation projects 
•	 Planting individuals in a protected location 
that is expected to provide suitable habitat into 
the future in a natural setting, such as a stand 
on a partner’s property.
Developed urban sites
•	 Using local conservatories, arboretums, 
botanical gardens, and parks to cultivate 
species after climate change makes natural 
regeneration challenging for that species 
•	 Including at-risk species (or species that 
provide habitat for at-risk wildlife) in urban 
park, street, or campus plantings whenever 
possible or feasible (e.g., planting endangered 
southern species in parks).
Strategy 5: Maintain and enhance 
species and structural diversity
Promoting species and structural diversity is as 
important in urban forests as in nonurbanized forest 
landscapes, if not more so. Urban areas are highly 
susceptible to introduction of nonnative pests 
and pathogens and often exhibit high occurrence 
of invasive plant species (Dreistadt et al. 1990, 
McKinney 2002). Urban forests have been 
decimated because of a lack of species diversity 
in the face of pest introductions (Poland and 
McCullough 2006, Santamour 2004). Widespread 
acknowledgment of this problem has led to 
guidelines focused on diversification of the urban 
forest (Santamour 2004). However, urban areas 
contain difficult sites, and only a limited set of tree 
species may be able to tolerate the conditions of 
many of these sites (Whitlow and Bassuk 1987). 
Species and structural diversity are especially 
important as a climate adaptation strategy because 
urban habitats (both natural areas and urban land 
uses) are likely to be stressed in the future in many 
ways, some of which will be unforeseeable (Gill 
et al. 2007, Kirshen et al. 2008). A diverse set 
of species, carefully selected to match the urban 
environment, will be more likely to maintain 
adequate forest cover and ecosystem services under 
a changing and increasingly variable climate.
64
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Approaches:
5.1. Promote diverse age structure
A diverse age structure can be beneficial because 
trees are most vulnerable to specific stressors at 
different ages. For example, droughts are typically 
more damaging to seedlings than to mature trees, 
whereas older individuals may be more susceptible 
to damage from wind events. In many cases, urban 
forests are dominated by trees that persisted on the 
landscape as it became urbanized, and many of these 
trees are reaching the end of their lifespan (Fahey et 
al. 2012). Active management may be necessary to 
promote regeneration and development of younger 
age classes. Furthermore, in developed urban areas, 
managers often focus on individual trees, which are 
removed upon death or damage and replanted as 
soon as resources permit. Age class diversification 
may consequently be less straightforward than in 
natural forests. However, a diverse age structure 
in these locations could increase the habitat value 
of the urban forest and spread out tree losses from 
natural mortality (Clark et al. 1997, Millar et al. 
2007). In developed urban sites, some planting and 
tree removal practices could help develop a more 
diverse tree age structure both within and among 
management units.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Using group selection to promote multiaged 
forest stands 
•	 Restoring or creating conditions that allow 
tree seedlings to thrive by removing nonnative 
species in the shrub layer and canopy trees.
Developed urban sites
•	 Planting replacement trees in anticipation of 
mortality from emerald ash borer and before 
actual loss of canopy trees in order to diversify 
age structures
•	 Rotating planting schedules so that removal 
and replanting is dispersed geographically, 
thereby avoiding complete removal or planting 
within a single area (e.g., street or park) during 
a single year.
5.2. Maintain and restore diversity of native 
species
The reasoning and tactics for promoting native 
species diversity in urban natural areas are 
essentially the same as those for nonurban 
forests—that is, diverse communities may be less 
vulnerable to climate change impacts because risk 
is distributed among multiple species. The need for 
and difficulty of promoting native species diversity 
in urban systems may be greater, however, because 
of higher pressure from nonnative invasive species 
and more-extensive planting and promotion of 
nonnative species (McKinney 2002). Transitioning 
the urban forest to higher dominance by a diversity 
of native species would have multiple important 
positive effects on the adaptation potential of the 
urban ecosystem (Clark et al. 1997). Native species 
planted in urban locations can provide important 
habitat value for wildlife species; areas such as parks 
may be able to emulate a functioning ecosystem 
to some degree and support functioning food webs 
(Marzluff et al. 2001, Nowak and Dwyer 2007). 
These ecosystems may also be able to provide 
migration corridors through intensely fragmented 
urban landscapes (also see strategy 8) (Savard et al. 
2000).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Restoring or creating conditions that allow for 
successful regeneration of a diverse mix of 
native species, such as removing older native 
and nonnative trees to open the canopy 
•	 Planting desired native species within an 
area that is otherwise expected to regenerate 
naturally in order to add diversity. 
Developed urban sites
•	 Promoting native tree species in urban tree 
planting lists, especially those with high 
habitat value for wildlife species (e.g., oaks) 
(Clark et al. 1997)
•	 Using native plant species as groundcover or 
horticultural plantings in the rooting zone of 
urban trees
65
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
•	 Planting species with diverse timing of 
phenological events (e.g., flowering, fruiting, 
leaf out, leaf drop) to provide necessary 
resources over a longer time frame to forest-
dependent wildlife species (Walther et al. 
2002).
5.3. Retain biological legacies
In urban areas, pre-urban legacy trees often provide 
much of the ecosystem services and functional value 
(e.g., carbon storage, shading, and habitat) of the 
urban forest (Fahey et al. 2012). Preservation of 
these features will be essential to adapting the urban 
forest to future climates, because old trees may have 
superior genetics and they may play a valuable role 
in helping species persist on the landscape (Gunn 
2009). Tactics for urban areas may differ from those 
used in rural forests managed for timber because 
there is rarely pressure to harvest or salvage in urban 
areas. However, legacy retention is often difficult 
or impossible because of development pressure. 
Despite the challenge, the retention of legacy trees 
can be helpful to promote the habitat value that these 
features provide. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Retaining snags and downed trees whenever 
possible (i.e., those that pose no threat 
to people or infrastructure) during post-
disturbance cleanup operations
•	 Prioritizing creation of new parks, easements, 
or natural areas centered on areas that have 
biological legacies.
Developed urban sites
•	 Retaining legacy trees from the pre-urban 
landscape during development or redesign of 
urban areas
•	 Retaining snags within parks where they are 
unlikely to pose a risk to the public in order to 
provide wildlife habitat.
5.4. Establish reserves to maintain 
ecosystem diversity 
Although urban areas are highly developed, some 
natural areas may remain to serve as reserves. 
Reserves are traditionally defined as natural areas 
with little to no harvest activity that do not exclude 
management of fire or other natural disturbance 
processes (Halpin 1997). In a highly fragmented 
urban area, this definition may need to be adjusted to 
reflect the realities of what is possible on small tracts 
of land surrounded by development. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Identifying areas with high diversity (species, 
topography, soils, or other factors) or other 
desirable attributes that can be set aside as a 
reserve, perhaps using easements or similar 
tools 
•	 Prioritizing protection of areas where riparian 
corridors connect core areas to other reserves 
and habitats.
Strategy 6: Increase ecosystem 
redundancy across the landscape
Urbanized landscapes are expected to undergo 
especially intense alteration of environmental 
conditions with future climate change (McCarthy 
et al. 2010). Increasing the number, extent, and 
representation across land uses and ownerships of 
a variety of ecosystem types will help to make the 
persistence of these ecosystem types more likely. 
Collaboration among an especially wide variety 
of stakeholders will be necessary to promote this 
strategy in urbanized landscapes.
Approaches:
6.1. Manage habitats over a range of sites 
and conditions 
Climate change impacts on ecosystems are likely 
to differ greatly depending on position within 
the urban-rural gradient, specific land use, and 
ownership and management type (Iakovoglou et 
al. 2001, McDonnell et al. 2008). Creating diverse 
combinations of topographic position, land use, and 
ownership for each ecosystem type may provide 
66
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
more opportunity for one of those locations to be 
buffered from change because of the unique site 
conditions (Colding 2007, Millar et al. 2007). 
Increasing the number of existing preserved habitats 
and ecosystems represented in urban landscapes 
is likely to be difficult (although not necessarily 
impossible) as most land in urban areas already 
has a designated land use and most undeveloped 
ecosystems are already in reserve systems. However, 
many urban areas have significant levels of land 
abandonment; restoration and reclamation efforts 
in these locations could be targeted to produce a 
diversity of ecosystems and habitats across the 
landscape (Colding 2007).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Restoring native communities that are 
underrepresented in the landscape, taking 
advantage of a variety of different landscape 
positions, ownerships, and other site factors
•	 Managing for multiple ecosystems and 
communities within larger natural areas—but 
without reducing potential habitat patch size.
Developed urban sites
•	 Managing for underrepresented species, 
communities, and ecosystems in urban habitats 
(especially sites such as parks and institutional 
campuses) to offset potential losses elsewhere 
(e.g., small areas of wetland habitat within 
developed areas)
•	 Seeking and building opportunities for 
collaboration to connect species, communities, 
and ecosystems at a larger scale, such as 
intergovernmental agreements or ordinances.
6.2. Expand or buffer the boundaries of 
reserves to increase diversity
Reserve expansion can help buffer forest interior 
habitats from a variety of edge effects, such as 
changing temperature and moisture conditions and 
increased exposure to disturbances (Hobbs 2002). 
Providing buffering from edge effects may be 
especially important in the harsh environment of 
the urban landscape. Buffer functions can include 
benefits such as reduced direct runoff exposure, 
reduced weed pressure (if weeds are managed in the 
buffer), and stabilization of banks next to flowing 
water. These benefits may become increasingly 
important as climate-related stresses increase on 
forest interior habitats. However, reserve expansion 
is often extremely difficult and costly in urban areas 
so buffering through management practices in urban 
habitats and creation of easements are likely to be 
necessary (Rissman et al. 2007). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Expanding urban natural areas or developing 
easements in or adjacent to areas of 
underrepresented habitat whenever feasible to 
create buffers (e.g., create streamside buffers, 
purchase adjacent land, limit roadside damage 
to the edges of properties)
•	 Restoring or managing newly acquired reserve 
or easement areas to promote habitat diversity.
Developed urban sites
•	 Managing urban areas adjacent to natural 
areas to create buffer or transitional habitats, 
by either mimicking the natural habitat to 
whatever extent possible or mimicking a 
transitional habitat (e.g., using parks as 
“savanna-like” edge to forested natural area).
Strategy 7: Promote landscape 
connectivity
Minimizing fragmentation and maximizing 
connectivity are both important as adaptation tools 
in connecting urban areas to the larger landscape. 
Species migrations and gene flow are essential 
in climate-mediated species range shifts. Urban 
areas dominate some of the most important coastal 
migration corridors in the northeastern United 
States. To maintain these areas as migration and 
dispersal corridors in the future, it will be important 
to minimize additional fragmentation, manage 
existing corridors to provide high-quality migration 
habitat, and create new corridors to connect reserves 
or fragmented habitat in urban areas. 
67
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and ApproachesR115
Approaches: 
7.1. reduce landscape fragmentation 
Development pressure will probably continue to 
increase the level of fragmentation on the landscape 
in most urban areas. Avoiding fragmentation of 
the few remaining large parcels will instead be the 
likely emphasis. For example, in the Chicago, IL, 
region most remaining forested parcels are less than 
100 acres in area and many of the remaining units 
are privately owned or span multiple landowners 
and uses (Fahey et al. 2015). Therefore, limiting 
fragmentation in urban areas like Chicago will be 
most effective with cooperation from a spectrum of 
the landowners in the region. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	
Establishing partnerships and coordinating
acquisition of conserved forest lands or
riparian areas to achieve common management
goals
•	
Acquiring property for preserves or creating
easements on private landholdings adjacent or
close to existing natural areas.
Developed urban sites
•	
Managing areas adjacent to natural areas to
mimic the habitat and ecosystem structure
of the natural areas to create larger areas of
habitat that are unfragmented in some respects
(e.g., continuous canopy cover in residential
areas adjacent to a natural area)
•	
Establishing incentives or ordinances, or
a combination, that enable collaboration
between landowners to encourage cooperation
in development, design, and management
strategies that reduce fragmentation and
extend natural areas and ecosystem services.
7.2. Maintain and create habitat corridors 
through reforestation or restoration
Corridors that connect fragmented areas will help 
build resilience in ecological communities and will 
be essential to those landscapes acting as species 
migration corridors in response to climate change. 
Their presence will also help to minimize the effects 
of climate change on species whose habitat patches 
may be damaged or destroyed. In urban areas 
these corridors are both especially valuable and 
especially vulnerable (to development, degradation, 
or fragmentation) (Bryant 2006). Management 
strategies that protect existing corridors or create 
new ones through restoration or reclamation will be 
valuable in maintaining urban landscapes as regional 
migration corridors.
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
Urban natural areas
•	
Using urban tree canopy and other geospatial
data to identify new and existing migration
corridors
•	
Acquiring property for preserves or creating
easements on private landholdings to create
corridors between existing natural areas
•	
Managing natural areas that act as corridors
to promote their maximum habitat value (e.g.,
by removing invasive species) and prioritizing
management in those locations
•	
Creating artificial corridors (e.g., safe road
crossings) at key dispersal or migration
locations for wildlife (Beier and Noss 1998).
Developed urban sites
•	
Managing areas that could act as corridors
between natural areas to mimic habitat and
ecosystem structure of the natural habitat (e.g.,
by maintaining or promoting oak canopy cover
in a residential development between two
oak woodland natural areas while avoiding
the creation of ecological traps in these areas
(Battin 2004)
•	
Managing riparian corridors within otherwise
highly developed landscapes to provide habitat
value and ecosystem services (Groffman et al.
2003).
68
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Strategy 8: Maintain and enhance 
genetic diversity 
Reduced gene flow of remnant native populations 
and the prevalence of genetically identical cultivars 
in urban areas contribute to a reduction in genetic 
diversity of the urban forest. Urban natural areas 
are heavily fragmented, which can cause reduced 
gene flow and lead to a decline in genetic diversity 
(Young et al. 1993). Morphological uniformity is a 
priority in street and park trees. Most street and park 
trees are cultivars, or are grown from seeds that are 
sourced from a small number of parents to ensure 
that trees have predictable growth, survivorship, 
and tolerances. At the same time, morphological 
uniformity often comes at the expense of genetic 
diversity, and in changing conditions, a lack of 
genetic diversity may prove to be deleterious to 
long-term survivorship (Raupp et al. 2006). For 
example, if all of the maple trees in an area are a 
single cultivar, they will probably react to climate 
change in a nearly identical manner. Increasing 
genetic diversity in the urban forest will ensure that 
some individuals are better equipped to withstand 
climate-induced stressors.
Approaches: 
8.1. Use seeds, germplasm, and other 
genetic material from across a greater 
geographic range
Although seeds from local sources may be the 
best adapted for an area currently, they may be 
maladapted to the changing climate in coming 
decades (Vitt et al. 2010). Alternatively, seeds that 
are native to areas with a climate similar to the 
projected climate of the target region may have 
higher survivorship than local seeds if other habitat 
factors (e.g., soils) are also suitable (Pedlar et al. 
2012). In addition, the unique climate in an urban 
center may already necessitate a different set of 
genetic material than for more pristine natural 
areas. Trials can help ensure that seedlings from 
distant areas will thrive in a new environment 
before large-scale plantings are undertaken. Other 
risks associated with introducing seeds from distant 
sources include the potential for also introducing 
exotic pests and diseases, or the possibility that the 
introduced species may become invasive, hybridize 
with other local species, or cause outbreeding 
depression (Ricciardi and Simberloff 2009, Vitt et al. 
2010). These risks are reduced, but not eliminated, 
when a species is moved within its native range 
(Pedlar et al. 2012)
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
All urban sites
•	 Using climate change projections to determine 
what region currently has a climate that is 
similar to the expected future climate in the 
target area and sourcing seeds from this area
•	 Creating a dialogue with nurseries and 
growers to ensure that seeds are being selected 
from healthy trees in areas that have a climate 
that is similar to the target area’s expected 
climate
•	 Using mapping programs to track the origin 
of seed stocks and monitor their success to 
inform seed sourcing decisions from in the 
future
•	 Sourcing seeds from a variety of areas to 
increase overall genetic diversity
•	 Planting and producing individuals collected 
or propagated from a variety of sites 
(including drought- and flood-prone areas) 
because of uncertainty in future conditions.
8.2. Favor existing genotypes that are better 
adapted to future conditions
Urban trees are generally selected for their shape, 
height, pest and disease tolerance, and tolerance of 
harsh urban conditions. However, other factors such 
as tolerance of heat, drought, wind, or flooding may 
become more important under changing climate 
conditions. Some individuals in a diverse forest 
may already possess genotypes that make them 
more resistant to pests, drought, or other climate-
related changes (Millar et al. 2007). Identifying 
genotypes that will be adapted to future conditions 
will be a complex endeavor, given the range of 
different stressors that may be intensified directly 
or indirectly due to climate change. Through time, 
these individuals could be identified through 
monitoring and research and used to propagate 
future generations. 
69
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
All urban sites
•	 Collecting and planting seeds from individuals 
that have survived dieback events (such as 
pest outbreaks or drought) as these individuals 
may have resistant genotypes
•	 Collecting and planting seeds from individuals 
that have survived extreme weather events 
such as droughts or floods as they may be 
more tolerant of these stressors. 
8.3. Use new genotypes that are better 
adapted to future threats and conditions
It may be easier to introduce new genetic diversity 
into urban forests compared to natural forests, 
because it is already routine practice to introduce 
cultivars of a given species. With care, the 
introduction of new cultivars can be used to create a 
more resilient urban forest. In many cases, cultivars 
for a given species have already been developed 
for several different climate zones. For example, 
the sugar maple cultivar ‘Unity’ was developed for 
hardiness in Manitoba (USDA zone 3), and ‘Astis’ 
was bred to thrive in the U.S. Southwest (zone 5). As 
the climate changes, cultivars that were developed 
for drier and warmer regions may be best suited for 
new locations. Using cultivars to increase genetic 
diversity may be suitable only for developed urban 
sites, however, because these individuals may not 
reproduce in natural areas or otherwise may not 
thrive in a natural ecosystem.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Developed urban sites
•	 Using cultivars of species that will be better 
suited for hotter and drier climates
•	 Working with growers to create new genotypes 
and cultivars of currently planted species that 
will be best adapted to climate changes
•	 Using a variety of cultivars to increase overall 
genetic diversity
•	 Planting disease-resistant cultivars that had 
been previously lost due to pests or disease in 
order to reestablish a form of this species on 
the landscape, such as disease-resistant elm or 
chestnut.
Strategy 9: Facilitate composition 
adjustments through species 
transitions
Urban areas already contain a broad mixture of 
species that come from outside of the area. Because 
these species evolved in different climates, they will 
probably have very different tolerances to future 
climate conditions. In the urban landscape, fostering 
species transitions is less a question of whether to 
assist migration of species from other geographies; 
this is already a common occurrence. Instead, it is 
more about deciding when and where to incorporate 
species into forests and plantings in different habitats 
and land uses. These species could be nonnative taxa 
or species that are regionally native, that is, those 
from the same region but not currently growing at 
that particular location. In addition to increasing the 
climatic resilience of the urban landscape, urban 
forests could also facilitate the migration of species 
that will be favored under future climate to new 
habitats at or beyond the edges of their current range 
(Woodall et al. 2010).
Approaches: 
9.1. Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be adapted to future conditions
Selecting native species already present in an urban 
area that are likely to do well under a range of future 
climate conditions can be a low-risk approach for 
transitioning to future climate conditions. Native 
species can provide important ecosystem services 
such as habitat for vertebrate and invertebrate 
species, and do not carry a risk of becoming 
invasive, spreading new diseases, or leading to 
genetic mixing. However, there may be a limited set 
of native species that will be able to withstand future 
climate conditions and also be adapted to harsh 
urban environments. Therefore, this approach will 
probably need to be balanced with other approaches 
to ensure sufficient biodiversity in an area. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Planting native seedlings in restoration 
projects that are likely to do well based on 
climate model projections and information 
about climatic tolerances. 
70
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Developed urban sites
•	 Prioritizing native species that are near their 
northern range limit when promoting and 
developing native species for use in urban 
planting lists.
9.2. Establish or encourage new mixes of 
native species
Future conditions in urban areas are likely to become 
especially extreme, with higher peaks in temperature 
and moisture than might be seen in nonurban 
landscapes (McCarthy et al. 2010). However, 
considerable uncertainty exists in what future 
conditions will be, especially at the site level. Thus, 
encouraging new mixtures of native species and 
regionally, but not locally, native species in forest 
communities and plantings could help these systems 
adapt and maintain ecological function (Millar et 
al. 2007). This approach could also discourage 
invasion by exotic invasive species (Naeem et al. 
2000). Managers may need to prioritize diversity 
(both in terms of species as well as functional groups 
and phylogenetic lineages) over historical species 
combinations to increase community resilience.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Planting a mixture of locally and regionally 
native species during ecosystem restoration to 
allow for uncertainty in future conditions at 
the site level, and not necessarily planting just 
those species that are best adapted to current 
site conditions or that made up the historical 
community on the site 
•	 Creating heterogeneous conditions in canopy 
structure, ground layer, and hydrology that 
will allow a variety of species to become 
established.
Developed urban sites
•	 Including a diverse mix of locally and 
regionally native species in plantings, 
especially in plantings that are near natural 
areas.
9.3. Select tree species to match current and 
future site conditions 
Many trees in urban areas are individually selected 
for a particular site, allowing a high degree of 
flexibility. Species selection for a given site can also 
take likely future climate conditions into account. 
For example, flood-tolerant species may be selected 
for areas that fall into a moderate-risk flood zone 
because flooding in the area is projected to increase. 
Matching planted trees to a range of current and 
future conditions is likely to be more feasible than 
attempting to alter growing conditions to match 
a preferred tree species. Furthermore, selecting 
trees that are known to be well matched to growing 
conditions may increase the trees’ ability to reach 
maturity, contribute to a healthy forest, and provide 
environmental benefits (Nowak et al. 2006). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
Urban natural areas
•	 Planting dry-mesic species in mesic sites that 
are projected to become drier 
•	 Planting heat-sensitive species on north slopes 
or in cold air drainages. 
Developed urban sites
•	 Selecting species that can withstand poor site 
conditions near roads maintained with salt, 
sand, or other winter additives and that also 
can tolerate a range of other climate-related 
stressors 
•	 Selecting trees that are hardier to extreme 
storm events and less likely to break up when 
pruned correctly, especially in wind-prone 
areas
•	 Planting tree species that are less sensitive to 
increased flooding and ponding in low-lying 
areas expected to get wetter. 
9.4. Protect future-adapted seedlings and 
saplings 
A wide variety of potentially damaging agents and 
practices are present in the urban environment, 
including many direct anthropogenic influences that 
are less of a concern in nonurban landscapes (Clark 
et al. 1997). Care should be taken to avoid damaging 
those species, communities, and ecosystems that 
71
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
are likely to be most well adapted to future climates 
during development of restoration and management 
projects. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are: 
Urban natural areas
•	 Protecting seedlings and saplings of desirable 
species during restoration and management 
operations by using barriers or fencing to 
discourage trampling.
Developed urban sites
•	 Avoiding damage to existing young trees of 
future-adapted species and cultivars during 
redevelopment projects.
9.5. Disfavor species that are distinctly 
maladapted
Urban areas are expected to experience especially 
rapid changes in climatic extremes, and some 
species at the edges of their natural ranges 
may more quickly become maladapted to these 
conditions (Walther et al. 2002). In addition, urban 
environments are already extreme in many senses 
and more species may eventually become poorly 
adapted there. For example, species whose range is 
projected to encompass an urban area may not be 
able to tolerate conditions in more-extreme urban 
microclimates.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Using information from especially extreme 
urban sites or areas with similar climatic 
extremes and fluctuations to determine which 
native species are likely to decline
•	 Selectively removing or not replacing species 
that are not drought-, heat-, or flood-tolerant to 
promote establishment of more-tolerant native 
or near-native species.
Developed urban sites
•	 Selectively removing or not replacing species 
that are not drought-, heat-, or flood-tolerant
•	 Protecting healthy legacy trees that fail 
to regenerate, while deemphasizing their 
importance in the mix of species being planted 
or regenerated.
9.6. Manage for species or genotypes with 
wide moisture and temperature tolerances
Urban areas often experience even greater stress 
from heat, flooding, and drought than natural areas 
due to suboptimal growing conditions and high 
amounts of impervious cover. This additional stress, 
coupled with the uncertainty inherent in future 
climate projections, means that selecting for any 
particular future scenario may have some risk. A 
focus on species with large latitudinal ranges and 
wide tolerances may allow for better resilience 
(Millar et al. 2007). 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Planting seedlings of native species from a 
wide range of source locations (including non-
local populations) when conducting restoration 
and reclamation treatments
•	 Using prescribed fire to favor species that 
have very broad latitudinal ranges and 
environmental tolerances.
Developed urban sites
•	 Planting a variety of both cultivars and wild 
genotypes for a given species
•	 Encouraging the planting of species that are 
adapted to wide tolerances rather than just 
specific current conditions (e.g., a species 
that is both drought- and flood-tolerant) in 
municipal planting lists. 
9.7. Introduce species that are expected to 
be adapted to future conditions
Urban sites can act as locations for incorporation 
of regionally native species and could potentially 
help facilitate the movement of species within 
or outside of their current ranges (Woodall et al. 
2010). Southern or drought-adapted genotypes and 
populations can also be incorporated into urban 
areas to help facilitate the adaptation of species 
and communities in the region to future climates 
(Millar et al. 2007). This idea is not new to urban 
forestry: Urban foresters have moved species across 
states, continents, and even oceans for centuries. 
However, the emphasis of this approach is to focus 
on those species that are most likely to align with 
72
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
future climate conditions. This approach can include 
relatively low-risk actions, such as moving a species 
to slightly north of its current range, but could 
also include riskier actions such as introducing a 
nonnative species from another continent. Careful 
consideration of these high-risk actions is warranted, 
especially before widespread implementation. 
Smaller trials may be helpful in assessing 
invasiveness and other issues.
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Incorporating regionally, but not locally, 
native species as well as nonnative species 
into reclamation projects in degraded habitats 
to assess their viability and aggressiveness
•	 Encouraging southern species that become 
established in natural areas.
Developed urban sites
•	 Increasing the representation of or 
incorporating new regionally native or 
likely future native species in urban planting 
projects, for example, Kentucky coffeetree or 
tuliptree in upper Midwestern cities
•	 Planting nonnative species from analogous 
climates. 
9.8. Move at-risk species to locations that 
are expected to provide habitat
The climate may be changing more rapidly than 
some species can migrate, and the movement of 
species may be restricted by land use or other 
impediments between areas of suitable habitat 
(Davis and Shaw 2001, Iverson et al. 2004a). 
Fragmentation of habitat and physical barriers in 
urban areas may make this even more challenging, 
especially for rare or threatened species. Species-
rescue assisted migration, focused on avoiding 
extinction by physically relocating climate-
threatened species, may be an option to consider 
in some cases. This approach is best implemented 
with great caution, incorporating due consideration 
of the uncertainties inherent in climate change, the 
sparse record of previous examples, and continued 
uncertainties of forest response (Ricciardi and 
Simberloff 2009).
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
All urban sites
•	 Planting or seeding a rare or threatened plant 
species that is at risk for extinction to a newly 
suitable habitat outside its current range 
•	 Assisting the migration of wildlife around 
barriers by trapping and releasing in newly 
suitable locations. 
Strategy 10: Realign urban 
ecosystems after disturbance 
Urban areas, in particular, may face dramatic 
impacts as a result of climate change-related 
alterations in disturbances, including pest 
outbreaks, floods, and storm events. As with natural 
ecosystems, some of the best opportunities for 
addressing disturbance-related impacts may occur 
immediately after the disturbance event; having a 
suite of preplanned options in place may facilitate 
an earlier and more flexible response. Urban areas 
faced with disasters are provided the opportunity 
to rebuild, and can use this opportunity to create an 
urban landscape that is better aligned with current 
and future climate conditions. 
Approaches: 
10.1. Promptly revegetate sites after 
disturbance
Changes in climate will probably lead to increases 
in large-scale disturbances such as floods and wind 
storms. These disturbances can lead to catastrophic 
losses of trees and other vegetation in some areas. 
Quickly reestablishing vegetation on disturbed sites 
will be necessary to maintain the climate mitigation 
services associated with urban forests and could help 
reduce the impacts of invasive species. In highly 
developed areas, replanting may be the only way 
to ensure the presence of species that provide the 
desired ecosystem services such as shade, aesthetics, 
or stormwater control. In natural areas, where a 
native seedbank may remain, replanting or managing 
natural regeneration may be beneficial to ensure the 
area has a species composition and structure that are 
aligned with management goals.   
73
Chapter 4. Urban Forest Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Managing for natural regeneration of native 
species after disturbance through such 
practices as protecting seedlings and saplings 
from herbivory
•	 If possible, using the disturbance as an 
opportunity to eradicate or reduce the impact 
of invasive species
•	 Prioritizing planting of trees into recently 
disturbed areas
•	 Allowing nonnative species to remain as 
part of a novel mix of species, rather than 
eradicating these species.
Developed urban sites
•	 Planting new trees, with an emphasis on 
increasing diversity
•	 Spacing out planting over several years to 
create a diverse age and size class structure in 
the urban canopy.
10.2. Prioritize remediation of remaining 
trees following disturbance 
In most cases, disturbances will not lead to complete 
loss of vegetation, but the remaining trees may have 
some degree of damage. After urgent severe hazards 
are dealt with, it is important to assess the damage 
to the remaining urban forest. This is the time to 
prioritize the level of importance for removal of 
severely damaged trees. Every attempt should be 
made to retain and restore amenity trees, especially 
legacy trees. The retention of these trees can help 
provide ecosystem services while new trees and 
other vegetation are becoming established. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Retaining nonhazardous dead and damaged 
trees for wildlife habitat and other ecosystem 
services.
Developed urban sites
•	 Removing remaining severely damaged trees 
that were not immediately removed during 
emergency response
•	 Implementing appropriate tree crown 
restoration pruning strategies for less severely 
damaged trees
•	 If possible, standing fallen trees back up and 
using stakes or guy wires for support until 
the root system is structurally stable (usually 
newly planted trees or trees less than 4 inches 
in diameter).
10.3. Realign significantly disrupted 
ecosystems to meet expected future 
conditions
Many urban areas may experience such significant 
alterations from human- and climate-induced 
disturbance that it will become difficult to 
restore systems that reflect native ecosystems of 
the past. Management of these systems may be 
realigned to create necessary changes in species 
composition and structure to better adapt forests 
to current and anticipated environments, rather 
than historical pre-disturbance conditions (Millar 
et al. 2007, Spittlehouse and Stewart 2003). In 
more developed areas, this could mean designing 
“novel ecosystems” that incorporate both natural 
and engineered elements and contain entirely 
new species compositions (Hobbs et al. 2006). 
Developing clear plans that establish processes for 
realigning significantly altered ecosystems before 
undertaking these actions will allow for more 
thoughtful discussion and better coordination with 
other adaptation responses. 
Examples of adaptation tactics are:
Urban natural areas
•	 Allowing community transition by planting 
future-adapted species within a site that is 
already declining or is expected to decline 
(e.g., converting a mesic maple forest to an 
oak savanna)
•	 Allowing nonnative species to remain as 
part of a novel mix of species, rather than 
eradicating these species.
Developed urban sites
•	 Designing “novel ecosystems” composed of a 
carefully selected mix of native and nonnative 
species that align with projected future 
climates. 
74
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Climate change is becoming an increasingly 
important consideration in land management 
planning and decisionmaking at a variety of spatial 
scales. This chapter outlines a process to help natural 
resource managers incorporate climate change 
considerations into management planning and 
activities, while complementing existing processes 
and procedures for making decisions (Box 14). 
It also contains instructions for the Adaptation 
Workbook, which helps land managers work through 
this process step-by-step and identify actions that 
can help ecosystems adapt to climate change.
Incorporating Climate Change 
Considerations into Management
Land management agencies and organizations are 
under increasing pressure to integrate climate change 
considerations into planning and implementation 
activities. In recent years, a great deal of work has 
occurred to provide conceptual frameworks (e.g., 
Millar et al. 2007, Peterson et al. 2011), compile 
adaptation strategies (e.g., Heinz Center 2008, Heller 
and Zavaleta 2009, Ogden and Innes 2008), and 
provide tools to support management decisions (e.g., 
Cross et al. 2012, Morelli et al. 2012, Stein et al. 
2014). At the same time, there remains a critical gap 
between the synthesis of scientific information on 
climate change vulnerability and adaptation and the 
actual integration of these ideas into management 
plans and practices (Carlton et al. 2014).
This chapter describes a flexible approach to 
address this issue and translate largely broad-scale 
and conceptual information into tangible actions 
that can be used by forest managers and other 
Box 14
Using the Adaptation Workbook
The Adaptation Workbook can help natural 
resource managers:
•	 View climate change as an emerging 
management consideration that can be 
incorporated into many aspects of existing 
management planning and decisionmaking
•	 Integrate a wide variety of adaptation 
strategies and approaches into management 
decisions based upon existing management 
goals and objectives
•	 Discuss climate change-related topics 
with coworkers, team members, and other 
collaborators
•	 Document considerations and decisions 
regarding climate change and management.
The Adaptation Workbook does not:
•	 Make recommendations or set guidelines for 
management decisions or actions 
•	 Establish a plan for implementation of the 
selected tactics and monitoring efforts. 
Rather, that step is reserved for managers to 
pursue after completing the workbook.
75
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
natural resource professionals to advance their on-
the-ground work. It is designed to accommodate 
a diversity of management goals, ecosystems, 
ownership types, spatial scales (e.g., stand, large 
ownership), and levels of decisionmaking (e.g., 
planning, problem solving, implementation) 
(Janowiak et al. 2014b, Swanston and Janowiak 
2012). Through this approach, managers begin with 
the current management goals and objectives for 
a particular forest management project (Fig. 12). 
Climate change is then incorporated as an additional 
“filter” through which to consider potential 
management responses and outcomes. Once 
adaptation actions are identified to help achieve 
management goals, monitoring is used to evaluate 
whether the goals and objectives were achieved, as 
well as to assess the role of the selected adaptation 
actions in meeting the desired outcome. This 
approach draws upon regionally specific information 
on anticipated climate change effects, such as 
vulnerability assessments, as well as the Adaptation 
Strategies and Approaches in Chapters 3 and 4 of 
this document. 
One of the strengths of this approach is the 
flexibility that is built in to account for different 
future conditions. Given the need to make decisions 
despite incomplete information and to “learn 
by doing,” adaptive management principles are 
well suited for incorporating climate change 
considerations into management (Millar et al. 2012, 
Stankey et al. 2005). Several aspects of adaptive 
management are evident in working through this 
approach, including explicit acknowledgment and 
consideration of uncertainty, iterative learning to 
improve understanding and reduce uncertainty, 
integration of monitoring, and a focus on continued 
improvement to achieve desired outcomes (Larson 
et al. 2013, Williams et al. 2007). In particular, 
the intentional use of monitoring to evaluate the 
effectiveness of adaptation actions helps to inform 
future management decisions. Further, because the 
individual steps mirror other processes used during 
management planning, ideas generated through 
the consideration of climate change can be easily 
incorporated into management plans, silvicultural 
prescriptions, or other plans.
Figure 12.—An illustration of the adaptation process used to incorporate climate change as a management consideration 
and help ecosystems adapt to the anticipated effects of climate change. Additional resources provide information and 
tools that support the process.
76
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Another strength of this approach is that hundreds 
of natural resource managers across diverse forest 
management and conservation projects have 
tested and applied it. A variety of public, private, 
nongovernmental, and tribal natural resource 
managers are using this approach to develop 
projects that implement a diversity of adaptation 
actions while also meeting manager-identified goals 
(Janowiak et al. 2014b). More than 200 adaptation 
demonstrations have been developed, ranging in 
size from stand-level silvicultural prescriptions to 
management plans covering thousands of acres. 
These demonstrations serve as examples of how 
this process has been applied in real-world natural 
resource management planning and projects. 
Examples of these projects are provided in Chapter 6 
and at www.forestadaptation.org/demos.
About the Adaptation Workbook
The Adaptation Workbook is intended to help natural 
resource managers consider climate change in 
resource management activities. It builds upon the 
adaptation process described earlier in this chapter 
(Fig. 12), and provides additional details and items 
for consideration in each of the five steps. Rather 
than providing specific guidance or replacing other 
forms of management planning, the Adaptation 
Workbook draws upon the experience and expertise 
of natural resource professionals and complements 
existing management planning and decisionmaking 
systems.1 
Because the Adaptation Workbook is designed to be 
flexible and used in a wide range of applications, it 
provides a general structure that can then be adjusted 
to include more or less information as desired. Three 
different versions of the Adaptation Workbook are 
available to lead managers through the same series 
of steps and considerations; managers can select the 
version that best meets their needs (Box 15).
1 The Adaptation Workbook is designed to supplement 
and support existing decisionmaking processes in the 
U.S. Forest Service and other agencies or institutions, but 
does not in any way replace, supersede, or circumvent 
those processes.
For all versions of the Adaptation Workbook, 
natural resource managers are asked to draw upon 
information from a variety of resources, such as 
local and regional vulnerability assessments and the 
Adaptation Strategies and Approaches presented 
in Chapter 2 of this document. Because the 
understanding of the impacts of climate change is 
continually changing and growing, we recommend 
that users consult recent information and resources 
that are relevant to their particular location and 
management interests. Several resources are 
recommended where appropriate. We also encourage 
users to consult with scientists and others with 
expertise on climate change impacts to obtain 
relevant and up-to-date information to include in this 
process.
Getting Started
To get an overview of the process before you begin 
using the Adaptation Workbook, it is recommended 
that you first review the directions for all five steps. 
Select a version of the workbook that meets your 
needs (Box 15). Then collect any information, 
including relevant maps and management plans, 
which may be needed to provide additional 
information about your project area (Table 3). 
Tables have been provided in the workbook to 
show how information is arranged, and you can use 
electronic spreadsheets for capturing your notes 
while working on the short or complete versions 
of the workbook (Appendixes 4 and 5). The online 
version of the workbook is available at 
www.adaptationworkbook.org.  
The Adaptation Workbook can be used by an 
individual or by a team of specialists, and this will 
influence how the process is completed. If you are 
working individually, it is likely that you will work 
your way through each of the steps more or less in 
sequence. If you are working as part of a team, it 
may be more efficient for one or two people to pull 
together much of the needed information to create 
initial drafts of Steps 1 and 2 (Table 3), which the 
larger group can then review and discuss. 
77
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Box 15
 Other Adaptation Workbook Versions
The Adaptation Workbook outlines a broad, 
adaptive approach for integrating climate change 
into management while also prompting users 
to consider specific information and ideas that 
will help inform decisionmaking. Although the 
comprehensive version of the workbook featured in 
this chapter provides a starting point for those who 
are new to the process or prefer to view it all in one 
document, other versions of the workbook may be 
more appropriate for other applications (Table 2). 
•	 The online version of the workbook 
(www.adaptationworkbook.org) follows from 
the workbook presented in this chapter, but 
includes additional capabilities for integrating 
regional climate change impacts from 
multiple vulnerability assessments. 
•	 A short version of the workbook is included 
in Appendix 4 of this document. It leads 
users step-by-step through the “big 
questions” of the overarching adaptation 
process. Because of this condensed 
approach, it is more suitable for use by 
individuals who have previously used the 
comprehensive or online version of the 
workbook and for less complex projects.
Table 2.―Explanation of the different versions of the Adaptation Workbook
Version
Contains
Most suitable for users who are:
Comprehensive 
(worksheets follow 
p. 145 in Appendix 5)
A complete set of climate 
change considerations 
and detailed step-by-step 
instructions for using the 
adaptation process
First-time users of the workbook   
Less familiar with the information on 
projected climate change impacts   
Working in situations where the 
consideration of climate change in 
management needs to be documented
Short (worksheets 
follow p. 138 in 
Appendix 4)
A streamlined set of 
considerations that uses the 
overarching adaptation process
Familiar with the adaptation process or 
have used the comprehensive workbook 
before   
Familiar with projected climate change 
impacts    
Working in situations that do not need 
detailed documentation
Online (www.
adaptationworkbook.
org)
A comprehensive set of 
climate change considerations 
and detailed step-by-step 
instructions for using the 
adaptation process, as well 
as links to regionally relevant 
information and resources
Comfortable working with an online tool   
First-time or repeat users of the workbook   
Working on relatively small projects, such 
as a small property or single management 
unit
78
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Table 3.—A list of resources and information that may be helpful in completing the Adaptation 
Workbook. If a team is going to complete the workbook, it is recommended that relevant information 
from this list is prepared and disseminated to team members before completing the workbook.
Workbook step
Materials needed
Potential sources for information
All steps
Adaptation workbook worksheets
URL for files
Step 1
Relevant maps of the location, such as: 
   Aerial photos   
   Ownership, project, stand boundaries
Geographic information systems (GIS) databases   
Mapping software, such as that available through 
Forest*A*Syst (www.forestasyst.org) or MyLandPlan 
(www.mylandplan.org)
Step 1
Management goals and objectives for 
the project area
Forest or land management plans   
Other planning documents
Step 1
Information on past and future 
management
Management records   
GIS databases
Steps 2 and 3
Information on regional projected 
climate change effects on ecosystems
Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability Assessments 
   (Box 2 on p. 7)   
Regional vulnerability assessments (selected list 
available at www.adaptationworkbook.org)   
Other vulnerability and impact assessments (see 
Chapter 2 for more details on this type of information)   
Climate Change Resource Center 
   (www.fs.usda.gov/ccrc)
Steps 2 and 3
Location-specific information that may 
help assess anticipated climate change 
impacts, such as soils, hydrology, 
habitat type, or past management 
influences (see Steps 1 and 2 for more 
details)
Forest or land management plans   
Local or regional ecosystem descriptions and 
assessments   
GIS databases or mapping programs   
Management records   
Local expertise
Step 4
A list of potential adaptation 
approaches that may be suitable for 
your forest ecosystem
Adaptation Strategies and Approaches (Chapters 3 and 
4 of this document)   
Other lists of adaptation actions, such as the list at 
www.adaptationpartners.org/library.php   
Available literature on forest adaptation to climate 
change (see the Literature Cited section and Appendix 1 
for some resources)
Step 5
Information about any forest inventory 
or monitoring that is taking place in (or 
near, if relevant) to the project area 
Forest or land management plans   
Monitoring reports   
Other planning documents   
Regional forest monitoring programs 
79
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
In general, it works well to organize information in 
the workbook by ecosystem types or management 
topics; these will generally be the same groupings 
as you would use for other management projects. 
Additionally, you may decide to further subdivide 
your project area into more precise ecosystem 
groupings or by management units or stands. 
After you have organized your information, it may 
be most effective to move through the workbook by 
completing a single step for all parts of the project, 
and then moving on to the next step (as opposed to 
completing Steps 1 through 5 for a single ecosystem 
type and then moving on to the next type). This 
allows for better consideration of the interactions 
between the different ecosystem types at a larger 
geographic level, such as across an entire project or 
property. It also tends to be a faster, more efficient 
way to complete the Adaptation Workbook. 
At times you might get ahead of your place in the 
workbook and have ideas for future steps; this can 
be a good thing. Although you will generally go 
through the workbook sequentially, you may find 
it helpful to jump ahead or circle back from time to 
time. If you find yourself jumping ahead, be sure 
to write your ideas down regardless of where in the 
process they fall, and then return to where you left 
off.
80
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Step 1: DEFINE location, project, 
and time frames 
Key Questions:
•	 Where are you working?
•	 What are your management goals and 
plans for this area?
About this Step
This step records fundamental information about 
the project area or property that will be used for the 
workbook process. Because it serves as a starting 
point for the subsequent steps, management goals 
and objectives should be as specific as possible. 
In many instances, this information will already 
be available as part of a management plan or other 
planning document. If you will be going through the 
workbook as part of a group, it may be most efficient 
for one or two people to compile information for this 
step before any group discussions.
Description of Workbook Items
Project Area or Property – Name the project area 
or property. 
Location – Describe the geographic location of the 
area that you are using for this project. 
Ecosystem Type or Management Topic – List 
the ecosystem types or management topics that 
are relevant to your project area. Because this 
information is tied to the management goals and 
objectives, as well as how actions are implemented, 
you may want to subdivide areas based upon 
management units, stands, or other features. 
Note: Sometimes the current condition of an 
ecosystem is different from the desired future 
conditions, and management seeks to change the 
community over time. If the management goals or 
planned activities will include the conversion of 
the current ecosystem to a different type, clearly 
describe both the current and desired future type 
(and conditions, where appropriate).
Management Goals – List the management goals 
for the project area (Box 16). These may include the 
desired future characteristics of the location, such as 
forest conditions, habitat characteristics, anticipated 
products, or other ecological features or services. 
Management Objectives – List any management 
objectives for the project area (Box 16). These will 
explain how management goals will be achieved. 
There may be multiple objectives for a single 
management goal.
Time Frames – List approximate time frames for 
implementing management actions and for achieving 
management goals and objectives. As a default, 
identify a point in both the short term (10 years or 
less) and the long term (30 or more years) that you 
can use to consider and visualize how things may 
change over time.
81
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Box 16
Goals and Objectives
Management Goals 
Management goals are broad, general statements, 
usually not quantifiable, that express a desired 
state or process to be achieved (Society of 
American Foresters 2008). These could include 
desired future ecosystem conditions, habitat 
characteristics, forest products, or other services. 
They are often not attainable in the short term, 
and they provide the context for more specific 
objectives (Table 4). 
Management Objectives
Management objectives are concise statements 
of measurable planned results that correspond 
to preestablished management goals and help to 
achieve a desired outcome (Society of American 
Foresters 2008). These objectives commonly 
include information on resources to be used and 
form the basis for further planning to define the 
precise steps to be taken to achieve the identified 
goals (Table 4).     
Table 4.―Examples of a management goal and a corresponding management objective
Management goal
Management objective
Enhance tree vigor and quality
Maintain annual growth of 1.5 cords per acre per year for the 
next 15 years
Restore Kirtland’s warbler habitat
Increase acreage of early successional pine habitats by 
harvesting and replanting 20 acres every 10 years
82
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Step 2: ASSESS site-specific 
climate change impacts and 
vulnerabilities
Key Questions:
•	 How might the area be uniquely affected 
by climate change and subsequent impacts?
•	 How might regional impacts be different in 
the project area?
About this Step
Climate change will have a wide variety of effects 
on the landscape, and not all places will respond 
similarly. For this reason, it is critical not only to 
think about the general (e.g., statewide or regional) 
anticipated effects of a changing climate on 
ecosystems, but also to consider how specific places 
on the landscape may be affected. 
In this step, you will consider broad-scale 
scientific information about the expected effects of 
climate change in your region using vulnerability 
assessments or other published sources. After 
identifying these relatively general impacts, you 
will use your expertise and experience to evaluate 
how your specific project area or property may be 
vulnerable to climate change. Because there is a 
great deal of variability among different locations, 
your understanding of specific site conditions in that 
location will help you to identify the more relevant 
management responses in later steps. 
Description of Workbook Items
Ecosystem Type or Management Topic – Insert 
the forest type(s) or management topic(s) that you 
identified in Step 1. 
Regional Climate Change Impacts and 
Vulnerabilities – Begin by creating a list of relevant 
climate change impacts and vulnerabilities for the 
region that you are working in. You may also want 
to include the source of this information. Some 
of this information may be relevant to the entire 
project area or property, while other information 
may be specific to some of the ecosystem type(s) or 
management topics(s) that you identified in Step 1. 
Many resources on climate change impacts and 
vulnerabilities are available, such as reports and 
peer-reviewed papers on climate change. Several 
regions have a vulnerability assessment that 
describes this information for an entire region, as 
well as by forest or community type (see Box 2 
on p. 7 for a short list of available assessments). If 
you are trying to determine whether a vulnerability 
assessment meets your needs, Chapter 2 provides a 
starting point. 
Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities for 
the Project Area or Property – As you consider 
the general impacts and vulnerabilities (above), 
draw upon your experience and knowledge of 
this particular area to describe more specific ways 
that your project area or property may be affected 
by a changing climate (see Box 17 for a list of 
considerations). For example, a forest may have 
greater vulnerability to anticipated increases in the 
frequency and intensity of storm events because 
the trees on site are more susceptible to windthrow. 
Alternatively, an area may have less risk from 
late-summer moisture stress due to its topographic 
position and high water table. 
Vulnerability Rating – Vulnerability is the 
susceptibility of a system to the adverse effects 
of climate change (Chapter 2). It is a function of 
its sensitivity to climatic changes, its exposure to 
those changes, and its ability to cope with climate 
change impacts with minimal disruption (Glick et 
al. 2011, Levina and Tirpak 2006) (Fig. 13). For 
example, an ecosystem subject to few potential 
impacts and having a high adaptive capacity would 
be determined to have low vulnerability. 
•	 High – Potential climate change impacts are 
expected to exceed the ability of the ecosystem 
to cope with impacts. Ecosystems may 
undergo changes that will disrupt important 
ecosystem functions and key environmental 
benefits.
83
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
•	 Moderate – Potential climate change 
impacts are expected to alter ecosystems, but 
ecosystems will be able to cope with some 
impacts. 
•	 Low – Ecosystems are expected to readily 
cope with potential climate change impacts. 
It is not anticipated that climate change will 
have substantial negative effects on important 
ecosystem functions and environmental 
benefits.
Box 17
Climate Change and Your Project Area or Property
Most of the available information on the potential 
effects of climate change has probably been 
developed for spatial scales that are larger than 
your project area. It is important to consider 
not only this broad-scale information, but also 
how your particular project area may be more 
or less vulnerable to these effects. Factors that 
may influence risk and vulnerability for a specific 
location include:
•	 Landscape pattern
•	 Location, such as topographic position or 
proximity to water features
•	 Soil characteristics
•	 Management history or current management 
plans
•	 Species or structural composition
•	 Presence of or susceptibility to pests, 
disease, or nonnative species that may 
become more problematic under future 
climate conditions.
Figure 13.—Diagram 
that helps identify a 
vulnerability rating 
reflecting an ecosystem’s 
sensitivity to climatic 
changes, its exposure to 
those changes, and its 
capacity to adapt to those 
changes while maintaining 
its character and function. 
Adapted from Swanston 
and Janowiak (2012).
84
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Step 3: EVALUATE management 
objectives given projected impacts 
and vulnerabilities
Key Questions:
•	 What management challenges or 
opportunities might occur?  
•	 Can current management meet 
management goals?
•	 Do goals need to change?
About this Step
In earlier steps, you defined management goals 
and objectives for your project area (Step 1) 
and considered climate change impacts and 
vulnerabilities for this area (Step 2). In this step, 
you will identify management challenges and 
opportunities associated with climate change. You 
will also evaluate the feasibility of meeting your 
management objectives under current management 
and consider whether they should be altered or 
refined to better account for anticipated climate 
change impacts. 
Note: It is inevitable that discussion will jump ahead 
at times to identifying approaches or developing 
tactics that can help forests cope with the anticipated 
impacts; rather than lose these ideas or skip critical 
steps in the process, be sure to record any ideas that 
will be useful in later steps.
Description of Workbook Items
Ecosystem Type or Management Topic – Insert 
the forest type(s) or management topic(s) that you 
identified in Step 1. 
Management Objectives – Insert the management 
objectives that you identified in Step 1. 
Challenges to Meeting Management Objective 
with Climate Change – List ways in which climate 
change impacts and associated vulnerabilities may 
make it more difficult to achieve each management 
objective. For example, warmer temperatures and 
drier conditions may limit regeneration of a desired 
species and make it more challenging to maintain 
that species into the future. Focus on concerns 
related to ecological or environmental challenges; 
other considerations (e.g., financial, social) will be 
included later in this step.
Opportunities for Meeting Management 
Objective with Climate Change – List ways 
in which climate change impacts and associated 
vulnerabilities may make it easier to achieve each 
management objective or create new management 
opportunities. For example, increases in small- 
and medium-scale disturbance may help increase 
structural heterogeneity within a stand or landscape. 
Focus on concerns related to ecological or 
environmental challenges; other considerations (e.g., 
financial, social) will be included later in this step.
Feasibility of Meeting Management Objective 
under Current Management – Consider how 
the challenges and opportunities that you have 
identified may affect the feasibility of meeting your 
management objectives using current (business-
as-usual) management strategies and actions. 
Feasibility can be determined for individual or 
multiple time frames (e.g., short-term versus long-
term).
•	 High – Existing management options can 
be used to overcome the challenges for 
meeting management objectives under climate 
change. Opportunities are likely to outweigh 
challenges. 
•	 Moderate – Some challenges to meeting 
management objectives under climate change 
have been identified, but these can probably 
be overcome by using existing management 
options. Additional resources or enhanced 
efforts may be necessary to counteract key 
challenges or promote new opportunities.
•	 Low – Existing management options may 
not be sufficient to overcome challenges to 
meeting management objectives under climate 
change. Additional resources or enhanced 
efforts will be necessary to counteract key 
challenges or promote new opportunities.
85
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Other Considerations – List any social, financial, 
administrative, or other factors that are part of your 
decision to pursue your management objectives. 
You may also want to note reasons that you would 
continue pursuing a management objective with 
low feasibility, such as requirement by law, a high 
social value, or if an area with low feasibility has 
the highest likelihood of success when compared to 
other areas with low feasibility.
            Slow Down to Consider… 
Climate change may make some management goals 
and objectives more difficult to achieve in the future 
(Joyce et al. 2008, 2009; Millar et al. 2007), and 
there may be situations in which they need to be 
altered or refined to better account for anticipated 
climate change impacts. After completing Step 3, 
you should have a much better idea about whether 
your management objectives are feasible, given the 
current management options that are available to 
you. You have also identified social, economic, or 
other considerations that may affect your decision to 
pursue certain management objectives.
Are you going to continue with the management 
objectives you have identified? 
If you have high feasibility of meeting your 
management objectives and these objectives are still 
sound given projected climate change impacts, you 
can proceed to Step 4 to explore adaptation actions.
If some or all of your management objectives have 
moderate or low feasibility, or if they no longer 
seem sensible under climate change (e.g., managing 
a species that very likely will experience a severe 
decline), you may reconsider your management 
objectives or your broader management goals. 
You can record any potential issues or changes in 
the “Other Considerations” section of Step 3 or 
return to Step 1 to alter your management goals 
and objectives. Use the information that you 
have gathered up to this point to create goals and 
objectives that are more likely to succeed, given 
projected impacts from climate change.
86
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Step 4: IDENTIFY adaptation 
approaches and tactics for 
implementation
Key Question:
•	 What actions can enhance the ability of the 
ecosystem to adapt to anticipated changes 
and meet management goals?
About this Step
New or modified management practices may be 
needed to address the challenges to ecosystem 
management brought about by climate change. 
The Adaptation Workbook helps you identify and 
evaluate specific management actions that can help 
prepare for changing conditions given the challenges 
and opportunities that were identified in Step 3. 
In doing this you will generate a custom set of 
adaptation tactics—prescriptive actions specifically 
designed for your project area or property and your 
unique management objectives.
The step also helps you create a clear rationale 
for your suggested tactics by connecting them to 
broader adaptation ideas. Chapters 3 and 4 of this 
document contain menus of Adaptation Strategies 
and Approaches for forest management and 
conservation in natural and urban forests. As you 
brainstorm and evaluate ideas for adaptation tactics, 
you’ll also link these specific ideas to the list of 
more general adaptation strategies and approaches. 
These links will provide important context and 
rationale to justify your adaptation tactics. If you 
need help brainstorming specific adaptation tactics, 
you can use the menu of strategies and approaches 
as a springboard to develop specific tactics that can 
help achieve your management objectives.
Description of Workbook Items
Ecosystem Type or Management Topic – Insert the 
ecosystem type(s) or management topic(s) that you 
identified in Step 1. 
Adaptation Actions
•	 Adaptation Approach – Review the 
Adaptation Strategies and Approaches 
(Chapters 3 and 4) and select any approaches 
that you think may be applicable. Also include 
any additional approaches that you devise. 
•	 Tactics – Describe specific actions that you 
can take in your project area to implement the 
adaptation approaches using your experience 
and expertise.  
87
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Because adaptation approaches provide context 
for specific tactics that will be implemented, we 
encourage you to include both; however, you may 
find it easier to list tactics first and then go back to 
identify the corresponding strategies and approaches. 
Time Frames – List the approximate time frames in 
which the tactics would be implemented. The nature 
of the action can help determine an appropriate time 
frame. Some actions may occur in the short term 
(i.e., next 5 years), whereas others may not occur 
for several decades or will occur only in certain 
situations (such as after a large disturbance). 
Benefits – For each tactic, list any benefits 
associated with using this tactic. For example, note if 
a tactic addresses your biggest challenge, addresses 
multiple challenges, or has a side benefit, such as 
improving overall ecosystem health.
Drawbacks and Barriers – For each tactic, list 
any drawbacks that may arise, such as negative 
ecosystem impacts, or any barriers to implementing 
the tactic, including legal, financial, infrastructural, 
social, or physical barriers.
Practicability of Tactic – An adaptation tactic 
is practicable if it is both effective (it will meet 
the desired intent) and feasible (it is capable of 
being implemented). Both of these characteristics 
increase the likelihood of success and are desirable 
in selected adaptation tactics. Consider the benefits, 
drawbacks, and barriers associated with each tactic 
in order to determine the practicability of meeting 
your management goals and objectives using that 
tactic (see Box 10 on p. 34). This is based on 
ecological and nonecological factors. 
•	 High – The tactic is expected to be both 
effective and feasible. Benefits of the tactic 
clearly outweigh drawbacks and barriers. 
•	 Moderate – There are drawbacks or 
barriers that could reduce the effectiveness 
or feasibility of the tactic. The use of other 
adaptation tactics or management actions may 
make it possible to overcome some drawbacks 
or barriers.
•	 Low – The tactic does not appear to be 
effective or feasible. The drawbacks and 
barriers are insurmountable or the benefits are 
too small relative to the required effort. The 
tactic may need adjustment to be made more 
effective or feasible.  
Recommend Tactic? – Consider the time frame, 
benefits, drawbacks, barriers, and practicability for 
each tactic and select the tactics that you recommend 
for consideration in future management decisions. 
Tactics that overcome or avoid challenges, have 
high practicability, or have major benefits should 
be favored. For each tactic, determine whether you 
would recommend it for consideration in future 
management decisions:
•	 Yes – This tactic is likely to be helpful in 
overcoming management challenges from 
climate change and meeting management 
objectives, and it should be considered in 
future management decisions. If needed, note 
any barriers that must be overcome to use this 
tactic. 
•	 No – This tactic is not helpful or cannot be 
used in overcoming management challenges 
or meeting management objectives, and it is 
not recommended for current consideration in 
future management activities. 
As you identify recommended tactics, consider how 
they work together as a set of actions. The goal is 
to identify a set of actions that are complementary 
and help to overcome the barriers identified in the 
previous step in order to achieve your management 
goals and objectives.
88
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Key Questions:
•	 How do you know if the selected actions 
were effective?
•	 What can you learn from these actions 
to inform future management?
About this Step
Monitoring is critical for understanding what 
changes are occurring because of climate change as 
well as whether selected actions were effective in 
meeting management goals and adapting forests to 
future conditions. This step helps to identify metrics 
that will be used to monitor whether management 
goals are achieved in the future and to determine 
whether the recommended management tactics were 
effective. The outcome of this step is a realistic and 
feasible monitoring scheme that can be used to help 
determine whether management should be altered 
in the future to account for new information and 
observations. 
There are several types of monitoring, and many 
efforts are already underway to monitor some 
indicators in the region. Most of these efforts are 
not designed to specifically monitor climate change, 
but they can still be useful in the context of climate 
change. Drawing upon and contributing to existing 
monitoring efforts when possible will help to detect 
changes that may not be detectable at smaller 
spatial scales and also may require fewer resources 
to implement. Consider what existing monitoring 
efforts are available and if they need to be modified 
to better monitor the results of your adaptation 
actions. Also consider what new monitoring items 
may be needed to evaluate whether you have met 
your management goals.  
Description of Workbook Items
Ecosystem Type or Management Topic – Insert the 
ecosystem type(s) or management topic(s) that you 
identified in Step 1. 
Adaptation Monitoring Variable – Identify 
monitoring items that will be used to evaluate 
whether you have achieved your management 
objectives and goals, or whether you have achieved 
a milestone that indicates progress toward your goal. 
When possible, select monitoring items that will 
also help you to understand whether the adaptation 
tactics recommended in the previous step were 
effective in working toward your management goals 
under climate change. 
Criteria for Evaluation – Identify a value or 
threshold that is meaningful for this monitoring item. 
For example, you may have a goal of 70-percent 
seedling survival after 3 years if your project will 
include tree planting. 
Monitoring Implementation – Describe how and 
when this information will be gathered. For example, 
you may monitor seedling survival every summer 
for 5 years after planting. It can be helpful and save 
resources to take advantage of existing monitoring 
efforts when possible. 
Step 5: MONITOR and evaluate 
effectiveness of implemented 
actions
89
Chapter 5. Adaptation Workbook
A 
D 
A 
P 
T 
A 
T 
I 
O 
N 
  
W 
O 
R 
K 
B 
O 
O 
K
Next Steps
Congratulations on completing the Adaptation 
Workbook! Now that you have considered how you 
can help your project area to adapt to the anticipated 
effects of climate change, you can work to integrate 
the information from the workbook, especially 
Steps 4 and 5, into existing management plans and 
decisionmaking processes. As you work toward this 
integration, it is important to keep in mind that the 
tactics you developed by completing the workbook 
have been recommended for further consideration 
(Step 4). Taking this step does not necessarily mean, 
however, that the tactics must be implemented or 
that the recommendations must supersede other 
considerations. The workbook was designed to 
lead you through a process for considering climate 
change, and it is up to you and your organization 
to determine the ways in which you will use the 
information and ideas you have developed. 
Finally, the workbook is designed as part of an 
adaptive management process, which by definition 
needs to be able to incorporate new information 
as it becomes available. When developing a plan 
to implement your adaptation tactics and then 
monitor the results, also make plans to revisit this 
workbook as often as necessary to evaluate whether 
any changes are needed. Consult with experts 
whenever possible to gather new information and 
further refine your management decisions. As new 
information becomes available through scientific 
research, monitoring activities, or other avenues, 
use that information to consider how it may change 
your expectations about future conditions and 
whether it is appropriate to adjust your management 
or monitoring to better help the systems adapt to a 
changing climate.
90
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
One of the unique aspects of the Climate Change 
Response Framework is that its comprehensive 
approach not only delivers high-quality information 
and tools, but also moves beyond general 
discussions of climate change to actual planning 
and implementation of adaptation in real-world 
management projects (Chapter 1). Climate-informed 
management actions identified and selected through 
the Adaptation Workbook (Chapter 5) are carried 
out in adaptation demonstration projects. Adaptation 
demonstrations serve as real-world examples of 
the integration of climate change information into 
natural resource management (Janowiak et al. 
2014b). 
More than 185 adaptation demonstrations have been 
developed in collaboration with a variety of public, 
private, nongovernmental, and tribal land managers 
to illustrate a diverse array of adaptation tactics 
(Fig. 14). These “case studies” reflect a variety of 
forest ownerships, management objectives, spatial 
scales, and complexity. In most of the adaptation 
demonstrations developed thus far, an individual 
or small group of landowners and land managers 
uses the adaptation workbook in a facilitated 
discussion or training session, which is led by a 
specialist with expertise in both climate change and 
forest management. This chapter summarizes five 
demonstration projects in order to show different 
applications of climate change adaptation in forest 
management. Additional summaries of adaptation 
demonstrations are available online at 
www.forestadaptation.org/demos. 
Figure 14.—Location of adaptation demonstrations developed through the Climate Change Response Framework as of 
the time of publication. Demonstrations featured in this chapter are identified with blue markers.
91
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Caroline Lake Property
Project Area and Management Goals
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) owns and manages 
more than 1,000 acres of forest on the Caroline 
Lake Property (Fig. 15) in northern Wisconsin. The 
property was acquired from industrial ownership in 
1997, and has since been maintained as a working 
forest to demonstrate sustainable forestry practices. 
Natural resource professionals from TNC and 
the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources 
used the Adaptation Workbook with facilitation to 
consider climate change effects on the property as 
part of updating the property’s forest management 
plan. A consulting forester worked with TNC staff to 
translate the proposed adaptation actions into stand-
level recommendations for the new plan. 
The Caroline Lake Property has been actively 
managed since 1997 with the intent of restoring 
characteristics associated with pre-European 
settlement forests. Much of the property contains 
upland northern hardwood forest, with numerous 
areas of lowland hardwood and conifer forest. 
Before considering the potential effects of climate 
change on the property, TNC management generally 
focused on:
•	 Encouraging mid- to late-successional forest 
characteristics 
•	 Emulating natural disturbance dynamics
•	 Increasing underrepresented species 
•	 Increasing age diversity 
•	 Protecting water quality along headwater 
tributaries.
Climate Change and the Caroline 
Lake Property
Climate Change Impacts
A vulnerability assessment for forest ecosystems 
in northern Wisconsin (Swanston et al. 2011) was 
used to identify potential climate change effects 
across the region. The managers combined this 
broad-scale information with their knowledge of the 
local landscape to identify attributes of the property 
that they believed would increase or decrease risks 
from climate change (Fig. 16). For example, many 
common tree species are projected to have reduced 
habitat suitability or productivity by the end of the 
century across northern Wisconsin (Janowiak et al. 
2014a, 2014b; Swanston et al. 2011). In particular, 
black spruce, balsam fir, quaking aspen, and other 
boreal species are at the southern extent of their 
range in the region, and these species are projected 
to decline substantially over the next century under 
multiple climate scenarios. Other important species, 
such as sugar maple, eastern hemlock, yellow 
birch, and eastern white pine, are also projected 
to decrease due to climate change; however, the 
projected decreases are less than for boreal species 
and generally only under climate scenarios that 
project greater levels of climate warming. The high 
abundance of boreal and northern tree species on 
the Caroline Lake property puts the forest at risk 
from potential changes in composition. At the same 
time, the property has a notably high diversity of 
Figure 15.—A wetland at the south end of Caroline Lake in 
northern Wisconsin. Photo by Maria Janowiak, U.S. Forest 
Service.
92
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
tree species compared to other tracts in the vicinity, 
which may reduce certain risks if one or a few tree 
species undergo especially large declines. 
A number of other potential effects on the property 
from climate change were also considered. These 
included direct effects on forests from warmer 
temperatures, altered precipitation, and extreme 
weather events, as well as indirect impacts related 
to interactions with forest pests and diseases and 
other stressors (Janowiak et al. 2014a, Swanston 
et al. 2011). Projected changes in precipitation and 
associated hydrology were identified as having 
the potential to greatly affect forests, but these 
projections were also the most uncertain. Projections 
of summer precipitation are highly variable for 
the region, but the combination of earlier spring 
snow melts and warmer temperatures without a 
compensatory increase in summer precipitation 
generally suggests drier summer conditions and 
altered hydrology. Lowland conifer forests, which 
contain a disproportionate share of tree species that 
are expected to decline due to climate change, may 
be at particular risk if hydrology is disrupted. 
Challenges and Opportunities for 
Management
In this step, managers explored the challenges and 
opportunities in meeting the property- and stand-
level management goals and objectives under 
changing conditions. Many of the challenges were 
based upon the vulnerabilities identified in the 
previous step, such as the challenge of promoting 
eastern hemlock and yellow birch in the upland 
hardwoods stands when some model results suggest 
that these species are at increased risk of declining 
by the end of the century. 
Some of the expected climate change impacts 
were perceived as potential opportunities. 
The species diversity in these stands provided 
many opportunities to maintain a sufficiently 
healthy forest and work toward goals related to 
increasing underrepresented species and increasing 
characteristics associated with older forests. Even 
increased frequency of disturbance from extreme 
weather events was viewed as a potential benefit 
(as long as the extent was not too great) because 
of the interest in incorporating natural disturbance 
Figure 16.—Forestry professionals discussing the adaptation demonstration at Caroline Lake. Photo by Maria Janowiak, 
U.S. Forest Service.
93
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
patterns into management and increasing structural 
diversity. Although the managers did not feel 
that the management trajectory needed to change 
dramatically as a result of considering climate 
change, they recognized that it could become more 
challenging to reach some of the management goals 
for tree species composition, and that considering 
a broader suite of tree species could increase the 
likelihood of achieving other management goals. 
Adapting to Climate Change
Approaches and Actions for Adaptation
Within this context, a number of potential adaptation 
actions were identified with the overarching intent 
to maintain the resilience of the forest to changing 
conditions (Table 5). In the northern hardwood 
forest, actions to maintain and enhance tree species 
diversity were prescribed to reduce the risk from 
climate change-related declines in the dominant 
species. This included the use of group selection and 
shelterwood harvests to enhance natural regeneration 
of mid-tolerant species. Several of these species, 
including northern red oak and black cherry, were 
present on the property in relatively low numbers 
and are projected to fare better under climate change 
compared to other species on the site. Eastern white 
pine was also identified as a desirable species. 
Although it is projected to decrease under some 
climate scenarios, the species is at a lower risk of 
decline than other native conifer species. 
The managers generally viewed the proposed actions 
as slight adjustments to, rather than a significant 
departure from, the current management trajectory. 
Additionally, several “contingency plans” were 
discussed for responding to disturbances or other 
unforeseen events. For example, lowland hardwood 
forests were identified as at risk from altered 
hydrologic regimes and reduced late growing season 
soil moisture from climate change, introduction of 
the emerald ash borer, or a combination of these 
threats. Although no active management is currently 
planned in these stands, swamp white oak and bur 
oak were identified as two potential species that 
could be planted in lowland hardwood forests to 
maintain forest cover if intervention were deemed 
necessary. These species are not currently present 
on the property but can be found at the northern 
extent of their range in localized areas in northern 
Wisconsin, which would represent a small degree of 
assisted migration.
Monitoring
Managers from TNC and the consultancy 
responsible for the property management identified 
forest inventory data as an integral component of 
monitoring the effectiveness of adaptation actions 
over time. Permanent forest inventory plot locations 
were established in randomized locations across 
the property, and a comprehensive inventory was 
performed to document stand characteristics and 
ecological attributes. The robust inventory provided 
a useful baseline for prescribing management 
activities for adaptation. For example, data on 
tree species abundance were used to calculate tree 
species richness and diversity evenness and provided 
an indication of the relative risk associated with 
the loss of different tree species. Additionally, the 
presence of advance regeneration of northern red 
oak and black cherry (tree species that may be better 
adapted to future conditions) was evident in the 
inventory data. In the future, inventories repeated 
at approximately 10-year intervals will be used to 
evaluate whether the selected management activities 
increase the abundance of these species in the 
understory and eventually the overstory.
More Information
A forest management plan for the Caroline Lake 
Property integrates the ideas that managers generated 
while using the Adaptation Workbook. More 
information on this adaptation demonstration is 
available at www.forestadaptation.org/CarolineLake. 
94
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
white pine
Table 5.—Selected proposed adaptation actions identified for the Caroline Lake Property in northern 
Wisconsin. The current management activities reflect the 2005 forest management plan and did not 
take the effects of climate change into account. The proposed adaptation actions were identified 
as part of the Adaptation Workbook process and will be integrated into a new, updated forest 
management plan.
Management area/topic
Adaptation approach
Proposed adaptation tactics
Northern hardwoods
Promote diverse age classes   
Maintain and restore diversity of 
native tree species   
Retain biological legacies
Use single-tree selection with additional use 
of targeted gaps and seed trees to maintain or 
enhance species diversity (e.g., mid-tolerant 
species) and age class diversity
Favor or restore native species that 
are expected to be better adapted to 
future conditions
Use large group selection or shelterwood harvests 
to increase northern red oak component in areas 
where natural regeneration is present
Prioritize and protect existing 
populations on unique sites   
Maintain and restore diversity of 
native tree species
Where opportunities exist, promote eastern white 
pine, black cherry, yellow birch, and other desirable 
species that have a lower risk of declining as a 
result of climate change   
Look for opportunities to reserve high-quality 
pockets of eastern hemlock on less vulnerable sites 
to serve as refugia for that species
Lowland conifer
Maintain or restore soil quality 
and nutrient cycling   
Maintain or restore hydrology
Maintain as no harvest reserve area   
Increase monitoring to detect hydrological changes 
in peatland systems; revisit planned management if 
changes are observed
Lowland hardwoods
Maintain or restore soil quality and 
nutrient cycling   
Maintain or restore hydrology   
Maintain or restore riparian areas
Maintain as no harvest reserve area
Establish or encourage new mixes of 
native species   
Identify and move species to sites 
that are likely to provide future habitat
Monitor stocking and natural regeneration 
of desired species; if inadequate, consider 
experimental plantings of swamp white oak or bur 
oak as species that are not currently present in the 
area but may do well in the future
Shoreline buffer
Maintain or restore riparian areas   
Maintain and restore diversity of 
native tree species
Where opportunities exist, promote eastern white 
pine or other species to provide long-lived conifer 
component and shading along lake shorelines
Upland conifer 
Maintain and restore diversity of 
native tree species   
Favor or restore native species that 
are expected to be better adapted to 
future conditions   
Manage for species and genotypes 
with wide moisture and temperature 
tolerances
Promote long-lived conifers, with additional 
emphasis on species that are at lower risk of 
decline under climate change, such as eastern 
95
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
L-A-D Foundation’s Pioneer Forest 
and the Ozark National Scenic 
Riverways: Jerktail Mountain
At 140,000 acres, the L-A-D Foundation’s Pioneer 
Forest is Missouri’s largest private land ownership. 
Since the early 1950s, this forest has employed a 
conservative, uneven-aged management method 
known as single-tree selection harvesting. Decades-
long application of this successful method on 
the Pioneer Forest indicates a truly sustainable 
forest management practice. Recognizing the 
importance of fire in managing glade ecosystems 
and shortleaf pine woodlands, foresters have 
developed fire prescriptions to reduce woody species 
encroachment, restore and maintain the targeted 
ecosystem, and enhance adaptive capacity to better 
cope with a range of future climates. 
Ozark National Scenic Riverways was established 
as a unit of the National Park System by the U.S. 
Congress in 1964 to conserve and interpret the 
scenic, natural, scientific, ecological, and historic 
values and resources within the National Riverways, 
and to provide for public outdoor recreational use 
and enjoyment of those resources. The National 
Riverways includes portions of the Current and 
Jacks Fork Rivers, providing 134 miles of clear, 
free-flowing, spring-fed waterways. The overarching 
goal of the fire management program in the 
Riverways is to restore and maintain fire-dependent 
natural communities such as glades and woodlands.   
Project Area and Management Goals 
This project is located on a 1,836-acre tract within 
the Current River Hills subsection of the Missouri 
Ozark Highlands in south-central Missouri about 9 
miles northeast of Eminence. The rugged terrain of 
the Current River Hills features extensive forest and 
woodlands with high ridges dominated by shortleaf 
pine and oak with scattered igneous and dolomite 
glades. The L-A-D Foundation and National Park 
Service each own portions of the Jerktail Mountain 
management area, and jointly manage and monitor 
the area. This project is supported in part by the 
Wildlife Conservation Society’s Climate Adaptation 
Fund.
The overall goal of the project is to improve 
natural community health and resilience while also 
providing timber products. Two community types 
are found in the area: igneous and dolomite glades, 
and woodlands dominated by oak and shortleaf pine. 
The goal was to restore these ecosystems to natural 
conditions more in character with pre-European 
settlement conditions. 
Specific objectives included: 
•	 Restoring fire on the landscape by initiating a 
prescribed burn regime
•	 Removing encroaching eastern redcedar and 
nonnative invasive species
•	 Reducing the impacts of overuse 
•	 Decreasing stand density to align better with 
local site conditions.
Climate Change 
and Jerktail Mountain
Climate Change Impacts
According to a recently completed vulnerability 
assessment for the Central Hardwoods region 
(Brandt et al. 2014), several climate change impacts 
are expected in the Missouri Ozarks region by the 
end of the century, including:
•	 Mean annual temperature increases from 2 to 
7 °F (1.1 to 3.9 °C)
•	 Increased precipitation in winter and spring 
and potential declines in summer
•	 Increased frequency and severity of wildfire.
These climatic changes will affect local ecosystems 
in the Jerktail Mountain management area. Glades 
are primarily dominated by nonwoody species. 
Although future distribution of these nonwoody 
species has not been modeled, many are adapted to 
the hot, dry conditions that are expected to become 
more common. Nevertheless, a number of modeling 
studies in other areas have shown that some species 
with very narrow geographic distributions, like 
many glade-associated species, are more at risk to 
climate change. Post oak is typically found in glade 
systems, and habitat suitability for this species is 
likely to increase. Eastern redcedar encroachment 
96
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
(Fig. 17) is the main issue negatively affecting 
herbaceous species on glades at this site, and that 
species is likely to expand in the future due to other 
factors besides climate change.
In the woodland, shortleaf pine and post oak 
are projected to benefit from a warmer climate. 
Shortleaf pine, however, is less prevalent in this site 
than in some nearby areas and will regenerate only 
on bare mineral soil in an open area. In addition, 
southern pine beetle could be a potential future 
risk for shortleaf pine, although risks are relatively 
low due to the low density of pine at the site. Other 
species common in the site, like black, chinkapin, 
red, and scarlet oak, are projected to be negatively 
affected by drier summers (Brandt et al. 2014). 
White oak is also common, and models suggest it 
may persist in the area at least over the next several 
decades. Woodlands are adapted to frequent, low-
intensity fires, but could be negatively affected if 
fires become too severe. 
Challenges and Opportunities 
for Management
Managers identified potential management 
challenges on both the glade and woodland sites. 
The increased likelihood of rain during the winter 
could make it harder to conduct prescribed burns in 
glades compared to the woodlands because glades 
can absorb water like a sponge in the spring. This 
could make it difficult to control or reduce eastern 
redcedar with fire alone, and mechanical treatment 
for eastern redcedar might be needed. 
Shifts in precipitation could also alter the prescribed 
burn window, which might require the timing to be 
adjusted. Burn crews must be planned for months in 
advance, so it is hard to make last-minute changes to 
the timing of prescribed burns. It could also become 
more challenging to thin timber if conditions 
become too wet during some seasons, as there is an 
increased risk of damage to shallow roots and soil 
quality when operations are conducted on wet soils. 
Despite these challenges, the managers at Jerktail 
Mountain expressed confidence in their flexibility to 
make adjustments in their management as conditions 
change, especially with timber harvest. 
Adapting to Climate Change
Approaches and Actions for Adaptation
Staff from the L-A-D Foundation and Ozark 
National Scenic Riverways used the Adaptation 
Workbook to identify actions to enhance the 
adaptive capacity of pine woodland ecosystems 
(Table 6). Adaptation tactics identified were closely 
in line with current management, but added an 
increased emphasis on restoring fire. 
Monitoring
Monitoring for the two sites will be focused on 
assessing the effectiveness of achieving management 
goals. Restoration of the understory flora will 
be evaluated by monitoring herbaceous species 
richness and cover in plots both pretreatment 
and post-treatment. To assess the effectiveness 
of the treatments at reducing stand density 
(Fig. 18), the density of pole-sized trees will be 
monitored pretreatment and post-treatment and 
photo monitoring will be used for visual changes 
in structure and composition. Basal area, species 
composition, and growth of woody species will be 
monitored to assess how well the treatments favored 
future-adapted species. Shortleaf pine regeneration 
will also be monitored. 
Figure 17.—Encroachment of eastern redcedar on a glade 
ecosystem on Jerktail Mountain in south-central Missouri. 
Photo by Leslie Brandt, U.S. Forest Service.
97
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
More Information
Implementation of this project began in 2014. More 
information on this adaptation demonstration is 
available at www.forestadaptation.org/Jerktail_
Mountain. 
Table 6.—Selected proposed adaptation actions identified for the Jerktail Mountain adaptation 
demonstration in south-central Missouri
Management area/topic
Adaptation approach
Proposed adaptation 
tactics
Both sites
Restore fire to fire-adapted systems
Variable-intensity 
prescribed fire every 3 to 
4 years initially, then 
shifting to every 5 years
Maintain or restore soil quality and nutrient cycling  
Glade
Favor and restore native species that are expected to be 
better adapted to future conditions 
Mechanical reduction 
of eastern redcedar to 
increase light penetration 
to the ground and reduce 
competition
Prioritize and protect existing populations on unique sites  
Prioritize and protect sensitive or at-risk species or 
communities
Woodland
Maintain or improve the ability of forests to resist pests and 
pathogens   
Allow for areas of natural regeneration after disturbance    
Retain biological legacies
Selective thinning focused 
on removing scarlet oak 
and other species not 
favored under future 
climate conditions 
Maintain and restore diversity of native tree species
Disfavor species that are distinctly maladapted 
Favor and restore native species that are expected to be 
better adapted to future conditions
Figure 18.—Thinned woodland stand on Jerktail Mountain, 
Missouri. Photo by Leslie Brandt, U.S. Forest Service.
98
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Middle Blue River Watershed 
Project Area and Management Goals 
The Middle Blue River watershed (Fig. 19) is 
located in Kansas City, Missouri, and covers an 
area of 13,500 acres. It is one of 11 locations in the 
national Urban Waters Federal Partnership. The 
Kansas City Missouri Partnership has formed around 
four existing projects that have commonalities 
in their visions, planning elements, partners, and 
geographies in the Middle Blue River reach. This 
location is also at the confluence with Brush Creek, 
one of the Blue River’s most visible and degraded 
tributaries. The watershed includes a mix of 
developed urban areas and upland and bottomland 
natural areas. 
The Middle Blue River watershed has suffered 
from frequent and serious flooding, degraded 
water quality, habitat loss from channelization, 
and economic disinvestment and blight. However, 
the area is rich with potential for sustainable 
redevelopment and restoration. Municipal Farms, 
a largely abandoned site comprising multiple 
brownfields, has deep historical and cultural 
significance to the city and its residents. It also has 
extensive native wetland and upland areas, and a 
Figure 19.—Rocky Point Glade, Middle Blue River 
watershed, Kansas City, Missouri. Photo by Wendy 
Sangster, Missouri Department of Conservation, used 
with permission.
Figure 20.—Vegetation along the Blue River, Missouri. 
Photo by Wendy Sangster, Missouri Department of 
Conservation, used with permission.
geographical nexus with the Blue River and Brush 
Creek confluence through the native stream Round 
Creek (Fig. 20). The former farm can be redeveloped 
to be a hub of connectivity to riparian greenways, 
conservation opportunity areas, and restoration sites 
that are being developed through the partnership 
project. This will address what local residents 
have identified as needs: connectivity, livable 
neighborhoods, recreation, river access, economic 
development, sustainable jobs, and access to fresh 
food.
Key management goals in the Middle Blue River 
watershed include: 
•	 Conserving the health and sustainability of 
forests, savannas, glades, and other natural 
areas in the watershed 
•	 Establishing and maintaining the ecosystem 
services of natural and urban ecosystems in 
the area, including minimizing stormwater 
runoff, improving water quality, improving air 
quality, and reducing urban heat island effects 
•	 Maintaining and establishing high-quality 
wildlife habitat 
•	 Improving the health and sustainability of 
residential and street trees in the watershed.
99
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Climate Change 
and the Middle Blue River 
Climate Change Impacts 
At the time of using the workbook, no climate 
change vulnerability assessment was available 
for the Kansas City area. Instead, managers of the 
Middle Blue River watershed relied on regional 
technical input reports from the National Climate 
Assessment (Melillo et al. 2014), tree species habitat 
suitability modeling results from the Climate Change 
Tree Atlas (Landscape Change Research Group 
2014), and other relevant primary and secondary 
literature. Regional downscaled climate projections 
(Brandt et al. 2014) were also used. 
One key climate change impact that managers 
identified as having the potential to affect the area is 
an expected increase in heavy precipitation events, 
which could increase runoff and the risk of severe 
flooding. Along with changes in precipitation and 
hydrology, temperatures in the area are projected to 
increase several degrees by the end of the century. 
Temperatures in some places in the watershed could 
be even more severe due to local urban heat island 
effects. The managers also discussed how changes in 
temperature and precipitation could lead to increased 
stresses on both native and cultivated species and 
increase habitat suitability for many weedy and 
invasive species. 
Challenges and Opportunities 
for Management 
Based on the projected impacts to the area, managers 
of the Middle Blue River watershed identified 
numerous potential challenges and opportunities in 
meeting their management objectives. Examples 
of climate change-related challenges for the 
management of the watershed are as follows:
•	 Tree species diversity may decrease as many 
trees become stressed from increased flooding, 
extreme heat, and reduced habitat suitability. 
•	 It could become harder to manage invasive 
species due to a longer growing season and an 
increased range of southern invasive species.
•	 Extreme weather could inhibit recruitment and 
establishment of native species. 
•	 In upland sites, there could be difficulty 
matching appropriate weather and time for 
prescribed burning. 
•	 It could become challenging to find suitable 
species for planting in boulevards and yards 
that are able to withstand a suite of weather 
extremes. 
•	 Climate-related stressors could increase the 
susceptibility of trees to pests and pathogens 
in both natural and developed areas. 
Climate change-related opportunities for the 
management of the watershed include the following:
•	 Some native species could benefit from the 
projected changes in climate. 
•	 Some invasive species might be negatively 
affected by extreme rain events and heat. 
•	 A longer growing season could increase 
establishment of new tree species and cultivars 
in boulevard and residential plantings.
•	 A longer growing season could provide a 
longer window of opportunity for prescribed 
burns. 
•	 Increases in temperature could increase public 
desire for shade trees to help mitigate heat 
island effects. 
•	 New species that require less maintenance 
could be planted on developed sites. 
Adapting to Climate Change
Approaches and Actions for Adaptation
Several adaptation approaches were identified 
across the watershed that differed by landscape 
position and land use (Table 7). Adaptation actions 
for bottomland natural areas centered on restoring 
hydrology to increase resilience to more-extreme 
runoff and rainfall. Upland area adaptation actions 
focused on restoring native ecosystems and favoring 
native species that are more likely to withstand 
projected changes in climate. In developed urban 
areas, adaptation actions focused on replacing 
declining urban trees with a new, more diverse mix 
of species that is better suited to future climate 
conditions. 
100
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Table 7.—Selected proposed adaptation actions identified for the Middle Blue River watershed 
adaptation demonstration in Kansas City, Missouri
Management area/topic
Adaptation approach
Proposed adaptation tactics
Riparian and 
   bottomland areas 
Maintain or restore hydrology 
Create an incentive program that encourages residents 
and businesses to implement infiltration practices    
Adopt ordinances that require development plans to 
mimic predevelopment hydrology
Prevent the introduction and 
establishment of invasive plant 
species and remove existing 
invasive species
Expand funding to remove bush honeysuckles and 
other invasive species through volunteer workdays and 
contracted removal    
Map honeysuckle by using aerial photography
Upland areas 
Prioritize and maintain unique 
sites
Continue management of Blue River Glade as a 
natural area
Favor or restore native species 
that are expected to be adapted 
to future conditions
Plant areas where natural regeneration is less likely    
Use species predicted to respond well to risks such 
as climate change and potential insect and disease 
problems
Restore fire in fire-adapted 
ecosystems
Conduct prescribed burns using appropriate timing and 
frequency
Developed and 
   urban areas 
Disfavor species that are 
distinctly maladapted
Develop a replacement plan for declining and at-risk 
tree species
Establish or encourage new 
mixes of native species that 
increase species diversity.    
Discourage species predicted 
to be maladapted to future risks
Develop recommendations for urban trees that include 
new species and discourage maladapted species
Adaptation actions identified were in line with 
conservation goals already identified by the 
partnership. However, managers felt that climate 
change places an additional urgency on restoring 
the system’s hydrology and native species diversity 
while also identifying new species that may be better 
suited to future climates. 
Monitoring
Managers of the Middle Blue River watershed 
identified a number of potential monitoring metrics 
to evaluate the effectiveness of their adaptation 
strategies. For example, in riparian areas, the number 
of acres of honeysuckles removed or replanted 
with desirable species would be measured. Across 
the watershed, changes in canopy cover in both 
developed and natural areas could be measured. In 
addition, as new trees are planted in developed areas, 
both the number and species diversity of trees could 
be monitored over time. 
More Information
At this time partners have applied for several grants 
to support restoration efforts in the Middle Blue 
River watershed. These grants pertain to different 
geographic areas and address various issues. If 
these efforts are funded, the forest management 
adaptation plan created using the Adaptation 
Workbook will inform the scope of work that will 
be performed. More information on this adaptation 
demonstration is available at www.forestadaptation.
org/MiddleBlueRiver. 
101
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Hudson Farm Club, Inc.
Organized in the late 1970s, Gracie & Harrigan 
Consulting Foresters, Inc. uses science-based forest 
management to serve more than 750 woodland 
owners, including families, major corporations, and 
nonprofit organizations. Together, they own more 
than 34,000 acres of woodland which benefit from 
sustainable forestry. Responding to climate change- 
and climate-related disturbances is an important 
part of sustainable forest management. Gracie & 
Harrigan Consulting Foresters, Inc. demonstrated 
how to incorporate climate change into private forest 
management through the project described below.
Project Area and Management Goals 
This project covers about 3,000 acres of privately 
owned forest land in northern New Jersey. Most 
of the property is forested upland characterized by 
mid-successional, closed-canopy upland oak and 
northern hardwood forest. Due to a combination 
of past management, fire suppression, and natural 
succession, this forest type is beginning to shift 
from oak/hickory to northern hardwood forest. The 
management goals included: 
•	 Improving the overall quality, health, and 
vigor of the forest 
•	 Restoring early successional habitat for the 
state-endangered golden-winged warbler and 
other species in this niche
•	 Increasing species and structural diversity
•	 Retaining hard mast sources on the landscape.
Early management actions included a modified 
seed tree harvest that retained 10 to 15 songbird 
perch trees per acre preceded by removal of 
invasive plants. After 2 years, the high-quality 
seed bed provided a source for native plants, and 
there was aggressive stump-sprouting. Post-harvest 
regeneration surveys confirmed dominance of 
maple and birch. The golden-winged warbler was 
not yet observed, probably due to lack of advance 
regeneration. The yellow-breasted chat, a songbird 
that is a state species of concern, was observed using 
young regeneration. Additionally, deer populations 
have been managed on this property over the last 5 
years through a Quality Deer Management Program.
Climate Change and the Hudson 
Farm Club 
Climate Change Impacts 
At the time of using the workbook, no climate 
change vulnerability assessment was available 
for northern New Jersey. Instead, a consulting 
forester from Gracie & Harrigan relied on global 
and regional technical input reports from the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007), 
tree species habitat suitability modeling results from 
the Climate Change Tree Atlas (Landscape Change 
Research Group 2014), and other relevant primary 
and secondary literature. Projected changes in 
climate include:
•	 Warmer temperatures and drier soils during 
the summer
•	 Increased annual precipitation with a shift 
toward more-intense rain events and longer 
periods between events
•	 Increased disturbance from wind and storms.
These climatic changes are expected to affect forests 
in northern New Jersey. The Climate Change Tree 
Atlas projects declines in suitable habitat for many 
of the northern hardwood species, but also projects 
increases or stability in suitable habitat for oak and 
hickory species. Sugar maple, red maple, white ash, 
black cherry, American beech, and black birch are 
among the most common species on this property, 
and are all projected to lose suitable habitat. Species 
projected to increase include pignut hickory, 
bitternut hickory, mockernut hickory, shagbark 
hickory, white oak, and chinkapin oak. Some species 
that are currently rare or absent from northern New 
Jersey that are expected to have suitable habitat in 
the future are post oak, southern red oak, loblolly 
pine, slash pine, shortleaf pine, black hickory, and 
blackjack oak. Warmer temperatures and a shifting 
soil moisture regime are also expected to benefit 
invasive species such as autumn olive, ailanthus, 
garlic mustard, and bush honeysuckles. These 
species generally occupy a range of site conditions, 
and can outcompete seedlings and saplings, thus 
hindering the regeneration of native species. 
102
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Challenges and Opportunities 
for Management 
Based on the projected impacts to the area, 
challenges and opportunities in meeting management 
objectives were identified. Overall, warmer and drier 
conditions are expected to favor species that are 
suited to warmer and drier conditions, which could 
reverse the ongoing transition from oak/hickory 
to northern hardwoods that has been occurring in 
this area in recent decades. Climate change-related 
challenges include the following: 
•	
It may be difficult to maintain American beech
in the future, although this species is currently
an important mast species. Beech bark disease
is currently a problem for beech, and this
species is also projected to decline sharply
as a result of climate change.
•	
It may be harder to maintain other northern
hardwood species in this location because
suitable habitat for many species is also
projected to decrease.
•	
Insect pests and pathogens are expected
to become more damaging as tree species
respond to a variety of climate-related
stressors. For example, oak species are
at greater risk of total mortality when
consecutive years of gypsy moth defoliation
are combined with drought.
Climate change-related opportunities include the 
following: 
•	
Warmer temperatures, drier soils, and more
frequent drought are expected to create more-
suitable conditions for the regeneration of
oaks and hickories, which are currently not
regenerating adequately.
•	
Successful regeneration of oak and hickory
species would also provide important mast for
wildlife in the absence of beech nuts.1
Adapting to Climate Change 
Approaches and Actions for Adaptation
Staff from Gracie & Harrigan Consulting Foresters 
used the Adaptation Workbook to identify actions 
to enhance the adaptive capacity of the property. 
A consulting forester first identified an overall 
approach to managing this stand under changing 
conditions: restoring the oak and hickory component 
of this forest while simultaneously reducing the 
northern hardwood component. Specific tactics 
were identified that, given anticipated challenges 
in maintaining northern hardwood species over the 
long term, support transition to an oak- and hickory-
dominated forest while providing early successional 
habitat (Table 8, Figs. 21 and 22). 
Table 8.—Selected proposed adaptation actions identified for the Hudson Farm Club adaptation 
demonstration in northern New Jersey
Management area/topic
Adaptation approach
Proposed adaptation tactics
Upland oak/
   northern hardwood 
   forest
Restore fire to fire-adapted 
ecosystems 
Simulate low- to medium-intensity fire regime to 
stimulate or enhance oak regeneration and improve 
light conditions on the forest floor   
Perform intermediate treatment to reduce maple/
beech/birch seed sources and stimulate resprouting of 
the woody understory
Prevent the introduction and 
establishment of invasive plant 
species, and remove existing 
invasive species
Conduct preharvest invasive plant control and 
increase frequency of monitoring and control
Maintain or improve the ability 
of forests to resist pests and 
pathogens
Spray for gypsy moth to prevent two consecutive 
years of defoliation and reduce mortality of oaks 
during periods of drought
103
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Monitoring
Consulting foresters identified a number of potential 
monitoring metrics to evaluate the effectiveness of 
their adaptation strategies. For example, in harvested 
areas, the number of acres of successful oak and 
hickory regeneration will be measured at 1 and 
3 years post-harvest. The number of gypsy moth 
egg casings per acre will be measured during the 
winter or fall following a season with widespread 
defoliation. A successful evaluation would confirm 
more species present in post-harvest stand survey 
than in the preharvest stand survey, with low 
occurrence of gypsy moth. Across the property, and 
larger northern New Jersey region, invasive species 
are expected to become a greater threat and require 
more resources. Although monitoring for invasive 
species is usually conducted 3 years post-harvest, an 
earlier and additional survey at 1 year post-harvest 
will improve chances of early detection.
More Information
A forest management plan for the Hudson Farm 
Club integrates the ideas that were generated by 
using the Adaptation Workbook. More information 
on this adaptation demonstration is available at 
www.forestadaptation.org/demonstration-projects/
HudsonFarmClub. 
Figure 21.—Results of an intermediate stand treatment, 
which reduced the maple and beech component, and 
improved site conditions for oak regeneration, Hudson 
Farm Club demonstration site in northern New Jersey. 
Photo by Steve Kallesser, Gracie & Harrigan Consulting 
Foresters, Inc., used with permission.
Figure 22.—Resprouting of the woody understory, which will provide early successional habitat for wildlife in the short 
term, at the Hudson Farm Club demonstration site, New Jersey. Photo by Steve Kallesser, Gracie & Harrigan Consulting 
Foresters, Inc., used with permission.
104
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Superior National Forest – North 
Shore Forest Restoration Project
Project Area and Management Goals
The forests along Minnesota’s North Shore of Lake 
Superior (Fig. 23) are important for wildlife habitat, 
as regulators of stream temperatures, and as scenic 
elements of the North Shore. Tourists who make the 
drive along Scenic Highway 61 from Duluth to the 
Canadian border support a thriving recreation and 
tourism economy with many outfitters, restaurants, 
and lodges. Visitors and year-round residents have 
noticed a striking change in the landscape in the last 
few decades. Current stands of paper birch and aspen 
have reached their biological age limits and nearly 
80 percent of the birch along the North Shore are old 
and dying (Fig. 24). In addition, conifer regeneration 
is nearly absent in the understory of North Shore 
forests due to a lack of mature trees to provide 
seed, increased competition from native bluejoint 
grass, and heavy deer browse. Both the decline of 
aspen and birch and the apparent lack of conifer 
regeneration have prompted attention and concern 
from many agencies and landowners in the region. 
As a result, the Superior National Forest (SNF) is 
trying to restore forests in this landscape through 
active forest management. In 2013, SNF staff joined 
with the State of Minnesota, the Grand Portage 
Tribe, and a broader group of stakeholders 
Figure 23.—The North Shore Forest Restoration Project location and surrounding area. Map prepared by the Superior 
National Forest.
105
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
called the North Shore Forest Collaborative 
(www.northshoreforest.org/) to create the North 
Shore Forest Restoration Project. All partners shared 
the primary concern of restoring eastern white pine, 
northern white-cedar, and other native plants to 
the area to ensure the health and resilience of the 
forest. The SNF North Shore Interdisciplinary Team 
designed restoration treatments for this adaptation 
demonstration that would occur on SNF lands 
only. The project area for the Forest Service North 
Shore Forest Restoration Project is about 102,000 
acres, which is part of a larger North Shore Forest 
Collaborative boundary of more than 200,000 
acres. Active management is planned for about 
12,000 acres within the Forest Service ownership. 
This project was planned according to National 
Environmental Policy Act procedures used within 
the Forest Service. 
Goals for the North Shore Forest Restoration Project 
include: 
•	 Restoring native vegetation communities, 
including forests of paper birch and long-lived 
conifers
•	 Improving wildlife habitat, including cavities 
for nesting sites and coarse woody debris
•	 Improving watershed health, with a focus on 
riparian areas that drain into Lake Superior
•	 Ensuring a sustainable supply of timber 
products that provide an economic opportunity 
to local communities
•	 Reducing hazardous fuels to decrease wildfire 
risk.
Figure 24.—Stands of old and dying birch, with very little conifer regeneration in the understory, along the North Shore in 
Minnesota. Photo by the Superior National Forest.
106
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Climate Change and the North Shore 
of Lake Superior
Climate Change Impacts
The SNF project team gathered information from 
the Minnesota Forest Ecosystem Vulnerability 
and Synthesis to capture large-scale trends and 
projections for northern Minnesota (Handler et al. 
2014a). The team also considered how the local 
characteristics of the project area might modify 
some of the projected impacts of climate change. 
Northern Minnesota has experienced substantial 
changes in temperature and precipitation over the 
past 100 years, and the rate of change appears to 
be increasing (Handler et al. 2014a). A few climate 
trends relevant to the project area are: 
•	 Temperatures have increased across northern 
Minnesota, with the greatest warming 
occurring during winter, and this trend is 
expected to continue. Temperature increases 
during the 20th century were greater along the 
North Shore of Lake Superior than in other 
parts of northern Minnesota. 
•	 The North Shore project area received 
increased precipitation during the 20th 
century across all seasons, and heavy rainfall 
events became more frequent. Precipitation 
is projected to increase in winter and spring 
across a range of climate scenarios, but there is 
greater uncertainty for summer precipitation. 
Slight increases or large decreases are 
possible.
•	 Snowfall decreased across northern Minnesota 
over the past century and this trend is expected 
to continue, with more winter precipitation 
falling as rain. 
In summary, these climate trends point to a future 
that is warmer and more variable, presenting greater 
stress for paper birch, white spruce, balsam fir, 
and other boreal species present in the area. The 
steep terrain and shallow soils along the North 
Shore make the area more susceptible to flooding 
from heavy rain events, as was experienced in the 
summer of 2012. At the same time, forests may also 
be at increased risk of moisture stress because the 
southern aspect, warmer conditions, thin soils, and 
longer growing season could combine to make water 
stress more challenging for forests in this landscape. 
Challenges and Opportunities 
for Management
Based on the projected impacts to the area, 
project team members identified challenges 
and opportunities in meeting their management 
objectives. Examples of climate change-related 
challenges for forest restoration in the North Shore 
landscape are as follows:
•	 It may become more challenging to regenerate 
paper birch in the future as conditions change. 
•	 Deer herbivory will be an obstacle for 
planning and regenerating many tree species 
because deer populations are expected to 
remain high. 
•	 Many iconic tree species in the project area, 
such as white spruce, balsam fir, paper birch, 
and quaking aspen, are projected to decline in 
the future.
•	 Outbreaks of pests like spruce budworm may 
be larger and more damaging in the future. 
Climate change-related opportunities for forest 
restoration in the North Shore landscape 
include the following:
•	 There may be a window remaining for 
regeneration of paper birch during the next 
10 years, before conditions become more 
unfavorable. 
•	 Lake Superior may moderate future changes. 
This landscape could provide one of the best 
long-term refugia for boreal species, compared 
to other parts of Minnesota. 
•	 There are some north-facing and wetter 
microsites within the project area that may be 
better options for retaining boreal species over 
the long term. 
•	 Eastern white pine is tolerant of a wide 
range of conditions and is projected to have 
increased suitable habitat. Red pine is also 
projected to increase in suitable habitat along 
the North Shore. 
107
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Adapting to Climate Change
Approaches and Actions for Adaptation
After going through the Adaptation Workbook, 
SNF staff continued to think about possible 
adaptation actions and refine the North Shore Forest 
Restoration Project (Table 9). Importantly, the team 
members recognized that many of the management 
actions they already had planned also had benefits 
for climate change adaptation. Northeastern 
Minnesota also has the potential to provide refugia 
for boreal species like paper birch and white spruce. 
Therefore, the team ultimately decided to proceed 
with many of the original goals and objectives of 
the project. Several modifications were added to 
the Proposed Action to increase diversity and future 
management flexibility.
Table 9.—Selected proposed adaptation actions identified for the North Shore Forest Restoration 
Project on the Superior National Forest in Minnesota
Management area/topic
Adaptation approach
Proposed adaptation tactics
Entire project
Maintain and create habitat corridors through 
reforestation or restoration
Consider spatial arrangement of 
treatments for connectivity and corridors 
Use landscape-scale planning and 
partnerships to reduce fragmentation and 
enhance connectivity
Work with neighboring landowners and 
the North Shore Forest Collaborative to 
connect treatment areas 
Manage herbivory to protect or promote 
regeneration    
Protect future-adapted regeneration from 
herbivory
Try a variety of strategies for protecting 
regeneration from deer herbivory, such as 
fences, tree cages, bud caps, or repellent 
sprays, or some combination
Establish or encourage new mixes of native 
species
Plant additional native species that are 
present in the surrounding landscape 
that were not originally part of the project 
design, including bur oak and northern red 
oak
Paper birch
Anticipate and respond to species decline    
Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be better adapted to future 
conditions
Identify stands of old, poor-quality paper 
birch for restoration to other appropriate 
native or climate-adapted forest types 
Prioritize and protect existing populations on 
unique sites
Identify the best possible locations to 
retain paper birch on the landscape for 
the long term, including stands of healthy 
paper birch, areas with north-facing 
slopes, and cold pockets
Eastern white pine
Manage for species and genotypes with wide 
moisture and temperature tolerances    
Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be better adapted to future 
conditions    
Manage habitats over a range of sites and 
conditions
Increase the proportion of planted eastern 
white pine, and plant this species within 
many other topographic positions and 
forest types
108
Chapter 6. Adaptation Demonstrations
Adding these adjustments to the original Proposed 
Action will help the Superior National Forest restore 
forest cover along the North Shore, and accomplish 
the objectives of restoring native vegetation 
communities, improving wildlife habitat, improving 
watershed health, providing sustainable timber 
products, and reducing hazardous fuels.
Monitoring
Project team members identified several monitoring 
items routinely applied or required on Forest Service 
vegetation management projects that would deliver 
important information about the effectiveness 
of adaptation actions. For example, standard 
silvicultural exams will provide information about 
the number of trees per acre by species, basal area, 
and size classes. These surveys can give managers a 
sense of the number of species or the volume within 
a stand that may be composed of species at risk of 
declining over time. Similarly, stocking surveys 
are routinely implemented during the first and 
third years after planting. It may be possible to add 
another survey at this time for the subset of future-
adapted or off-site species to compare their success 
to more conventional species. 
After completing the Adaptation Workbook and 
subsequent project planning, the SNF decided that 
the North Shore Forest Restoration Project will be 
managed according to an adaptive management 
framework. This means that treatments are designed 
with built-in continuous assessment and processes 
for improvement (i.e., “If X happens, then action Y 
will be implemented.”). This approach will allow 
managers the latitude to treat successive portions of 
the project based on local conditions, and to learn 
from activities implemented in early years of the 
project. 
More Information
A final Decision Notice was issued for the North 
Shore Forest Restoration Project in August 2014. 
More information about the final decision and 
planned actions is available on the Superior 
National Forest Web site (http://go.usa.gov/SyVz). 
Implementation of the project began in 2014 and 
will continue for the next several years. More 
information on this adaptation demonstration is 
available at www.forestadaptation.org/NorthShore. 
109
Acknowledgments
The second edition of the Forest Adaptation 
Resources, like the first, has drawn heavily upon 
numerous contributors for their perspectives, 
expertise, critical review and feedback, testing, 
and enthusiasm. We are thankful to all of these 
people and organizations for their time and effort. 
Linda Parker and Matt St. Pierre were among the 
original authors who conceptualized and created the 
original interrelated resources, which persist into 
the current edition. Dave Peterson and Linda Joyce 
helped shape the original edition and provided early 
reviews of the vulnerability assessment chapter 
in this version. Dozens of experts from across the 
Northeast and upper Midwest generously donated 
their time to reviewing and amending the adaptation 
strategies and approaches chapters. The Adaptation 
Workbook has been used by hundreds of natural 
resource professionals, who have shown us what 
could be done in the real world with these tools 
and provided feedback to help us improve them. 
Our partners from The Nature Conservancy, L-A-D 
Foundation’s Pioneer Forest and the National Park 
Service, Kansas City Missouri Partnership, Gracie & 
Harrigan Consulting Foresters, Inc., and the Superior 
National Forest, were kind enough to let us share 
their stories and to work with us to make sure we got 
things right. Five intrepid peer reviewers formally 
reviewed the document; two provided anonymous 
reviews, and Toni Lyn Morelli and Michelle 
Staudinger from the Northeast Climate Science 
Center, and Karen Dante from the U.S. Forest 
Service, Office of Sustainability and Climate Change 
provided open reviews. We are indebted to all of 
them for greatly improving this edition. Finally, 
this work is made possible through core support 
by the U.S. Forest Service, especially the Northern 
Research Station and the Eastern Region; it took 
vision to launch this work, and requires dedication 
to continue it. We are honored to work with so many 
fine people.
110
Aber, J.D.; Ollinger, S.V.; Driscoll, C.T. 1997. 
Modeling nitrogen saturation in forest 
ecosystems in response to land use and 
atmospheric deposition. Ecological Modelling. 
101 (1): 61-78.
Abrams, M.D. 1992. Fire and the development of 
oak forests. BioScience. 42: 346-353.
Agee, J.K.; Bahro, B.; Finney, M.A.; Omi, P.N.; 
Sapsis, D.B.; Skinner, C.N.; Van Wagtendonk, 
J.W.; Weatherspoon, P.C. 2000. The use 
of shaded fuelbreaks in landscape fire 
management. Forest Ecology and Management. 
127: 55-66.
Akçakaya, H.R.; Mills, G.; Doncaster, C.P. 2007. 
The role of metapopulations in conservation. 
In: Macdonald, D.W.; Service, K., eds. Key topics 
in conservation biology. Malden, MA: Blackwell 
Publishing: 64-84.
American National Standards Institute. 2008. 
American national standards for tree care 
operations—tree, shrub, and other woody 
plant maintenance—standard practices (A300 
Part 1—Pruning). Manchester, NH: Tree Care 
Industry Association. 13 p. Available at http://tcia.
org/business/ansi-a300-standards (accessed 
April 20, 2016).
Anderson, M.; Clark, M.; Sheldon, A.O. 2012. 
Resilient sites for terrestrial conservation 
in the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic region. 
The Nature Conservancy, Eastern Conservation 
Science. 168 p. https://www.conservationgateway.
org/ConservationByGeography/
NorthAmerica/UnitedStates/edc/Documents/
TerrestrialResilience020112.pdf (accessed May 1, 
2016). 
Literature Cited
Anderson, P.D.; Chmura, D.J. 2009. Silvicultural 
approaches to maintain forest health and 
productivity under current and future 
climates. Western Forester. 54: 6-8.
Ashcroft, M.B. 2010. Identifying refugia from 
climate change. Journal of Biogeography. 37: 
1407-1413.
Aubin, I.; Garbe, C.; Colombo, S.; Drever, C.; 
McKenney, D.; Messier, C.; Pedlar, J.; Saner, 
M.; Venier, L.; Wellstead, A. 2011. Why we 
disagree about assisted migration 1: ethical 
implications of a key debate regarding the 
future of Canada’s forests. The Forestry 
Chronicle. 87: 755-765.
Ayres, M.P.; Lombardero, M.J. 2000. Assessing 
the consequences of global change for forest 
disturbance from herbivores and pathogens. 
Science of the Total Environment. 262: 263-286.
Bagne, K.E.; Friggens, M.M.; Finch, D.M. 2011. A 
system for assessing vulnerability of species 
(SAVS) to climate change. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
RMRS-GTR-257. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Forest 
Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station. 28 p.
Barling, R.D.; Moore, I.D. 1994. Role of buffer 
strips in management of waterway pollution: 
a review. Environmental Management. 18: 
543-558.
Battin, J. 2004. When good animals love bad 
habitats: ecological traps and the conservation 
of animal populations. Conservation Biology. 
18: 1482-1491.
111
LITERATURE CITED
Beever, E.A.; O’Leary, J.; Mengelt, C.; West, 
J.M.; Julius, S.; Green, N.; Magness, D.; Petes, 
L.; Stein, B.; Nicotra, A.B.; Hellmann, J.J.; 
Robertson, A.L.; Staudinger, M.D.; Rosenberg, 
A.A.; Babij, E.; Brennan, J.; Schuurman, 
G.W.; Hofmann, G.E. 2015. Improving 
conservation outcomes with a new paradigm 
for understanding species’ fundamental 
and realized adaptive capacity. Conservation 
Letters. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/conl.12190.
Beier, P.; Noss, R.F. 1998. Do habitat corridors 
provide connectivity? Conservation Biology. 
12: 1241-1252.
Benedict, M.E.; McMahon, E.T. 2006. Green 
infrastructure: linking landscapes and 
communities. Washington, DC: Island Press. 
299 p.
Biringer, J. 2003. Forest ecosystems threatened 
by climate change: promoting long-term 
forest resilience. In: Hansen, L.J.; Biringer, J.; 
Hoffman, J.R., eds. Buying time: a user’s manual 
for building reistance and resilience to climate 
change in natural systems. Washington, DC: 
World Wide Fund for Nature: 41-69.
Brandt, L.; He, H.; Iverson, L.; Thompson, F.R.; 
Butler, P.; Handler, S.; Janowiak, M.; Shannon, 
P.D.; Swanston, C.; Albrecht, M.; Blume-Weaver, 
R.; Deizman, P.; DePuy, J.; Dijak, W.D.; Dinkel, 
G.; Fei, S.; Jones-Farrand, D.T.; Leahy, M.; 
Matthews, S.; Nelson, P.; Oberle, B.; Perez, 
J.; Peters, M.; Prasad, A.; Schneiderman, J.E.; 
Shuey, J.; Smith, A.B.; Studyvin, C.; Tirpak, J.M.; 
Walk, J.W.; Wang, W.J.; Watts, L.; Weigel, D.; 
Westin, S. 2014. Central Hardwoods ecosystem 
vulnerability assessment and synthesis: a 
report from the Central Hardwoods Climate 
Change Response Framework project. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. NRS-124. Newtown Square, PA: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station. 254 p.  
Brandt, L.; Swanston, C.; Parker, L.; Janowiak, M.; 
Birdsey, R.; Iverson, L.; Mladenoff, D.; Butler, 
P. 2012. Climate change science applications 
and needs in forest ecosystem management: a 
workshop organized as part of the northern 
Wisconsin Climate Change Response 
Framework Project. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-
GTR-95. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. 53 p.
Brandt, L.A.; Butler, P.R.; Handler, S.D.; Janowiak, 
M.K.; Shannon, P.D.; Swanston, C.W. 2016. 
Integrating science and management to assess 
forest ecosystem vulnerability to climate 
change. Journal of Forestry. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5849/jof.15-147.
Breed, M.F.; Stead, M.G.; Ottewell, K.M.; Gardner, 
M.G.; Lowe, A.J. 2013. Which provenance 
and where? Seed sourcing strategies for 
revegetation in a changing environment. 
Conservation Genetics. 14: 1-10.
Breshears, D.D.; Myers, O.B.; Meyer, C.W.; Barnes, 
F.J.; Zou, C.B.; Allen, C.D.; McDowell, N.G.; 
Pockman, W.T. 2008. Tree die-off in response 
to global change-type drought: mortality 
insights from a decade of plant water potential 
measurements. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment. 7: 185-189.
Brubaker, L.B. 1986. Responses of tree 
populations to climatic change. Vegetatio. 
67: 119-130.
Bryant, M.M. 2006. Urban landscape conservation 
and the role of ecological greenways at local 
and metropolitan scales. Landscape and Urban 
Planning. 76: 23-44.
Burger, J.A.; Gray, G.; Scott, D.A. 2010. Using soil 
quality indicators for monitoring sustainable 
forest management. In: Page-Dumroese, D.; 
Neary, D.; Trettin, C., tech. eds. Scientific 
background for soil monitoring on National 
Forests and Rangelands: workshop proceedings; 
April 29-30, 2008; Denver, CO. Proc. RMRS-
P-59. Fort Collins, CO: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain 
Research Station: 13-42.
112
LITERATURE CITED
Burton, J.I.; Zenner, E.K.; Frelich, L.E. 2008. 
Frost crack incidence in northern hardwood 
forests of the southern boreal-north temperate 
transition zone. Northern Journal of Applied 
Forestry. 25: 133-138.
Butler, P.R.; Iverson, L.; Thompson, F.R., III; 
Brandt, L.; Handler, S.; Janowiak, M.; Shannon, 
P.D.; Swanston, C.; Karriker, K.; Bartig, J.; 
Connelly, S.; Dijak, W.; Bearer, S.; Blatt, S.; 
Brandon, A.; Byers, E.; Coon, C.; Culbreth, 
T.; Daly, J.; Dorsey, W.; Ede, D.; Euler, C.; 
Gillies, N.; Hix, D.M.; Johnson, C.; Lyte, L.; 
Matthews, S.; McCarthy, D.; Minney, D.; 
Murphy, D.; O’Dea, C.; Orwan, R.; Peters, M.; 
Prasad, A.; Randall, C.; Reed, J.; Sandeno, C.; 
Schuler, T.; Sneddon, L.; Stanley, B.; Steele, 
A.; Stout, S.; Swaty, R.; Teets, J.; Tomon, T.; 
Vanderhorst, J.; Whatley, J.; Zegre, N. 2015. 
Central Appalachians forest ecosystem 
vulnerability assessment and synthesis: a 
report from the Central Appalachians Climate 
Change Response Framework peoject. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. NRS-146. Newtown Square, PA: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station. 310 p. 
Butler, P.R.; Janowiak, M.K.; Brandt, L.A.; 
Swanston, C.W. 2011. Lessons learned from the 
Climate Change Response Framework Project 
in northern Wisconsin. A white paper prepared 
by the Northern Institute of Applied Climate 
Science. 24 p. www.nrs.fs.fed.us/niacs/local-
resources/docs/LESSONS_LEARNED_from_
the_CCRFP.pdf (accessed May 2, 2016).
Byers, E.; Norris, S. 2011. Climate change 
vulnerability assessment of species of concern 
in West Virginia. Technical Reports 02/2011. 
Elkins, WV: West Virginia Division of Natural 
Resources.
Cadotte, M.W.; Dinnage, R.; Tilman, D. 2012. 
Phylogenetic diversity promotes ecosystem 
stability. Ecology. 93: 223-233.
Carlton, J.S.; Angel, J.R.; Fei, S.; Huber, M.; 
Koontz, T.M.; MacGowan, B.J.; Mullendore, 
N.D.; Babin, N.; Prokopy, L.S. 2014. State 
service foresters’ attitudes toward using 
climate and weather information when 
advising forest landowners. Journal of Forestry. 
112(1): 9-14.
Casper, B.B.; Jackson, R.B. 1997. Plant 
competition underground. Annual Review of 
Ecology and Systematics. 28: 545-570.
Castelle, A.J.; Johnson, A.; Conolly, C. 
1994. Wetland and stream buffer size 
requirements—a review. Journal of 
Environmental Quality. 23: 878-882.
Chornesky, E.A.; Bartuska, A.M.; Aplet, G.H.; 
Britton, K.O.; Cummings-Carlson, J.; Davis, 
F.W.; Eskow, J.; Gordon, D.R.; Gottschalk, K.W.; 
Haack, R.A.; Hansen, A.J.; Mack, R.N.; Rahel, 
F.J.; Shannon, M.A.; Wainger, L.A.; Wigley, T.B. 
2005. Science priorities for reducing the threat 
of invasive species to sustainable forestry. 
Bioscience. 55: 335-348.
Clark, J.R.; Matheny, N.P.; Cross, G.; Wake, V. 
1997. A model of urban forest sustainability. 
Journal of Arboriculture. 23: 17-30.
Climate Change Wildlife Action Plan Work 
Group. 2009. Voluntary guidance for states to 
incorporate climate change into state wildlife 
action plans & other management plans. 
Washington, DC: Association of Fish & Wildlife 
Agencies. 47 p.
Coates, D.J.; Dixon, K.W. 2007. Current 
perspectives in plant conservation biology. 
Australian Journal of Botany. 55: 187-193.
Colding, J. 2007. ‘Ecological land-use 
complementation’ for building resilience 
in urban ecosystems. Landscape and Urban 
Planning. 81: 46-55.
113
LITERATURE CITED
Comer, P.J.; Young, B.; Schulz, K.; Kittel, G.; 
Unnasch, B.; Braun, D.; Hammerson, G.; Smart, 
L.; Hamilton, H.; Auer, S.; Smyth, R.; Hak, 
J. 2012. Climate change vulnerability and 
adaptation strategies for natural communities: 
piloting methods in the Mojave and Sonoran 
Deserts. Report to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service. Arlington, VA: NatureServe.
Cross, M.S.; Zavaleta, E.S.; Bachelet, D.; 
Brooks, M.L.; Enquist, C.A.F.; Fleishman, 
E.; Graumlich, L.J.; Groves, C.R.; Hannah, 
L.; Hansen, L.; Hayward, G.; Koopman, M.; 
Lawler, J.J.; Malcolm, J.; Nordgren, J.; Petersen, 
B.; Rowland, E.L.; Scott, D.; Shafer, S.; Shaw, 
M.R.; Tabor, G.M. 2012. The Adaptation for 
Conservation Targets (ACT) Framework: 
a tool for incorporating climate change into 
natural resource management. Environmental 
Management. 50(3): 341-351.
Dale, V.H.; Joyce, L.A.; McNulty, S.; Neilson, 
R.P.; Ayres, M.P.; Flannigan, M.D.; Hanson, 
P.J.; Irland, L.C.; Lugo, A.E.; Peterson, C.J.; 
Simberloff, D.; Swanson, F.J.; Stocks, B.J.; 
Wotton, B.M. 2001. Climate change and forest 
disturbances. BioScience. 51(9): 723-734.
D’Amato, A.W.; Bradford, J.B.; Fraver, S.; Palik, 
B.J. 2011. Forest management for mitigation 
and adaptation to climate change: insights 
from long-term silviculture experiments. Forest 
Ecology and Management. 262(5): 803-816.
Daniels, A.E.; Morrison, J.F.; Joyce, L.A.; 
Crookston, N.L.; Chen, S.C.; McNulty, S.G. 
2012. Climate projections FAQ. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RMRS-GTR-277WWW. Fort Collins, CO: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Rocky Mountain Research Station. 32 p. 
D’Antonio, C.M.; Jackson, N.E.; Horvitz, C.C.; 
Hedberg, R. 2004. Invasive plants in wildland 
ecosystems: merging the study of invasion 
processes with management needs. Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment. 2: 513-521.
Davis, M.B. 1983. Quaternary history of 
deciduous forests of eastern North America 
and Europe. Annals of the Missouri Botanical 
Garden. 70(3): 550-563.
Davis, M.B.; Shaw, R.G. 2001. Range shifts and 
adaptive responses to Quaternary climate 
change. Science. 292: 673-679.
Davis, M.B.; Shaw, R.G.; Etterson, J.R. 2005. 
Evolutionary responses to changing climate. 
Ecology. 86: 1704-1714.
Delworth, T.L.; Broccoli, A.J.; Rosati, A.; Stouffer, 
R.J.; Balaji, V.; Beesley, J.A.; Cooke, W.F.; 
Dixon, K.W.; Dunne, J.; Dunne, K.A.; Durachta, 
J.W.; Findell, K.L.; Ginoux, P.; Gnanadesikan, 
A.; Gordon, C.T.; Griffies, S.M.; Gudgel, 
R.; Harrison, M.J.; Held, I.M.; Hemler, R.S.; 
Horowitz, L.W.; Klein, S.A.; Knutson, T.R.; 
Kushner, P.J.; Langenhorst, A.R.; Lee, H.C.; 
Lin, S.J.; Lu, J.; Malyshev, S.L.; Milly, P.C.D.; 
Ramaswamy, V.; Russell, J.; Schwarzkopf, 
M.D.; Shevliakova, E.; Sirutis, J.J.; Spelman, 
M.J.; Stern, W.F.; Winton, M.; Wittenberg, A.T.; 
Wyman, B.; Zeng, F.; Zhang, R. 2006. GFDL’s 
CM2 global coupled climate models. Part I: 
Formulation and simulation characteristics. 
Journal of Climate. 19(5): 643-674.
Devine, W.; Aubry, C.; Miller, J.; Potter, K.M.; 
Bower, A. 2012. Climate change and forest 
trees in the Pacific Northwest: guide to 
vulnerability assessment methodology. 
Olympia, WA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region. 49 p. 
http://ecoshare.info/wp-content/uploads/2012/04/
CCFT_Methodology.pdf.
Dobrowski, S.Z. 2011. A climatic basis for 
microrefugia: the influence of terrain on 
climate. Global Change Biology. 17: 1022-1035.
Dreistadt, S.H.; Dahlsten, D.L.; Frankie, G.W. 1990. 
Urban forests and insect ecology. BioScience. 
40: 192-198.
Dukes, J.S.; Pontius, J.; Orwig, D.; Garnas, 
J.R.; Rodgers, V.L.; Brazee, N.; Cooke, B.; 
Theoharides, K.A.; Stange, E.E.; Harrington, R. 
2009. Responses of insect pests, pathogens, and 
invasive plant species to climate change in the 
forests of northeastern North America: What 
can we predict? Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research. 39: 231-248.
114
LITERATURE CITED
Duryea, M.L.; Kampf, E.; Littell, R.C. 2007. 
Hurricanes and the urban forest: I. Effects on 
southeastern United States coastal plain tree 
species. Arboriculture and Urban Forestry. 33: 
83-97.
Duveneck, M.J.; Scheller, R.M.; White, M.A. 2014a. 
Effects of alternative forest management 
strategies in the face of climate change in the 
northern Great Lakes region. Canadian Journal 
of Forest Research. 44: 700-710.
Duveneck, M.J.; Scheller, R.M.; White, M.A.; 
Handler, S.D.; Ravenscroft, C. 2014b. Climate 
change effects on northern Great Lake 
(USA) forests: a case for preserving diversity. 
Ecosphere. 5(2): 1-26. 
Dwyer, J.M.; Fensham, R.; Buckley, Y.M. 2010. 
Restoration thinning accelerates structural 
development and carbon sequestration in an 
endangered Australian ecosystem. Journal of 
Applied Ecology. 47: 681-691.
EcoAdapt. 2014. A climate change vulnerability 
assessment for focal resources of the 
Sierra Nevada. http://ecoadapt.org/
data/documents/EcoAdapt_CALCC_
SierraNevadaVulnerabilityAssessment_
26Feb2014.pdf (accessed December 2, 2015).
Elmqvist, T.; Folke, C.; Nystrom, M.; Peterson, 
G.; Bengtsson, J.; Walker, B.; Norberg, J. 
2003. Response diversity, ecosystem change, 
and resilience. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment. 1: 488-494.
Erickson, B.; Navarrete-Tindall, N. 2004. Missouri 
native ecotype program: increasing local-
source native seed. Natural Areas Journal. 
24: 15-22.
Evans, A.; Perschel, R. 2009. A review of forestry 
mitigation and adaptation strategies in the 
Northeast U.S. Climatic Change. 96: 167-183.
Everham, E.; Brokaw, N.L. 1996. Forest damage 
and recovery from catastrophic wind. The 
Botanical Review. 62: 113-185.
Fahey, R.T.; Bowles, M.L.; McBride, J.L.; 
McPherson, E.; Scharenbroch, B. 2012. Origins 
of the Chicago urban forest: composition 
and structure in relation to pre-settlement 
vegetation and modern land-use. Arboriculture 
and Urban Forestry. 38(1): 181-193.
Fahey, R.T.; Darling, L.; Anderson, J. 2015. 
Sustaining our oaks: a vision for the future 
of oak ecosystems in the Chicago Wilderness 
Region. Extended summary report. The Chicago 
Wilderness Oak Ecosystem Recovery Working 
Group. 40 p. Available at http://c.ymcdn.com/
sites/www.chicagowilderness.org/resource/
resmgr/Publications/OERP-Ext-Report-lowres-
pgs_%28.pdf (accessed May 2, 2016).
Fiedler, P.L.; Laven, R.D. 1996. Selecting 
reintroduction sites. In: Falk, D.A.; Millar, C.I.; 
Olwell, M., eds. Restoring diversity: strategies for 
reintroduction of endangered plants. Washington, 
DC: Island Press: 157-169.
Fischer, J.; Lindenmayer, D.B. 2007. Landscape 
modification and habitat fragmentation: a 
synthesis. Global Ecology and Biogeography. 
16: 265-280.
Fischlin, A.; Ayres, M.; Karnosky, D.; Kellomaki, 
S.; Louman, B.; Ong, C.; Plattner, G.K.; Santoso, 
H.; Thompson, I.; Booth, T.H.; Marcar, N.; 
Scholes, B.; Swanston, C.; Zamolodchikov, 
D. 2009. Future environmental impacts 
and vulnerabilities. In: Seppala, R.; Buck, 
A; Katila, P., eds. Adaptation of forests and 
people to climate change: a global assessment 
report. IUFRO World Series Vol. 22. Helsinki, 
Finland: International Union of Forest Research 
Organizations: 53-100.
Flannigan, M.; Stocks, B.; Turetsky, M.; Wotton, 
M. 2009a. Impacts of climate change on 
fire activity and fire management in the 
circumboreal forest. Global Change Biology. 
15(3): 549-560.
Flannigan, M.D.; Krawchuk, M.A.; de Groot, 
W.J.; Wotton, B.M.; Gowman, L.M. 2009b. 
Implications of changing climate for global 
wildland fire. International Journal of Wildland 
Fire. 18: 483-507.
115
LITERATURE CITED
Francis, J.K. 2000. Comparison of hurricane 
damage to several species of urban trees in San 
Juan, Puerto Rico. Journal of Arboriculture. 
26: 189-196.
Frelich, L.E. 2002. Forest dynamics and 
disturbance regimes: studies from temperate 
evergreen-deciduous forests. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 266 p.
Frelich, L.E.; Reich, P.B. 2010. Will environmental 
changes reinforce the impact of global 
warming on the prairie-forest border of 
central North America? Frontiers in Ecology 
and the Environment. 8: 371-378.
Frerker, K.; Sabo, A.; Waller, D. 2014. Long-term 
regional shifts in plant community composition 
are largely explained by local deer impact 
experiments. PloS ONE. 9: e115843. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115843.
Furniss, M.J.; Roby, K.B.; Cenderelli, D.; Chatel, 
J.; Clifton, C.F.; Clingenpeel, A.; Hays, P.E.; 
Higgins, D.; Hodges, K.; Howe, C.; Jungst, L.; 
Louie, J.; Mai, C.; Martinez, R.; Overton, K.; 
Staab, B.P.; Steinke, R.; Weinhold, M. 2013. 
Assessing the vulnerability of watersheds 
to climate change: results of national forest 
watershed vulnerability pilot assessments. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-884. Portland, OR: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station. 32 p. plus 
appendix.
Furniss, M.J.; Staab, B.P.; Hazelhurst, S.; Clifton, 
C.F.; Roby, K.B.; Ilhadrt, B.L.; Larry, E.B.; Todd, 
A.H.; Reid, L.M.; Hines, S.J.; Bennett, K.A.; 
Luce, C.H.; Edwards, P.J. 2010. Water, climate 
change, and forests: watershed stewardship 
for a changing climate. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-
GTR-812. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. 75 p.
Galatowitsch, S.; Frelich, L.; Phillips-Mao, L. 
2009. Regional climate change adaptation 
strategies for biodiversity conservation in 
a midcontinental region of North America. 
Biological Conservation. 142: 2012-2022.
Gandhi, K.J.K.; Gilmore, D.W.; Katovich, S.A.; 
Mattson, W.J.; Spence, J.R.; Seybold, S.J. 2007. 
Physical effects of weather events on the 
abundance and diversity of insects in North 
American forests. Environmental Reviews. 
15: 113-152.
Gibson, W.P.; Daly, C.; Kittel, T.; Nychka, D.; Johns, 
C.; Rosenbloom, N.; McNab, A.; Taylor, G. 2002. 
Development of a 103-year high-resolution 
climate data set for the conterminous United 
States. Proceedings, American Meteorological 
Society 13th conference on applied climatology: 
181-183.
Gill, S.; Handley, J.; Ennos, A.; Pauleit, S. 2007. 
Adapting cities for climate change: the role of 
the green infrastructure. Built Environment. 
33(1): 115-133.
Girvetz, E.H.; Zganjar, C.; Raber, G.T.; Maurer, 
E.P.; Kareiva, P.; Lawler, J.J. 2009. Applied 
climate-change analysis: the Climate Wizard 
Tool. PLoS ONE 4(12): e8320. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008320. 
Gitay, H.; Suarez, A.; Watson, R.T.; Dokken, D.J., 
eds. 2002. Climate change and biodiversity. 
IPCC Technical Paper V. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
77 p. 
Glick, P.; Stein, B.A.; Edelson, N.A., eds. 2011. 
Scanning the conservation horizon: a guide 
to climate change vulnerability assessment. 
Washington, DC: National Wildlife Federation. 
168 p. http://www.nwf.org/vulnerabilityguide 
(accessed May 2, 2016).
Groffman, P.M.; Bain, D.J.; Band, L.E.; Belt, 
K.T.; Brush, G.S.; Grove, J.M.; Pouyat, R.V.; 
Yesilonis, I.C.; Zipperer, W.C. 2003. Down by 
the riverside: urban riparian ecology. Frontiers 
in Ecology and the Environment. 1: 315-321.
116
LITERATURE CITED
Gross, J.; Johnson, K.; Glick, P.; Hall, K. 2014. 
Understanding climate change impacts and 
vulnerability. In: Stein, B.A.; Glick, P.; Edelson, 
N.; Staudt, A., eds. Climate-smart conservation: 
putting adaptation principles into practice. 
Washington, DC: National Wildlife Federation. 
Chapter 6. http://www.nwf.org/pdf/Climate-
Smart-Conservation/NWF-Climate-Smart-
Conservation_5-08-14.pdf  (accessed May 2, 
2016).
Groves, C.; Game, E.; Anderson, M.; Cross, M.; 
Enquist, C.; Ferdana, Z.; Girvetz, E.; Gondor, 
A.; Hall, K.; Higgins, J.; Marshall, R.; Popper, 
K.; Schill, S.; Shafer, S. 2012. Incorporating 
climate change into systematic conservation 
planning. Biodiversity and Conservation. 21(7): 
1651-1671.
Gunn, J.S.; Hagan, J.M.; Whitman, A.A. 2009. 
Forestry adaptation and mitigation in 
a changing climate: a forest resource 
manager’s guide for the northeastern United 
States. Brunswick, ME: Manomet Center for 
Conservation Sciences. 16 p.
Guyette, R.P.; Thompson, F.R.; Whittier, J.; 
Stambaugh, M.C.; Dey, D.C. 2014. Future fire 
probability modeling with climate change data 
and physical chemistry. Forest Science. 60(5): 
862-870.
Halofsky, J.E.; Peterson, D.L.; O’Halloran, K.; 
Hoffman, C.H., eds. 2011. Adapting to climate 
change at Olympic National Forest and 
Olympic National Park. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-
GTR-844. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. 130 p.
Halpin, P.N. 1997. Global climate change and 
natural-area protection: management 
responses and research directions. Ecological 
Applications. 7: 828-843.
Handler, S.; Duveneck, M.J.; Iverson, L.; Peters, 
E.; Scheller, R.M.; Wythers, K.R.; Brandt, 
L.; Butler, P.; Janowiak, M.; Shannon, P.D.; 
Swanston, C.; Barrett, K.; Kolka, R.; McQuiston, 
C.; Palik, B.; Reich, P.B.; Turner, C.; White, M.; 
Adams, C.; D’Amato, A.; Hagell, S.; Johnson, 
P.; Johnson, R.; Larson, M.; Matthews, S.; 
Montgomery, R.; Olson, S.; Peters, M.; Prasad, 
A.; Rajala, J.; Daley, J.; Davenport, M.; Emery, 
M.R.; Fehringer, D.; Hoving, C.L.; Johnson, 
G.; Johnson, L.; Neitzel, D.; Rissman, A.; 
Rittenhouse, C.; Ziel, R. 2014a. Minnesota 
forest ecosystem vulnerability assessment 
and synthesis: a report from the Northwoods 
Climate Change Response Framework project. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-133. Newtown Square, PA: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station. 228 p.
Handler, S.; Duveneck, M.J.; Iverson, L.; Peters, E.; 
Scheller, R.M.; Wythers, K.R.; Brandt, L.; Butler, 
P.; Janowiak, M.; Shannon, P.D.; Swanston, C.; 
Eagle, A.C.; Cohen, J.G.; Corner, R.; Reich, 
P.B.; Baker, T.; Chhin, S.; Clark, E.; Fehringer, 
D.; Fosgitt, J.; Gries, J.; Hall, C.; Hall, K.R.; 
Heyd, R.; Hoving, C.L.; Ibanez, I.; Kuhr, D.; 
Matthews, S.; Muladore, J.; Nadelhoffer, K.; 
Neumann, D.; Peters, M.; Prasad, A.; Sands, M.; 
Swaty, R.; Wonch, L.; Daley, J.; Davenport, M.; 
Emery, M.R.; Johnson, G.; Johnson, L.; Neitzel, 
D.; Rissman, A.; Rittenhouse, C.; Ziel, R. 2014b. 
Michigan forest ecosystem vulnerability 
assessment and synthesis: a report from 
the Northwoods Climate Change Response 
Framework project. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-
129. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. 229 p.
Hannah, L. 2008. Protected areas and climate 
change. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences. 1134: 201-212.
Harris, J.A.; Hobbs, R.J.; Higgs, E.; Aronson, J. 
Ecological restoration and global climate 
change. Restoration Ecology. 14: 170-176.
117
LITERATURE CITED
Hatfield, J.; Swanston, C.; Janowiak, M.; Steele, 
R.; Hempel, J.; Bochicchio, J.; Hall, W.; Cole, 
M.; Hestvik, S.; Whitaker, J. 2015. Midwest 
and Northern Forests Regional Climate Hub: 
assessment of climate change vulnerability 
and adaptation and mitigation strategies. 
Anderson, T., ed. U.S. Department of Agriculture. 
55 p. http://www.climatehubs.oce.usda.gov/sites/
default/files/pdf/Midwest%20Region%20Vul
nerability%20Assessment%203_20_2015.pdf 
(accessed May 6, 2016).
Hatfield, J.L.; Bidwell, D.; Brown, D. 2014. Climate 
change in the Midwest: a synthesis report for 
the National Climate Assessment. Washington, 
DC: Island Press. 272 p.
Havens, K.; Vitt, P.; Maunder, M.; Guerrant, E.O., 
Jr.; Dixon, K. 2006. Ex situ plant conservation 
and beyond. BioScience. 56: 525-531.
Heinz Center. 2008. Strategies for managing 
the effects of climate change on wildlife and 
ecosystems. 43 p. http://www.heinzctr.org/
publications/PDF/Strategies_for_managing_
effects_of_climate_change_on_wildlife_Nov_4_
2008.pdf (accessed April 15, 2011). 
Heller, N.E.; Zavaleta, E.S. 2009. Biodiversity 
management in the face of climate change: 
a review of 22 years of recommendations. 
Biological Conservation. 142: 14-32.
Hellmann, J.J.; Byers, J.E.; Bierwagen, B.G.; 
Dukes, J.S. 2008. Five potential consequences 
of climate change for invasive species. 
Conservation Biology. 22: 534-543.
Hemery, G. 2008. Forest management and 
silvicultural responses to projected climate 
change impacts on European broadleaved 
trees and forests. International Forestry Review. 
10: 591-607.
Heneghan, L.; Fatemi, F.; Umek, L.; Grady, K.; 
Fagen, K.; Workman, M. 2006. The invasive 
shrub European buckthorn (Rhamnus 
cathartica L.) alters soil properties in 
Midwestern US woodlands. Applied Soil 
Ecology. 32: 142-148.
Hobbs, R.J. 2002. Habitat networks and biological 
conservation. In: Gutzwiller, K.J., ed. Applying 
landscape ecology in biological conservation. 
New York: Springer: 150-170.
Hobbs, R.J.; Arico, S.; Aronson, J.; Baron, J.S.; 
Bridgewater, P.; Cramer, V.A.; Epstein, P.R.; 
Ewel, J.J.; Klink, C.A.; Lugo, A.E.; Norton, D.; 
Ojima, D.; Richardson, D.M.; Sanderson, E.W.; 
Valladares, F.; Vila, M.; Zamora, R.; Zobel, 
M. 2006. Novel ecosystems: theoretical and 
management aspects of the new ecological 
world order. Global Ecology and Biogeography. 
15: 1-7. 
Hoegh-Guldberg, O.; Hughes, L.; McIntyre, S.; 
Lindenmayer, D.; Parmesan, C.; Possingham, 
H.; Thomas, C. 2008. Assisted colonization and 
rapid climate change. Science (Washington). 
321: 345-346.
Holling, C.S. 1973. Resilience and stability of 
ecological systems. Annual Review of Ecology 
and Systematics. 4: 1-23.
Horsley, S.B.; Stout, S.L.; deCalesta, D.S. 2003. 
White-tailed deer impact on the vegetation 
dynamics of a northern hardwood forest. 
Ecological Applications. 13: 98-118.
Horton, R.; Yohe, G.; Easterling, W.; Kates, R.; 
Ruth, M.; Sussman, E.; Whelchel, A.; Wolfe, D.; 
Lipschultz, F. 2014. Northeast. In: Melillo, J.M.; 
Richmond, T.C.; Yohe, G.W., eds. Climate change 
impacts in the United States: the Third National 
Climate Assessment. Chapter 16. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program. 
http://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/regions/
northeast (accessed May 7, 2016).
Hulme, P.E. 2005. Adapting to climate change: 
Is there scope for ecological management in 
the face of a global threat? Journal of Applied 
Ecology. 42: 784-794.
Hunter, M.L. 2007. Climate change and moving 
species: furthering the debate on assisted 
colonization. Conservation Biology. 21: 
1356-1358.
118
LITERATURE CITED
Iakovoglou, V.; Thompson, J.; Burras, L.; Kipper, 
R. 2001. Factors related to tree growth across 
urban-rural gradients in the Midwest, USA. 
Urban Ecosystems. 5: 71-85.
Innes, J.; Joyce, L.A.; Kellomaki, S.; Louman, B.; 
Ogden, A.; Parrotta, J.; Thompson, I.; Ayres, M.; 
Ong, C.; Santosa, H.; Sohngen, B.; Wreford, A. 
2009. Management for adaptation. In: Seppala, 
R.; Buck, A.; Katila, P., eds. Adaptation of forests 
and people to climate change: a global assessment 
report. IUFRO World Series vol. 22. Helsinki, 
Finland: International Union of Forest Research 
Organizations: 135-186.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[IPCC]. 2007. Summary for policymakers. 
In: Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation 
and vulnerability. Contribution of Working 
Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
[Parry, M.L.; Canziani, O.F.; Palutikof, J.P.; van 
der Linden, P.J.; Hanson, C.E., eds.]. Cambridge, 
UK, and New York: Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC]. 
2012. Managing the risks of extreme events 
and disasters to advance climate change 
adaptation. In: A Special Report of Working 
Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change [Field, C.B.; Barros, V.; 
Stocker, T.F.; Qin, D.; Dokken, D.J.; Ebi, K.L.; 
Mastrandrea, M.D.; Mach, K.J.; Plattner, G.-K.; 
Allen, S.K.; Tignor, M.; Midgley, P.M., eds.]. 
Cambridge, UK, and New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 582 p.
Iverson, L.R. 2002. Potential redistribution of 
tree species habitat under five climate change 
scenarios in the eastern US. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 155: 205-222.
Iverson, L.R.; Prasad, A.M. 1998. Predicting 
abundance of 80 tree species following climate 
change in the eastern United States. Ecological 
Monographs. 68: 465-485.
Iverson, L.R.; Prasad, A.M.; Matthews, S.N.; Peters, 
M. 2008. Estimating potential habitat for 
134 eastern US tree species under six climate 
scenarios. Forest Ecology and Management. 
254: 390-406. 
Iverson, L.R.; Schwartz, M.W.; Prasad, A.M. 2004a. 
How fast and far might tree species migrate 
in the eastern United States due to climate 
change? Global Ecology and Biogeography. 
13: 209-219.
Iverson L.R.; Schwartz, M.W.; Prasad, A.M. 2004b. 
Potential colonization of new available tree 
species habitat under climate change: an 
analysis for five eastern US species. Landscape 
Ecology. 19: 787-799.
Jacobson, G.L., Jr.; Webb, T., III; Grimm, E.C. 1987. 
Patterns and rates of vegetation change during 
the deglaciation of eastern North America. In: 
Ruddiman, W.F.; Wright, H.E., Jr., eds. North 
American and adjacent oceans during the last 
deglaciation. Geology of North America, 
vol. K-3. Boulder, CO: Geological Society of 
America: 277-288.
Janowiak, M.K.; Iverson, L.; Mladenoff, D.J.; 
Peters, E.; Wythers, K.R.; Xi, W.; Brandt, L.A.; 
Butler, P.R.; Handler, S.D.; Shannon, P.D.; 
Swanston, C.W.; Parker, L.R.; Amman, A.J.; 
Bogaczyk, B.; Handler, C.; Lesch, E.; Reich, P.B.; 
Matthews, S.; Peters, M.; Prasad, A.; Khanal, S.; 
Liu, F.; Bal, T.; Bronson, D.; Burton, A.; Ferris, 
J.; Fosgitt, J.; Hagan, S.; Johnston, E.; Kane, E.; 
Matula, C.; O’Conner, R.; Higgins, D.; St. Pierre, 
M.; Daley, J.; Davenport, M.; Emery, M.R.; 
Fehringer, D.; Hoving, C.; Johnson, G.; Neitzel, 
D.; Notaro, M.; Rissman, A.; Rittenhouse, C.; 
Ziel, R. 2014a. Forest ecosystem vulnerability 
assessment and synthesis for northern 
Wisconsin and western Upper Michigan: a 
report from the Northwoods Climate Change 
Response Framework project. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. NRS-136. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station. 247 p.
119
LITERATURE CITED
Janowiak, M.K.; Swanston, C.W.; Nagel, L.M.; 
Brandt, L.A.; Butler, P.R.; Shannon, P.D.; 
Iverson, L.R.; Matthews, S.N.; Prasad, A.; 
Peters, M.P. 2014b. A practical approach 
for translating climate change adaptation 
principles into forest management actions. 
Journal of Forestry. 112(5): 424-433.
Janowiak, M.K.; Swanston, C.W.; Nagel, L.M.; 
Webster, C.R.; Palik, B.J.; Twery, M.J.; Bradford, 
J.B.; Parker, L.R.; Hille, A.T.; Johnson, S.M. 
2011. Silvicultural decisionmaking in an 
uncertain climate future: a workshop-based 
exploration of considerations, strategies, and 
approaches. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-81. Newtown 
Square, PA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service. 14 p.
Johnston, M. 2009. Vulnerability of Canada’s tree 
species to climate change and management 
options for adaptation: an overview for policy 
makers and practitioners. Canadian Council 
of Forest Ministers. http://www.ccfm.org/pdf/
TreeSpecies_web_e.pdf (accessed May 2, 2016).
Johnston, M.; Williamson, T.; Price, D.; 
Spittlehouse, D.; Wellstead, A.; Gray, P.; Scott, 
D.; Askew, S.; Webber, S. 2006. Adapting forest 
management to the impacts of climate change 
in Canada. In: Final report, BIOCAP Research 
Integration Program Synthesis paper. https://
www.for.gov.bc.ca/hre/pubs/docs/Johnstonetal_
2006.pdf (accessed May 10, 2016).
Jones, J.A. 2011. Hydrologic responses to climate 
change: considering geographic context and 
alternative hypotheses. Hydrological Processes. 
25: 1996-2000.
Joyce, L.; Blate, G.; McNulty, S.; Millar, C.; Moser, 
S.; Neilson, R.; Peterson, D. 2009. Managing 
for multiple resources under climate change: 
national forests. Environmental Management. 
44: 1022-1032.
Joyce, L.; Janowiak, M. 2011. Climate change 
assessments. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Climate Change Resource Center. 
www.fs.usda.gov/ccrc/topics/assessments/
vulnerability-assessments (accessed May 2, 
2016).
Kellomaki, S.; Strandman, H.; Nuutinen, T.; 
Peltola, H.; Korhonen, K.T.; Vaisanen, H. 2005. 
Adaptation of forest ecosystems, forests 
and forestry to climate change. FINADAPT 
Working Paper 4. Finnish Environment Institute 
Mimeographs. Helsinki, Finland: Finnish 
Environment Institute. 44 p. 
Keppel, G.; Van Niel, K.P.; Wardell-Johnson, G.W.; 
Yates, C.J.; Byrne, M.; Mucina, L.; Schut, A.T.; 
Hopper, S.D.; Franklin, S.E. 2012. Refugia: 
identifying and understanding safe havens 
for biodiversity under climate change. Global 
Ecology and Biogeography. 21: 393-404.
King, D.A. 1986. Tree form, height growth, 
and susceptibility to wind damage in Acer 
saccharum. Ecology. 67: 980-990.
Kirshen, P.; Ruth, M.; Anderson, W. 2008. 
Interdependencies of urban climate change 
impacts and adaptation strategies: a case study 
of Metropolitan Boston USA. Climatic Change. 
86: 105-122.
Klausmeyer, K.R.; Shaw, M.R.; MacKenzie, 
J.B.; Cameron, D.R. 2011. Landscape-scale 
indicators of biodiversity’s vulnerability to 
climate change. Ecosphere 2:art88. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1890/ES11-00044.1.
Landscape Change Research Group. 2014. Climate 
change atlas. Delaware, OH: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. www.nrs.fs.fed.us/atlas (accessed 
February 13, 2014). 
Larson, A.J.; Belote, R.T.; Williamson, M.A.; Aplet, 
G.H. 2013. Making monitoring count: project 
design for active adaptive management. 
Journal of Forestry. 111(5): 348-356.
120
LITERATURE CITED
Lawler, J.J. 2009. Climate change adaptation 
strategies for resource management and 
conservation planning. Year in Ecology and 
Conservation Biology. 2009(1162): 79-98.
Lawler, J.J.; Tear, T.H.; Pyke, C.; Shaw, M.R.; 
Gonzalez, P.; Kareiva, P.; Hansen, L.; Hannah, L.; 
Klausmeyer, K.; Aldous, A.; Bienz, C.; Pearsall, 
S. 2010. Resource management in a changing
and uncertain climate. Frontiers in Ecology and
the Environment. 8(1): 35-43.
Levina, E.; Tirpak, D. 2006. Adaptation to climate 
change: key terms. Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD) and 
International Energy Agency. http://www.oecd.
org/dataoecd/36/53/36736773.pdf (accessed 
May 2, 2016).
Lexer, M.J.; Seidl, R. 2009. Addressing 51516111611
biodiversity in a stakeholder-driven climate 
change vulnerability assessment of forest 
management. Forest Ecology and Management. 
258: S158-S167. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.foreco.2009.07.011.
Liang, X.; Lettenmaier, D.P.; Wood, E.F.; Burges, 
S.J. 1994. A simple hydrologically based model 
of land surface water and energy fluxes for 
GSMs. Journal of Geophysical Research. 9(D7): 
14415-14428.
Lindenmayer, D.B.; Franklin, J.F.; Fischer, J. 
2006. General management principles and 
a checklist of strategies to guide forest 
biodiversity conservation. Biological 
Conservation. 131(3): 433-445.
Littell, J.S.; Peterson, D.L.; Millar, C.I.; O’Halloran, 
K.A. 2012. US national forests adapt to 
climate change through science-management 
partnerships. Climatic Change. 110: 269-296.
Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences and 
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. 
2010a. Climate change and Massachusetts fish 
and wildlife: volume 2—habitat and species 
vulnerability. http://www.mass.gov/eea/docs/
dfg/dfw/habitat/cwcs/climate-change-habitat-
vulnerability.pdf (accessed December 2, 2015).
Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences and 
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. 
2010b. Climate change and Massachusetts fish 
and wildlife: volume 3—habitat management. 
http://www.mass.gov/eea/docs/dfg/dfw/habitat/
cwcs/climate-change-habitat-management.pdf 
(accessed May 6, 2016).
Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences and 
National Wildlife Federation [NWF]. 2013. 
The vulnerabilities of fish and wildlife 
habitats in the northeast to climate change. 
A report to the Northeastern Association 
of Fish and Wildlife Agencies and the 
North Atlantic Landscape Conservation 
Cooperative. Manomet, MA. 188 p. 
http://rcngrants.org/sites/default/files/
final_reports/Galbraith%20et%20al%20-
%20Terrestrial-Wetland%20Vulnerabililty
%20Assessment_0.pdf (accessed May 4, 2016).
Marzluff, J.M.; Bowman, R.; Donnelly, R. 2001. 
Avian ecology and conservation in an 
urbanizing world. New York: Springer. 585 p.
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. 
2006. 2005 Massachusetts comprehensive 
wildlife conservation strategy. Boston, MA: 
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and 
Wildlife, Department of Fish and Game and 
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Executive 
Office of Environmental Affairs.
Mastrandrea, M.D.; Field, C.B.; Stocker, T.F.; 
Edenhofer, O.; Ebi, K.L.; Frame, D.J.; Held, 
H.; Kriegler, E.; Mach, K.J.; Matschoss, P.R.; 
Plattner, G.K.; Yohe, G.W.; Zwiers, F.W. 
2010. Guidance note for lead authors of the 
IPCC Fifth Assessment report on consistent 
treatment of uncertainties. Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Available at 
http://www.ipcc.ch/activities/activities.shtml 
(accessed Feb. 28, 2011).
Mawdsley, J.R.; O’Malley, R.; Ojima, D.S. 2009. A 
review of climate-change adaptation strategies 
for wildlife management and biodiversity 
conservation. Conservation Biology. 23: 
1080-1089.
121
LITERATURE CITED
McCarthy, M.P.; Best, M.J.; Betts, R.A. 2010. 
Climate change in cities due to global 
warming and urban effects. Geophysical 
Research Letters. 37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/
2010GL042845.
McDonnell, M.J.; Pickett, S.T.A.; Groffman, 
P.; Bohlen, P.; Pouyat, R.V.; Zipperer, W.C.; 
Parmelee, R.W.; Carreiro, M.M.; Medley, K. 
2008. Ecosystem processes along an urban-to-
rural gradient. In: Marzluff, J.M.; Shulenberger, 
E.; Endlicher, W.; Alberti, M.; Bradley, G.; Ryan, 
C.; ZumBrunnen, C.; Simon, U., eds. Urban 
ecology: an international perspective on the 
interaction between humans and nature. New 
York: Springer: 299-313.
McKenney, D.; Pedlar, J.; O’Neill, G. 2009. Climate 
change and forest seed zones: past trends, 
future prospects and challenges to ponder. 
The Forestry Chronicle. 85: 258-266.
McKinney, M.L. 2002. Urbanization, biodiversity, 
and conservation: The impacts of urbanization 
on native species are poorly studied, but 
educating a highly urbanized human 
population about these impacts can greatly 
improve species conservation in all ecosystems. 
BioScience. 52: 883-890.
McLachlan, J.S.; Hellmann, J.J.; Schwartz, M.W. 
2007. A framework for debate of assisted 
migration in an era of climate change. 
Conservation Biology. 21(2): 297-302.
Melillo, J.M.; Richmond, T.C.; Yohe, G.W., eds. 
2014. Climate change impacts in the United 
States: the Third National Climate Assessment. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research 
Program. 841 p. http://nca2014.globalchange.
gov/downloads (accessed May 7, 2014). 
Millar, C.I. 1991. Conservation of germplasm 
in forest trees. In: Ahuja, M.R.; Libby, M.R., 
eds. Clonal Forestry II. Conservation and 
Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag: 42-65.
Millar, C.I.; Brubaker, L.B. 2006. Climate change 
and paleoecology: new contexts for restoration 
ecology. In: Palmer, M.; Falk, D.; Zedler, J., eds. 
Restoration science. Washington, DC: Island 
Press: 315-340.
Millar, C.I.; Skog, K.E.; McKinley, D.C.; Birdsey, 
R.A.; Swanston, C.; Hines, S.J.; Woodall, C.W.; 
Reinhart, E.D.; Peterson, D.L.; Vose, J.M. 2012. 
Adaptation and mitigation. In: Vose, J.M.; 
Peterson, D.L.; Patel-Weynand, T., eds. Effects 
of climatic variability and change on forest 
ecosystems: a comprehensive science synthesis 
for the U.S. forest sector. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-
GTR-870. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station: 7-95.
Millar, C.I.; Stephenson, N.L.; Stephens, S.L. 2007. 
Climate change and forests of the future: 
managing in the face of uncertainty. Ecological 
Applications. 17(8): 2145-2151.
Millar, C.I.; Stephenson, N.L.; Stephens, S.L. 
2008. Re-framing forest and resource 
management strategies for a climate change 
context. Mountain Views Newsletter of the 
Consortium for Integrated Climate Research 
in Western Mountains. 2: 5-10. Available at 
articles.extension.org/sites/default/files/w/b/b1/
millar020508.pdf (accessed May 4, 2016).
Miller, R.W. 1997. Urban forestry: planning and 
managing urban greenspaces. 2nd ed. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 502 p.
Mitchell, S. 2013. Wind as a natural disturbance 
agent in forests: a synthesis. Forestry. 86(2): 
147-157. 
Mladenoff, D.J.; Stearns, F. 1993. Eastern 
hemlock regeneration and deer browsing 
in the northern Great Lakes region: a 
re-examination and model simulation. 
Conservation Biology. 7: 889-900.
122
LITERATURE CITED
Mooney, H.; Larigauderie, A.; Cesario, M.; 
Elmquist, T.; Hoegh-Guldberg, O.; Lavorel, 
S.; Mace, G.M.; Palmer, M.; Scholes, R.; 
Yahara, T. 2009. Biodiversity, climate change, 
and ecosystem services. Current Opinion in 
Environmental Sustainability. 1: 46-54.
Morelli, T.L.; Yeh, S.; Smith, N.; Hennessey, M.B.; 
Millar, C.I. 2012. Climate project screening 
tool: an aid for climate change adaptation. Res. 
Pap. PSW-RP-263. Albany, CA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Southwest 
Research Station. 29 p.
Morgan, D.; Daust, D. 2013. A climate change 
vulnerability assessment for British 
Columbia’s managed forests. https://www.for.
gov.bc.ca/het/climate/knowledge/vulnerability-
assessment.htm (accessed December 2, 2015).
Moritz, M.A.; Parisien, M.-A.; Batllori, E.; 
Krawchuk, M.A.; Dorn, J.V.; Ganz, D.J.; Hayhoe, 
K. 2012. Climate change and disruptions to 
global fire activity. Ecosphere. 3(6): 1-22.
Naeem, S.; Knops, J.M.; Tilman, D.; Howe, K.M.; 
Kennedy, T.; Gale, S. 2000. Plant diversity 
increases resistance to invasion in the absence 
of covarying extrinsic factors. Oikos. 91: 
97-108.
National Fish Wildlife and Plants Climate 
Adaptation Partnership. 2012. National fish, 
wildlife and plants climate adaptation strategy. 
Washington, DC: Association of Fish and 
Wildlife Agencies, Council on Environmental 
Quality, Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife 
Commission, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, and U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service.
The National Wildlife Federation and Manomet 
Center for Conservation Sciences. 2013. 
Implementing climate-smart conservation 
in northeastern upland forests. In: A report 
to the Wildlife Conservation Society and the 
Northeastern Association of Fish and Wildlife 
Agencies. Montpelier, VT: The National Wildlife 
Federation.
Natural Resources Conservation Service. 2012. 
Introduced, invasive, and noxious plants. U.S. 
Department of Agriculture. http://plants.usda.gov/
java/noxiousDriver#state (accessed May 2, 2016).
The Nature Conservancy. 2009. Conservation 
action planning guidelines for developing 
strategies in the face of climate change. 
http://conserveonline.org/workspaces/
climateadaptation/documents/climate-change-
project-level-guidance/documents/climate-
change-cap-guidance-october-2009 (accessed 
September 8, 2011).
Nicotra, A.B.; Beever, E.A.; Robertson, A.L.; 
Hofmann, G.E.; O’Leary, J. 2015. Assessing the 
components of adaptive capacity to improve 
conservation and management efforts under 
global change. Conservation Biology. 29: 
1268-1278. 
Nitschke, C.R.; Innes, J.L. 2008. Integrating 
climate change into forest management in 
south-central British Columbia: an assessment 
of landscape vulnerability and development of 
a climate-smart framework. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 256: 313-327.
Noss, R.F. 2001. Beyond Kyoto: forest 
management in a time of rapid climate change. 
Conservation Biology. 15: 578-590.
Nowacki, G.J.; Abrams, M.D. 2008. The demise 
of fire and “mesophication” of forests in the 
eastern United States. BioScience. 58(2): 
123-138.
123
LITERATURE CITED
Nowak, D.J. 2000. The interactions between 
global climate change and urban forests. In: 
Abdollahi, K.A.; Ning, Z.H.; Appeaning, A., 
eds. Global climate change and the urban forest. 
Baton Rouge, LA: Gulf Coast Regional Climate 
Change Council: 31-44.
Nowak, D.J.; Dwyer, J.F. 2007. Understanding the 
benefits and costs of urban forest ecosystems. 
In: Kuser, J.E., ed. Urban and community forestry 
in the Northeast. The Netherlands: Springer: 
25-46.
Nowak, D.J.; Hoehn, R.E., III; Crane, D.E.; Stevens, 
J.C.; Walton, J.T. 2006. Assessing urban forest 
effect and values: Washington, D.C.’s urban 
forest. Resour. Bull. NRS-1. Newtown Square, 
PA: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest 
Service, Northern Research Station. 24 p. 
Ogden, A.; Innes, J. 2008. Climate change 
adaptation and regional forest planning in 
southern Yukon, Canada. Mitigation and 
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change. 
13(8): 833-861.
O’Hara, K.L.; Ramage, B.S. 2013. Silviculture 
in an uncertain world: utilizing multi-aged 
management systems to integrate disturbance. 
Forestry. 86: 401-410.
Ohlson, D.W.; McKinnon, G.A.; Hirsch, K.G. 2005. 
A structured decision-making approach to 
climate change adaptation in the forest sector. 
The Forestry Chronicle. 81: 97-103.
Oliver, C.D.; Larson, B.C. 1996. Forest stand 
dynamics. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
544 p.
Papaik, M.; Canham, C. 2006. Species resistance 
and community response to wind disturbance 
regimes in northern temperate forests. Journal 
of Ecology. 94: 1011-1026.
Parry, M.L.; Canziani, O.F.; Palutikof, J.P., coord. 
lead authors. 2007. Technical summary. 
In: Parry, M.L.; Canziani, O.F.; Palutikof, 
J.P.; van der Linden, P.J.; Hanson, C.E., eds. 
Climate change 2007: impacts, adaptation and 
vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group 
II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press: 
23-78.
Patterson, J.D.; Mader, D.L. 1982. Soil compaction: 
causes and control in urban forest soils—a 
reference workbook. Syracuse, NY: SUNY 
College of Environmental Science and Forestry. 
Chapter 3. 
Pedlar, J.H.; McKenney, D.W.; Aubin, I.; 
Beardmore, T.; Beaulieu, J.; Iverson, L.; O’Neill, 
G.A.; Winder, R.S.; Ste-Marie, C. 2012. Placing 
forestry in the assisted migration debate. 
BioScience. 62: 835-842.
Peters, E.B.; Wythers, K.R.; Zhang, S.; Bradford, 
J.B.; Reich, P.B. 2013. Potential climate 
change impacts on temperate forest ecosystem 
processes. Canadian Journal of Forest Research. 
43: 939-950
Peterson, D.L.; Millar, C.I.; Joyce, L.A.; Furniss, 
M.J.; Halofsky, J.E.; Neilson, R.P.; Morelli, 
T.L. 2011. Responding to climate change on 
national forests: a guidebook for developing 
adaptation options. Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-
GTR-855. Portland, OR: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest 
Research Station. 109 p. 
Peterson, G.C.; Allen, R.; Holling, C.S. 1998. 
Ecological resilience, biodiversity, and scale. 
Ecosystems. 1: 6-18.
Poland, T.M.; McCullough, D.G. 2006. Emerald 
ash borer: invasion of the urban forest and the 
threat to North America’s ash resource. Journal 
of Forestry. 104: 118-124.
124
LITERATURE CITED
Putz, F.E.; Coley, P.D.; Lu, K.; Montalvo, A.; 
Aiello, A. 1983. Uprooting and snapping of 
trees: structural determinants and ecological 
consequences. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research. 13: 1011-1020.
Raupp, M.J.; Cummings, A.B.; Raupp, E.C. 2006. 
Street tree diversity in Eastern North America 
and its potential for tree loss to exotic borers. 
Arboriculture and Urban Forestry. 32(6): 
297-304.
Reed, T.E.; Schindler, D.E.; Waples, R.S. 2011. 
Interacting effects of phenotypic plasticity 
and evolution on population persistence in a 
changing climate. Conservation Biology. 
25: 56-63.
Ricciardi, A.; Simberloff, D. 2009. Assisted 
colonization is not a viable conservation 
strategy. Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 
24: 248-253.
Rissman, A.R.; Lozier, L.; Comendant, T.; Kareiva, 
P.; Kiesecker, J.M.; Shaw, M.R.; Merenlender, 
A.M. 2007. Conservation easements: 
biodiversity protection and private use. 
Conservation Biology. 21: 709-718.
Rooney, T.P.; Waller, D.M. 2003. Direct and 
indirect effects of white-tailed deer in forest 
ecosystems. Forest Ecology and Management. 
181: 165-176.
Root, T.L.; Price, J.T.; Hall, K.R.; Schneider, S.H.; 
Rosenzweig, C.; Pounds, J.A. 2003. Fingerprints 
of global warming on wild animals and plants. 
Nature. 421: 57-60.
Rudnick, D.A.; Ryan, S.J.; Beier, P.; Cushman, 
S.A.; Dieffenbach, F.; Epps, C.W.; Gerber, L.R.; 
Hartter, J.; Jenness, J.S.; Kintsch, J.; Merenlender, 
A.M.; Perkl, R.M.; Preziosi, D.V.; Trombulak, 
S.C. 2012. The role of landscape connectivity 
in planning and implementing conservation 
and restoration priorities. Issues in Ecology. 
16(Fall): 1-20.
Santamour, F.S., Jr. 2004. Trees for urban planting: 
diversity uniformity, and common sense. 
Proceedings, 7th Conference of the Metropolitan 
Tree Improvement Planting Alliance (METRA): 
57-65.
Sathre, R.; Gustavson, L. 2012.Time-dependent 
radiative forcing effects of forest fertilization 
and biomass substitution. Biogeochemistry. 
109(1): 213-218.
Savard, J.-P. L.; Clergeau, P.; Mennechez, G. 2000. 
Biodiversity concepts and urban ecosystems. 
Landscape and Urban Planning. 48: 131-142.
Scheller, R.M.; Domingo, J.B.; Sturtevant, B.R.; 
Williams, J.S.; Rudy, A.; Gustafson, E.J.; 
Mladenoff, D.J. 2007. Design, development, and 
application of LANDIS-II, a spatial landscape 
simulation model with flexible temporal and 
spatial resolution. Ecological Modelling. 
201(3-4): 409-419.
Schiermeier, Q. 2010. The real holes in climate 
science. Nature. 463: 284-287.
Schmidlin, T.W. 2009. Human fatalities from 
wind-related tree failures in the United States, 
1995-2007. Natural Hazards. 50: 13-25.
Schmitz, O.J.; Lawler, J.J.; Beier, P.; Groves, 
C.; Knight, G.; Boyce, D.A., Jr.; Bulluck, J.; 
Johnston, K.M.; Klein, M.L.; Muller, K. 2015. 
Conserving biodiversity: practical guidance 
about climate change adaptation approaches 
in support of land-use planning. Natural Areas 
Journal. 35: 190-203.
Seddon, P.J. 2010. From reintroduction to assisted 
colonization: moving along the conservation 
translocation spectrum. Restoration Ecology. 
18: 796-802.
Seymour, R.S.; White, A.S.; deMaynadier, P.G. 
2002. Natural disturbance regimes in 
northeastern North America—evaluating 
silvicultural systems using natural scales and 
frequencies. Forest Ecology and Management. 
155: 357-367.
125
LITERATURE CITED
Shuman, B.; Bartlein, P.; Logar, N.; Newby, P.; 
Webb, T. 2002. Parallel climate and vegetation 
responses to the early Holocene collapse of 
the Laurentide Ice Sheet. Quaternary Science 
Reviews. 21: 1793-1805.
Simpson, P.; van Bossuyt, R. 1996. Tree-caused 
electric outages. Journal of Arboriculture. 
22: 117-121.
Society of American Foresters. 2008. The 
dictionary of forestry. Bethesda, MD. 
dictionaryofforestry.org/ (accessed August 8, 
2011).
Spies, T.A.; Giesen, T.W.; Swanson, F.J.; Franklin, 
J.F.; Lach, D.; Johnson, K.N. 2010. Climate 
change adaptation strategies for federal forests 
of the Pacific Northwest, USA: ecological, 
policy, and socio-economic perspectives. 
Landscape Ecology. 25: 1185-1199.
Spittlehouse, D.L. 2005. Integrating climate 
change adaptation into forest management. 
The Forestry Chronicle. 81(5): 691-695.
Spittlehouse, D.L.; Stewart, R.B. 2003. Adaptation 
to climate change in forest management. 
BC Journal of Ecosystems and Management. 
4(1): 1-11.
Stankey, G.H.; Clark, R.N.; Bormann, B.T. 2005. 
Adaptive management of natural resources: 
theory, concepts, and management institutions. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-654. Portland, OR: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station. 73 p.
Staudinger, M.D.; Grimm, N.B.; Staudt, A.; Carter, 
S.L.; Chapin, F.S., III; Kareiva, P.; Ruckelshaus, 
M.; Stein, B.A. 2012. Impacts of climate change 
on biodiversity, ecosystems, and ecosystem 
services: technical input to the 2013 National 
Climate Assessment. Cooperative Report to 
the 2013 National Climate Assessment. 296 p. 
http://assessment.globalchange.gov (accessed 
December 21, 2015). 
Staudinger, M.D.; Morelli, T.L.; Bryan, A.M. 2015. 
Integrating climate change into Northeast and 
Midwest state wildlife action plans. Amherst, 
MA: U.S. Department of the Interior, Northeast 
Climate Science Center. 205 p. Available at http://
necsc.umass.edu/projects/integrating-climate-
change-state-wildlife-action-plans (accessed 
December 2, 2015). 
Stein, B.A.; Glick, P.; Edelson, N.; Staudt, A., 
eds. 2014. Climate-smart conservation: 
putting adaptation principles into practice. 
Washington, DC: National Wildlife Federation. 
262 p.
Stein, B.A.; Staudt, A.; Cross, M.S.; Dubois, N.S.; 
Enquist, C.; Griffis, R.; Hansen, L.J.; Hellmann, 
J.J.; Lawler, J.J.; Nelson, E.J. 2013. Preparing 
for and managing change: climate adaptation 
for biodiversity and ecosystems. Frontiers in 
Ecology and the Environment. 11: 502-510.
Stoner, A.M.K.; Hayhoe, K.; Yang, X.; Wuebbles, 
D.J. 2012. An asynchronous regional 
regression model for statistical downscaling of 
daily climate variables. International Journal of 
Climatology. 33(11): 2473-2494.
Stromayer, K.A.K.; Warren, R.J. 1997. Are 
overabundant deer herds in the eastern United 
States creating alternate stable states in forest 
plant communities? Wildlife Society Bulletin. 
25: 227-234.
Swanston, C.; Janowiak, M.; Iverson, L.; Parker, L.; 
Mladenoff, D.; Brandt, L.; Butler, P.; St. Pierre, 
M.; Prasad, A.; Matthews, S.; Peters, M.; Higgins, 
D.; Dorland, A. 2011. Ecosystem vulnerability 
assessment and synthesis: a report from the 
Climate Change Response Framework Project 
in northern Wisconsin. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-
82. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. 142 p.
126
LITERATURE CITED
Swanston, C.W.; Janowiak, M.J. 2012. Forest 
adaptation resources: climate change tools and 
approaches for land managers. Gen. Tech. Rep. 
NRS-87. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research 
Station. 121 p.
Tang, Y.; Zhong, S.; Luo, L.; Bian, X.; Heilman, 
W.E.; Winkler, J. 2014. The potential impact 
of regional climate change on fire weather in 
the United States. Annals of the Association of 
American Geographers. 105(1): 1-21. 
Tobin, D.; Janowiak, M.; Hollinger, D.; Skinner, 
R.H.; Swanston, C.; Steele, R.; Radhakrishna, 
R.; Chatrchyan, A.; Hickman, D.; Bochicchio, 
J.; Hall, W.; Cole, M.; Hestvik, S.; Gibson, D.; 
Kleinman, P.; Knight, L.; Kochian, L.; Rustad, 
L.; Lane, E.; Niedzielski, J.; Hlubik, P. 2015. 
Northeast and Northern Forests Regional 
Climate Hub assessment of climate change 
vulnerability and adaptation and mitigation 
strategies. Anderson, T., ed. Durham, NH: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Northern Research Station, Northeast Hub. 
65 p. http://www.climatehubs.oce.usda.gov/sites/
default/files/Northeast%20Regional%20Hub%
20Vulnerability%20Assessment%20Final.pdf 
(accessed December 21, 2015). 
Urban, J. 2008. Up by roots: healthy soils and 
trees in the built environment. Champaign, IL: 
International Society of Arboriculture. 479 p.
Urbanek, R.E.; Nielsen, C.K. 2012. Deer, 
humans, and vegetation: a case study of deer 
management in the Chicago metropolitan area. 
In: Timm, R.M., ed. Proceedings of the 25th 
vertebrate pest conference. Davis, CA: University 
of California: 282-288.
Uriarte, M.; Papaik, M. 2007. Hurricane 
impacts on dynamics, structure and carbon 
sequestration potential of forest ecosystems 
in Southern New England, USA. Tellus. 59A: 
519-528.
U.S. Forest Service. 2008. Forest Service strategic 
framework for responding to climate change, 
ver. 1.0. http://www.fs.fed.us/climatechange/
documents/strategic-framework-climate-change-
1-0.pdf (accessed May 6, 2016).
U.S. Forest Service. 2010. National roadmap for 
responding to climate change. http://www.
fs.fed.us/climatechange/pdf/roadmap.pdf 
(accessed May 6, 2016).
U.S. Forest Service. 2015. Forest Inventory and 
Analysis national program homepage. 
http://www.fia.fs.fed.us/ (accessed December 21, 
2015).
Vitt, P.; Havens, K.; Kramer, A.T.; Sollenberger, D.; 
Yates, D. 2010. Assisted migration of plants: 
changes in latitudes, changes in attitudes. 
Biological Conservation. 143: 18-27.
Vose, J.M.; Peterson, D.L.; Patel-Weynand, T. 
eds. 2012. Effects of climatic variability and 
change on forest ecosystems: a comprehensive 
science synthesis for the U.S. forest sector. 
Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW-GTR-870. Portland, OR: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station. 265 p. 
Walck, J.L.; Hidayati, S.N.; Dixon, K.W.; 
Thompson, K.; Poschlod, P. 2011. Climate 
change and plant regeneration from seed. 
Global Change Biology. 17: 2145-2161.
Walk, J.; Hagen, S.; Lange, A. 2011. Adapting 
conservation to a changing climate: an update 
to the Illinois Wildlife Action Plan. In: Report 
to the Illinois Department of Natural Resources. 
Contract TNC10WAP. Peoria, IL: Illinois Chapter 
of The Nature Conservancy.
Walther, G.-R.; Post, E.; Convey, P.; Menzel, 
A.; Parmesan, C.; Beebee, J.; Fromentin, J.-
M.; Hoegh-Guldberg, O.; Bairlein, F. 2002. 
Ecological responses to recent climate change. 
Nature. 416: 389-395.
127
LITERATURE CITED
Wang, W.J.; He, H.S.; Fraser, J.S.; Thompson, F.R., 
III; Shifley, S.R.; Spetich, M.A. 2014. LANDIS 
PRO: a landscape model that predicts forest 
composition and structure changes at regional 
scales. Ecography. 37: 225-229.
Wang, W.J.; He, H.S.; Spetich, M.A.; Shifley, S.R.; 
Thompson, F.R., III; Larsen, D.R.; Fraser, J.S.; 
Yang, J. 2013. A large-scale forest landscape 
model incorporating multi-scale processes and 
utilizing forest inventory data. Ecosphere. 4(9): 
106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES113-00040.1.
Washington, W.M.; Weatherly, J.W.; Meehl, 
G.A.; Semtner, A.J., Jr.; Bettge, T.W.; Craig, 
A.P.; Strand, W.G., Jr.; Arblaster, J.; Wayland, 
V.B.; James, R.; Zhang, Y. 2000. Parallel 
climate model (PCM) control and transient 
simulations. Climate Dynamics. 16(10-11): 
755-774.
Watson, G.W.; Himelick, E.B. 2013. Root-friendly 
planting site design. Arborist News. 22: 64-68.
Weiner, J. 1990. Asymmetric competition in plant 
populations. Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 
5: 360-364.
Whitlow, T.H.; Bassuk, N.L. 1987. Trees in difficult 
sites. Journal of Arboriculture. 13: 10-17.
Wilkerson, E.; Sartoris, J. 2013. Climate change 
adaptation plan for Allen Whitney Forest, 
Maine. Plymouth, MA: Manomet Center for 
Conservation Sciences.
Wilkerson, E.; Whitman, A. 2011. Climate change 
& forests. What can we expect? What can we 
do about it? Brunswick, ME: Manomet Center 
for Conservation Sciences. 8 p. 
https://www.manomet.org/sites/
default/files/publications_and_tools/
ClimateChangeandForests_10.11.pdf (accessed 
May 6, 2016).
Williams, B.K.; Szaro, R.C.; Shapiro, C.D. 2007. 
Adaptive management: the US Department 
of the Interior technical guide. [N.p.]: U.S. 
Department of the Interior, Adaptive Management 
Working Group.
Woodall, C.W.; Nagel, L.M. 2007. Downed 
woody fuel loading dynamics of a large-scale 
blowdown in northern Minnesota, U.S.A. 
Forest Ecology and Management. 247: 194-199.
Woodall, C.W.; Nowak, D.J.; Liknes, G.C.; Westfall, 
J.A. 2010. Assessing the potential for urban 
trees to facilitate forest tree migration in the 
eastern United States. Forest Ecology and 
Management. 259: 1447-1454.
Wullschleger, S.D.; Gunderson, C.A.; Tharp, 
M.L.; Post, W.M.; West, D.C. 2003 Simulated 
patterns of forest succession and productivity 
as a consequence of altered precipitation. In: 
Hanson, P.J.; Wullschleger, S.D., eds. North 
American temperate deciduous forest responses 
to changing precipitation regimes. New York: 
Springer-Verlag: 433-446.
Yaussy, D.A.; Iverson, L.R.; Matthews, S.N. 2013. 
Competition and climate affects US hardwood-
forest tree mortality. Forest Science. 59(4): 
416-430.
Young, A.G.; Merriam, H.G.; Warwick, S.I. 1993. 
The effects of forest fragmentation on genetic 
variation in Acer saccharum Marsh (sugar 
maple) populations. Heredity. 71(3): 277-289.
Young, B.; Byers, E.; Gravuer, K.; Hall, K.; 
Hammerson, G.; Redder, A. 2010. Guidelines 
for using the NatureServe Climate Change 
Vulnerability Index Release 1.2. Arlington, VA: 
NatureServe. 54 p.
128
Appendix 1. Synthesis of Adaptation Strategies 
and Approaches
The adaptation strategies and approaches described 
in Chapter 3 of this document provide a menu 
of strategies and approaches for adapting forest 
ecosystems to climate change. These strategies and 
approaches serve as stepping stones to enable natural 
resource managers to translate broad concepts into 
targeted and prescriptive tactics for implementing 
adaptation (Janowiak et al. 2010). For the updated 
menu used in this document, we expanded our 
geographic extent to the Midwest and Northeast, and 
extended our consideration to the major forest types 
within those regions. The methods and processes 
used to develop and refine this menu are described 
in this appendix.
Synthesis of Adaptation Actions
This menu of adaptation strategies, approaches, 
and example tactics builds on the menu that was 
originally published in Swanston and Janowiak 
(2012) and compiled from a number of sources in 
both peer-reviewed and gray literature. We also 
used the BioOne®, Google Scholar, and TreeSearch 
search engines to conduct additional literature 
searches for peer-reviewed and gray literature 
that had been published in the last 3 years. Key 
words included climate change, adaptation, forest 
management, adaptive management, impacts, 
migration, and genetic conservation. A list of key 
literature used is presented in Table 10. Additional 
actions were identified from contemporary literature 
and recent case studies of forest adaptation projects, 
such as those found at www.forestadaptation.
org/demonstrations. The adaptation concepts and 
actions compiled from the literature and case studies 
were organized into a hierarchy of adaptation 
actions from broad concepts to specific tactics (see 
Figure 5 in Chapter 2). Based on expert review (see 
next section), adaptation actions were refined and 
organized into 10 strategies, 36 approaches, and 
more than 100 example tactics. 
Expert Comment Process
We drew upon the experience and expertise of 
scientists, adaptation experts, and forest managers 
for input on how this expanded menu of adaptation 
strategies and approaches relates to forest types 
across ecological provinces in the Midwest and 
Northeast (Tables 11 and 12). We compiled a list 
of individuals with expertise in forest ecology and 
management in the region, seeking representation 
from a variety of geographies and a balance 
of science and management from a range of 
institutions (Table 13). Expertise was determined 
by publications related to key words, as well as 
previous experience working in a region or forest 
type. Overall, 42 experts provided feedback, with at 
least two experts commenting from each ecological 
province. 
We elicited comments from experts by using 
an online questionnaire that asked each person 
to evaluate all of the adaptation strategies and 
approaches for a single forest type. A draft chapter of 
the revised strategies and approaches was provided. 
Before beginning the review, experts were asked to 
think about potential climate change impacts that are 
most important to the ecological province that they 
would be considering. We provided a list of existing 
climate change vulnerability assessments and impact 
reports that they could use for reference.
For each adaptation strategy, experts were first 
asked a set of questions about the applicability of 
each adaptation approach under that strategy for 
their assigned forest type and region. Experts were 
129
Appendix 1
Table 10.—Literature reviewed for compilation of adaptation strategies and approaches. Full citations 
for these resources are in the Literature Cited section of this document
Biringer, J. 2003. Forest ecosystems threatened 
by climate change: promoting long-term forest 
resilience.
Brandt, L.; Swanston, C.; Parker, L.; Janowiak, M.; 
Birdsey, R.; Iverson, L.; Mladenoff, D.; Butler, P. 2012. 
Climate change science applications and needs 
in forest ecosystem management: a workshop 
organized as part of northern Wisconsin Climate 
Change Response Framework Project. 
Chornesky, E.A.; Bartuska, A.M.; Aplet, G.H.; Britton, K.O.; 
Cummings-Carlson, J.; Davis, F.W.; Eskow, J.; Gordon, 
D.R.; Gottschalk, K.W.; Haack, R.A.; Hansen, A.J.; 
Mack, R.N.; Rahel, F.J.; Shannon, M.A.; Wainger, L.A.; 
Wigley, T.B. 2005. Science priorities for reducing the 
threat of invasive species to sustainable forestry.
Climate Change Wildlife Action Plan Work Group. 2009. 
Voluntary guidance for states to incorporate 
climate change into state wildlife action plans & 
other management plans. 
D’Amato, A.W.; Bradford, J.B.; Fraver, S.; Palik, B.J. 2011. 
Forest management for mitigation and adaptation 
to climate change: insights from long-term 
silviculture experiments. 
Dale, V.H.; Joyce, L.A.; McNulty, S.; Neilson, R.P.; Ayres, 
M.P.; Flannigan, M.D.; Hanson, P.J.; Irland, L.C.; Lugo, 
A.E.; Peterson, C.J.; Simberloff, D.; Swanson, F.J.; 
Stocks, B.J.; Wotton, B.M. 2001. Climate change and 
forest disturbances.
Galatowitsch, S.; Frelich, L.; Phillips-Mao, L. 2009. 
Regional climate change adaptation strategies 
for biodiversity conservation in a midcontinental 
region of North America. 
Gitay, H.; Suarez, A.; Watson, R.T.; Dokken, D.J., eds. 
2002. Climate change and biodiversity. 
Gunn, J.S.; Hagan, J.M.; Whitman, A.A. 2009. Forestry 
adaptation and mitigation in a changing climate: 
a forest resource manager’s guide for the 
northeastern United States. 
Halpin, P.N. 1997. Global climate change and natural-
area protection: management responses and 
research directions. 
Hannah, L. 2008. Protected areas and climate change. 
Heinz Center. 2008. Strategies for managing the effects 
of climate change on wildlife and ecosystems. 
Heller, N.E.; Zavaleta, E.S. 2009. Biodiversity 
management in the face of climate change: a 
review of 22 years of recommendations. 
Hellmann, J.J.; Byers, J.E.; Bierwagen, B.G.; Dukes, 
J.S. 2008. Five potential consequences of climate 
change for invasive species. 
Hulme, P.E. 2005. Adapting to climate change: Is there 
scope for ecological management in the face of a 
global threat? 
Innes, J.; Joyce, L.A.; Kellomaki, S.; Louman, B.; Ogden, 
A.; Parrotta, J.; Thompson, I.; Ayres, M.; Ong, 
C.; Santosa, H.; Sohngen, B.; Wreford, A. 2009. 
Management for adaptation. 
Janowiak, M.J.; Swanston, C.W.; Nagel, L.M.; Brandt, 
L.A.; Butler, P.R.; Handler, S.D.; Shannon, P.D.; 
Iverson, L.R.; Matthews, S.N.; Prasad, A.; Peters, 
M.P. 2014. A practical approach for translating 
climate change adaptation principles into forest 
management actions. 
Janowiak, M.K.; Swanston, C.W.; Nagel, L.M.; Webster, 
C.R.; Palik, B.J.; Twery, M.J.; Bradford, J.B.; Parker, 
L.R.; Hille, A.T.; Johnson, S.M. 2011. Silvicultural 
decisionmaking in an uncertain climate future: a 
workshop-based exploration of considerations, 
strategies, and approaches. 
Joyce, L.; Blate, G.; McNulty, S.; Millar, C.; Moser, S.; 
Neilson, R.; Peterson, D. 2009. Managing for multiple 
resources under climate change: national forests. 
Lawler, J.J. 2009. Climate change adaptation strategies 
for resource management and conservation 
planning. 
Lawler, J.J.; Tear, T.H.; Pyke, C.; Shaw, M.R.; Gonzalez, 
P.; Kareiva, P.; Hansen, L.; Hannah, L.; Klausmeyer, 
K.; Aldous, A.; Bienz, C.; Pearsall, S. 2010. Resource 
management in a changing and uncertain climate. 
Lindenmayer, D.B.; Franklin, J.F.; Fischer, J. 2006. 
General management principles and a checklist 
of strategies to guide forest biodiversity 
conservation. 
Manomet Center for Conservation Sciences and 
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. 
2010b. Climate change and Massachusetts fish and 
wildlife: volume 3—habitat management.
McLachlan, J.S.; Hellmann, J.J.; Schwartz, M.W. 2007. A 
framework for debate of assisted migration in an 
era of climate change. 
Millar, C.I.; Stephenson, N.L; Stephens, S.L. 2007. 
Climate change and forests of the future: managing 
in the face of uncertainty. 
Millar, C.I.; Stephenson, N.L.; Stephens, S.L. 2008.
Re-framing forest and resource management 
strategies for a climate change context. 
The Nature Conservancy. 2009. Conservation action 
planning guidelines for developing strategies in the 
face of climate change.
Nitschke, C.R.; Innes, J.L. 2008. Integrating climate 
change into forest management in south-central 
British Columbia: an assessment of landscape 
vulnerability and development of a climate-smart 
framework. 
Sathre, R.; Gustavsson, L. 2012. Time-dependent 
radiative forcing effects of forest fertilization and 
biomass substitution. 
(Continued on next page)
130
Appendix 1
Table 10 (continued).
Spies, T.A.; Giesen, T.W.; Swanson, F.J.; Franklin, J.F.; 
Lach, D.; Johnson, K.N. 2010. Climate change 
adaptation strategies for federal forests of the 
Pacific Northwest, USA: ecological, policy, and 
socio-economic perspectives. 
Spittlehouse, D.L. 2005. Integrating climate change 
adaptation into forest management. 
Spittlehouse, D.L.; Stewart, R.B. 2003. Adaptation to 
climate change in forest management. 
U.S. Forest Service. 2008. Forest Service strategic 
framework for responding to climate change, ver. 1.0.
U.S. Forest Service. 2010. National roadmap for 
responding to climate change. 
Wilkerson, E.; Whitman, A. 2011. Climate change & 
forests: What can we expect? What can we do 
about it? 
Yaussy, D.A.; Iverson, L.R.; Matthews, S.N. 2013. 
Competition and climate affects US hardwood-
forest tree mortality. 
Table 11.—Number of reviewers for each ecological province in the Midwest and Northeast
	
	
	
Number of
Province	
Province name	
Acres	
reviewers
	 212	
Laurentian Mixed Forest	
 64,486,516 	
20
	 222	
Midwest Broadleaf Forest Province	
 91,504,442 	
17
	 221	
Eastern Broadleaf Forest	
 50,063,685 	
12
	 223	
Central Interior Broadleaf Forest	
 43,500,974 	
10
	 251	
Prairie Parkland	
 88,787,652 	
10
	 211	
Northeastern Mixed Forest	
 33,980,801 	
8
	 M211	
Adirondack-New England Mixed Forest-Coniferous Forest-Alpine Meadow	
 24,404,254 	
7
	 M221	
Central Appalachian Broadleaf Forest-Coniferous Forest-Meadow	
 20,713,304 	
4
	 232	
Outer Coastal Plain Mixed Forest	
 7,721,043 	
3
	 234	
Lower Mississippi Riverine Forest	
 2,656,565 	
2
	 231	
Southeastern Mixed Forest	
 367,860 	
2
Table 12.—Forest and forest ecosystem types represented by reviewers’ expertise
Forest type or forest ecosystem	
Forest type or forest ecosystem
Allegheny hardwoods	
Mixed oak
Aspen 	
Mixed pine
Aspen-paper birch	
Northern hardwoods
Bottomland hardwoods	
Oak savanna and woodland
Central hardwoods	
Oak-hickory
Coastal plain pine-hardwoods	
Oak-pine
Dolomite glade	
Peatlands (forested)
Dry oak heath	
Pine-oak barrens
Flatwoods	
Red spruce 
Floodplain forest	
Riverine forest
Hemlock	
Shortleaf pine
Jack pine 	
Southern hardwoods
Limestone glade and barrens	
Spruce-fir (boreal and montane)
Loblolly pine	
Tallgrass prairie
Loblolly-shortleaf pine	
Upland black spruce
Longleaf pine	
Urban hardwoods
Lowland conifer	
Wetlands (forested)
Lowland hardwoods	
White pine
Mixed mesophytic hardwoods
131
Appendix 1
Table 13.—Name and affiliation of experts participating in the review process, listed alphabetically by 
last name
RespondentID
Name
Organization
2501616594
Scott Bearer
The Nature Conservancy
2466763305
Tara Bergeson
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
2465358976
Don Bragg
U.S. Forest Service, Southern Research Station
2460741669
Diane Burbank
U.S. Forest Service, Green Mountain and Finger Lakes National Forests
2460156915
Andrew Burton
Michigan Technological University, School of Forest Resources and 
Environmental Science
2458772630
Greg Corace
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Seney National Wildlife Refuge
Abigail Derby Lewis
The Field Museum and Chicago Wilderness
2458498047
Dan Dey
U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station
2458456740
George F. Frame
Society for the Protection of New Hampshire Forests
2458018735
Lee Frelich
University of Minnesota, Department of Forest Resources
2457977386
Susan Galatowitsch
University of Minnesota, Department of Fisheries, Wildlife and Conservation 
Biology
2456799239
Erica Hahn
U.S. Forest Service, Superior National Forest
2455969424
Robert G. Haight
U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station
2454659604
Beth Hardman
U.S. Forest Service, Mark Twain National Forest
2454440654
Dawn Henderson
Missouri Department of Conservation
2453270684
Brad Hutnik
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Division of Forestry
2451946637
John Kabrick
U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station
2451074763
Kent Karriker
U.S. Forest Service, Monongahela National Forest
2450434996
William S. Keeton
University of Vermont, Rubenstein School of Environment and Natural 
Resources
2449659075
Benjamin Knapp
University of Missouri, School of Natural Resources
2449008261
Rose-Marie Muzika
University of Missouri, School of Natural Resources
2448789985
Christian Nelson
Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
2447619854
David Neumann
Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Forest Resources Division
2447372748
Greg Nowacki
U.S. Forest Service, Eastern Region
2447232755
Brian Palik
U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station
2445749238
Linda Parker
U.S. Forest Service, Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest
2445004553
Judi Perez
U.S. Forest Service, Hoosier National Forest
Ann Pierce
Minnesota Department of Natural Resources, Division of Ecological and 
Water Resources
2443096734
Charles Ruffner
Southern Illinois University-Carbondale, Department of Forestry  
2442974255
Lindsey Rustad
U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station
2441726031
Gregor Schuurman
Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Bureau of Endangered 
Resources
2440156915
K. Rogers Simmons
U.S. Forest Service, White Mountain National Forest
2438661117
Matthew St. Pierre
U.S. Forest Service, Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest
2438640191
Susan Stout
U.S. Forest Service, Northern Research Station
2433223991
Esther D. Stroh
U.S. Geological Survey
2432921593
John B. Taft
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Prairie Research Institute, Illinois 
Natural History Survey    
2432105714
Chris Thornton
U.S. Forest Service, Hoosier National Forest
2428553992
Eric Ulaszek
U.S. Forest Service, Midewin National Tallgrass Prairie
2427998214
Laura Watts
U.S. Forest Service, Mark Twain National Forest
2425112578
Mark White
The Nature Conservancy in Minnesota and the Dakotas
2421356782
Sandy Wilmot
Vermont Department of Forests, Parks and Recreation
132
Appendix 1
then asked to consider how effectively the suite of 
approaches helped support the broader strategy. 
The questions were open-ended to allow reviewers 
to comment freely. Experts were asked to evaluate 
every strategy and every approach and to provide 
examples of adaptation actions that apply to their 
forest type or ecological province (i.e., example 
tactics). If the expert determined that a strategy or 
approach was useful in the forest type considered, he 
or she was asked to provide a rationale. 
The instructions to the experts are reproduced 
on the next two pages (with deadline and project 
coordinator’s contact information omitted). Use of 
the online questionnaire enabled us to easily manage 
a large amount of feedback. However, some experts 
chose not to use the questionnaire and provided 
comments in a Microsoft® Word document.
Experts were given about 1 month to respond. After 
the deadline, responses were collated by strategy, 
then by approach; and comments from multiple 
reviewers were listed together. Responses for all 
approaches and strategies were evaluated and 
incorporated into chapter revisions that clarified 
adaptation actions, reorganized adaptation concepts, 
and identified new examples of tactics that might 
be applied in a specific place to meet specific 
management objectives. 
Red pine needles in the Upper Peninsula, Michigan. Photo by Kailey Marcinkowski, Michigan Technological University, 
used with permission.
133
Appendix 1
(continued on next page)
134
Appendix 1
135
Appendix 2: Common and Scientific Names of Species 
Mentioned in this Document
Flora
Common name
Scientific name
fir spp.
Abies spp.
balsam fir
Abies balsamea
maple 
Acer spp.
red maple
Acer rubrum
silver maple 
Acer saccharinum
sugar maple
Acer saccharum
ailanthus
Ailanthus altissima
garlic mustard
Alliaria petiolata
birch spp.
Betula spp.
yellow birch
Betula alleghaniensis
black birch
Betula lenta
paper birch
Betula payrifera
bluejoint grass
Calamagrostis canadensis 
hickory 
Carya spp.
bitternut hickory
Carya cordiformis
pignut hickory
Carya glabra 
shagbark hickory 
Carya ovata 
black hickory
Carya texana 
mockernut hickory 
Carya tomentosa 
chestnut
Castanea spp.
American yellowwood
Cladastris kentukea
glade coneflower
Echinacea simulata
autumn olive
Elaeagnus umbellata
beech
Fagus spp.
American beech
Fagus grandifolia
white ash
Fraxinus americana 
blue ash
Fraxinus quadrangulata 
Kentucky coffeetree
Gymnocladus dioica  
eastern redcedar
Juniperus virginiana 
tamarack
Larix laricina 
sericea lespedeza
Lespedeza cuneata
privet
Ligustrum vulgare
tuliptree
Liriodendron tulipifera
bush honeysuckles
Lonicera spp.
southern blazing star
Mentzelia lindleyi
Japanese stiltgrass
Microstegium vimineum 
spruce spp.
Picea spp.
white spruce
Picea glauca 
black spruce
Picea mariana
red spruce
Picea rubens
pine spp.
Pinus spp.
jack pine
Pinus banksiana
shortleaf pine 
Pinus echinata 
slash pine
Pinus elliottii 
longleaf pine
Pinus palustris
red pine
Pinus resinosus 
Common name
Scientific name
eastern white pine 
Pinus strobus 
loblolly pine 
Pinus taeda 
aspen
Populus spp.
quaking aspen
Populus tremuloides 
black cherry
Prunus serotina 
kudzu
Pueraria montana
oak
Quercus spp.
white oak
Quercus alba
swamp white oak 
Quercus bicolor 
scarlet oak
Quercus coccinea 
southern red oak
Quercus falcata 
bur oak
Quercus macrocarpa 
blackjack oak
Quercus marilandica 
chinkapin oak
Quercus muehlenbergii 
northern red oak
Quercus rubra 
post oak
Quercus stellata 
black oak
Quercus velutina 
European buckthorn
Rhamnus cathartica 
black locust 
Robinia pseudoacacia 
northern white-cedar
Thuja occidentalis
eastern hemlock
Tsuga canadensis 
American elm
Ulmus americana
FAuna
Common name
Scientific name
hemlock woolly adelgid
Adelges tsugae
moose 
Alces americanus 
Asian longhorned beetle
Anoplophora glabripennis 
cattle 
Bos spp. 
spruce budworm
Choristoneura fumiferana
southern pine beetle
Dendroctonus frontalis
yellow-breasted chat
Icteria virens
gypsy moth
Lymantria dispar
Indiana bat 
Myotis sodalis
white-tailed deer 
Odocoileus virginiana
rabbit
Oryctolagus cuniculus
prairie warbler
Setophaga discolor
Kirtland’s warbler
Setophaga kirtlandii
feral hog
Sus scrofa 
black bear
Ursus americanus
golden-winged warbler
Vermivora chrysoptera
Flora (continued)
136
Appendix 3. Lead Authors and Other Contributors 
to Chapter 4 
Lead Authors
Abigail Derby Lewis, senior conservation ecologist, 
the Field Museum
Robert Fahey, assistant professor, University of 
Connecticut
Lydia Scott, director, Chicago Region Trees 
Initiative, the Morton Arboretum
Angela Kerber, wetland specialist and certified 
arborist, DuPage County
Jason Miesbauer, arboriculture scientist, the Morton 
Arboretum
Lindsay Darling, geographic information systems 
analyst, the Morton Arboretum
Other Contributors
Alison Anastasio, manager of graduate research, 
education, and outreach, University of Chicago
Susan Ask, director, Animalia Project
Judy Beck, Lake Michigan manager, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency
Jeffrey Brink, senior city forester, Chicago 
Department of Transportation
Mary Carroll, community education specialist, 
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
Shawn Cirton, fish and wildlife biologist, U.S. 
Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife 
Service
Tom Dilley, natural resources specialist, U.S. Forest 
Service
Owen Donath, intern, the Wetlands Initiative
Aaron Durnbaugh, director of sustainability, Loyola 
University
Andrew Hipp, plant systematist and herbarium 
curator, the Morton Arboretum
Christian Keeve, undergraduate Fellow, 
Environmental Science and Urban Studies, 
Northwestern University
Martin Jaffe, director of and associate professor in 
Urban Planning and Policy Program, University 
of Illinois at Chicago
Kathryn Jonas, arborist, Openlands Tree Keepers
Kris Lah, endangered species coordinator, U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service
John Legge, natural resources manager, Coastal 
Management Program, Illinois Department of 
Natural Resources
Joy Marburger, research coordinator, Indiana Dunes 
National Lakeshore
Karen Ann Miller, executive planner, Kane County 
Development Department
Bob Moseley, director of conservation, Illinois, The 
Nature Conservancy
Chris Mulvaney, staff, Chicago Wilderness 
Alison Neuman, landscape operations manager, 
Chicago Gateway Green
Brenda Occhiuzzo, resource technician, Forest 
Preserves of Cook County
Chip O’Leary, chief ecologist, Forest Preserves of 
Cook County
Daniella Pereira, regional forester, Openlands
Laura Perna, Community Outreach, Illinois 
Department of Natural Resources
Wendy Pollack, founder, Evanston Treekeepers
Izabella Redlinski, ecologist, the Wetlands Initiative
137
Appendix 3
Bryant Scharenbroch, soil scientist, the Morton 
Arboretum
Jerome Scott, forester, Chicago Park District
Doug Stotz, conservation ecologist, the Field 
Museum
Matt Ueltzen, restoration ecologist, Lake County 
Forest Preserve
Nancy Williamson, ecosystem administrator, Illinois 
Department of Natural Resources 
Curtis Witek, Rivers, Trails and Conservation 
Assistance, U.S. Department of the Interior, 
National Park Service 
Claire Woolley, founder, AddATree
138
Appendix 4. Adaptation Workbook: Short Version
This short version of the Adaptation Workbook 
provides a streamlined set of considerations 
using the adaptation process that is described in 
Chapter 5 of this document. It is intended for users 
who are familiar with the process and the anticipated 
effects of climate change in the area in which they 
work. It can also be used to collect notes and ideas 
that will be integrated into the comprehensive 
version of the workbook found in Chapter 5.
Step 1: DEFINE location, project, and time frames. 
What are your management goals and objectives for the project area?
The first step is to describe the project area and your management objectives before considering the potential 
effects of climate change. This may include identifying:
•	 Any ecosystem types, stands, or other distinct areas that you want to consider individually
•	 Any short- or long-term milestones that can be used to evaluate progress.
Step 2: ASSESS site-specific climate change impacts and vulnerabilities.
What climate change impacts and vulnerabilities are most important 
to this particular site?
Climate change will have a wide variety of effects on the landscape, and not all places will respond similarly. 
List site-specific factors that may increase or reduce the effects of climate change in your project area, 
such as:
•	 Site conditions, such as topographic position, soils, or hydrology
•	 Past and current management 
•	 Forest composition and structure
•	 Susceptibility to pests, diseases, or other stressors that may increase.
You can consult vulnerability assessments for information on the anticipated effects of climate change 
on forest ecosystems in a particular region. Select assessments are listed under “Resources” at 
www.adaptationworkbook.org.
Step 3: EVALUATE management objectives given projected impacts 
             and vulnerabilities.
What management challenges and opportunities may occur 
as a result of climate change?
This step explores management challenges and opportunities that may arise under changing conditions. For 
each of your management objectives, consider: 
•	 Management challenges and opportunities given the climate impacts you identified previously
•	 The feasibility of meeting each management objective under current management
•	 Other considerations (e.g., administrative, legal, or social considerations) beyond climate change that 
may affect your ability to meet your management objectives.
Do any of your management objectives need to change, given the projected 
climate impacts listed above?     
	
	 Yes	
	 No
If yes, adjust management objectives before proceeding to the next step.
Step 4: IDENTIFY adaptation approaches and tactics for implementation.
What actions can enhance the ability of the ecosystem to adapt to anticipated 
changes and meet management goals?
Generate a list of adaptation tactics—prescriptive actions specifically designed for your project area or 
property and your unique management objectives. Use the menu of Adaptation Strategies and Approaches 
(Box 18) as a starting point for identifying specific management tactics (e.g., what, how, when) that you can 
implement. As you develop tactics, consider the 
•	 Benefits, drawbacks, and barriers associated with each tactic
•	 Effectiveness and feasibility of each tactic.
Box 18
Menu of Adaptation Strategies and Approaches
Strategy 1: Sustain fundamental ecological 
functions.
1.1. Reduce impacts to soils and nutrient cycling.
1.2. Maintain or restore hydrology.
1.3. Maintain or restore riparian areas. 
1.4. Reduce competition for moisture, nutrients, 
and light.
1.5. Restore or maintain fire in fire-adapted 
ecosystems.
Strategy 2: Reduce the impact of biological 
stressors.
2.1. Maintain or improve the ability of forests to 
resist pests and pathogens.
2.2. Prevent the introduction and establishment 
of invasive plant species and remove existing 
invasive species. 
2.3. Manage herbivory to promote regeneration of 
desired species.
Strategy 3: Reduce the risk and long-term 
impacts of severe disturbances.
3.1. Alter forest structure or composition to reduce 
risk or severity of wildfire. 
3.2. Establish fuelbreaks to slow the spread of 
catastrophic fire. 
3.3. Alter forest structure to reduce severity or 
extent of wind and ice damage. 
3.4. Promptly revegetate sites after disturbance.
Strategy 4: Maintain or create refugia. 
4.1. Prioritize and maintain unique sites. 
4.2. Prioritize and maintain sensitive or at-risk 
species or communities.
4.3. Establish artificial reserves for at-risk and 
displaced species. 
Strategy 5: Maintain and enhance species and 
structural diversity.
5.1. Promote diverse age classes.
5.2. Maintain and restore diversity of native 
species. 
5.3. Retain biological legacies. 
5.4. Establish reserves to maintain ecosystem 
diversity. 
Strategy 6: Increase ecosystem redundancy 
across the landscape. 
6.1. Manage habitats over a range of sites and 
conditions. 
6.2. Expand the boundaries of reserves to increase 
diversity.
Strategy 7: Promote landscape connectivity. 
7.1. Reduce landscape fragmentation. 
7.2. Maintain and create habitat corridors through 
reforestation or restoration.
Strategy 8: Maintain and enhance genetic 
diversity.
8.1. Use seeds, germplasm, and other genetic 
material from across a greater geographic 
range. 
8.2. Favor existing genotypes that are better 
adapted to future conditions. 
Strategy 9: Facilitate community adjustments 
through species transitions. 
9.1. Favor or restore native species that are 
expected to be adapted to future conditions. 
9.2. Establish or encourage new mixes of native 
species.
9.3. Guide changes in species composition at early 
stages of stand development.
9.4. Protect future-adapted seedlings and saplings.
9.5. Disfavor species that are distinctly 
maladapted.
9.6. Manage for species and genotypes with wide 
moisture and temperature tolerances.
9.7. Introduce species that are expected to be 
adapted to future conditions.
9.8. Move at-risk species to locations that are 
expected to provide habitat. 
Strategy 10: Realign ecosystems after 
disturbance.
10.1. Promptly revegetate sites after disturbance. 
10.2. Allow for areas of natural regeneration to test 
for future-adapted species.
10.3. Realign significantly disrupted ecosystems to 
meet expected future conditions.
Step 5: MONITOR and evaluate effectiveness of implemented actions.
What information can be used to evaluate whether the selected actions 
were effective and to inform future management?
Monitoring metrics can help you determine whether you are making progress on your management goals and 
evaluate the effectiveness of those actions. When identifying monitoring items, work to identify monitoring 
items that:
•	 Can tell you whether you have achieved your management goals and objectives 
•	 Can tell you whether the adaptation tactics had the intended effect
•	 Are realistic to implement. 
145
Appendix 5. Adaptation Workbook: Blank Worksheets
Step 1 Worksheet
Project Area or Property:
Location:
Ecosystem Type 
or Management Topic
Management Goals
Management Objectives
Time Frames
Step 2 Worksheet
Ecosystem Type 
or Management Topic 
(from Step 1)
Regional Climate Change Impacts 
and Vulnerabilities
Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities 
for the Project Area or Property
Vulnerability 
Determination
Step 3 Worksheet
Ecosystem Type or 
Management Topic 
(from Step 1)
Management 
Objectives 
(from Step 1)
Challenges to Meeting 
Management Objective 
with Climate Change 
Opportunities for Meeting 
Management Objective 
with Climate Change
Feasibility of Meeting 
Management Objective 
under Current 
Management
Other 
Considerations
Slow down to consider…
Step 4 Worksheet
Ecosystem Type or 
Management Topic 
(from Step 1)
Adaptation Actions
Time 
Frames
Benefits
Drawbacks and 
Barriers
Practicability 
of Tactic
Recommend 
Tactic?
Approach
Tactic
Step 5 Worksheet
Ecosystem Type or 
Management Topic
 (from Step 1)
Adaptation Monitoring Variable
Criteria for Evaluation
Monitoring Implementation
 
 
 
 
151
Appendix 6. Adaptation Workbook: Example Worksheets
A more complete set of information is provided 
in Tables 14 through 18 for the Jerktail Mountain 
adaptation demonstration (see Chapter 6, pp. 95-97, 
for a description of the demonstration).
152
Appendix 6
Table 14.—Example of a completed Step 1 worksheet for the Adaptation Workbook, drawn from the Jerktail Mountain adaptation 
demonstration (described in Chapter 6)
Project Area or Property: Jerktail Mountain glade and woodland
Location: Jerktail Mountain management unit, Pioneer Forest and Ozark 
National Scenic Riverway, 9 miles northeast of Eminence, Shannon County, 
Missouri
Ecosystem Type or 
Management Topic
Management Goals
Management Objectives
Time Frames
All forest types
Improve natural community 
health and resilience.      
Provide timber products.
Use selective timber thinning and prescribed fire to achieve 
management goals. 
Ongoing.
Igneous and 
dolomite glades
Restore glade natural 
communities. 
Restore glade communities using prescribed fire of variable intensity 
(higher on igneous glades; lower in wetter, more protected areas) once 
every 3-4 years in beginning. Move to 5-year rotation after four to five 
entries.      
Reduce negative human impacts on sites (e.g., ATVs, horses).      
Reduce eastern redcedar encroachment.     
Monitor and treat invasive exotic species if feasible (e.g., hogs, plants), 
potentially using late summer burns (moisture-of-extinction burns).
Prescribed burns 
every 3-4 years 
initially, switching 
to every 5 years 
once established.
Woodland
Restore woodland to more 
natural conditions.
Reduce eastern redcedar encroachment.     
Variable-intensity prescribed fire once every 3-4 years in beginning; 
move to 5-year rotation after four to five entries. Increase component of 
fire-tolerant species including shortleaf pine, white oak, post oak, and 
chinkapin oak. Thin timber; stand density will be variable based on site 
conditions across the landscape (aspect, soil type).
Prescribed burns 
every 3-4 years 
initially, switching 
to every 5 years 
once established. 
Harvest every 20-
30 years.
153
Appendix 6
Table 15.—Example of a completed Step 2 worksheet for the Adaptation Workbook, drawn from the Jerktail Mountain adaptation 
demonstration (described in Chapter 6). *Regional Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities information was drawn from Brandt et al. 
(2014).
Ecosystem Type or 
Management Topic
Regional Climate Change Impacts and 
Vulnerabilities*
Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities 
for the Project Area or Property
Vulnerability 
Determination
All forest types
Temperatures: warmer temperatures and longer 
growing seasons (especially warmer winter lows); more 
extremely hot days.    
Precipitation: wetter springs, heavy precipitation events. 
Winter conditions: less snow and freezing rain, reduced 
periods of frozen soil.     
Drier soil later in the growing season. 
Greater risk of wildfire. 
Exacerbation of oak decline. 
Increase in new and existing invasive plant species 
(kudzu, privet, Japanese stiltgrass, sericea lespedeza).   
Risk of southern pine beetle expanding into Missouri.   
See Chapter 6 of Brandt et al. (2014) for more details. 
Oak decline is not as much of an issue on 
Pioneer Forest due to a history of uneven-aged 
management.     
Sericea lespedeza is currently the major 
nonnative invasive species of issue on these 
sites.
Igneous and dolomite 
glades
Although future distribution of these nonwoody species 
has not been modeled, many are adapted to the hot, 
dry conditions that are expected to become more 
common. Despite this, a number of modeling studies 
in other areas have shown that species with narrow 
geographic distributions, like many glade-associated 
species, are more at risk to climate change. Post oak 
is typically found in glade systems, and is likely to 
increase. 
Eastern redcedar invasion has led to this species 
becoming a dominant species in glades, and it is likely 
to expand in the future due to other factors besides 
climate change.
Eastern redcedar encroachment is the main 
issue negatively affecting herbaceous species 
on glades at this site; some removal may be 
needed. 
Sericea lespedeza invasion is a local issue that 
also may need to be addressed. Reduction in 
human disturbance would reduce the risk of 
invasion of sericea lespedeza. Some removal 
may be needed in sites already invaded.  
In general, system is well positioned to respond 
favorably to management planned for the area.  
There is a wide diversity of herbaceous species 
already present or in the seed bank.  
Low. Current 
management 
and species 
composition help 
reduce risks to 
the area.
154
Appendix 6
Ecosystem Type or 
Management Topic
Regional Climate Change Impacts and 
Vulnerabilities*
Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities 
for the Project Area or Property
Vulnerability 
Determination
Woodland
Many tree species in this community type are projected 
to do better under future climate conditions, such 
as shortleaf pine, blackjack and post oak, and black 
hickory. 
Changes in black, chinkapin, and scarlet oak may 
depend on whether summer precipitation increases or 
decreases. 
Although white oak is projected to decline slightly 
based on temperature and precipitation alone, its 
tolerance to drought and fire would be expected to 
allow it to persist. 
Eastern redcedar, which outcompetes herbaceous 
vegetation and limits pine regeneration, is projected to 
remain relatively stable under future climate changes 
and could expand for other reasons 
Oak decline is likely to remain a threat to black and 
scarlet oak. Oak decline may become a larger threat to 
trees that become stressed by an increased duration 
and extent of drought conditions, which appear to 
be more likely under the GFDL A1FI scenario. See 
Chapter 2 in Brandt et al. (2014) for more information 
about general circulation models and scenarios.
Shortleaf pine, which is less prevalent on the site, 
is projected to do well under a range of climate 
scenarios. However, it will regenerate only on 
bare mineral soil in an open area. Therefore, it 
will do well only if conditions are established to 
allow regeneration. Southern pine beetle could 
be a potential future risk for shortleaf pine, but 
prescribed fire and reduction in stand density 
through timber thinning could reduce risk of pine 
beetle attack. 
Post oak, another common species on the site, is 
projected to do well under a range of scenarios. 
White oak and black oak, which are also 
common on the site, should generally do well, 
but Tree Atlas suggests a slight decline in habitat 
suitability under a harsher climate/emissions 
scenario.  
Scarlet oak, a species that is currently common 
on the site, is projected to be negatively affected 
under both scenarios. 
Chinkapin oak, which is more prevalent on this 
site than on the pine site, may be negatively 
affected under high emissions scenario, 
positively under low emissions scenario.  
Northern red oak is also more common on this 
site than on the pine site and is projected to be 
negatively affected by warmer temperatures, 
especially if summers become drier.  
Eastern redcedar encroachment may continue to 
be an issue at this site. 
Lower risk of pine beetle outbreaks due to 
a more open structure and less of a pine 
component than at the shortleaf pine site. 
Clay content is higher at this site (soils are less 
permeable).
Low. Current 
management 
and species 
composition help 
reduce risks to 
the area.
Table 15 (continued).
155
Appendix 6
Table 16.—Example of a completed Step 3 worksheet for the Adaptation Workbook, drawn from the Jerktail Mountain adaptation 
demonstration (described in Chapter 6)
Ecosystem 
Type or 
Management 
Topic
Management Objectives 
(from Step 1)
Challenges to Meeting 
Management Objective with 
Climate Change
Opportunities 
for Meeting 
Management 
Objective with 
Climate Change
Feasibility 
of Meeting 
Management 
Objective under 
Current Management
Other 
Considerations
Igneous and 
dolomite 
glades
Restore glade communities 
using prescribed fire of 
variable intensity (higher 
on igneous glades; lower 
in wetter, more protected 
areas) once every 3-4 years 
in beginning. Move to 5-year 
rotation after four to five 
entries. 
Reduce negative human 
impacts on sites (e.g., ATVs, 
horses).  
Reduce eastern redcedar 
encroachment.  
Monitor and treat invasive 
exotics as feasible (e.g., 
hogs, plants), potentially 
using late summer burns 
(moisture-of-extinction 
burns).
More winter moisture will 
mean that glades will be 
harder to burn than the 
woodlands. Glades can act 
like a wet sponge in the 
spring.   
It could be difficult to control 
or reduce eastern redcedar 
with fire alone; mechanical 
treatment for eastern redcedar 
may be needed. 
Moisture-of-
extinction burns 
may be a way to 
reduce eastern 
redcedar without 
affecting woodland 
communities.
High. However, 
more mechanical 
treatments may be 
needed.
Rare species 
may be of more 
concern in these 
sites. 
Prairie warbler 
is declining 
nationally, but 
restoration will 
improve habitat.
156
Appendix 6
Ecosystem 
Type or 
Management 
Topic
Management Objectives 
(from Step 1)
Challenges to Meeting 
Management Objective with 
Climate Change
Opportunities 
for Meeting 
Management 
Objective with 
Climate Change
Feasibility 
of Meeting 
Management 
Objective under 
Current Management
Other 
Considerations
Woodland
Reduce eastern redcedar 
encroachment.   
Variable-intensity prescribed 
fire once every 3-4 years in 
beginning; move to 5-year 
rotation after four to five 
entries. 
Increase component of fire-
tolerant species including 
shortleaf pine, white oak, 
post oak, and chinkapin oak. 
Thin timber; stand density 
will be variable based on 
site conditions across the 
landscape (aspect, soil 
type).
May need to shift timing of 
prescribed burns to align with 
seasonal changes in climate. 
Burn crews must be planned 
for months in advance, so it 
is hard to make last-minute 
changes to the timing of 
prescribed burns.  
May need to do some growing 
season burns for brush 
control; could run the risk of 
scarring hardwoods in the 
canopy. 
May be more challenging to 
do timber thinning if conditions 
are really wet during some 
seasons; there is an increased 
risk of tearing up the soil if it’s 
too wet.
Can easily make 
changes to 
management if 
conditions change 
(more flexibility to 
make last-minute 
changes with harvest 
than with prescribed 
fire).
High. Assumption 
that funding remains 
available.
Table 16 (continued).
Slow down to consider…
157
Appendix 6
Table 17.—Example of a completed Step 4 worksheet for the Adaptation Workbook, drawn from the Jerktail Mountain adaptation 
demonstration (described in Chapter 6)
Ecosystem Type 
or Management 
Topic
Adaptation Actions
Time 
Frames
Benefits
Drawbacks 
and Barriers
Practicability 
of Tactic
Recommend 
Tactic?
Approach
Tactic
Igneous and 
dolomite glades
1.1. Reduce 
impacts to soils 
and nutrient 
cycling.  
1.5. Restore 
or maintain fire 
in fire-adapted 
ecosystems.
Prescribed 
fire (variable 
intensity). 
Every 
3-4 years 
initially, 
shifting 
to every 
5 years. 
Releases 
potash, which 
is beneficial 
to species 
such as glade 
coneflower, 
southern 
blazing star, 
and other glade 
herbaceous 
species. There 
is a secondary 
benefit to 
pollinators.    
Glade 
species are 
fire-adapted. 
Generally few 
species that 
are at risk to 
fire on glades.   
There are concerns about 
erosion from loss of litter 
and duff layer (especially 
before herbaceous layer is 
established) over the short 
term. (However, effects will 
be reduced if burning is 
done in March. Can shift to 
fall burn once herbaceous 
layer is established.) Could 
be beneficial to sericea 
lespedeza.   
Need to be careful about 
timing with Indiana bat 
breeding.   
Black bear could be 
negatively affected.    
Because this site is partially 
federally owned, time is 
needed to go through NEPA 
process.    
There is always a risk any 
time a prescribed burn is 
initiated. 
High.
Yes.
158
Appendix 6
Table 17 (continued).
Ecosystem Type 
or Management 
Topic
Adaptation Actions
Time 
Frames
Benefits
Drawbacks 
and Barriers
Practicability 
of Tactic
Recommend 
Tactic?
Approach
Tactic
Igneous and 
dolomite glades
4.1. Prioritize 
and maintain 
unique sites.    
4.2. Prioritize 
and maintain 
sensitive or at-
risk species or 
communities.   
9.1. Favor or 
restore native 
species that 
are expected 
to be adapted 
to future 
conditions. 
Mechanical 
reduction 
of eastern 
redcedar. 
Gradual.
Maintains 
and restores 
biodiversity, 
increases 
sunlight to the 
ground.    
Reduces 
competition 
for light and 
nutrients to 
favor glade 
herbaceous 
species. 
Restores 
genetically 
viable 
populations.    
Restores a 
community of 
conservation 
concern 
(glades).    
Gradual 
reduction 
reduces risks of 
fuel-loading. 
Time-consuming and costly. 
There can be localized 
scorching of the soil in areas 
where the redcedar was 
burned (short-term impact).   
Can create unnatural fuel 
loads if done incorrectly. 
Could damage post 
and chinkapin oaks with 
increased fuel load.   
Could create a niche 
where exotic species could 
come in. 
High.
Yes.
159
Appendix 6
Table 17 (continued).
Ecosystem Type 
or Management 
Topic
Adaptation Actions
Time 
Frames
Benefits
Drawbacks 
and Barriers
Practicability 
of Tactic
Recommend 
Tactic?
Approach
Tactic
Woodland
2.1. Maintain 
or improve the 
ability of forests 
to resist pests 
and pathogens. 
5.2. Maintain 
and restore 
diversity of 
native species.  
5.3. Retain 
biological 
legacies.    
9.1. Favor or 
restore native 
species that 
are expected 
to be adapted 
to future 
conditions.   
10.2. Allow for 
areas of natural 
regeneration 
to test for 
future-adapted 
species.
Selective 
thinning.  
Every 20-
30 years.
Provides timber 
(economic 
benefit). 
Increases light 
on the ground 
to promote a 
herbaceous 
layer.   
Helps reduce 
the risk of 
pest/pathogen 
outbreaks 
by reducing 
density. 
This area has low 
accessibility for logging 
operations.    
Topography limits where 
logging can occur.    
Opens up the stand for 
adverse human use.   
Too much light can shock 
some of the timber and 
cause epicormic sprouting 
in oaks.   
Adds fuel-loading in short 
term.    
Logging equipment can 
disturb soil (which may be 
beneficial for shortleaf pine) 
and bring in exotic species. 
High.
Yes.
160
Appendix 6
Table 17 (continued).
Ecosystem Type 
or Management 
Topic
Adaptation Actions
Time 
Frames
Benefits
Drawbacks 
and Barriers
Practicability 
of Tactic
Recommend 
Tactic?
Approach
Tactic
Woodland
1.1. Reduce 
impacts to soils 
and nutrient 
cycling.    
1.5. Restore 
or maintain fire 
in fire-adapted 
ecosystems.    
3.3. Alter forest 
structure to 
reduce severity 
or extent of 
wind and ice 
damage.   
9.1. Favor or 
restore native 
species that 
are expected 
to be adapted 
to future 
conditions. 
Prescribed 
fire (variable 
intensity). 
Every 
3-4 years 
initially, 
shifting 
to every 
5 years. 
Creates 
conditions for 
regeneration of 
shortleaf pine 
(a climate-
adapted 
species). 
Will increase 
herbaceous 
species 
abundance in 
the understory 
(which will help 
reduce erosion 
and maintain 
soil moisture).  
Reduces 
fuel loads. 
Improves 
habitat for 
game species.   
Improves 
habitat for 
some bird 
species. 
There are concerns about 
erosion from loss of litter 
and duff layer (especially 
before herbaceous layer is 
established) over the short 
term. (However, effects will 
be reduced if burning is 
done in March. Can shift to 
fall burn once herbaceous 
layer is established.) Could 
be beneficial to sericea 
lespedeza.   
Need to be careful about 
timing with Indiana bat 
breeding.   
Black bear could be 
negatively affected.    
Because this site is partially 
federally owned, time is 
needed to go through NEPA 
process.    
There is always a risk any 
time a prescribed burn is 
initiated. 
High.
Yes.
161
Appendix 6
Table 18.—Example of a completed Step 5 worksheet for the Adaptation Workbook, drawn from the Jerktail Mountain adaptation 
demonstration (described in Chapter 6).
Ecosystem Type 
or Management Topic
Adaptation 
Monitoring Variable
Criteria for Evaluation
Monitoring 
Implementation
All forest types
Herbaceous species richness 
and cover 
Jerktail woodland and glade: minimum of 20-percent increase 
in number of herbaceous species per quadrat in second year 
following second burn (90-percent confidence interval); increase 
mean percent cover of native herbaceous species by 50 percent 
after four burns. 
Use the National Park 
Service Fire Monitoring 
Handbook plot design: 
two plots each in 
glades and woodlands. 
Baseline monitoring in 
June 2014 (year prior to 
first burn). Return first 
and second growing 
season after each burn. 
Density of pole-sized trees 
Reduction in pole-sized trees 1-6 inches d.b.h. by at least 30 
percent by the second growing season after the second burn. 
(Lower density indicates open woodland structure.)
Photo monitoring of visual 
changes in structure/
composition 
Photo accuracy: Capture identical images within +/-5 percent of 
original image for comparison. (Shows structural and species 
changes toward desired condition.)
Fuel loads 
Reduce fuel loads; reduce leaf litter depth by 50 percent by first 
year after second burn.
Tree basal area, growth, and 
composition
Increase in shortleaf pine, white oak, and chinkapin oak, and 
achievement of woodland structure.
Permanent inventory 
plots to be established. 
Shortleaf pine regeneration
Presence of shortleaf pine seedlings and saplings.
Qualitative observation. 
Tree mortality 
Presence of dead/declining trees. 
Visual observation.
Exotic invasive species
Presence/absence, abundance. 
Mapping, observation. 
Abundance, migration dates 
of birds (e.g., prairie warbler)  
Increase in prairie warbler abundance on glades. 
To be determined.
Prescribed fire 
implementation
Coverage of fire implemented; visual changes postburn. 
Before/after photos; 
mapping fire coverage.
Igneous and dolomite 
glades
Disturbance to ground 
from ATVs, feral hogs, and 
domestic/wild horse impacts
Extent of damage.
Visual observation.
Page intentionally left blank
Printed on recycled paper
Swanston, Christopher W.; Janowiak, Maria K.; Brandt, Leslie A.; Butler, Patricia 
R.; Handler, Stephen D.; Shannon, P. Danielle; Derby Lewis, Abigail; Hall, 
Kimberly; Fahey, Robert T.; Scott, Lydia; Kerber, Angela; Miesbauer, Jason 
W.; Darling, Lindsay; Parker, Linda; St. Pierre, Matt. 2016. Forest Adaptation 
Resources: climate change tools and approaches for land managers, 2nd 
ed. Gen. Tech. Rep. NRS-GTR-87-2. Newtown Square, PA: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northern Research Station. 161 p. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2737/NRS-GTR-87-2.
Forests across the United States are expected to undergo numerous changes in 
response to the changing climate. This second edition of the Forest Adaptation 
Resources provides a collection of resources designed to help forest managers 
incorporate climate change considerations into management and devise adaptation 
tactics. It was developed as part of the Climate Change Response Framework and 
reflects the expertise, creativity, and feedback of dozens of direct contributors and 
hundreds of users of the first edition over the last several years. Six interrelated 
chapters include: (1) a description of the overarching Climate Change Response 
Framework, which generated these resources; (2) a brief guide to help forest 
managers judge or initiate vulnerability assessments; (3) a “menu” of adaptation 
strategies and approaches that are directly relevant to forests of the Northeast 
and upper Midwest; (4) a second menu of adaptation strategies and approaches 
oriented to urban forests; (5) a workbook process with step-by-step instructions 
to assist land managers in developing on-the-ground climate adaptation tactics 
that address their management objectives; and (6) several real-world examples 
of how these resources have been used to develop adaptation tactics. The ideas, 
tools, and resources presented in the different chapters are intended to inform and 
support existing decisionmaking processes of multiple organizations with diverse 
management goals. 
KEY WORDS: climate change, adaptation, forest, workbook, 
                        vulnerability assessment, urban forests, Northeast, 
                        Midwest, resilience 
In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights 
regulations and policies, the USDA, its Agencies, offices, and employees, and institutions participating 
in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national 
origin, religion, sex, gender identity (including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, 
marital status, family/parental status, income derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, 
or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or funded by 
USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program 
or incident. 
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information 
(e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American Sign Language, etc.) should contact the responsible 
Agency or USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TTY) or contact USDA through the 
Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339. Additionally, program information may be made available in 
languages other than English. 
To file a program discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint 
Form, AD-3027, found online at http://www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint_filing_cust.html and at any USDA 
office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in 
the form. To request a copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or 
letter to USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Civil 
Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; (2) fax: (202) 690-7442; or 
(3) email: program.intake@usda.gov. 
Northern Research Station
www.nrs.fs.fed.us
