WILDFIRE-RESILIENCE BEST-PRACTICE 
CHECKLIST FOR HOME CONSTRUCTION, 
RENOVATION AND LANDSCAPING
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
      3
CONFLICT WITH APPLICABLE CODES	
	
	
  
SHARE YOUR FEEDBACK		
	
	
	
	
	
  
HOW TO USE THIS CHECKLIST	
	
	
	
	
      4
PROPERTY-LEVEL CHECKLIST 	
	
	
	
	
  
LOT-LEVEL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS		
      6
APPENDIX A: EXAMPLES OF ACCEPTABLE  
WILDFIRE-RESILIENCE BUILDING MATERIALS	        7
APPENDIX B: EXAMPLES OF WILDFIRE- 
RESILIENCE CONSTRUCTION BEST  
PRACTICES AND NOTES	 	
	
	
	
	
	
       9
APPENDIX C: KEY CRITERIA FOR WILDFIRE-
RESILIENT LANDSCAPE AND VEGETATION PLAN    10
3
WILDFIRE-RESILIENCE BEST-PRACTICE CHECKLIST FOR HOME 
CONSTRUCTION, RENOVATION AND LANDSCAPING IN 
WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE AREAS OF CANADA
INTRODUCTION
This checklist was compiled by FireSmart Canada™, the Canadian Home Builders’ Association, University of Alberta 
and the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation at the University of Waterloo. The goal of the checklist is to encourage 
the use of wildfire resilience best practices in home construction, renovations and landscaping to reduce the risk of 
wildfire property damage in wildland urban interface areas of Canada.
The best practices featured in the checklist align with the National Guide for Wildland-Urban Interface Fires: 
Guidance on hazard and exposure assessment, property protection, community resilience and emergency 
planning to minimize the impact of wildland-urban interface fires (National Research Council Canada, 2021). 
The checklist also includes links to resources that provide more detailed guidance for consideration. 
For more information, and for contact information, please visit www.firesmartcanada.ca.
CONFLICT WITH APPLICABLE CODES
This checklist is based on the assumption that the project complies with applicable building codes. 
Building code regulations differ among provinces and territories and nationally. It is therefore possible that some code 
requirements may be in conflict with best practices on this checklist, or that some of the checklist’s requirements may 
result in unintended consequences in regard to other applicable requirements (e.g. higher-tier energy requirements). 
If this is the case, please contact FireSmart Canada at general@firesmartcanda.ca to connect with science and 
research organizations to find a design that works. One of the goals of the checklist is to continue to build a practical 
source of solutions for such technical conflicts.
SHARE YOUR FEEDBACK
The checklist is intended to serve as a regularly updated living document that reflects the most up-to-date information 
available at the time of publication. Feedback is welcome to help us continually improve the checklist for accuracy, 
completeness and ease of use. Please email general@firesmartcanada.ca if you would like to make comments or 
suggestions to improve the checklist. 
4
HOW TO USE THIS CHECKLIST
The checklist can be applied in its entirety (every measure) or partially, for example during renovations. Each 
improvement has the potential to limit the probability of a home being damaged beyond repair during a wildland fire, 
and the potential to make the home more resilient. However, applying any or all measures does not guarantee the 
absence of damage or destruction during a wildland fire. 
The checklist contains several voluntary best practices to consider when building or renovating homes for greater 
wildfire resilience. The simplest application of the list is as a decision-making tool for home builders, renovators, and 
landscapers in their discussions with homeowner clients.
The technical guidance provided here consists of two complementary parts: 
•	
Home/property-level considerations that address fire resilience of roofing, flashing, vents, soffits, wall cladding, 
windows, doors, skylights, fencing, decks, balconies, patios and porches; and 
•	
Lot-level landscaping considerations that address the fire resilience of the types of vegetation/surfaces around 
the perimeter of the home.
PROPERTY-LEVEL CHECKLIST 
ROOFING, FLASHING AND ROOF PENETRATIONS 
1.	
Roof covering and underlayment has Class A fire 
rating. 
2.	
Roofing does not consist of wood shingles and 
shakes. 
3.	
Roof flashing consists of non-combustible 
material. 
4.	
Roof ridges (metal roofing products) are sealed 
at their terminations.
5.	
Roofs are fitted with a metal drip-edge along both 
eaves and rakes (see Appendix B for details).
6.	
Roof penetrations are fitted with non-combustible 
flashing. 
7.	
Chimneys connected to a solid-fuel burning 
appliance are fitted with an approved spark 
arrestor that is securely attached and made of 
welded or woven wire mesh screens, with mesh 
no coarser than 12 millimetres.
8.	
Chimney outlets have at least three  
metres of clearance from all vegetation  
and obstructions.
 
NOTE:  Please see Appendix A for details and discussion on building-material selection for each 
consideration. See Appendix B for construction details. 
VENTS IN ROOFS, ATTICs AND WALL-MOUNTED 
VENTS
9.	
Vents are of non-combustible material.
10.	
Gable-end vents are not present.
11.	
Soffit venting have vent perforations of less than 
three millimetres in any direction, or follow the 
details provided in Appendix B.
12.	
External vent terminations and service opening 
connected to internal venting equipment (e.g., 
kitchen and bathroom exhaust fans, HRV intake 
and exhaust vents, etc.) are of non-combustible 
construction and are fitted with three-millimetre 
non-combustible screens. 
13.	
All exhaust vents are equipped with non-
combustible, self-closing flaps. 
14.	
All external vents and air intakes are connected 
to metal ductwork that extends at least one metre 
from the point of connection.
5
SOFFITS, FASCIA AND GUTTERS
15.	
Eaves are closed. Roof systems that include a 
built-up roof above rafters do not include venting 
on the vertical face between rafters. Soffit venting 
can be used provided it follows item 11 above.
16.	
Soffits and fascia are constructed of non-
combustible materials and are tight fitting.
17.	
Rain gutters and downspouts are of  
metal construction. 
18.	
Rain gutters are fitted with non-combustible 
gutter caps.
EXTERIOR SIDING/CLADDING
19.	
Exterior siding is non-combustible or  
ignition resistant.
20.	
There is no vinyl siding and/or wood  
siding installed.
21.	
Exterior siding terminates a minimum of 
15 centimetres above grade. The exposed 
foundation wall between the siding termination 
and grade is non-combustible. This applies to all 
homes whether built with a foundation, frost wall, 
or slab-on-grade.
WINDOWS, DOORS and SKYLIGHTS
22.	
Windows are equipped with a tempered exterior 
pane.
23.	
Exterior doors have a fire protection rating of at 
least 30 minutes.
24.	
Door lites are glazed with tempered glass.
25.	
Exterior screen doors are of non-combustible 
construction and have non-combustible 
screening.
26.	
Skylights or daylighting tubes, including 
flashing, is of non-combustible construction and 
incorporate tempered glass and not  
acrylic glazing.
28.	
Non-intentional gaps larger than three millimetres 
anywhere along the exterior of the structure are 
filled and sealed with a suitable fire-retardant 
caulking or sealing product.
29.	
Only suitable fire-retardant caulking or sealing 
products is used to seal exterior penetrations, 
joints and gaps.
FENCING
30.	
Where the property includes combustible fencing, 
a 1.5 metre metal gate or full break exists 
between a wood fence and the exterior wall of a 
home. 
DECKS, BALCONIES, PATIOS AND PORCHES
31.	
Decks, balconies, patios, porches, and similar 
building extensions attached to, or within 10 
metres of a home have a continuous, ignition 
resistant or non-combustible top surface without 
slots, openings or spaces, which terminate low 
to the ground. Decks with gaps or cracks in 
the deck surface have deck joists capped with 
corrosion resistant, non-combustible material, or 
are constructed with non-combustible deck joists.
32.	
Where deck, porch or balcony structures 
intersect with exterior walls, a non-combustible 
flashing is installed between the underside of the 
exterior siding and the top surface of the deck.
33.	
Where a deck, porch or patio structure sits 
above a graded surface, this surface is devoid 
of vegetation and graded with non-combustible 
materials. Additionally, 12-millimetre sheathing or 
three-millimetre metal non-combustible screens 
can be installed to enclose the space under the 
deck.
34.	
Where a deck, balcony, or porch requires a 
railing, the railing consists of  
non-combustible material.
35.	
Decks that are on, or directly above slopes 
of 10 per cent or greater are enclosed with 
12-millimetre non-combustible sheet or panel-
type material to minimize the incursion of radiant 
and convective heat from below. 
 
EXTERIOR SEALING AND CAULKING
27.	
Where gaps in the exterior siding are 
incorporated to allow drying of the wall assembly, 
(e.g. rain screen walls) any gap larger than three 
millimetres is fitted with three millimetre non-
combustible metal screening to prevent ember 
penetration.
 
6
LOT-LEVEL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
PRIORITY ZONE 1a, Non-combustible Zone: (Immediate zone) zero - 1.5 metres from the foundation
36.	
The house has a 1.5-metre wide, horizontal, non-combustible surface perimeter along the outer walls of 
the house and any attachments (e.g., decks).
37.	
This critical area adjacent to the home uses only non-combustible materials, such as gravel, brick, 
paving stones or concrete. 
38.	
This critical area adjacent to the home does not have any woody shrubs, bark mulch, trees or  
tree branches.
NOTE: It is good practice to create a landscaping and vegetation plan. The best practices are listed for 
information purposes only. See Appendix C for additional details.
Priority Zone 2: (EXTENDED ZONE) beyond 10 metres 
For single lot applications where the lot extends beyond 10 metres from the home, and for all multi-home/subdivision 
applications, additional landscaping considerations may apply for areas beyond 10 metres for any dwelling. 
In general, best practices for these applications exclude the presence of dense conifer groupings, or other landscape 
detail that would provide a fire pathway within the application area. A qualified landscaping assessor can provide 
specific guidance for the design of Priority Zone 2. Note that homeowners are not responsible for landscaping of 
adjacent lands over which they do not hold legal title or control.
Priority Zone 1: (Intermediate zone) 1.5 - 10 metres (or lot boundary, whichever comes first)  
from the foundation
39.	
In this zone some fire-resistant plants, trees and shrubs can be planted in low density. 
40.	
This zone does not have any woody debris and landscaping materials (e.g., bark mulch, hay, etc.). 
41.	
This zone does not have evergreen or coniferous trees. 
7
APPENDIX A: EXAMPLES OF ACCEPTABLE 
WILDFIRE-RESILIENCE BUILDING 
Component 
Material 
Testing standards that 
must be met
Notes and supplier 
examples
Roof covering
Asphalt fibreglass composition 
shingles, clay tiles, slate, 
(non-aluminum) metal roofs, 
and concrete tiles, Ethylene 
Propylene Diene Monomer 
(EPDM) roofing.
ASTM E108 
Standard Test Methods for 
Fire Tests of Roof Coverings 
ULC S107  Fire Tests of Roof 
Coverings  —  “Class A” rating. 
Widely available from 
multiple manufacturers, 
building suppliers and roofing 
installers.
Roof, attic and  
wall-mounted vents
ASTM Tested Ember Resistant 
Vents.
ASTM E 2886 and ASTM E 
2886M.
Vulcan Technologies.
Soffits and fascia 
Non-combustible sheetrock, 
fibre cement board and metal 
soffit and fascia material, fire 
retardant pressure treated 
(rated) wood.
ASTM E2957 Standard 
Test Method for Resistance 
to Wildfire Penetration of 
Eaves, Soffits and Other 
Projections CAN/ULC-S135, 
Standard Method of Test for 
Determination of Degrees 
of Combustibility of Building 
Materials Using an Oxygen 
Consumption Calorimeter 
(Cone Calorimeter).
Non-combustible materials 
are widely available through 
manufacturers, building 
suppliers and installers.
Gutters
Non-combustible aluminum, 
copper, stainless steel.
CAN/ULC-S135, Standard 
Method of Test for 
Determination of Degrees 
of Combustibility of Building 
Materials Using an Oxygen 
Consumption Calorimeter 
(Cone Calorimeter).
Aluminum gutters are widely 
available from multiple 
manufacturers, building 
suppliers and installers. 
Copper is available for 
order from many building 
suppliers; some installers 
offer copper gutters. Stainless 
steel gutters are rare. Non-
combustible gutter caps are 
widely available through 
manufacturers, building 
suppliers and installers.
Non- combustible metal three-
millimetre screen, including 
screen frame.
CAN/ULC-S135, Standard 
Method of Test for 
Determination of Degrees 
of Combustibility of Building 
Materials Using an Oxygen 
Consumption Calorimeter 
(Cone Calorimeter).
Widely available from multiple 
manufacturers, building 
suppliers and installers.
This appendix includes suggestions for acceptable wildfire resilient building materials; it addresses only details relevant to wildfire resilience. 
The material features and characteristics are meant as guidance, FireSmart Canada does not endorse or rate building materials, products or 
specific websites.
8
Component 
Material 
Testing standards that 
must be met
Notes and supplier 
examples
Exterior siding/ cladding
Non-combustible cladding 
systems, such as
•	
metal
•	
fibre cement panels/
boards
•	
cementitious 
•	
stucco
•	
stone 
•	
rock
•	
concrete block
ASTM E108 
Standard Test Methods for 
Fire Tests of Roof Coverings 
ULC S107  Fire Tests of Roof 
Coverings  —  “Class A” rating. 
Widely available from 
multiple manufacturers, 
building suppliers and roofing 
installers.
Heavy timber or log
No standard
Available primarily through 
custom log-home builders.
Windows, doors and 
skylights
Minimum 30-minute fire-rated; 
non-combustible frame.
CAN/ULC-S104 
SFM Standard 12- 7A-2 
“Exterior Windows”.
The SFM Standard is a 
California Referenced 
Standards Code. Products that 
meet this standard are unlikely 
available in Canada.
Exterior sealing and 
caulking
Fire-retardant or high-
temperature sealant and 
caulking.
No standard.
Products labelled fire-retardant 
or high-temperature sealant 
and caulking are available 
from many building suppliers.
Fencing
Non-combustible concrete, 
cement fibre and metal fence 
(aluminum, chain-link, page 
wire).
CAN/ULC-S135, Standard 
Method of Test for 
Determination of Degrees 
of Combustibility of Building 
Materials Using an Oxygen 
Consumption Calorimeter 
(Cone Calorimeter).
James Hardie fibre cement 
siding is widely available in 
Canada. Duracrete-Roma 
fencing is manufactured in 
Canada. Metal fencing is 
widely available in Canada.
Decks, balconies, patios and 
porches
•	
Fire retardant pressure 
treated (rated) wood
•	
Fire-rated composite 
decking
•	
Class A fire-rated vinyl 
decking (with  
•	
Non-combustible, metal, 
concrete or stone
•	
Foil bitumen tape capped 
deck joists
ASTM E2632 / E2632M 
Standard Test Method for 
Evaluating the Under-Deck 
Fire Test Response of Deck 
Materials. ASTM E2726 / 
E2726M Standard Test Method 
for Evaluating the Fire-Test-
Response of Deck Structures 
to Burning Brands CAN/ULC 
S107 Fire test of roof covering 
test method - Class A (vinyl 
deck).
CRAFT BILT non-combustible 
aluminum decking is available 
in Canada. Duradek Class A 
fire-rated decking is available 
in Canada. Amera Deck 
composite Class A fire-
rated decking is available 
for shipping to Canada. 
Non-combustible concrete 
or stone decks – multiple 
Canadian manufactures, 
suppliers and installers. 
Exterior fire-retardant treated 
wood, available through 
distributors in Canada. Foil-
bitumen roofing tape is widely 
available.
9
APPENDIX B: EXAMPLES OF WILDFIRE-RESILIENCE 
CONSTRUCTION BEST PRACTICES AND NOTES 
This appendix includes suggestions for acceptable wildfire resilient construction approaches; it addresses only details that differ from conventional 
practices. The intent of each detail is addressed in the notes. The solutions descriptions and illustrations are meant as examples. FireSmart Canada 
does not endorse or rate building materials, products or specific websites.
Roof underlayment detail
Non-combustible underlayment is used to reduce 
the risk of roof deck ignition resulting from ember 
penetration under the exterior roofing material 
during the high wind conditions typical of wildfire 
situations.
Non-combustible roofing underlayment should be 
installed on all roof edges, including rakes, and 
must have a minimum width of 75 millimetres.
Drip-edge detail
The addition of rake-edge drip edging is intended 
to reduce the risk of roof deck ignition resulting 
from ember penetration under the rake exposure 
of roofing material during the high wind conditions 
typical of wildfire situations.
Eve-edge drip edging should be installed in the normal manner. Drip edge installed on rakes should be installed above 
the roofing underlayment to prevent water penetration beneath the underlayment. 
Soffit vent detail
Soffits and ridge vents are particularly prone to allowing 
ember penetration into the attic space. There are 
several commercial products available (may require 
special orders) that reduce this risk.
Detailing on rain screen and wall assembly voids for 
drying purposes
Where a rain screen-type wall assembly is utilized, 
openings to allow drying that are more than three 
millimetres wide should incorporate non-combustible 
screening to reduce the risk of ember penetration into 
the wall cavity.
(Source: Casma.ca, 2021)
(Source: Vulcanvents.com, 2021)
(Source: BuildingAdvisor.com, 2021)
10
Priority zone
Key principles 
Professional guidance
Priority Zone 1A, Non-
Combustible Zone: (Immediate 
Zone) 
0-1.5 metres from perimeter of 
structure and any extensions, 
including under projections 
(balconies, porches, decks, 
cantilevered floors, pier foundations) 
Non-combustible surface of mineral soil, 
pavement, concrete, concrete pavers, 
stone/ rock, brick.
Landscape architect, landscaper, 
horticulturist, contractor with FireSmart 
Home Partners online module training 
completion.
Priority Zone 1: (Intermediate 
Zone)  
1.5-10 metres from perimeter 
of structure and any extensions, 
including under projections 
(balconies, porches, decks, 
cantilevered floors, pier foundations)
Manage cultivated/natural vegetation to 
minimize ember ignition, minimize surface 
fire spread and manage the short distance 
radiant heat transfer by using appropriate 
plant selection, creating breaks in vegetation 
and organic surface continuity, reducing 
heavy vegetation concentrations and 
maintaining distance between vegetation 
and structures.  Mitigation of this zone must 
be appropriate for local topography and 
surrounding fire environment conditions, 
including conditions of Priority Zones 2  
and 3.
 
Landscape architect, landscaper, 
horticulturist, arborist, or forest professional 
with FireSmart Home Partners Online 
Module training completion.
Priority Zone 2: (Extended Zone)
10-30 metres from perimeter of 
structure and any extensions, 
including under projections 
(balconies, porches, decks, 
cantilevered floors, pier foundations)
Manage natural vegetation to reduce 
wildfire intensity, crown-fire transition 
spread and ember production by reducing 
surface vegetation concentrations and 
continuity, creating space between tree 
crowns, pruning, or “lifting” tree crowns and 
interrupting the vertical continuity of the 
forest through appropriate spacing of shrubs 
and trees. Mitigation of this zone must 
be appropriate for local topography and 
surrounding fire environment conditions, 
including conditions of Priority Zones 1  
and 3.
Forest professional, arborist, landscape 
architect qualified with intermediate 
wildland fire behaviour training, or Home 
Partners Mitigation Specialist training with 
basic forest dynamics and forest ecology 
understanding, experience in wildfire 
mitigation fuels management and access 
to forest/environment professional advisors1.
APPENDIX C: KEY CRITERIA FOR WILDFIRE-
RESILIENT LANDSCAPE AND VEGETATION PLAN
Note: For additional information about nationally recognized FireSmart landscaping best practices and plant 
selection guidance, please visit the FireSmart Canada yard and landscaping web page.  
11
Priority zone
Key principles 
Professional guidance
Priority Zone 3: 
30-100 metres from perimeter 
of structure and any extensions, 
including under projections 
(balconies, porches, decks, 
cantilevered floors, pier 
foundations)
Manage natural vegetation to reduce wildfire 
intensity, crown-fire transition spread and 
ember production by reducing surface 
vegetation concentrations and continuity, 
creating space between tree crowns, pruning, 
or “lifting” tree crowns and interrupting the 
vertical continuity of the forest through 
appropriate spacing of shrubs and trees. 
Management of this zone is typically at a 
lesser intensity than Priority Zone 2 and 
must be appropriate for local topography 
and surrounding fire environment conditions, 
including conditions of Priority Zones 1 and 2.
Forest professional with advanced wildland fire 
behaviour training, advanced forest dynamics 
and forest ecology knowledge, knowledge of 
local, provincial, and federal environmental/ 
forest regulations.
1 Assumes that this zone will not be intensely landscaped/managed to Priority Zone 1 standards; if managed to 
Priority Zone 1 standards please refer to qualified professional guidance for Priority Zone 1 
