Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program
Guide for Integrating 
Climate Change 
Considerations 
into Municipal 
Asset Management
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This guide is based on the input and best 
practices from 11 municipalities participating 
in the Federation of Canadian Municipalities’ 
Climate and Asset Management Network 
(CAMN) and the former Leaders in Asset 
Management Program (LAMP), including:
•	 Saint John, NB
•	 Fredericton, NB
•	 Ville de Saint-Quentin, NB
•	 Bromont, QC
•	 Halton Hills, ON
•	 Guelph, ON
•	 Kitchener, ON
•	 Kenora, ON
•	 Selkirk, MB
•	 Cowichan Valley Regional District (CVRD), BC
•	 Nanaimo, BC
These communities represent varying geographies, populations, 
service delivery responsibilities, and are affected by a cross 
section of the hazards experienced by municipalities in Canada. 
Each community has taken a unique approach to integrating 
climate change into asset management; some communities are 
still in the early stages of their process, or have only focused on 
an individual service area, while others have looked at how 
climate change could affect all of their services.
FCM’s Municipal Asset Management Program’s Technical 
Working Group also provided input for this guide. The guide 
was prepared by Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd.
CAMN is available through the Municipalities for Climate 
Innovation Program delivered by the Federation of 
Canadian Municipalities and funded by the Government 
of Canada.
Find out more about our program, tools and training at 
fcm.ca/climateinnovation
ABOUT THIS GUIDE
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities commissioned this guide 
under the Municipalities for Climate Innovation Program (MCIP).
Integrating climate change into asset 
management is not easy. Climate change and 
its implications for municipal services and 
infrastructure are complex. The intention of this 
guide is to provide a clear roadmap that munic­
ipalities can use to understand the issues and 
systematically build climate resiliency into asset 
management policies, plans and practices. It is 
intended for use by municipal staff who need 
to understand how to address climate change 
in asset management processes. A compan­
ion video and information briefs have been 
developed, which are intended to help elected 
officials and the public understand what the 
issues are, and why they are important. 
The guide is focused on integration of climate 
change within infrastructure levels of service 
and/or risk management frameworks, because 
these are the components of asset man­
agement most directly impacted by climate 
change. There are also important implications 
for costs of service and financial planning over 
asset lifecycles, which are also addressed in 
the guide. Some communities may choose to 
approach these issues as part of their climate 
change or community sustainability strate­
gies, while others may do so through their 
asset management programs. Regardless of 
the approach, the principles and practices 
described in this guide can be applied.
The guide consists of the following six sections:
1.	 Enhancing Community Resilience through 
Service Delivery—Sets the context for the 
guide, which links community resilience and 
service delivery to the more focused topics 
of levels of service and risk management 
from a climate change perspective.
2.	 Integrating Climate Change Considerations 
into Decision Making—Describes the rationale 
and benefits of integrating climate change 
considerations into municipal decision making.
3.	 The Framework—Introduces a single 
process for integrating climate change in 
the development of levels of service and 
risk management frameworks. 
4.	 Entry Points—Describes four different 
approaches for using this framework, 
depending on whether you are beginning 
from the ground up, focusing on levels of 
service, focusing on risk management, or 
adapting an existing framework to integrate 
climate change considerations.
5.	 Step by Step through the Framework—
Provides a systematic process that 
practitioners can follow for developing 
or revising the infrastructure risk and 
level of service components of their asset 
management programs.
6.	 A Call to Action—Provides advice on how 
to get started, informed by 15 key lessons 
learned from participating CNAM and LAMP 
municipalities.
Each chapter includes examples from practice 
leaders, incorporating municipal approaches, 
lessons learned, and tools. 
Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1
Enhancing Community Resiliency 
through Service Delivery...................................2
Impacts of Climate Change 
on Municipal Services..........................................2
Community Resiliency.........................................5
Risk and Levels of Service Defined................6
What are Levels of Service?.............................7
CHAPTER 2
Integrating Climate Change Considerations 
into Decision Making..........................................8
How is Climate Change 
Affecting Infrastructure?....................................8
How do Adaptation and Mitigation 
Strategies Play a Role?.......................................9
Why Integrate Mitigation 
and Adaptation?..................................................10
How to Integrate Mitigation 
and Adaptation Strategies............................... 11
CHAPTER 3
The Framework.................................................. 12
Overview of the Framework........................... 12
CHAPTER 4
Entry Points........................................................ 13
CHAPTER 5
Step by Step through the Framework.......... 16
Before You Begin.................................................17
IDENTIFICATION
Step 1: Identify Service Areas......................... 19
Step 2: Identify Assets that Support 
Service Provision................................................. 19
Step 3: Gather Regional and 
Local Climate Change Information..............20
Step 4: Identify Climate Change Hazards... 21
Step 5: Identify Levels of Service 
(Current and Target).........................................22
ASSESSMENT
Step 6: Determine Gaps Between 
Current and Targeted Levels of Service ..... 24
Step 7: Assess Climate Change 
Considerations on Levels of Service ...........27
Step 8: Assess Risks from 
Climate Change.................................................. 29
PRIORITIZATION
Step 9: Identifying Strategies 
to Address Gaps and Risks due 
to Climate Change............................................. 34
Step 10: Determine Preferred 
Strategies to Mitigate or Adapt 
to Climate Change............................................. 35
MANAGEMENT
Step 11: Integrate Actions into 
Asset Management Plans................................ 36
Step 12: Monitor Progress and 
Explore Opportunities for 
Continuous Improvement............................... 38
CHAPTER 6
A Call to Action................................................. 39
APPENDIX A
Glossary of Terms.............................................. 41
Abbreviations....................................................... 41
Glossary of Terms............................................... 41
APPENDIX B
LOS Checklist for Climate Impacts............... 43
Common Impacts of Climate 
Change on Local Government 
Infrastructure Systems..................................... 43
APPENDIX C
Additional Resources...................................... 45
2
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
CHAPTER 1
Enhancing Community 
Resiliency through 
Service Delivery
Impacts of Climate Change 
on Municipal Services
A Changing Climate
1	
Vancouver Coastal Health, Moving Towards Climate Resilient Health Facilities for Vancouver Coastal Health 
(Lower Mainland Facilities Management, 2018), 10.
Climate change may be a global problem, 
but it is often municipalities facing the biggest 
impacts of extreme weather events. Climate 
change projections in Canada include:
•	 warmer summer temperatures with 
hotter and more extreme heat days in 
the summer;
•	 warmer winter temperatures causing 
more winter precipitation to fall as rain;
•	 more precipitation and intense storms 
throughout the year;
•	 less rain and longer droughts during 
the summer months; 
•	 increased frequency and amount of ice 
during the winter months;
•	 summers stretching later in the year; 
•	 sea level rise.1
These changes affect municipalities in different 
ways, depending on their location, the services 
they provide, and the engineered and natural 
systems they employ in delivering services.
Climate change hazards most frequently 
experienced across Canada are described on 
the next page. While this isn’t an exhaustive 
list, it does provide a snapshot of many services 
and hazards that municipalities can expect to 
encounter more frequently in the future.
3
u Enhancing Community Resiliency through Service Delivery
Typical Canadian Hazards by Service Area
u Enhancing Community Resiliency through Service Delivery
Delivery of Services
The ways in which a community is vulnerable depend 
on factors such as the services provided, local 
industry, population, historical planning decisions, 
community health, area, and geographic location. 
These changes to our climate impact major com­
munity-owned and operated assets (both built 
infrastructure and natural assets), and often affect the 
conditions within which these assets operate in ways 
that were not anticipated when design occurred. As a 
result, we need to understand the impacts and limita­
tions of our assets, which could result in a change in 
how we deliver services to the community.
Municipalities provide a wide variety of services that 
support the people, the future, and the environmental 
health of communities. By assessing and managing 
risk, as well as levels of service, through a climate 
change lens, communities become more resilient.
Natural Assets
Climate change impacts natural assets such as 
wetlands, creeks, deltas, foreshore areas, parks, 
forests, and groundwater aquifers by upsetting 
the equilibrium under which they developed. Rising 
sea levels, more intense and frequent storms and 
more severe droughts can cause radical changes 
in physical and biological systems.3 
Built Assets
Climate change impacts infrastructure assets such 
as transportation systems, buildings, water systems, 
wastewater systems, marine infrastructure, drainage 
and flood protection systems, solid waste facilities, 
and electrical systems. The frequency and severity 
of extreme weather events amplifies risks that these 
assets will be overtaxed and possibly even fail. As 
the reliability of infrastructure systems decrease, it 
becomes more difficult and costly to attain desired 
levels of service targets.
3	
Asset Management BC, Climate Change and Asset 
Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer, 
(www.assetmanagementbc.ca), 2.
Municipality in Action
2	
http://www.fredericton.ca/sites/default/
files/frederictons_flood_challenge.pdf
The City of Fredericton is 
faced with finding innova­
tive ways of combatting 
river and coastal flooding 
that hits the City every 
winter, like raising the 
roads so they are out of 
the flood plain zone.
They are using an adaptive 
approach to mitigate the effects of flood 
risks on both municipal infrastructure and 
residential properties, illustrating how 
compromises between drainage, trans­
portation, and emergency services are 
being negotiated in an effort to ensure 
that the most critical services remain 
reliable when the City depends on them. 
Public communication is an important 
part of this process.
For example, they use parking areas for 
detention or conveyance of flood waters. 
City staff have reached out to residents 
to discuss flood challenges, and released 
a paper addressing many specific ways 
that Fredericton is prioritizing its services 
in long-term planning, asset renewal, and 
emergency planning. They are working 
with the public to confirm that protect­
ing buildings and providing continuity of 
major transportation routes is a greater 
priority during a flood than providing 
convenient 
parking.2 
Two 
important 
questions bring asked as part of the 
process are:
1.	 How do we mitigate against the 
worst impacts of major flooding?
2.	 How do we prioritize our spending?
As a way of helping community members 
stay informed on rising river flooding, the 
City of Fredericton has created a “River 
Watch” page on their municipal website 
for the public to access, which is updated 
frequently. They are also using communi­
cation to reinforce the need for moving 
forward in a measured way as they build 
flood resilience, which could take years 
and possibly decades. #GetPrepared 
City of Fredericton, NB 
5
u Enhancing Community Resiliency through Service Delivery
Community Resiliency
Municipal resiliency improves by reducing 
short and long-term risks resulting from climate 
change. A resilient community can adapt quickly 
and effectively when faced with chronic stresses 
or acute shocks such as climate change impacts 
(e.g., severe storms, flooding, or melting per­
mafrost). To achieve resiliency, it is necessary 
to have a holistic understanding about com­
munity vulnerabilities as well as how systems 
are dependent on each other.4 Addressing risks 
keeps costs stable and avoids a reliance on 
resources that are not sustainable. Incorporating 
climate change and sustainability considerations 
into both levels of service and risk management 
frameworks enables consistent and proactive 
decision making, ultimately improving resiliency.
4	
Green Municipal Fund, Building Sustainable and Resilient Communities with Asset Management: An introduction 
for municipal leaders (Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2018), 2.
Integrating climate change in asset management 
enables local governments to:
•	 identify and align priorities;
•	 increase decision making transparency;
•	 involve and educate stakeholders;
•	 improve asset investment efficiency 
by minimizing undesirable outcomes 
of investment decisions;
•	 increase adaptive capacity;
•	 measure progress towards actionable 
climate objectives and identify potential 
trade-offs; and,
•	 develop and implement a set of adaptation 
measures to ensure communities can 
continue to thrive in a changing climate.
For more of an introduction on resiliency, 
see FCM’s guide on Building Sustainable and 
Resilient Communities with Asset Management.
6
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Enhancing Community Resiliency through Service Delivery
Risk and Levels of 
Service Defined
Managing infrastructure related risks and 
levels of service are the most difficult parts 
of asset management. Introducing climate 
change to these processes may feel daunt­
ing. This Guide breaks the process into small, 
measured steps. 
For small communities, this will likely mean 
taking a more general and subjective/qualitative 
approach during your first iteration of the pro­
cess. Larger communities generally need to 
invest more in information systems to manage 
the quantity and complexity of assets.
More on entry points is described in Chapter 4.
What is Risk?
Risk is the potential for undesirable outcomes 
resulting from an incident, event, or occur­
rence. This is made up of the consequence and 
likelihood of a service disruption or asset failure.
To assess the risks to service delivery in our 
communities we need to understand the 
potential hazards assets could be exposed to, 
vulnerabilities that may exist, and the proba­
bility that a hazard could exploit a vulnerability 
and the associated impacts and consequences.5
For example, increased precipitation with 
undersized drainage infrastructure could result 
in localized flooding. The impacts and conse­
quences of flooding can vary significantly: from 
low, if it were to occur in a parking lot or field, 
to high, if it were to occur in a populated area or 
prevent access for emergency services (e.g. loss 
of life or property).
5	
Envision, Sustainable Infrastructure Framework Guidance Manual 3rd edition (Washington DC: Institute for Sustainable 
Infrastructure, 2019), 170-171.
A commonly used risk matrix is illustrated below.
Figure 1: Risk Matrix
There are many definitions and perspectives 
used when evaluating climate risks—what’s 
important is deciding on an approach, with 
shared terminology, and using it consistently 
within your municipality. Vulnerability is often 
used as a lens for assessing risk, and focuses on 
the susceptibility of an asset to the impact of 
a hazard. In terms of people and communities, 
this can be described as the degree to which an 
individual or group is unable to cope with the 
impact of hazards. The concept of vulnerability 
is applicable across sectors and communities.
For example, the City of Saint John’s approach 
to understanding climate change vulnerabilities 
involves compiling specific examples of inci­
dents or events, such as freezing and flooding, 
and analyzing the risk through the simple 
formula of risk = probability x consequence. 
City staff using this approach can prioritize 
strategies for managing climate change risks.
7
u Enhancing Community Resiliency through Service Delivery
What are Levels of Service?
Levels of service are specific parameters that describe 
the extent and quality of services that the municipality 
provides to users.
This dictates the need for infrastructure, resources (e.g., staff 
time, funding, or materials), and ultimately the costs of pro­
viding the services. Factors that influence levels of service 
include local conditions, priorities of decision makers, regu­
lations set by provincial, territorial and federal governments, 
and customer expectations. Levels of service can generally 
be described in the following ways:
•	 Regulatory – Does the service comply with 
applicable laws?
•	 Capacity/Availability – Is there adequate capacity 
to meet the needs of users?
•	 Safety – Is the system safe for workers and the public?
•	 Quality – Does the service meet quality standards? 
How good is it?
•	 Reliability – Is the service reliable? How often is 
it interrupted?
•	 Sustainability – How does the service provide for 
quality of life, leadership, resource use, natural 
environment, and resiliency?
The pyramid below illustrates the layers associated with 
levels of service. The municipality can track and measure 
the delivery of a service based on legal requirements, 
community expectations and needs, and operational require­
ments. If the municipality is not meeting a commitment, it 
may have to be reconsidered or more funding may be real­
located to hit this commitment. Community expectations are 
an important factor when assessing levels of service, costs 
and risks over the lifecycle of assets.6
Figure 2: Levels of Service Pyramid
6	
AIM Network, A Workshop on Getting Started with Asset 
Management Planning (Atlantic Infrastructure Management 
Network, Fall 2018)
Municipality 
in Action
The biggest climate 
change hazards affect­
ing Saint-Quentin are 
heavy rainfall, more 
frequent forest fires, 
harsher and less pre­
dictable winters, and 
drought. 
The City began integrating climate 
change considerations into risk 
management in 2015 to determine 
how best to address these hazards; 
however, their commitment to sus­
tainable community planning can be 
seen much earlier though the Green 
Municipal Plan developed in 2008.
Saint-Quentin has asset management 
policies, an inventory, a corporate 
program and an action plan (with 
clear priorities) in place. They have 
moved forward with tangible actions 
in GHG emission reduction: a new 
biomass system, building retrofits, 
and fleet electrification.
They are now looking at how to 
manage impacts on the environ­
ment and to stakeholders through 
solutions such as securing a potable 
water source for residents, prepar­
ing an emergency management plan 
that incorporates climate change con­
siderations, and preparing a climate 
change plan.
Saint-Quentin’s initiatives over the 
last decade have all come together 
under the umbrella of climate action 
and asset management. They have 
demonstrated tangible results in 
climate 
mitigation 
and 
adapta­
tion which supports their ability to 
deliver municipal services in a more 
resilient way.
Saint-Quentin, NB
CHAPTER 2
Integrating Climate 
Change Considerations 
into Decision Making
8
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
How is Climate Change Affecting Infrastructure?
7	
Green Municipal Fund, Building Sustainable and Resilient Communities with Asset Management: An introduction 
for municipal leaders (Federation of Canadian Municipalities, 2018), 2.
Infrastructure is facing different conditions than 
those for which it was designed due to climate 
change. In past practices, infrastructure decisions 
relied on historical information. This means that 
our existing infrastructure was built to perform 
well in a climate that no longer exists and may not 
provide the levels of service needed in the future. 
Climate-related risks are different than many 
other risks. Time horizons are longer and 
affect a broader range of built and natural. 
Traditional risk management approaches, 
which rely on historical information to esti­
mate the probability of future events, are 
no longer reliable for climate-related risk 
management without significant modification.
The design of new infrastructure should 
consider how climate change will affect life­
cycles in the present and in the future. The 
performance of existing assets must also be 
reassessed in light of climate change.
Canadian municipalities are facing infrastructure 
challenges including:
1.	 Rapid growth in cities and declining 
populations in rural communities.
2.	 Rapidly changing service needs 
caused by demographic changes 
(e.g., aging population).
3.	 Changing health, safety, and environmental 
laws and standards that reflect our 
ever-increasing understanding of the 
related risks.
4.	 Historical underinvestment in asset renewal. 
Asset management allows municipalities to plan 
for community sustainability and resiliency. 
This is done by proactively managing assets 
through their full lifecycle to deliver services 
now and in the future. It helps ensure the long-
term affordability of services, and achievement 
of GHG emission targets and other sustainability 
targets. Finally, it often reduces deficits over 
the life of an asset and debt while attracting 
business and investment to the municipality.7
9
u Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Decision Making
How do Adaptation and Mitigation 
Strategies Play a Role?
8	
IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and 
Vulnerability (IPCC Working Group II, 2014).
9	
Deborah Harford and Christopher Raftis, Low Carbon Resilience: 
Best Practices for Professionals (SFU Adaptation to Climate 
Change Team, 2018).
Climate change makes natural hazards more severe, 
persistent, and irreversible. By planning for these changes 
within a risk management framework, the severity or fre­
quency of damage to infrastructure or loss of its service can 
be decreased through adaptation, and the rate and magni­
tude of climate change can be reduced through mitigation. 
Planning for climate change within a levels of service frame­
work enables municipalities to deliberately and effectively 
maintain the quality and extent of service delivery.
The best approach is to involve the combination of both 
adaptation and mitigation strategies, also known as Low 
Carbon Resilience (LCR).8 It is important that practitioners 
and decision-makers take the initiative to consider LCR 
approaches within both levels of service and risk man-
agement frameworks. Although it is difficult to negotiate 
trade-offs and minimize conflicts between competing 
climate change objectives, utilizing an LCR approach 
can offer greater benefits and co-benefits.
LCR Examples
1.	 Transit-oriented development decreases tailpipe 
emissions and increases resident’s resilience through 
enhanced mobility.
2.	 Green features such has green roofs, vegetated 
boulevards, and rain gardens reduce urban heat and 
absorb stormwater and can also fix atmospheric carbon.
3.	 Protection and restoration of natural assets such 
as forests and foreshores contribute to reduced 
flood risks with co-benefits for watershed integrity, 
human health, and the survival of biodiversity in a 
changing climate.9
Municipality 
in Action
The City of Saint John 
has experienced a cul­
tural shift with respect 
to climate change, likely 
due to significant flooding, 
freeze/thaw cycle changes, and 
ice storms which are becoming 
more frequent and severe. 
In May, Council demonstrated 
their commitment to taking a 
local leadership role when they 
adopted a Climate Change 
Action Plan alongside the unan­
imously signed Declaration on 
Climate Change. 
This has been a catalyst for 
piloting Saint John’s vulnera­
bility and risk assessment, as 
well as developing mitigation 
and adaptation strategies. In 
response, the electrical substa­
tion, as well as the water and 
wastewater pumping station, 
will be relocated to improve 
resilience. The harbor sea will 
also be raised by 1.5  m in rec­
ognition of recent flooding and 
anticipated sea level rise.
10
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Decision Making
Saint John, NB Mitigation
Climate change mitigation is a set of actions 
taken to prevent or reduce climate change, 
generally by decreasing greenhouse gas emis­
sions. The focus is on preventing the need for 
costly adaptation measures in the long term. 
Mitigation can be accomplished through:
•	 Avoidance: measures taken to avoid creating 
impacts from the outset;
•	 Minimization: measures taken to reduce the 
duration, intensity, or extent of impacts that 
cannot be avoided;
•	 Abatement: measures taken to rehabilitate 
degraded ecosystems; or
•	 Offsetting: measures taken to compensate 
for any residual adverse impacts.10
Adaptation
Adaption is a set of actions taken to reduce the 
impacts from climate change, for example by 
protecting facilities and infrastructure that may 
be vulnerable to hazards such as flooding and 
wildfire. The focus is on altering how we live to 
reduce the harmful effects of climate change. 
To do this we need to understand where we 
are most vulnerable.
Sea Level Rise
Coastal communities must contend with a 
significant increase in maximum sea levels 
over the next 50 to 100 years, which is well 
within the lifecycles of assets such as build­
ings, dikes, sea walls, and wastewater and 
stormwater infrastructure. The implications for 
some municipalities are enormous. Planning to 
address sea level rise involves a combination 
of mitigation and adaptation measures:
Mitigation: Reduce GHG emissions to slow 
or stop sea level rise. Through planning and 
design for buildings and transportation infra­
structure, municipalities can contribute to 
national and international efforts to curtail the 
use of fossil fuels that drive climate change, 
which in turn causes glaciers to melt and run 
into the world’s oceans.
10	
Envision, Sustainable Infrastructure Framework Guidance Manual 3rd edition (Washington DC: Institute for Sustainable 
Infrastructure, 2019), 13.
11	
Adapted from the Climate Change and Cities Second Assessment Report of the Urban Climate Change Research 
Network: Summary for City Leaders (2015)
Adaption: Develop or enlarge as sea walls, 
dikes, and vegetation (e.g., green shores) to 
protect the land from sea level rise. Municipal, 
regional, and provincial governments can 
address the impacts of sea level rise by 
relocating assets at the end of their useful 
lifespans. However, in many cases the scale 
and cost of the required construction will 
impose a large burden on taxpayers.
Why Integrate Mitigation 
and Adaptation?
It is important to integrate mitigation and 
adaptation11 because:
1.	 Mitigation and adaptation strategies aim to 
achieve the same goal—reduced exposure 
to climate change impacts. This means the 
solutions are interrelated. Proactive, holis­
tic planning can increase benefits of both 
strategies, improve cost-effectiveness, avoid 
conflicts, and help manage trade-offs.
2.	 Aligning climate adaptation and mitigation 
strategies can enhance the effectiveness of 
both strategies, avoid risks, and generate 
economic, ecological, and social benefits.
3.	 Climate change impacts infrastructure levels 
of service and risks. Through the inclusion of 
climate change into the levels of service and 
risk management frameworks, the municipal­
ity’s response to climate change improves. 
Through implementation of both mitigation 
and adaptation strategies, it reduces fear of 
the unknown, higher consequences of cli­
mate change, and planning that focuses on 
short term outcomes and does not anticipate 
long-term outcomes.
4.	 Municipalities have limited budgets and 
must prioritize a range of actions that can 
be applied practically and cost-effectively, 
which typically includes a combination of 
mitigation and adaptation measures.
11
u Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Decision Making
5.	 Municipalities need meaningful GHG emissions tracking 
and reduction objectives in order to prepare strategies 
to mitigate the effects of climate change.
6.	 Holistic approaches that consider both quantitative 
and qualitative costs and benefits of integrating mitiga­
tion and adaptation strategies should be compared to 
stand-alone strategies so decisions can be made based 
on local priorities and evidence-based data. 
7.	 Both mitigation and adaptation strategies will 
contribute to the efficient management of municipal 
assets over their lifespans. 
How to Integrate Mitigation 
and Adaptation Strategies
Integration can be achieved by12:
1.	 Starting as early as possible basing it on 
scientific evidence.
2.	 Engaging and applying solutions across disciplines, 
sectors (energy, waste management, water treatment, 
infrastructure, health, and consumption) and all levels 
of governance.
3.	 Providing clear short, medium, and long-term goals 
and establishing the commitment for these goals in 
your municipality’s asset management policy.
4.	 Identifying implementation opportunities, create 
budgets, provide clear roles and responsibilities of 
key personnel, and create concrete measures for 
the assessing process.
12	
Grafakos, Stelios & Pacteau, Chantal & Delgado, & Landauer, 
Mia & Lucon, Oswaldo & Driscoll, Patrick. (2017). Integrating 
mitigation and adaptation: Opportunities and challenges.
Municipality 
in Action
The City of Guelph’s Strategic Asset 
Management Policy (2018) details 
their principles and general frame­
work for asset management. This 
includes clear direction on manag­
ing risks, including understanding 
vulnerabilities, developing strat­
egies and taking actions related 
to both climate change mitigation 
and adaptation.
To implement this Policy, the City 
tackled technical levels of service 
as part of their asset management 
planning process. They have pre­
pared a corporate levels of service 
framework, within which climate 
change has been integrated using 
climate-related key performance 
indicators. Using this framework, 
staff from across the corporation 
were involved in intensive work­
shops to document level of service 
statements for all 17 service areas. 
Staff were engaged early, and 
the 
work 
plan 
was 
integrated 
with Guelph’s budgeting process, 
resulting in buy-in throughout the 
project. The strong communication 
plan and methodology, developed 
at the onset of the project, was crit­
ical to success. This process took a 
little over a year to complete.
Recognizing that their journey is 
one of continuous improvement, 
Guelph’s levels of service framework 
is scheduled for review annually 
and anticipates refinements to the 
process during the next round of 
updates. Next steps include rolling 
up the City’s technical levels of ser­
vice into public levels for outward 
facing communication, capturing 
and managing data and tools, and 
creating reports that present key 
performance indicators in a mean­
ingful and value-focused way.
City of Guelph, ON
12
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
CHAPTER 3
The Framework
Overview of the Framework
In asset management, service levels and risk are 
interrelated. For example, reliability is an important 
characteristic of most municipal services, which is 
often expressed as a level of service. Reliability also 
can be expressed in terms of the risk that a service 
will be interrupted by an asset failure or an event 
such as severe weather. Considering both levels 
of service and risks in a single process is efficient 
and helps to identify synergies that may yield rel­
atively simple solutions to the complex problem 
of climate change.
An important lesson learned from Canadian 
municipalities is to establish a clear process 
and framework early on. “One size doesn’t fit 
all” says Adam Smith from the City of Kenora 
with respect to frameworks. The City of Selkirk 
and the CVRD both created custom approaches 
that were hybrids of existing, more complicated, 
models. They felt existing tools and frameworks, 
while helpful to reference, were ultimately too 
complicated for their needs. Their experience has 
taught them that spending extra time up front 
developing a process pays off. Ensuring that your 
municipality has a clear, repeatable process that 
staff and Council understand and buy into is key. 
The framework presented in guide was developed 
with these municipal experiences in mind.
A general process for integrating climate change 
in the management of infrastructure levels of 
service and risks is presented below:
The overarching purpose of this process 
is to answer to the following questions:
1.	 How will climate change impact 
our municipality?
2.	 How will it affect our ability to deliver 
municipal services?
3.	 How do we prepare for the future?
Figure 3: Climate Change Framework for 
LOS and Risk Management
13
CHAPTER 4
Entry Points
This guide encourages you to consider a shared 
framework for climate change integration, beginning at 
the entry point most appropriate for your municipality’s 
needs. This could be the first time you’ve tackled the 
subjects of asset management and/or climate change, an 
addition or adjustment to an existing approach or 
framework developed as part of your asset management 
program, or a separate initiative integrated within your 
community sustainability or climate change strategy.
1–5
6–8
9–10
11–12
1–5
6–7
14
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Entry Points
There are four possible entry points for using 
the framework, with the related pathways 
described below:
1.	 Begin from the ground up
This involves preparing a linked risk and 
levels of service framework that considers 
climate change.
Rather than letting concerns over volume 
of work stymie getting started, a logical 
first step may be to select one or two ser­
vice areas for piloting your process. And a 
first iteration of implementing the process 
may include completing only steps 1–5 
described in Chapter 5 of the guide. Your 
objective is to ultimately complete all 
12 of the how to steps, but think of it 
as a phased approach.
2.	Start with levels of service
If you are interested in documenting and 
assessing levels of service based on climate 
change considerations, follow steps 1–7 
described in Chapter 5 of the Guide. You may 
also consider steps 11 and 12. You may choose 
this approach because you have already 
completed an infrastructure risk assessment 
that incorporates climate change, or doing 
both at once seems daunting.
You can use this process to evaluate all of 
your levels of service, or only those that will 
be affected by climate change.
Most municipalities undertake levels of service 
analysis distinctly from their risk processes, 
particularly when developing an asset manage­
ment program, simply because of the level of 
effort required. Often these steps are, at least 
in part, undertaken back-to-back. However, 
keep in mind that there will be overlap.
Municipal 
Staff 
in Action	 
Samir Yammine has 
been working with 
the City of Saint John 
to tackle climate change 
for over 20 years. His role began 
as the Energy Manager, and has 
evolved to the Manager of Asset 
and Energy Management.
Saint John was an early adopter of a 
Municipal Efficiency Energy Program, 
which reduced the City’s energy 
costs by almost $2.5 million and cut 
9,400  tonnes of carbon emissions 
under Samir’s leadership.
Samir believes that there are still 
significant opportunities that will 
support City targets. He is work­
ing towards solutions with the 
City’s team by taking an integrated 
approach to asset management 
and climate change.
Saint John was new to asset 
management 
in 
2016 
and 
has 
quickly moved forward. The City’s 
entry point for climate integration 
is to focus on risk management as 
part of the Climate Change Action 
Plan. This began with a vulnerability 
assessment of drainage infrastruc­
ture (as a pilot) which resulted in a 
corporate methodology for assess­
ing and mitigating climate change 
risks and vulnerabilities to improve 
infrastructure resilience.
They have remained 
directly aligned their 
asset 
management 
program—from 
the 
draft risk framework 
and its recommended 
use for climate assess­
ments in the 2017 Asset Management 
Roadmap, 
to 
direction 
for 
cli­
mate integration in the 2018 Asset 
Management Policy.
Saint John, NB
1–4
8
9–10
3–4
7–8
9–10
15
u Entry Points
3.	Focus on risk management 
If you are interested in assessing and 
managing risk based on climate change 
considerations, follow steps 1–4 and 8–10 
described in Chapter 5 of the Guide. You 
may also consider steps 11 and 12.
You may choose this approach because 
you have already developed an infra­
structure levels of service framework 
that incorporates climate change, or 
doing both at once seems daunting.
You can use this process to evaluate all 
of your risks, or only those that will be 
affected by climate change.
Some municipalities chose to assess risk 
for all service areas at once, while others 
are focused on a subset of service areas 
or selected a pilot service to being with. 
Taking manageable steps enables you to 
focus on continuous improvement within 
your capacity to achieve meaningful results.
For example, the Cowichan Valley 
Regional District undertook a Climate 
Risk Assessment as part of their Asset 
Management Strategic Plan. In contrast, 
the City of Saint John is currently under­
taking a risk evaluation as part of their 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan, but they 
are using a framework that is consistent 
with their Asset Management Policy. 
They tested their climate risk assessment 
through a pilot focused on drainage.
4.	Adapt an existing framework
If you already have an asset 
management framework in place 
and would like to adapt it to consider 
climate change, follow steps 3–4,7–10 
described in Chapter 5 of the Guide. If 
you’re only focused on levels of service 
you can skip step 8–9, and if you’re only 
focused on risk you can skip step 7. You 
may also consider steps 11 and 12 if this 
isn’t part of your existing framework.
Remember, you are specifically 
targeting your assessment to assess­
ing service delivery through a climate 
change lens. You may find it helpful to 
quickly review the full guide to confirm 
that these steps will fully meet your 
needs or to identify other steps you 
will need to take.
16
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
CHAPTER 5
Step by Step through 
the Framework
This section of the Guide describes how to develop infrastructure levels of 
service and risk frameworks that incorporate climate change. Each step is 
described below, along with examples and lessons learned.
Climate change resiliency “becomes an embedded value in a local 
government when it is integrated across all aspects of decision-making, 
and when there is a commitment to evaluate alternatives with a long-term 
perspective that aims to benefit both current and future citizens.”13
Figure 4: Steps for Integrating Climate Change 
and Asset Management
13	
Green Municipal Fund, Building Sustainable and Resilient Communities with Asset 
Management: An introduction for municipal leaders (Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities, 2018), 4.
17
u Step by Step through the Framework
Before You Begin
There are five key things common among 
municipalities that have undergone this process 
for consideration prior to embarking on this 
climate change response process:
1.	 They formalize a process that everyone 
understands and buys into;
2.	 They agree on definitions at the start of 
the process, but remember to keep it simple;
3.	 They clarify roles and responsibilities for 
all contributors up front;
4.	 They engage staff from all levels of 
the organization; and,
5.	 They obtain external support 
where appropriate.
Small municipalities, and those stretched for 
resources, will likely need expertise beyond 
what’s available in-house. In particular, some 
of the early steps such as gathering climate 
change information can be quite intensive. 
As part of your municipality’s project scoping 
phase, consider where you may need external 
support. It could include:
•	 Building internal knowledge from external 
examples and tools, either through pro­
grams like ICLEI—Local Governments for 
Sustainability’s (ICLEI Canada) ‘Training the 
Trainers’ or by seeking out examples from 
municipalities similar to yourself; 
•	 Collaborating with a partner organization 
such as an educational institution or 
neighbouring local government, such as 
the Prairie Climate Centre (PCC) or the 
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC); 
•	 Contacting the Canadian Centre for Climate 
Services Support Desk; or,
•	 Hiring an expert to provide the most 
up-to-date industry knowledge as well 
as additional capacity to your team. 
For many communities, this is a key to success.
18
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Municipality in Action
The City of Selkirk’s   award-
winning  Climate Change   
Adaptation 
 
Strategy 
(CCAS) provides a com­
prehensive, practical and cost-effective plan 
for beginning to address the impacts of climate 
change on municipal services and citizens. This 
work has been integrated into the City’s Capital 
Asset Management Program (CAMP), as well as 
existing business planning processes, to sup­
port clear actions for adaptation over the next 
50 years. Selkirk’s CCAS was adopted in May 
of 2019 and the City is now beginning to imple­
ment the tactics laid out.
Selkirk participated in FCM’s Climate and Asset 
Management Network group which offered peer 
learning opportunities, training and funding 
to integrate climate change and sustainability 
goals into infrastructure decision making. This 
was a catalyst for the City’s collaboration with 
the University of Winnipeg’s Prairie Climate 
Centre (PCC) to develop the CCAS. The PCC is 
a national leader in the interpretation, commu­
nication, and activation of climate change data; 
they were the City’s climate experts. PCC and 
City staff researched and prepared a process 
to bring the best available climate data and 
local knowledge together. The framework they 
developed is illustrated to the right. 
This 
unique 
approach 
brought 
together 
Selkirk’s CAMP team along with City service 
experts to form a CCAS team. The team partici­
pated in a series of climate adaptation planning 
workshops that were led by PCC. They used a 
“season by season” and “service by service” 
approach to incorporate climate change into 
risk management. In other words, they focused 
on understanding how each climate change 
hazard would impact a service (as opposed to 
an asset class) which allowed staff from all lev­
els and departments to identify the different 
consequences—and do this for each season.
One of the key take-aways from their experience 
is that there is a lot of climate data out there, and 
much of it is extremely complex. It is important 
to not get overwhelmed by the amount, but to 
gather and collect information—maybe consult 
with an expert like PCC—and then take some 
time to step back and think “so what does this 
mean?” It was critically important for Selkirk staff 
to take time in the workshops with both service 
experts and climate experts, to think about what 
this meant for the City—and specifically service 
delivery. 
Selkirk’s advice to other municipalities is to 
build your own program—don’t buy a plan—
and borrow frequently. Climate change is not 
a technical problem. They feel that it is critical 
that climate change adaptation and asset 
management gets baked into every aspect of 
business, so that you can stop thinking about 
it, and it becomes something that happens 
naturally—it will become the norm. And just 
get  started!
Selkirk, MB
2
1
19
u Step by Step through the Framework
IDENTIFICATION
The identification phase in the process explores the existing services 
provided to your community, the level at which you currently provide 
those services, the infrastructure assets that enable service delivery, and 
the climate change hazards that threaten these services. Regional and 
local climate change knowledge is also included here in support of decision 
making. The identification phase encompasses Steps 1 to 5 in the process.
Step 1: Identify Service Areas
In these early stages of identification, consider 
the following question: What services does the 
municipality provide to the community?
To answer this:
1.	 Use bylaws, budgets, and service plans 
as a reference.
2.	 Consider the following categories as 
a starting point:
a.	 Water
b.	 Sewer
c.	 Drainage
d.	 Recreation
e.	 Health/Emergency Services
f.	 Transportation
g.	 Solid Waste/Recycling
h.	 Electrical
i.	 Others?
3.	 Document each area within which your 
municipality provides service, and add a 
second layer of granularity where required 
(e.g., for water, do you provide both supply 
and treatment services?)
Step 2: Identify Assets that 
Support Service Provision
Consider the following question for each service 
area you identified in Step 1: What built or natu­
ral assets are required to deliver these services?
To answer this:
1.	 List the assets within each service area.
2.	 Use capital plans and asset registers as 
reference, as needed.
The idea is not to create a complete inventory 
of all assets, but to link assets to services in 
general groupings. If you end up with assets in 
your inventory that aren’t linked to a service 
then they are likely excess assets.
An example is provided below which you can 
use as a starting point for this step.
Table 1: Asset Examples by Service Area
Service Area
Assets
Water
Wells, reservoir, treatment 
facilities, pump stations, 
water mains, service 
connections, hydrants
Sewer
Sewer mains, manholes, service 
connections, pump stations, 
treatment facilities, outfalls
Drainage
Catch basins, manholes, 
culverts, storm mains, open 
channels/ditches, wetlands, 
detention ponds
Recreation
Community buildings, 
parks, equipment
Health/
Emergency 
Services
Hospital, ambulances, fire hall, 
fire trucks, ambulance station 
and police station
Transportation
Bridges, roads, trails, curb and 
gutter, sidewalk, road signs, 
streetlights, traffic lights, buses, 
light rail
Solid Waste/
Recycling
Trucks, landfill, recycling depot
Electrical
Transmission lines, 
transformers, generators, 
lighting, telecommunications
3
20
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 3: Gather Regional 
and Local Climate 
Change Information
Consider the following questions: 
•	 What climate projection data is available 
regionally and locally?
•	 What can we learn from the available information, 
as a basis for action or decisions?
To answer this:
1.	 Look at trends and predictions from climate data, 
as well as historical weather events, to understand 
how they impact natural and built assets.
2.	 Place a high priority on the most recent projec­
tions published by authoritative sources that are 
based on downscaled global climate models that 
include your community. 
There are a variety of sources for climate change 
information available and being used by commu­
nities across Canada, both federal and regional. 
Appendix C includes a list of climate change 
resources for consideration, including major 
organizations that provide support and information.
The Canadian Centre for Climate Services (CCCS), 
a website hosted by the Government of Canada, 
provides a wide range of information resources 
and assistance in using them. One of the portals 
CCCS supports is ClimateData.ca which is a collab­
orative collection of the up-to-date climate data 
in easy to use formats and visualizations. Climate 
Network with Environment Canada also provides 
historical climate data from across Canada.
The City of Selkirk used the Climate Atlas of 
Canada, a web-based science and education 
portal hosted by the Prairie Climate Centre 
and the University of Winnipeg. A similar west 
coast organization is the Pacific Climate Impacts 
Consortium, a regional climate service centre at 
the University of Victoria that provides practical 
information about the Pacific and Yukon, while 
Ouranos provides climate services in Quebec.
While it may seem overwhelming to begin with, 
remember to start small and add details over time 
as needed through a continuous improvement pro­
cess. This may be an ideal time to enlist external 
support if you do not have in-house expertise.
Municipality in Action 
The City of Bromont is 
in the early stages of 
their climate change 
response process and recognize that 
climate change is far more complex 
than simply variations in the weather. 
Key questions they have raised for 
consideration when gathering climate 
data include:
3.	 What is the most reliable data? 
Most available?
4.	 What measurement units are 
being used/most useful (e.g., days 
of extreme heat, violent rainfall, 
freeze-thaw cycles)?
5.	 How will forecasts be selected?
6.	 Should the most optimistic or 
pessimistic scenarios be used?
Bromont, QC 
Municipality in Action 
In 
2015, 
the 
City 
of 
Kitchener partnered with 
the University of Waterloo 
and 
together 
assessed 
over 20+ years of severe 
weather data, historical trends, future 
climate projections and weather fore­
casting. Gaps in the data are being 
identified, and temperature and pre­
cipitation rates analyzed. The intention 
is to prepare for these events proac­
tively by considering climate impacted 
levels of service and the implications 
for municipal assets.
Moving forward, Kitchener is explor­
ing how best to bring sustainable 
practices to a variety of municipal 
assets, as well as looking at how to uti­
lize performance data. Specific work 
activity projects are created in their 
work management system to better 
understand the impacts of adverse 
weather events. Furthermore, they are 
working to engage stakeholders more 
fully into levels of service discussions.
Kitchener, ON
4
21
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 4: Identify Climate 
Change Hazards
Consider the following question: Which climate 
change hazards impact your municipality? 
To answer this:
1.	 Brainstorm recent or recurring hazards that your 
community is exposed to, flagging the approximate 
frequency and impact of each.
2.	 Identify any existing climate change studies that are 
relevant to your community to better understand the 
direct or indirect impact these hazards have.
Consider also a general scan of the potential impacts 
on infrastructure and services which you will be able 
to elaborate on in Steps 7 and 8. The checklist in 
Appendix B could be used, and adjusted as necessary 
based on your circumstances, to assist in identifying 
how climate change can affect your municipality.
Hazards are physical events of phenomenon that may 
have a negative impact, such as habitat damage, injury 
or loss of life, economic disruption. Climate-related 
hazards include:
Municipality 
in Action
In order to identify the effectiveness 
of current services provided, the 
City of Nanaimo brought together 
focus groups asking what the level 
of service is today for parks/trails, 
and then what level it should be 
at. The City also hosted commu­
nity engagement workshops with 
residents on how levels of service 
relate to their parks and trail sys­
tems specifically. They realized that 
the public is interested in learning 
more about service provision, cost, 
and sustainability.
Commitments 
can 
now 
be 
established, 
and 
monitoring 
will continue to ensure the City 
is 
meeting 
the 
needs 
of 
the 
community through exceptional, 
sustainable service delivery.
Nanaimo, BC 
5
22
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 5: Identify Levels of 
Service (Current and Target)
Consider the following questions:
•	 How would you describe the levels at which 
a service is currently being provided? 
•	 Is this different from your target, or 
committed, level for providing this service?
•	 How do you currently measure the delivery 
of this service?
•	 Does climate change affect the delivery 
of each service, and if so, then how?
Note that there is an important distinction 
between the service you are actually providing 
customers and the objective or target levels you 
are working towards providing service at. If this 
is your first time tackling levels of service, focus 
first on the service customers are actually receiv­
ing, from a community perspective (i.e. customer 
facing as opposed to internal/technical levels).
Few municipalities have established a complete 
set of service levels for all of the services they 
provide. Not all levels of service are quantitative, 
but it is important that they are measurable. One 
important measure is the subjective community 
member experience with the services provided, 
which is often assessed through complaints.
There are a number of organizations across 
the country that have recently developed lev­
els of service tools and delivered workshops 
on how to use these tools. Customer levels 
of service, tailored to smaller communities, 
was the focus for the Atlantic Infrastructure 
Management Network, Asset Management 
BC, and the Northwest Territories Association 
of Communities. Technical levels of service, 
tailored to larger communities, was the focus 
for Asset Management Ontario. The Institute 
of Public Works Engineering Australasia’s 
NAMS Plus and the International Infrastructure 
Management Manual were also referenced 
by CAMN and LAMP municipalities as helpful 
frameworks. For more details on how to iden­
tify and assess levels of service, see the links 
in Appendix C or contact these organizations.
To answer these questions:
1.	 Identify current levels of service for each 
service area (i.e., water, drainage, etc.) based 
on the following service categories:
a.	 Regulatory – what is required by law?
b.	 Capacity/Availability – does the system 
have adequate capacity?
c.	 Safety – is the system safe for workers 
and the public?
d.	 Quality – does the service meet quality 
standards? How good is it?
e.	 Reliability – is the service reliable? 
How often is it interrupted?
f.	 Sustainability – how does the service provide 
for quality of life, leadership, resource use, 
natural environment, and resiliency?
2.	 Document how is this currently being 
measured (e.g. direct measurement, customer 
survey, complaint, internal review, etc.).
3.	 Identify the level of service objective or 
target you are either formally or informally 
working towards. This could be described 
in a community document or be a level that 
Council has set.
4.	 Discuss with your team what is working well 
about community member expectations of 
services, and what could be done better.
This process takes time and input from a 
multi-disciplinary group of staff that represent 
all departments within your municipality.
Table 2 includes drainage level of service 
examples for safety and reliability service cate­
gories, on a 4 point scale from low to very high. 
The intention would be to select the level that’s 
most reflective of your current situation and 
adjust the descriptor as needed. 
23
u Step by Step through the Framework
Table 2: Sample Drainage Levels of Service
Drainage
Service 
Categories
Safety
Reliability
Service 
Indicator
Buildings are protected 
against flooding
Streets are not susceptible to flooding
Example Levels of Service
Low
1
Many areas and/or critical services 
are exposed to significant flood 
risk, but do not have adequate 
flood protection.
Flooding due to overflow and/or backup is frequent and 
significant (i.e., sufficient to potentially harm residents, 
damage property and/or limit access to critical 
community services such as hospitals, police, fire, etc.)
Moderate
2
All critical areas of the community 
have adequate flood protection, but 
some other areas of the community 
exposed to significant flood risk do 
not have adequate flood protection.
Flooding due to overflow and/or backup is frequent 
but not significant (i.e. no harm to residents, no damage 
to property and/or limit access to critical community 
services such as hospitals, police, fire, etc.).
High
3
Nearly all areas of the community 
exposed to significant flood risk 
have adequate flood protection.
Flooding due to overflow and/or backup is infrequent 
and not significant (i.e. no harm to residents, no damage 
to property and/or limit access to critical community 
services such as hospitals, police, fire, etc.).
Very High
4
All areas of the community exposed 
to significant flood risk have 
adequate flood protection.
Flooding due to overflow and/or backup rarely occurs.
6
24
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
ASSESSMENT
The assessment phase in the process explores general gaps in our 
ability to provide services, and how our ability to provide services may 
be compromised as a result of climate change. Through integrating 
climate change into our evaluation, we can begin to assess the hazards, 
define impacts to current and future operating conditions, and assess 
possible vulnerabilities and their associated risks.This phase encompasses 
steps 6 to 8 in the process.
Step 6: Determine Gaps 
Between Current and 
Targeted Levels of Service 
Consider the following questions: 
•	 Have you been meeting established levels of 
service (i.e., is the current performance more 
or less than the service level commitment)? 
•	 Can current performance be sustained 
over time?
By evaluating your services, you can determine 
the gaps between current performance and 
your committed levels of service. This will also 
help inform how the gaps can be overcome, 
for example if current commitments need to 
be reconsidered.
To answer these questions:
1.	 Flag all service levels where the current 
performance (i.e. current level of service) 
is more or less than the level of service com­
mitment. How does this compare to past 
performance (if records are available)? Start 
first by focusing on gaps that you know are 
exposed to climate impacts, and if desired 
then move onto other gaps for your commu­
nity. In other words, how are the hazards your 
community is currently experiencing affecting 
your ability to deliver services today.
2.	 Flag all service levels where there is a 
probable future gap in service delivery. 
Changes in land use, population, economic 
changes, immigration, and other demograph­
ics can all have implications on the level of 
service. However, for the purposes of this 
activity focus first on how climate change 
may affect your ability to provide services 
into the future.
The example in Table 3 can be used as a 
framework for documenting and assessing 
municipality’s levels of service. Focus on the 
first four columns; this will be built upon in 
Steps 9 and 10. If your community already has 
documented levels of service, and you are now 
adding to that process by focusing specifically 
on climate change gaps, then this process will 
be quite targeted.
25
u Step by Step through the Framework
Table 3: Sample Levels of Service Matrix
Service 
Characteristic
Current 
Level of 
Service
Level of 
Service 
Commitment
Performance 
Gap?
Options and/or 
Recommended 
Action to 
Address Gap
Estimated 
Lifecycle 
Cost
Timeframe
Regulatory
Discharges 
comply with 
statutory 
requirements
Minimum Level 
of Service
No
Capacity/ 
Availability
Stormwater 
infrastructure is 
accessible for 
servicing lots 
throughout the 
service area
Some areas of 
the community 
do not have the 
opportunity to 
connect to the 
drainage sys­
tem (but want/
need to).
No
Safety
Buildings are 
protected 
against 
flooding
Nearly all areas 
of the commu­
nity exposed 
to significant 
flood risk have 
adequate flood 
protection.
All critical areas 
of the community 
have adequate 
flood protection, 
but some other 
areas of the com­
munity exposed 
to significant 
flood risk do not 
have adequate 
flood protection.
Upgrade drainage 
assets to provide 
adequate capacity 
during design flood 
events so that all 
areas of the com­
munity exposed to 
significant flood 
risk have adequate 
flood protection.
$3M
5 years
Reliability
Streets are not 
susceptible to 
flooding
Flooding due to 
overflow and/
or backup is 
infrequent and 
not significant 
(i.e. no harm 
to residents, 
no damage to 
property and/or 
limit access to 
critical com­
munity services 
such as hospi­
tals, police, 
fire, etc.).
Flooding due to 
overflow and/
or backup is 
frequent but not 
significant (i.e., 
no harm to resi­
dents, no damage 
to property and/
or limit access 
to critical com­
munity services 
such as hospitals, 
police, fire, etc.).
Do nothing
$0
N/A
Environmental
Providing the 
service gen­
erates a low 
environmental 
impact
Minimal 
reductions in 
GHG emissions 
(compared to 
baseline).
No
26
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Municipality in Action
The Town of Halton Hills 
is working to develop and 
implement climate change 
adaptation and mitigation 
measures relating to service 
levels. One area of focus 
is centred around sustain­
ability service levels, and in particular closing 
gaps by achieving GHG emissions targets for 
transportation systems, as well as facilities.
For example, their existing energy management 
program addresses energy use and carbon 
emissions associated with Town facilities and 
is being expanded to include fleet vehicles and 
employee commutes. They are taking action to 
eliminate carbon emissions associated with their 
operations through new net-zero construction, 
deep energy retrofits, green vehicle procure­
ment, and a renewable energy supply. As part of 
the process, Halton Hills has hosted workshops 
on levels of service, held public consultation 
sessions on risk assessment and climate change 
adaptation planning, and carried out vulnerabil­
ity assessment on facilities.
While the Town is identifying and closing gaps 
in their strategy for how to best integrate 
climate change considerations into a levels 
of service framework, challenges are being 
addressed along the way:
3.	 Creating the awareness of “why alignment 
and integration is important” over and 
beyond the asset management planning 
regulatory requirements in Ontario.
4.	 Bringing all the pieces of the puzzle 
together to come up with a common 
decision-making framework; 
5.	 Taking all available data and linking it to 
climate change and then relating this to 
levels of service in a structured manner. 
The Town of Halton Hills has since taken action:
1.	 They have integrated Climate Change and 
Asset Management under one department 
reporting to the CAO’s Office to ensure 
there are synergies and minimize conflicts 
between the two programs.
2.	 They have adopted an Integrated A+M 
approach that will not only consider adap­
tation and mitigation measures to combat 
climate change but also integrate whole 
lifecycle asset management strategies 
and financial planning.
Halton Hills, Ont
7
27
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 7: Assess Climate 
Change Considerations 
on Levels of Service 
Consider the following questions: 
•	 How does climate change affect 
levels of service? 
•	 Where are you most vulnerable?
Several of the risks assessed in Step 8 may also 
have levels of service implications. There is no 
need to duplicate the work of assessing the 
climate change scenarios in this section; these 
can be addressed in the strategies developed 
through either path.
To answer these questions:
1.	 Refer back to the hazards identified in Step 
4. Consider how frequently your community 
experiences each hazard to assess how these 
are relevant to your municipality’s ability to 
deliver services. Consider:
a.	 Exposure: whether infrastructure 
systems will be impacted in some 
way by climate change
b.	 Sensitivity: an evaluation of how the 
functionality of the infrastructure 
system will be impacted
c.	 Adaptive Capacity: the ability of the 
infrastructure system to adjust to 
potential impacts
2.	 For each hazard, describe where your 
municipality is vulnerable. For example, 
which services and, consequently, which 
build and/or natural assets are likely to be 
affected by climate change based on their 
exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity?
3.	 What are the implications for your 
infrastructure, organization, and systems? 
Refer back to the climate projection data 
gathered in Step 3 to assess how this will 
change over time. Future vulnerabilities 
should also be noted.
4.	 Identify the top 3–5 vulnerabilities for 
your municipality.
28
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Vulnerability refers to a weakness in the 
ability of a person, structure, or natural sys­
tem to respond to a force, such as a hazard. 
A community’s vulnerability to a hazard can 
be addressed by developing adaptation 
strategies that strengthen infrastructure, sup­
port local ecosystems, and build community 
awareness and preparedness. A community 
with less vulnerabilities is more resilient.
Vulnerabilities may be experienced with any of 
the following systems: drinking water, sewer, 
drainage, community buildings, energy, com­
munication, food systems/agriculture, native 
plants, community health, families, aging 
population, local economy, habitat (animals, 
fish and plants), recreation, housing, industry 
and jobs, transportation, forests. Think about 
what a service is most sensitive to as well as 
your ability to adapt.
For example, climate change can increase the 
frequency and amount of ice in a community. 
This can make the community more vulnerable: 
impacting safety (and the risk of liability due 
to slips and trips), increasing stress on assets 
(for example street trees directly through ice 
but also indirectly from higher salt exposure). 
In turn, this triggers the need to for a change 
in practice: increase the frequency of mainte­
nance to road and sidewalk surfaces during 
winter months. The result is an increased level 
of service (affecting both staff resources and 
material use), potential environmental impacts 
from salt use, and a higher budget.
Example 1: Urban Flooding
If precipitation levels exceed the capacity of 
the existing drainage system, flooding can 
occur. In major events drainage systems may 
rely on transportation networks like roads to 
convey flows. If the system is not sized for 
extreme events the stormwater could over­
whelm the system resulting in flooding on 
private property.
1.	 What storm events were used to 
inform the design of the existing 
drainage system?
2.	 Where in the drainage system do 
systemic capacity issues already exist?
3.	 How might those storm events change 
with the impacts of climate change?
4.	 How is the land use expected to change?
5.	 How will future development 
be impacted?
To tackle this, some communities are 
updating their IDF curves to incorporate 
climate change projections. The City of 
Kitchener did this as part of their Stormwater 
Master Plan, based on the projections that 
the University of Waterloo produced.
Example 2: Extreme Heat
Extreme heat events can cause increased 
demands on numerous community services 
including emergency services; energy and 
recreation (individual and community cooling 
access (e.g., air conditioners, tree-shaded areas, 
pools); transportation systems; and, water for 
hydration (people, animals, and plants).
1.	 Where heat events used to inform the 
design of the community systems?
2.	 How might the frequency and duration 
of extreme (greater than 30˚C) heat 
events change with the impacts 
of climate change?
3.	 How might those changes impact services?
a.	 Employer risk: Health and safety regu­
lations, codes, and standards 
for worker exposure
b.	 Community design to provide easy 
access to heat-relief and drinking water, 
decrease heat absorption, retention, 
and release (e.g., urban trees, minimise 
concrete surfaces, green roofs)
8
29
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 8: Assess Risks 
from Climate Change
Consider the following questions:
•	 What are the infrastructure-related risks 
(consequence and likelihood)?
•	 How could this impact service delivery?
•	 How could climate change impact the 
standards that inform infrastructure design 
in the future?
If you have skipped Steps 6 and 7, begin this 
step by considering where your community is 
most vulnerable to climate change because this 
directly relates to risk. Risks do not have to be 
negative; they can also result in positive out­
comes. For example, warmer winters on average 
may reduce the costs of snow removal and 
the quantities of sand that need to be applied 
to streets and removed from catch basins and 
storm drains.
Several of the service levels assessed in Step 7 
may also have risk implications. Where an issue 
is related to both risk and levels of service, it 
should be identified and adequately treated 
under one step or the other. There is no need 
to duplicate the work of assessing the climate 
change scenarios in this section; these can be 
addressed in the strategies developed through 
either path. 
To answer these questions:
1.	 For each hazard, identify consequences of 
climate change on your services where their 
delivery is interrupted temporarily 
or permanently? Consider:
a.	 Will people be affected?
b.	 Will property be affected?
c.	 What services could be affected?
d.	 What existing controls are in place? 
Will they remain in place over time? If so, 
consider the consequence of the hazard 
with the controls in place.
14	
Asset Management BC, Climate Change and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer, 
www.assetmanagementbc.ca.
A sample consequences table is presented 
in Table 5 illustrating a 1–5 scale (insignificant 
to catastrophic).
Asset management has traditionally used an 
asset-first perspective in risk assessments. 
However, assessing risk from an event, or 
hazard, perspective is becoming more com­
mon. This shift in approach is key when 
evaluating climate risks. For example, instead 
of identifying an asset such as a bridge and 
then assigning the asset a risk rating, con­
sider the hazard that impacts the community, 
for example flooding. In such a case you are 
assessing the consequence of the flood, and 
the likelihood that this will disrupt a service, 
for example access into or out of a commu­
nity. There could be one or more assets tied 
to that hazard, for example the bridge, nearby 
pump stations, etc.
2.	 Identify the likelihood of a such an event 
or occurrence. A sample likelihood table is 
presented in Table 6 illustrating a 1–5 scale 
(rare to almost certain).
3.	 Using a risk table, determine the risk rating. 
Risk = Consequence x Likelihood
Infrastructure systems are often 
interconnected and depend on one another. 
Sometimes they can affect other jurisdictions, 
or other jurisdictions could be relying on you 
for services. Discuss any cascading impacts of 
high-risk areas for major infrastructure sys­
tems. For example, if there was a reservoir dam 
failure from an earthquake leading to a loss of 
a community’s drinking water source and dam­
age to downstream land and infrastructure, 
who would be impacted, and how?14
30
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Based on the sample consequences and 
likelihood tables, a risk matrix is presented 
in Table 7 illustrating a 1–25 scale (low to 
extreme). Table 8 provides an example of 
risk assessment outcomes from urban flood­
ing according to drainage services, health/
emergency services and transportation 
based  on a low, medium, high scale (1–3). 
4.	 Are any risks unacceptable? This involves 
setting a threshold for your risk rating. Very 
generally, this could mean that you decide 
that any high risks, and possibly the medium 
risks identified, are considered unacceptable. 
If you use a more detailed risk table as shown 
in Table 7, with risks rated between 1 and 25, it 
could mean that any risks 10 and above are con­
sidered unacceptable. Therefore, action would 
be needed to address these risks by taking 
steps to eliminate or lower the risk to below a 
10 through mitigative action (where possible).
There are a number of frameworks being  
referenced and used by CAMN and LAMP 
communities to assess risk. If you’re looking 
for more details regarding a risk assess­
ment process consider PIEVC—which has 
been developed specifically for assessing 
climate-related risks; ICLEI—has a workbook 
centered around changing climates; and 
the IIMM—which outlines a traditional asset 
management approach to risk.
Municipal 
Staff 
in Action
Jessica Angers,  the 
Manager of Corporate 
Asset 
and 
Project 
Management with the 
City of Guelph, has imple­
mented quarterly reporting on 
key levels of service projects and 
phases through these three steps:
1.	
Collecting information internally
2.	 Looking outward—reaching out 
to Cornell University and the 
general public
3.	 Summarizing and refining levels 
of service based on information 
gathered from Steps 1 & 2.
Jessica is utilizing the plan, implement 
and evaluate methodology through 
her steps. 
Through her experience with this 
work, Jessica learned that in person 
meetings and phone conversations 
are the most effective method for 
creating buy in. She also noted that 
the process of documenting and 
assessing all service areas simultane­
ously was a much larger undertaking 
than she had anticipated; it was 
a full time role in conjunction with 
her other capital planning respon­
sibilities. Jessica shares this advice 
to those getting started: begin with 
an area of successes 
(inferred by available 
data) and don’t bite 
off more than you 
can chew.
City of Guelph, ON
31
u Step by Step through the Framework
Table 5: Sample Consequences Table
Consequence
Public Health/
Safety
Financial
Service 
Interruption
Regulatory
Insignificant
1
Nil
Insignificant (<$10k)
< 4 hours
No consequence
Minor 
2
Minor injuries/ 
illness
<$100k
up to 1 day
Report violation
Moderate 
3
Severe injuries/
illness
$100k to $500k
1 day to 
1 week
Ministry review, 
possible order
Major 
4
Major injuries 
to multiple 
parties, 
possible death
$500k to $1 million
1 week to 
1 month
Financial penalty
Catastrophic
5
Table 6: Sample Likelihood Table
Likelihood
Descriptor
Frequency of Occurrence
Rare
1
May occur only in exceptional 
circumstances
Beyond 20 years
Unlikely
2
Could occur at some time
Within 10 to 20 years
Possible 
3
Will probably occur at some time
Within 5 to 10 years
Likely 
4
Will probably occur in most circumstances
Within 1 to 5 years
Almost Certain
5
Expected to occur in most circumstances
Within 1 year
32
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Table 7: Sample Risk Matrix
Likelihood
Consequence
Insignificant (1)
Minor (2)
Moderate (3)
Major (4)
Catastrophic (5)
Rare
1
L (1)
L (2)
L (3)
M (4)
M (5)
Unlikely
2
L (2)
M (4)
M (6)
M (8)
H (10)
Possible
3
L (3)
M (6)
H (9)
H (12)
H (15)
Likely
4
M (4)
M (8)
H (12)
H (16)
E (20)
Almost Certain
5
M (5)
H (10)
H (15)
E (20)
E (25)
Table 8: Sample Urban Flooding Risk Assessment
Service Area
Vulnerability
Implications
Consequence
Likelihood
Risk 
Rating
Drainage
Community 
buildings 
and housing 
susceptible to 
damage during 
flooding
High volume 
or blockage; 
undersized 
resulting in 
sedimentation 
and overtopping
Medium (2): 
potential flood 
damage to 
structures or 
pooling on 
properties near 
undersized culverts
Low (1)
Low
2
Health/ 
Emergency 
Services
Access to 
emergency 
services could 
be delayed 
during flooding
Road washout; 
lack of access to 
services, delayed 
emergency 
response
High (3): 
could delay 
emergency 
response
Medium 
(2)
Medium
6
Transportation
Minor 
thoroughfares 
Street are 
susceptible 
to flooding 
Traffic delays; 
flooding and 
damage to road 
structure
Medium (2): 
traffic delays 
and rerouting 
to major roads
Medium 
(2)
Medium
4
33
Municipality in Action
The CVRD is currently conducting 
climate risk assessments and has 
identified over 100 infrastructure 
assets that are vulnerable to cli­
mate change impacts, across 12 
asset systems. All staff, from operations to senior 
management, were engaged from the beginning 
of the process and used workshops for education 
and buy-in. 
Having a simple framework, and definitions that 
everyone agrees on has been key. The project 
team determined that although none of the 
existing frameworks they reviewed met all of 
their project criteria, the ICLEI Canada tools 
provided a good starting point for modification. 
These tools were used and adapted to develop 
a custom process for CVRD—an asset system 
vulnerability and risk assessment that was 
conducted using this four-step process:
5.	 Identify Exposure 
6.	 Vulnerability Assessment
7.	 Risk Assessment 
8.	 Risk Management
Three of these four steps have been completed 
to date. The CVRD’s project team recognized 
that they didn’t have the resources to com­
plete assessments for all asset systems at once. 
Focusing on their most vulnerable systems 
first—water and sewer—has enabled them to 
test the process and build internal capacity 
before assessing other asset systems such as 
fire halls, recreation centres, recycling centres, 
parks, and trails.
As a next step, they will be developing a Corporate 
Risk Management Framework that defines what 
risks should be managed and who is responsible, 
and risk data management procedures. They will 
also run climate risk assessments for other systems.
CVRD notes the following recommendations for 
those undertaking a similar journey:
•	 A quality risk assessment needs input 
from all levels of staff management 
through to operations.
•	 As new data becomes available, the 
risk assessments should be updated or 
reviewed annually.
•	 You can’t really prioritize climate risks 
without looking at ALL risks—hence the 
need for a corporate framework. 
Cowichan Valley Regional District, BC 
9
34
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
PRIORITIZATION
The prioritization phase explores strategies to address gaps between 
current levels of service and commitments that have been made by the 
municipality, as well as preferred strategies to manage climate change 
risks. This phase encompasses Steps 9 and 10 in the process.
It is unlikely that you have the resources available to address all service 
delivery gaps at once or mitigate all municipal risks from climate change. 
Addressing gaps in services and minimizing risks as a result of climate 
change impacts will require making tough decisions.
Step 9: Identifying Strategies 
to Address Gaps and Risks 
due to Climate Change
Consider the following questions:
•	 What possible strategies can be used 
to address current and future level of 
service gaps? 
•	 How can climate change risks be managed? 
Are there ways to be more proactive in 
accomplishing this? 
To answer these questions:
1.	 Prioritize the identified gaps (with LOS gaps 
and key risks being combined) from high to 
low. Consider your most critical assets and 
keep them in the forefront of your mind, think­
ing about how many people may be affected, 
and how seriously they may be affected.
2.	 Discuss actions that could be taken to address 
gaps, including options previously developed 
and costed in master plans or other studies. 
Think about:
a.	 Ways to meet the municipality’s 
needs without new infrastructure
b.	 If doing nothing is acceptable
c.	 The level of municipality input required
d.	 Preventative work compared to 
reactionary work
e.	 Co-benefits of response decisions
When evaluating potential options for 
addressing gaps, the value of considering 
non-capital solutions cannot be underesti­
mated. Changing operations and maintenance 
practices, temporary protection measures, 
communication regarding risks, disposal 
of assets, demand management, and some­
times doing nothing are all key strategies 
to be considered. 
3.	 For each unacceptable LOS gap or risk 
(beginning with the top 5–10), identify 
potential solutions such as creating new 
assets, developing an O&M strategy, 
disposing of assets, demand management 
and doing nothing. 
You can build on the example in Table 3, 
focusing on the last three columns. 
As presented in Asset Management BC’s 
Primer on Climate Change and Asset 
Management, here are a few examples for 
climate change mitigation and adaptation:
Mitigation
•	 Supporting low-emissions fleet and 
transportation options
•	 Improving energy efficiency of new 
and existing facilities
•	 Protecting/enhancing natural assets 
through planning and land policies 
and bylaws
Adaptation
•	Increasing system redundancy for 
system resilience
•	Increased O&M of culverts to improve 
resilience towards flooding
•	Increasing drinking water storage capacity
10
35
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 10: Determine Preferred Strategies to Mitigate 
or Adapt to Climate Change
15	
Asset Management BC, Climate Change and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer, 
(www.assetmanagementbc.ca), 10.
Consider the following question: What is 
the preferred, or optimum strategy, for 
each unacceptable risk or LOS gap?
To answer this question:
1.	 Describe what options are best for the 
community. Look at effectiveness, feasibility, 
equitability, flexibility, or similar values that 
are important to your municipality.
2.	 Flag options that are the most financially 
feasible, including assessment of lifecycle cost.
3.	 Evaluate the implications for risk over the 
full lifecycle of the asset.
Remember that your preferred strategies can 
be those you feel are most appropriate to tackle 
immediately, or consist of a combination of both 
short and longer term actions. Addressing climate 
change is not a one time task, and so you will 
want to review your strategies on a cyclical basis 
to ensure they still make sense given available 
date, align with your municipality’s vision, and are 
appropriate from a lifecycle costing perspective.
Prioritization enables municipalities to make 
decisions regarding15:
•	Where and when to invest in adaptation to 
climate change hazards and vulnerabilities
•	Where to invest in capital or operational 
measures to manage risk and increase 
resilience
•	Where to accept changes to levels of service
•	How to minimize investment costs 
while maintaining levels of service and 
managing risk
•	How to compare climate change risks 
to other risks
•	How and where to invest in mitigating 
climate change, such as most cost-effectively 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions
11
continued on next page
36
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
MANAGEMENT
The management phase in the process explores how to integrate actions 
into asset management plans, strategies for monitoring progress over 
time, and beginning a journey of continuous improvement. This phase 
encompasses steps 11 and 12 in the process.
Step 11: Integrate Actions 
into Asset Management Plans
Consider the question: How do you move from 
planning into action?
Now that you have a prioritized list of measures 
you need to take, the next phase of the process 
is to identify what actions will be required, by 
when, who is responsible, at what cost, and how 
will they accomplish actions. This can be incor­
porated into your corporate or service-specific 
asset management plan(s), or in some cases 
through the action plan for your corporate 
asset management strategy. Components may 
also belong in your corporate climate change 
strategy. It may be as simple as a table detail­
ing the municipality’s top 10 priorities based on 
the assessment process undertaken. However, 
it could be that you develop a more detailed 
service delivery plan or risk management plan 
that becomes a core component of your asset 
management plan when it’s next updated. 
Remember, at the end of the day we are trying 
to achieve action, so your output should be in 
whatever form is going to be the most useful 
to your municipality.
Actions (What)
Actions should fall directly from the preferred 
strategies to mitigate or adapt to climate 
change risks. Begin with a list small enough 
that it’s practically actionable given the munic­
ipality’s resources, and the planning horizon 
you will be working within. You can always add 
actions once the first list is complete. Some of 
these actions could be related to capital proj­
ects, others will be further studies, and others 
still could be stakeholder meetings or securing 
grant funding.
Justification (Why)
The risk and LOS analysis completed in Steps 
1–10 should fully describe the justification for 
each of the selected actions. An important 
part of this is leveraging Council’s existing 
policies and strategies. Do not re-invent the 
wheel, if climate action and sustainable infra­
structure policies already exist, utilize them 
in your level of service and risk management 
frameworks. If there are gaps pertaining 
to climate change, update the policies and 
frameworks that are already in place. If there 
are none, then start by creating them.
Municipality 
in Action	 
“Balancing what we 
need, what we can 
provide, and what the 
public expects” are all important con­
siderations when preparing a service 
delivery plan.
Fredericton, NB
37
u Step by Step through the Framework
Integrating climate change into levels of service 
and risk management is a practical approach 
to managing liability and risks. The more 
established, documented, and published lev­
els of service frameworks can provide a policy 
defense to local governments. Incorporating 
extreme weather events and climate change in 
inspection and maintenance programs provides 
a reasonable standard of care requirement. It 
shows due diligence on the trade-offs between 
the costs of providing a level of service and the 
associated risks.
Timeline (When)
Regular evaluation periods vary depending on 
municipality. Typically, short-term plans are 
implemented annually, medium-term plans are 
implemented every three years and long-term 
plans are implemented every 5 years. Policies are 
generally renewed every five years. Incorporating 
climate change into your frameworks and 
policies is a continuous improvement process.
Responsibility (Who)
Although the core team, at the least, should be 
involved throughout the planning process, this 
step is where thoughts can be translated into 
successful action. Identify the core team and 
any champions in management before imple­
menting a project or program. Within your 
16	
Envision, Sustainable Infrastructure Framework Guidance Manual 3rd edition (Washington DC: Institute 
for Sustainable Infrastructure, 2019).
team, invest in early and regular collaboration 
between designers, contractors and operators 
which will help prevent design conflicts, reduce 
change orders, and result in easier, faster, and 
less costly projects.
Implementation (How)
What resources are required to take action? 
This includes finances as well as people.
Consider the cost be of taking the identified 
actions. Little can happen without a budget! 
And part of preparing a budget is ensuring 
that the business case is presented clearly 
based on the justification.
Staff resources are the other key component 
of implementation. While you will have clear 
champions, they should be leading the process 
but drawing on a larger network for implemen­
tation. Engage staff from across departments 
and levels so everyone can bring their exper­
tise and knowledge to the table. This builds 
buy-in and also prevents errors caused by lack 
of awareness or assumptions. When the team is 
given an environment to collaborate and share 
their ideas, innovative and sustainable solutions 
can be more readily achieved.16 Remember 
to take the time to provide new staff with an 
orientation to the process.
Key Components of an Action Plan
Actions
Justification
Timeline
Responsibility
Resources
Budget
What steps need 
to be taken?
•	Consultation
•	Plans
•	Strategy 
implementation
•	Monitoring
•	Review
Why is this 
important?
How does 
it support 
Council’s 
existing policies, 
strategies, or 
Strategic Plan?
When does 
it need to be 
done by?
Do we have a 
way to monitor 
progress?
Do we have 
goals, buy-in, 
and priorities?
Who is 
responsible for 
implementation?
Who is a 
part of the 
project team?
Do we need 
an expert?
Do we have 
a way to 
monitor budget?
Are there 
pressures on 
the long-range 
capital budget?
12
38
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Step by Step through the Framework
Step 12: Monitor Progress 
and Explore Opportunities 
for Continuous Improvement
Consider the following questions:
•	 How are you doing?
•	 What should you be doing differently?
Monitoring and evaluation are methods for 
supporting continuous improvement. The intent 
should be to make it easier for time for users and 
decision makers to understand what is working 
well and what should be done differently.
To answer these questions:
1.	 Develop a plan to monitor the progress of 
implementation and the effectiveness of both 
adaptation and mitigation measures.
2.	 Establish a process for reviewing frameworks 
and processes, along with set timelines for 
doing so. This is also an opportunity to recon­
sider internal capacity and when to move 
forward with additional service areas, etc.
3.	 Set out a record keeping system, if that hasn’t 
been established already. Ensure all key players 
have access to core components of the pro­
gram, and that new information is documented 
in a timely manner.
4.	 Finally, communicate accomplishments.
Municipality in Action 
The City of Kenora 
staff have recognized 
the need for contin­
uous 
improvement 
 
in 
asset 
manage­
ment planning, data 
gathering and management, and in 
decision making.
Kenora has an asset management 
framework in place and has included 
climate change risk as part of the 
document. The process identifies risk— 
what constitutes a risk, formalized risk 
assessment process—and the degree 
of information and data competencies 
required. It also includes risk manage­
ment—deciding what actions need to 
be taken to achieve “low regret” sit­
uations and implements a strategy to 
adapt accordingly.
The remaining challenge is how to 
effectively use the risk reports which 
are generated by the AMP software and 
the considerations of those climate vari­
ables within capital decision-making.
The next steps are to draw from their 
background studies and frameworks 
to focus on prioritization and manage­
ment. The City is looking to keep the 
process simple as they adapt due to the 
nature of being a smaller community. 
The momentum from work completed 
to date will kick start the solutions and 
actions specific to the vulnerabilities 
that have been identified.
Kenora, ON
39
CHAPTER 6
A Call to Action
Canada is warming up twice as 
fast as the rest of the world, and 
municipalities across the country are 
facing the biggest impacts. Historical 
trends can no longer be used to 
predict future scenarios, and what 
used to be infrequent extreme weather 
occurrences are now common. We 
are being challenged in our ability to 
deliver services, with the capacity of 
our infrastructure being stretched in 
unprecedented ways. As the providers 
of local services, our residents and 
businesses rely on us to manage these 
services reliably and sustainably.
When it comes to making a real change, 
municipalities are in the driver’s seat. Municipalities 
influence roughly half of Canada’s GHG emissions 
and are the focal point when it comes to building 
long-term climate resilience in their communities.
The climate affects almost everything about how 
we design, build, and live in our cities. We have a 
huge opportunity as aging infrastructure across the 
country reaches the end of its useful life to ensure 
new investments are made with the future of our 
communities in mind.
It is a crucial time for municipal leaders to assess 
and reaffirm their commitments and take concrete 
actions to become more resilient. This Guide can 
be used as a tool for taking some concrete steps 
forward. To assist your community through this 
journey, 15 key lessons learned have been assem­
bled from municipalities across the country that 
are engaged in actions focused on integrating 
climate change with asset management.
LESSONS LEARNED
Take a service perspective;
5.	 Agree on a shared set of definitions at 
the start of the process, using layman’s 
terms wherever possible;
6.	 Establish a clear process and 
framework early on, keeping in mind 
that your community is unique and 
the approach you take will be as well;
7.	 Select a champion;
8.	 Use workshops generously for 
education and buy-in;
9.	 Ensure broad engagement with staff 
(operations through senior management);
10.	Collaborate across departments;
11.	 A significant investment of staff time 
is needed for success;
12.	 Good climate information is key for 
risk management framework analysis;
13.	 Consider external support where 
appropriate (e.g., aligning yourself with 
experts who can speak to the impacts 
of climate change and translate them 
into relevant, local consequences);
14.	 Connect levels of service and risk to 
asset management and corporate 
processes;
15.	 Partnering with the right people is 
very important;
16.	 Leading into action can be a challenge;
17.	 For long term success focus on a 
roadmap for action including a plan for 
rolling out year by year (and put it into 
the annual budget process); and,
18.	 Seek out funding from outside sources.
40
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u A Call to Action
Municipality in Action
17	
Ed Hunter, “Artist makes ‘bittersweet’ Fredericton return to mark historic spring flood”, CBC News, October 16, 
2018, https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/new-brunswick/watermark-spring-flood-art-beaulieu-1.4863892.
Gerald Beaulieu, an artist 
commissioned by the City of 
Fredericton in 2016, installed 
11 wooden posts of different heights along the 
river near Westmorland Street Bridge. These 
posts have copper plates to mark peak water 
levels of historic spring floods.
The spring flood of 2018 displaced hundreds of 
New Brunswickers and caused tens of millions 
of dollars in damage. Gerald has returned to his 
work after the devastating spring flood of 2018 
to mark the new flood records.
Gerald’s 
artwork 
also 
links 
the 
implications 
of flooding to munic­
ipal services. The art 
is an effective means 
of engaging the pub­
lic in dialogue about 
the impacts of climate 
change 
on 
reliability 
of roads, parking facili­
ties, and risk of damage to 
buildings at low  elevations.17
City of Fredericton, NB
Municipality in Action
On Monday, April 1, 2019, the City of Nanaimo 
Council Members officially declared a climate 
emergency for the purposes of identifying and 
deepening their commitment to protecting the 
economy, eco-systems, and community from 
global warming. They voted unanimously on the 
following four policies:
1.	
That all funds in the Regional Emissions 
Reduction Reserve be moved to a new 
reserve fund for the purpose of supporting 
projects, plans and initiatives that reduce 
the City of Nanaimo’s community wide CO2 
emissions to between 50% to 58% below 
2010 levels by 2030, and between 94% and 
107% below 2010 levels by 2050.
2.	 That the framework, strategies and actions, 
and implementation of City of Nanaimo 
Community Sustainability Action Plan be 
updated to reflect the target goal, based 
on the information contained in the latest 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
report, of limiting global warming to 1.5˚C.
3.	 That correspondence be sent to the 
Regional District of Nanaimo requesting 
the addition of 20,000 annual public transit 
hours to improve public transit service deliv­
ery within the City of Nanaimo and develop 
transit routes that connect our local system 
with inter-regional connections.
4.	 That correspondence be sent to the 
Honourable George Heyman, provincial 
Minister of Environment and Climate Change 
Strategy, requesting that province reinstate 
the production of the Community Energy 
and Emissions Inventory Reports or dedicate 
grant funding to be used for their creation.
City of Nanaimo, BC
41
APPENDIX A
Glossary of Terms
Abbreviations
Below are some abbreviations used in this guide: 
CAMN	 Climate and Asset Management Network
FCM	
Federation of Canadian Municipalities
LAMP	 Leaders in Asset Management Program
LOS	
levels of service
Glossary of Terms
Below are some commonly used terms referenced in this guide: 
1.	 An asset is an item, thing or entity that has 
potential or actual value to an organization. 
The value can be tangible or intangible, and 
financial or non-financial. An organization 
may choose to manage its assets as a group, 
rather than individually, to accommodate its 
needs and achieve additional benefits. Such 
groupings of assets may be organized by 
asset type, asset system or asset portfolio. 
(Source: ISO 55000:2014)
2.	 Climate change adaptation refers to actions 
taken to help communities and ecosystems 
cope with changing climate conditions. 
(Source: United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, 1992)
3.	 Climate change mitigation refers to a 
human intervention to reduce the sources 
or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases. 
(Source: United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, 1992)
4.	 Consequence refers to the result or effect 
of an action or condition. (Macmillan 
Dictionary, 2019)
5.	 Exposure refers to the state of being in a 
place or situation where there is no protec­
tion from something harmful or unpleasant. 
(Oxford Dictionary, 2019).
6.	 Hazard refers to a physical event of 
phenomenon that may have a negative 
impact, such as habitat damage, injury or 
loss of life, economic disruption. Negative 
impacts from hazards can be reduced 
through adaptation strategies.
7.	 Impact refers to the strong effect on 
something or someone.
8.	 Infrastructure refers to the physical assets 
developed and used by a municipality to 
support its social, cultural and economic 
services. (Source: LAMP Municipalities, 2017)
9.	 Levels of service are the parameters, or 
combination of parameters, that reflect the 
social, political, environmental, and economic 
outcomes that the organization delivers. The 
parameters can include safety, customer 
satisfaction, quality, quantity, capacity, 
reliability, responsiveness, environmental 
acceptability, cost, and availability (Source: 
ISO 55000:2014)
10.	Likelihood refers to a qualitative assessment 
that is subjective with little objective 
measurement; low, medium, or high.
11.	 Natural Assets in a municipality are the stock 
of natural resources or ecosystems that is 
relied upon, managed, or could be managed 
by a municipality, regional district, or other 
form of local government for the sustainable 
provision of one or more municipal services. 
(Source: Defining and Scoping Municipal 
Natural Assets, Municipal Natural Assets 
Initiative, BC, 2017)
12.	Resilience is the capacity to recover quickly 
from difficulties (Oxford Dictionary, 2018). 
A resilient community has the capacity to 
survive and adapt to chronic stresses and 
acute shocks, like population growth or 
decline, aging populations, influxes of new 
immigrants, economic swings, or climate 
change impacts like severe storms, flood­
ing or melting permafrost. (Source: Building 
Sustainable and Resilient Communities with 
Asset Management, FCM 2018)
13.	Risk refers to the product of likelihood 
and consequence.
14.	Threat refers to something that is likely 
to cause damage or danger.
15.	Vulnerability refers to a weakness in the 
ability of a person, structure, or natural system 
to respond to a negative force, such as a haz­
ard. A community’s vulnerability to a hazard 
can be addressed by developing adaptation 
strategies that strength infrastructure, sup­
port local ecosystems, and build community 
awareness and preparedness.
42
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Glossary of Terms
43
APPENDIX B
LOS Checklist for 
Climate Impacts
The following checklist provides a sample of common impacts that local 
government infrastructure systems experience due to climate change. It is 
based on information presented in Asset Management BC’s Climate Change 
and Asset Management: A Sustainable Service Delivery Primer.
Common Impacts of Climate Change 
on Local Government Infrastructure Systems
Sewer Impacts
Exceeded capacity caused by increased 
inflow and infiltration (may lead to surface 
surcharging and basement flooding)
Changes in the characteristics of 
wastewater effluent
Flooding that affects buildings, tankage, 
and housed process equipment
Health/Emergency Services Impacts
Higher demand for emergency services
Damage or flooded emergency 
services structures
Longer response times
Reduced aide capacity
Transportation Impacts
Road damage caused by erosion, 
landslides, and embankment failure
Road damage caused by more frequent 
thawing/freezing of soil
Road washout caused by overflowing 
culverts and storm sewers
Causeways, bridges, and low-lying roads have 
a high risk of being inundated or damaged
Drainage Impacts
System capacity exceeded more frequently
Failure of drainage systems and dikes 
causing property and infrastructure damage
Increased pumping (which increases 
energy costs)
44
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u LOS Checklist for Climate Impacts
Recreation Impacts
Stress on vegetation and water restrictions 
for built water features caused by drought
Loss of trees due to drought, windstorms 
and pests (e.g. MPB)
Higher demand on parks and water 
features by increased temperatures
Changes to water quality of lakes or 
rivers which may affect recreational use
Increased erosion and decreased 
slope stability
Solid Waste/Recycling Impacts
Increased odour and pests during 
warmer summers and winters
More landfill leachate during winter months
Flooding to critical infrastructure or 
collection routes
Restricted water use (during summer 
months) for wet site management practices
Water Impacts
Loss of reliable water sources by drought
Loss of water and/or reduced source 
water quality
System capacity issues and stress on 
water sources by higher water demands
Damage to infrastructure from fires 
and flooding
Flooding causing water-borne 
health problems
Taste/odour problems during 
summer months
Reservoir dam failures
45
APPENDIX C
Additional Resources
The following additional resources were noted by participating CAMN and 
LAMP communities, and could be helpful as your community navigates 
through the climate integration process:
Additional Resources
Asset Management BC
BC Framework for Sustainable Service Delivery
https://www.assetmanagementbc.ca/
framework/
The Framework establishes a high-level, systematic 
approach that supports local governments in moving 
toward service, asset and financial sustainability through 
an asset management process.
Asset Management Toolkit
https://assetmanagement.toolkitnwtac.com/
The Northwest Territories Association of Communities’ 
Asset Management Toolkit includes a Levels of 
Service Template and Guide which is designed to help 
communities to interpret and adapt the Template to 
their local context.
Climate Atlas of Canada
https://climateatlas.ca/
Combines climate science, mapping and storytelling to 
bring the global issue of climate change closer to home 
for Canadians. It is designed to inspire local, regional, and 
national action that will let us move from risk to resilience.
Climate Data for a Resilient Canada
https://climatedata.ca/
Provides high-resolution climate data to help decision 
makers build a more resilient Canada. The goal of this 
portal is to support decision makers across a broad 
spectrum of sectors and locations by providing the 
most up to date climate data in easy to use formats 
and visualizations.
Canadian Centre for Climate Services
www.canada.ca/climate-services
Works with users to understand climate chance 
concepts, trends, and guidance on how to use climate 
information in decision-making. CCCS provides access 
to climate experts to find, interpret and apply historical 
and future climate information.
International Council for Local 
Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI)
https://www.icleicanada.org/
ICLEI Canada works with a wide-variety of stakeholders 
from across government, industry, academia and the 
NGO community to build more sustainable, low-carbon, 
energy efficient, climate-ready communities through 
peer exchange, partnerships and capacity building.
46
Guide for Integrating Climate Change Considerations into Municipal Asset Management
u Additional Resources
Additional Resources (continued)
Institute for Sustainable Infrastructure 
Envision Framework 
https://sustainableinfrastructure.org/envision/
A framework that provides the guidance needed to 
initiate this systemic change in the planning, design and 
delivery of sustainable and resilient infrastructure. It 
outlines sustainability metrics for infrastructure projects 
to help users assess the extent to which their project 
contributes to conditions of sustainability across the full 
range of social, economic, and environmental indicators.
Institute of Public Works Engineering 
Australasia (IPWEA)
https://www.ipwea.org/home
IPWEA provides regular continuing professional 
development, conferences, technical publications, and 
the chance to be involved in committees addressing 
technical issues for those who deliver public works and 
engineering services to communities. This includes the 
International Infrastructure Management Manual which 
has guidance on risk as well as levels of service.
Municipal Metrics Catalogue
https://amontario.ca/
municipal-metrics-catalogue_2/
This catalog provides Councils and Municipal Staff 
across Ontario with a reference to metrics used by other 
Municipalities to manage their infrastructure and meet 
asset management-related standards and regulations. 
The intent is to help choose the Level of Service metrics 
that best align with corporate objectives as well as 
other indicators or technical measures to support 
decision-making.
NAMS Canada
https://www.namscanada.org/
NAMS Canada is an affiliate of IPWEA and assists 
Canadian and North American local governments and 
public works entities improve the way they manage 
their public infrastructure assets. They have tools for 
both risk and levels of service.
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium
https://www.pacificclimate.org/
A regional climate service centre at the University of 
Victoria that provides practical information on the 
physical impacts of climate variability and change in 
the Pacific and Yukon Region of Canada.
Prairie Climate Centre
http://prairieclimatecentre.ca/
The Prairie Climate Centre is committed to making 
climate change meaningful and relevant to Canadians 
using an evidence-based perspective through maps, 
documentary video, research reports, and plain-lan­
guage training, writing, and outreach. Their Climate 
Atlas tool is available for those seeking information 
about climate change and its impacts.
Public Infrastructure Engineering 
Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC)
https://pievc.ca/
PIEVC’s Vulnerability Committee leads a national 
initiative to determine and mitigate the engineering 
vulnerability of Canadian public infrastructure to the 
impacts and risks of current and future climate. Its goal 
is to ensure civil infrastructure projects are considering 
the impacts of climate change.
Visit  
fcm.ca/climateinnovation
