Changing 
Communities:
Changing 
Climate,
Guide and Workbook for Municipal Climate Adaptation 
Changing Climate, Changing Communities:
Guide and Workbook for Municipal Climate Adaptation 
Preface	
2
About This Guide 	
4
climate change primer	
 10
Milestone 1: initiate 	
16
Milestone 2: research 	
28
Milestone 3: plan 	
44
Milestone 4: implement 	
58
Milestone 5: monitor/review 	
64
FINAL THOUGHTS	
71
This guide was made possible with the generous  
support of Natural Resources Canada:  
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division.
2      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Adapting to climate change is the new reality. Despite genuine efforts to mitigate climate change, 
leading scientists tell us that a changing climate is inevitable and we can expect increasing 
temperatures, more frequent storms and sea level rise. Many local governments are already at  
the centre of this reality; dealing with the effects of thawing permafrost, damaged infrastructure 
and heat waves. As practitioners of good governance, local governments must develop responses 
that protect their local citizens, environment and economy. 
ICLEI is an association of local governments that are committed to sustainability. ICLEI  
works with its members to build the capacity of municipal staff and elected officials to fulfill this 
commitment. We develop process-based frameworks and build practical tools and resources  
to support implementation. This guide provides a milestone framework that leads local 
government practitioners through a process of initiation, research, planning, implementation  
and monitoring for climate adaptation planning. The workbook is filled with practical tools  
and exercises to support the milestone process, and the information annexes summarize a  
variety of policy and scientific resources that can be used to compliment your activities. The 
multifunctional nature of these resources is in response to the fact that while adaptation 
planning can be a long-term and complex process, there are exercises that can be done in the 
short term to support a longer-term process.
I encourage you to bring this guide to your community and put it to use. Tailor it to your needs. 
And, please share your experiences with ICLEI so we can ensure that the lessons you’ve learned 
on the ground in your community are shared with your peers across the country.  
Megan Meaney
Director, ICLEI-Canada
preface
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      3
Ten years ago, Delta started to think seriously about climate change and what we could do to  
mitigate and adapt to the impacts on our community and environment. We knew we had to look 
inward and so began a series of changes. We have promoted discussion, sometimes at the risk  
of ridicule, encouraged our staff to put their sound ideas into practice, and participated in national 
programs, like ICLEI Canada’s adaptation toolkit pilot, when few others were interested.
But now the science is in and all sectors of government and private industry are rising to the climate  
change challenge. The timing couldn’t be better. In the past few years, Delta has experienced  
climate change first hand with several severe weather events like storm surges and flooding  
in Boundary Bay Village. As a coastal community, Delta may be on the frontline of vulnerability, 
but it’s certainly at the forefront for change.
We are privileged to have worked with ICLEI Canada to produce this very useful toolkit for  
communities across the nation. Congratulations to ICLEI Canada for completing Changing  
Climate, Changing Communities. The toolkit is relevant, practical and useful.
At the Corporation of Delta, we’ve shown that small changes result in huge dividends. The time  
for debate is over. Please join us now as we all do our best to meet the climate change challenge.
Mayor Lois Jackson
Municipal Corporation of Delta, BC
4      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Today, the effects of climate change are being felt in communities  
across the country. These effects are set to become so pervasive that all  
levels of government and all sections of society will have a responsibility 
to become informed and to take appropriate action within their mandates 
to prepare for and adapt to them.  
Changing Climate, Changing Communities: Guide and Workbook for Municipal  
Climate Adaptation is a compendium of resources that provide a milestone based frame-
work to assist local governments in the creation of adaptation plans to address the relevant 
climate change impacts associated with their communities. Although climate change 
adaptation is a complex process, this guide aims to provide a straightforward methodology 
to adaptation planning using a five-milestone approach. Each milestone represents a  
fundamental step in the adaptation planning process, starting with the initiation of  
adaptation efforts (by building an adaptation team and identifying local stakeholders)  
and culminating with a monitoring and review process that analyzes the successes  
and reviews the challenges of the adaptation plan and its implementation. 
Though presented sequentially, the milestone framework is not necessarily linear; 
rather, it can be an iterative process whereby adaptation goals and actions are  
continuously monitored based on new local conditions and information. Likewise  
the distinction between planning and implementation may be blurred so that actions  
that are already underway or may be implemented easily can be undertaken while  
other elements of planning are still ongoing. 
Changing Climate, Changing Communities is a compendium of three distinct elements:  
a main guide, a workbook for practitioners, and a set of information annexes. 
Main Guide
The main guide outlines the five milestones for climate adaptation and outlines how to 
implement each one. The guide can be used on its own or in coordination with the  
workbook and annexes which provide additional tools to assist in moving through the 
Milestone process. 
Workbook
Though the workbook is a non-compulsory component of the guide, it contains seventeen 
tools that operationalize the adaptation methodology identified in the main guide.  
The tools range from basic conceptual mappings to more complex matrices on adaptive 
capacity and risks associated with climate change impacts, each tool can be used to  
facilitate moving through the milestones. 
Information Annexes
The third component of the compendium are the information annexes which supplement 
the main guide and includes information on regional climatic changes, adaptation options, 
and a synthesis of other resources, organized by topic, that can assist communities in 
planning for climate change.  
Changing Climate, Changing Communities is aimed at municipal staff interested in working 
on climate change adaptation strategies. Staff from across all municipal departments can 
be involved in the process outlined in this resource; as it encourages an integrated approach 
to planning that requires examination of the environmental, economic, social, and health 
implications of climate change. 
Although the need for adaptation planning is clear, it is important to recognize that  
there is no one way to approach planning for climate change. Adaptation planning, by 
its definition of responding to local impacts, requires a certain degree of ‘right-sizing’ or 
localizing, as any plan must be tailored to the community. This guide offers a methodology 
which can be tailored to any local government as dictated by the resources, capacity and 
priorities of the community. 
Principles for Working on Climate Change Adaptation
As your community engages in a climate change adaptation planning process, the  
following principles1 should be considered to help guide your work:
•	Balance of immediate and long-term needs: Acknowledge that climate change 
impacts will continue to take shape over the long-term based on our actions today,  
but many impacts are already emerging. Communities must, therefore, ensure  
their approach is one that finds a balance between immediate and long-term needs.
• Interaction must be supplemented with action: Acknowledge that the complexity 
and transboundary nature of climate change impacts means that many stakeholders 
will need to act to develop a truly holistic response to those impacts, yet the  
coordination of such a large number of actors can be daunting. Communities must, 
therefore, commit to driving this initiative by identifying and following-through on the 
actions they can undertake themselves or directly influence without getting side-
tracked or held back by the inaction of other stakeholders.
ABOUT THIS GUIDE
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      5
• Commitment to act in the face of uncertainty: Acknowledge the reality that 
human beings constantly have to act in the face of uncertainty and that acting on 
climate change is no different. The lack of certainty about how our climate is changing 
should not be seen as an impediment to taking action. Therefore, municipalities must 
commit to an approach that enables staff to make decisions in the face of uncertainty.
• Recognizing existing work: Acknowledge the work that your community is  
already doing which addresses climate change impacts (but which may not be labeled  
as “adaptation”). Where there is such work, it is important to incorporate any  
future adaptation planning with those existing efforts to ensure an integrated and  
comprehensive plan.
Approaches to Climate Change Adaptation Planning 
There are a variety of approaches to adaptation planning that can be taken, each with 
its own focus and purpose. Exhibit 1 offers a brief overview of possible approaches and 
examples of where such an approach was used. 
The methodology presented in this guide uses a hybrid approach which touches  
on elements from each of the approaches listed below and represents a widely  
applicable methodology. This approach was chosen to acknowledge the differences in  
how communities will proceed with this planning process as it would be the most relevant 
across the country. 
The Changing Climate, Changing Communities Guide
This guide offers a five milestone methodology that local governments have become  
familiar with through the Partners for Climate Protection (PCP) program. The purpose  
of the guide is to convey a straightforward approach for how municipalities can  
investigate climate change impacts at a general level and devise strategies for addressing 
those impacts. There are many other guides available which take various approaches  
to adaptation planning. For instance, there are guides specific to risk and infrastructure  
(i.e. A Risk-Based Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia), climate change and 
health (i.e. Human Health in a Changing Climate), or profession specific (i.e. Engineers 
Canada or the Canadian Institute of Planners). This guide does not intend to supplant 
those resources, rather it is intended to provide a holistic process for how local communi-
ties can address the array of impacts likely to occur as a result of climate change. ICLEI 
encourages users of this guide to also utilize existing sector or impact specific resources to 
further advance their adaptation efforts. 
Though this guide will be particularly valuable to local government staff, it is important 
to acknowledge the importance of involvement at the political level. By exposing locally 
elected officials to key elements of the guide, and including them at key points, staff can 
ensure that their adaptation planning and implementation efforts will have the political 
support, in the short- and long-term, that is necessary to successfully undertake an 
adaptation planning process.  
Scope
Key Features
Examples
Sectoral/Department Specific
• Initiated by a single department or sector
• May spark a city wide municipal plan
• Quebec City, QC  
Environmental Services Adaptation Plan
Municipal Operations Plan
• Municipal operations plan for all departments 
• Top down
• King County, WA (USA)  
2007 Climate Plan 
Community Wide
• Community involvement 
• Multi-stakeholder
• Keene, NH (USA)  
Climate Resilient Communities Action Plan 
Hybrid
• May be led by a single department but planned  
for the municipality
• Expanded one department at a time
• Community driven (i.e. resident from a flooded 
area) pushes community into action
• May be driven by a weather event (i.e. flooding)
 
• Delta, BC  
Climate Change Initiative 
• Toronto, ON  
Ahead of the Storm
EXHIBIT 1 
 
Approaches to Climate Change  
Adaptation Planning
6      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Summary of the Five Milestones for 
Climate Adaptation Planning
ICLEI’s Five Milestones for Climate Adaptation methodology 
provides a structured approach to adaptation planning which 
moves participating local governments through a series  
of progressive steps. While each milestone builds off of the 
findings of the one before, the methodology as a whole  
creates an opportunity to reevaluate and review findings and 
decisions. As outlined earlier, Canadian local governments 
should be familiar with the Milestone process, as it is also 
central to the Partners for Climate Protection (PCP) program 
offered in partnership by the Federation of Canadian  
Municipalities and ICLEI. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      7
Milestone One: Initiate 
The first milestone is meant to start the process of plan-
ning for adaptation. Within this milestone communities 
will identify possible internal and external stakeholders 
that should be part of a climate change adaptation team. 
From here they will assess their existing knowledge on 
how regional climate is changing and begin to brainstorm 
anticipated climate change impacts, positive and negative, 
relevant to their community. As part of this milestone,  
it is important to establish political support for the process 
and identify a climate change champion to lead your  
community’s efforts and/or help keep momentum for  
the process.
Milestone Two: Research
The second milestone is meant to further develop your 
community’s understanding of climate change impacts 
and the major service areas which are likely to feel these 
impacts most acutely. Within this milestone you will  
scope the climate change impacts for your region and 
conduct both a vulnerability and risk assessment. 
Milestone Three: Plan
Based on the impacts previously identified, the third 
milestone provides guidance on how to establish a vision 
and set adaptation goals and objectives, identify adaptation 
options, and examine possible constraints and drivers to 
action. From there you will begin drafting your Adaptation 
Action Plan, within which you will establish baseline  
data, address financing and budget issues, create an imple-
mentation schedule, determine who is responsible for 
implementation, and estimate how implementation progress 
will be measured and evaluated. With this information you 
will then finalize your Adaptation Action Plan. 
Milestone Four: Implement
In the fourth milestone, you will work to ensure that you 
have the approval and support of council, municipal  
staff and the community. You will also make sure that you  
have the appropriate implementation tools to ensure  
your success. 
Milestone Five: Monitor/REVIEW 
The fifth and final milestone serves to assess whether the 
goals and objectives previously set by your community 
have been achieved, identify any problems that have been 
encountered and develop solutions. Additionally, the 
fifth milestone helps you to communicate progress to the 
general public. 
monitor/ 
REVIEW
plan
implement
initiate
Research
EXHIBIT 2 
 
Basic Milestone Framework
8      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
MILESTONE 3:
PLAN
MILESTONE 4:
IMPLEMENT
MILESTONE 5:
MONITOR/REVIEW
•Establish adaptation  
 vision and objectives
•Set goals
•Identify options   
 and actions
•Identify possible  
 drivers and constraints
•Evaluate actions  
 against drivers and  
 constraints
•Determine appropriate  
 baseline and  
 indicator data
•Examine financing  
 and budget
•Establish implementa- 
 tion schedule
•Create action plan
•Launch plan
•Begin implementation
•Solidify support  
 from Council and  
 community
•Use appropriate  
 implementation tools
•Follow terms of  
 action plan
•Report on successes  
 regularly to maintain  
 momentum
•Asses new information  
 and review drivers
•Track implementation  
 progress
•Evaluate effectiveness  
 of actions using  
 baseline data and  
 indicators
•Communicate  
 accomplishments
•Investigate future  
 adaptation options  
 and actions
•Revise adaptation  
 plan
•Launch next round  
 of adaptation plan
UPDATE  
ADAPTATION   
ACTIONS
Review
Review
Review
MILESTONE 1:
INITIATE
MILESTONE 2:
RESEARCH
•Initiate research on  
 climatic changes
•Refine impacts  
 and consider service  
 areas for each
•Vulnerability  
 assessment (study  
 of sensitivity and  
 adaptive capacity)
•Risk assessment  
 (consequence and  
 likelihood of impacts)  
 and prioritization
EXHIBIT 3 
 
Milestone Framework
•Identify stakeholders
•Build climate change  
 adaptation team
•Identify an  
 adaptation champion
•Take a first look at  
 climate change   
 impacts and existing  
 adaptation actions
•Pass council  
 resolution and  
 community charter
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      9
term
DESCRIPTION
  Adaptation
Includes any initiatives or actions in response to actual or projected climate change impacts and which reduce the affects of  
climate change on built, natural and social systems.
  Adaptive Capacity
The ability of built, natural and social systems to adjust to climate change (including climate variability and extremes),  
to moderate potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope with the consequences.  
  Climate Change
Climate change refers to a statistically significant variation in either the mean state of the climate or in its variability, persisting  
for an extended period (typically decades or longer). Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or external forces,  
or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use.
  Extreme Events
Extreme events refer to meteorological conditions that are rare for a particular place and/or time, such as an intense storm or  
heat wave and are beyond the normal range of activity. They can be the result of sudden and drastic changes in temperature,  
precipitation and sea-level or they may be the result of a more gradual, but prolonged, shift in temperature or precipitation that  
is beyond the normal range. Such events include severe thunderstorms, heat waves, floods, droughts, ice storms, fires etc.  
Extreme Weather Event is an event that is rare within its statistical reference distribution at a particular place; it would normally  
be as rare as or rarer than the 10th or 90th percentile.
Extreme Climate Event is an average of a number of weather events over a certain period of time, an average which is itself  
extreme (e.g. rainfall over a season). 
  Impact
The effects of existing or forecasted changes in climate on built, natural, and human systems. One can distinguish between  
potential impacts (impacts that may occur given a projected change in climate, without considering adaptation) and residual  
impacts (impacts of climate change that would occur after adaptation). 
  Maladaptation
Any changes in built, natural, or human systems that inadvertently increases vulnerability to climate stimuli; an adaptation that  
does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but instead increases it.
  Mitigation 
The promotion of policy, regulatory and project-based measures that contribute to the stabilization or reduction of greenhouse  
gas concentrations in the atmosphere. Renewable energy programs, energy efficiency frameworks and substitution of fossil fuels  
are examples of climate change mitigation measures. 
  Resiliance
The capacity of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to adapt, by resisting or changing in order to reach  
and maintain an acceptable level of functioning and structure.
  Risk
Risk can be considered as the combination of an event, its likelihood and its consequences – risk equals the probability of  
climate hazard multiplied by the consequence of that event.  
  Sensitivity
The degree to which a given system is directly or indirectly affected (either adversely or beneficially) by climatic conditions  
(i.e. temperature increases) or a specific climate change impact (i.e. increased flooding).
  Systems
The built, natural and human networks that provide services or activities within a municipality.
  Vulnerability
The degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate  
variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of both the sensitivity and the adaptive capacity of a given sector.
glossary 2
10      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Introduction to Adaptation
Climate change is already being felt in towns and cities across the country. Canadian  
communities are becoming increasingly vulnerable to a range of impacts including  
rising temperatures, more frequent and intense storms and sea level rise. Municipal  
services and infrastructure are increasingly being affected by these events. 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has concluded that the  
evidence for climate change is now “incontrovertible” and that most of the observed  
temperature increases since the middle of the 20th century have been caused by  
increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases resulting from human activity such as  
the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation.3 There is much evidence of this rapid 
warming around the world: retreating glaciers; thinning sea-ice; decreased snow cover; 
melting permafrost; changing growing seasons; and rising sea levels.4 
Across Canada, warmer temperatures have supported the rapid spread of invasive 
animal and plant species, melting of arctic and glacial ice, and increased heat stress  
among vulnerable populations. While at the same time exacerbating Canadians concern 
about extreme weather events, including ice storms, floods, and forest fires.
Within only a handful of decades the climate in Canada is expected to experience  
more significant changes, including increased temperatures, increased risk of flood-
ing, drought, forest fires, disease and various other impacts. While these are some of the 
national changes, it is important to note that each region of the country will be impacted 
differently by climate change. 
Mitigation measures are designed to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases  
(GHGs) that contribute to climate change and are meant to offer long-term benefits.  
Recognizing that current GHG concentrations in the atmosphere are already having an  
impact on the Earth’s climate, climate change adaptation is necessary to moderate  
harm and take advantage of opportunities.5 Hundreds of Canadian municipalities have  
already undertaken climate change efforts with mitigation work and have successfully 
reduced their emissions. However, with the increasing effects of climate change  
becoming apparent, municipalities are beginning to assess their vulnerability to the 
changes that are already underway, and to develop responses that protect their citizens 
and their economies. While neither adaptation nor mitigation actions alone can prevent 
significant climate change impacts, taken together they form a comprehensive climate 
change response strategy that will prepare communities for the climate impacts underway 
while working to avoid even worse future affects.
Climate Change Primer
“ADAPTATION to climate change can include any activity that reduces 
the negative impacts of climate change and/or takes advantage  
of new opportunities that may be presented. This includes activities 
that are taken before impacts are observed (anticipatory) and after 
impacts have been felt (reactive). Both anticipatory and reactive 
adaptation can be planned (i.e. the result of deliberate policy 
decisions), and reactive adaptation can also occur spontaneously. 
In most circumstances, anticipatory adaptations will incur lower 
long-term costs and be more effective than reactive adaptations. 
Successful adaptation does not mean that negative impacts  
will not occur, only that they will be less severe than would be 
experienced had no adaptation occurred.”
Mitigation is necessary to reduce the rate  
and magnitude of climate change, while 
adaptation is essential to reduce the damages 
from climate change that cannot be avoided.  
NRCan. (2009) Adaptation 101: What is Adaptation? <http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/101/adapt_e.php>  
[accessed January 9, 2010]
NRCan. (2009) Adaptation 101: What is Adaptation? <http://adaptation.nrcan.
gc.ca/101/adapt_e.php> [accessed January 9, 2010]
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      11
Global Climate Change
During the past century, the global climate has gotten warmer. Increased temperatures 
have been accompanied by a number of other observed changes in the global climate 
(Exhibit 4). Experts indicate that the average Northern hemispheric temperature during 
the past 50 years has been higher than at any other time during at least the past 1300 years.6
During the next two decades, the IPCC estimates that average global temperature will 
increase by 0.2°C per decade.8 Even if the atmospheric concentrations of all GHGs were 
to be kept constant at year 2000 levels, a further warming of about 0.1°C per decade would 
be expected globally.9 The greatest warming is expected to occur over land and at high 
northern latitudes, in places such as Canada.10 Higher temperatures will be accompanied 
by continued reductions in snow cover, sea ice, and an increase in permafrost thaw.11 Based  
on increasing evidence, scientists have projected that days of extreme heat in the summer 
will also become more common, winter temperatures will be significantly warmer than 
current temperatures and heavy precipitation events will occur more frequently.12 
Climate Change and Canada
In Canada, over the past fifty years, climate change has resulted in increases in tempera-
tures across much of the country, changes in precipitation patterns, reduced sea-ice cover, 
shifting hydrological conditions and changes in extreme weather events.13 The changes  
on many physical and biological systems, such as ice and snow cover, river, lake and sea 
levels, and plant and animal distributions are unequivocal.14 In addition, increases in the 
occurrence of heat waves, forest fires, storm-surge flooding, coastal erosion and other 
climate related hazards are the result of changes in the climate.15
Temperature
On average, Canada has warmed by more than 1.3°C since 1948, a rate of warming  
that is approximately twice the global average.16 All regions of Canada have experienced 
warming however the greatest temperature increases have been in the Yukon and  
Northwest Territories.17 Under a medium emissions scenario, Canada is expected to warm 
2°C by 2050 and 4°C by 2080.18 Seasonally, Canada is expected to experience summertime 
warming of at least 2.5°C but this may be as much as 3.5°C, with the exception of the  
Arctic coast (at 1°C) where the absence of summertime sea ice will greatly moderate this  
summertime warming.19 Winter warming is expected to be most pronounced in the 
Hudson Bay and high Arctic regions. In Northwestern Canada, winter temperatures 
already have increased more than 3°C between 1948 and 2003.20 
Precipitation
Canada has, on average, become wetter during the past half century, with the average 
precipitation across the country increasing by about 12%.21 When averaged annually, the 
largest percentage increase in precipitation has occurred in the high Arctic (25-45%),  
while parts of Southern Canada (particularly in the Prairies) have seen little change (~5%) 
or even a decrease in precipitation in some areas.22 With winter precipitation, most of 
southern Ontario, except the western part which has seen an increase in lake effect snow, 
has experienced a significant decline in summer and winter precipitation.23 In contrast, 
Southern British Columbia and Southeastern Canada have regions with significant 
increases in precipitation in spring and autumn.24 
EXHIBIT 4 
 
Observed changes in climate and weather conditions 7
indicator
change
comments
Air temperature
Increased 0.74°C
Increased 0.13°C per decade
1906-2005
Rate (last 50 years)
Ocean temperature
Increased to depths of 
3000 m
Sea level
Rose 1.8 mm/annually
Rose 0.17 m
Rate (1961-2003)
Total (1900-2000)
Snow cover
Declined 
Northern Hemisphere
Mountain glaciers
Widespread retreat
Since 1900
Arctic sea-ice extent
Decreased 2.7% per decade
Rate (1978-2005)
Permafrost extent 
Decreased by roughly 7%
Since 1900
Heavy precipitation events
Increased in frequency
Droughts
Increased in intensity and duration
Since 1970s
Heat waves 
Increased in frequency
Topical cyclones 
Increased in intensity
Since 1970s
To Find Out More...
• Information Annex One and Two
• From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a 	
	
   Changing Climate, Natural Resources Canada 
12      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Changes in Freshwater Levels 
Due to recent declines in the volume of glacial melt water in Western Canada, precipita-
tion change and increased evaporation, water resources across much of Canada have  
been altered.25 In the Great Lakes areas, for example, a 1°C increase in mean annual  
temperature has been associated with a 7-8% increase in the actual evaportranspiration 
(AET) rates, resulting in a decrease in water availability. 
Changes in Seawater Levels
The magnitude of sea-level rise along Canadian coastlines also varies.26 For example,  
in some parts of Canada, such as Hudson Bay, land has continued to emerge despite  
rising global sea levels whereas along most of the Atlantic coastline, the rate of sea level 
rise has doubled.27 Relative sea-level changes will continue to exhibit similar patterns  
to those observed in the twentieth century. Therefore, those areas which are currently 
subsiding (e.g. Beauford Sea coast, Atlantic coastlines and Fraser River Delta) will  
experience the most impacts.28  
Extreme Events
In general Canada has seen a change in the frequency of extreme temperature and pre-
cipitation events from 1950 to 2003. Such changes include fewer cold days, more extreme 
warm days, and more days with extreme precipitation.29 Many of the most severe and 
costly impacts will be associated with projected increases in the frequency and magnitude 
of extreme events and the associated natural disasters such as flooding due to high-inten-
sity rainfall and storm surges, ice and wind storms, heat waves and drought.30 Flooding 
in particular is among the most prominent climate hazards Canadian communities face, 
and has been responsible for some of Canada’s worst disasters.31 Exhibit 5 lists examples 
of extreme events, and their associated costs, from across Canada between 1991 – 2005. 
More rapid and extensive snowmelt associated with rising temperatures and increasingly 
intense rainfall associated with summer storms could heighten the flood risk in many 
Canadian communities. In addition, serious disruptions to critical municipal infrastruc-
ture such as transportation, water treatment and distribution, and energy transmission 
have already occurred as a result of severe ice storms and are expected to occur more 
frequently in the future.32 
Globally, the number of severe damage-causing storms has increased from an average 
of 150 per year in the early 1980s to between 250 and 300 per year in the period from 2000 
to 2004.33 In Canada, scientific models show shorter return periods of extreme weather 
events – that is, the estimated interval of time between occurrences – in the future.34  
Although there is some debate as to the connections between extreme events and climate 
change, it is important to consider the consequences of these events and their implications 
for communities across Canada.
pictures
(shown on 
p. 13)
event  
and 
date
region
estimated 
costs
deaths
injuries
evacuations
1
Ice storm,  
1998
Ontario, 
Quebec, 
Atlantic 
Canada
$5.4 billion
28
945
17,800
2
Saguenay flood, 
1996
Quebec
$1.7 billion
10
0
15,825
3
Calgary hailstorm, 
1991
Prairies
$884 million
0
0
0
4
Red River flood, 
1997
Prairies
$817 million
0
0
25,447
5
BC/Alberta  
wildfires, 2003
British 
Columbia
$700 million
3
unknown
45,000
6
Toronto extreme 
rain, 2005
Ontario
Greater than
$500 million
0
0
0
7
Southern Alberta 
floods, 2005
Prairies
Greater than
$400 million
4
unknown
>2000
8
Calgary hailstorm, 
1996
Prairies
$305 million
0
0
0
9
Hurricane Juan, 
2003
Atlantic 
Canada
$200 million
8
unknown
unknown
EXHIBIT 5 
 
Some observed impacts of changing climate on physical and biological systems in Canada 35
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      13
Importance of Local Government Action
Local governments need to begin adapting by taking steps to prepare for the existing and 
future impacts associated with a changing climate. These impacts can already be felt  
across the country – in large urban centres, in small-rural communities, and everywhere  
in between. Municipal decision makers have a unique opportunity to begin preparing  
for a changing climate as they will be on the front lines of responding to its impacts and 
therefore, have an interest in preparing for them. 
As local governments are responsible for key service areas that will be affected by 
climate change: infrastructure, parks and recreation, health, and transportation. They 
are on the front lines of preparing for climate change impacts and have a responsibility to 
respond through strategic adaptation planning. 
There are many reasons that local and regional governments are well positioned to  
plan for climate change:
• As climate change will affect a broad range of municipal assets and government  
services, operations and policy areas, preparing for climate change is a matter  
of risk management and good governance. Municipal governments have the  
responsibility of ensuring the safety, health and welfare of their communities  
both now and in the future.36
  
• Local and regional governments are in a position to tailor climate change  
adaptation strategies to their local circumstances and to the unique set of  
climate change impacts they expect to face. 
 
• Anticipatory adaptation planning can increase future benefits and reduce future  
risks associated with climate change. Being proactive in planning for climate  
change can create opportunities for modifying present policies that can decrease  
vulnerability while also creating opportunities for capitalizing on some of the  
benefits of climate change. 
1
4
7
2
5
8
3
6
9
14      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Local Government Action Mechanisms
There are five key mechanisms available to local governments to utilize and drive local 
action on climate change adaptation.37 These are:
	 Land use and urban planning	
	
A key role of local government is to manage local places in a coordinated, planned  
way that reflects the community’s shared vision adapting to climate change.
	 Licensing and regulation	
	
Local governments can utilize their powers to set the local regulatory environment 
through assessment and approval processes, the use of surcharges and rebates,  
and through the enforcement of local laws, to implement and enforce adaptive policies.
	 Facilitation, advocacy and leadership	
	
Local government is in close contact with community organizations, businesses,  
residents and other stakeholders at the local level. This influence can be used to develop 
shared understandings and encourage whole community responses to climate change.
	 Community service delivery, community development and civic engagement	
	
Local governments are committed to preserving the safety, health and wellbeing of  
residents and visitors, and to ensuring active civic participation.
	 Workforce development	
	
As responsible corporate citizens, local governments can lead the way in ensuring  
good occupational health and safety systems including through the reduction of  
workplace risks.
 
Through these mechanisms local governments can use direct and indirect influences to 
support and foster communities that can adapt to a changing climate.
Legal Liability
Climate change awareness is strengthening the discussion into the prospect of legal  
liability related to adaptation. A growing number of legal professionals are looking at  
how failure to adapt to known and expected climate change realities may expose  
communities and governments to legal actions by individuals or others for property 
damage and personal injury.38 Beyond financial compensation, the implications  
of this heightened exposure to legal liability include investor risk aversion, decreased  
confidence in governments, and backlogs in infrastructure projects.
Legal liability for failure to adapt infrastructure to climate change derives from the 
common law principles of negligence, nuisance, strict liability, and occupier’s liability  
legislation. For example, a local government may be found negligent if it demonstrated 
awareness of a particular climate risk, such as the risk that decreased lake levels will  
result in the failure of an above-ground water system and affect water quality, but did not 
address the risk.39 For infrastructure practitioners, reliance on existing codes, standards 
and related instruments would likely prove an insufficient defense against negligence,  
particularly if it is known that the codes or standards were inadequate under changing 
environmental conditions.40 As the impacts of climate change intensify, infrastructure 
practitioners also need to be aware of potential changes in professional liability insurance. 
Although Canada does not have legislation that specifically addresses obligations or 
responsibilities on climate change adaptation, it may not be reasonable for infrastructure 
decision-makers to seriously dispute the significance of climate risks, but ignoring  
the risks may not guarantee immunity to legal liability. In some communities, the prospect 
of legal liability will likely be a significant driver of climate change adaptation responses  
in the future. 
 
EXHIBIT 6 
 
Benefits and Challenges of Adaptation Planning
Benefits of Adaptation Planning  
Challenges of Adaptation Planning
• Insurance against future risk
• Reducing vulnerability
• Creating opportunities
• Lower long-term costs
• Reduced risk
• Degree of uncertainty
• Nature of scientific information (constantly changing)
• Benefits of advance planning may only appear when  
   impact occurs
• Limited resources and/or political support
“... As responsible public leaders, we cannot afford the luxury of not  
preparing. We know now that some impacts are inevitable and we 
know that these impacts will affect many of the essential services and 
functions that our governments are expected to provide. We must 
prepare for the impacts underway while we work to avoid even worse 
future effects.” 
	 	
	
	
	
  Ron Sims, Executive, King County, WA
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      15
Looking Ahead
It is clear that climatic changes are affecting communities across Canada. The unique 
position of municipalities as the level of government closest to residents along with their 
specific action mechanisms, allows for the development of locally tailored and integrated  
adaptation plans that can have measurable results in improving local adaptive capacity. 
Taking practical steps early, with the best information available, enables your community 
to reduce future climate change related risks. 
The remainder of this compendium of resources is focused on helping your local  
community undertake a climate adaptation process. Use these resources as needed to  
help increase your community’s capacity to prepare for climate change. 
endnotes
 
1.	
ICLEI Oceania (2009): Local Government Climate Change Adaptation Toolkit. Melbourne, Australia: ICLEI 
Oceania.
2.	 Glossary terms have been adapted from Bizikova, L., Neale, T., Burton, I. (2008). Canadian Communities’ 
Guidebook for Adaptation to Climate Change: Including an approach to generate mitigation co-benefits in the 
context of sustainable development. First Edition. Environment Canada and University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver.
3.	
Watson, R. T., and the Core Writing Team (eds.) (2001). Climate Change 2001: Synthesis Report. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK. Available for 
download at http://www.ipcc.ch/ipccreports/tar/vol4/index.htm
4.	 McCarthy, J. J., Canziani, O. F., Leary, N. A., Dokken, D. J., and White, K. S. (eds.) (2001). Climate Change 2001: The 
Scientific Basis – Contribution of Working Group 1 to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC). Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK. Available for download at http://www.
ipcc.ch/ipccreports/tar/vol4/index.php?idp=75
5.	
Bernstein, L. et al. (2007) Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report – Summary for Policy Makers. Cambridge 
University Press: Cambridge, UK. Available for download at http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/
ar4_syr_spm.pdf
6.	 Hengeveld, H. Bush, E., Edwards, P., and Lacroix, J. (2008). Frequently Asked Questions about the Science of 
Climate Change. Environment Canada. Available for download at http://www.ec.gc.ca/scitech/2A953C90-CC12-
42B2-BD0A-B51FECC2AEC3/FAQ_e.pdf
7.	
Solomon S., Qin, D., Manning, M., Chen, Z., Marquis, M. Averty, K.B., Tignor, M., and Miller, H.L., (eds.) (2007). 
Climate Change 2007: Summary for Policy Makers – The Physical Science Basis. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK and New York, New York.  Available for Download at http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/
wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf
8.	 Ibid
9.	
Bernstein, L. et al. (2007) Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report – Summary for Policy Makers. Cambridge 
University Press: Cambridge, UK. Available for download at http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/
ar4_syr_spm.pdf
10.	 Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008)  Chapter 2: Background – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a 
Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
11.	 Solomon S., Qin, D., Manning, M., Chen, Z., Marquis, M. Averty, K.B., Tignor, M., and Miller, H.L., (eds.) (2007). 
Climate Change 2007: Summary for Policy Makers – The Physical Science Basis. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, UK and New York, New York.  Available for Download at  http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/
wg1/ar4-wg1-spm.pdf
12.	 Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008). Chapter 2: Background – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a 
Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
13.	 Ibid
14.	 Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 1- 20.
15.	 Ibid
16.	 Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008).  Chapter 2: Background Information – From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
17.	 Ibid
18.	 Ibid
19.	 McBean, Gordon and Henstra, Dan (2009). Background Report Climate Change and Extreme Weather: Designing 
Adaptation Policy. Available for download at http://www.sfu.ca/act/documents/05_09-EWE_Background_Report_WEB.
pdf
20.	 Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008).  Chapter 2: Background Information – From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
21.	 Ibid
22.	 Ibid
23.	 Ibid
24.	 Ibid
25.	 Ibid 
26.	 Ibid
27.	 Ibid
28.	 Ibid
29.	 Ibid
30.	 Ibid
31.	 McBean, Gordon and Henstra, Dan (2009). Background Report Climate Change and Extreme Weather: Designing 
Adaptation Policy. Available for download at http://www.sfu.ca/act/documents/05_09-EWE_Background_Report_WEB.
pdf
32.	 Ibid
33.	 Bruce, J.P. and Haites, E. (2008). Canada in an International Context - From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in 
a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J.Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, p. 387-424.
34.	 McBean, Gordon and Henstra, Dan (2009). Background Report Climate Change and Extreme Weather: Designing 
Adaptation Policy. Available for download at http://www.sfu.ca/act/documents/05_09-EWE_Background_Report_WEB.
pdf
35.	 Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 1- 20.
36.	 Adapted from ICLEI Oceania (2009): Cities for Safe and Healthy Communities Data Inventory. Melbourne, 
Australia: ICLEI Oceania.
37.	 Snover, et al., (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. In 
association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA.
38.	 National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy. (2009). True North: Adapting Infrastructure to 
Climate Change in Northern Canada. Ottawa: NRTEE. Available for download at http://www.nrtee-trnee.com/eng/
publications/true-north/true-north-eng.pdf
39.	 Ibid
40.	 Ibid
•Establish adaptation  
 vision and objectives
•Set goals
•Identify options   
 and actions
•Identify possible  
 drivers and constraints
•Evaluate actions  
 against drivers and  
 constraints
•Determine appropriate  
 baseline and  
 indicator data
•Examine financing  
 and budget
•Establish implementa- 
 tion schedule
•Create action plan
•Launch plan
•Begin implementation
•Solidify support  
 from Council and  
 community
•Use appropriate  
 implementation tools
•Follow terms of  
 action plan
•Report on successes  
 regularly to maintain  
 momentum
•Asses new information  
 and review drivers
•Track implementation  
 progress
•Evaluate effectiveness  
 of actions using  
 baseline data and  
 indicators
•Communicate  
 accomplishments
•Investigate future  
 adaptation options  
 and actions
•Revise adaptation  
 plan
•Launch next round  
 of adaptation plan
UPDATE  
ADAPTATION   
ACTIONS
Review
Review
Review
•Identify stakeholders
•Build climate change  
 adaptation team
•Identify an  
 adaptation champion
•Take a first look at  
 climate change   
 impacts and existing  
 adaptation actions
•Pass council  
 resolution and  
 community charter
•Initiate research on  
 climatic changes
•Refine impacts  
 and consider service  
 areas for each
•Vulnerability  
 assessment (study  
 of sensitivity and  
 adaptive capacity)
•Risk assessment  
 (consequence and  
 likelihood of impacts)  
 and prioritization
16      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
MILESTONE 3:
PLAN
MILESTONE 4:
IMPLEMENT
MILESTONE 5:
MONITOR/REVIEW
MILESTONE 1:
INITIATE
MILESTONE 2:
RESEARCH
MILESTONE 1:  
INITIATE
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      17
18      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
milestone 1: INITiate
purpose
outputs
To initiate your climate change adaptation  
planning process and build political as well as 
community support for the process.
 List of possible stakeholders
 A climate change adaptation team
 A climate change adaptation champion
 A first look at how climate change will affect your community
 List of existing municipal actions that improve adaptive capacity
 Identification of municipal plans and activities that could include  
adaptation components
 Council resolution which entrenches your communities’  
commitment to the adaptation planning process
Communities and Adaptation
There are a variety of reasons motivating communities to pursue adaptation planning.  
Some communities are motivated by events, such as flooding or wildfires that have 
occurred or are expected to occur, while others have a history of proactive community 
leadership and are building on that footing when it comes to adaptation planning. What 
will drive an adaptation effort in your community will be based on some combination  
of political will, financial resources, personnel, and public support. Exhibit 7 offers a list  
of possible drivers and corresponding questions to consider for moving forward with  
adaptation planning. 
As you consider these questions, it may be helpful to use the answers to start identifying 
an initial list of adaptation goals that are relevant to your community. You will go through 
a formal process of identifying a vision and goals for your adaptation plan in Milestone 
Three, however, having a sense of where you would like the community to be in terms of 
climate change response may help to move forward through the initiation phase.
Milestone One, Initiate, involves the first steps of your climate change 
adaptation effort. In this chapter you will go through the process of 
establishing the context for your adaptation plan, building your adaptation 
team, identifying an adaptation champion, and solidifying the adaptation 
planning process through a political commitment.    
 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      19
Milestone 1: initiate
Identifying potential stakeholders 
Although this exercise will inform the building of your adaptation team, it is also an  
exercise in surveying those individuals and groups which will likely be needed more 
broadly throughout your community’s adaptation initiative. The list of potential  
stakeholders that you identify in this exercise will include more than those that can 
reasonably be included on your team, however, it is important to engage in a stakeholder 
identification process to establish a foundation for communication and input with a  
wide-net of internal and external stakeholders. 
Involving a variety of stakeholders is an important component to securing widespread 
support for the implementation of adaptation actions. Many of the challenges of adapting 
to climate change can be overcome by developing working relationships with both internal 
and external stakeholders. Relationships between and among local governments, utilities, 
universities, non-governmental organizations, community-based entities and business 
organizations are helpful in turning the abstract idea of planning for climate change into 
concrete joint activities. Identifying stakeholders will also help to further establish the 
context of your adaptation plan by refining how far reaching your adaptation activities will be. 
Gathering a few key colleagues to determine who your potential stakeholders are is a 
good way to ensure that you are drawing from a broad spectrum of departments, working 
areas and the community. If you are working in a smaller community, it may be that a 
single or pair of individual(s) will be conducting this activity. 
Regardless of your approach, be sure to consider stakeholders that may be outside  
of your immediate working area (for example, if you generally work with environmental 
groups and a university partner, it will be important to consider including developers, 
Chamber of Commerce representatives, etc. which may be outside of your immediate 
sphere of influence). When identifying potential stakeholders either for your adaptation 
team, or to be involved in key communication and input points along the way, it is  
important to be as specific as possible and identify:
• Internal stakeholders with responsibility for management of climate change  
impacts such as infrastructure, public communications, natural resources, economic 
development and emergency services (this will help later on when identifying  
potential adaptation team members). 
• Existing relationships with external stakeholders, such as regional alliances of local 
governments, environment or community groups, universities, local businesses, 
industry associations, insurers, utilities, scientific research bodies and other levels of 
government. 
• External stakeholders with whom you do not have an existing relationship but which 
may be valuable to your community’s adaptation process. 
EXHIBIT 7 
 
Possible drivers for adaptation planning 
Driver
Questions to Consider
Past [extreme] events (i.e. flooding, fire where there 
was damage to people or infrastructure)
What extreme weather events has your community 
already experienced? What happened? What were the 
damages and associated costs?
How has the climate changed in your experience?
Anticipated events (i.e. increased frequency  
and more extreme events)
How well prepared is your community if an extreme  
event occurs? Especially if such an event becomes more 
frequent or severe as a result of climate change.
Identified vulnerability (i.e. study which examines 
the vulnerability of the community to climate change 
impacts and/or anecdotal evidence of changes in  
the community)
What climate change impacts are the most likely to 
impact your community?
How has the climate changed in your experience?
Funding opportunities 
Are there any federal or provincial funding opportunities 
available to your community? Can you leverage existing 
funding?
Co-benefits 
What are some existing sustainability priorities your  
community has? 
How can adaptation planning help meet these priorities? 
Are there any opportunities associated with climate 
change that could arise for your community (i.e. job 
creation)?
Are there ways in which your community can address 
both climate change adaptation and mitigation in the 
same plan? 
Political Pressure
Are there residents or community groups that are  
pushing the municipality to act on climate change?
Work in other areas that also address vulnerability, 
resilience or adaptation 
What adaptation initiatives exist in your community  
that may not be labelled as such?
What actions has your community taken thus far to 
prepare for changes in climate? What about changes  
to infrastructure (specifically technology)? 
20      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Once you have brainstormed a list of all possible stakeholders, discuss with your  
colleagues which stakeholders will be the most relevant to the adaptation planning  
process. You may also want to use this refined list of stakeholders to help inform  
the make-up of your climate change adaptation team. 
	
	
Worksheet 1 uses the idea of spheres of influence to assist in identifying 	
	
stakeholders and their relationship to your community.
Building your Climate Change Adaptation Team
When forming your adaptation team, try to ensure a diversity of expertise which draws  
on all relevant departments or programs. This process can draw from the stakeholder  
identification activity done previously and can include as many or as few individuals as  
is appropriate for your community. The team can be any mix of stakeholders (internal  
or external) that you, as a community, are comfortable with. Where possible, try and  
draw on the expertise within your municipal network. Keep in mind that the more people 
there are on the team, the more comprehensive your dialogue and resulting adaptation 
plan will be, however, the logistics of scheduling and managing meetings can become 
increasingly difficult with more participants. 
There are both pros and cons to having a team that is made up of only staff or one that  
is a mix of both internal and external individuals. It may be the case that working internally 
allows for more frank and open discussions and it may be more efficient as members  
are likely to be familiar with each other and common processes. On the other hand, having 
a team that is made up of both internal and external members may result in a more  
comprehensive mandate and show members of the public that your local authority is  
keen to engage with the community and work together. 
The number and background of your team members will vary. The team makeup that is 
appropriate for your community will depend on the specific impacts likely to occur in your 
region; the infrastructure and policies that will be affected; and how your local government 
intends to interact with other stakeholders and the public to prepare for climate change.41 
As such, it is important to take a first look at impacts at the beginning of your adaptation 
process, so as to bring on 
additional members to 
your adaptation team as 
your community’s needs 
may change and evolve 
over time. 
1
Consider This…
If you are a small community your staffing  
capacity may be limited. In such cases it might 
be necessary to involve individuals outside  
of your organization including scientific  
authorities, business community leaders, and/or 
provincial or federal agencies as participants  
of your adaptation team.   
   Case Study   	
Engaging Stakeholders
	
	
        	
Raising awareness and engaging stakeholders  
	
	
	
in Boston, MA
In the City of Boston, their adaptation planning research team 
contracted the Metropolitan Area Planning Council (MAPC), a regional 
planning agency, to coordinate stakeholder involvement across the 
101 towns and cities that make up the Boston Metropolitan area. 
MAPC prepared a brochure which invited stakeholders to get involved 
and highlighted several extreme weather events. Resulting from the 
success of the brochure, Boston had approximately 30 stakeholders 
participate in their Stakeholder Advisory Group which met several 
times throughout the five-year adaptation planning project. 
Penney, J. and Wieditz, I. (2007). Cities Preparing for Climate Change: A study of six urban regions. Clean Air Partnership: Toronto, Canada.
EXHIBIT 8 
 
Potential Participants in a Climate Change Adaptation Team 
Departments
Agriculture
Environment
Police
Coastal Zone Management
Finance and Administration
Port and Harbour Management
Communications 
Fire Services
Public Health
Economic Development,  
Culture and Tourism
Housing
Transportation
Emergency Management 
Legal Services
Water
Energy
Parks and Recreations
Waste
Engineering
Planning and Zoning
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      21
Developing a Mandate
Working with your team, you will need to develop a mandate for the adaptation team.  
The following questions are intended to help guide the development of the mandate:
• Is your adaptation team being established as a permanent working group?
• What are the ultimate deliverables the team is responsible for?
• How much time does the team have to accomplish these deliverables?
• What resources are available for the team to accomplish its work? 
• What authority does the team have? 
• To whom is the team accountable?
A clear and strong mandate will not only help the team with its work but will also give 
legitimacy to the work that is being carried out from an outside perspective. 
Selecting a Team Leader
With your adaptation team and mandate in place, your next step is to designate someone 
as the team leader. This person will have the responsibility of assembling the team and 
leading its efforts. Given that your adaptation team will cross a variety of departments, it 
is important that the team leader have a strong understanding of municipal operations, 
be centrally located, have a good grasp of the community’s concerns, and should be able to 
communicate well with colleagues from other departments or divisions. The team leader 
should also have authority to work with staff members from all departments; though they 
will not be the direct manager of all team members they should ideally have authority to 
require deliverables from the departments represented on the team. With the help of  
the team mandate and the appropriate authority, the team leader should be able to count  
on the willingness of departments to contribute.
Consider This…
It may be helpful to kick-off your community’s adaptation 
efforts with trainings for staff, the community and other 
stakeholders on relevant climate science and predicted 
impacts. This also provides an opportunity to begin to  
think about sectors that would be most impacted by a 
changing climate. You can look to external organizations  
to conduct this training or, if the resources are available  
to you internally, you could have municipal staff do it.  
   Case Study   	
Building a Team – An Interagency FireSmart  
Committee in Kamloops, BC   
In response to a growing concern about the frequency and severity of 
wildfires in Kamloops, the City established the Interagency FireSmart 
Committee, a multi-stakeholder team to coordinate wildfire responses.  
Drawing from a variety of stakeholder groups, team members include 
individuals from the City of Kamloops Fire Rescue Services; City 
of Kamloops Parks, Recreation, and Cultural Services Department; 
Ministry of Forests and Range; Thompson-Nicola Regional District; City 
of Kamloops Development and Engineering Services Department; and 
the British Columbia Office of the Fire Commissioner. 
In addition to the participation of these stakeholders, the City of 
Kamloops also created a Community Wildfire Planning Group which 
consists of additional subject experts. The purpose of the FireSmart 
Committee is to recommend and support initiatives in order to 
reduce the risk of wildfire losses within the City boundaries. In 2007, 
the Committee produced a Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
which outlined the City’s actions to date and contains a number 
of future recommendations to reduce the risk of life, property 
and environmental losses directly or indirectly related to wildfires 
within the City.  The Kamloops inter-agency FireSmart Committee 
will collectively and collaboratively monitor and evaluate the Plan 
on a regular basis. For more information on Kamloops approach to 
adaptation or to get a copy of the Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
visit http://www.kamloops.ca/firerescue/wildfire/wildfireoverview.shtml
Milestone 1: initiate
22      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
   Case Study   	
Selecting an Adaptation Champion – A Climate 
Change Adaptation Champion in Toronto, ON   
“While stopping the release of greenhouse gases remains our first 
priority, it’s apparent that some degree of climate change has already 
begun. In developing an adaptation strategy, the City of Toronto is 
taking steps to prevent negative impacts associated with the realities 
of a changing climate while proceeding with actions designed to 
combat further change.” 
	
	
	
	
Mayor David Miller, Spring 2008
Ahead of the Storm: Preparing Toronto for Climate Change is the  
City’s adaptation plan which outlines a series of actions to improve 
Toronto’s resilience to climate change including:
	
•	A series of short-term actions beginning in 2008 that will  
	
	 help prevent and/or minimize the impacts of climate change  
	
	 in Toronto;
	
•	A series of actions that will guide the City’s development of a 	 	
	
	 comprehensive, long-term strategy to adapt to climate change. 
Ahead of the Storm was unanimously endorsed by City Council  
in July, 2008. Mayor David Miller has been a champion for the  
City’s adaptation planning and the on-going implementation that  
it will involve.
	
Worksheet 2 offers additional guidance on creating your adaptation team. 
Now that you’ve created your adaptation team you may want to revisit your list  
of stakeholders to ensure that the list is still relevant and there aren’t any key  
stakeholders missing. 
Selecting a Climate Change Adaptation Champion
Outreach will play a major role in building and maintaining support for your adaptation 
effort; therefore it is a good idea to identify an adaptation champion to lead outreach  
activities. In some cases you will have existing support from individuals for your climate 
change work, while in other cases you may have to develop a new champion. Selecting  
an appropriate champion will help solidify the awareness and long-term commitment  
from your local government to the planning process. Your adaptation champion  
should commit to this process and the responsibility of being the public spokesperson  
on adaptation to the community. 
Potential champions include, but are not limited to, current (or former) elected  
officials, key business leaders, long-range planners, or other respected members of the 
community. It will generally be the case that your champion and team leader will be  
different individuals.42 If, however, you feel that it is most appropriate for your community 
to have one individual that is both your adaptation team leader and champion this can  
also work. 
2
Consider This…
Your community may want to hold a press 
event to introduce the Adaptation Champion. 
The event can kick off your adaptation  
effort and showcase publicly your commit-
ment to the planning process.    
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      23
   Case Study   	
Championing Adaptation – An Advocate in Homer, AK 
In September 2006, Mayor James Hornaday returned from a national convention on climate 
change which emphasized the critical role of local governments in reducing greenhouse  
gas (GHG) emissions and helping communities to begin preparing for unavoidable changes  
in the climate. Subsequently, in an effort foster leadership in climate protection, the Homer 
Global Warming Task Force (GWTF) was formed thanks to Mayor Hornaday’s commitment  
to reduce the impact of climate change on the community. With further support from the Mayor, 
City Council approved the mandate of the task force via a council resolution in January  
2007 which commissioned the GWTF to research and make recommendations to City Council  
on how to reduce GHG’s and the impact of climate change on Homer’s environment,  
economy, infrastructure and future development. 
The resulting report, the Homer Climate Action Plan (CAP), was produced involving a number 
of stakeholders including the Alaska Marine Conservation Council, Sustainable Homer, Homer 
Chamber of Commerce, Alaska Conservation Solutions, Alaska Islands and Ocean Visitor Center, 
and ICLEI. To review the report visit www.ci.homer.ak.usCLPL.pdf 
Milestone 1: initiate
24      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
A First Look at Climate Impacts 
Once your adaptation team is formed, it is important to assess what common understand-
ing exists about climate change and how it affects your community. As part of Milestone 
Two, Research, you will complete a more in-depth analysis of the effects of climate change 
on your region; however it is important to look at these questions at the beginning of  
the process so that you can ascertain what is already known about climate change and its 
impacts. Take this opportunity to brainstorm how climate change is impacting (or how  
it will impact) your community, what you already know about climate change, and how 
your community currently addresses climate change impacts via informal adaptation 
actions or existing policies that might include adaptation components. This will be a good 
opportunity to gather your adaptation team to brainstorm with, you may also want to  
consider bringing in additional people from various departments as this will help ensure 
that a broad spectrum of potential impacts is covered. 
This initial brainstorming session is where you will lay the groundwork for identifying 
areas which will require further research and what resources are easily available to  
you now. You may wish to look at the basic question of “How could climate change affect  
my region, and do these impacts pose a risk for my community?” 
Impacts and Systems Thinking
Climate change impacts will be cumulative and often synergistic. As such, it is important  
to look at climatic changes and their impacts on a range of systems – physical, social,  
economic, and ecological. By looking at the variety of systems that are being affected, 
impacts on one system can be understood in the context of their relationships with other 
systems rather than in isolation (i.e. the effects of sewage system failures both on the  
physical sewer infrastructure and on the wider ecological system).
By examining the linkages and interactions between impacts and the entirety of the 
municipal system, the effect and nature of the climatic change will be better understood. 
Acknowledging that a change in one area of a system can adversely affect another area  
of the system, promotes organizational communication at all levels in order to avoid the 
silo effect. 
It is important to recognize that repeated or continued stresses, such as those posed  
by climate change impacts, can increase vulnerability, particularly when they occur in  
combination with other stress-inducing factors (such as population growth) and at high 
enough frequencies to prevent recuperation.43
Physical Systems
Climate change presents a variety of challenges for the physical infrastructure of  
communities. Expected climate changes will increase maintenance and protection costs, 
replacement costs and the loss of assets across the country.44 Physical systems can include: 
dykes, culverts, roadways, bridges, buildings, sewer systems, and levees.
Climatic Change:
Refers to the changes in climate variables including 
precipitation and temperature, as well as changes in 
sea and lake levels and the frequency and intensity 
of extreme events.
Impact:
The effects of existing or forecasted changes in  
climate on built, natural, and human systems. 
EXHIBIT 9 
 
Impacts and Systems
social
system
economic
systems
ecological 
systems
PHYSICAL 
SYSTEMS
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      25
Part One: A first look at climate change impacts 
Having looked at the relationship among systems, Worksheet 3 A First Look is meant to 
assist your adaptation team with determining a preliminary understanding of climate 
change impacts and their effects on a variety of systems (physical, ecological, social, etc.) 
in your community, prior to having conducting research. 
Some questions to get your team started include:
• What extreme weather events has your community already experienced?  
What were the impacts of those events? 
• How well prepared is your community if such an event occurs again? Especially  
if such an event becomes more frequent or severe as a result of climate change?
• Based on your existing knowledge what climatic changes are the most likely to  
impact your community?
• Are there any opportunities associated with climate change that could arise for  
your community?
Part Two: First look at existing municipal actions
Before delving into the research stage in Milestone Two, it is helpful to take stock of  
existing actions that improve the adaptive capacity of your community; keep a list of 
actions that are already underway and even planned actions that might be relevant to the 
adaptation planning process. This will help your team evaluate where there are existing 
actions addressing weather related impacts, how these actions can be revised to  
accommodate for climate change and where there is a need for more action. Where actions 
exist that already address some aspect of climate impacts, consider how that impact is  
likely to change in the future and how the action might be revised to accommodate further 
climatic changes. For example, consider emergency management and response work, 
infrastructure maintenance, and public health actions. As you look at these existing actions, 
keep the impacts you’ve 
brainstormed previously 
in mind: Do any of these 
existing actions address the 
impacts you’ve identified? 
Can the actions be amended 
to account for climate 
changes? 
Social Systems
Expected changes in precipitation, water levels, and temperatures will affect the complex 
social systems in communities across the country. Some impacts include: the health of 
individuals and particularly vulnerable populations; incidents of environmental refugees 
and displaced persons; limitations in the livelihoods of certain populations while  
improving the livelihoods of others; and increases in the need for (and alteration of)  
emergency response plans. These impacts focused on social systems will also be exacer-
bated by non-climate related phenomenon (i.e. economic downturn, civil conflict, etc.).
Economic Systems
Economic systems will be affected by climate change in a variety of ways: extreme events 
will cause significant economic losses; changing climate conditions will affect the produc-
tion, price, and demand for goods and services; costs related to public health  
and safety will also result from 
climate change impacts.45 
Climate change will also 
have a profound impact on 
the insurance industry.46 The 
cost of insurance for homes 
and businesses, for example, 
has increased in recent 
years in regions where new 
research shows that the 
expected future damage 
is higher than historical 
damage.47
Ecological Systems 
Ecological systems will be profoundly affected by climatic changes. The impacts can range 
from: changes in abundance and/or distribution of species, large shifts in species ranges,
increased fragmentation of habitats, and wildfire frequency and severity. Temperature and 
precipitation fluctuations will affect growing seasons, plant productivity, as well as animal 
habitat, migration patterns, breeding and survival rates, the incidence of insect infesta-
tions, and habitat diversity.48 
In particular, ecological consequences will not be felt in isolation and should be  
considered in tandem when looking at climate change impacts. For example, vegetation 
and insects will shift in response to climate change and as a result, tourism and other  
recreational activities, such as bird watching, will be affected along with sectors such as 
agriculture, forestry and urban park management.49
Consider This…
More than 1600 communities in Canada 
obtain 30% or more of their employment 
income from agriculture, forestry,  
fishing and hunting. The vulnerability of 
resource dependent communities to  
climate change reflects the high climate 
sensitivity, limited economic diversification 
and restricted access to services of  
many natural resource based industries.     
Adaptive Capacity: Describes the ability of the 
built, natural and social systems to adjust to 
climate change (including climate variability and 
extremes), to moderate potential damages,  
to take advantage of opportunities, or to cope 
with the consequences.  
Milestone 1: initiate
26      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Part Three: First look at existing plans and policies
As with actions, there may be existing plans and policies within your community that 
already address adaptation but perhaps aren’t labelled as such; likewise there may  
be plans and policies that should include adaptation provisions in the future. Look into the 
variety of plans that exist across departments (i.e. Transportation Master Plans, Cycling 
Master Plans, Environmental Master Plans, etc.), as well as any other strategic policy  
documents (i.e. Official Community Plans, Long-term Sustainability Visions, Strategic 
Plans, etc.) and take stock of the way these plans may already include some elements of 
adaptation and which of these plans should in future iterations, include climate change 
adaptation components. 
	
Worksheet 3 will assist your team with a preliminary scan of existing 
knowledge on climate change impacts, actions which are already address 
elements of adaptation and look at the policies, plans, or other municipal 
decisions that pertain (or could include) adaptation elements.
The information from Worksheet 3 will be the basis for communicating how climate 
change impacts will affect various service areas in your community to both internal and 
external audiences.
Issue briefs
It is important that staff and decision makers from all departments within your local 
government are made aware of the importance of adaptation planning. Since adaptation 
actions will be required across most (if not all) departments, informing staff and managers 
from these departments early on in the process about projected climate change and  
the related impacts will help build support for the planning process. It will be helpful to  
the process if decision makers and individuals with influence are made aware of the  
importance of climate impacts within their spheres of responsibility and understand that 
there are realistic and practical measures that can be taken to reduce vulnerability.50 
Issue briefs (as outlined in Worksheet 4) are a way in which various departments can 
communicate with each other. They may go by another name in your community, such  
as framework documents, memos or interdepartmental communications, however they  
all accomplish the same goal of interdepartmental communication.  
Likewise, issue briefs can be used to communicate to the key stakeholders identified in  
Worksheet 1. They can help in communicating that the community is undertaking an 
adaptation planning process and offer information on how individuals or organizations  
can become involved. 
	
Worksheet 4 provides a sample issue brief which can be used to  
	
communicate both internally with other municipal staff and externally  
	
with stakeholder groups.
Passing a Council Resolution 
Though this guide will be particularly valuable to local government staff, it is important  
to acknowledge the importance of political level involvement in adaptation planning.  
By exposing local elected officials to key elements of the guide, and including them  
at significant points, staff can ensure that their efforts will have political support in the  
long-term. In this way, solidifying the adaptation planning process through a political  
commitment is an important component of Milestone One. 
 In making a political commitment to the adaptation planning process, you are ensuring 
that this process will continue in spite of possible political changes in the community. 
This commitment is not specific to particular impacts or corresponding actions, rather 
the council resolution is simply committing the community to examine climate change 
impacts and move forward with preparing a climate response plan. This kind of political 
declaration can provide a useful foundation to which your government, your future 
adaptation team and your successors will be able to refer. Passing a resolution highlights 
the importance elected officials place on climate change and serves as another opportunity 
to educate the public and local government staff on impacts, while also securing a path 
towards action and implementation far into the future.
   Case Study   	
Passing a Resolution - Establishing the Miami-
Dade Country Climate Change Advisory Task Force  
Through the adoption of Ordinance 06-113, the Board of County 
Commissioners established the Miami-Dade County Climate Change 
Advisory Task Force (CCATF) in July, 2006. The CCATF acts as an 
advisory body to the Board of County Commissioners recommending 
both mitigation and adaptation measures in response to potential 
climate change impacts. Through these recommendations the CCATF 
is working with the Board and the Mayor to solidify Miami-Dade’s 
commitment to climate change adaptation planning and greenhouse 
gas reduction measures.
4
3
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      27
As your team develops a resolution for your community you may also want to consider:
• The provincial or territorial position on climate change and adaptation planning; 
• How existing plans address climate change impacts and adaptation planning; and,
• How to involve internal and/or external stakeholders. 
	
Worksheet 5 provides a sample council resolution which will help  
	
in drafting your community’s own climate change adaptation  
	
council resolution.
Where Should You Be Now? 
Upon finishing Milestone One you should have formed an interdepartmental (and  
possibly external) climate change adaptation team with a clear and transparent mandate; 
the team should be spearheaded by a team leader and likewise an Adaptation Champion 
should be identified who will build support and advocate for your adaptation planning 
efforts. Through the first steps of this milestone, you will have a sense of what the perceived 
climate change impacts are for your community (and how you may already be responding 
to some of these). Moving onto Milestone Two, Research, your adaptation team will  
delve deeper into the specific climatic changes that will affect your region and accordingly 
will refine the climate change impacts associated with these. 
Summary of Outputs
List of identified stakeholders 
A climate change adaptation team
A climate change adaptation champion
A first look at how climate change will affect your community
List of existing municipal actions that improve adaptive capacity
Identification of municipal plans that could involve adaptation  
components
Council resolution which entrenches your communities’ commitment  
to the adaptation planning process
endnotes
 
41.	 ICLEI Oceania (2009): Local Government Climate Change Adaptation Toolkit. Melbourne, Australia: ICLEI 
Oceania.
42.	 Ibid
43.	 Sauchyn, D. and Kulshreshtha, S. (2008).  Chapters 7: Prairies – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 275-328
44.	 Ibid
45.	 Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 1- 20.
46.	 Bruce, J.P. and Haites, E. (2008). Canada in an International Context – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a 
Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J.Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
ON, p. 387-424.
47.	 Ibid
48.	 Sauchyn, D. and Kulshreshtha, S. (2008).  Chapters 7: Prairies – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 275-328
49.	 Ibid
50.	 Penney, J. and Wieditz, I. (2007). Cities Preparing for Climate Change:  A study of six urban regions. Clean Air 
Partnership: Toronto, Canada.
5
Milestone 1: initiate
•Establish adaptation 	
	 vision and objectives
•Set goals
•Identify options 	 	
	 and actions
•Identify possible  
	 drivers and constraints
•Evaluate actions 	
	 against drivers and 	
	 constraints
•Determine appropriate 	
	 baseline and  
	 indicator data
•Examine financing  
	 and budget
•Establish implementa-	
	 tion schedule
•Create action plan
•Launch plan
•Begin implementation
•Solidify support  
	 from Council and  
	 community
•Use appropriate  
	 implementation tools
•Follow terms of  
	 action plan
•Report on successes 	
	 regularly to maintain 	
	 momentum
•Asses new information 	
	 and review drivers
•Track implementation 	
	 progress
•Evaluate effectiveness 	
	 of actions using  
	 baseline data and 	
	 indicators
•Communicate  
	 accomplishments
•Investigate future 	
	 adaptation options  
	 and actions
•Revise adaptation  
	 plan
•Launch next round  
	 of adaptation plan
UPDATE  
ADAPTATION   
ACTIONS
Review
Review
Review
•Identify stakeholders
•Build climate change 	
	 adaptation team
•Identify an  
	 adaptation champion
•Take a first look at  
	 climate change 	 	
	 impacts and existing 	
	 adaptation actions
•Pass council  
	 resolution and  
	 community charter
•Initiate research on 	
	 climatic changes
•Refine impacts  
	 and consider service  
	 areas for each
•Vulnerability  
	 assessment (study  
	 of sensitivity and  
	 adaptive capacity)
•Risk assessment 	
	 (consequence and  
	 likelihood of impacts) 	
	 and prioritization
28      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
MILESTONE 3:
PLAN
MILESTONE 4:
IMPLEMENT
MILESTONE 5:
MONITOR/REVIEW
MILESTONE 1:
INITIATE
MILESTONE 2:
RESEARCH
MILESTONE 2:  
research
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      29
30      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
milestone 2: research
This chapter begins the research phase of your climate adaptation planning 
efforts. This segment of the planning process will provide a critical foundation 
on which all later stages of your adaptation effort will rest. An important part 
of assessing climate change impacts is not only obtaining information about 
changes in basic climatic variables such as temperature and precipitation, but 
also gathering information on what these changes will mean for the resources, 
infrastructure and residents of your community.
	
In Milestone Two, you will delve deeper into climatic changes and  
their impacts, how these impacts affect the service areas in your community, 
and the vulnerability and level of resulting risk your community faces.   
purpose
outputs
To research the climatic changes and impacts  
for your region and identify the main service 
areas that will be impacted by those changes. 
	A list of impact statements and the service areas that will be  
directly or indirectly affected 
	A vulnerability assessment
	A risk assessment 
	A prioritized list of impacts – based on vulnerability and  
risk assessment
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      31
Milestone 2: research
Checking Back
Adaptation planning is an iterative process which requires a degree of continuous  
assessment. As you progress through Milestone Two, be sure to keep track of how new 
conditions within your community as well as new data on how the climate may be  
changing might affect the decisions you’ve taken in Milestone One. Examples of conditions 
that might influence your decisions include: 
• Changes in staff (additions or decreases);
• New positions that have been created; and 
• New stakeholders that might be of interest.
Maintaining the relevance and accuracy of your information throughout the planning 
process is extremely important as the information you collect informs the decisions  
you will make in the future. Monitoring and review will be articulated more formally in  
Milestone Five; however it will help down the road to establish a process of reflecting on 
the outcomes of the previous Milestone at each phase of the adaptation planning process.
Climate Change
As Exhibit 9 demonstrates, Canada is expected to get hotter, wetter and experience  
more instances of extreme events. Many of the most severe and costly climate change 
impacts will be associated with projected increases in the frequency and magnitude of 
extreme climate events and associated natural disasters. These events include flooding due 
to high-intensity rainfall and storm surges, ice and wind storms, hail, heat waves  
and drought. An understanding of future extreme events  
is particularly important for the design and maintenance of 
infrastructure, emergency management, and community 
health and safety and should be integrated into your adapta-
tion planning efforts.51 
In addition to increasing the intensity and frequency of 
impacts already being observed, a changing climate will bring new risks to some areas, 
including the introduction of  
vector-borne diseases into areas where climate conditions have inhibited survival of vector 
hosts in the past.52 
The cumulative nature of impacts, and the associated uncertainties, makes it likely that 
climate change will produce some ‘surprises’. However, as is the case for all human and 
managed natural systems, the magnitude of impacts can be reduced through adaptation.53
To Find Out More...
• Information Annexes
“Extreme weather events can become natural disasters when they 
strike vulnerable communities that are unable to manage the  
risk and are unprepared to cope with the hazard. People in Canada 
can be affected by natural disasters in other countries through 
indirect impacts on the availability and cost of goods and services, 
changes in financial markets, and requests for donations of money, 
clothing and food. An example was the spike in oil and gas prices  
in Canada following Hurricane Katrina in 2005, and the storm’s 
impact on Gulf oil production.”  
Bruce, J.P. and Haites, E. (2008). Canada in an International Context – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J.Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 387-424.
32      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
EXHIBIT 9 
 
Summary of Projected Climatic Changes for Canada 54
National
Past Climate
Expected Climate 
(Medium Emissions 
Scenario)
Low Emissions 
Scenario
High Emissions 
Scenario
Degree of Certainty  
(data retrieval)
Annual Average Temperature
Annual temperature increase of 
1.1°C from 1950-2000
Projected increase of 2°C 
by 2050 and 4°C by 2080
Projected increase by 
2050 of 1°C and 2°C  
by 2080
Projected increase by 
2050 of 5°C and 8°C  
by 2080
The values that are used for medium, low and high emissions 
scenarios reflect the average median projected change in 
temperature across six Canadian cities.
Annual Average Precipitation
Average precipitation increase of  
29 mm from 1950-2000 
Projected increase of  
138 mm by 2050 and  
171 mm by 2080
Projected increase of  
46 mm by 2050 and  
29 mm by 2080
Projected increase of  
271 mm by 2050 and  
333 mm by 2080
The values that are used for medium, low and high emissions 
scenarios reflect the average median projected change in 
precipitation across six Canadian cities.
Extreme Weather
There is evidence to suggest that 
extreme weather events, such as 
winter cyclonic storms, summer 
heat and drought, and flooding are 
increasing in intensity and frequency. 
These rapid rates of change may 
exceed certain coping thresholds.
N/A
N/A
N/A
Note: Not all extreme events can be linked to climate change 
however extreme weather events, such as flooding, wind 
storms, drought, ice storms, tornados and wild fires, highlight 
the vulnerability of Canadian communities and critical  
infrastructure to climate change.
Changes in Water Levels 
Rivers and Lakes
Water levels in Canada vary  
considerably over space and time.
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Prairies
N/A
Projected decrease of 
~9% in winter and spring 
stream flows by 2050.
N/A
N/A
N/A
Great Lakes
A 1°C increase in mean annual tem-
perature is associated with a 7-8% 
increase in the evapotranspiration 
rates (AET) resulting in decrease 
water availability in the Great Lakes.
Water levels in the  
Great Lakes are generally  
projected to drop in  
the future.
N/A
N/A
N/A
Changes in Water Levels 
Sea 
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Atlantic Canada
Between 1911-2000 sea level has 
risen ~30cm
2000-2100 sea level 
is projected to increase 
50-70cm
N/A
N/A
N/A
Pacific Canada
Average sea levels have risen 
4-12 cm along pacific coast (E.g. 
high water sea levels in Vancouver 
increased by 16-34 cm) 55 	
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      33
Milestone 2: research
Initiating Your Research
Having taken a first look at the climatic changes that your 
community has already experienced in Milestone One,  
it is now important to carry out research into the specific 
ways in which you region’s climate may change. There are 
many sources of information on climate change, ranging 
from national and regional reports to basic fact sheets. 
Begin by collecting information on key climatic variables 
such as precipitation, temperature, changes in water  
levels and extreme weather events. 
Exhibit 10 provides a list of organizations that collect or 
produce climate data, specific to each region of Canada.  
The information annexes also include resources ranging 
from regionally-focused climate change reports, to  
fact sheets and websites, which can help your team with 
researching projected changes in regional climate. 
region
organizations
website
International
• Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
• Pew Center of Global Climate Change
• Red Cross/Red Crescent Climate Centre
• UK Climate Impacts Programme
http://www.ipcc.ch/index.htm
http://www.pewclimate.org 
http://www.climatecentre.org/
http://www.ukcip.org.uk 
National
• Canadian Climate Change Scenario Network
• Canadian Institute of Planners
• Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources
• Engineers Canada
• Environment Canada
• Environmental Systems Research Institute Canada 
• The Federation of Canadian Municipalities
• International Association of Emergency  
Managers Canada
• Natural Resources Canada’s National and  
Regional Assessments
• Ouranos
• Policy Research Initiative
http://www.cccsn.ca 
http://www.cip-icu.ca 
http://www.cier.ca
http://www.engineerscanada.ca 
http://www.ec.gc.ca 
http://www.esricanada.com/english/955.asp
http://www.fcm.ca 
http://www.iaem-canada.ca/html/home/html/
http://www.nrcan.ca
http://www.ouranos.ca
http://www.policyresesarch.gc.ca 
Atlantic Canada
• Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions 
• ClimAdapt 
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/collab/index_e.php  
http://www.climadapt.com/aboutus.html 
British Columbia
• British Columbia Regional Adaptation Collaborative
• Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium 
• Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions
• Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of BC 
(APEGBC)
• Provincial Emergency Program 
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/collab/index_e.php
http://pacificclimate.org/
http://www.pics.uvic.ca/research/details.php?id=13899
http://www.apeg.bc.ca 
http://www.pep.bc.ca/index.html
Northern Canada
• Arctic Change
• Canadian Polar Information Network
• Northern Climate Exchange
• Taiga Net
http://www.arctic.noaa.gov/detect/ 
http://www.polarcom.gc.ca 
http://www.taiga.net/nce/index.html
http://www.taiga.net 
Ontario
• Emergency Management Ontario
• Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation 
Resources (OCCIAR)
• Professional Engineers Ontario
http://www.emergencymanagementontario.ca/english/    
home.html 
http://www.climateontario.ca 
http://www.peo.on.ca
Prairies
• Alberta Emergency Management Agency
• Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative (PARC)
http://www.aema.alberta.ca/
http://www.parc.ca 
Quebec
• Climat Municipalités
• Ouranos 
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/programmes/climat-
municipalites/
http://www.ouranos.ca 
EXHIBIT 10 
 
Sample Organizations with ClimateData by Region
Note: At the time of publishing, only British Columbia, Prairies, and Atlantic Canada’s  
Regional Adaptation Collaboratives had been announced. For more information on 
Regional Adaptation Collaboratives see the Natural Resources Canada website:  
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/collab/index_e.php
34      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
One place to begin your research is with department heads and staff from your within 
your municipal government. By drawing on the expertise that exists internally, you can 
determine the type of information that is currently available and where there are gaps that 
require more research. Other options include collecting information through more formal 
staff meetings, special workshops, or informal discussions. Interviews with long-time  
residents, examining government records, and reviewing media archives (i.e. newspapers 
and magazines) are also effective ways of gathering more information on the impacts of 
notable past climate and weather events.56 
The range of information available will vary from one community to another and can 
depend on where the community is located. Unfortunately, it may be difficult to find 
information on projected 
climatic changes by 
region that is sufficiently 
detailed for planning. One 
option for dealing with 
such limited information 
is to look at how sensitive 
your community was to 
past climate and weather 
events. Observed impacts 
can help a community 
assess their historic 
ability to respond and can 
inform adaptation plan-
ning in the future. This 
information can also  
be helpful in determin-
ing what type of climatic 
changes the community 
has been vulnerable to in 
the past and how important it is to plan for those changes in the future. 
Anecdotal evidence may also be helpful if your community is faced with limited  
information. For example, memories of Aboriginal elders in the Arctic can help to supple-
ment archeological records and ethno-historical accounts to provide more detailed  
information of how periodic, irregular and often dramatic ecosystems changes, triggered 
by periods of warming or cooling and extreme weather events, have influenced human  
life in the Arctic.57 
Consider This…
Some communities are already seeing  
climatic changes. For example in 2005, Toronto  
experienced the hottest summer on record 
where temperatures exceeded 30ºC for a  
total of 41 days. The City had to issue 8 heat 
alerts, 18 extreme heat alerts and 48 smog 
advisories. Extreme temperatures are expected 
to continue as the frequency of hot days  
(above 30ºC) in Toronto is expected to increase 
from 12 to 35 by 2050. Observed changes  
can be a good resource for communities as 
they help indicate adaptive capacity. 
McBean, Gordon and Henstra, Dan (2009). Background Report Climate Change 
and Extreme Weather: Designing Adaptation Policy. Available for download at  
http://www.sfu.ca/act/documents/05_09-EWE_Background_Report_WEB.pdf   
   Case Study   	
Creating Partnerships to Increase Local  
Adaptive Capacity in Annapolis Royal, NS   
Annapolis Royal, situated below sea level, has been flooding in certain 
key areas. The community, concerned about the risks associated 
with flooding during extreme weather events and notably spring tidal 
surges, went to the Town to explore the risks. Town staff in turn looked 
to the citizen-based group, Clean Annapolis River Project (CARP), to 
assess the Town’s vulnerability to storm surges. The limited resources 
at the Town’s disposal made this partnership mutually beneficial; and 
highlights a successful way to integrate other stakeholders into the 
land-use planning process. By knowing the risks, the Town was able 
to take preventative measures, and produce a set of initiatives that 
increase infrastructure stability, increase emergency preparedness 
and involve members of the public with emergency scenarios. After  
the risk assessment was complete, it became clear that adaptation 
action cannot remain isolated to one town/community, but rather, 
adopted by an entire region. Various surrounding communities were 
contacted to administer a large-scale risk assessment. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      35
Milestone 2: research
Partnerships
Partnerships (with local NGOs, non-profit organizations, local businesses and universities) 
are also valuable strategies that have been used by numerous communities across  
Canada in their adaptation efforts. See Exhibit 11 for a list of community’s that have part-
nered with citizen-based groups, universities, other levels of government and neighbouring 
communities in their adaptation efforts. 
Community
Partner
Partnership
Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia
Clean Annapolis River Project (CARP)
Annapolis Royal partnered with CARP, a citizen-based 
group, to conduct an assessment of the Town’s  
vulnerability to storm surges.
Delta, British Columbia
University of British Columbia
Delta partnered with the University of British Columbia 
to create visualizations of how the community might 
look under alternative climate futures. Different 
scenarios of sea level rise and changing land and 
energy use were projected out to the year 2100. 
Workshops were then held to explore residents’ 
reaction to the scenarios and to different response 
strategies. 
Halifax Regional Municipality, 
Nova Scotia 
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities Green 
Municipal Funds; Natural Resources Canada;  
Environment Canada; Nova Scotia Department of 
Energy; select members of ClimAdapat; community 
groups and local businesses
Halifax Regional Municipality launched ClimateSmart,  
a collaboration between public and private sectors  
that helps to mainstream climate change mitigation 
and adaptation into municipal planning and decision-
making. 
Kamloops, British Columbia
Thompson Rivers University 
Kamloops partnered with Thompson Rivers University 
on a pilot project involving integrated approaches to 
surface fuel management and alternative noxious  
weed management in the hopes of mitigating wildfires 
in the surrounding area of the community. 
London, Ontario
University of Western Ontario
Researchers at the University of Western Ontario  
conducted a preliminary analysis of London’s rainfall 
intensity, duration and frequency curves in the context 
of a changing climate. The study formed the basis for 
revised engineering standards for the City’s  
storm water management system and London’s  
Adaptation Strategy.
Le Goulet, New Brunswick
University of Moncton
Le Goulet partnered with the University of Moncton  
to produce a comprehensive local plan to adapt  
to the impacts of climate change and specifically  
rising sea levels.
EXHIBIT 11 
 
Community Partnerships on  
Adaptation Planning
36      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Recording Research Findings
Once you feel comfortable with the information you have collected and have determined 
that it is sufficient to base your adaptation plan on, you should make a commitment to 
monitoring the science that supports your climatic change scenarios to ensure that your 
planning process is drawing upon the most relevant and up to date information available. 
Throughout your research you may also encounter reports on specific areas or  
topics of interest. Keep track of this information as it will be important later in the process.
As your team conducts research, track the information you collect and record:
• the source of information;
• the timeframe of any future projections (e.g. 2020s);
• the date ranges for any historical data;
• the range of expected change (e.g. 1.5°C-2.5°C annually); and,
• the extent of seasonal variability.
	
	
	
Worksheet 6(a) can be used to record your research and other information 
on relevant climate changes. 
6a
Working with Limited Information
Working with limited information, may require you to extrapolate relevant data from 
more general or nationally based sources. Much of the data on climate change impacts is 
presented within ranges (i.e. range of increases in temperature, precipitation, etc.) as it 
is difficult to determine absolute numbers when using climate models. It is important to 
remember that the idea of adaptation planning is to plan for various scenarios. Therefore, 
try and formulate high, medium, and low emissions scenarios to work from for each  
climatic change and adjust your potential responses according to the different scenarios. 
It may also be the case that you are faced with too much information. In this case, use 
the questions below to refine your research and determine the most relevant information:
• What is the most basic information necessary to make an educated decision?
• How trusted is each source of information? Consider if the information presented  
has been peer-reviewed; did it emerge from a scientific study; does it come from  
an organization with a particular agenda; how recent is it; what is the level of  
certainty assigned to the information, etc. 
• How closely does the information relate to your specific context? (region, ecosystem, 
community, etc.)
• Who is producing the information and are they regarded as an expert?
• Which organizations conduct research in your community or region pertinent to 
climate change?
 • Who is the intended audience for the information? 
Determining how much information is necessary  
will depend on your community and your experience  
with climate change. Also keep in mind that for some 
topics, your community may need more detailed  
information before actions can be derived. 
   Case Study   	
Using Local Knowledge to Plan for a Changing Climate in Dawson, YT   
Northern Canada is due to experience rapid climatic changes, and this poses many challenges 
for the isolated communities that depend on specific resources and sound infrastructures.  
The northern community of Dawson, Yukon Territory acknowledged the strong need for  
adaptation planning and the residents played a key role in the production of the final community  
adaptation plan. In response to data gaps in the community, the City’s activities shifted as local 
community members and their knowledge provided the informational resources to account for 
previous climatic changes. Local knowledge formed the basis of building a community-based 
climate change scenario. From such changes, they set out five different adaptation projects 
that respond to problems, such as infrastructure collapse, limitation of resources, changing 
resources and cultural shifts. As a result, the community is aware of the changes in their region 
and had an invested stake in the adaptation planning process. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      37
Milestone 2: research
Refining Impacts and Identifying Service Areas
Once you have identified how climate change is likely to affect your community, you should 
start thinking about how those changes will impact your community’s services areas.
Also note that while it is important to emphasize that climate change will have  
negative impacts that community’s need to plan for, it is also relevant to consider the  
positive impacts and subsequent opportunities that are associated with climate change. 
For example, one such opportunity might be longer  
shipping seasons due to decreased sea, river and lake ice 
cover, however lower lake and river levels could have other 
negative impacts on transportation which should be  
considered in tandem.58 While it is likely that there will be 
some common impacts for Canadian communities, it is 
important to understand how climatic changes will uniquely 
affect local conditions. 
Whether positive or negative, impacts should be recorded 
consistently and should each address a similar scale. A 
description of an impact should include an identification  
of the ‘someone’ or ‘something’ that will be impacted,  
the specific way it will be impacted, and the reason the 
impact may occur. For example, “summer drought” is not a 
strong impact statement; but “increased demand on water 
supply due to summer drought” would be. Notice how the latter description answers  
all of the “what”, “why” and “how” questions, and that the impact is a result of changes to  
climatic conditions, namely precipitation. Get as specific as possible, including whatever 
level of detail the reports you are consulting can provide.
Exhibit 12 provides a variety of sample impacts and identifies which service areas will 
be affected either directly 
(with an “X”) or indirectly 
(with an “O”). This is not an 
exhaustive list; rather this 
table is meant to provide a 
few examples and should 
act as a starting point to get 
your team thinking about 
how climate change impacts 
will affect your operations 
and how to document 
impact statements.   
Service areas  
are the areas in 
which a government 
or community 
manages, plans, 
or makes policy 
affecting the services 
and activities 
associated with built, 
natural, and social 
systems.  
Consider This…
Documenting assumptions and key informa-
tion within your records is important as it will 
help to minimize inconsistent treatment of 
scientific data, incomplete transparency and 
poor archiving or protection of information.  
By carefully documenting sources (both 
written and verbal) you will help to ensure 
that other and future staff are able to 
understand your work.
EXHIBIT 12 
 
Impacts on Service Areas
Increased demand on energy 
due to increased cooling needs 
in summer
X
O
O
X
X
X
O
X
0
Longer growing seasons which 
increases agriculture potential
X
X
X
O
O
X
X
X
O
Decreased tourism in snow 
industries
X
X
Loss of native plant and animal 
species (extinction or migration)
O
X
O
X
X
X
Increased incidences of water
and food borne illnesses due to
warmer weather
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
X
X
Increase in invasive species due 
to more favourable climate
X
X
O
O
O
X
X
X
O
Increases in frequency and
intensity of fires due to hotter 
and drier seasons
O
X
O
O
O
X
X
X
O
O
O
O
O
Increased frequency of insect 
outbreaks due to warmer 
weather
X
X
O
O
O
X
X
X
X
O
Spread of infectious disease/ 
vector borne illnesses in summer
O
O
X
O
O
O
O
O
X
O
O
Increased demand on water  
supply due to summer drought
X
O
X
O
O
O
O
O
O
X
X
X
Agricultural Services
Biodiversity
Corporate Services
Economic Development
Culture and Tourism
Energy Services
Emergency Management
Fire Services
Environment
Forestry and Forestry Services
Housing
Parks and Recreation
Police
Public Health
Water Supply
Waste Management
Climatic Change
Increased Temperatures in Summer
	
Worksheet 6(b) offers more instruction on refining impact statements and 	
	
identifying relevant service areas. 
6b
38      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Vulnerability Assessment
Vulnerability refers to the susceptibility of a given service area to harm arising from 
climate change impacts.59 Vulnerability is a function of a service area’s sensitivity  
to climate change and its capacity to adapt to climate change impacts (or adaptive  
capacity). A vulnerability assessment can be one of the more intensive components of 
Milestone Two: however it is important to spend the time conducting a thorough  
assessment so you are integrating an external dimension, namely sensitivity to climate,  
into your examination of your service areas. A vulnerability assessment also necessitates 
an understanding of both biophysical and socioeconomic implications as the focus is  
more on understanding the processes involved with climate change impacts and the 
factors that influence sensitivity and adaptive capacity.60 This understanding will assist 
with the development of suitable adaptation actions later in Milestone Three. 
While conducting your vulnerability assessment, consider the following questions:
Is the service area already able to accommodate existing weather patterns and 
changes in climate? For example, emergency response and fire services already have 
methods for addressing changes in climate (i.e. increased or decreased precipitation). 
Are there barriers to a service area’s ability to accommodate changes in climate? 
For example, the number of competing uses of a service area; the number of organiza-
tions involved in managing a service area; or the service area’s biological, geographic or 
physical barriers might limit its flexibility.
Is the service area already stressed in ways that will limit its ability to accom-
modate changes in climate? An example is a community that has recently experienced 
economic downturn and does not have the resources to replace existing road culverts.61 
It is important to note that the perspective on vulnerability assessment presented here,  
is one methodology looking at sensitivity and adaptive capacity; other methodologies exist 
which touch on these and other themes (i.e. exposure) and can offer a more quantitative 
approach for analyzing vulnerability. 
Sensitivity Assessment
To determine how sensitive a service area is to projected changes in climate, consider the 
following questions:
• How exposed is the service area to the impacts of climate change?
• Is the service area subject to existing stresses?
• Will climate change cause the demand for a resource or service to exceed its supply or 
current abilities?
• Does the service area have limiting factors that may be affected by climate change?
• Are there measures that are presently in place that are able to provide a buffer against 
expected future changes?
 • With regard to ecological sensitivity – is there a plant and animal species of concern  
in your service area that is currently located near the limits of its range? 
The table to the right (Exhibit 13) assesses the sensitivity of water supply (sample service 
area) to the increased demand on water supply due to summer drought (impact). In order 
to: assess the service area’s sensitivity to an impact first determine which climatic changes 
affect the impact in question and next identify how the service area is affected by these 
changes. The first step is to assess whether the service area is subject to any existing stress 
and whether the impact will exacerbate that stress. The final step is to assign a value  
(out of 5) representing the sensitivity of the service area to the climate change impact.  
See Exhibit 14 for the 1 – 5 Sensitivity Scale. 
Adaptive Capacity 
In addition to sensitivity, assessing vulnerability requires consideration of the main  
stressors, both climatic and non-climatic, as well as the socioeconomic influences on adap-
tive capacity.62 Adaptive capacity describes the ability of built, natural and human systems 
to accommodate changes in climate with minimum disruption or additional cost.63 To 
measure adaptive capacity, consider the projected impacts for your community and assess 
how those impacts will affect the systems in your service areas. Think about how the  
key determinants listed could affect your community’s adaptive capacity. Also consider  
the extent to which current plans, policies and regulations account for the indentified  
set of climate variables 
and their future changes? 
By increasing adaptive 
capacity, a systems 
vulnerability to current 
and future climate is 
reduced.
Consider This…
Adaptive Capacity and Resilience
Resilience refers to the capacity of a system, 
community, or society potentially exposed to 
hazards to adapt by resisting or changing in 
order to reach and maintain an acceptable level 
of functioning and structure. Although similar 
to adaptive capacity, resilience also refers to 
the degree to which a community or society can 
organize itself and learn from past disasters. 
(United Nations Inter-Agency Secretariat of the International Strategy for Disaster 
Reduction [UN/ISDR] [2004] Living with Risk: A global review of disaster risk 
reduction initiatives. United Nations Publication: Geneva.)   
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      39
Milestone 2: research
Impact
Increased demand on water supply  
due to summer drought
 service area
water supply
  Which climatic changes affect the  
functioning of this service area? 
1.	Temperature (warmer temperatures expected across all 
seasons under all climate change scenarios, especially during 
summer months)
2.	Precipitation (less rain in summer and snow in winter)
  How is the service area affected by these 
changes today?
1.	Warm winter and spring temperatures lead to lower snowpack 
and earlier snowmelt, increasing summer drought
2.	Warmer summer temperatures increase evaporation rates 
and demand on water 
3.	Lower winter precipitation lowers winter snowpack, reducing 
water supply
  Is the service area subject to any  
existing stress? 
Water shortages have occurred in the past during particularly  
hot summer months.
  If so, how will the impact exacerbate  
that stress?
More frequent hot spells with no rain may result in more  
shortages.
  If the impact occurs, will it affect the  
functionality of the service area? 
Yes – Functionality will become unmanageable (S5)
EXHIBIT 13 
 
Sensitivity Assessment for Water 64 
If the impact occurs, will it affect the functionality of the service area?
No – Functionality 
will stay the same 
(S1)
Unlikely – Function-
ality will likely stay 
the same (S2)
Yes – Functionality 
is likely to get worse 
(S3) 
Yes – Functionality 
will get worse (S4)
Yes – Functionality 
will become  
unmanageable (S5)
EXHIBIT 14 
 
Sensitivity Scale   
There are several key determinants of adaptive capacity:65 
• Economic resources: Wealthier individuals, communities, regions, and nations  
are likely to be better able to bear the costs of adaptation to climate change than  
poorer ones.
• Technology: Lack of technology can impede adaptation.
• Information and skills: Information and trained personnel are required to assess 
and implement successful adaptation options.
• Social Capital: Connections between and within social networks improve the  
capacity of individuals and groups to prepare for and withstand impacts.
 
•	Institutions: Nations with well-developed social institutions are believed to have 
greater adaptive capacity than those with less effective institutions.
• Equity: Some believe that adaptive capacity is greater where there are government 
institutions and arrangements in place that allow equitable access to resources.
Consider This…
In Canada adaptive capacity is generally high, 
owing to high levels of education, access to 
technology, and strong and effective institu-
tions. As a result, Canada is well positioned 
to take action on adapting to climate change. 
However, there are significant differences in  
the ability to adapt among different sub-regions 
and population groups, resulting in differing 
vulnerabilities to climate change.  
Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen,  
F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 1- 20.
40      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Keep in mind that due to the difficulty in measuring adaptive capacity, proxy indicators, 
such as per capita income, education level and population density, can also be used for 
some of the determinants.66
Although local governments often have similar determinants, it is important to  
recognize that there are differences in the adaptive capacity of urban centers and rural 
communities. Exhibit 15 provides a quick look at some of the strengths and limitations  
of both urban and rural communities. 
Assessing Adaptive Capacity
Exhibit 16 provides a sample adaptive capacity assessment. Use the information from 
the sensitivity assessment completed earlier to frame the linkages between the climatic 
change, the effect on the service area and whether that service area can adapt to those 
changes. Based on that information, your team can assess the ability of the service area to 
accommodate these changes with little or no cost or disruption. Using the 1 – 5 Adaptive 
Capacity Scale in Exhibit 17, assign a value to represent the adaptive capacity of the  
service area and be sure to explain the reason for that assigned value.
EXHIBIT 15 
 
General Differences in Adaptive Capacity between Urban and Rural Communities 67 
urban centers
rural communities
Strengths
Strengths
• Greater access to financial resources
• Diversified economies
• Greater access to services (e.g. health care, social 
services, education)
• Easier access to technology
• Higher education levels
• Well-developed emergency response capacity 
• Highly developed institutions
• Strong social capital
• Strong social networks
• Strong attachments to community
• Strong traditional and local knowledge
• High rates of volunteerism
limitations
limitations
• Higher costs of living
• More air quality and heat stress issues
• Lack of knowledge of climate change impacts and 
adaptation issues
• Larger dependant populations (e.g. elderly and  
poorer residents)
• High dependence on critical, but aging, infrastructure
• Issues of overlapping jurisdictions that complicate 
decision-making processes
• Limited economic resources
• Less diversified economies
• Higher reliance on natural resource sectors
• Isolation and limited access to services
• Lack of knowledge of climate change impacts  
and adaptation issues
• Lower proportion of population with technical  
training
Impact
Increased demand on water supply 
due to summer drought
 service area
water supply
  Can the service area adjust to the projected  
impact with minimal cost and disruption?
No - Will require substantial costs ($$$$$) and staff 
intervention (AC1)
 Explain Response
Unable to “adapt” snowpack to warmer temperatures; 
limited options for expanding water supply and summer 
demand has already been greater than supply at times.
EXHIBIT 16 
 
Assessing the Adaptive Capacity of a Service Area 68  
EXHIBIT 17 
 
Adaptive Capacity Scale   
Can the service area adjust to the projected impact with minimal cost and disruption?
No – Will require 
substantial costs 
($$$$$) and staff 
intervention (AC1)
No – Will require 
significant costs 
($$$$) and staff 
intervention (AC2)
Maybe – Will require 
some costs ($$$) 
and staff interven-
tions (AC3) 
Yes – But will 
require some slight 
costs ($$) and staff 
intervention (AC4)
Yes – No to little 
costs ($) and staff 
intervention are 
necessary (AC5)
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      41
Milestone 2: research
	
Worksheet 7 provides tables for conducting both sensitivity and adaptive 
capacity assessments. 
With both assessments complete, the vulnerability of each service area can be determined. 
Those service areas with high sensitivity and low adaptive capacity are highly vulnerable; 
those with low sensitivity and high adaptive capacity have low vulnerability; and  
those service areas that have both high sensitivity and high adaptive capacity have a  
medium vulnerability. 
7
Risk Assessment 
Risk is the combination of an event’s likelihood and its consequences – risk therefore 
equals the probability of a climate hazard multiplied by the consequence of that event. 
Use the results from the vulnerability assessment (those impacts labeled as having high 
vulnerability) along with research on projected climatic changes to estimate the  
consequence and likelihood of specific impacts. The likelihood assessment, together  
with the consequence evaluation, will constitute the risk score for each impact.
Exhibit 18 and 19, along with the exercises found in Worksheet 8 will guide you through 
assessing risk [Note: this risk assessment cannot be conducted without using the  
information found in Worksheet 8]. 
Risk = Likelihood x Consequence
Consequence
Likelihood
  What are the known or estimated consequences 
(economic, ecological, social, and legal) of a  
particular climate change impact?
How likely is it that a projected impact will occur? 
Some climatic changes, such as increasing average 
temperatures and seal level rise, have more certainty 
while the frequency of extreme events has less.
   Case Study   	
Assessing Vulnerability – A Analysis of Climate 
Change Impacts in Toronto, ON   
The City of Toronto conducted a Scan of Climate Change Impacts 
(2006) to determine which systems within the City are the most 
vulnerable to climate change impacts. The report concluded that the 
City’s infrastructure systems – such as water supply, transportation  
of people and goods, health services and energy supply – are key 
points of vulnerability. The vulnerability assessment was followed  
by an assessment of initiatives in other cities which are adapting to 
climate change to determine the best course of action for the City of 
Toronto. Both reports can be found at http://www.cleanairpartnership.
org/reports_cities_preparing
42      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Once you have completed Worksheet 8 you will have the risk score for each impact.  
The final step in Milestone Two is to organize the impacts according to the risk score from 
extreme to low; this will prepare your team to assign actions to each of the impacts that 
were assessed.
To prepare you for Milestone Three, begin considering the following questions:
• What are the extreme risks? Do they revolve around one specific climatic change?
 • What are the lower risks?
 • Are all of the extreme risks very costly to address?
 • Which risks require political support? 
• Which risks have dire consequences if not acted upon? 
• Are we already considering these as risks within the community? 
Increased 
demand 
on water 
supply due 
to summer 
drought
Increased 
demand on 
energy due 
to increased 
cooling needs 
in summer
Contamination 
of streams  
and/or lakes  
due to sewer 
overflow
CONSEQUENCE 
RATING
PUBLIC SAFETY 
(OUT OF) /5
3
4
3
LOCAL ECONOMY AND 
GROWTH 
(OUT OF) /5
2
2
2
COMMUNITY AND 
LIFESTYLE
(OUT OF) /5
3
3
4
ENVIRONMENT AND 
SUSTAINBILITY  
(OUT OF) /5
3
3
4
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION 
(OUT OF) /5
3
3
3
CONSEQUENCE TOTAL 
(OUT OF) /25
(A)
14
15
16
LIKELIHOOD 
RATING
(OUT OF) /5
(B)
4
4
3
RISK SCORE
=
A X B
(OUT OF) /125
56
60
48
EXHIBIT 18 
 
Risk Score for Impacts  
EXHIBIT 19 
 
Risk Spectrum  
Note: the scale used in Exhibit 18 and Worksheet 8 assigns a low score of 1 and a high score of 5.  
5-20
Very-Low
21-35
Low
51-65
Medium
96-110
Very-High
36-50
Medium-Low
81-95
High
66-80
Medium-High
111-125
Extreme
Consider This…
The Public Infrastructure Engineering  
Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Protocol 
developed by Engineers Canada is another 
risk assessment tool that is being used  
to assess the vulnerability of individual  
facilities or types of infrastructure (build-
ings; storm water and wastewater systems; 
water resources; roads, bridges and  
other transportation infrastructure).  
The protocol along with a variety of Canada-
wide assessments can be accessed at 
http://www.pievc.ca/e/index_.cfm
8
	
Worksheet 8 provides more detailed instructions for assigning risk ratings 
for the impacts identified earlier.
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      43
Milestone 2: research
endnotes
 
51. Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 1- 20.
52.	 Ibid
53.	 Ibid
54. Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008).  Chapter 2: Background Information - From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada 
in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
55. Government of British Columbia. (2004). Weather, Climate and the Future: B.C.’s Plan. Available for download at 
http://www.llbc.leg.bc.ca/public/pubdocs/bcdocs/373154/actions.pdf 
56. Snover, A.K., et al. (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. 
In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA
57. Furgal, C., and Prowse, T.D. (2008): Northern Canada – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 57-118
58. Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 
1- 20.
59. Snover, A.K., et al. (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State 
Governments. In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA
60. Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008).  Chapter 2: Background Information - From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
61. Snover, A.K., et al. (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. 
In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA
62.	 Ibid
63. Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008).  Chapter 2: Background Information – From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
64. Snover, A.K., et al. (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. 
In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA
65. Smit, B. et al. (2001). Adaptation to Climate Change in the Context of Sustainable Development and Equity; In 
Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (eds.) J.J. McCarthy, O.F. Canziani, N.A. 
Leary, D.J. Dokken and K.S. White. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., and New York, N.Y., U.S.A.  
Available for download at http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.htm 
66. Warren, F.J. and Egginton, P.A. (2008).  Chapter 2: Background Information – From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 27-56
67. Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J. and J. Lacroix. (2008). Synthesis – From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,  
p. 1- 20.
68. Snover, A.K., et al. (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. 
In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA
Where Should You be Now?
Upon completing Milestone Two, you will have undertaken research on the climatic 
changes that will affect your community and subsequently developed a list of impacts.  
You will also have conducted a vulnerability and risk assessment and should now  
have a list of impacts which have been prioritized by their risk score. 
In Milestone Three, Plan, you will establish a vision, set goals, and identify both short 
and long terms actions to tackle the impacts that you have indentified. 
Summary of Outputs
A comprehensive understanding of climatic changes  
and impacts for your community
A list of impact statements and the primary and  
secondary service areas affected
A vulnerability assessment
A risk assessment
A prioritized list of impacts – based on vulnerability  
and risk assessment
•Establish adaptation 	
	 vision and objectives
•Set goals
•Identify options 	 	
	 and actions
•Identify possible  
	 drivers and constraints
•Evaluate actions 	
	 against drivers and 	
	 constraints
•Determine appropriate 	
	 baseline and  
	 indicator data
•Examine financing  
	 and budget
•Establish implementa-	
	 tion schedule
•Create action plan
•Launch plan
•Begin implementation
•Solidify support  
	 from Council and  
	 community
•Use appropriate  
	 implementation tools
•Follow terms of  
	 action plan
•Report on successes 	
	 regularly to maintain 	
	 momentum
•Asses new information 	
	 and review drivers
•Track implementation 	
	 progress
•Evaluate effectiveness 	
	 of actions using  
	 baseline data and 	
	 indicators
•Communicate  
	 accomplishments
•Investigate future 	
	 adaptation options  
	 and actions
•Revise adaptation  
	 plan
•Launch next round  
	 of adaptation plan
UPDATE  
ADAPTATION   
ACTIONS
Review
Review
Review
•Identify stakeholders
•Build climate change 	
	 adaptation team
•Identify an  
	 adaptation champion
•Take a first look at  
	 climate change 	 	
	 impacts and existing 	
	 adaptation actions
•Pass council  
	 resolution and  
	 community charter
•Initiate research on 	
	 climatic changes
•Refine impacts  
	 and consider service  
	 areas for each
•Vulnerability  
	 assessment (study  
	 of sensitivity and  
	 adaptive capacity)
•Risk assessment 	
	 (consequence and  
	 likelihood of impacts) 	
	 and prioritization
44      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
MILESTONE 3:
PLAN
MILESTONE 4:
IMPLEMENT
MILESTONE 5:
MONITOR/REVIEW
MILESTONE 1:
INITIATE
MILESTONE 2:
RESEARCH
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook        45
MILESTONE 3:  
Plan
46      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
milestone 3: plan
purpose
outputs
To establish your short and long terms  
adaptation actions and finalize your climate 
change adaptation plan. 
	Vision 
	Goals and Objectives
	List of Adaptation Actions
	Financial implications of your plan
Milestone Three, Plan, will help you establish a vision, goals and  
objectives for your community’s adaptation effort. In addition, in this 
chapter you will use the impacts you identified as well as the results of 
the vulnerability and risk assessment that you conducted in the previous 
milestone to help you prioritize the impacts your community faces.  
Based on these priorities you will develop both short and long term actions 
to address significant impacts. As you develop your actions, you will also 
examine the constraints and drivers which may affect your ability to 
implement your actions. From there you will address the financial aspects  
of these actions. Finally, using this information you will create and  
finalize your climate change adaptation action plan. 
Check Back
As you proceed through Milestone Three, be sure to keep track of how new conditions 
within your community might affect the decisions you’ve taken in the preceding mile-
stones. One way to ensure that your research stays up-to-date is to make a commitment to 
monitoring the information that you’ve used to identify the climate change impacts in your 
community. As future climate projections change, for example, you may find that you need 
to reassess the vulnerability and risks associated with those changes for your community –  
be sure that the projections are significant enough to warrant the reassessment. Likewise 
be sure to consider any internal changes with the community that might affect the make-up  
of your adaptation team, larger stakeholder network, or political support for your effort.
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      47
Milestone 3: plan
Establishing a Climate Adaptation Vision 
Establishing a vision for you adaptation plan provides an opportunity to integrate your 
adaptation goals into the broader vision of your entire community. This is not a necessary 
step; however it is a useful exercise and will help your community set your adaptation  
goals and objectives a little later on. Engaging the community in visioning exercises may 
help to solidify their support and commitment to climate change adaptation (be careful  
to not let the visioning process slow your community down in the overall development of 
your adaptation plan).
An adaptation vision is a statement on where you want your community to be in the 
future with regard to climate change adaptation. For local governments embarking  
on the adaptation planning process a vision will help to: establish what a climate resilient 
community looks like; articulate where you’d like to see your community in the future;  
and will be something to refer back to throughout the planning process and while  
implementing adaptation actions. 
A vision statement also acts as a call to action and can be a catalyst to inspire change; 
as such it is an important element to include in your adaptation plan. Ideally, it should 
incorporate the values that are important to your community while also communicating 
the purpose and intended outcome of your climate adaptation plan.
Key questions to consider while establishing your vision:
• What are you trying to accomplish with your climate change adaptation plan?
• What does a well adapted community look like?
• What sort of climate change impacts will affect your region?
• Who is your target audience: council, stakeholders, and/or citizens? 
• Will the Adaptation Plan be a key public document?
Remember that your vision is meant to inspire, energize and help create a picture of your 
resilient community. 
Consider This…
There are both pros and cons to community engagement; 
specifically as to the types and frequency of such engage-
ment (for example: asking for input too frequently may  
lead to stakeholder burnout, however, not including the  
public in various stages can result in aggravation and loss 
of interest). It is important to consider these factors as  
you seek public input throughout the planning process.
EXHIBIT 20 
 
Sample Vision Statements 
community
vision
Keene, NH
“The impacts associated with a changing climate are already being felt in 
Keene. From more frequent and severe flooding, to changes in annual 
snowfall amount, to the infestation of non-native plant and animal species, 
to increases in the total number of high heat index days and more numerous 
poor air quality days, the City has come to recognize that these changes are 
ultimately impacting the community’s built, natural, and social environments. 
To address these changes, the City of Keene has committed to the Climate 
Change Adaptation Plan to help make the community resilient to the  
effects of climate change. The City of Keene strives to be a protected and 
sustainable community which prioritizes public safety and climate protection.”
North Vancouver, BC
“The City of North Vancouver’s vision is to be a vibrant, diverse, and highly 
liveable community that strives to balance the social, economic and  
environmental needs of our community.”
St. John, NB
“Our Saint John, Canada’s first city, leads the nation as an example of a 
sustainable community.
Our Saint John was born of the water. Like the tides we live by, we are re-
sponsive to the constant changes in our environment, economy and society.
Our Saint John is a liveable city designed for people where everyone  
can feel at home. We are diverse in cultures, rich in arts, full of exciting 
entertainment and recreational activities.
Our Saint John provides educational excellence and life-long-learning  
opportunities to help people reach their full potential.
Our dynamic economy is built on creativity, innovation and entrepreneurial 
spirit.
Our Saint John is a population of problem solvers where each individual 
and organization has a vital role to play. It is a place where leadership is 
based on transparency, integrity and trust.
Our Saint John is a place where we overcome our challenges and live  
our dreams.
This is our Saint John.”
Toronto Environment Office, 
City of Toronto, ON
“The Toronto Environment Office works to be a recognized centre of  
environmental excellence for the City, providing the leadership and building 
the partnerships to ensure a clean, green and sustainable future for all.”
48      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Setting your Adaptation Goals and Objectives
Goals 
Once you have completed your vision, your team can now develop adaptation goals.  
Goals should be phrased in reference to the climatic changes that are threatening your 
community. They will act as high level intentions which a community will strive towards. 
Goals are general statements about the expectations of a program or plan, for example: 
• Increasing public awareness of climate change and its projected impacts on  
our community.
• Increasing technical capacity to prepare for climate change impacts.
• Increasing adaptive capacity of built, natural and human systems in our community. 
Objectives 
Now that you have identified community goals, you can set specific objectives. Objectives 
refer to the ways in which your community intends to overcome the impacts that  
have been identified (in Worksheet 6b) and represent the path towards achieving your  
vision. Some objectives might be specific, while others might be broad and thus more  
challenging to measure. 
Remember that adaptation objectives will vary from one community to another  
based on a variety of factors, including: types and magnitude of projected climatic changes 
and impacts; level of support for adaptation efforts; and service areas on which your  
community has direct influence. Some examples of objectives include:
• Expand and diversify water supply
• Increased drought preparedness
• Reduce shoreline erosion
• Reduce the impact of extreme heat events
• Reduce flooding and erosion impacts on infrastructure 
• Improving energy conservation 
• Lower the ecological footprint of existing buildings
• Engage energy providers to enhance local renewable energy generation opportunities
• Support the local agricultural economy
• Protect local habitats and migration routes
Identifying Adaptation Options
Based on your high priority impacts (identified through the risk assessment in  
Milestone Two) and your community’s objectives, your team can now begin the process  
of developing adaptation options for how to overcome the impacts of climate change.  
These options should be broken down into short- and long-term time frames, and should 
reflect your community’s vision and the objectives that you have identified previously. 
Adaptation options include a wide range of actions or activities and will likely involve 
some combination of the following:
• Modifying policies, plans, practices and procedures: Existing by-laws, codes,  
regulations, policies, development plans, and operating practices may have to be  
modified in order to adapt for climate change impacts.
   Case Study   	
Setting Goals – Climate Resilient Community  
Goals and Objectives in Keene, NH  
Based on their top ranking risks, Keene, New Hampshire’s Climate 
Resilient Communities Committee members divided into three teams 
(one per service area) and developed a set of goals and objectives for 
each impact. The goals and objectives were identified as ways in which 
the City government could begin efforts to adapt to climate change. 
For example, one goal was to “reduce the likelihood of structural  
damage resulting from predicted increases in severe weather events.” 
The objectives (or targets) which accompanied that goals included:  
a) encourage more pitched roofs and incorporate design standards 
that consider snow stacking and ice falling zones; b) identify a 
200-year floodplain and prevent future development in these areas; and  
c) Investigate design standards for buildings that currently handle 
weather conditions similar to the climate forecast New England  
can expected in the future.  
For more information on Keene’s goals and objectives see Adapting  
to Climate Change: Planning a Climate Resilient Community (2007)  
at http://www.ci.keene.nh.us. 
9
	
Worksheet 9 offers guidance on visioning and setting goals and objectives.
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      49
• Building new or upgrading existing infrastructure: Examples of this include 
expanding stormwater collection systems, expanding wastewater treatment capacity, 
increasing bridge heights or strengthening levees.
• Improving community awareness and public education: To generate support  
for adaptation efforts your municipality will likely need to use outreach and education 
actions. These can also be useful to effect voluntary change at the individual level,  
such as water or energy conservation.
• Varying and/or diversifying your options: By developing “safeguards” against 
climate change impacts you can increase the preparedness of your community. 
Examples can include: diversifying your community’s economic base to move  
away from sources that will be negatively affected by climate change (i.e. coastal  
recreation); developing new groundwater sources to expand water supply; or  
diversifying your energy supply to include renewable energy to both help mitigate 
climate change impacts and reduce demand from the electric grid during heat waves.
	
Worksheet 10 will help you identify adaptation options and  
relevant departments.
These options will be refined later through an assessment of drivers and constraints  
in Worksheet 11. 
Selecting Options
There are many factors that will affect the type of actions your community includes  
in your final adaptation plan, including the resources that are available and the extent of  
your community’s vulnera­bility to specific climate change impacts.
As you develop your adaptation options, keep in mind that these should not only  
address the climate change impacts which your community is facing, but should do so in  
a sustainable way. Specifically, they should not impede any wider sustainability efforts. 
For example: if not given proper consideration, adaptation actions can increase local 
greenhouse gas emissions unless they are considered together, and likewise mitigation 
measures can actually increase a community’s vulnerability to climate change impacts.69 
For that reason it may be relevant to consider adaptation actions which have co-benefits 
i.e. those that benefit both adaptation and mitigation efforts. For more information on 
adaptation-mitigation co-benefits see the Drivers section below. In addition, the Canadian 
Communities’ Guidebook for Adaptation to Climate Change produced by Environment 
Canada helps to identify those actions that support sustainability efforts while at the  
same time improving resilience.
  
	
10
Alternatives… It is likely that there will be 
actions that can be carried out now. Although it 
is important to include these actions within your 
final plan, it is not be necessary to wait for  
a formal plan before implementing them. In such 
cases, it may be valid to go ahead with the  
action before more formal planning has occurred. 
   Case Study   	
Leading By Example – Department of Environmental 
Services Adaptation Plan in Quebec City, QC  
In 2006, Quebec City decided to create an adaptation plan for  
its Environmental Services department. This proactive approach was 
driven by the desire to reduce both the costs and negative effects  
of a changing climate on the City’s operations and infrastructure.  
During the development of the plan, it was recognized that many 
actions existed in management plans that could be considered 
adaptation actions as they serve to reduce vulnerability to climactic 
changes. Therefore, throughout the planning and consultation  
process, staff was encouraged to identify both existing and new 
adaptation measures. Both were included in the final adaptation plan 
which commits the Environmental Services department to consider  
the impacts of a changing climate in all of its operations, projects, 
plans and bylaws. However, the majority of adaptation actions  
included in the plan target the aquatic environment and drinking  
water in Quebec City as these are areas of high vulnerability. 
Milestone 3: plan
50      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Drivers
Similarly to the drivers that influenced you to begin adaptation planning, there are also 
factors that can drive the implementation of an action. In many cases, the drivers of 
action will be the co-benefits and opportunities which result from the implementation of 
that action. Co-benefit strategies are those which aim for the win-win options and have 
multiple benefits and which often build the most momentum and support. For example, a 
co-beneficial action may be one that addresses both adaptation and mitigation goals, or  
it might be an action which is both cost effective and will increase local adaptive capacity. 
Other possible drivers include:
• Externally identified vulnerabilities – an academic study which examines the vulner-
ability of the community may spur interest and action on climate change impacts;
• Funding opportunities – funding becomes available to develop and implement  
adaptation actions;
• Economies of scale – it may be more cost effective to split the cost of implementing 
an action over many departments as the issues are cross-boundary and results can be 
valuable across many departments, therefore interest from multiple departments  
may drive implementation;
• Co-benefits – strategies which aim for the win-win options and have multiple benefits;
• Fear of inaction – the fear of being adversely affected by climate change impacts; 
• Damage to infrastructure – damaged infrastructure due to a climatic change might 
spur the implementation of actions to replace or update inadequate infrastructure; 
and
• A localized weather event that drew attention to the need for preparedness actions. 
Constraints
In addition to drivers for the implementation process, there are also a variety of  
constraints which may affect your community’s ability to implement adaptation actions. 
Whether or not to include constraints in your formal adaptation plan will be the decision of 
your adaptation team, however, considering these constraints while drafting the plan  
is necessary for both setting timelines and allocating staff responsibilities.
Constraints may be scientific, social, operational, environmental or financial. To identify 
any applicable constraints consider the following questions:
• Do you have enough scientific information to act? 
• How much support (financial, personnel, infrastructure) do you have?  
How much do you need? Where or with whom might you find what you don’t  
currently have?
• Is the identified option possible within your community’s policy context –  
does your government have the power to change the policies that are influenced  
by climate change?
• Who has the authority in your local government to enact adaptation actions?  
Are they already involved in the planning process?
• Do you have sufficient support from council to carry out an option?
 • How would a change in political leadership alter the implementation of an option?
• Who will you need to convince that action needs to happen now?
• How much time do you need to develop and implement each option?
• What resources do you have already? What else might you need? Are these internally 
or externally available?
• How will the environment be impacted? Is this impact positive or negative?
 • Will the option have implications for mitigation activities? 
Constraints that may influence 
implementation: 
• Lack of available information
• Cost
• Staff capacity
• Number of departments involved
• Silo thinking
• Lack of messaging
• Need for external resources
• Lack of agreement on severity and timing  
of climate change impacts
• Political will
• Competing or short timelines
• Effects on mitigation activities
• Provincial or territorial legislation
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      51
	
Worksheet 11 provides more detailed information on drivers and  
	
constraints and how to identify them. The worksheet will also assist in  
	
identifying possible ways to overcome them. 
Creating a Baseline 
While developing your adaptation plan, you will develop a set of indicators that can be used 
as a baseline against which the effectiveness of your community’s adaptation actions can 
be gauged. These indicators can also help assess how your community’s vulnerabilities are 
changing based on implemented actions and whether these actions increase or decrease 
your community’s adaptive capacity or sensitivity to climate change impacts.
Collecting Baseline Data 
Adaptation baseline data provides a record of a community’s current condition as it relates 
to vulnerability and risk. In order to create a baseline your team will need to identify a set 
of indicators which can be used to record your community’s current conditions. 
The process of establishing baseline data can range from exhaustive (touching on  
sensitivities, adaptive capacity, exposure, etc.) to cursory (selecting only one or two  
sample indicators). Keep in mind that the more information that is gathered at this stage,  
the better equipped your  
community will be to  
communicate the successes 
of your adaptation actions 
later in Milestone Five. 
Collecting baseline data is 
also a good opportunity to 
utilize the help of students, 
volunteers and/or interns.
Indicators
Indicators should be precise, clear and easy to understand. The specific indicators for  
your community will vary based on the actions that you have indentified but can include  
quantitative data (e.g. the quantity of infrastructure that has been replaced, the amount of 
cooling centers that have been opened, etc.) or more qualitative data on the activities  
that have been carried out by city staff (e.g. number of reports on the effects of climate 
change creation of opportunities for collaboration, public awareness on the issue of 
climate change, etc.).
11
Consider This…
Collecting baseline data can also be used  
as an entry point to your community’s  
adaptation work. The City of Boston took this  
approach and created a baseline prior even 
to their first look or vulnerability assessment. 
Milestone 3: plan
52      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
For example, if your objective is to increase public awareness of climate change and  
its projected impact on your community there are a variety of indicators that can be used 
to measure public awareness including:
• Attendance sheets from public meetings on climate change;
• Tracking “hits” on community-sponsored or community-run web-pages; and
• Surveys examining whether elected or public officials understand how climate  
change impacts relate to major decision making and how those decisions  
either reduce or increase climate change vulnerabilities or risks. 
Such indicators will help your community assess the effectiveness and success of  
your adaptation plan over time and determine areas which require further planning  
and/or action. 
	
Worksheet 12 offers more guidance on how to establish baseline data  
using indicators and provides sample indicators that can be used  
to track changes in sensitivity and adaptive capacity. 
Drafting your Climate Adaptation Plan
After having considered drivers and constraints, the actions that you have identified will 
make up your climate adaptation plan. In order to move from a general list of adaptation 
actions to a more formalized plan you will need to identify, for each action: when it can  
be implemented; sources of funding for its implementation; and assign responsibilities  
for implementation to relevant departments.
Short-term or immediate actions might include ones that can be done quickly, for a  
low cost or as part of routine operations; whereas long-term or ongoing actions might 
require changes to by-laws, planning documents, or a dramatic increase in a departments 
operating budget. To determine timelines for short-and long-term actions, your  
adaptation team should consider the specific circumstances in your community and  
the specific impacts you’ve identified. Likewise, in the action plan, you will want to  
include actions which have already begun but will be expanded to address the impacts  
that have been identified. 
Whether or not action is required immediately can often be determined by  
the imminence of the impact the action is meant to address. If the impact requires  
immediate action, due 
to safety concerns for 
example, than it will likely 
require immediate and 
short term actions. Keep in 
mind that such short term 
actions may also have to be 
supplemented by longer 
term and ongoing actions. 
One example would be the 
replacement of a specific 
culvert or storm drain 
where the short-term action 
is the physical replacement 
and the longer term action 
being changes to the policies 
regarding the frequency 
of infrastructure replace-
ment or the sizing of all new 
culverts.
 
For each action it is important to identify:
• A responsible department – this will be the department charged with implementing 
the action;
• Other relevant department (s) – any other departments that should be involved with 
planning and/or implementation;
• Timeline – is this action ongoing, immediate, future – when should it start and how 
long will it take to complete;
• Costs – what are the anticipated costs of an action – this can be represented  
with symbols (i.e. $, $$, $$$, $$$$) or with words (i.e. negligible, variable/fixed, 
significant) this estimate is not meant to act as a budget but rather an estimate of  
the expected costs;
• Funding – can this be funded by an existing budget, through third-party funding, 
future budgets, etc.; 
• Benefit – what will be the environmental, social, or environmental benefit associated 
with implementing this action; 
• Target - what are your community’s objectives and actions striving to accomplish 
within a defined timeframe? What are the numerical standards to measure  
progress against?
12
Consider This...
Consider that certain low consequence  
impacts may be easily addressed in  
the short term and may give the community  
a success to celebrate. For example,  
changes in animal and bird migration  
patterns may be addressed through a  
public awareness and education campaign 
that promotes the protection and  
maintenance of these species migratory  
path and creates awareness around the  
importance of bird habitats. Such a short-
term action (such as a public event on the 
species) is both low cost and low resource 
intensive but gives the community an  
accomplishment to celebrate and report 
against, without any significant expenditure. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      53
• Indicators - what is the baseline information required to measure the effectiveness  
of the action against (i.e. the amount of existing permeable surface, number  
and size of urban hot spots, number of policies that include climate change adaptation 
considerations, etc.). [Refer to Worksheet 12 for more information]
• Pre-cursors to action – what steps need to be taken to enable the implementation of  
an action (i.e. research studies, establishing partnerships, etc); and
• Other factors – what other factors are important to consider for this action (pre- 
planning needs, major sub-tasks, potential barriers, etc.).
In some cases there may be existing municipal actions or measures which lesson a  
community’s vulnerability to climate change. In Milestone One, your adaptation team 
would have done a preliminary scan of such actions. If appropriate, this list of existing 
actions can also be included in your community’s final adaptation plan. 
Sub-tasks should be developed where necessary and should include a relevant order for 
implementation if one task depends upon the successful implementation of another task.
It is also important to build in a certain degree of flexibility into the plan. As new  
information becomes available you may find that actions or timelines need to be revised. 
Adaptation planning is an ongoing process as climate change science is constantly evolv-
ing. As social, economic, and environmental conditions change your original assumptions 
may also need to change. There is more detail on the process of monitoring and review  
in Milestone Five. 
Financing
Financing adaptation actions is an important element to your adaptation plan,  
however as stated earlier, it cannot be the sole reason for pursuing or postponing action. 
When budgeting for climate change adaptation it will be important to consider the  
following questions:70
• Which actions can be incorporated into existing projects or expenditures?
• Which actions will require new expenditures?
• Is there a payback period for the action? (e.g. an action with a mitigation co-benefit 
may have a payback period associated with it)
• What are the potential savings over the lifetime of the improvement?  
Will replacing a piece of infrastructure with better technology save costs over the  
use of the older technology?
• What are the project’s life cycle costs?
• Is funding available in the existing municipal budget?
• What alternative funding sources exist?
 • Are there legal or insurance costs associated with inaction? How do these compare  
to the costs of building or replacement?
Your adaptation team will likely have to seek the input of senior management and  
department heads to find specific answers to the questions above. Making a detailed  
financial plan, or at least considering the financing mechanisms in as much detail  
as possible, will make your adaptation plan much more comprehensive and will ease  
with the implementation phase in Milestone Four. 
Setting Targets 
Although your community may already have mechanisms which can help to determine 
whether you are meeting your goals and objectives, it will be important to set specific 
targets to measure the progress and success in meeting your adaptation objectives and 
actions. These targets should be included within your adaptation plan as they will  
provide a benchmark for your community’s successes and challenges. 
To the extent possible, identify what your community’s objectives and actions are  
striving to accomplish within a defined timeframe (e.g. develop a downtown food co-op  
by 2015 or designate reliable shelters for extreme heat events by 2012) and any  
numerical standards to measure progress against (e.g. improving energy conservation  
by 25% or increase local food production by 20%). Numerical standards will only be  
possible in cases where baseline data is available (i.e. energy use prior to an adaptation 
action). In some instances, baseline inventories from Milestone One of the Partners 
 for Climate Protection program can be used to supply this information. 
Alternatives… Some community’s are 
addressing adaptation without formalizing their 
process via the creation of a Preparedness Plan. 
If this approach suits your community better, it is 
possible to create a list of adaptation actions to 
share with relevant stakeholders. 
Milestone 3: plan
54      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Identify Possible Funding Sources
Where funding does not exist within existing budgets, there may be other options to  
securing funding for adaptation activities. Seeking external or third-party funding can  
be an excellent way to start off any adaptation action. The following table (Exhibit 21)  
provides an example of possible funding sources and the types of actions that they can  
help to finance:
It is important that your adaptation team realistically looks at the costs 
associated with the actions that it identifies. However, as stated earlier, costs 
should not inhibit adaptation actions from being included in the plan. Where 
applicable, actions can be timed around the investigation of future funding 
opportunities or partnerships to seek funding for a given action.
Estimate How Progress will be Measured and Evaluated 	
A method to monitor the progress and effectiveness of your community’s actions should  
be included in the action plan in preparation for the fifth and final Milestone, Monitor  
and Review. Building monitoring and review activities into your plan can contribute to  
its long-term success. How frequently your community assesses the progress towards  
your adaptation objectives will depend on a variety of factors including the nature of your  
planning processes, your community’s budget cycle, and the implementation timeline 
for associated actions. The indicators that are established are a natural starting point for 
monitoring and review; add to these by outlining the specific times at which progress will 
be measured.
Building in measuring points on an annual basis can act as a mechanism to build and 
continue momentum for the adaptation process as your community moves through the 
implementation phase in Milestone Four.  
EXHIBIT 21 
 
Possible Funding Sources
Source
Funding possibilities
Green Municipal Funds
Available for municipalities with innovative environmental projects – GMF 
grants and below-market loans directly support municipal initiatives.
Partnerships
Opportunities for funding through partnerships with local universities and/or 
non-profit groups particularly for research and public outreach.
Federal government  
departments
Infrastructure Canada (gas tax funding), Natural Resources Canada Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, and Federal Government EcoAction 
Fund are some examples of federal funders.
Revolving funds
Using the savings from existing mitigation work to help fund the expansion of 
adaptation actions. This can be particularly useful where the action is being 
instituted as part of the adaptation plan but will also have an economic 
payback via budgetary savings. See the City of Edmonton case study in the 
case study box below.
Carbon trading
Once you’ve met your council’s commitment to emissions reductions, any 
surplus emissions reductions you make could be traded and the income 
from these could be used to support your adaptation actions.
   Case Study   	
Securing Funding – Energy Management  
Revolving Fund in Edmonton, AB  
The City of Edmonton has a revolving fund aimed at financing  
energy retrofits for City facilities. The benefits of a revolving fund 
include: it reduces operating costs, projects are not competing for 
limited capital funds, and due to the internality of the fund there  
is flexibility to address changing conditions. This or similar revolving 
funds can be used to fund adaptation actions. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      55
Create an Implementation Schedule
The creation of an implementation schedule is the backbone for the implementation 
milestone (Milestone Four). Note that although it is included here as part of the planning 
process, it could also be used as an implementation tool and be created as the first steps  
of Milestone Four. 
Earlier your adaptation team identified an estimated time to implement and/or  
complete each action; these timelines should now be finalized and compiled to create an 
overall implementation schedule. This schedule will track each action and associated 
tasks/sub-tasks, and will include a calendar of when each action is to be implemented 
(including the lead department, financing requirements, etc.). A comprehensive  
implementation schedule will help later to monitor what progress is being made on  
the adaptation plan. Keep in mind that the purpose of the implementation schedule is  
not to prioritize or rank adaptation actions but rather provides a tool for planning  
the implementation of each action. Also note that the implementation schedule will  
likely cover an extensive period of time as all adaptation actions, from immediate to 
ongoing, should be included. 
	
Worksheet 13 will assist your community with drafting your adaptation 	
	
plan, providing guidance on how to identifying timelines, associated costs, 	
	
responsible persons, other resources (external support, tools, financing), 	
	
pre-cursors and sub-tasks for each of the actions that have been identified 	
	
as well as an implementation schedule. 
Finalizing Your Adaptation Action Plan
The work your community has done to this point will make up the majority of your  
adaptation plan. The more thorough your adaptation team has been in identifying goals  
and objectives, categorizing actions, assigning responsibilities, and identifying funding  
mechanisms, the easier it will be to compile those items into a formalized adaptation plan. 
Drafting the plan may be a good task to assign to the adaptation team leader, as writing 
by committee can often lead to delays, miscommunication, and aggravation. One person, or 
at most a small group, should be assigned the job of turning the various components into a 
larger document for review by the adaptation team. Once a draft of the adaptation plan has 
been written by the core writing group this should be circulated to the wider adaptation team 
for review, comments, and editing. By circulating a draft to a wider audience than the drafting 
group, you are creating a more consensus built document rather than one that is ‘owned’ by 
a small group. Elements that should be included in the final adaptation plan include: 
• Acknowledgements – Thank you to stakeholders, adaptation team, Mayor, Council, etc.
• Mayors/Council Commitment 
• Executive Summary 
• Glossary – Key terms that may assist the reader.
• Introduction 
• Background and Context – What is climate change? Why was this process  
undertaken? Why is it important
• Impacts & Issues – What impacts are projected for the community?  
What are the risks?
• Vision Statement – A call to action for your community
• Goals and Objectives – What are the objectives for achieving the vision?  
What are our targets for measuring these?
• Actions – Actions, costing, financing, responsibilities, timeline, monitoring & review
• Implementation schedule – A timeline by action with a defined date and  
responsible departments.
• Additional Information – References, sources of information, etc.
Integration with other Municipal Planning Activities
In addition to having a stand alone adaptation action plan, it is good practice to interweave 
adaptation planning into existing municipal planning documents such as master/ 
strategic plans (transportation, cycling, etc.), official plans, community visions and/or your 
community’s Integrated Community Sustainability Plan (ICSP). By integrating adaptation 
into existing policy documents, your community’s adaptation plan will not become a  
stand alone stagnant document but rather will make up part of the way your community 
operates. This sort of integration will not necessarily be done quickly, but the process 
should be initiated upon the completion of an adaptation plan.
13
Milestone 3: plan
56      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
	
Worksheet 14 provides a template for a press release which can be used  
	
in two ways; firstly to outline your community’s adaptation plan and  
	
secondly to communicate how far your community has come in increasing 	
	
its adaptive capacity as well as any next steps. 
Ensure You Have the Approval and Support of Council, Municipal Staff  
and the Community
In Milestone One, you secured the support of council for your adaptation planning efforts. 
It is important to maintain that support, as such it is suggested to bring your adaptation 
plan to Council at this stage in the process. Having the support of Council, municipal staff 
and the community will help in moving plan implementation forward.
Your community’s final Adaptation Plan will likely need to pass through Council in order 
to ensure that each action will be implemented in Milestone Four. Your climate change 
champion may be a good choice to present the plan to Council as they will be able to speak 
to the importance of the plan and also provide a stirring call to action. 
The completion of the formal adaptation plan and its passing through Council is a 
success that your adaptation team will want to communicate both internally to staff (using 
issue briefs), and externally to stakeholders and the community at large (use the press 
release template in Worksheet 14). It will likely be an occasion to celebrate as it marks your 
community’s first steps  
in becoming more adaptive 
to the impacts of climate 
change. Use this to build 
momentum for the  
implementation phase as 
well as to mark the achieve-
ments of your adaptation 
team to date.
Once you have a finalized adaptation plan which has been passed through Council,  
be sure to reconnect with relevant departments as to their roles and responsibilities.  
Some departments will have been involved throughout the process, however for those who 
have not been involved recently this information should be (re)communicated. 
As you engage internal and external stakeholders it is important to focus on action and 
emphasize local benefits. Be sure to identify the importance of adaptation efforts while still 
emphasizing the necessity of mitigation as you engage stakeholders. 
It is also important to address the fact that there are costs associated with delaying 
action, most importantly the increased risks and possible danger to the community. Take 
the time to communicate both the objectives of your adaptation plan and the implications 
of the plan to the key stakeholders that were identified in Milestone One. This communica-
tion may also extend more widely to other municipalities, local government associations, 
and provincial or federal governments. You can use Issue Briefs (See Worksheet 4) to 
communicate internally. You can also use Worksheet 14 to announce the completion of the 
adaptation plan to external stakeholders.
Note that in many cases there are steps in Milestone Three that could be done in  
Milestone Four and vice versa. This happens because both planning and implementing are 
conceptually linked. Although we have recommended a certain progression of activities, 
it may make more sense for your community to conduct certain elements of each stage 
out of sequence. Often, Milestone Three and Milestone Four will be done simultaneously 
with constant revision and modification. This iteration demonstrates the cyclical nature of 
adaptation planning and the importance of monitoring and reviewing.  
Alternatives… If it is not possible to pass the 
completed adaptation plan through Council, 
one alternative is to take the plan to Council in 
sections or even divide up the larger plan into 
smaller plans which address a given impact. 
    Case Study   	
Collaborative Planning – Urban Forest  
Management Plan in Edmonton, AB  
Due to an urban forest that is threatened by drought and invasive 
pests, the City of Edmonton created an Urban Forest Management 
Plan (UFMP) that guides the City’s future urban forest management 
over a 10 year horizon. The plan was developed collectively, with  
regular input from a multi-stakeholder advisory group and consulta­-
tion with the public. This collaborative approach has been a key  
strength of the UFMP and demonstrates how adaptation planning can 
be incorporated into a municipal plan for managing urban forests. 
14
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      57
   Case Study   	
Planning Across Council – Ahead of the Storm:  
Preparing for Climate Change in Toronto, ON   
In 2008, the Toronto Environment Office, in collaboration with  
the City of Toronto’s Climate Adaptation Steering group and  
the Clean Air Partnership, developed Ahead of the Storm: Preparing 
Toronto for Climate Change. As part of the actions contained  
within the City’s Climate Change, Clean Air and Sustainable Energy 
Action Plan, this adaptation plan includes programs that will reduce 
the effects of various climate change impacts such as heat waves, 
flooding from intense rainstorms, high winds, the expanding  
range of insect pests, and changes in lake levels. A few examples  
of adaptation actions that are currently in place in Toronto include: 
Toronto’s Heat Alert System and Hot Weather Response Plan; 
Flood Warning Forecasting; the Deep Lake Water Cooling (Enwave), 
Peaksaver and Keep Cool Programs (Toronto Hydro); and their 
Emergency Plan. Within the City’s Adaptation Plan they’ve  
also included a number of recommended actions for developing  
and implementing their climate change adaptation strategy  
including actions specific to establishing a strong ongoing  
adaptation process and enhancing capacity within the community. 
Where Should You Be Now?
At this point you should have a finalized action plan, which includes an outline of 
adaptation actions, costing, financing, responsibilities, implementation timeline, and a 
basis for monitoring and reviewing your implementation success. With your community’s 
adaptation plan finalized, you can start putting your plan into action in Milestone Four, 
Implementation. 
Summary of Outputs
Vision and guiding principles
Adaptation options 
Specific actions (where applicable) 
Financial implications of your plan
Draft and Final Adaptation Plan
endnotes
 
69.	 Bizikova, L., Neale, T., Burton, I. (2008). Canadian Communities’ Guidebook for Adaptation to Climate Change: 
Including an approach to generate mitigation co-benefits in the context of sustainable development. First Edition. 
Environment Canada and University of British Columbia, Vancouver.
70. Partners for Climate Protection (2008). Five-Milestone Framework for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 
Available for download at http://www.sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/PCP_Resources/
PCPFiveMilestoneFramework-e.pdf
Milestone 3: plan
•Establish adaptation 	
	 vision and objectives
•Set goals
•Identify options 	 	
	 and actions
•Identify possible  
	 drivers and constraints
•Evaluate actions 	
	 against drivers and 	
	 constraints
•Determine appropriate 	
	 baseline and  
	 indicator data
•Examine financing  
	 and budget
•Establish implementa-	
	 tion schedule
•Create action plan
•Launch plan
•Begin implementation
•Solidify support  
	 from Council and  
	 community
•Use appropriate  
	 implementation tools
•Follow terms of  
	 action plan
•Report on successes 	
	 regularly to maintain 	
	 momentum
•Asses new information 	
	 and review drivers
•Track implementation 	
	 progress
•Evaluate effectiveness 	
	 of actions using  
	 baseline data and 	
	 indicators
•Communicate  
	 accomplishments
•Investigate future 	
	 adaptation options  
	 and actions
•Revise adaptation  
	 plan
•Launch next round  
	 of adaptation plan
UPDATE  
ADAPTATION   
ACTIONS
Review
Review
Review
•Identify stakeholders
•Build climate change 	
	 adaptation team
•Identify an  
	 adaptation champion
•Take a first look at  
	 climate change 	 	
	 impacts and existing 	
	 adaptation actions
•Pass council  
	 resolution and  
	 community charter
•Initiate research on 	
	 climatic changes
•Refine impacts  
	 and consider service  
	 areas for each
•Vulnerability  
	 assessment (study  
	 of sensitivity and  
	 adaptive capacity)
•Risk assessment 	
	 (consequence and  
	 likelihood of impacts) 	
	 and prioritization
58      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
MILESTONE 3:
PLAN
MILESTONE 4:
IMPLEMENT
MILESTONE 5:
MONITOR/REVIEW
MILESTONE 1:
INITIATE
MILESTONE 2:
RESEARCH
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook        59
MILESTONE 4:  
implement
60      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
milestone 4: implement
purpose
outputs
Secure the support of Council and the  
community and implement the actions identified 
in your adaptation plan. 
	Support and Approval from Council 
	Implementation Tools
	Community Engagement and Partnerships
In the fourth milestone, Implement, you will be working to ensure that 
you have the appropriate implementation tools as well as the approval 
and support of Council, municipal staff and the community to enact your 
adaptation plan. Though your community has made strides towards 
becoming more adaptive by planning, it is through the implementation 
phase and beginning to put the adaptation plan into action that it will 
improve its adaptive capacity.
Check Back
As you progress through Milestone Four, be sure to keep track of how new conditions 
within your community might affect the decisions taken in Milestones One, Two and 
Three. Maintaining the relevance and accuracy of information throughout this  
adaptation process is important as the information collected will continue to inform  
decisions in the future. By periodically scanning the sources you’ve used in Milestone Two, 
you will be able to make changes as per any new information. You will also want to ensure 
the actions you’ve identified in Milestone Three remain appropriate for each impact,  
especially as local conditions may change. Throughout this Milestone be sure to take note 
of the measuring and monitoring elements that have been included in your adaptation  
plan to prepare you for Milestone Five on monitoring and review.
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      61
Milestone 4: implement
Getting Started
While the scope of activities and steps in Milestone Four may seem less time consuming 
than the activities from previous milestones, the implementation phase can be one of  
the longest milestones in this process. The work that the adaptation team has  
done to this point in ensuring that the adaptation plan is as comprehensive as possible will  
help to ease any difficulties with implementation. The duration and resources needed 
for implementation will vary, sometimes considerably, from one community to the next; 
however, several elements will be consistent including: a comprehensive implementation 
schedule (from Milestone Three), identification and use of implementation tools, and 
partnerships for delivery.
While your adaptation team and other municipal staff are responsible for putting  
your adaptation plan into motion and maintaining momentum, non-governmental  
organizations and private-sector contractors can contribute to the implementation of 
specific projects.71 Approval from both internal stakeholders (Council and municipal staff) 
and external stakeholders (vendors, residents and community groups) will contribute to 
the plan’s success. 
As actions are developed, it may be the case that certain elements are implemented  
prior to the more formal implementation process outlined in this milestone. This will 
likely be the case for many communities and is common in most planning processes.  
It is good practice to take a quick survey of the implementation status of actions before  
delving further into the implementation milestone; this will assist in documenting what 
has taken place already and allow you to identify appropriate implementation tools for 
remaining actions. 
The implementation tools identified below will help to secure support from the  
departmental staff that will, in effect, be charged with carrying out the actions and pre-
cursors to actions contained within the plan.
If your team was not able to establish a baseline or identify indicators in Milestone 
Three, you may find that you are able to now. It will be helpful later in Milestone Five  
to have some indication of the pre-existing levels of adaptive capacity prior to the  
implementation of adaptation actions in order to assess the progress and effectiveness of 
each action. If your team 
was able to establish a 
baseline and identify 
indicators in Milestone 
Three, ensure that that 
information is still rep-
resentative and current 
before moving on. 
Ensure You Have Appropriate Implementation Tools
Identification of the appropriate tools for implementation will help to drive the  
implementation process. These tools will be used at various times throughout this stage 
and represent the way in which your adaptation team will reach out to the responsible staff  
and wider community as identified in Milestone Three. 
Training
Throughout implementation, training of staff, elected officials, and key community  
stakeholders is a key tool for the execution of adaptation actions. Some examples of train-
ing topics that may be required include:
• New standards or codes of practice;
• Benefits of a given adaptation action (i.e. increasing tree cover in the community);
• New technologies (i.e. engineered materials or machinery) that may be used in  
infrastructure replacement; and
• Rationales behind policy changes and or amendments to departmental strategic plans.
Additional training workshops may also be required on specific technologies that are  
being adopted by various departments; these may require the hiring of external experts  
or consultants who may be most familiar with the given technology. Trainings need not be 
long formal sessions, brown-bag lunch’n’learns are an excellent example of a small, informal 
training session that can help to educate key individuals on a given action or policy initiative.
Workshops and other training exercises will both add to your community’s skill set  
and contribute to the successful implementation of your adaptation plan overall. 
Pilots
Piloting is a way to implement adaptation actions through small scale initiatives. By  
conducting a pilot, you can assess the strengths and weaknesses of specific actions, as well 
as associated costs and whether it produces both desired and measurable results. This 
analysis will allow you to determine if your identified adaptation action is the most appro-
priate action to pursue on a larger scale. 
For example, if your community decided to replace aging infrastructure, your adaptation team 
may decide that before a full scale project is undertaken it may be relevant to conduct a pilot by 
replacing the infrastructure of a particular site and assessing the benefits of that action. Such a 
pilot would help to determine the associated costs and find out whether the action produces the 
desired results. Likewise, replacing impermeable paving materials with permeable ones at the 
neighbourhood level would be a great way to determine if the measure should be scaled up to 
cover the entire community. Pilots can help to secure the commitment of smaller groups of 
residents who can then help to spread the message about the need and benefit of a given action.
Consider This…
Your community may decide to solidify its 
implementation commitments through political 
declarations. Alternatively, if the political will is 
not present, your community may drive imple-
mentation through stakeholder feedback from 
the community or from departmental staff.  
62      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Internal Communication
Along with training, communication will play a significant role in the implementation  
of your actions. In addition to those stakeholders which have been involved throughout the 
process, there are likely other teams, departments, individuals with whom information on 
the adaptation plan and specific actions will need to be communicated. Depending on the 
specific actions in your adaptation plan, a variety of information should be communicated 
both to Council and municipal staff including:
• Emergency service updates and preparedness plans; 
• Changes to Council priorities and objectives;
• Changes to by-laws, zoning requirements, and codes;
• New plans or guides; and
• New land-use regulations.
Much of this information will also need to be relayed to the public and should be included 
in relevant external communication.
This sort of internal communication can be done in a variety of ways; options include 
regular updates to Council, inclusion in departmental annual reports, internal memos or 
informal means of communication within the corporation (i.e. lunch and learn sessions, 
information posters, etc.). Coupling internal communication activities with more rigorous 
training exercises can be an effective way to ensure that staff and Council are well 
appraised of not only the actions that are taking place but also the reasons and motivation 
behind adaptation actions. 
External Communication 
In addition to communicating specific changes that will affect municipal staff and  
residents, it will be important to communicate more generally on the impacts of climate 
change and the risks associated with those impacts to the wider community. For example, 
increasing public awareness and education about the public health implications of climate 
change and the need for emergency preparedness, may be an action you’ve identified in 
your adaption plan, and you will need to utilize communication tools to achieve it. 
As you carry out the implementation phase of this process be sure to continue to include 
public input, involvement, and engagement. Volunteers are also a powerful resource  
and can help enhance public awareness on these issues and can be helpful to target larger 
groups such as youth, specific community groups, etc. 
There is also opportunity for partnerships with other communities throughout  
implementation. Partnerships provide a chance to share resources, experiences and 
lessons learned. It is often helpful to know how other similar communities have  
progressed through implementation and what methods they employed during the  
process which may also be valuable to your community. 
Marketing 
Given that public involvement and awareness is such an important element of implemen-
tation, marketing is a helpful tool through which communication with wider audiences can 
be carried out. Of course, your community will want to market its accomplishments and 
successes, but it is similarly important to inform the public about adaptation efforts, more 
generally, and of where there might be opportunities for public participation. By encourag-
ing residents to participate in adaptation activities at the household level, your munici-
pality is broadening its adaptation efforts from tackling only those issues that are under 
municipal control to those which are within the wider realm of the community. 
There are a variety of marketing tools that are available to you. A few possibilities include:
• Awareness raising campaigns or events;
• Tips for home adaptation (e.g. downspout disconnecting, emergency preparedness 
kits, or rain barrels);
• Incentives for participation in City led programs (e.g. installing backwater valves, 
disconnecting downspouts, etc.)
• Guides, brochures, and pamphlets on climate change threats and risks; and
• Public challenges and contests relating to climate change adaptation and preparedness.
   Case Study   	
Engaging the Community – Encouraging Residents 
to Prepare for Emergencies in New York, NY   
As a way to engage the community with emergency planning,  
New York City implemented Get Prepared: Ready New York.  
Ready New York is an educational campaign which encourages  
preparedness planning for residents. Ready New York’s resources  
now includes 11 multilingual publications, numerous public service 
announcements, multimedia advertising campaigns, extensive  
web content, a speakers’ bureau, a reprinting program, corporate 
partnerships, and continuous community outreach.
For more information on this program visit New York City’s Office  
of Emergency Management website at http://www.nyc.gov/html/oem/ 
html/get_prepared/ready.shtml 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      63
Community based social marketing (CBSM) is another tool which can be used to assist 
with the implementation of particular actions. CBSM is marketing that emphasizes direct, 
personal contact among community members and the removal of barriers (i.e., “road-
blocks” to more sustainable actions and behaviours).
Other Resources
There are also other implementation tools that you may find applicable to your commu-
nity. For instance other planning guides or documents from communities that have  
already implemented an adaptation plan may be helpful during implementation. Through 
such resources your community will have access to best practices, information sharing, 
and knowledge exchange. 
Also recall the local government action mechanisms that are available to your com-
munity (See Background, p. 14). Consider how these mechanisms can be used to aid the 
implementation of your adaptation actions. Such mechanisms include land use and urban 
planning, licensing and regulation, facilitation, advocacy and leadership, community 
service delivery, community development and civic engagement, and workforce develop-
ment. Through these action mechanisms, local governments can use direct and indirect 
influences to support and foster behaviour that furthers adapting to a changing climate.
Whatever means your community uses to implement its adaptation plan, ensure that  
it remains transparent and includes stakeholders from the community (especially those 
that can be considered vulnerable populations or groups at risk). 
	

	
Worksheet 15 will help you to allocate tools to aid in the implementation of 
identified adaptation actions.
Follow the Terms of the Adaptation Action Plan
Be sure to check-in to your wider plan as implementation progresses. Your team will want 
to ensure that implementation is following the terms that have been outlined in the adap-
tation plan. Though the implementation phase does require a degree of flexibility, your 
adaptation team will want to ensure that this process remains consistent with the vision, 
goals and objectives that you have outlined in Milestone Three.
Where Should You Be Now?
Your community should now be underway with the implementation phase of the adaptation 
process. Do not get discouraged if implementation is slower or more challenging than you 
anticipated; the work to get to this point took many months (or years) therefore the results 
cannot be expected to take place instantly. Also remember that planning does not end with 
implementation — be sure to revisit your plan on a regular basis to account for new changes 
and to review the appropriateness of identified measures (more on this in Milestone Five). 
Building ongoing renewal into your plan is a key element to long-term success.72
Summary of Outputs
Support and approval from Council
Identified implementation tools
Strong community engagement and ongoing partnerships
endnotes
 
71.	 Partners for Climate Protection (2008). Five-Milestone Framework for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 
Available for download at http://www.sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/PCP_Resources/
PCPFiveMilestoneFramework-e.pdf
72.	 Ibid
   Case Study   	
Implementing Action – Using Community Based  
Social Marketing in the Town of The Blue  
Mountains, ON     
As part of their Integrated Community Sustainability Plan (ICSP), and 
with funding from the Ontario Ministry of the Environment’s Community 
Go Green Fund, The Blue Mountains created Your Community, Your 
Planet: A Guide to Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. The guide 
emphasizes the importance of individual actions and seeks to 
animate the community on what they can to do about climate change 
whether it be joining one of the EcoAction teams or implementing 
simple actions to reduce energy use. Using community based social 
marketing; the guide stresses the importance of bringing a global 
issue to the local culture through real people, real stories and real 
situations. For more information on The Blue Mountains program visit 
http://www.thebluemountains.ca/sustainability-plan.cfm
15
Milestone 4: implement
•Establish adaptation 	
	 vision and objectives
•Set goals
•Identify options 	 	
	 and actions
•Identify possible  
	 drivers and constraints
•Evaluate actions 	
	 against drivers and 	
	 constraints
•Determine appropriate 	
	 baseline and  
	 indicator data
•Examine financing  
	 and budget
•Establish implementa-	
	 tion schedule
•Create action plan
•Launch plan
•Begin implementation
•Solidify support  
	 from Council and  
	 community
•Use appropriate  
	 implementation tools
•Follow terms of  
	 action plan
•Report on successes 	
	 regularly to maintain 	
	 momentum
•Asses new information 	
	 and review drivers
•Track implementation 	
	 progress
•Evaluate effectiveness 	
	 of actions using  
	 baseline data and 	
	 indicators
•Communicate  
	 accomplishments
•Investigate future 	
	 adaptation options  
	 and actions
•Revise adaptation  
	 plan
•Launch next round  
	 of adaptation plan
UPDATE  
ADAPTATION   
ACTIONS
Review
Review
Review
•Identify stakeholders
•Build climate change 	
	 adaptation team
•Identify an  
	 adaptation champion
•Take a first look at  
	 climate change 	 	
	 impacts and existing 	
	 adaptation actions
•Pass council  
	 resolution and  
	 community charter
•Initiate research on 	
	 climatic changes
•Refine impacts  
	 and consider service  
	 areas for each
•Vulnerability  
	 assessment (study  
	 of sensitivity and  
	 adaptive capacity)
•Risk assessment 	
	 (consequence and  
	 likelihood of impacts) 	
	 and prioritization
64      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
MILESTONE 3:
PLAN
MILESTONE 4:
IMPLEMENT
MILESTONE 5:
MONITOR/REVIEW
MILESTONE 1:
INITIATE
MILESTONE 2:
RESEARCH
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook        65
MILESTONE 5:  
monitor/review
66      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
milestone 5: monitor and review
purpose
outputs
Assess progress towards the goals and  
objectives that were set out in Milestone Three 
and to reassess the scientific information upon 
which vulnerability and risk were evaluated. 
	Review of scientific information 
	Progress on implementation
	Effectiveness of actions
	Updated action plan
	Communication of accomplishments
Getting Started
Since Milestone One, the process of monitoring and reviewing progress on climate change 
adaptation has been built into this guide. This process should be ongoing and happening on 
multiple levels (political, staff, budgetary) and for multiple audiences (from your adapta-
tion team to your community at large).
Monitoring, as set out in your community’s adaptation plan, should enable your team to 
examine lessons learned throughout implementation in order to identify if the context of 
your risks and vulnerabilities have changed or if any of the underlying research is now out 
of date, in which case a review should be triggered (and potentially revision) of the plan.  
The fifth and final milestone, Monitor and Review, serves to assess whether 
the goals and objectives previously set by your community have actually 
been achieved, and to identify any problems that have been encountered 
with an aim of developing solutions.  An internal review of your community’s 
adaptation plan should be conducted to look at whether planned actions 
have been implemented, and if so, what has been achieved, what barriers 
were encountered, and to begin identifying potential solutions. 
	
This milestone should also be an opportunity for communicating 
progress to the outside world, thereby helping to raise general awareness 
about climate change adaptation and celebrate your community’s 
accomplishments.
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      67
Milestone 5: monitor/review
In addition to ongoing monitoring and review, Milestone Five offers a specific opportunity 
to focus efforts on tracking your community’s progress against its adaptation goals and 
objectives and to update your adaptation plan based on this information and analysis.
Lastly, though your adaptation team has likely been reporting back to Council and  
other staff its key findings, informing Council, municipal staff and the community  
on the progress that has been made to date and any changes that need to be made to the 
planning process is an important part of this milestone. 
Tracking your Progress 
Tracking results is an important part of the adaptation process; it requires following up  
on the goals and objectives that were set as part of Milestone Three; looking at the  
indicators of progress that were identified earlier; and interpreting whether or not the 
actions taken have improved the adaptive capacity of the chosen service areas within  
your community. Looking at the progress made to-date is important as it:73 
1)	 Gives your adaptation team an opportunity to assess whether you are continuing 
towards your adaptation vision and goals;
2) Enables your community to know more accurately where, to what extent, and  
against which impacts it is most vulnerable;
3) Allows your adaptation team to know whether the actions in your plan are producing 
the results that were anticipated (and if not, giving the opportunity to modify and/ 
or replace them with more appropriate ones); and
4) Will likely be an occasion to celebrate your first steps in becoming more adapted to 
the effects of climate change.
Fundamentally, tracking your community’s progress is meant to gauge the implementation 
status of the adaptation actions your team has developed, and to identify whether these 
actions are helping to improve your adaptive capacity and achieve the climate adaptation 
vision established in Milestone Three. 
Exhibit 22 offers a set of questions that can be used for this purpose. The questions 
have been divided into two distinct areas: tracking progress on implementation and 
tracking effectiveness of actions. These questions are meant to help your community 
examine how successful your actions have been in achieving your community goals  
and the lessons you have learned in the process. 
Reflecting on progress made throughout the process is a cornerstone of Milestone Five;  
be sure to allocate enough time to do this thoroughly. 
EXHIBIT 22 
 
Tracking Progress and Effectiveness 
Progress on Implementation:
Are actions being implemented as  
per the adaptation schedule in your  
adaptation plan?
Effectiveness of Actions:  
How are your actions increasing or maintaining 
the adaptive capacity of service areas in your 
community? Are individual actions producing the 
intended results?
• How many actions have been undertaken by  
various departments?
• How many departments/staff have been  
involved in implementing adaptation actions?
• How have you engaged stakeholders in the  
development and implementation of your  
adaptation action plan?
• Are community partnerships in place to enable 
robust decision making with regard to adaptation 
planning?
  
• To what extent have you increased the general 
and technical capacity of your community to 
prepare for climate change impacts?
 
• How is climate information being considered  
in decision making processes within your  
community?
  
• How much support is there among your  
government, your community, and stakeholders  
to prepare for climate change impacts?
• How have drivers or constraints changed? Are 
there new opportunities available which might aid 
the implementation of your community’s actions 
now and in the future?
• Refer to the specific indicators established in  
Worksheet 12 and reassess your baseline. How have 
the conditions in your community changed?
  
• How effectively is your community’s technical capacity 
being used to evaluate risk and vulnerability?
 
• How effective have the measures been in achieving 
your community’s vision and goals?
• Are there any formal mechanisms in place that 
“mainstream” or otherwise facilitate climate change 
adaptation planning? If not, what has prevented  
this from happening?
 
• How has awareness about climate change and its 
projected impacts on your community increased?  
68      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Assessing new information 
Keep in mind that climate change adaptation is an ongoing process. As natural, economic, 
social and political conditions change, the research that was conducted as part of  
Milestone Two may also need to be updated. When assessing new information, important 
questions to consider include:
• To what extent has there been a change in political leadership since the adoption of  
the adaptation plan?
 • Has there been a shift in public opinion that has led to a shift in priorities?
• How have economic factors changed? Has this driven or constrained implementation 
(i.e. budgetary cuts, lack of third-party funding, delayed pay-back into revolving  
funds, etc.)?
• Has there been societal shifts which might influence your communities adaptation 
efforts (i.e. increased unemployment, increase in violence and/or crime, decrease in 
interest in environmental issues, etc.)
As your team likely found while completing the research phase of the adaptation  
planning process, the range of information available varies depending on the location of 
your community. Recall that one option for dealing with limited information was to look 
at how sensitive your community was to past and present-day climate and weather events. 
This method of research is highly applicable in Milestone Five as your team can begin to 
interpret the data from the period covered by your adaptation plan to identify any  
significant changes or impacts.
Your team will want to ensure that it considers all of the factors that may affect policy-
making and the planning processes over all. These considerations will help to shape 
updates to your adaptation plan, as discussed in the next section of this Milestone.
Use the following considerations to help review the assumptions that underlie your  
adaptation plan:74
 
• What non-climate related changes (societal, economic or political) were 
important in the creation of a climate adaptation plan? Have any changes to 
these assumptions occurred that might affect the successful implementation 
of your community’s adaptation actions? Take note of how these changes will 
affect your ability to address climate change (i.e. funding, public perception, and/or 
political support?) and whether these factors are a short-term concern or an ongoing 
issue. Also consider whether such changes have eliminated constraints thereby  
creating an opportunity to implement an action. 
• Have new scientific findings improved or changed the understanding of your 
community’s vulnerabilities to climate change? Maintaining the relevance and 
accuracy of information throughout this process is important as the information 
collected will continue to inform decisions in the future. Make a commitment to 
monitoring the science that you’ve used to base the climate change impacts for your 
community on by periodically scanning the data sources you’ve used in Milestone 
Two and making changes as per any new and applicable data. One possible way to do 
this is to plan for a scientific review every few years. In cases where you find new (and 
sometimes seemingly conflicting) scientific reports, it may be useful to work with the 
academic community to determine how relevant new findings are to your work and 
whether they should influence a change in the direction of your adaptation plan.  
It is important to keep in mind that climate change science will not stay static. Science 
is constantly evolving and it is likely that your adaptation plan will experience a  
similar evolution. 
• Based on changes in scientific information, have your community’s  
vulnerabilities or high risk areas changed? A re-evaluation of scientific informa-
tion may lead your community to change the focus of its adaptation plan. For instance, 
though your initial research (in Milestone Two) led you to assign a high risk factor 
to particular impacts, your current evaluation has found that your original assess-
ment assigned a higher risk than what is currently needed and/or other impacts have 
become a more pressing concern. In such instances your updated adaptation plan will 
need to reprioritize certain actions, based on the higher risk factor, to account for the 
changes in scientific information. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      69
• Are your vision and goals still relevant to the information and results  
from the first milestones? Though the adaptation vision and corresponding goals  
that were originally set will likely be broad enough to account for new scientific  
information and conditions, these might need to be narrowed or expanded to  
account for the most relevant and current data.75 
• Have you collected enough information about the success or failure of your 
adaptation actions? Tracking the progress that your community has made towards 
its adaptation goals may reveal that a given adaptation action is not improving the 
adaptive capacity of your community and may in fact be amplifying your commu-
nity’s vulnerability.76 Conversely a given measure may be so successful that additional 
funding is necessary to replicate that measure in another department. The informa-
tion collected as part of your tracking therefore can be useful for critical review of the 
plan and later for updates to public reports, budget requests and policy decisions.77 
• Are you able to address the lower vulnerability impacts that you identified in 
Worksheet 7? The purpose of conducting a vulnerability assessment in Worksheet 7 
was to identify which impacts your community is the most vulnerable to and proceed 
with a risk assessment of those impacts. For the impacts that ranked lower, it may be 
valuable to re-evaluate whether your vulnerability has changed and whether your 
community is now equipped to address these impacts. You may also want to consider 
conducting a risk assessment of those lower vulnerability impacts at this point. 
Update your Adaptation Plan
Once you have tracked progress against your community’s adaptation plan and reviewed 
new information, your community is ready to tackle the second part of Milestone Five, 
updating your adaptation actions and plan. In some cases you may need to update a specific 
action while in others you may have to adjust the implementation schedule of the entire 
plan. For example, an economic crisis which results in major industry cuts may have an 
impact on your ability to carry out your adaptation plan and should be taken into consider-
ation when you review your implementation schedule. 
Be sure to incorporate the most urgent and specific information in short-term 
decision making or budgetary processes. As you progress through your plan,  
external factors will not remain static. Depending on the length of time in between  
Milestone Four and Milestone Five, you may find that the factors which influence  
the effectiveness of your plan have changed. Many of these immediate and unforeseen  
changes cannot be adequately addressed in your regular policy making and planning 
cycles. Some of these changes may require immediate attention, and although they may 
not have been integrated into your original plan, will need to be incorporated into decision 
making and budgetary processes now. Due to the likelihood of such unforeseen factors, 
it is important to re-evaluate the relevance of your plan in the short term and determine 
whether it adequately addresses the most pressing concerns. 
Incorporate new climate change information into your regular planning and policy 
updates.78 While some new information is urgent and requires immediate attention, other 
information can be integrated into your regular policy making and planning processes. 
Building new climate change information into, comprehensive land use plans, official 
plans, shoreline management plans, and other such planning documents can be a useful 
policy mechanism to address and integrate climate change information on a ongoing basis.
Try to think about the opportunities that this juncture offers to share your knowledge and 
lessons learned in order influence climate change adaptation efforts beyond your immedi-
ate adaptation team. The plan updating process is an ideal time to communicate with a 
larger audience on the successes and lessons learned from the initial adaptation planning 
process – specifically how new research may necessitate expediting or strengthening your 
adaptation efforts. 
	
Worksheet 16 is a checklist which should be referred to as your team 
	
updates your adaptation plan.
16
Milestone 5: monitor/review
70      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Communicating Accomplishments
The completion of your implemented action plan is a success that your adaptation  
team will want to celebrate and communicate both internally to Council and staff, and  
externally to stakeholders and the community at large. Use this occasion to build  
momentum for ongoing implementation as well as to mark the achievements of your  
adaptation team to date.
Your team may want to use similar implementation tools as those used in Milestone 
Four to communicate the accomplishments of your adaptation team to the wider  
community. These communication tools include annual progress reports, press releases, 
issue briefs, website updates, workshops, awareness campaigns, celebration events and  
advertisements. 
A communication strategy that reaches out beyond your adaptation team to the wider 
community will help to foster adaptive behaviour outside of municipal operations. Engage 
those external stakeholders from citizen groups, local NGOs, universities or businesses 
that you identified in Milestone One as you develop a communications strategy to  
convey the accomplishments of your community’s adaptation efforts. Make an effort to 
consider a broad range of the community population, in particular those populations 
which are particularly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. By targeting vulnerable 
populations and groups that tend to be disengaged from municipal politics, your local 
authority can further expand its adaptation work beyond its own operations through  
individual actions and behaviour changes. 
Communicating your successes will be a testament to the countless months (and years) 
that your adaptation team has put into the process of creating, implementing and  
monitoring your community’s adaptation plan. It is important that both elected officials 
and senior managers take time to acknowledge the commitment of the adaptation team 
and its stakeholders to secure the community’s future against the impacts of climate 
change. A public celebration of this work (through an “adaptation week” or an awards  
ceremony for instance) could serve as an open and appreciative gesture towards the  
dedication of the adaptation team.
	
Worksheet 17 suggests a variety of options for communicating successes 
and assists with the development of a communications strategy. 
Where Should You Be Now?
Your community has now gone through the full cycle of the adaptation planning  
milestones, from initiating your adaptation effort through implementation and now  
monitoring and review. Recall that this is an iterative process; the cycle of adaptation  
planning should be maintained by following your implementation schedule and  
adding to it any new action items that have arisen as a result of Milestone Five.
deliverable
Assessment of progress on implementation
Review of effectiveness of actions
Updated action plan
Communication on accomplishments and successes
endnotes
 
73.	 Partners for Climate Protection (2008). Five-Milestone Framework for Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 
Available for download at http://www.sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/PCP_Resources/
PCPFiveMilestoneFramework-e.pdf
74.	 Snover, A.K., et al. (2007) Preparing for Climate Change: A Guidebook for Local, Regional and State Governments. 
In association with and published by ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability: Oakland, CA
75.	 Ibid
76.	 Ibid
77.	 Ibid
78.	 Ibid
17
Milestone 5: monitor 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      71
72      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
final thoughtS
Climate change is already being felt in towns and cities across the country. 
There are many indications that these changes are already underway: 
temperatures are increasing, snowpack is disappearing, spring is arriving 
earlier, and seas are rising. Across Canada, warmer temperatures have 
supported the rapid spread of invasive animal and plant species, melt-
ing of arctic and glacial ice, and increased heat stress among vulnerable 
populations. While at the same time exacerbating Canadians concern 
about extreme weather events, including ice storms, floods, and forest 
fires. Municipal services and infrastructure are increasingly being  
affected by these events.
Hundreds of Canadian municipalities have stepped up to the climate 
change challenge and are doing their part to control emissions by  
undertaking successful climate change mitigation activities. However, 
with the increasing effects of climate change becoming apparent,  
municipalities are beginning to see the need to assess their vulnerability 
to the changes that are already underway, and to develop responses  
that protect their communities. Mitigation is necessary to reduce the  
rate and magnitude of climate change, while adaptation is essential to 
reduce the damages from climate change that cannot be avoided. 
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      73
Changing Climate, Changing Communities: Guide and Workbook for Municipal 
Climate Adaptation is a collection of resources that provide a milestone based framework 
to assist local governments in the creation of adaptation plans to address the relevant 
climate change impacts associated with their communities. Although climate change 
adaptation is a complex process, this guide aims to provide a straightforward methodology 
to adaptation planning using a five-milestone approach. Each milestone represents  
a fundamental step in the adaptation planning process, starting with the initiation of  
adaptation efforts (by building an adaptation team and identifying local stakeholders)  
and culminating with a monitoring and review process that analyzes the successes  
and reviews the challenges of the adaptation plan and its implementation. 
This guide is aimed at municipal staff interested in working on climate change  
adaptation strategies. Staff from across all municipal departments can be involved in the 
process outlined in this resource; as it encourages an integrated approach to planning  
that requires examination of the environmental, economic, social, and health implications 
of climate change. 
In moving forward with your community’s adaptation planning efforts, consider the  
following key messages to municipalities on adaptation: 
Understand what adaptation is.
Adaptation to climate change can include any activity that reduces the negative impacts 
of climate change and/or takes advantage of new opportunities that may be presented. 
Climate change, unlike most other public priorities, will directly or indirectly affect a broad 
range of resources and activities in the public sector (from water resources and land use 
planning to public health and emergency management). As climate change will affect  
a broad range of community assets and government services adapting to climate change  
is a matter of “good government” and risk management in an effort to ensuring the  
safety, health and welfare of communities now and into the future. In order to reduce your  
communities’ vulnerabilities public decision-makers must ensure a positive lasting  
influence on their communities’ so that future generations do not bear the worst effects  
of climate change. 
Realize that adaptation and mitigation are not mutually exclusive
Mitigation efforts, or efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions, have become widespread 
among local governments. However, scientific evidence indicates that even if we could halt 
greenhouse gas emissions today, the world would still experience a changing climate for 
decades to come.
Many of the impacts (changing temperature and weather patterns, drought, flooding, 
erosion, and sea level rise) will be felt directly at the local level. Local governments have  
the greatest ability to prepare for these changes, and many are now embracing climate 
adaptation as a co-strategy to their climate mitigation efforts. While neither adaptation  
nor mitigation actions alone can prevent significant climate change impacts, taken 
together they form a comprehensive climate change response strategy that will prepare 
communities for the climate impacts underway while working to avoid even worse  
future affects.
Know what you are adapting to
The old management adage – you cannot manage what you don’t measure – is accurate 
when looking at adaptation planning. Developing your community’s understanding of 
climate change impacts and the major service areas which are likely to feel these impacts 
most acutely is crucial to know what climatic changes and impacts you will need to adapt 
to. Conducting both a vulnerability and risk assessment are crucial first steps in becom-
ing more adaptive to a changing climate. There are many sources of information on how 
climate change will affect Canada and its various sub-regions. These sources can all be used 
to some degree to develop a better understanding of how climate change will affect your 
community even when information specific to your location is not available. Knowing the 
impacts on your municipality will not only help you plan for adaptation but will also help 
build support among stakeholders for your planning efforts.
Prepare for those impacts
As practitioners of good governance, local governments must develop responses  
that protect their local citizens, environment and economy. Preparing for the impacts that 
will face your community will be the fundamental action you must take. It is important 
to remember that as your community engages in a climate change adaptation planning 
process, it should consider the balance of immediate and long-term needs, that community 
interaction must be supplemented with municipal action, and the need for commitment  
to plan for impacts despite facing uncertainty. Communities must, therefore, commit to  
driving this initiative by identifying and following-through on the actions they can  
undertake themselves or directly influence without getting sidetracked and delayed. 
Realize there is no ‘one size fits all’ approach
Although the need for adaptation planning is clear, it is important to recognize that there is 
no one way to approach planning for climate change. Adaptation planning, by its definition  
of responding to local impacts, requires a certain degree of ‘right-sizing’ or localizing, 
as any plan must be tailored to the community. The methodology presented here is not 
intended to be a one size fits all approach nor is it intended to supplant the many other 
resources that are available to Canadian municipalities. Rather it is meant to provide a 
high-level framework for how local governments can address the array of impacts likely 
to occur as a result of climate change. The Guide encourages the use of existing sector or 
impact specific resources to further advance and/or refine municipal adaptation efforts. 
74      Changing Climate, Changing Communities
Adaptation planning is not a new process and should be integrated  
with existing efforts
Acknowledge the work that your community is already doing which addresses climate 
change impacts (but which may not be labelled as “adaptation”). Where there is such work, 
it is important to incorporate any future adaptation planning with those existing efforts  
to ensure an integrated and comprehensive plan. In many cases, climate change will  
exacerbate existing high priority management concerns rather than creating completely 
new challenges. It is likely that your community will find that efforts to address existing 
management concerns affected by climate change may simultaneously reduce vulner-
ability to project climate impacts, particularly in the projected impacts are included in the 
scope of current decision making. 
Anticipatory planning is more effective than reactive planning
Taking proactive steps to be flexible and to anticipate and address expected impacts can 
save money and protect the well being of communities. This includes activities that are 
taken before impacts are observed (anticipatory) and after impacts have been felt (reac-
tive). In most circumstances, anticipatory adaptations will incur lower long-term costs and 
be more effective than reactive adaptations. Successful adaptation does not mean that neg-
ative impacts will not occur, only that they will be less severe than would be experienced 
had no adaptation occurred. Taking practical steps now with the best information available 
enables you to reduce your future risk and also realize possible near-term benefits. 
As stated in the preface to this guide, adapting to climate change is the new reality.  
Many local governments are already at the centre of this reality; dealing with the effects 
of thawing permafrost, damaged infrastructure and heat waves. Adaptation will require 
an integrated approach as it is a long-term, continual process which will touch all sectors 
of society; however, local governments have a unique opportunity to begin preparing for a 
changing climate as they will be on the front lines of responding to its impacts and there-
fore, have an interest in preparing for them. While higher levels of government can and 
must provide funding and support for climate change adaptation strategies on the ground, 
local and regional governments have an equal or even greater responsibility to plan  
proactively as well.
	
Municipal Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook      75
Acknowledgements
ICLEI – Canada would like to thank the many people  
who contributed their time so generously to review this 
guide throughout its production.
Advisory Group
Rachel Bocock, Alberta Urban Municipalities Association 
Mike Brotherston, Municipal Corporation of Delta
Ian Burton, University of Toronto
Devin Causley, Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM)
Angela Danyluk, Municipal Corporation of Delta
Gary Davidson, Davidson Group
Al Douglas, Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation 
Resources (OCCIAR)
Jenny Fraser, Province of British Columbia
Gordon McBean, University of Western Ontario
Jennifer Penney, Clean Air Partnership
Dave Sauchyn, Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative (PARC)
Missy Stults, ICLEI USA
Municipal Review Workshop Participants
Allison Ashcroft, City of Victoria
Brian Beck, City of Vancouver
Curt Benson, Niagara Region
Mark Boysen, District of Saanich
John Charles, Halifax Regional Municipality
Kathryn Cooper Macdonald, Halifax Regional Municipality
Angela Danyluk, Municipal Corporation of Delta
Ciara De Jong, City of Toronto
Cameron Deacoff, Halifax Regional Municipality
Jennifer Decker, City of Fort St. John
Jenna Dunlop, Durham Region
Suzanne Elston, City of Oshawa
Brian Hamilton, City of Hamilton
Birgit Isernhagen, City of Ottawa
Maria Jacobs, Halifax Regional Municipality
Caroline Jackson, City of North Vancouver
Kelly Johnston, City of Kamloops
Pamela Kertland, Natural Resources Canada
David Lane, Halifax Regional Municipality
Meagan Leach, City of Iqaluit
Leilani Lee-Yates, Region of Peel
Trisha Leszczynski, Town of Oakville
Richard MacLellan, Halifax Regional Municipality
Chris MacPherson, City of Fredericton
Shannon Miedema, Halifax Regional Municipality
Wayne Miller, Town of Essex
Debbie Nielsen, Union of Nova Scotia Municipalities (UNSM)
Brenda Osborne, City of Mississauga
Renee Roberge, Halifax Water
Kim Sare, City of Regina
Cindy Toth, Town of Oakville
Publisher
ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability, Canada Office
Authors
Ewa Jackson, ICLEI Canada
Leya Barry, ICLEI Canada
Nicole Marzok, ICLEI Canada
Design and Layout
Hambly & Woolley Inc.
photo credits
p. 2  Megan Meaney, Director ICLEI Canada. Photo courtesy of ICLEI 
Canada
p. 3  Mayor Lois Jackson. Photo courtesy of the Municipal Corporation  
of Delta, BC
p. 6  “Couple birding with manhattan skyline background.”  
Dreamstime.com/© Stefan Ekernas | 
p. 10 “Wickaninnish Bay.” Dreamstime.com/© Fallsview
p. 13 
	
1) “Bench after ice storm.” Flickr/bradipo
	
2) “Flooding in Cedar Rapids.” Flickr/U.S. Geological Survey
	
3) “Epic hail.” Flickr/Shiny Things
	
4) “Red River Valley.” Flickr/morningstartphoto
	
5) “Forest fire.” Flickr/canadagood
	
6) “Toronto flood.” Flickr/Diego_3336
	
7) “Flooding in Cedar Rapids 2.” Flickr/U.S. Geological Survey
	
8) “Hailstorm.” Flickr/schuey
	
9) “Hurricane Gustav.” Flickr/DVIDSHUB
p. 16 “Blue Ice.” Dreamstime.com© Staphy
p. 17  Photo courtesy of ICLEI 
p. 18  Photo courtesy of ICLEI
p. 22  “TO City Hall.” Flickr/416style
p. 23  “Homer, AK.” Dreamstime.com/© Matt Wise
p. 28  “Flood.” Dreamstime.com/© Péter Gudella
p. 29  “Hiker.” Dreamstime.com/© Rafał Cichawa
p. 30  “Cold reception.” Flickr/jaxxon
p. 34  “Plant fighting drought/desert.” Dreamstime.com/© Pascal Eisenschmidt
p. 44 “Flooded road near Richmond, London.” IstockPhoto/Mike Graham
p.45  “Windmills.” Dreamstime.com/© Fallsview
p. 51 “Just clearing the bridge.” Flickr/oldonliner
p. 56 “Wildfire.” Flickr/Eggs&Beer
p. 56 “The storm cloud.” Flickr/ragardner4
p. 58 “Forest fire.”Dreamstime.com/© Bambi L. Dingman 
p. 59 “Boy planting sprouts.” Dreamstime.com/© Valentina Razumova
p. 60 “Water level measure.” Dreamstime.com/© Jasenka
p. 64 “Smog sunrise.” Dreamstime.com/© Arne9001
p. 65  “City people.” Dreamstime.com/© Joy Fera
p. 69  “Green leaves with sun ray.” Dreamstime.com/© Iryna Sosnytska
p. 71  “City bikers in San Francisco.” Dreamstime.com/© Can Balcioglu
p. 72  “City at dusk, Seattle.” IstockPhoto/Veni
p. 75 “Stanley Park, Vancouver.” Dreamstime.com/© Brad Calkins
This Guide was made possible with the generous support of Natural 
Resources Canada: Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division.
ICLEI Canada
401 Richmond Street West, Studio 417
Toronto, Ontario M5V 3A8
T: 647.728.4308  F: 416.642.0954
E: iclei-canada@iclei.org
www.iclei.org
