REPORT
Health of 
Canadians 
in a Changing 
Climate 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 2 
Health Canada is the federal department responsible for helping the 
people of Canada maintain and improve their health. Health Canada 
is committed to improving the lives of all of Canada's people and to 
making this country's population among the healthiest in the world 
as measured by longevity, lifestyle and effective use of the public 
health care system.
Également disponible en français sous le titre :
La santé des Canadiens et des Canadiennes dans un climat en 
changement : faire progresser nos connaissances pour agir
To obtain additional information, please contact:
Health Canada
Address Locator 0900C2
Ottawa, ON  K1A 0K9
Tel.: 613-957-2991
Toll free: 1-866-225-0709
Fax: 613-941-5366
TTY: 1-800-465-7735
E-mail: hc.publications-publications.sc@canada.ca 
© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the 
Minister of Health, 2022
Publication date: February 2022
This publication may be reproduced for personal or internal use only 
without permission provided the source is fully acknowledged. 
Cat.: H129-121/2022E-PDF
ISBN: 978-0-660-41525-3
Pub.: 210509
This Report was developed with understanding and 
acknowledgement that Canada was built on the original 
homelands of many culturally diverse and historically 
distinct First Nations people and Inuit. Canada also 
is part of the ancestral homelands of The Métis. We 
respectfully acknowledge all Indigenous Peoples on 
whose traditional lands we live and work.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 3 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 7
HEADLINE STATEMENTS . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 17
CHAPTER 1. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Climate Change and Health Linkages. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 34
CHAPTER 2. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 53
CHAPTER 3. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Natural Hazards . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 114
CHAPTER 4. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Mental Health and Well-Being. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 226
CHAPTER 5. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Air Quality . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 286
CHAPTER 6. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Infectious Diseases. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 366
CHAPTER 7. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Water Quality, Quantity, and Security . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 468
CHAPTER 8. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Food Safety and Security . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 535
CHAPTER 9. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . Climate Change and Health Equity. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 614
CHAPTER 10. .  .  .  .  .  .  . Adaptation and Health System Resilience . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 668
GLOSSARY . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 756
Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: 
Advancing our Knowledge for Action 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 4 
Edited by 
Peter Berry, Health Canada
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Suggested Citation 
Berry, P., & Schnitter, R. (Eds.). (2022). Health of Canadians in a 
Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: 
Government of Canada.
Authors
Peter Berry, Health Canada
Phil Blagden, Health Canada
Céline Campagna, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
and Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national 
de la recherche scientifique
Marika Egyed, Health Canada
Paddy Enright, Health Canada and University of Waterloo
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
and Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national 
de la recherche scientifique
Sherilee Harper, University of Alberta
Katie Hayes, Health Canada and University of Toronto
National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health with 
contributions from Donna Atkinson, Roberta Stout, Regine 
Halseth, and Margo Greenwood
Nicholas Ogden, Public Health Agency of Canada
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Tim K. Takaro, Simon Fraser University
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 5 
Contributors
Lewis Archer, National Reconciliation Program 
at Save the Children 
Donna Atkinson, National Collaborating Centre for 
Indigenous Health
Jura Augustinavicius, McGill University
Amber Bedard, University of Calgary 
Peter Berry, Health Canada
Catherine Bouchard, Public Health Agency of Canada
Gabrielle Brankston, University of Guelph
Elizabeth Brown, Public Health Ontario
Jordan Brubacher, Simon Fraser University
Chris Buse, University of Northern British Columbia and 
University of British Columbia
Céline Campagna, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
and Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national de la 
recherche scientifique
Susan Clayton, College of Wooster
Christina Cook, University of British Columbia
Tricia Corrin, Public Health Agency of Canada
Ashlee Cunsolo, Memorial University
David Demers-Bouffard, Institut national de santé publique 
du Québec
Antonia Dibernardo, Public Health Agency of Canada
Shawn Donaldson, Health Canada and Carleton University
Michael A. Drebot, Public Health Agency of Canada
Gemma Dunn, Uisce (Ishka) Consulting International
Betty Edwards, Health Canada
Susan Elliott, University of Waterloo
Paddy Enright, Health Canada and University of Waterloo
Aamir Fazil, Public Health Agency of Canada
David N. Fisman, University of Toronto
Mike Flannigan, University of Alberta
Manon Fleury, Public Health Agency of Canada
James Ford, University of Leeds
Eleni Galanis, BC Centre for Disease Control and University of 
British Columbia
Lindsay Galway, Lakehead University
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
and Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national de la 
recherche scientifique
Amy Greer, University of Guelph
Regine Halseth, National Collaborating Centre for 
Indigenous Health
Carla Hilario, University of Alberta
Emily Jenkins, University of Saskatchewan
Daniel Jubas-Malz, University Health Network
Nia King, Queen’s University
Tom Kosatsky, British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
Julianne Kus, University of Toronto
Eric Lavigne, Health Canada
Patrick A. Leighton, Université de Montréal and CIUSSS du Centre-
Sud-de-l’Île-de-Montréal
Alexandra Lesnikowski, Concordia University
L. Robbin Lindsay, Public Health Agency of Canada
Benny Ling, Health Canada
Diana Valencia Lopez, Health Canada
Ann-Marie Lowe, Public Health Agency of Canada
Antoinette Ludwig, Public Health Agency of Canada
Catherine Macdonald, Alliance for Healthier Communities 
Morgan MacNeill, Health Canada
Paul Makar, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Maria Malik, Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Carlyn Matz, Health Canada
Deborah McGregor, York University
Lorraine McIntyre, British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
Ericha Moores, Natural Resources Canada
Shaun K. Morris, University of Toronto
Tyrone Munroe, Four Arrows Regional Health Authority
Hannah Tait Neufeld, University of Waterloo
Victoria Ng, Public Health Agency of Canada
Jolly Noor, University of Waterloo
Jaclyn Paterson, Health Canada
Radenko Pavlovic, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Melissa Perri, University of Toronto
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 6 
David Plummer, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Sami Qutob, Health Canada
Jacinthe Racine, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Pierre Raymond, Health Canada
Jérôme Ribesse, Synergie Santé Environnement
Gabrielle Richards, University of Ottawa
Robyn Rittmaster, Health Canada
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Shanaya Singh, Health Canada
Ben Smith, Public Health Agency of Canada
Roberta Stout, National Collaborating Centre for 
Indigenous Health
Rebecca Stranberg, Health Canada
Denise Thomson, University of Alberta
Linda Varangu, Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care 
Marielle Verret, Health Canada
Linda Vrbova, Public Health Agency of Canada
Lisa Waddell, Public Health Agency of Canada
Shannon Waters, Vancouver Coastal Health 
Aaron Wilson, Health Canada
Heidi Wood, Public Health Agency of Canada
Guoliang Xi, Health Canada
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 7 
Acknowledgements
The Climate Change and Innovation Bureau at Health Canada gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the following people in 
assisting in the development of assessment chapters.  
Amreen Babujee, Katharine Neale, Alexandra Sawatzky, Francesca Cardwell, Robyn Hocking
Carolyn Brown is gratefully acknowledged for contributions to technical writing and editing that made this publication possible. 
Reviewers
The Climate Change and Health Innovation Bureau at Health Canada gratefully acknowledges the contribution of the following people 
in providing guidance, reviewing chapters and providing written comments. 
Bryan Adlard, Abdul Afghan, Christina Ameni, Eric Aubin, Helen Berry, Sonya Billiard, Barrie Bonsal, Elizabeth Bush, Tia Caprino, Anne 
Castelino, Keith Chau, Jade Craig-Payette, Ashlee Cunsolo, Angie Daze, Rob de loe, Chris Derksen, Warren Dodd, Patricia D'Onghia, 
Helen Doyle, Monica Dutt, Kristie L. Ebi, Elizabeth Elliott, Neville Ellis, Marjorie Emmanuel, Neal Fann, Victor Gallant, Frank Geraghty, 
Zoe Gillespie, Nela Gojevic, Michelle Hooper, Courtney Howard, Kristen Howe, Dave Hutton, Cheryl Khoury, Richard King, Megan Kirch­
merier-Young, Christina Lee-Fuller, Sarah Levitt, Johanna MacDonald, Carlyn Matz, Stephanie McFayden, Deborah McGregor, Jeremy 
McNeil, Natasha Mohammed, Asish Mohapatra, Andy Morse, Pemma Muzumdar, Erin Myers, Meghan Myles, Chad Nelson, Simon Otto, 
Claudel Pétrin-Desrosiers, Bruno Pilote, David Plummer, Dominique Poulin, Kim Raine, François-Nicolas Robinne, Pablo Romero-Barri­
os, Daniel Rosenbaum, Rainer Sauerborn, Ryan Schwartz, Tina Sheppard, Raquel Silva, Kelly Skinner, Victoria Tunstall, David Turcotte, 
Eduardo Vides, Sonia Wesche, Kyle Whyte, Kara Williamson, Britt Wray, and Xuebin Zhang.
Secretariat and Peer Review Coordination
Rebekka Schnitter, Peter Berry, Jolly Noor, and Brianna Dukeshire
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 8 
About the National Climate Change 
and Health Assessment 
Why This Assessment Is Needed
The rapid rate of global climate change and the diminishing opportunity to keep warming below 1.5°C (IPCC, 
2018) has increased awareness of the urgent need to prepare for climate change impacts on health and to 
mitigate climate change (WHO, 2018). Near-term reductions in greenhouse gases (GHGs) will not prevent 
further warming of the globe in the next few decades; increased efforts are needed to adapt to protect all 
Canadians from the associated health impacts (WHO, 2013; Smith et al., 2014; Watts et al., 2018). In many 
important areas, progress has been made globally to prepare individuals and health systems for climate 
change impacts, but a significant adaptation gap exists in many countries (Martinez & Berry, 2018). 
Health authorities, researchers, and individual Canadians are seeking information about the way climate 
change is currently affecting health and is projected to do so in the future. Many local health units have 
undertaken assessments of climate change, health vulnerability, and adaptation and have begun taking 
measures to protect health. The number of decision makers requiring the latest scientific evidence of health 
threats from climate change is expanding, with new programs at local to national levels to support efforts to 
prepare for impacts. An example is Health Canada’s climate change and health capacity-building program, 
HealthADAPT, launched in 2018 (Government of Canada, 2019). 
At the same time, attribution studies have forged a causal link between climate change and health effects 
associated with specific events, and the urgency of efforts to better understand climate change impacts has 
increased, with international studies suggesting that even modest increases in temperature, expected in the 
next few decades, are associated with significant health impacts (IPCC, 2018). Scientists have also cautioned 
about possible limits to health adaptation (Watts et al., 2015; IPCC, 2018) under current rates of warming. 
This assessment, Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action, is the 
first comprehensive study of current and projected risks from climate change to the health of Canadians 
since 2008. It was developed by a team of more than 80 subject matter experts from regional and federal 
health authorities and academic institutions across Canada. It addresses the evolving knowledge needs of 
government decision makers, civil society organizations, and individual Canadians by providing evidence-
based and, where possible, quantitative information to help people understand how Canada’s climate is 
changing, and the effects on health and health systems, including implications for those most at risk in 
society. For key risks to health, it also examines current efforts to prepare for climate change, from individual 
to national levels, and explores what further efforts are needed. The potential for very large co-benefits to 
health of well-designed measures to reduce GHGs are also explored in the report. 
As part of the national assessment process, Canada in a Changing Climate (Natural Resources Canada, 
2020), this study contributes to broaden understanding of climate change impacts and adaptation by the 
Government of Canada, including a focus on Canada’s changing climate (Bush & Lemmen, 2019), national 
issues, regional perspectives, and impacts on First Nations, Métis, and Inuit peoples and communities. The 
national assessment process is based on a broad partnership of subject-matter experts and assessment 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 9 
users from all orders of government, Indigenous organizations, universities, professional and non-
governmental groups, and the private sector. It includes engagement through a National Advisory Committee and 
the Adaptation Platform and engages the public through meetings, conferences, and online engagement tools. 
Report Format
The chapters in this report discuss relevant findings from the scientific literature on priority health risks 
related to climate change and on adaptation options for protecting health. Where information is available, 
chapters include quantitative projections of future health risks from climate change (see Chapter 5: Air 
Quality; Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases; Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). The report includes 
analysis of the interplay between climate change and important determinants of health, which can affect 
adaptive capacity and health equity to influence vulnerability to health impacts (see Chapter 9: Climate 
Change Impacts on Health Equity). The assessment includes a separate chapter on climate change impacts on 
Indigenous Peoples’ health and includes information on these impacts throughout the full report (see Chapter 2: 
Climate Change on Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada). All chapters include illustrative case studies of actions 
being undertaken by health authorities to reduce risks to Canadians from climate change. 
The report is structured as follows:
Chapter 1: Climate Change and Health Linkages – provides information on how Canada’s climate is changing 
and is projected to continue to change, to support the understanding of growing threats to health. It identifies the 
complex pathways through which climate change affects health and the key health risks facing Canadians. 
Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada – explores current impacts of climate 
change on the health of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and communities. It highlights the role of 
current and legacy impacts of colonialism, racism, and discrimination in contributing to these impacts and 
highlights, through a number of case studies, the strengths and resilience of Indigenous Peoples in planning 
for the impacts. 
Chapter 3: Natural Hazards – reviews evidence of how natural hazards are affected by climate change and 
their impacts on the mental, social, and physical health of Canadians. It then provides information about 
effective adaptation strategies for reducing risks and the co-benefits of undertaking these measures. It 
proposes research directions to address key knowledge gaps in this field. 
Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being – discusses current evidence of the mental health impacts of 
climate variability and change on Canadians, including regions and populations at higher risk for such 
impacts. It highlights important factors that support psychosocial well-being and adaptation options for 
preparing for climate change and limiting impacts from current hazards. 
Chapter 5: Air Quality – examines the linkages between climate change and air quality in Canada, including 
how the health of populations could be affected by changes in air quality under various climate scenarios. 
The chapter also discusses the health co-benefits associated with efforts to mitigate GHG emissions and 
adaptation options for protecting Canadians from climate change impacts.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 10 
Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases – highlights the impacts of climate change on risks from infectious diseases 
of importance for public health in Canada, including those that are current, known disease risks (e.g., Lyme 
disease, West Nile virus) and new risks that may emerge. It then discusses adaptation to reduce climate-
related infectious diseases, including their importance for populations at increased risk and the capacity of 
health systems to take needed actions. Existing research gaps are highlighted for the reader.
Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security – describes the relationship between climate change and the 
water cycle in Canada and attendant risks to the health of Canadians from impacts on water contamination, 
safety, and security. The vulnerability of drinking water systems, private wells, and Indigenous water systems 
is examined, and projected health risks from climate change are discussed. The chapter presents possible 
adaptations to reduce risks and important knowledge gaps in efforts to take actions.
Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security – presents existing evidence on the impacts of climate change on health 
through effects on food safety and security. It describes the nexus among climate change, the food system, 
and human health, as well as key drivers of poor health outcomes in Canada. Populations and regions at 
higher risk from impacts are discussed, along with options for adapting to future impacts. 
Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity – examines how important factors and trends at the individual, 
community, and health system levels can increase or decrease climate change risks to the health of 
Canadians. The implications of climate change for health equity are explored, along with measures to 
empower specific population groups to adapt. The chapter also provides tools and resources that support the 
integration of health equity considerations into climate change and health activities, such as vulnerability and 
adaptation assessments, and the adaptation design and evaluation process.
Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience – provides an overview of adaptation as the 
key response to climate change impacts on the health of Canadians and discusses the importance of 
mainstreaming climate information into existing policies and planning, adaptation to future climate change 
conditions, and measures to address adaptation challenges. The status of health adaptation in Canada is 
investigated, along with evidence of climate change impacts on health systems, trends in health system 
vulnerability, and new tools that health authorities can use to build resilience. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 11 
Headline Statements
•	 Climate change is already negatively impacting the health of 
Canadians.
Climate change has been a driver of recent health effects related to rising temperatures and extreme 
heat, wildfires, and the expansion of zoonotic diseases into Canada, such as Lyme disease (see Chapter 3: 
Natural Hazards; Chapter 5: Air Quality; Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases).
•	 Health risks will increase as warming continues, and the greater 
the warming, the greater the threats to health.
Projected increases in the frequency and severity of intense precipitation events, urban flood risk, 
droughts, extreme heat, wildfires, and storms will directly affect health by causing more illness, 
injuries, and deaths, without greater adaptation efforts. The current burden of mental ill health 
in Canada is likely to rise as a result of climate change. Disruptions to food systems and water 
resources; worsening of air pollution; the emergence and re-emergence of climate sensitive infectious 
diseases; and increasing demands on health systems will continue to threaten Canadians' health (see 
Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada; Chapter 3: Natural Hazards; 
Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being; Chapter 5: Air Quality; Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases; 
Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security; Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security).
•	 Some Canadians are affected more severely by climate change, 
as exposure and sensitivity to hazards and the ability to take 
protective measures varies across and within populations and 
communities.
Growing climate change impacts worsen socio-economic conditions harmful to health, such 
as poverty, and amplify health inequities. Combined with increasing rates of chronic diseases, 
social isolation and an aging population, climate change augments impacts on health. People 
disproportionately affected by climate change include children; pregnant people; First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis peoples; people with chronic illnesses; outdoor workers; low income individuals; and people 
with disabilities (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada; Chapter 3: 
Natural Hazards; Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 12 
•	 The effects of climate change on health systems in Canada — for 
example, damage to health facilities and disruptions to health 
services and operations — are already evident and will increase in 
the absence of strong adaptation measures.
Health infrastructure, operations, health financing, health care, public health programming, supply 
chains, and the health workforce can be impacted by extreme weather events and by chronic stresses 
from longer-term warming, reducing access to and quality of care to Canadians. Health facilities and 
services in rural and remote areas, and health systems that have not assessed and managed risks, 
face the greatest threats. Compounding climate change hazards that can arise — for example, when 
extreme heat occurs with drought and a wildfire — pose severe risks to individuals and the health 
systems they rely on (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). 
•	 Efforts to prepare for climate change are known to reduce risks 
and protect health. We must take action now.
Many health authorities are working with decision makers in other sectors, such as emergency 
management, to take actions to protect people, communities, and health systems. This is called 
adaptation. Adaptation measures must be scaled up rapidly and substantially if current and future 
health impacts are to be reduced (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience).
•	 The health impacts of climate change on First Nations, Inuit, and 
Métis peoples are far-reaching, with disproportionate impacts on 
their communities, including food and water security and safety, 
air quality, infrastructure, personal safety, mental health and 
wellness, livelihoods, culture, and identity.
Indigenous Peoples have been adapting to changing environments since time immemorial. 
Indigenous knowledge systems and practices are equal to Western scientific knowledge and 
contribute to Indigenous Peoples’ survival, adaptation, and resilience. Preparing for climate change 
requires addressing determinants of health and ongoing health inequities. It also requires that 
Indigenous Peoples’ rights and responsibilities over their lands, natural resources, and ways of life are 
respected, protected, and advanced through Indigenous-led climate change mitigation, adaptation, 
policy, and research (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada).
•	 To successfully protect all Canadians from the health impacts of 
climate change, decision makers must pursue adaptation actions 
that are inclusive and equitable and consider the needs of 
racialized, marginalized, and low income populations.
Existing health inequities could be made worse unless future adaptation and greenhouse gas 
mitigation efforts are designed to address them. Redressing inequities and strengthening 
determinants of good health, such as improving access to health care and housing quality, can 
help reduce the impacts of climate change on individual health (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and 
Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada; Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 13 
•	 Increased efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are 
required to help protect the health of Canadians.
The continued emission of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere will impose limits on our ability to 
adapt and lead to more severe impacts on health. The health sector can show leadership in reducing 
its carbon footprint and improving environmental sustainability while building resilience to future 
climate change impacts (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience).
•	 Reducing greenhouse gas emissions can provide very large and 
immediate health co-benefits to Canadians.
The economic value of the health co-benefits can help to offset the implementation costs of 
measures. Health co-benefits of taking actions on air pollution are estimated to include thousands of 
avoided premature deaths annually in Canada by the middle of the century (see Chapter 5: Air Quality; 
Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 14 
Guide to the Report
This assessment builds on previous scientific studies and reports on risks to the health of Canadians so that 
government decision makers, health practitioners, researchers, and individual Canadians can take effective 
measures to protect health now and to prepare for future impacts. The Executive Summary provides an 
overview of key findings from each chapter of the report to help readers to easily access information most 
relevant to their efforts to prepare for climate change. 
Assessment Approach and Methods 
Beginning in 2017, Health Canada led focus groups and bilateral meetings with health sector decision makers, 
civil society organizations, researchers, National Indigenous Organizations, and youth to receive input on 
conducting the assessment. Advice was provided on key health issues to be addressed in the report, effective 
engagement processes during the assessment, and communicating the final results. The discussions 
revealed a strong interest in gaining a greater understanding of emerging issues related to climate change 
impacts on mental health, health equity, and Canada’s health systems. In addition, partners highlighted the 
need for a strong focus on climate change impacts on the health of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples 
and their communities; the importance of Indigenous knowledge systems for adapting; and the requirement 
for full and meaningful engagement, inclusion, and leadership of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples to 
address climate change impacts. Partners also highlighted the strong desire to have this report include 
discussion of reducing GHG emissions as the key preventive approach to protecting health from climate 
change and of capturing the large health co-benefits of well-designed policies and measures. 
The assessment builds on knowledge from the previous Government of Canada report, Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation (Chapter 7: Human Health; Berry et al., 2014), as well 
as the previous comprehensive national climate change assessment, Human Health in a Changing Climate: 
A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity (Séguin, 2008). The report draws from a 
large body of scientific peer-reviewed research and other publicly available sources and is an evidence-
based, mixed-methods study of the health and health system impacts from climate change in Canada. 
Authors compiled and assessed research to summarize the current state of science on priority health risks 
facing Canadians. The sources that informed this assessment included peer reviewed and grey literature in 
both English and French. There was no set cut-off period for the literature, although precedence was given 
to recent peer-reviewed literature and to seminal literature on the topic area published since the previous 
national climate change and health assessment, released in 2014. 
While the geographic focus of this assessment is Canada, the authors draw upon the increasing number 
of studies at the local or regional levels in Canada and from analysis in other countries that are relevant for 
understanding impacts and adaptation options in Canada. The report was extensively reviewed by Canadian 
and international experts and federal health-portfolio partner departments; and a public review of the 
chapters was also undertaken. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 15 
Intersecting Factors that Increase Climate Change Vulnerability
Identifying intersecting factors that increase vulnerability to climate change impacts on health was a key 
objective of this assessment. Knowledge of these factors allows for the development of targeted adaptation 
measures that address challenges for individuals or health sector decision makers in protecting health from 
climate change. Each chapter includes discussion of factors that increase the risk of climate-related health 
impacts, and a full chapter is dedicated to this topic (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). 
Uncertainty in the Analysis
Studies of climate change impacts on health are challenged by complex pathways and determinants — for 
example, factors related to personal behaviours, socio-economic conditions, and health system capacity. 
Through these pathways and determinants, individuals are exposed to climate hazards, respond to the 
threats, and experience effects on health. Exposures may be short-term and direct, as in the case of extreme 
heat events, or occur over longer time scales and be mediated by indirect factors related to physiological 
sensitivity and adaptive capacity. Analysis in this and previous Canadian assessments was hampered by 
Canada’s large geography and diverse population centres, including smaller populations in remote and 
Northern communities, and limitations associated with the completeness, comparability, and usability of 
available health and climate data (Seguin, 2008; Berry et al., 2014). Understanding the potentially severe 
health impacts of compounding, cascading, or cumulative climate change impacts (for example, the floods 
and wildfires that struck parts of British Columbia in quick succession in 2017) is a larger and even more 
complex challenge and was beyond the scope of this report. 
The number of studies that project risks to the health of Canadians from climate-related hazards, such as 
wildfires, extreme heat, air pollution, infectious diseases, and water-borne diseases, have increased in the 
last decade. However, some health outcomes related to climate change, including impacts on mental health, 
health equity, health systems, and food insecurity, remain difficult to model because of complex and dynamic 
drivers or data limitations. Studies of projected health risks from climate change reported in this assessment 
often included new analysis or existing studies of future health outcomes based on low Representative 
Concentration Pathway (RCP 2.6), medium (RCP 4.5), and/or high (RCP 8.5) emissions scenarios. Projections 
from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 5 (CMIP5) using the RCPs 2.6, 4.5, and 8.5 are widely used 
and have undergone robust evaluation by the science community. Where possible, authors drew upon results of 
climate scenarios, models, and projections reported in Canada’s Changing Climate Report (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Economic estimates of climate change impacts on the health of populations and health systems, and of 
the costs of needed adaptation measures, are required for cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness analysis of 
measures to address climate change. This includes measures to adapt to health impacts and actions to 
prevent future climate change through GHG mitigation that may result in health co-benefits. A paucity of data 
still precludes rigorous economic analysis along the spectrum of health concerns facing Canadians from 
climate change. Selected examples and case studies of economic impacts (Chapter 5: Air Quality; Chapter 10: 
Adaptation and Health System Resilience) are included in this assessment report. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 16 
Assessment of confidence and uncertainty are critical elements of climate change and health scientific 
assessments. Uncertainty arose from data limitations related to a lack of spatial or temporal fit between 
climate and health information. It also arose from limitations or lack of models of relationships between 
climate and health (e.g., future mental health impacts), and lack of data integrated across disciplines 
and from projections of human behaviour (e.g., future adaptation actions by individuals). In this report, 
authors used standard language to communicate their confidence in the results, and the level of certainty 
or uncertainty. This was generally based on the amount of existing evidence to support a statement (e.g., 
number of studies), the quality of the evidence (e.g., based on an assessment of the credibility of the source 
authors and literature), and the relationships between observed and projected trends. 
Research Needs 
The assessment revealed that significant knowledge gaps remain about climate change impacts on health, 
vulnerabilities, and needed adaptations to reduce current impacts and avoid much more severe impacts in 
the future. Each chapter provides information on research needed to build the integrated knowledge base 
to inform future policy decisions by local, regional, provincial, territorial, and national governments as they 
prepare for climate change.
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Executive 
Summary 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 18 
Summary
Climate change is already affecting the health of 
Canadians and, without taking concerted action, will 
continue to result in injury, illness, and death — with 
greater warming comes greater health risks. Many of 
these health impacts can be prevented if Canada rapidly 
and substantially scales up efforts now to adapt to 
growing threats to health. With increased awareness 
of the issue and collaboration among partners, health 
decision makers and communities should seize this 
window of opportunity to adopt strong adaptation 
measures and make health systems and facilities 
environmentally sustainable and resilient to climate 
change. Otherwise, climate change will continue to 
stress health systems, through longer-term impacts 
and by increasing disasters and emergencies 
that threaten to overwhelm their ability to protect 
Canadians and their communities. 
How to use this report
The report Health of Canadians in a Changing 
Climate: Advancing Our Knowledge for Action 
assesses the latest research and knowledge 
to inform Canadians about the effects of 
climate change on health and health systems, 
populations most at risk of these effects, and 
the adaptation measures being taken in Canada. 
The report is designed to help decision 
makers plan for the health effects of climate 
change and take action to reduce risks as 
well as to empower individuals to protect 
themselves and their loved ones. Public health 
officials can learn from promising practices to 
mainstream consideration of climate change 
and health into their plans and activities. 
Information presented in the report and the 
accompanying infographics, policy briefs, 
and presentations may be used by local and 
regional health authorities, and provincial 
and territorial governments to undertake 
climate change and health vulnerability and 
adaptation assessments, and engage and 
mobilize partners in adaptation efforts. It 
can also be used to raise awareness among 
all Canadians of the need to take concerted 
efforts to address the climate change 
challenge and of the many health benefits of 
doing so. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 19 
Climate Change Impacts on Health
Research shows that the health of Canadians has been affected by climate variability and change in recent 
years — both directly, when extreme heat and other natural hazards result from climate change, and indirectly, 
through a range of social, environmental, cultural, and economic pathways that have effects on health. Recent 
health effects related to rising temperatures and extreme heat, wildfire events, and the expansion of zoonotic 
diseases into Canada, such as Lyme disease, are linked to a warming climate.
All Canadians can be affected by climate change; however, the distribution of these impacts and related 
health risks are not uniform. Seniors, children, racialized populations, low-income individuals, individuals with 
chronic health conditions, and First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples often experience greater health impacts 
of climate change. Existing health inequities and variations in the status of determinants of health can drive 
this increased risk, as can an individual’s sensitivity (such as pre-existing health conditions) and exposure 
(such as geographic location) to climate hazards.
Natural Hazards
A range of natural hazards, including extreme weather events, routinely affect the health of Canadians, 
but sometimes effects on communities can be catastrophic. The number of days when the maximum 
temperature climbs over 30°C has increased in Canada, by about one to three days annually from 1948 to 
2016 {3.4.1.2}. Such extreme heat increases deaths in Canadian cities by 2% to 13%, according to one study 
{3.4.2.1}. It is estimated that recent extreme heat events (“heat waves”) in Quebec have led to a significant 
number of deaths: 291 in a 2010 extreme heat event and 86 in a 2018 extreme heat event. A severe extreme 
heat event in British Columbia in 2021 resulted in the death of 740 people {3.4.2.2}. Extreme heat can also 
increase hospitalization for cardiovascular problems {3.4.2.4} and pregnancy complications, including 
premature birth, early delivery, miscarriage, and congenital abnormalities such as neural tube defects 
{3.4.2.6}. While some risks, such as injury and death from cold, may decrease, the increase in death due to 
heat is expected to outpace the reduced rates of death due to cold {3.6.3.2}.
Drought increases fine dust in the air, which affects cardiovascular and respiratory health function. During 
droughts, winds spread pollen, fungi, mould, and bacteria, causing allergies and diseases. When rain falls 
after drought, pathogens can be carried into water bodies and drinking water systems, causing water-borne 
disease. Crop failures due to drought have many ripple effects on food security and food prices, as well as on 
the mental health of farmers and others in agricultural communities {3.7.2.4}. 
Rainstorms and freezing rain result in pedestrian and motor vehicle-related injuries and other health risks 
due to infrastructure failure (such as power outages). Wind can also lead to accidents, especially if it 
reaches speeds of more than 70 km/h. Storms can lift massive amounts of pollen into the air, causing asthma 
outbreaks. In addition to washing viruses, bacteria, and parasites into surface and groundwater, leading to acute 
gastrointestinal illness, storms can spread the bacteria in airborne particles that cause legionellosis {3.9.2.5}. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 20 
Flooding can result in injuries, drowning, hypothermia, and electrocution. Because floodwaters can become 
contaminated from various sources, including sewage overflow, they can cause gastrointestinal and skin 
disease as well as infect wounds. Flooded homes can become unsafe because of mould, fungi, and bacteria. 
If power outages result from storms or floods, these can lead to accidents due to darkness, hypothermia 
from lack of heat, and carbon monoxide poisoning from using barbecues, camp stoves, and outdoor heaters 
indoors {3.9.2.6; 3.10.2.5}. Flooding can result in the evacuation of communities and cause long-term 
displacement, including from traditional territories, which can cause significant impacts on the health and 
well-being of affected Indigenous Peoples {2.4.1}. Studies show that flood victims can suffer mental health 
problems and cardiac events after a flood {3.10.2}. 
Climate projections show increased extreme heat events in communities across Canada, and less 
precipitation in the summer throughout Southern Canada, with more droughts and water shortages in the 
summer in the Southern Prairies and the British Columbia Interior throughout the rest of this century {3.7.1}. 
While summer rain will decrease in Southern Canada, paradoxically, overall annual precipitation is increasing, 
especially in Northern Canada. More extreme precipitation events (unusually heavy rainfalls) are expected 
in the future {3.9.1}, leading to increased urban flood risk. Rising sea levels on the east coast of Canada are 
expected to submerge and erode coastlines. 
With changing rainfall, snowfall, and temperatures, landslides are expected to become more common; the 
effect on avalanches has not yet been determined {3.11.1}. These hazards are rare in Canada but pose a risk 
of injury and death when they do happen. Avalanches are a risk for back-country skiers and snowmobilers, 
and landslides threaten homes and other infrastructure on hillsides {3.11.3}.
A growing threat to health in Northern communities is permafrost melting. Permafrost currently covers 40% 
of Canada’s landmass, but this area is expected to decrease by between 16% to 20% by 2090, compared with 
1990 {3.11.1}. Thawing threatens the stability of buildings, roads, and communities in Northern Canada, with 
concomitant effects on transportation and access {2.4.1}. As it melts, permafrost may release infectious 
diseases from frozen wildlife carcasses and heavy metals such as mercury that can threaten health {3.11.2.3}.
Air Quality 
Exposure to air pollution causes a range of adverse health effects, including respiratory symptoms, 
development of heart and lung diseases including cancer, and premature death. Three major outdoor air 
pollutants — fine particulate matter, ground-level ozone, and nitrogen dioxide — together cause about 15,300 
premature deaths in Canada annually, with an economic cost of $114 billion {5.3}. Climate change and air 
quality are closely linked. Key air pollutants are produced from fossil fuel combustion, which is also a primary 
source of greenhouse gases (GHGs) {5.4}, and from wildfires, which are increasing as a result of climate 
change. Some air pollutants, such as methane and soot, worsen climate change, whereas some scatter 
solar radiation, cooling the planet. Climate change affects air quality, as higher temperatures can increase 
pollutants in smog, such as ground-level ozone. Large, slow-moving high-pressure weather systems, which 
are expected to become more common with climate change, also worsen air pollution {5.4.3 and Figure 5.1}.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 21 
Figure 5.1 Linkages between air quality and climate change.
The area burned by wildfires in Canada is increasing, doubling from the 1970s to the 2000s. Western Canada, 
in particular, has seen significant increases in the number of fires and area burned from 1959 to 2015 {3.8.1}. 
In addition to residents and firefighters injured and killed by wildfire, smoke from wildfires, which can travel 
in plumes in the atmosphere up to several thousand kilometres, has adverse effects on health. Wildfire 
smoke contains many different air pollutants including fine particulate matter that can penetrate deep into 
lungs {5.3.1}. Exposure to wildfire smoke is associated with an increase in all-cause mortality as well as 
exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and increased respiratory infections. In 
Canada, the health burden of air pollution from wildfire smoke varies from year to year and between regions. 
Over five recent years, it is estimated that 54 to 240 premature deaths due to short-term exposure and 570 
to 2500 premature deaths due to long-term exposure per year were attributable to fine particulate matter 
from wildfires as well as many non-fatal cardiorespiratory health outcomes. Studies project increases in 
these effects in North America throughout the century, including thousands of deaths, depending on the 
climate change scenario {5.6.4}. Wildfires in Canada causes property loss, evacuations, and environmental 
degradation, leading to increased mental health impacts in affected communities, such as depression, 
anxiety, and post-traumatic symptoms, even in young children {3.8.2.4; 3.8.3.3}.
Climate change can also affect indoor air quality, such as when elevated levels of outdoor air pollutants 
(including wildfire smoke) infiltrate buildings or when mould is produced after floods. Changes in the climate 
are also affecting airborne allergens by expanding the geographic distribution of plant species, extending pollen 
seasons and increasing pollen counts, which can affect the health of individuals with asthma and allergies.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 22 
Infectious Diseases
Risk from infectious diseases is affected by three factors: presence of the disease, protective behaviours 
by individuals, and people’s sensitivity to the pathogen (which may be affected by their overall health and 
underlying health issues). Climate change is expected to affect all three of these factors directly or indirectly. 
In 2008, a previous science assessment report projected that climate change would increase the prevalence 
of Lyme disease, as blacklegged tick vectors (Ixodes scapularis) and the infectious agents they carry (Borrelia 
burgdorferi) expand their range further into Canada from the United States, as a result of warming temperatures. 
Surveillance now provides strong evidence that Lyme disease emerged in Canada and spread northward as a result of 
climate change, causing a dramatic increase in human cases from 2009 to 2017 {6.3.1.5; Figure 6.5}.
Like Lyme disease, many other diseases will emerge or spread within Canada as our climate warms. These 
include viruses transmitted to humans by mosquitoes that are already found in regions of the United States 
bordering Canada, including La Crosse encephalitis virus. Like West Nile virus, which was probably imported 
to North America by infected mosquitoes on an airplane, other exotic viruses could reach Canada and 
spread if their reservoir hosts and vectors are found here. New species of mosquitoes and ticks may expand 
their range into Canada or arrive on human transportation, bringing both the vectors and the diseases they 
transmit. For example, a species of mosquito new to Canada that transmits chikungunya, dengue, and Zika 
viruses in other countries has become established in an area of Southern Ontario {Box 6.2}.
In addition to West Nile virus, Canada already has several diseases that can be transmitted by mosquitoes 
— eastern equine encephalitis virus, snowshoe hare virus, and Jamestown Canyon virus {6.3.1.3} — and 
one carried by fleas — Yersinia pestis, which causes pneumonic or bubonic plague {6.3.1.4}. Infections with 
these diseases are fortunately rare, and mainly result in mild or asymptomatic illness, but climate change 
could change the range and abundance of host animals and vectors, and lead to disease outbreaks {6.3.1.3}. 
Researchers are also watching other illnesses transmitted by blacklegged ticks (anaplasmosis, babesiosis, 
Powassan virus, and Borrelia miyamotoi), which are expected to spread in Canada with the expanding range 
of these ticks {Box 6.3}.
Climate change may have effects on diseases transmitted to humans directly by animals. Of concern is 
rabies in Arctic foxes, since the Arctic is warming more quickly than Southern Canada, affecting Arctic fox 
ecology. Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, carried by mice, is a climate-sensitive disease, but it is not yet clear 
how climate change will affect it in Canada {6.3.2.1}. Roundworms and other parasites carried by domestic 
dogs, coyotes, foxes, or raccoons may expand their range in Canada {6.3.2.2}. 
Weather and climate affect diseases transmitted from human to human. For instance, respiratory infections 
are often more prevalent in the winter. With climate change, milder and shorter winters may decrease 
incidence in that season, but research shows that warmer winters can lead to more widespread influenza the 
following year {6.3.3.1}. 
Some infections acquired from the environment may also be sensitive to aspects of climate. Cryptococcus 
gattii {6.3.4.2}, blastomycosis {6.3.4.3}, and coccidioidomycosis {6.3.4.5} are fungal infections found in 
Canada, and risks from these are likely to change with expected changes in temperature and rainfall. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 23 
Water Quality 
Climate change can affect the quality of drinking water, which is critical to health, and the safety and 
availability of water can have cascading effects on some other health risks discussed in this report. First, 
climate change can affect the sources of drinking water. Extreme rain events and rapid spring snowmelts can 
wash disease-causing bacteria and chemicals into oceans, lakes, and rivers. Heavy rainfalls can also lead to 
sewage overflows, which can contaminate bodies of water {7.3.2.3}. Conversely, droughts and low river flows 
can concentrate harmful substances and pathogens, causing health risks {7.3}. Rising temperatures can lead 
to outbreaks of toxic algae and cyanobacteria (together referred to as “harmful algal blooms”) in oceans and 
lakes, which can contaminate surface water and fish and shellfish.
Contaminated water can reach consumers directly if they use private surface or groundwater sources. 
Contaminated stormwater and wastewater can reach drinking water systems, which must be treated 
effectively to prevent illness in consumers. Fifteen per cent of Canadians get their drinking water from 
small non-municipal systems, and most water-borne acute gastrointestinal illnesses have been linked to 
such systems {7.3.2.1}. But even large municipal drinking water systems can be overwhelmed by extreme 
precipitation {7.3.3.2}. Stormwater can stir up sediments, making water more turbid and thus difficult to treat. If 
storms batter treatment facilities, water treatment systems can become ineffective or inoperative {7.3.2.1.1}. 
Heavy rainfalls have been increasing in most regions of Canada under a changing climate. Such heavy rainfall 
was a contributing factor in the Walkerton, Ontario, tragedy in 2000, when bacteria entered the drinking water 
system, killing seven people and making hundreds ill. A single heavy rainfall was also involved in the worst 
outbreak of illness from drinking water in North America to date, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1993 {7.3.2.1}. 
Climate change driven sea-level rise also threatens to intensify water quality issues in coastal areas reliant on 
groundwater, with salt water intrusion of aquifers and private wells already challenging some coastal regions 
(such as British Columbia’s Gulf Islands and Atlantic Canada) {7.3.2.2}.
Access to safe drinking water is a particular problem for many Indigenous communities across Canada 
{2.4.5}. For example, 61 First Nations communities had been under a drinking water advisory for more than a 
year as of February 15, 2020. Such communities may use a variety of water systems, including wells, trucked 
water stored in tanks, and piped water, and may have few or no household water services. Lack of water can 
lead to dehydration and unhygienic conditions, and breakdowns in water safety can lead to gastrointestinal 
illness. Water insecurity may also lead community members to use “gathered water” from the environment, 
which may be unsafe.
Risks to Food Safety and Security
Climate change is an increasing threat to food safety and security in Canada. Storms and heavy precipitation 
can cause sewage overflow, carrying pathogens from the ground and sewage into water bodies, and 
contaminating crops in fields. If water treatment systems do not treat contamination effectively, food can 
become contaminated during production and processing, which require large amounts of clean water {7.3.3}. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 24 
Rising temperatures, changes in precipitation patterns, and extreme weather events can also contaminate 
food directly (Figure 8.4). Higher temperatures in fields and farms can mean that disease-causing pathogens 
grow more successfully in manure and soil. If food is not kept cold throughout its journey to the plate, warm 
temperatures can allow dangerous bacteria and other pathogens to grow. These pathways can lead to 
contaminated food, which is a particular problem for food eaten raw, such as leafy greens.
Health depends on food security — eating sufficient nutritious food. Food security, in turn, depends on 
the ability of the food system to support food availability, accessibility, and use (Figure 8.1). These are 
interconnected and affected by steps in the food system and social determinants of food security, such 
as income and cultural food traditions. If climate change affects the food system or determinants of food 
security, it can have cascading effects on health. Household food insecurity is associated with many adverse 
physical and mental health outcomes, including nutritional deficiencies, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, oral 
health issues, and depression. Furthermore, malnutrition can make people more susceptible to disease {8.4.2}.
Climate change is projected to affect global food availability, as rising temperatures, changing precipitation 
patterns, extreme weather, droughts, and sea level rise (saltwater flooding of coastlines) could all directly 
damage crops and decrease yields {Table 8.2}. These factors could also increase pests, invasive species, and 
diseases affecting food supplies. We are already seeing impacts on crops due to shifting climate patterns, 
such as the loss of the strawberry crop in Ontario in 2012 because of unusual spring temperatures {8.4.3.1}. 
As a storm in St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, demonstrated, food security can be affected when 
people cannot reach grocery stores for long periods {8.4.3.1}.
Rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere may affect the nutritional content of food. Experiments have 
found that growing crops such as wheat, rice, and legumes in controlled environments with high atmospheric 
concentrations of carbon dioxide reduces zinc, iron, and protein concentrations by 3% to 15% {8.4.3.3.1}. 
Furthermore, pesticides and herbicides are less effective as carbon dioxide increases, which might lead to 
greater use and more health risks from these products {8.5.2.1.1}. 
Climate change will also affect food accessibility. Research has shown disruptions to the global food system 
and supply chain from natural hazards, and climate-related lower crop yields have already been linked with 
increased food prices in Canada and may push them higher. These prices could make it more difficult for low-
income Canadians to obtain essential foods they need to stay healthy.
Food insecurity can also result in changes in how people use food. This is particularly evident in Indigenous 
communities, where climate change is affecting the distribution, quality, and quantity of traditional food 
sources. In the absence of stable sources for traditional foods, Indigenous Peoples may rely more heavily 
on store-bought food, which can contribute to diets high in calories, salt, sugar, and saturated fat, and low 
in whole grains, nuts, seeds, legumes, fruits, and vegetables {2.4.4}. Such diets are a leading risk factor for 
death and disability in Canada {8.4.3.3.3}.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 25 
Figure 8.1 Conceptual framework outlining the relationships among food security, food safety, and health in a 
changing climate.
Mental Health
According to the Mental Health Commission of Canada, 7.5 million people in Canada experience mental 
health problems every year. While there are no known Canadian studies that project the mental health 
impacts of climate change, the current burden of mental ill health in Canada is likely to rise as a result of 
climate change. Costs of mental ill health borne by Canadians and health systems are expected to increase in 
the absence of further adaptation measures. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 26 
Climate change increases the risks of mental health impacts: 
•	
worsening of existing mental illness such as psychosis; 
•	
new-onset mental illness such as post-traumatic stress disorder; 
•	
mental health stressors such as grief, worry, anxiety, and vicarious trauma; and, 
•	
a lost sense of place, which refers to perceived or actual detachment from community, 
environment, or homeland. 
Impacts can also include disruptions to psychosocial well-being and resilience, disruptions to a sense of 
meaning in a person’s life, and lack of community cohesion. All of these can result in distress, higher rates 
of hospital admissions, increased suicide ideation or suicide, and increased substance misuse, violence, 
and aggression. Studies are also showing that people can become distressed about climate change itself, 
resulting in increased anxiety (often termed eco- or climate anxiety), grief (often termed eco-grief or climate 
grief), worry, anger, hopelessness, and fear.
Climate-related disasters are associated with mental health outcomes. For example, flooding, the most 
frequent form of disaster globally, can lead to increased levels of PTSD, general distress, depression, 
and anxiety among flood survivors {4.4.3.1}. Even people who are indirectly exposed to climate-related 
hazards can experience poor mental health outcomes, including vicarious trauma, secondary stress, and/or 
compassion fatigue for those whose lives have been disrupted by extreme events {4.4.3}.
Economic insecurity, displacement, and food and water insecurity after a disaster can also lead to mental 
health problems such as stress, anxiety, and depression {Chapter 4}. Research also shows that extreme heat 
can increase aggression and suicide rates, as well as increase social isolation for people who must stay 
inside {3.4.2.8}. Further, extreme heat can put people with mental illness at disproportionate risk because 
some mental illnesses, and some medications that treat mental illness, can affect the body’s ability to cool 
down {4.4.3.2}. In addition, people with mental illness may face greater challenges in adapting to extreme 
heat because of cognitive impairment (for example, they do not seek shade) and/or socio-economic barriers, 
which disproportionately affect people with mental illness {4.4.3.2}. 
Vulnerability to the Health Effects 
of Climate Change
As many sectors of Canadian society work together to mitigate and adapt to climate change, they must focus 
on the Canadians who are most at risk of the impacts. While climate change can affect any Canadian’s health, 
an individual’s sensitivity to climate change, exposure to its effects, and capacity to take protective measures 
and adapt (Figure 9.1) can increase or decrease vulnerability and their risk of being harmed.  
The conditions and factors that affect a person’s health, such as income, education, employment, and 
working and living conditions, are known as determinants of health. These determinants can increase or 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 27 
decrease an individual’s exposure or sensitivity to climate-related health hazards and can create barriers that 
limit their ability to take protective measures. Existing health inequities (avoidable and unjust differences 
in health) and determinants of poor health (such as low income, substandard housing, food insecurity) can 
compound climate change vulnerability and create barriers to adaptation. Structural systems of oppression 
that result in health inequities are underlying drivers of vulnerability to climate change. Such systems of 
oppression include racism, heteronormativity, and colonialism. Redressing inequities and strengthening 
determinants of good health is required to increase climate change resilience {9.4.3}. 
Increased risk can also be linked to certain locations, such as Canada’s North, which is undergoing more rapid 
climate change than Southern areas; rural and remote areas, where access to health care may pose problems 
{9.4.3.3}; and urban heat islands in cities, where dark, paved surfaces and lack of green space can cause 
temperatures to exceed those in surrounding areas, endangering residents during extreme heat events. 
Figure 9.1 Climate change and health equity framework.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 28 
Research shows that the populations most affected by many climate change hazards are seniors, children, 
racialized populations, low-income individuals, individuals with chronic health conditions, and First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples {Chapter 2, Chapter 3, Chapter 9}. However, each individual within these broad 
population groups has a wide range of intersecting factors and characteristics that can increase or decrease 
resilience. Evidence shows that individual characteristics and resources should be taken into account 
when considering vulnerability and developing measures to empower people to adapt and to assist those 
disproportionately affected. In the absence of careful planning and accounting for existing health inequities, 
adaptation measures may benefit only part of the population and inadvertently worsen existing inequities {9.5.1}. 
Many Indigenous communities, while experiencing disproportionate impacts of climate change and increased 
risk, draw on Indigenous knowledges that have enabled them to adapt and be resilient to climate over the 
millennia {2.5.1}. Thanks to strong community ties, for example, in Indigenous communities in the Arctic, 
people help each other cope with hazards and threats to health and safety {9.4.3.4}. There are gaps in current 
research of how some social groups, such as gender-diverse and 2SLGBTQQIA+ people, experience the health 
effects of climate change {9.2}. 
Current Impacts on the Health System
When climate-related emergencies and disasters strike, health facilities and services are among those 
affected. The report lists many examples of storms, floods, and wildfires that forced health care centres and 
hospitals in Canada to close temporarily, evacuate patients, and/or cancel operations and other services 
{Table 10.5}. But it is precisely during these disasters that Canadians need emergency services, and health 
care disruptions can have major effects on health and well-being. Even if health facilities and services remain 
operational during a climate-related disaster, they can be pushed beyond their capacity to respond because of 
injuries, illnesses, and patient transfers due to the disaster {10.4.1}. Combined effects of climate change that 
overlap and interact could lead to cascading effects on several health outcomes simultaneously.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 29 
Climate variability and change impacts on Canadian health facilities (Chapter 10, Table 5).
Adaptation and Preparedness
Canada can reduce the health risks — and thus the injuries, illnesses, and deaths — from climate change by 
taking steps to prepare for risks and adapt to climate change. To stay ahead of the climate change curve of 
increasing impacts, health officials must increase current efforts, in collaboration with those in other fields, to 
understand, assess, prepare for, and help prevent the health impacts of climate change {10.3.1}.
Many actions are already being taken to protect Canadians, and these provide a foundation for learning and 
expanding such efforts. For example, heat alert and response systems are increasing in Canada. They allow 
residents facing impending hot weather to take necessary precautions, such as staying hydrated, seeking 
cool areas, and helping family members and friends who may need assistance. Since an extreme heat event 
in 2010, the province of Quebec has had an early warning system, which may have helped alleviate the effects 
of an extreme heat event in 2018 {3.4.4.2}. Tests of a telephone alert system for seniors and those with 
chronic diseases in case of extreme heat in the Montérégie region of Quebec showed that it resulted in fewer 
medical appointments {Box 3.3}. 
To reduce risks from air pollution, Environment and Climate Change Canada forecasts an Air Quality Health 
Index across the country (except in Quebec, which has its own system), which provides a risk rating, health 
messages, and health protection advice, the latter two aimed at specific groups that may be at increased risk 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 30 
to the health impacts of poor air quality {5.7.1}. Further, the department has implemented Canada’s Wildfire 
Smoke Prediction System (FireWork) to forecast fine particulate concentrations due to wildfire across Canada 
over the coming 48 hours {3.8.4.2; 5.7.2}. 
Another common adaptation is “greening” of spaces in cities through planting trees and shrubs and creating 
parks. Several provinces and cities in Canada have actively adopted this measure, to combat urban heat islands. 
The soil in green spaces can also soak up excess water during heavy rainfalls and floods. However, greening of 
urban spaces has to be carefully planned and accompanied with public health guidance and messaging to avoid 
increasing risks from infectious diseases such as Lyme disease, and impacts of pollen on allergies. 
Adaptation to infectious diseases that may emerge or increase with climate change requires a “One Health” 
approach that integrates our knowledge of disease in humans, the role of animal disease reservoirs, and 
the role of the environment, including climate. This integrated approach is needed to design and undertake 
systematic assessments of where disease risks may emerge, conduct surveillance for emerging diseases, 
and develop prevention and control responses (ranging from public alerts to vaccination programs) to protect 
Canadians from infectious diseases driven by climate change.
Generally, health authorities are lagging in climate change and health actions needed to keep up with growing 
risks to Canadians. For example, many do not have a climate change and health program or dedicated 
resources to support the development of adaptation measures. Research also shows that many health 
facilities — a critical component of health systems in efforts to reduce climate change impacts — are not 
taking needed actions to prepare for current risks and future warming {10.4.1}.
Many sectors must come together to address climate change impacts, as adaptation efforts related to 
land-use planning, infrastructure development, emergency preparedness, environmental management, and 
transportation planning can all affect health {Chapter 10}. Climate change adaptation plans, from local to 
national levels, can reduce health outcomes if they “mainstream” consideration of health in these plans and 
routinely evaluate their effectiveness as the country continues to warm. 
While adaptation carries costs, these are offset by mitigating the escalating costs of health care due to 
climate change. Recent research in Quebec suggests that the projected costs of the increase in ragweed 
allergies due to climate change are $360 million for governments in that province and $475 million for 
society as a whole. For extreme heat, the study estimated increased costs of $370 million for governments in 
Quebec. In addition, increases of Lyme disease due to climate change are projected to cost governments in 
Quebec $60 million to $95 million {10.4.2}.
Making Adaptation Inclusive and Equitable
Research suggests that vulnerability and adaptation assessments (V&As) for climate change and health 
can be helpful in identifying the root causes of vulnerability, such as food insecurity, inadequate income, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 31 
and social exclusion {Box 9.3}. They can also be used to identify unintended — negative or positive — health 
impacts of a planned policy, program, or initiative on marginalized populations {9.4.4}. 
Adaptation planning should involve communities and those most affected by climate change. Participation 
of marginalized individuals and communities that already experience a disproportionate burden of illness and 
health inequities, such as Indigenous Peoples and racialized populations, is particularly important {Chapter 
9}. Health adaptation planning can also include partnering with populations at highest risk, including women, 
persons with disabilities, seniors, immigrants, low-income residents, non-English/non-French speakers, 
outdoor workers, people exposed to environmental pollution, people with existing illnesses, people without 
access to insurance, public housing residents, newcomers to Canada, lone-parent households, students, 
transient and homeless populations, and parents with young children {10.3.2}. 
A number of frameworks familiar to public health authorities are available to help decision makers engage 
with communities. To increase the representation and participation of groups that have often been excluded, 
decision makers and researchers need to recognize, acknowledge, and remove barriers to participation 
(such as financial burdens, travel requirements, language, child care, etc.). Investing time and resources in 
relationship-building and cultivating trust is key to this process {9.5.3}.
Adaptations affecting Indigenous communities should be Indigenous-led. There are many examples of 
adaptation projects that have improved health and were led by the community: a project to develop climate-
resilient, healthy, and culturally appropriate housing in Nain, Nunatsiavut, Newfoundland and Labrador {9.5.2}; 
and a project to map flooding hazards and its effects in the Cree community of Kashechewan, in Northern 
Ontario {2.4.1; Box 2.2}.
Tailoring actions to protect health to specific communities and locations is one of the ways to avoid 
“maladaptation” — inadvertently causing other health risks when implementing adaptation measures. For 
example, greening in a city by planting pollen-producing trees can cause health problems for allergy sufferers 
{10.3.3; Table 2}. Or creating an urban green space can backfire if it leads to gentrification and displaces low-
income people the park was designed to benefit. Adaptation needs to be carefully considered to avoid such 
missteps {10.3.3; Table 10.2}. 
Adaptation of the Health System 
The health system needs to be included in adaptation. Adaptation can help the health system prepare for 
climate-related effects on health and protect it from future effects on infrastructure, staff, and services. The 
adaptation framework for health systems {10.3.2} includes, among other areas of focus, analyzing health 
facility resilience, a first step in ensuring that health services remain functional. To support such an analysis, 
the Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, in partnership with Health Canada, has developed a Health 
Care Facility Climate Change Resilience Checklist that can find gaps in resilience. More facilities need to 
assess their readiness for climate change impacts. In a recent survey, only 9% of health care facility staff 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 32 
respondents reported having completed resilience assessments, while only 4% have completed vulnerability 
assessments {10.4.1}. 
Adaptation measures taken for health care facilities can include a range of actions in areas such as workforce 
training, food and medical supplies procurement, emergency preparedness, and design and engineering 
changes or upgrades to cope with heat, flooding, and power outages. As an example, the Nanaimo Regional 
General Hospital in British Columbia completed renovations in 2012 designed to lower risks in case of an 
extreme-weather emergency and to lower energy costs {Box 10.6}. 
Health Co-Benefits of Climate Change Mitigation 
and Adaptation Actions
Measures taken in many sectors to mitigate climate change (by reducing GHGs or sequestering carbon) or to 
adapt to climate change can also have very large benefits for health — immediately or in the long term. These 
“co-benefits” of climate change mitigation and adaptation add to the value of action taken and can avoid poor 
health outcomes and economic costs to health systems and society {10.6}. Economic savings from such 
actions can also help to offset the costs to society of reducing GHGs. 
As some examples, reducing fossil fuel use can improve air quality through reductions in fine particulates 
including soot and ground-level ozone. Better air quality has multiple co-benefits, including reductions in 
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, and deaths. Greening communities to cool them can also have 
multiple knock-on health benefits, such as reductions in chronic diseases and improvements to mental 
health. Measures to make communities more liveable, such as installation of walking and biking paths, can 
improve exercise levels and mental health in residents. Such measures can also have positive impacts by 
reducing social isolation and crime {10.6}. Analysis in this assessment estimated that reductions in Canadian 
GHG and air pollutant emissions consistent with an RCP 6.0 pathway could result in 5200 avoided deaths for 
a single summer in 2050. 
Several successful GHG mitigation and adaptation projects in Canada have had major co-benefits. To 
mention one, the University Health Network (UHN) in Toronto, Ontario, has reduced GHGs from its on-site 
natural gas use and consumption of purchased electricity, heat, or steam by 19% from 2010 to 2019. Much 
of this reduction came out of 214 energy projects completed between 2013 and 2018, saving UHN $18.9 
million in utility costs. For cooling, UHN has also replaced traditional chillers with Deep Lake Water Cooling 
Technology at some of its facilities; this technology uses water cooled by Lake Ontario, improving the 
capacity, resilience, and reliability of UHN’s chilled water system, and saves more than $22 million over 20 
years. Such projects improve air quality, by removing sources of fossil fuel use, and water availability, by 
foregoing the use of water in cooling (in this case, 67 million litres per year) {Box 10.8}. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 33 
Scaling-Up Efforts to Protect Canadians
The health of Canadians can be protected from climate change. Canada has a historic opportunity to avoid 
many of its health effects. Decision makers in the health sector are recognizing the need to take adaptation 
measures to prepare for the health impacts of climate change. Levels of inequity, social cohesion, and 
technological innovation will influence how greatly the health of Canadians and their communities are 
affected by climate change and should be taken into account in all adaptation plans and processes. The 
resilience of health systems and the willingness and capacity of decision makers to take needed adaptive 
actions, in close collaboration with other sectors, will determine how the health system responds to climate 
change and helps Canadians affected by it. Reducing health risks to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples 
requires respect for rights and responsibilities over their lands, natural resources, and ways of life, and 
advancing these rights through distinctions-based, Indigenous-led, climate change adaptation, policy, and 
research {Chapter 2}.
A number of health authorities, from local to national levels, in Canada are taking adaptation actions to 
reduce health risks. These experiences can be shared to mobilize further efforts to protect health. Such 
efforts must be scaled up rapidly and focused on health and health systems to take advantage of this 
opportunity to prevent and prepare for the health impacts of climate change. 
The health of Canadians and their communities cannot be protected if warming continues unabated. 
Increased efforts to reduce GHGs can have very large health co-benefits, building individual and health 
system resilience and countering the effects of a warming climate. The health sector has the opportunity 
to show leadership in reducing its carbon footprint and preparing for climate change. The future health of 
Canadians will rely on such efforts from our decision makers.
Source:
Berry, P., & Schnitter, R. (Eds.). (2022). Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge 
for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
CHAPTER 1
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Climate Change 
and Health 
Linkages
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 35 
Lead Authors
Peter Berry, Health Canada
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Jolly Noor, University of Waterloo
Suggested Citation
Berry, P., Schnitter, R., & Noor, J. (2022). Climate Change and Health 
Linkages. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a 
Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: 
Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 36 
Table of Contents
1.1 Introduction 
37
1.2 Canada’s Changing Climate
37
1.3 Climate Change and Health
40
1.4 Growing Knowledge of Climate Change Impacts on the Health of Canadians
43
1.5 Demographic and Socio-Economic Trends in the Canadian Population
44
1.5.1 Population Growth
44
1.5.2 Social Capital and Networks
45
1.5.3 Racial and Ethnic Diversity
45
1.5.4 Economic Disparity and Inequity
45
1.5.5 Health Status
46
1.6 Climate Change Impacts on Indigenous Peoples’ Health
46
1.7 References
48
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 37 
1.1 Introduction 
A broad range of risks to the health and well-being of Canadians from climate change were identified over 
two decades ago by scientists (Royal Society of Canada, 1995; Koshida & Avis, 1998; Health Canada, 1999). 
Subsequent science assessments and related studies, from national to local levels, have suggested that 
health risks are increasing, that they are posing serious threats to populations, and that impacts on some 
individuals and communities from current climate variability are significant (Séguin, 2008; Gosselin, 2010; 
Berry et al., 2014a; Berry et al., 2014b; Levison et al., 2018). An increase in some diseases, such as Lyme 
disease, due in part to a changing climate (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018); the observed increase in the 
frequency and severity of extreme weather events and disasters such as extreme heat events and wildfires; 
and the expected increases in extreme precipitation with a warmer climate and associated flood risks in 
some areas, all call for a better understanding of the populations and regions at higher risk to impacts on health. 
New information about growing risks, key vulnerability factors, and promising adaptation options is needed to 
support efforts to increase the resilience of Canadians, their communities, and their health systems. 
Canadians are concerned about climate change impacts on health. In 2017, 93% of Canadians who accept 
the reality of climate change indicated that it is either a health risk now (53%), or will be in the future (40%), 
and over half (55%) felt personally vulnerable to its impacts (Environics, 2017). In addition, health authorities 
and medical organizations in and outside of Canada have called for concerted efforts to reduce risks and 
increase the climate resilience of health systems (WHO, 2015; Health Care without Harm, 2017; Medical 
Society Consortium on Climate & Health, 2017; Howard, 2018; WMA, 2018; Claudel et al., 2020; Global Climate 
and Health Alliance, 2020). Adaptation actions based on robust evidence of risks to health can be effective 
in protecting people, including those that experience disproportionate impacts, from the effects of climate 
change (Ebi & Burton, 2008; WHO, 2015). However, important limits to adaptation may exist as warming 
increases (Ebi et al., 2021). 
1.2 Canada’s Changing Climate
Greenhouse gases (GHGs) that cause warming of the globe continue to increase rapidly. In 2019, globally 
averaged atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2), the main driver of long-term climate change, 
reached a record high of 409.8 parts per million (ppm), up from 400.1 ppm in 2015 (WMO, 2018a; Lindsey, 
2020). Such levels of CO2 are unprecedented; similar levels only existed 3 to 5 million years ago, when the 
Earth was 2°C to 3°C warmer and sea level was 10 m to 20 m higher (WMO, 2018b). Global CO2 emissions 
rose by 1.7% in 2018 (IEA, 2019). Atmospheric concentrations of the other two important long-lived GHGs, 
methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O), also continue to increase rapidly. In 2018, CH4 reached 259% and N2O 
reached 123% of pre-industrial (1750) levels (WMO, 2020). 
Due to global anthropogenic emissions of GHGs, Canada’s climate has changed and is projected to continue 
to do so over the coming decades. On average, Canada is warming at approximately twice the rate of the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 38 
global average, and the Northern region is warming even faster (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Since 1948, annual 
average temperatures over the Canadian landmass have increased by 1.7°C, while the North has warmed on 
average by 2.3°C over the same time period. In addition, extreme warm temperatures have become hotter 
while extreme cold temperatures have become less cold (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Climate models project that temperatures across Canada will continue to increase, with the largest warming 
occurring in the winter. The continued warming is “virtually certain” (Zhang et al., 2019), but the magnitude 
will vary, depending on the future rate of GHG emissions. Under a low global emissions scenario (RCP2.6), an 
additional annual warming of about 2°C is projected for most of this century compared to the 1986 to 2005 
base period, whereas, under the high emissions scenario (RCP8.5), additional warming of over 6°C is projected for 
the country as a whole by late century, with even larger changes projected in the North (Figure 1.1). 
Figure 1.1 Projected change in annual mean temperature across Canada. The figure shows projected annual 
temperature change for Canada under a low emissions scenario (RCP2.6) (left panel) and a high emissions 
scenario (RCP8.5) (right panel) for the near term (top row) and the late century (bottom row). Projections are 
represented by the median of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) multi-model ensemble. 
Changes are relative to the 1986 to 2005 period. Source: Zhang et al., 2019.
In many parts of Canada, there has been an increase in precipitation and a shift toward less snowfall and 
more rainfall. There has been no observed increase, for Canada as a whole, of extreme precipitation 
(accumulated amounts over a day or less); however, in the future, daily extreme precipitation is projected to 
increase (Zhang et al., 2019). Continued warming means that total precipitation is expected to increase for 
much of Canada (Figure 1.2), while some areas might experience decreases in the summer, particularly in 
Southern Canada under a high emission scenario and toward late century (Zhang et al., 2019). The availability 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 39 
of freshwater may be reduced as warming continues, increasing risks of summer water supply shortages in 
some regions (Bonsal et al., 2019; Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Figure 1.2 Projected annual precipitation changes across Canada. The figure shows projected annual 
precipitation changes for Canada under a low emissions scenario (RCP2.6) (left panel) and under a high 
emissions scenario (RCP8.5) (right panel) for the near term (top row) and the late century (bottom row). Maps 
and time series of projected annual mean precipitation change (%) as represented by the median of the fifth 
phase of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5) multi-model ensemble. Changes are relative to the 
1986 to 2005 period. Source: Zhang et al., 2019. 
Daily extreme precipitation is projected to increase and the return periods — the time between events — for 
given extreme precipitation events are projected to decrease. Under a high GHG emissions scenario, a current 
once in 20-year rainfall extreme will become a once in 10-year event by mid-century (a two-fold increase 
in frequency) (Zhang et al., 2019). Urban areas will therefore need to manage increased flood risks and 
attendant health threats (e.g., contaminated water supplies) due to more severe rainfalls. Local sea level is 
projected to rise along much of the Canadian coastline, which will increase the frequency and magnitude of 
extreme high water level events and increase coastal flooding (Greenan et al., 2019). 
Given that some additional warming is unavoidable, many current trends in climate change impacts relevant 
for health will continue, including (Bush & Lemmen, 2019):
•	
more frequent and intense extreme hot temperatures;
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 40 
•	
increased severity of extreme heat events;
•	
less extreme cold;
•	
increased risk of drought;
•	
increased risk of wildfires;
•	
increasing length of the growing season;
•	
reduced seasonal lake ice cover across the Arctic;
•	
reduced sea ice extent;
•	
thinning of glaciers; and
•	
warming and melting of permafrost.
Increased variability in weather and climate is more challenging for people to adapt to. Profound effects on 
the Canadian climate are expected, should global GHGs continue to increase this century. Limiting warming 
globally, and in Canada, requires global action to reduce GHG emissions to near zero within a few decades 
(Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
1.3 Climate Change and Health
Evidence of the risks to health from climate change and the pathways through which people are affected has 
grown with publication of reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (Confalonieri 
et al., 2007; Smith et al., 2014; WHO, 2014; WHO, 2018) and related studies (Watts et al., 2015; Crimmins et al., 
2016; Watts et al., 2018). Climate drivers of poor health that need to be understood to adapt are complex and 
mediated by a range of determinants of health and other situational, behavioural, and organizational factors 
(Figure 1.3). This makes the management of current risks to health, and of projected impacts, by public health 
officials challenging and requires close partnerships with officials within and outside the health sector. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 41 
Figure 1.3 Pathways through which climate change affects the health of Canadians. Source: Adapted from WHO, 
2022, Working paper on measuring climate resilience of health systems; Haines & Ebi, 2019.
Upstream drivers related to trends such as population growth, economic growth, urbanization, colonialism, 
and racism can put pressures on a range of factors that can increase or decrease vulnerability to the health 
impacts of climate change. Health can be affected by climate change directly or indirectly, through a range 
of exposure pathways, as temperatures continue to rise, precipitation patterns change, and the frequency 
and severity of extreme weather events increase, resulting in more natural disasters (IPCC, 2012; Smith et al., 
2014; Watts et al., 2015; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018).
Direct impacts on health can include non-communicable diseases (e.g., respiratory and cardiovascular 
diseases, mental health impacts) and injuries and deaths associated with extreme weather events such 
as wildfires, storms, extreme heat events, floods, and droughts. Less obvious effects of climate change on 
health arise from changes to ecosystems that support the spread of disease, pathogens, or contaminants 
to people, for example, the expansion of vector-borne diseases in new geographical regions, more water and 
air pollution due to warmer temperatures, or greater risks to food insecurity. Climate change is increasing 
vulnerability to multiple simultaneous hazards that threaten health (Mora et al., 2018), and continued global 
warming beyond 1.5°C increases risks of exceeding critical thresholds that would lead to more severe 
damage of natural systems and human societies (Haines & Ebi, 2019).
Health and social services play an important role in protecting Canadians from climate change impacts. They 
are the first lines of defence, whether through primary prevention (e.g., reducing GHG emissions in health 
care and reducing the urban heat island effect), secondary prevention (e.g., warning systems and public 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 42 
education campaigns), or tertiary prevention (e.g., treating injuries and illnesses associated with climate-
related hazards) (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). The failure of such services 
during an extreme event, or the diminished capacity to provide services over time, would have direct impacts 
on health and well-being. There is increasing recognition of the impacts that climate change can have on 
health systems (WHO, 2015; Balbus et al., 2016; Haines & Ebi, 2019), as evidenced by recent disasters such 
as Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy in the United States (Health Care without Harm, 2018) and catastrophic 
wildfires in Alberta and British Columbia (Purdy, 2016; Toews, 2018).
Certain populations in and outside Canada bear a disproportionate burden of the health impacts from climate 
change (Berry et al., 2014; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018; Shultz et al., 2020) (see Chapter 2: Climate Change 
and Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada; Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). Globally, it has 
been estimated that children bear 88% of the burden of disease from climate change (WHO & UNEP, 2010). 
Climate change is a threat to the health of people in all countries. Some dynamics that drive risks, such as 
infectious diseases, effects on water and food systems, or supply chain disruptions, can transcend borders 
(Balbus et al., 2016; Friel, 2019), thereby affecting Canadians.
Climate change is increasing the risk of humanitarian crises (Jochum et al., 2018) and threatening the global 
health gains achieved over the past century (Smith et al., 2014). From 2014 to 2017, climate shocks were 
partly responsible for the increase in food-insecure people in the world to more than 800 million — a growth 
of between 37 million and 122 million (GCA, 2019). Globally, it has been estimated that 200 million people 
every year by 2050 could need international humanitarian aid because of the impacts of climate change, 
which is almost double the number of people (108 million) that required assistance in 2018 to recover from 
floods, storms, and wildfires (IFRCRCS, 2019). Possible linkages exist between climate-related hazards and 
human migration (UNHCR, 2015; Haines & Ebi, 2019; McLeman, 2020) — for example, the 2018 droughts 
in Central America coincided with international migration patterns (CRED, 2019). Impacts have also been 
linked with conflict (Schleussner et al., 2016; Werrell & Femia, 2017) — for example, droughts in Ethiopia have 
been indirectly linked to decreased food security and areas of conflict (WHO, 2018) and the 2006 drought in Syria 
contributed to the deterioration of economic conditions and subsequent conflict (Gleick, 2014; Kelley et al., 2015). 
Climate change is considered a “threat multiplier” (Hallegatte et al., 2015) and is expected to lead to increased 
poverty, dislocation, and forced migration among many populations (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018). It is also 
recognized as an increasingly important national health security issue, given the potential interplay between 
climate change and infectious diseases (Hawa, 2017) (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases). However, the 
way in which climate change shocks and stresses can compound other drivers of conflict and migration is 
complex, as are implications for human health, and research in these areas is still emerging (Hsiang, 2013; 
Bowles et al., 2015).
Impacts on the health of populations and communities may be immediate or may last years (e.g., non-
communicable diseases such as mental health; see Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being); they may also 
be long-lived, multi-generational, or irreversible, such as impacts on or the loss of cultures (WHO, 2018) (see 
Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada). In addition, researchers are starting 
to link specific events that have affected health directly to climate change. For instance, specific extreme 
weather events, including the hot and dry conditions that contributed to record wildfires in British Columbia in 
2016, or the record heat wave in that province in June 2021 have been attributed to climate change (Herring 
et al., 2018; World Weather Attribution, 2021), allowing researchers to also make linkages to the health 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 43 
impacts of such events (Ebi et al., 2017; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018). In addition, Vicedo-Cabrera et al. (2021) 
estimate that, between 1991 and 2018, 38.5% of heat-related mortality in 25 census metropolitan areas in 
Canada could be attributed to human-induced climate change.
Scientists are also learning more about the very large short-term and longer-term health co-benefits of 
well-designed GHG mitigation measures and of proactive adaptation actions in other sectors. Actions to 
address climate change in the agriculture, water and sanitation, infrastructure, energy, urban design, and 
transportation sectors, for example, can reduce environmental pollution and support healthy lifestyles and 
communities (Haines et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2014; Martinez et al., 2018). The potential benefits of reduced 
deaths from air pollution, are so large that the Lancet Commission on Climate and Health has called climate 
change the “greatest global health opportunity of the 21st century” (Watts et al., 2015, p.1) (see Chapter 5: Air 
Quality). Research suggests that, for a range of future scenarios, the value of the benefits to health resulting 
from policies and activities in line with meeting the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Paris Agreement targets could exceed their costs (Markandya et al., 2018). Canada is a signatory to the Paris 
Agreement and has pledged to reduce its GHG emissions to 511 Mt CO2 equivalent by 20301 and to achieve a 
net-zero-emissions economy by 2050 (Government of Canada, 2021).
Health system infrastructure and services in Canada are being affected by climate-related hazards; reduced 
pressures and costs to health systems from improved population health through such measures can free up 
resources to build climate-resilient health systems and recover from the unavoidable impacts (Martinez et al., 
2018). Greater understanding of how to gauge the climate resilience of health systems (e.g., indicators), tools 
to facilitate needed adaptation, and roles and responsibilities of key actors and partnership opportunities will 
support preparedness efforts (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience).
1.4 Growing Knowledge of Climate Change 
Impacts on the Health of Canadians
Over two decades ago, the first national assessment of climate change impacts on Canadians that included 
information on human health and well-being was conducted (Koshida & Avis, 1998). Since that time, two 
national-level climate change and health assessments, led by Health Canada, were completed (Séguin, 
2008; Berry et al., 2014), contributing to a growing foundation of scientific knowledge. The 2014 study 
provided updated knowledge about climate change-related health concerns included in previous reports 
(e.g., air pollution, infectious diseases, water and food-borne diseases, and climate-related natural hazards), 
populations that experience disproportionate impacts, and adaptation options.
The 2014 assessment also provided new information about health challenges faced by people living in 
specific communities and regions — urban, rural, coastal and Northern — and included a list of key research 
1	
Canada’s GHG emissions were 729 Mt CO2 eq in 2018 (Government of Canada, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 44 
gaps that require investigation to inform efforts to protect health. All people in Canada are at risk from 
the health impacts of climate change. However, the experience of impacts and the ability to adapt are not 
uniform and vary across populations, communities, and regions. An individual’s sensitivity to climate change 
impacts, exposure to climate change hazards, and ability to take protective measures all contribute to 
climate change vulnerability. Upstream drivers of inequity (e.g., colonialism, racism, social and economic 
inequities) interact with and shape determinants of health. Health inequities and determinants of poor health 
compound vulnerability, and thus, some individuals and population groups face disproportionate health risks 
and challenges with adapting. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has intensified pre-existing inequities in 
Canadian society (Statistics Canada, 2020a).
Efforts to protect health from climate change through adaptation and GHG mitigation measures can 
inadvertently exacerbate population vulnerability, or present opportunities to strengthen health equity and 
reduce disproportionate health risks in society (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). Broad 
population groups that are commonly at higher risk to the health impacts of climate change in Canada 
include seniors, children and youth, people that are socially and economically disadvantaged, Indigenous 
Peoples, people with chronic diseases and compromised immune systems, people with disabilities, emergency 
first responders and support workers, and residents of northern and remote communities (Berry et al., 2014a). 
There is much variation within and among these groups in Canada. Populations at higher risk, and those on the 
front lines of climate change have historically been labelled as “victims,” when, in reality, many people have a long 
history of demonstrated adaptive capacity, despite existing health inequities and discrimination.
1.5 Demographic and Socio-Economic Trends in 
the Canadian Population
Most Canadians enjoy good health, which increases resilience to the impacts of climate change. Specific 
demographic, social, and economic trends are important for understanding current and future health risks 
associated with climate change, as they can affect vulnerability and lead to inequitable health outcomes 
as risks increase (Balbus et al., 2016). For example, health and income disparities can increase the risk of 
some health impacts of climate change (Balbus et al., 2016; WHO, 2018). Trends in Canada relevant to the 
understanding of current and future impacts of climate change health risks are provided below.
1.5.1 Population Growth
•	
Canada’s population is estimated to have increased by 23.7% from 2000 (30.7 million) to 2020 (38 
million) (Statistics Canada, 2020b).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 45 
•	
Much of Canada’s population is also aging. According to the 2016 Census, adults over the age of 
65 years (5.9 million) now outnumber children under the age of 15 (5.8 million). The number of 
Canadians over the age of 85 years is growing rapidly — four times more quickly than the general 
population (PHAC, 2017).
•	
In contrast, younger Indigenous population cohorts are growing quickly, and Indigenous 
communities have proportionally more children than older adults (PHAC, 2017).
1.5.2 Social Capital and Networks
•	
Many more Canadians now are living alone. In 2016, 4 million Canadians were living alone, which 
is double the number in 1981 (Statistics Canada, 2019b).
•	
Social isolation is increasing in Canada. In 2017, 44% of Canadians visited friends at least a few 
times a week, while in 2003, 58% did so. In addition, visits to family also declined over that time 
period, from 38% to 26% (PHAC, 2017).
•	
In 2018, 86% of Canadians had access to high-speed broadband internet (CRTC, 2019).
1.5.3 Racial and Ethnic Diversity
•	
In 2011, almost one in five Canadians (19.1%) belonged to a visible minority group, which was up 
from 16.2% in 2006. In 2011, the South Asian (25% of the visible minority population), Chinese 
(21.1%), and Black populations (15.1%) were the three largest visible minority groups. By 2031, 
Statistics Canada estimates that visible minority groups will make up between 29% and 32% of 
the population (Statistics Canada, 2018).
1.5.4 Economic Disparity and Inequity
•	
The percentage of Canadians considered low-income after tax was 12.3% in 2018, which is just 
slightly lower than in 2000 (12.8%) (Statistics Canada, 2020c).
•	
A significant number of Canadians struggle with food and water insecurity, and levels vary across 
Canada, with higher rates in the North. It was estimated that, in 2017–2018, 12.7% of Canadian 
households experienced food insecurity at some point during the previous year, an increase from 
previous national estimates (Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). This is likely an underestimate, as not 
all populations were captured in the survey (e.g., on-reserve Indigenous Peoples and homeless 
people) and not all provinces and territories monitor rates of food insecurity (PHAC, 2017).
•	
In 2016, 1.7 million households were in core housing need; that is, their dwelling is considered 
unsuitable, inadequate, or unaffordable (Statistics Canada, 2016), and there were 22,190 
Canadians living in 995 shelters (Statistics Canada, 2019c).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 46 
1.5.5 Health Status
•	
Life expectancy has continued to climb in Canada, with an increase of 5.3 years for men and 
3.3 years for women from 1995 to 2019 (PAHO, 2019). From 2016 to 2017, for the first time, life 
expectancy did not increase, as a result of the opioid epidemic (Statistics Canada, 2019a).
•	
In 2016, 44% of all Canadians over 20 years of age had at least one chronic health condition, 
including hypertension (25%), mood and/or anxiety disorders (13%), diabetes (11%), asthma 
(11%), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (10%), ischemic heart disease (8%), cancer (8%), 
and dementia (7%) (PHAC, 2019b).
•	
The number of Canadians who report they are obese, living with diabetes, or have a mood 
disorder has been increasing in Canada. Over the past three decades, the number of obese 
children has tripled (PHAC, 2019a), and the number of all Canadians who are obese rose from 
23.1% in 2004 to 26.7% in 2015 (Statistics Canada, 2017). These conditions are linked to 
increased health risks related to cancer, cardiovascular disease, and respiratory disease (PHAC, 
2017).
•	
There are important differences in health status between rural and urban populations. People 
living in urban areas tend to have lower mortality rates for injury, suicide, and motor vehicle 
accidents, as well as lower rates of smoking and being overweight or obese. However, urban 
populations tend to have higher rates of cancer, infectious disease and stress, as well as a weaker 
sense of community belonging. Fully 80% of Canadians live in urban or suburban areas, with 
almost 36% (12.5 million) living in Toronto, Montreal, or Vancouver (PHAC, 2017). In contrast, 
rural Canadians tend to be in poor or fair health, less stressed, and have a stronger sense of 
community belonging. In addition, they have the highest rates of mortality from all causes as well 
as from respiratory disease (PHAC, 2017).
1.6 Climate Change Impacts on Indigenous 
Peoples’ Health
The health and well-being of Canada’s Indigenous Peoples2 continues to be affected by Canada’s history of 
systemic racism, colonization, and discrimination. This has included forced displacement from traditional 
territories, residential school experiences of abuse and neglect, and the disruption of traditional culture, 
language, and practices (PHAC, 2020). Compared to non-Indigenous people, First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
peoples face greater challenges from climate change impacts on health due to existing disparities, such 
as shorter lifespans, higher rates of chronic diseases, and greater food and water insecurity in many 
communities (PHSA, 2011; FNHA, 2018; PHAC, 2018). Sharp divisions in health status exist between some 
2	
The term Indigenous Peoples is used throughout this report to refer to the original inhabitants of Canada and their 
descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as defined under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 47 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous Canadians. Many serious health challenges face Indigenous Peoples living 
in remote communities because of less access to safe drinking water, health care, and quality housing, as 
well as challenges with food security and safety (PHAC, 2017). Several factors increase risks to First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples from climate change impacts, including (Furgal & Séguin, 2006; Furgal et al., 2008; 
Turner & Clifton, 2009):
•	
close cultural connection and dependence on the natural environment;
•	
historic and ongoing burdens of colonialism;
•	
vast distances between communities;
•	
small service centres;
•	
harsher climates;
•	
remoteness and isolation;
•	
limited social, educational, and employment opportunities;
•	
poorer transportation systems;
•	
infrastructure vulnerabilities (e.g., unstable housing, water, sewage);
•	
food costs;
•	
effects of industrial resource extraction; and
•	
the unique and relatively complex legal, governance, and service structures for First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis peoples and communities.
Drawing on studies using Indigenous knowledge and Western science, this assessment includes an 
examination of how climate change is expected to exacerbate health risks among Indigenous Peoples living 
in Canada. For example, health may be affected through climate effects on food and water, or less directly 
through an erosion of diverse cultures, language, and traditional livelihoods. However, the cultural and 
social factors unique to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, including the inextricable connection to and 
reliance on land and water for food, medicines, identity, and spirituality and a holistic, interconnected view 
of health and well-being, may also convey important and unique adaptive capabilities that all Canadians 
can learn and benefit from (PHAC, 2017) (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in 
Canada). Consideration of the unique perspectives and disproportionate impacts experienced by Indigenous 
Peoples in Canada in this assessment can support efforts to further the recommendations in the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada: Calls to Action (TRC, 2015) and the United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples as they relate to climate change action (UN, 2007).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 48 
1.7 References
Balbus, J., Crimmins, A., Gamble, J. L., Easterling, D. R., Kunkel, 
K. E., Saha, S., & Sarofim, M. C. (2016). Climate Change and 
Human Health. In A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. L. Gamble, C. B. 
Beard, J. E. Bell, D. Dodgen, R. J. Eisen, N. Fann, M. D. Hawkins, 
S. C. Herring, L. Jantarasami, D. M. Mills, S. Saha, M. C. Sarofim, 
J. Trtanj, & L. Ziska (Eds.), The Impacts of Climate Change on 
Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment (pp. 
25-42). Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program. 
<https://doi.org/10.7930/J0765C7V>
Berry, P., Clarke, K.-L., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014a). 
Human health. In F. J. Warren & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts 
and Adaptation (pp. 191-232). Ottawa, ON: Government 
of Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/
pub?id=9.699408&sl=0>
Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Buse, C. (2014b). Assessment of 
Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Climate Change in 
Middlesex-London. Report Prepared for the Middlesex-London 
Health Unit. London, United Kingdom. Retrieved from <https://www.
healthunit.com/climate-change>
Bonsal, B. R., Peters, D. L., Seglenieks, F., Rivera, A., & Berg, A. 
(2019). Changes in freshwater availability across Canada. In E. 
Bush, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report 
(pp. 261-342). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Bowles, D. C., Butler, C. D., & Morisetti, N. (2015). 
Climate change, conflict and health. Journal of the Royal 
Society of Medicine, 108(10), 390–395. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0141076815603234>
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
energy/Climate-change/pdf/CCCR_ExecSumm-EN-040419-
FINAL.pdf>
Canadian Radio, Television and Telecommunications 
Commission (CRTC). (2019). Communications monitoring report. 
Retrieved from <https://crtc.gc.ca/eng/publications/reports/
policymonitoring/2019/> 
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED). 
(2019). Disasters 2018: Year in review. CRED crunch, Issue No. 
54. Retrieved from <https://www.emdat.be/cred-crunch-54-
disasters-2018-year-review>
Claudel, P-D., Hackett, F., McGregor, D., & Banasiak, K. (2020). 
The Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change: Policy 
Brief for Canada. Lancet Countdown Tracking Progress 
on Health and Climate Change and Canadian Medical 
Association. Retrieved from <https://policybase.cma.ca/
en/viewer?file=%2fdocuments%2fPolicyPDF%2fPD21-01.
pdf#search=setName%3a(%2bClimate%20
change)&phrase=false> 
Confalonieri, U., Menne, B., Akhtar, R., Ebi, K. L., Hauengue, M., 
Kovats, R. S., Revich, B., & Woodward, A. (2007). Human Health. 
In M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden, 
& C. E. Hanson (Eds.), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (pp. 391-431). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Crimmins, A., Balbus, J., Gamble, J. L., Beard, C. B., Bell, J. E., 
Dodgen, D., Eisen, R. J., Fann, N., Hawkins, M. D., Herring, S. C., 
Jantarasami, L., Mills, D. M., Saha, S., Sarofim, M. C., Trtanj, J., 
& Ziska, L. (Eds.). (2016). The Impacts of Climate Change on 
Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Global Research Program.
Ebi, K. L., Boyer, C., Ogden, N., Paz, S., Berry, P., Campbell-
Lendrum, D., Hess, J. J., & Woodward, A. (2021). Burning embers: 
synthesis of the health risks of climate change. Environmental 
Research Letters, 16(4), 044042. Retrieved from <https://
iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/abeadd/pdf>
Ebi, K. L., & Burton, I. (2008). Identifying practical adaptation 
options: an approach to address climate change-related health 
risks. Environmental Science and Policy, 11(4), 359–369.
Ebi, K. L., Ogden, N. H., Semenza, J. C., & Woodward., A. (2017). 
Detecting and Attributing Health Burdens to Climate Change. 
Environment Health Perspectives, 125(8), 085004. doi: 10.1289/
EHP1509.
Environics Research. (2017). Public perceptions of climate change and 
health – Final report. Ottawa, ON. 
First Nations Health Authority (FNHA). (2018). First Nations 
Health Status & Health Services Utilization: Summary of Key 
Findings 2008/09 - 2014-15. West Vancouver, BC: First Nations 
Health Authority.
Friel, S. (2019). Climate change and the people’s health 
(N. Krieger, Ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/
oso/9780190492731.001.0001
Furgal, C., Buell, M., Chan, L., Edge, V., Martin, D., & Ogden, 
N. (2008). Health impacts of climate change in Canada’s north. 
In J. Séguin (Ed.), Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian assessment of vulnerabilities and adaptive capacity 
(pp. 303-366). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.699408&sl=0>
Furgal, C., & Séguin, J. (2006). Climate change, health, and 
vulnerability in Canadian northern Aboriginal communities. 
Environmental health perspectives, 114(12), 1964–1970. <https://
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8433>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 49 
Gleick, P. H. (2014). Water, Drought, Climate Change, and 
Conflict in Syria. Weather, Climate, and Society, 6(3), 331-340. 
Retrieved from <https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/
wcas/6/3/wcas-d-13-00059_1.xml>
Global Climate and Health Alliance. (2020). Health as a 
driver for action on climate change. Retrieved from <http://
climateandhealthalliance.org/climate-health/health-as-a-driver-
for-action-on-climate-change/>
Global Commission on Adaptation (GCA). (2019). Adapt now: 
A global call for leadership on climate resilience. Global Centre 
on Adaptation and World Resources Institutes. Retrieved 
from <https://gca.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/
GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf>
Gosselin, P. (2010). Health of populations. In C. DesJarlais, 
M. Allard, D. Bélanger, A. Blondlot, A. Bouffard, A. Bourque, D. 
Chaumont, P. Gosselin, D. Houle, C. Larrivée, N. Lease, A. T. 
Pham, R. Roy, J. P. Savard, R. Turcotte, & C. Villeneuve (Eds.), 
Learning to Adapt to Climate Change (pp. 64-75). Montreal, QC: 
Ouranos.
Government of Canada. (2020). Greenhouse gas emission. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/environmental-indicators/
greenhouse-gas-emissions.html>
Government of Canada. (2021). Progress towards Canada’s 
greenhouse gas emissions reduction target. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/environmental-indicators/progress-
towards-canada-greenhouse-gas-emissions-reduction-target.
html>
Greenan, B. J. W., James, T. S., Loder, J. W., Pepin, P., Azetsu-
Scott, K., Ianson, D., Hamme, R. C., Gilbert, D., Tremblay, J-E., 
Wang, X. L. & Perrie, W. (2019). Changes in oceans surrounding 
Canada. In E. Bush & D. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report (p. 343-423). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Haines, A., & Ebi, K. (2019). The Imperative for Climate Action 
to Protect Health. The New England journal of medicine, 380(3), 
263–273. <https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1807873> 
Haines, A., McMichael, A. J., Smith, K. R., Roberts, I., Woodcock, 
J., Markandya, A., Armstrong, B. G., Campbell-Lendrum, D., 
Dangour, A. D., Davies, M., Bruce, N., Tonne, C., Barrett, M., & 
Wilkinson, P. (2009). Public health benefits of strategies to 
reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: Overview and implications 
for policy makers. Lancet (London, England), 374(9707), 2104–
2114. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61759-1> 
Hallegatte, S., Bangalore, M., Bonzanigo, L., Fay, M., Kane, T., 
Narloch, U., Rozenberg, J., Treguer, D., & Vogt-Schilb, A. (2015). 
Shock waves: managing the impacts of climate change on 
poverty. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hawa, K. (2017). Health and climate Security: Interconnected 
security challenges of climate change and infectious disease. 
In C.E. Werrell, & F. Femia (Eds.), Epicenters of Climate and 
Security: The New Geostrategic Landscape of the Anthropocene. 
The Center for Climate and Security. Retrieved from <https://
climateandsecurity.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/epicenters-
of-climate-and-security_the-new-geostrategic-landscape-of-the-
anthropocene_2017_06_091.pdf>
Health Canada. (1999). CAPITALizing on Science: Report of a 
Workshop on Climate Change, Science and Health. Canadian 
Journal of Public Health.
Health Care without Harm. (2017). Health Care Worldwide Calls 
for Action on Climate Change. Retrieved from <https://noharm-
global.org/articles/news/global/health-care-worldwide-calls-
action-climate-change>
Health Care without Harm. (2018). Safe haven in the storm: 
Protecting lives and margins with climate-smart health care. 
Retrieved from <https://noharm-uscanada.org/documents/safe-
haven-storm-protecting-lives-and-margins-climate-smart-health-
care>
Herring, S. C., Christidis, N., Hoell, A., Kossin, J. P., Schreck, C. J., 
III, & Stott, P. A. (2018). Explaining Extreme Events of 2016 from 
a Climate Perspective. Bulletin of the American Meteorological 
Society, 99(1), 1-157. Retrieved from <https://journals.ametsoc.
org/view/journals/bams/99/1/bams-explainingextremeevents2
016.1.xml>
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Jacob, D., Taylor, M., Bindi, M., Brown, S., 
Camilloni, I., Diedhiou, A., Djalante, R., Ebi, K.L., Engelbrecht, 
F., Guiot, J., Hijioka, Y., Mehrotra, S., Payne, A., Seneviratne, S. 
I., Thomas, A., Warren, R., & Zhou, G. (2018). Impacts of 1.5ºC 
Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems. In V. Masson-
Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, 
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, 
J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. 
Maycock, M. Tignor, & T. Waterfield (Eds.), Global Warming of 
1.5°C. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/
sites/2/2019/06/SR15_Chapter3_Low_Res.pdf>
Howard, C. (2017). Lancet countdown 2017 report: Briefing 
for Canadian policymakers. Canadian Medical Association & 
Canadian Public Health Association. Retrieved from <https://
www.cpha.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/advocacy/2017_
lancet_canada_brief.pdf>
Howard, C. (2018). Lancet countdown 2018 report: Briefing 
for Canadian policymakers. Canadian Medical Association & 
Canadian Public Health Association. Retrieved from <https://
cape.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/2018-Lancet-Countdown-
Policy-Brief-Canada.pdf>
Hsiang, S. M., Burke, M., & Miguel, E. (2013). Quantifying the 
influence of climate on human conflict. Science, 341, 1235367. 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.1235367>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 50 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2012). 
Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to 
Advance Climate Change Adaptation: Special Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (C. B., Field, V. 
Barros, T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, D. J. Dokken, K. L. Ebi, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, K. J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S. K. Allen, M. Tignor, 
& P. M. Midgley, Eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. Retrieved from <https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/managing-the-risks-of-extreme-events-and-
disasters-to-advance-climate-change-adaptation/> 
International Energy Agency (IEA). (2019). Global Energy & CO2 
Status Report 2019. Paris, France. Retrieved from <https://www.
iea.org/reports/global-energy-co2-status-report-2019>
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent 
Societies (IFRCRCS). (2019). The cost of doing nothing: The 
humanitarian price of climate change and how it can be avoided. 
Geneva, Switzerland.
Jochum, B., Devine, C., Calain, P., Guevara, M., Schwerdtle, 
P. N., Belliveau, L. B., Ali, S. I., Tremblay, L. L., McIver, L., 
Xue, K., Harczi, G., Lai, W., Lamb, S., Collet, O., & Tirima., S. 
(2018). Climate Change and Health: an urgent new frontier 
for humanitarianism. Lancet Countdown: Tracking Program 
on Health and Climate Change and Doctors without Borders. 
Retrieved from <https://www.doctorswithoutborders.ca/sites/
default/files/2018-lancet-countdown-policy-brief-msf.pdf>
Kelley, C. P., Mohtadi, S., Cane, M. A., Seager, R., & Kushnir, Y. 
(2015). Climate change in the Fertile Crescent and implications 
of the recent Syrian drought. PHAS, 112(11), 3241-3246.
Koshida, G., & Avis, W. (Eds.). (1998). Executive Summary. In 
Canada Country Study, Volume VII. Global Climate Change: 
National Sectoral Issue. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Levison, M., Butler, A., Rebellato, S., Armstrong, B., Whelan, 
M., & Gardner, C. (2018). Development of a Climate Change 
Vulnerability Assessment Using a Public Health Lens to 
Determine Local Health Vulnerabilities: An Ontario Health Unit 
Experience. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(10), 2237. <http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15102237>
Lindsey, R. (2020). Climate Change: Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide. 
Retrieved from <https://www.climate.gov/news-features/
understanding-climate/climate-change-atmospheric-carbon-
dioxide>
Markandya, A., Sampedro, J., Smith, S. J., Dingenen, R. V., 
Pizarro-Irizar, C., Arto, I., & González-Eguino, M. (2018). Health 
co-benefits from air pollution and mitigation costs of the Paris 
Agreement: A modelling study. The Lancet Planetary Health, 
2(3). doi:10.1016/s2542-5196(18)30029-9 
Martinez, G.S., Berry, P., Balbus, J., Hodgson, T., Salazar, M., 
Sellers, S., & Hess, J. (2018). The Adaptation Health Gap: A 
Global Overview. The Adaptation Gap Health Report. Nairobi, 
Kenya: United Nations Environment Programme.
McLeman, R. (2020). How will international migration policy and 
sustainable development affect future climate-related migration? 
Transatlantic Council on Migration. Retrieved from <https://
www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/publications/tcm-
climate-migration-mcleman_final.pdf> 
Medical Society Consortium on Climate & Health. (2017). 
Medical Alert! Climate change is harming our health. Retrieved 
from <https://medsocietiesforclimatehealth.org/wp-content/
uploads/2017/03/gmu_medical_alert_updated_082417.pdf>
Mora, C., Spirandelli, D., Franklin, E. C., Lynham, J., Kantar, M. 
B., Miles, W., Smith, C. Z., Freel, K., Moy, J., Louis, L. V., Barba, 
E. W., Bettinger, K., Frazier, A. G., Colburn, J. F. IX., Hanasaki, 
N., Hawkins, E., Hirabayashi, Y., Knorr, W.,...Hunter, C. L. (2018). 
Broad threat to humanity from cumulative climate hazards 
intensified by greenhouse gas emissions. Nature Climate 
Change, 8(12), 1062–1071. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-
018-0315-6>
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). (2019). 
Core indicators 2019: Health trends in the Americas. 
Washington, DC. Retrieved from <https://www.paho.
org/hq/index.php?option=com_content&view=article
&id=15499:core-indicators-2019-health-trends-in-the-
americas&Itemid=1894&lang=en> 
Provincial Health Services Authority (PHSA). (2011). Towards 
reducing health inequities: A health system approach to 
chronic disease prevention. A discussion paper. Vancouver, BC: 
Population & Public Health, Provincial Health Services Authority. 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2017). State of health 
report 2017. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.
ca/en/public-health/services/publications/chief-public-health-
officer-reports-state-public-health-canada/2017-designing-
healthy-living.html>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2018). Key health 
inequalities in Canada: A national portrait – Executive summary. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/content/
dam/phac-aspc/documents/services/publications/science-
research/key-health-inequalities-canada-national-portrait-
executive-summary/hir-executive-summary-eng.pdf>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2019a). Childhood 
obesity. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-
health/services/childhood-obesity/childhood-obesity.html> 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2019b). Prevalence 
of chronic diseases among Canadian adults. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/chronic-
diseases/prevalence-canadian-adults-infographic-2019.html>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 51 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2020). From risk to 
resilience: An equity approach to COVID-19: Chief Public Health 
Officer of Canada’s report on the state of public health in Canada 
2020. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
public-health/corporate/publications/chief-public-health-officer-
reports-state-public-health-canada/from-risk-resilience-equity-
approach-covid-19.html#a2.1>
Purdy C. (2016). Fort McMurray residents plagued by sleepless 
nights, study finds. Toronto Star.
Royal Society of Canada. (1995). Implications of global change 
for human health: Final report of the health issues panel of the 
Canadian Global Change Program. Incidental Report No IR95-2. 
Schleussner, C-F., Donges, J. F., Donner, R. V., Schellnhuber, 
H. J. (2016). Enhanced conflict risks by natural disasters. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(33), 9216-
9221. <doi: 10.1073/pnas.1601611113>
Séguin, J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.
gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf>
Shultz, J. M., Sands, D. E., Kossin, J. P., & Galea, S. (2020). 
Double environmental injustice – climate change, Hurricane 
Dorian, and the Bahamas. New England Journal of Medicine, 382, 
1-3. Retrieved from <https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/
NEJMp1912965>
Smith, K. R., Woodward, A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chadee, D. 
D., Honda, Y., Liu, Q.,... Sauerborn, R. (2014). Human health: 
Impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, 
D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. 
Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. 
S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. 
White (Eds.), Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and 
vulnerability. Part A: Global and sectoral aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 709-754). 
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/>
Statistics Canada. (2016). Core housing need: 2016 census 
of population. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www150.
statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/catalogue/98-509-X> 
Statistics Canada. (2017). Measured body mass index, 
Canadian Community Health Survey – Nutrition, 2015. Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-
quotidien/170801/dq170801a-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2018). Ethnic diversity and immigration. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/11-402-x/2011000/chap/imm/imm-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2019a). Changes in life expectancy by 
selected causes of death, 2017. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/190530/
dq190530d-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2019b). Insights on Canadian Society: Living 
Alone in Canada. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www150.
statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/75-006-x/2019001/article/00003-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2019c). The characteristics of shelter 
residents, Income Research Paper Series. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/75f0002m/75f0002m2019004-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2020a). Experiences of discrimination during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/200917/dq200917a-
eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2020b). Table 17-10-0009-01 Population 
estimates, quarterly. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://doi.
org/10.25318/1710000901-eng>
Statistics Canada. (2020c). Table 11-10-0135-02 Percentage 
of persons in low income by sex. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://doi.org/10.25318/1110013501-eng>
Tarasuk, V., & Mitchell, A. (2020). Household food insecurity 
in Canada, 2017-18. Toronto, ON: Research to identify policy 
options to reduce food insecurity (PROOF). Retrieved from 
<https://proof.utoronto.ca/>
Toews, E. (2018). Canadian Healthcare Facilities: Winter 2017-
2018. Journal of Canadian Healthcare Engineering Society, 38(1), 
28-30. Retrieved from <https://issuu.com/riccardo11/docs/
chf_winter_2017-2018>
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (TRC). (2015). 
Honouring the truth, reconciling for the future: Summary of 
the final report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of 
Canada. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Turner, N. J., & Clifton, H. (2009). “It’s so different today”: 
Climate change and indigenous lifeways in British Columbia, 
Canada. Global Environmental Change, 19(2), 180–190. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2009.01.005>
United Nations (UN). (2007). United Nations Declaration on 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). New York, NY. 
Retrieved from <https://www.un.org/development/desa/
indigenouspeoples/wp-content/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/
UNDRIP_E_web.pdf>
United Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR). (2015). 
The environment and climate change. Geneva. Retrieved from 
<https://www.unhcr.org/540854f49.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 52 
Vicedo-Cabrera, A. M., Scovronick, N., Sera, F., Royé, D., 
Schneider, R., Tobias, A., Astrom, C., Guo, Y., Honda, Y., Hondula, 
D. M., Abrutzky, R., Tong, S., de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, 
M., Nascimento Saldiva, P. H., Lavigne, E., Matus Correa, P., 
Valdes Ortega, N., Kan, H., Osorio, S., Kyselý, J., Urban, A., … 
Gasparrini, A. (2021). The burden of heat-related mortality 
attributable to recent human-induced climate change. Nature 
Climate Change. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01058-x>
Watts, N., Adger, W. N., Agnolucci, P., Blackstock, J., Byass, P., 
Cai, W., Chaytor, S., Colbourn, T., Collins, M., Cooper, A., Cox, P. 
M., Depledge, J., Drummond, P., Ekins, P., Galaz, V., Grace, D., 
Graham, H., Grubb, M., Haines, A., Hamilton, I., … Costello, A. 
(2015). Health and climate change: policy responses to protect 
public health. Lancet (London, England), 386(10006), 1861–
1914. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60854-6>
Watts, N., Amann, M., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Belesova, K., Bouley, T., 
Boykoff, M., Byass, P., Cai, W., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chambers, 
J., Cox, P. M., Daly, M., Dasandi, N., Davies, M., Depledge, M., 
Depoux, A., Dominguez-Salas, P., Drummond, P., Ekins, P., 
Flahault, A., … Costello, A. (2018). The Lancet Countdown 
on health and climate change: from 25 years of inaction to 
a global transformation for public health. Lancet (London, 
England), 391(10120), 581–630. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(17)32464-9>
Werrell, C. E., & Femia, F. (Eds.). (2017). Epicenters of 
climate and security: The new geostrategic landscape of the 
Anthropocene. The Center for Climate and Security. Retrieved 
from <https://climateandsecurity.files.wordpress.com/2017/06/
epicenters-of-climate-and-security_the-new-geostrategic-
landscape-of-the-anthropocene_2017_06_091.pdf>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2014). Quantitative Risk 
Assessment of the Effects of Climate Change on Selected Causes 
of Death, 2030s and 2050s. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). Operational 
framework for building climate resilient health systems. Geneva, 
Switzerland. Retrieved from <http://www.who.int/globalchange/
publications/building-climate-resilient-health-systems/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). COP 24 Special Report 
– Health and climate change. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/cop24-special-
report-health-climate-change>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019). WHO Health and 
Climate Change Survey Report: Tracking Global Progress. Geneva, 
Switzerland. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/globalchange/
publications/country-profiles-global-report-2019/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO) & United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP). (2010). Healthy environments for healthy 
children: key messages for action. Retrieved from <http://www.
who.int/ceh/publications/hehc_booklet/en/>
World Medical Association (WMA). (2018). Why doctors need 
to join the fight against climate change. Retrieved from <https://
www.wma.net/news-post/why-doctors-need-to-join-the-fight-
against-climate-change>
World Meteorological Association (WMO). (2018a). WMO 
greenhouse gas bulletin (GHG Bulletin) - No. 14: The state 
of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere based on global 
observations through 2017. Retrieved from <https://library.wmo.
int/index.php?lvl=notice_display&id=20697#.XFycurCWx1s>
World Meteorological Association (WMO). (2018b). WMO 
statement on the state of the global climate in 2017. 
Retrieved from <https://library.wmo.int/index.php?lvl=notice_
display&id=20220#.X5hF8DkUk2x>
World Meteorological Association (WMO). (2020). WMO 
statement on the state of the global climate in 2019. Retrieved 
from <https://library.wmo.int/doc_num.php?explnum_id=10211>
World Weather Attribution. (2021). Western North American 
extreme heat virtually impossible without human-caused climate 
change. <https://www.worldweatherattribution.org/western-
north-american-extreme-heat-virtually-impossible-without-
human-caused-climate-change/>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., 
Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., & Kharin, V. V. (2019). Changes 
in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada. In E. Bush, 
& D.S. Lemmen, (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report (pp. 
112-193). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
CHAPTER 2
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Climate Change 
and Indigenous 
Peoples’ Health 
in Canada
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 54 
Prepared by the National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health 
with contributions from Donna Atkinson, Roberta Stout, Regine Halseth, 
and Margo Greenwood
Suggested Citation
National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health (NCCIH). (2022). 
Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples' Health in Canada. In P. Berry & R. 
Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 55 
Table of Contents
Summary
57
Key Messages
57
2.1 Introduction
61
2.1.1 First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Populations in Canada 
62
2.2 Methods and Approach 
65
Box 2.1 Indigenous health data and research in Canada
66
2.3 Health Inequalities and Indigenous Peoples’ Health
67
2.3.1 Gender as a Determinant of Indigenous Peoples’ Health
68
2.4 Climate Change Risks to Indigenous Peoples’ Health
70
2.4.1 Natural Hazards
71
Box 2.2 Hazard mapping in Kashechewan First Nation
73
Box 2.3 Peavine Métis Settlement FireSmart Program
74
2.4.2 Mental Health and Well-Being
75
Box 2.4 Improving mental health and resilience among Selkirk First Nations youth in the face of 
climate change 
76
2.4.3 Air Quality
77
Box 2.5 Yellowknife’s Summer of Smoke, 2014
78
2.4.4 Food Safety and Security
79
Box 2.6 Enhancing food safety and security for urban Indigenous populations in the face of 
climate change
80
2.4.5 Water Quality, Safety, and Security
81
Box 2.7 Water quality, safety, and security adaptations in the Yukon and Inuvialuit Settlement Region  83
2.4.6 Infectious Diseases
83
Box 2.8 A potential role for Indigenous knowledges in mitigating the spread of Toxoplasma gondii 
 and other climate-related infectious diseases
85
2.4.7 Health Systems
86
Box 2.9 Health system adaptations to reduce risks facing First Nations and Inuit peoples
87
2.5 Indigenous Knowledges
87
2.5.1 Indigenous Knowledges and Climate Change
88
Box 2.10 Using Indigenous knowledges in climate change adaptation
91
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 56 
2.6 Indigenous Peoples’ Rights and National and International Commitments
92
2.6.1 Roles and Responsibilities in Indigenous Peoples’ Health and Climate Change
93
Box 2.11 Indigenous Services Canada’s Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program
95
2.7 Knowledge Gaps
96
2.8 Conclusion
97
2.9 References
98
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 57 
Summary
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples in Canada are uniquely sensitive to the impacts of climate change 
because they tend to live in geographic regions experiencing rapid climate change and because they have 
a close relationship to and depend on the environment and its natural resources. The direct and indirect 
impacts of climate change on the health and well-being of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis are interconnected 
and far-reaching. 
The changing climate will exacerbate the health and socio-economic inequities already experienced by 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, including respiratory, cardiovascular, water- and foodborne, chronic 
and infectious diseases, as well as financial hardship and food insecurity. Natural hazards, coupled with 
unpredictable and extreme weather events, can result in temporary or long-term evacuations from traditional 
territories, in addition to greater risk of injury and death from accidents while out on the land. Infrastructure 
damage or instability due to climate change, particularly in Northern and remote locations, may restrict 
access to health systems and supplies. Climate change threatens First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ 
ways of life, resilience, cultural cohesion, and opportunities for the transmission of Indigenous knowledges 
and land skills, particularly among youth. Cross-cutting climate impacts will disrupt the livelihoods of First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, families and communities, affecting their sense of identity and cultural 
continuity and compounding existing mental health issues. Indigenous knowledge systems and practices 
are key to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ ability to observe, respond, and adapt to climate and 
environmental changes.
Key Messages
•	
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples in Canada are uniquely sensitive to the impacts of climate 
change, given their close relationships to land, waters, animals, plants, and natural resources; 
tendency to live in geographic areas undergoing rapid climate change, especially Northern 
Canada; and greater existing burden of health inequities and related determinants of health. 
•	
The health impacts of climate change on First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are 
interconnected and far-reaching. They result from direct and indirect impacts of climate change 
that exacerbate existing inequities, and affect food and water security, air quality, infrastructure, 
personal safety, mental well-being, livelihoods, and identity, as well as increase exposure to 
organisms causing disease. 
•	
Health impacts are experienced differently within and between First Nations, Inuit, and Métis men, 
women, boys, girls, and gender-diverse people. Thus, research and adaptations must respect 
cultures, geography, local contexts, and the unique needs of these communities.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 58 
•	
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples have been actively observing and adapting to changing 
environments in a diversity of ways since time immemorial. Indigenous knowledge systems 
and practices are equal to scientific knowledge and have been, and continue to be, critical to 
Indigenous Peoples’ survival and resilience. 
•	
Indigenous knowledge systems are increasingly recognized, both nationally and internationally, as 
important in adapting to climate change, monitoring impacts at the local and regional level, and 
informing climate change policy and research. 
•	
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are rights holders. Preparing for the health impacts of 
climate change requires that Indigenous Peoples’ rights and responsibilities over their lands, 
natural resources, and ways of life are respected, protected, and advanced through distinctions-
based, Indigenous-led, climate change adaptation, policy, and research.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 59 
Overview of Climate Change Impacts on the Health and Well-Being of 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Peoples in Canada
HEALTH IMPACT 
OR HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Impacts on First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples 
and communities
•	
Increased wildfire, drought, 
and flooding events
•	
Instability and melting of 
permafrost and changes to 
ground snow cover, sea ice 
extent and thickness
•	
Changes to sea levels and 
weather patterns
•	
Higher exposure to climate 
risks in relation to natural 
and built environments 
(such as poor housing, 
water, sanitation, 
and environmental 
contaminants)
•	
Decreased availability, 
quality, quantity, and safety 
of traditional food sources
•	
Melting and damage to ice 
roads
•	
Effects of warming and 
changes to precipitation 
patterns that affect 
survival and transmission 
of disease-causing 
organisms
•	
Exacerbation of health and 
socio-economic inequities
•	
Air quality health impacts 
(such as respiratory and 
cardiovascular diseases)
•	
Increased water and 
foodborne diseases
•	
Mental health impacts 
(such as stress, anxiety, 
and post-traumatic stress 
disorder)
•	
Exacerbation of chronic 
and infectious diseases
•	
Increased injuries and 
deaths from accidents 
(e.g., natural hazards and 
extreme weather events)
•	
Increased direct and 
indirect health impacts 
from permafrost-related 
infrastructure damage
•	
Decreased opportunities 
for transmission of 
Indigenous knowledges 
and land skills, particularly 
among youth, affecting 
sense of identity, mental 
well-being, and cultures 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 60 
HEALTH IMPACT 
OR HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
•	
Temporary or long-term 
evacuation or displacement 
of populations from 
traditional territories, 
disrupting lives, creating 
financial hardship and 
affecting mental well-being
•	
Food and water insecurity 
due to decreased access to 
and quality of land, waters, 
plants, animals, and natural 
resources
•	
Impacts on health and 
infrastructure (such as 
restricted or delayed travel 
for health and emergency 
services, access to medical 
supplies, and patient 
safety)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 61 
2.1 Introduction
“Sister of ocean and sand,
Can you see our glaciers groan with the weight of the world’s heat?
I wait for you, here,
on the land of my ancestors,
heart heavy with a thirst for solutions
as I watch this land change 
while the world remains silent” 1
Indigenous2 Peoples, in Canada and globally, are recognized as uniquely sensitive to the impacts of climate 
change because they often live in geographic regions already experiencing rapid change and because of their 
close relationships with and dependence on land, waters, animals, plants, and natural resources for their 
sustenance, livelihoods, cultures, identities, health, and well-being (Ford, 2012; ILO, 2017; Jones, 2019). Non-
climate determinants of health exacerbate these sensitivities, including a greater existing burden of health 
inequities compared to non-Indigenous populations and the historic and ongoing effects of colonization and 
socio-economic and political marginalization (Ford et al., 2010a; Ford, 2012; ILO, 2017; Jones, 2019). 
The health impacts of climate change on First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are interconnected and 
far-reaching. Changing temperature and precipitation regimes will increase the frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events (e.g., floods, storms, heat events, droughts), wildfires, sea level rise, and coastal 
erosion, with direct and indirect impacts on food and water security, air quality, infrastructure, personal 
safety, mental health and well-being, livelihoods, and identity (Ford et al., 2010a; Ford, 2012; Yusa et al., 2015). 
These impacts will be experienced differently within and among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis men, women, 
boys, girls, and gender-diverse people in communities from coast to coast to coast.
Although often portrayed as passive victims or harbingers of climate change impacts in international 
reporting (Ford et al., 2016b; Belfer et al., 2017), Indigenous Peoples in Canada and around the world have 
been actively observing and adapting to changing environments in a diversity of ways for millennia (Ford et 
al., 2020). Indigenous knowledge systems and practices have been critical to their survival and resilience 
and are increasingly recognized as valuable to understanding and responding to climate change (Ford et al., 
2016b; Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience, 2018; ILO, 2019). Mobilizing Indigenous 
knowledges and experiences in climate change adaptation, policy, and research in a consistent, collaborative, 
decolonial, and rights-based way, however, remains a significant challenge (IPCC, 2014; Ford et al., 2016b; 
Belfer et al., 2019; Huntington et al., 2019; Latulippe & Klenk, 2020). 
1	
Excerpt from Rise (Jetñil-Kijiner & Niviâna, n.d.).
2	
The term Indigenous is used in this chapter to refer collectively to the original inhabitants of Canada and their 
descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as defined under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 
1982. Wherever possible, clear distinctions are made between these three distinct, constitutionally recognized 
groups. Indigenous Peoples outside of Canada are also referenced in some instances – particularly with respect to 
international climate policy, processes, and rights – and are identified as such.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 62 
This chapter provides an overview of climate change risks to Indigenous Peoples’ health in Canada. It begins 
with a description of Indigenous health inequities, followed by climate change risks to health specific to 
natural hazards; mental health and well-being; air quality; food safety and security; water quality, quantity, 
and security; infectious diseases; and health systems. The role of Indigenous knowledges in climate change 
adaptation, monitoring, policy, and research is then discussed within the context of Indigenous Peoples’ 
rights as well as national and international obligations. Existing knowledge gaps specific to First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples important for efforts to protect health are provided, along with considerations for 
moving forward. 
2.1.1 First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Populations in Canada 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples in Canada are a youthful and fast-growing population. In 2016, the 
Indigenous population reached 1,673,785 (4.9% of the total Canadian population), which represents an 
increase of 42.5% from the 2006 Census (Statistics Canada, 2017). From 2006 to 2016, the First Nations 
population grew by 39.3% to reach 977,230; the Inuit population grew by 29.1% to reach 65,025; while the 
Métis population grew by 51.2% to reach 587,545. The average age of the Indigenous population in 2016 was 
32.1 years, which is almost a decade younger than the non-Indigenous population. Approximately 29.2% of 
First Nations, 33% of Inuit, and 22.3% of Métis people were 14 years of age or younger in 2016, compared to 
16.4% of the non-Indigenous population (Statistics Canada, 2017). The proportion of Indigenous people over 
65 years of age is also on the rise and accounted for 7.3% of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis populations in 
2016 (Statistics Canada, 2017).
There are more than 600 First Nations communities in Canada, representing more than 60 Indigenous 
languages (Statistics Canada, 2017). The largest proportion of First Nations people live in Ontario (24.2%), 
followed by the western provinces of British Columbia (17.7%), Alberta (14.0%), Manitoba (13.4%), and 
Saskatchewan (11.7%) (Statistics Canada, 2017). In 2016, the majority of Inuit (72.8%) lived in the 53 
communities of Inuit Nunangat (the traditional homelands of Inuit), with the largest proportion living in 
Nunavut (63.7%), followed by Nunavik (24.9%), Inuvialuit (6.6%), and Nunatsiavut (4.8%) (Statistics Canada, 
2017). Inuktut is the term used for all Inuit languages; it includes 12 main dialects and nine different writing 
systems3 (The Royal Canadian Geographical Society, 2018). The majority of the Métis population (80.3%) 
live in communities and settlements4 in Ontario and the western provinces. Alberta has the largest Métis 
population (19.5%), followed by Manitoba (15.2%), British Columbia (15.2%), Quebec (11.8%), Saskatchewan 
(9.9%), and the Atlantic provinces (7.2%). Métis have their own unique language called Michif, a combination 
of French and Cree languages that also borrows from English and other Indigenous languages. 
3	
In September 2019, the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami Board of Directors approved a unified orthography for Inuktut called 
Inuktut Qaliujaaqpait. This standardized writing system was developed by Inuit for Inuit to strengthen Inuktut across 
Inuit Nunangat for future generations (ITK, 2019a).
4	
There are eight Métis settlements in Alberta: Paddle Prairie (or Keg River), Buffalo Lake (Caslan), East Prairie, 
Elizabeth, Fishing Lake (Packechawanis), Gift Lake (Ma-cha-cho-wi-se), Kikino (Goodfish Lake), Big Prairie (now 
Peavine). These settlements are the only government-recognized Métis land base in Canada (The Royal Canadian 
Geographical Society, 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 63 
Recent Statistics Canada data suggest Indigenous Peoples are increasingly urbanized. Among First Nations 
with registered or treaty Indian status, 44.2% lived on reserve in 2016, while the remainder lived off reserve. 
Growth was noted for both on-reserve (+12.8%) and off-reserve (+49.1%) First Nations over the period 2006 
to 2016 (Statistics Canada, 2017). While most Inuit lived in Inuit Nunangat in 2016, approximately 27.2% lived 
outside its borders; of those, 56.2% lived in a metropolitan area of at least 30,000 people, with the largest 
Inuit populations living in Ottawa-Gatineau, Edmonton, and Montreal (Statistics Canada, 2017). Of the three 
Indigenous groups, Métis are most likely to live in a city, with 62.6% living in a metropolitan area of at least 
30,000 people. Winnipeg has the highest Métis population in Canada, followed by Edmonton, Vancouver, and 
Calgary (Statistics Canada, 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 64 
Figure 2.1 The Indigenous population in Canada. Source: Statistics Canada, 2016.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 65 
2.2 Methods and Approach 
This chapter is a synthesis of publicly available peer-reviewed and grey literature, as well as alternative 
media sources (e.g., videos, news articles) focused on climate change risks to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
peoples’ health in Canada and on the role of Indigenous knowledges in climate change adaptation, policy, 
and research efforts. It is important to note that this is the first time an Indigenous-specific chapter has 
been included as part of Canada’s national climate change and health assessment. Emphasis was placed on 
literature specific to Canada published since the 2014 assessment on human health in Canada in a Changing 
Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation (Berry et al., 2014), although older sources and 
international literature were included, as appropriate. 
Sources were identified through a search of academic databases (e.g., BioMed Central, PubMed, and Science 
Direct), Google, and Google Scholar using the following search terms: “First Nations/Inuit/Métis/Indigenous” 
and “climate change” and “adaptation/infectious diseases/natural hazards/mental health/air quality/food 
security/water safety/water security/health services” and “Canada” and “traditional knowledge/traditional 
ecological knowledge/Indigenous knowledge.” This search was supplemented with manual scanning of 
citations in key publications and a targeted search of relevant websites, including Indigenous and non-
Indigenous government agencies and organizations (e.g., national Indigenous organizations, Indigenous 
Services Canada). Additional sources were included based on peer-review feedback of this chapter. 
Of the relevant publications identified, the majority were peer-reviewed and focused on Inuit populations 
in the Arctic, with the remainder focused on First Nations or Indigenous populations generally in rural 
and Northern Canada. Specific populations are distinguished in this chapter, where possible, to highlight 
the diverse perspectives and experiences within and among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and 
communities. However, some generalizations are made depending on the number and nature of citations 
used (e.g., more than one Indigenous group is being referenced) and in instances where there are potentially 
shared experiences (e.g., health inequities and determinants). 
Significant gaps identified from this review include literature related to climate change health risks affecting 
Indigenous populations in other regions of Canada (e.g., Prairies, Maritimes), Métis and urban Indigenous 
populations, and gendered perspectives on climate change (see section 2.7 Knowledge Gaps). The focus of 
research in the North is due to the more rapid warming in that region and the greater severity of current and 
projected impacts (Ford, et al., 2014; ITK, 2019b). The gaps also point to the limitations of Indigenous health 
research and data in Canada more generally (see Box 2.1).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 66 
Box 2.1 Indigenous health data and research in Canada
In assessing climate change risks to health, it is important to recognize the limitations and challenges 
of Indigenous health data and research as they currently exist in Canada. Relevant, high-quality data are 
challenged by a lack of disaggregated and longitudinal First Nations, Inuit, and Métis-specific data; the 
absence of relevant, consistent, and inclusive Indigenous identifiers in population health data sources; and 
a lack of strengths-based and community-driven health and wellness indicators (Smylie, 2010; Smylie & 
Firestone, 2015). Some geographic areas and populations are over-represented in core population health data 
sources (e.g., Status First Nations living on reserve or Inuit living in Inuit Nunangat), while others are severely 
under-represented (e.g., non-Status First Nations, Métis, or other Indigenous Peoples living in urban areas) 
(Young, 2003; Smylie, 2010; Kumar et al., 2012). This substandard health data result in generalizations across 
diverse First Nations, Inuit, and Métis populations and an under-estimation of the health inequities between 
Indigenous and non-Indigenous people (Smylie & Firestone, 2015). Working in partnership with First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples and their representative and governing organizations to govern and manage the data 
collected from them is critical to addressing these challenges (Smylie & Firestone, 2015). 
Research on Indigenous health has, and continues to be, dominated by non-Indigenous researchers (Brown, 
2018; Anderson, 2019) and by scientific knowledge paradigms that consider Indigenous methodologies, 
epistemologies, knowledges, and perspectives less rigorous than Western science (Saini, 2012; Hyett et 
al., 2018). It is also tainted by a history of unethical policies and practices, including the “misappropriation 
and abuse of Indigenous knowledge, property, culture and biological samples,” as well as a “failure to share 
data and resulting benefits; and the dissemination of information that misrepresented or stigmatized entire 
communities” (Hyett et al., 2018, p. E616). Consequently, much of the health research conducted to date is 
not relevant to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ health needs or priorities (Young, 2003; Wilson & Young, 
2008; Hyett et al., 2018). Although ethics guidelines and community-based and partnership approaches 
are improving the practice of health research involving First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples (Hyett et al., 
2018), there is still considerable work to be done to ensure research is respectful, relevant, reciprocal, and 
responsible. Guidance on best practices for research with Indigenous Peoples and communities have been 
developed by non-governmental organizations, national Indigenous organizations, and government agencies, 
and complement resources developed by communities and other organizations (RCAP, 1996; NAHO, 2011; 
CIHR, 2013; First Nations Information Governance Centre, 2014; CIHR, NSERC, & SSHRC, 2018; Hyett et al., 
2018; ITK, 2018; Kilian et al., 2019).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 67 
2.3 Health Inequalities and Indigenous 
Peoples’ Health
“Rapid climate change is yet another layer of stress 
cast over our already stressed society” 5
Although Indigenous Peoples are the most youthful and fastest-growing segment of Canada’s population, 
they do not enjoy the same benefits of good health as other Canadians. First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
individuals, families, and communities experience a disproportionate burden of ill health compared to non-
Indigenous people, including significantly higher rates of infant and child mortality, unintentional injury and 
death, chronic and infectious diseases, suicide, exposure to environmental contaminants, malnutrition, and 
a reduced life expectancy (Gracey & King, 2009; Greenwood et al., 2018; PHAC, 2018a). Health disparities 
are influenced, in part, by the social determinants of health, or the conditions in which individuals are born, 
grow, live, work, and age (CSDH, 2008). Key social determinants of health include income and social status, 
employment and working conditions, education, early childhood development, physical environments, social 
supports and coping skills, health behaviours, access to health services, gender, culture, and race. These 
conditions are, in turn, the result of complex structures and systems operating at the local, national, and 
global levels that determine the distribution of money, power, and resources within and among countries (Marmot, 
2007; CSDH, 2008; Reading, 2018). Together, the determinants of health and their structural drivers contribute to a 
social gradient of health, where the most socio-economically disadvantaged populations experience the greatest 
burden of ill health (Marmot, 2007) (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). 
Indigenous-specific determinants of health are linked to past and contemporary colonial policies and 
practices, including dispossession of traditional lands; forced relocation to reserves or settlements; child 
apprehensions related to Indian residential schools, the Sixties Scoop,6 and subsequent child welfare 
policies; forced relocation to tuberculosis sanatoria and Indian hospitals;7 oppression through the Indian Act; 
and systemic discrimination (Gracey & King, 2009; Greenwood et al., 2018). These determinants serve to 
perpetuate structural inequities and systemic disadvantage across the lifespan and across generations. Such 
intergenerational impacts are evident in the disturbingly high rates of substandard or overcrowded housing, 
poverty, food and water insecurity, unemployment, child apprehension, incarceration, as well as lower 
rates of educational attainment and poorer access to quality health care (Reading & Wien, 2009; NCCAH, 
5	
Natan Obed, as quoted in ITK (2016, p. 28).
6	
Indigenous Peoples continued to experience trauma, loss, and grief because of the rapid expansion of the 
child welfare system in the 1960s. During this period, commonly known as the “Sixties Scoop” (Sinclair, 2007), 
disproportionate numbers of Indigenous children were placed in foster care. By the end of the 1960s, “30% to 40% of 
the children who were legal wards of the state were Indigenous children – in stark contrast to the rate of 1% in 1959” 
(Fournier & Crey, 1997, as cited in Kirmayer et al., 2000, p. 609).
7	
Indian hospitals were racially segregated institutions, originally serving as tuberculosis sanatoria, but later operating 
as general hospitals overseen by the Indian Health Service. They were poorly funded, understaffed, and overcrowded, 
and many Indigenous people experienced abuse, coercion, and medical experimentation in them (Lux, 2016; 
McCallum & Perry, 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 68 
2012; NCCAH, 2017). In contrast, factors such as spending time out on the land, having a strong sense of 
Indigenous identity, cultural continuity, supportive kinship and community relationships, and expressions of 
self-government and self-determination can promote protective factors such as resilience, self-reliance, and 
self-confidence to facilitate more positive health outcomes (Chandler & Lalonde, 1998; Petrasek MacDonald 
et al., 2013a; Kielland & Simeone, 2014). Health determinants intersect and manifest differently among First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, influencing risk and protective factors associated with health status in 
distinct ways across the lifespan (Reading & Wien, 2009). 
Determinants of health frameworks, and perspectives of health and well-being generally, vary considerably 
within and among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples. At a national level, some key documents articulating 
these perspectives include: 
•	
The First Nations Health Transformation Agenda by the Assembly of First Nations (AFN, 2017)
•	
Social Determinants of Inuit Health in Canada by Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK, 2014) 
•	
Métis Life Promotion Framework© (MLPF) (Martens et al., 2010). 
The status of determinants of health can increase or decrease vulnerability to health risks associated with 
climate change (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). Existing health inequities and inequalities 
can compound vulnerability to climate-related health risks. This results in increased exposure and sensitivity 
to climate hazards and decreased ability to cope and adapt (Islam & Winkel, 2017). 
2.3.1 Gender as a Determinant of Indigenous Peoples’ Health
Before colonization, “Indigenous categorizations of gender emerged within other cultural and social practices, 
and were as diverse as Indigenous cultures themselves” (Hunt, 2016, p. 7). Historic and ongoing colonial 
processes imposed new social norms and legal rights that altered these often egalitarian and matrifocal 
gender roles and responsibilities, creating significant gender inequalities as well as discrimination against 
gender fluidity and homosexuality (Vinyeta, et al., 2015; Hunt, 2016). In the context of climate change, gender 
intersects with other determinants of health — such as education, race, income, and social status — to create 
unique climate change vulnerabilities, resiliencies, and lived experiences among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
women, men, boys, girls, and gender-diverse people (WHO, 2014; Vinyeta, et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2018). 
In Canada, the majority of gender and climate change research conducted with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
populations to date has focused on food security, mental health, unintentional injury, and deaths (Sellers, 
2018); attitudes and behaviours toward climate change (Bunce, 2015; Bunce et al., 2016); and environmental 
governance (Natcher, 2013; Staples & Natcher, 2015a; Staples & Natcher, 2015b; Sellers, 2018). 
Climate change impacts are experienced differently across genders due to cultural differences in gender-
based responsibilities. In a study by Bunce (2015), activities such as picking berries, making clothing, and 
preparing and preserving food were identified as central to identity and the well-being of Inuit women. 
Changes in berry production, thickness and duration of sea ice, and the quality and quantity of furs and pelts 
can hinder fulfillment of these traditional roles and the transmission of these skills to younger generations 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 69 
(Dowsley et al., 2010; Pauktuutit, 2011; Bunce, 2015; Bunce et al., 2016). For First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
women, a key part of female identity is the special relationship to water and the responsibilities to care for 
and protect it (Anderson, 2010; McGregor, 2012; Szach, 2013; Powys Whyte, 2014). Climate change may 
affect the availability and quality of fresh water, which can significantly affect emotional, mental, and spiritual 
health and well-being (Longboat, 2013; Szach, 2013). 
It is well recognized that warming temperatures are expected to increase the frequency and intensity of 
extreme heat events and the range and survival of vectors of infectious diseases, such as mosquitoes and 
ticks. Kovats and Hajat (2007) found that men are more likely to be active in hot weather, which makes them 
more vulnerable to heat stress. Pregnant women are at increased risk of poor health outcomes from placental 
abruption in full-term pregnancies (He et al., 2018) (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). Since First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis men spend considerable time outdoors engaging in land-based activities (e.g., hunting, fishing, 
trapping), climate change can be expected to disproportionately place Indigenous men at increased risk of 
heat-related conditions and vector-borne diseases such as Lyme disease and West Nile virus (Vinyeta et al., 
2016; Sellers, 2018). 
However, at present, there is a lack of surveillance and reporting on these types of climate-related impacts. 
For example, despite the expanded range and frequency of vector-borne illnesses such as West Nile virus, 
Lyme disease, and Zika virus, and recognition of the importance of vector-borne disease surveillance 
and monitoring programs, including among First Nations communities (PHAC, 2018b), systematic vector 
surveillance does not occur in all provinces and territories (Awuor et al., 2019), and Indigenous status has 
not been identified in human case surveillance data. As a result, there are no publicly available data from 
surveillance programs that identify the prevalence of vector-borne illnesses among specific populations, 
including Indigenous populations. 
Indigenous men may also be at greater risk of accidents as the environments in which they carry out their 
traditional activities become more hazardous (Vinyeta et al., 2016). Changes in weather and climate, including 
decreases in wildlife populations or safe access to hunting areas, can also limit the transmission of gender-
based knowledge and skills to younger generations (Jacob et al., 2010; Downing & Cuerrier, 2011; Pauktuutit, 
2011; Bunce, 2015; Bunce et al., 2016). 
Emotional responses and coping strategies related to climate change effects may also be gendered. For 
example, Inuit women experienced stronger emotional reactions (e.g., fear, distress, helplessness, anger, 
sadness, and frustration) to climate change effects than Inuit men, while men were more likely to experience 
anxiety in response to climate change (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Sellers, 2018). Inuit women are also more 
likely to share their feelings with others and manage stress in healthy ways, including becoming strong 
activists in climate change actions at global and local levels (Bunce, 2015; Williams et al., 2018; Hania, 2019; 
Santisteban, 2020). First Nations, Inuit, and Métis men may experience increased stress as a result of losing 
access to places and resources critical to masculine identities, especially those tied closely to livelihoods, 
which may exacerbate problems of substance abuse, suicide, and family violence that have been associated 
with colonization and cultural loss and are particularly prevalent in some First Nations and Inuit communities 
(Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Vinyeta et al., 2016).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 70 
2.4 Climate Change Risks to Indigenous 
Peoples’ Health
“The respect that we need to show the land and its relatedness to us. 
We are the land. If the land is sick then it ain’t going to be 
very long before we’re going to get sick.” 8
The impacts of climate change on the land, and on Indigenous Peoples’ relationships to the land, are already 
evident in communities from coast to coast to coast, not just in terms of effects on physical health, but also 
on the emotional, spiritual, psychological, and cultural well-being of Indigenous Peoples (ISC, 2019a). The 
dramatic, unprecedented rate of change has led some Indigenous communities and organizations to declare 
climate change states of emergency. In May 2019, the Vuntut Gwitchin First Nation (Old Crow, Yukon) was the 
first to issue a formal state of emergency, asserting that their traditional way of life was under threat from the 
rapidly changing landscape (Yeednoo Diinehdoo Ji’heezrit Nits’oo Ts’o’ Nan He’aa Declaration, n.d.). Vuntut 
Gwitchin First Nation Chief, Dana Tizya-Tramm, noted, “It’s going to be the blink of an eye before my great 
grandchild is living in a completely different territory, and if that’s not an emergency, I don’t know what is” 
(Avery, 2019, n.p.). The Assembly of First Nations (AFN) subsequently declared a global climate emergency 
at its July 2019 annual general meeting, along with calls to develop a First Nations–led climate strategy and 
to convene a national gathering to advance climate advocacy, which was held in March 2020, in Whitehorse, 
Yukon (AFN, 2019, AFN, 2020). 
In Inuit Nunangat, which is warming at almost three times the global average (Bush & Lemmen, 2019), the 
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK) has responded to this unprecedented rate of change and impacts by developing 
the Inuit Priorities for Canada’s Climate Strategy: A Canadian Inuit Vision for Our Common Future in Our 
Homelands report (ITK, 2016) and the National Inuit Climate Change Strategy (ITK, 2019b). 
In October 2016, the Métis National Council (MNC) passed a resolution on climate change and the 
environment at a special sitting of its general assembly. Couched in a nation-to-nation, government-
to-government approach, the resolution supports meaningful Métis engagement and review of federal 
environmental legislation, policy, protection, management, and assessment processes (Métis National 
Council, 2016). The MNC has also conducted a national climate change and health vulnerability assessment 
(JF Consulting, 2020). 
The health impacts of climate change on First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are far-reaching, and have 
already been observed in many regions of Canada. The following section provides a broad overview of climate 
change risks to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ health and well-being associated with natural hazards, 
mental health, air quality, infectious diseases, food safety and security, water safety and security, and 
health systems. Risks are discussed in the context of existing First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ health 
inequities and the unique sensitivities of Indigenous Peoples to climate change. Examples of Indigenous 
adaptation projects and initiatives from across Canada in response to climate change are also provided.
8	
Batchewana Elder quoted in Tobias & Richmond (2014. p. 29).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 71 
2.4.1 Natural Hazards
"The sea ice has really changed. I used to travel both by dog team and skidoo to 
and from Pond Inlet. In my recent trip, the snow has changed. The snow on top 
and snow condition on top has changed. Normally, in the spring, the snow on the 
top will freeze at night. This process is called qiqqsuqqaqtuq. This frozen layer 
can be seen when the day just starts getting daylight; it is sparkling because of 
the recent freeze up on top. I noticed it wasn’t like that anymore. This process, 
the freezing, isn’t happening anymore."9 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are uniquely sensitive to the health impacts of climate-related events, 
given their close reliance on the environment for their sustenance, livelihoods, and cultural practices (Ford, 
2012; Kipp et al., 2019b). The related health impacts are experienced both directly and indirectly. In the Arctic, 
rising temperatures are affecting permafrost stability, ground snow cover, sea ice extent and thickness, 
sea levels, and weather patterns (Ford et al., 2014; Durkalec et al., 2015; ITK, 2016). These changes are 
exacerbating the loss of knowledge and land skills related to weather prediction, transportation to hunting 
grounds, and wildlife patterns, leading to increased risk of injuries and fatalities, more search and rescue 
missions, and reduced access to country foods10 (Lemelin et al., 2010; Andrachuk & Smit, 2012; Pearce et al., 
2012; Sheedy, 2018). For example, the rate of unintentional injuries was more than three times higher than the 
Canadian average among Inuit land-users in Nunavut over the period 2006 to 2015, and the number of search 
and rescue operations has more than doubled over the past decade due to changes in temperature and ice 
(Clark et al., 2016a; Clark et al., 2016b). The loss of knowledge and land skills also threatens Inuit identity 
and well-being by decreasing opportunities for land- and sea-based activities and for sharing and teaching 
knowledge and skills, particularly for youth (ITK, 2016). 
Permafrost degradation, heavy storms, and coastal erosion can result in the destruction of places that have 
cultural significance, with potential mental health impacts (Government of Nunavut, 2010; Government of 
Nunavut, 2012; Donatuto et al., 2014). Such events can also destabilize housing, pipelines, and local civic 
water, wastewater, and transportation infrastructure and systems, increasing the risk of injury, water-borne 
illnesses, and environmental contamination, as well as causing disruptions in supply chains (Government of 
Nunavut, 2010; Government of Nunavut, 2014; Berner et al., 2016; FRMFNMES, 2016). In the Inuvialuit hamlet 
of Tuktoyaktuk, for example, coastal erosion is already forcing residents to relocate their homes further inland 
onto higher ground (Faris, 2019). Such impacts place additional financial strains on Inuit households and 
communities in the context of high living costs, low household income, low population base, and inadequate 
local government revenues (ITK, 2016). In response to these changes, local Inuit youth formed a filmmaking 
collective — Tuk TV — and captured these experiences in the documentary Happening to Us, which was 
9	
Palluq (2007) as quoted in Dowsley et al. (2010, p. 156).
10	 Country foods include “those harvested from the land sea, comprising primarily wild game, sea mammals, fish, and 
berries” and can vary from region to region (McGrath-Hanna, et al., 2003). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 72 
screened at the 25th session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 25) to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Madrid, Spain, in 2019.11 
Warming temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns have led to the increased frequency and severity 
of extreme weather events such as flooding, wildfires, and heat events (Berry et al., 2014; Bush & Lemmen, 
2019). Some First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities are more vulnerable to these events because of 
their geographic location, as well as existing socio-economic conditions and infrastructure (CIER, 2008; 
Christianson et al., 2012; Collier, 2015; McNeill et al., 2017). Over the period 2006 to 2016, approximately 67 
First Nations communities experienced a combined total of nearly 100 flooding events, causing significant 
property and infrastructure damage, disruptions to community services, and impacts to health and well-being 
(McNeill et al., 2017). 
Climate change has contributed to an increased number of extreme heat events and droughts, and 
to proliferation of pests such as the mountain pine beetle, which, in turn, is increasing the prevalence, 
magnitude, and intensity of wildfires and the devastation of forests (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). These 
are taking a tremendous social, psychological, emotional, and financial toll on First Nations and Métis 
communities across Canada (Scharbach & Waldram, 2016; Howard et al., 2017; Dodd et al., 2018a; Dodd 
et al., 2018b; ISC, 2018). Many Indigenous communities are located in regions that are expected to see 
increased wildfire activity over the next 40 years, including parts of British Columbia’s coast and Haida Gwaii, 
Northeastern Alberta, central Saskatchewan, Southern Manitoba and Ontario, and the Northwest Territories 
(B.J. Stocks Wildfire Investigations Ltd., 2013).
The increased prevalence and severity of extreme weather and climate-related events can have both direct 
and indirect impacts on human health (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). Extreme weather events can lead 
directly to increased injuries and fatalities (Kipp et al., 2019b). Droughts can affect respiratory health, mental 
health, exposure to environmental toxins, food security, water security, and rates of injury and infectious 
diseases, as well as causing increased stress on water treatment systems (Yusa et al., 2015). Flooding can 
result in water and food contamination from the release of environmental contaminants, bacteria, and other 
pathogens (Patrick, 2011; Huseman & Short, 2012; Daley et al., 2015). This can lead to increased water- and 
food-borne infections, skin conditions, and birth defects, as well as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, mental 
stress, heart disease, liver disease, kidney problems, neurological problems, immunopathology, cancers, 
thyroid conditions, and infant mortality (Bradford et al., 2016). Flooding and wildfires can damage fish and 
wildlife habitat important for species reproduction, with subsequent impacts on food security (Kipp et al., 
2019b). Wildfires can degrade air quality, contributing to high rates of respiratory and cardiovascular diseases 
(Liu et al., 2015; Reid et al., 2016), as well as leading to psychological impacts such as stress, anxiety, and 
depression (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Dodd et al., 2018a; Dodd et al., 2018b; Manning & Clayton, 2018). 
Extreme heat can result in heat-related illnesses and mortality, especially in Southern Canada and urban 
centres (Council of Canadian Academies, 2019). While research on Indigenous populations and extreme heat 
is limited, a comparative study of climate-related morbidities among urban and rural Indigenous populations 
in Ontario found that urban populations may be at greater risk because of inequities associated with access 
to health services, health status, poverty, housing, and political marginalization (Tam, 2013). 
11	 The documentary Happening to Us is available by request from Tuk TV.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 73 
Box 2.2 Hazard mapping in Kashechewan First Nation
In the flood-prone Cree community of Kashechewan, located in Northern Ontario, Indigenous knowledge 
about changing seasons, snowmelt, and runoff were used in conjunction with data from geographic 
information systems to gain a more comprehensive understanding of flooding and its effects on the 
community (Khalafzai et al., 2019). The federal government has made multiple, unsuccessful attempts to 
mitigate flooding since the 1990s; heavy ice jams continued to cause erosion and damage to the community’s 
water treatment plant, leading to an Escherichia coli (E. coli) outbreak in 2005. The community has been 
evacuated at least 12 times since 2004, at significant financial, emotional, and psychological cost. By 2015, 
engineers reported that the dyke was “deteriorating and inadequate to protect the growing community” 
(Khalafzai et al., 2019, p. 4).
In 2016, Kashechewan participated in a study documenting Indigenous knowledge related to spring flooding 
that used several participatory methods (e.g., in-depth interviews, flood mapping workshops, on-site walks) 
(Khalafzai et al., 2019). Findings revealed that the warming climate was increasing the frequency and scale 
of spring ice breakup and ice jams, resulting in earlier and more intense flooding events and greater potential 
for damage in the community. Participants also identified a number of landscape and human-induced factors 
that exacerbated the impacts of flooding on the community, including inadequate community infrastructure 
(e.g., water treatment plant) and flood protection, the region’s topography, and resource development 
activities in the region. These ecological changes have affected local hunting and harvesting practices, 
sociocultural activities, and the intergenerational transmission of knowledge. Findings from this study may be 
useful for ongoing flood monitoring and disaster risk-reduction activities in the community.
Climate-related emergencies can also lead to temporary evacuations or long-term displacements from 
traditional territories, which affect all aspects of Indigenous health and well-being. They disrupt lives; create 
financial hardship; increase stress, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder; and can bring back historical 
traumas associated with forced relocations and government interventions in the lives of Indigenous Peoples 
(Thompson et al., 2014; Scharbach & Waldram, 2016; Bedard & Richards, 2018; Dicken, 2018; Hassler et 
al., 2019). First Nations people living on reserve, in particular, have been disproportionately affected by 
displacement due to climate-related events. For example, over the period April 2017 to March 2019, nearly 
15,000 First Nations residents were evacuated because of floods, fires, and extreme heat (ISC, 2019, as cited 
in Parliamentary Information and Research Service, 2020). Going forward, emergency responses to these 
climate-related events will require adequate funding for emergency planning activities; capacity-building and 
training; the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples in coordination activities; the use of Indigenous knowledges and 
expertise; direct and immediate emergency response; evacuation processes that are sensitive to Indigenous 
Peoples; as well as ongoing efforts for Indigenous communities to recover from such events (Standing 
Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs, 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 74 
Box 2.3 Peavine Métis Settlement FireSmart Program
Many Indigenous communities are located in fire-prone forests where climate change is elevating wildfire 
risk (Christianson et al., 2014). FireSmart Canada works with federal, provincial, and territorial governments 
and organizations to increase community resilience to wildfires across Canada by implementing principles 
and best practices for wildfire prevention, mitigation, and preparedness (Christianson et al., 2012; ISC, 
2019b; FireSmart Canada, 2020). Using both Indigenous knowledges and scientific information, community 
members learn and share information about forest, vegetation, and ecosystem management; traditional 
burning practices; fireguard and fuel break strategies and activities; protection of homes and community 
infrastructure; and first response, among other issues (Government of the Northwest Territories, 2010; 
Christianson et al., 2012; Environment and Natural Resources, 2015; Environment and Natural Resources, 
2016; Dodd et al., 2018a; Dodd et al., 2018b). 
The Peavine Métis Settlement’s FireSmart Program involves conducting mitigation activities at residential and 
community levels. In addition to select, unique community projects, which occur twice annually, the program 
includes six ongoing activities (Christianson et al., 2012): 
•	
A lawn tractor program encourages residential lawn cutting.
•	
Agriculture 50/50 supports the conversion of forest to agricultural land vegetation thinning. 
•	
The New Homes Program supports clearing and thinning vegetation from future building sites. 
•	
Fire breaks, or gaps, in vegetation are being installed to help slow or stop wildfire spread.
•	
The Aboriginal Junior Forest Rangers crew assist with summer FireSmart projects such as 
vegetation management.
•	
A volunteer fire department manages fires.
Cultural norms and values influence a community’s perception and response to fire risk and mitigation 
(Christianson et al., 2014). For the Peavine Métis Settlement, these included the importance of assistance 
to community Elders, participation in subsistence activities on the land, traditional knowledge (TK), social 
relationships and support for community members, trust, pride in aesthetics, intergenerational knowledge 
transfer, and self-sufficiency. Each of these values is incorporated into some element of the community’s 
FireSmart Program (Christianson et al., 2012; Christianson et al., 2014). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 75 
2.4.2 Mental Health and Well-Being
Climate change threatens the cultural dimensions of Indigenous Peoples’ lives and livelihoods that are 
central to identity, community cohesion, and a sense of place and belonging (Adger et al., 2013). The impact 
of climate change on mental health and well-being can disproportionately burden some groups, including 
Indigenous women, children, and individuals from socio-economically disadvantaged communities (see 
Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being), as well as Elders, who can be deeply disturbed by the changes they 
are witnessing (FNMFNMES, 2016; Manning & Clayton, 2018). Since First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples 
have disproportionately higher rates of suicide, substance abuse, and violence as a result of intergenerational 
trauma and socio-economic marginalization (Aguiar & Halseth, 2015; Kumar & Tjepkema, 2019), these climate 
change impacts can compound existing mental health issues. 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples have a deep economic, social, and spiritual connection to their lands 
as a source of food, clothing, teaching, recreation, and connection to past, current, and future generations 
(Mecredi, 2010; Tobias & Richmond, 2014;) and see it as “intertwined and interconnected” to other 
determinants of health (Harper et al., 2015c, p. 6). Engaging in land- and culture-based activities can provide 
mental, emotional, social, cultural, and spiritual benefits that support individual and community resilience 
in the face of climate change. These activities can, for example, help to replenish the spirit, reduce stress, 
increase physical activity and nutrition, facilitate access to traditional medicines, build self-confidence, foster 
positive relationships, enhance cultural identities, and increase opportunities for intergenerational knowledge 
transmission (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Nisga’a First Nation, 2012; Arias-Bustamante, 2013; Cunsolo Willox 
et al., 2013a; Ulturgasheva et al., 2014; Durkalec et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015c). 
Climate change can disrupt Indigenous Peoples’ ability to hunt, fish, trap, forage, and spend time on the land, 
which can negatively affect their mental and emotional health and well-being. It can introduce new hazards, 
leading to increased stress and anxiety about the safety of family members travelling on the land (Harper 
et al., 2015c). It can disrupt the transmission of intergenerational knowledge and land skills to younger 
generations, which is critical to the formation of a strong cultural identity and resilience (Chandler & Lalonde, 
1998; Kral & Idlout, 2009; Wexler, 2013). Extreme climate events, such as wildfires, and resulting evacuations, 
along with impacts from slow-onset climate change effects can cause stress or worries about the future 
(Cunsolo Willox, 2012a; Cunsolo Willox, 2012b; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Scharback & Waldram, 2016; 
Asfaw, 2018; Dodd et al., 2018a; Dodd et al., 2018b; Manning & Clayton, 2018). 
Indigenous Peoples may also experience “ecological grief” from past and future climate change-related 
losses of land, ecosystems and species, environmental knowledge, and cultural identity (Cunsolo & Rigolet 
Inuit Community Government, 2014; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Meloche, 2018). As the climate warms, anxiety, 
stress, and “ecological grief” are expected to become increasingly more common (Cunsolo Willox et al., 
2013b, Bourque & Cunsolo Willox, 2014; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015c; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; 
Cunsolo et al., 2020) (see Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being). Responding to increasing mental health 
issues will be difficult and challenging, especially given that many First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities 
lack adequate mental health services (Mental Health Commission of Canada, 2016; Standing Committee 
on Indigenous and Northern Affairs, 2017; Carrière et al., 2018). Jurisdictional fragmentation of health care 
between federal and provincial governments and a lack of dedicated long-term funding for mental health 
services continue to be significant barriers to achieving health and well-being in First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
communities (Boksa et al., 2015). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 76 
Box 2.4 Improving mental health and resilience among Selkirk First 
Nations youth in the face of climate change 
Participation in land- and culture-based activities is considered by many First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
communities as a pathway to mental health and well-being, particularly for youth (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; 
Auger, 2019; Selkirk First Nation, & Arctic Institute of Community-Based Research, 2019). In the Yukon, the 
Selkirk First Nation relies on salmon as the mainstay of their diet, and harvesting salmon in fish camps is 
critical to their mental, physical, emotional, and spiritual well-being as a people (Richards et al., 2019). The 
community noticed a dramatic decline in the salmon population, which not only threatens their food security, 
but also the essence of their cultural identity — the age-old tradition of the fish camps. In 2015–2016, Selkirk 
First Nation received funding through the federal government’s Climate Change and Health Adaptation 
Program to conduct a community-based research and adaptation project related to maintaining food security 
and TK and culture around the fish camps to ensure the well-being of its community members.
The Selkirk First Nations project had the following short- and long-term objectives: 
•	
engage community members to collectively address issues of climate change; 
•	
build youth capacity in understanding climate change and conducting research;
•	
build relationships and cohesion in the community;
•	
present youth perspectives on mental well-being through photography;
•	
compile community strategies to adapt to climate change impacts to the fish camp and develop a 
community adaptation plan for climate change and the role of fish camps in youth mental health;
•	
understand climate change and health from a regional and Northern perspective;
•	
raise the voices of the Selkirk First Nation on issues of health and climate change while protecting 
traditional lifestyles; and
•	
support youth leadership in this area.
The research project was directed by an advisory committee of Elders and community members, while youth 
carried out surveys of the fish camps so they could learn first-hand the value and role of these camps and the 
impacts that climate change was having on their lands, community, and culture. The youth learned from the 
Elders the importance of connecting with TK and cultural traditions for promoting mental health and fostering 
resilience in the future. They learned valuable skills from on-the-land activities at a winter fish camp for youth, 
as well as skills involved in conducting community-based research. The “Keeping our traditions for the health 
and wellbeing of future Selkirk First Nation generations: ‘What do we do at the fish camp when there is no 
fish?’” project resulted in an adaptation strategy that identified a number of actions focused on supporting 
youth mental health and resilience, including teaching youth about traditional values, lifestyles, and laws; 
reconnecting them to the land; and supporting cultural activities such as art and dancing (Selkirk First Nation 
in collaboration with the Arctic Institute of Community-Based Research, 2016). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 77 
Exploration of the mental health impacts of climate change for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples is an 
emerging area of study and has focused primarily on the strong emotional and psychological responses 
experienced in the face of rapid ecological changes. For Inuit, these responses include intense feelings of 
anxiety, fear, stress, anger, sadness, disorientation, grief, loss and lament, increased drug and alcohol use, 
suicide ideation and attempts, violence, and decreased place-based mental solace (Cunsolo Willox, 2012a; 
Cunsolo Willox, 2012b; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Petrasek MacDonald et al., 
2013a; Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2013b; Ulturgasheva et al., 2014; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Harper et 
al., 2015c; Bunce et al., 2016). As noted by Durkalec and colleagues (2015), climate change is reinforcing 
environmental dispossession for Inuit, compounding disruption and denigration of Inuit knowledge and 
ways of life. Research on the mental health impacts of climate change on First Nations and Métis peoples 
is more limited. One study focused on the impacts of a summer of wildfires on the health and well-being of 
four First Nations communities in the Northwest Territories. Participants in this study reported experiences 
of evacuation and isolation, as well as feelings of fear, stress, and uncertainty about the future (Dodd et al., 
2018a; Dodd et al., 2018b).
Indigenous Services Canada provides funding for several targeted national strategies, including the National 
Aboriginal Youth Suicide Prevention Strategy, the National Native Alcohol and Drug Abuse Program, mental 
health counselling, and the Indian Residential Schools Mental Health Support Program (ISC, 2019c). Most 
of these programs are accessible to only a relatively small proportion of First Nations and Inuit12 and do not 
provide the range and quality of services required to address the complex mental health problems that exist 
in First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities (Maar et al., 2009; Boksa et al., 2015). Greater cooperation 
is needed among federal, provincial, and territorial governments to ensure that these communities have 
sustainable, dedicated funding to meet the potentially growing need for mental health services in response to 
climate change impacts. 
2.4.3 Air Quality
Weather and climate can affect indoor and outdoor air quality and have impacts on human health (Kinney, 
2008) (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). Warming temperatures can increase levels of air pollutants (e.g., ground-
level ozone, particulate matter) and the production of aeroallergens (e.g., pollens, molds) that are associated 
with a greater risk of cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, as well as premature death (Berry et al., 2014; 
Reid et al., 2016). First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples experience a disproportionate burden of chronic 
respiratory diseases, such as asthma13 and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,14 compared to non-
Indigenous people, and these diseases can become exacerbated by poor air quality (Gershon et al., 2014; 
12	 Under current jurisdictional arrangements, federal funding for most mental health programs and services is 
provided for community-based services accessible to status First Nations living on reserve and Inuit living in Inuit 
communities. In smaller, remote communities, access to mental health services may be very limited or non-existent 
(Boksa et al., 2015). Additionally, non-status First Nations and Métis peoples are not currently entitled to these same 
services and benefits. 
13	 First Nations people living off reserve and Métis have rates of asthma 1.6 times higher than Canadian-born non-
Indigenous peoples (PHAC, 2018a).
14	 Indigenous populations have a prevalence rate of 6.5% for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, compared to 4% 
for non-Indigenous populations in Canada (Bird et al., 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 78 
Ospina et al., 2015; Carrière et al., 2017; PHAC, 2018a; Koleade et al., 2018). Higher rates of respiratory 
infections, such as bronchitis, bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and tuberculosis, are also reported for First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis children (Kovesi, 2012; Konrad et al., 2013). The risks of exposure to poor air quality are 
greater for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples because of underlying health determinants such as poor 
housing conditions (e.g., homes in need of repair, overcrowding, poor ventilation, mold) in many communities, 
increased exposure to tobacco smoke and wood/oil heating, and geographic proximity to forests that are 
prone to wildfires and consequent smoke (CIER, 2008; B.J. Stocks Wildfire Investigations Ltd., 2013; Dodd et 
al., 2018a; Dodd et al., 2018b). 
Box 2.5 Yellowknife’s Summer of Smoke, 2014
“All that smoke we breathed in, where are you to go? It’s not only me. It’s the 
babies and the Elders. And then the vegetation and the runoff from the smoke and 
the rain all affects the ecosystem right to the water.” 15
During the summer of 2014, the Yellowknife area experienced an extreme wildfire season referred to as the 
“Summer of Smoke.” These fires resulted in a massive spike in air pollution to dangerous levels, confining 
many residents indoors for extended periods of time (Howard et al., 2017; Dodd et al., 2018a; Dodd et 
al., 2018b). The poor air quality associated with this wildfire season negatively affected First Nations 
communities, particularly children and the elderly. For example, the fire season corresponded to significant 
increases in emergency room visits for respiratory problems (42% over previous years), especially among 
children up to 4 years old (114% over previous years), as well as more cases of cough, pneumonia, and 
asthma (Dodd et al., 2018a). Confinement indoors during fires, disruptions in land-based activities, and 
physical inactivity also contributed to mental health impacts such as stress, anxiety, and depression.
To counteract cabin fever and physical inactivity, the First Nations communities of Kakisa and N’Dilo planned 
alternative physical and social activities to get away from persistent smoke, including hosting activities at the 
community hall that promoted physical activity among children and provided opportunities for community 
members to socialize. In Yellowknife, user fees were waived for recreational centres to encourage indoor 
physical activities. A documentary of the communities’ experiences, entitled Summer of Smoke, can be found 
at <https://vimeo.com/373958783> 
15	 Quote from Roxane Landry, Dene, Fort Providence from Summer of Smoke <https://vimeo.com/373958783>.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 79 
2.4.4 Food Safety and Security
Food insecurity is an urgent public health issue in Canada (Tarasuk et al., 2014) (see Chapter 8: Food 
Safety and Security), particularly for Indigenous Peoples in geographically remote regions with high rates of 
poverty (Loring & Gerlach, 2015; Bhawra et al., 2017; Human Rights Watch, 2020). Many Northern, remote 
communities rely on traditional or country foods to meet their nutritional needs (Earle, 2011). For example, 
Statistics Canada data indicate that 65% of Inuit, 35% of Métis, and 33% of First Nations living off reserve 
hunted, fished, or trapped in 2017, while 30% of off-reserve First Nations and 47% of Inuit gathered wild plants 
or berries16 (Kumar et al., 2019). Traditional or country foods are high in nutritional value and offer a number 
of physical and mental health benefits (Bunce, 2015; Bunce et al., 2016; Cyre & Slater, 2019). Harvesting 
traditional or country foods promotes physical activity, contributes to social cohesion through food sharing, 
facilitates spiritual renewal and cultural expression, and plays a role in the development of personal and 
community self-sufficiency and food sovereignty (Receveur & Kuhnlein, 1998; Earle, 2011; Cidro et al., 2015; 
Hirsch et al., 2016). 
Climate change is affecting the size, distribution, health, and behaviours of wildlife, fish, fowl, and other 
traditional sources of foods which, in turn, affect the ability to harvest and share them with family, Elders, 
and other community members (Organ et al., 2014; Statham et al., 2015; Archer, 2016; Spring et al., 2018). 
These impacts can be both positive and negative for enhancing food security. Warming temperatures have 
introduced new wildlife and plant species, allowed certain species to flourish, and lengthened growing 
seasons, making it easier for Northern communities to grow their own foods (Sheedy, 2018). However, a 
warming climate has altered the timing of harvesting periods and changed ecosystems and habitats in ways 
that negatively affect species reproduction, leading to declines or disappearances of specific species that 
constitute traditional livelihoods. 
Considerable research has already been undertaken on various climate-related aspects of food security for 
Indigenous populations, especially studies assessing the availability of traditionally important food sources. 
For example, many First Nations have been worried about declining numbers of some fish, shellfish, and 
goose species; the availability and quality of specific berries; and changes to caribou population size, health, 
distribution, and migration patterns (Mecredi, 2010; Hermann et al., 2012; Teslin Tlingit Council, 2012; Arias-
Bustamante, 2013; Donatuto et al., 2014; Kluane First Nations & AICBR, 2016; Parlee & Caine, 2018; Spring et 
al., 2018; Human Rights Watch, 2020). Inuit have also been alarmed by the changing population size, health, 
distribution, and/or migration patterns of caribou and other Arctic species, including muskox, seals, whales, 
and polar bears (Pauktuutit, 2011; Henry et al., 2012; Cuerrier et al., 2015; MacDonell, 2015; Quinn, 2016a; 
Quinn, 2016b; Mallory & Boyce, 2017; Parlee & Caine, 2018; Waugh et al., 2018). While little research has been 
conducted specifically on the climate-related food security impacts on Métis people, some have expressed 
concerns about a shortened goose hunt; changes in the movement and location of fish and their habitat; 
changes to the health, behaviour, and distribution of caribou and moose; changes in the availability and 
quality of specific berries; and the impacts of warmer weather on food preservation methods (Guyot et al., 
2006; North Slave Métis Alliance community members, Shiga, Evans, King, & Keats, 2018). 
16	 The authors provide no data on the proportion of Métis who gathered wild plants or berries beyond stating that this 
proportion remained relatively unchanged from the previous Aboriginal Peoples’ Survey.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 80 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis populations share a common concern about the unpredictability of weather and 
environmental conditions related to climate change and their ability to travel on the land access traditional 
foods. These impacts can place pressure on already stressed food systems, leading to increased food 
insecurity in Indigenous communities and a greater reliance on retail foods (Statham et al., 2015; Sheedy, 
2018). The move away from traditional or country foods to market foods, often of inferior quality, can 
exacerbate already high rates of chronic diseases prevalent among Indigenous Peoples, including obesity, 
diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases (Kolahdooz et al., 2015; Reading, 2015). 
Box 2.6 Enhancing food safety and security for urban Indigenous 
populations in the face of climate change
While Indigenous Peoples in Canada have become increasingly urbanized, there is also a high degree of 
geographic mobility between rural areas and cities (Norris & Clatworthy, 2011; Snyder & Wilson, 2015). 
This population trend can result in a loss of Indigenous knowledge and skills that are critical for enhancing 
nutrition, well-being, and self-reliance in the face of climate change impacts. Indigenous food and food 
systems are intrinsic to the health and well-being of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, regardless of 
whether they live in rural or urban spaces (Ray et al., 2019). Providing urban Indigenous populations with 
opportunities to learn about traditional practices and connect with TK around food is a way of strengthening 
Indigenous food sovereignty.
Some urban First Nations health access centres offer programs that foster relationships with the land 
coordinate traditional practices in urban spaces to provide opportunities for the transmission of Indigenous 
knowledge and skills. For example, the Shkagmik-Kwe Health Centre, located in Sudbury, Ontario, prepares 
traditional medicines in-house and holds annual medicine camps to enhance cultural teachings and practices 
around medicine picking and preparation (Ray et al., 2019). They also support traditional subsistence 
by organizing community and family hunts, providing basic hunting equipment and financial support for 
licensing fees to community members (Ray et al., 2019), collecting locally hunted and harvested food that is 
offered to struggling families through its Wild Food Bank (McLeod-Shabogesic, 2013), and teaching traditional 
food preparation and cooking methods to its members (Shkagamik-Kwe Health Centre, 2015).
The challenge that climate change poses for heightening food insecurity is compounded by the negative 
environmental impacts of resource development on the safety of traditional foods and a food system 
imposed through colonization that leaves Indigenous Peoples increasingly reliant on imported market-
based foods (Penner et al., 2019). The ability of Indigenous Peoples to exercise autonomy over their lands 
and traditional foods is crucial for redressing the colonial narrative of socio-economic marginalization and 
health disparities (Coté, 2016). This autonomy is embodied in the concept of “food sovereignty,” a human-
rights–based model founded on the notion that Indigenous Peoples have a right to “healthy and culturally 
appropriate food produced through ecologically sound and sustainable methods, and [the] right to define their 
own food and agricultural systems” (Sélingué, 2007, as cited in Coté, 2016, p. 8). Indigenous food sovereignty 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 81 
recognizes mino-pimatwisin, the Anishinaabe term for “good life,” and maligit, the Inuktitut term for “balance” 
in Qaujimajatuqangit (Inuit TK) (Penner et al., 2019). Innovative examples of Indigenous food sovereignty 
have been initiated across Canada, including school and community gardens, greenhouses, traditional foods 
education programs (e.g., conservation), market garden and food cooperatives, country food harvesting and 
sharing programs, wild food banks, and fish-buying clubs (Thompson et al., 2011; Thompson et al., 2012; 
Kamal et al., 2015; Martens, 2015; Robin, 2019).
2.4.5 Water Quality, Safety, and Security
“Water is what sustains us. Water is what brings us into this world, and water is what 
keeps us in this physical world. And so it’s our life.” 17
Climate change impacts, such as increased precipitation, flooding, and drought, can significantly affect the 
quality, quantity, and accessibility of water (Berry et al., 2014) (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and 
Security), exacerbating health risks related to water quality, safety, and security challenges already present 
in many First Nations and Inuit communities in Canada. Inadequate water and wastewater systems, a lack 
of trained staff, and increased exposure to pollutants or environmental contaminants have led to dozens 
of short- and long-term boil water advisories (White et al., 2012; Medeiros et al., 2016; Wright et al., 2018a; 
Wright et al., 2018b; ISC, 2020a; ISC, 2020b; ITK, 2020) While some progress has been made in improving the 
quality of drinking water in many Indigenous communities across Canada, a recent federal government report 
noted that Indigenous Services Canada was not on track to meet its 2015 commitment to eliminate all long-
term drinking water advisories on reserves by March 31, 2021 (Office of the Auditor General of Canada, 2021). 
For example, there were 51 long-term (as of June 16, 2021) and 26 short-term (as of July 15, 2021) drinking 
water advisories in place for First Nations public water systems18 (ISC, 2021a; ISC, 2021b). A further six boil 
water advisories and seven “do not consume” advisories were in place in First Nations communities across 
British Columbia as of June 31, 2021 (First Nations Health Authority, 2021). Many Inuit communities have 
a single established water source, which leads to challenges around water infrastructure, water shortages, 
municipal water treatment, environmental contamination of water sources, and boil water advisories. The 
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (2020) notes that 298 boil water advisories were issued in 29 Inuit communities 
between January 2015 and October 1, 2020. The result is that these communities face water emergencies 
under certain climatic conditions or must rely on trucked water and drinking water stored in containers, thus 
increasing the risk of contamination (Medeiros et al., 2016; Wright et al., 2018a). As recently as October 12, 
2021, the Government of Nunavut flew in 80,000 litres of bottled water to Iqaluit after a state of emergency 
was declared following the detection of fuel in the communityʼs drinking water (CBC News, 2021).
High-visibility events like boil water advisories can increase distrust in water quality and lead to avoidance 
of the use of household drinking water supplies (Ekos Research Associates, 2011; Allaire et al., 2019). 
Small water systems face drinking water advisories as often or more frequently than large municipal water 
systems and often lack the proper resources to adequately address the advisory (Lane and Gagnon, 2020). 
17	 Jan Longboat, as quoted in Anderson (2010, p. 7).
18	 These statistics exclude British Columbia and the Saskatoon Tribal Council.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 82 
Examinations of boil water advisories in Canada have identified that advisories are most often issued for 
operational or process-related concerns (Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2018; Lane and Gagnon, 
2020). Climate-related events, such as intense rainfall, severe storms, dry spells, extremely hot days, and 
storm surges, can damage water supply infrastructure, diminish the availability of water resources, and 
reduce the quality of water used for consumption (Kohlitz et al., 2020). Increased pressures on drinking water 
infrastructure at small drinking water systems are forecasted as climate change accelerates (Kohlitz et al., 2020).
Climate change has already had a significant impact on water security in Indigenous communities. Numerous 
First Nations communities have reported rapid declines in water levels, with significant impacts on the 
availability of fish resources and the migration and movement of other animal resources that are important 
for food security (Mecredi, 2010; Nisga’a First Nation, 2012; Teslin Tlingit Council, 2012; Harper et al., 2015a; 
FRMFNMES, 2016; Sheedy, 2018). In the Arctic, climate change has increased evaporation of the freshwater 
supply, the contribution of groundwater to river flows, and permafrost degradation. These impacts will place 
increasing pressure on the availability of drinking water, diminish water quality as a result of the release of 
stored environmental contaminants, and place cumulative and increasing pressure on freshwater resources 
(Nilsson et al., 2013; Goldhar et al., 2014; Bakaic & Medeiros, 2016; Medeiros et al., 2016). 
The lack of access to clean, safe water can make it difficult to maintain personal hygiene and contribute to 
the increased spread of water-borne infectious diseases such as gastrointestinal illness (Harper et al., 2015a; 
Harper et al., 2015b; Bradford et al., 2016; Chen, 2016), as well as infectious illnesses such as influenza, 
coronavirus (COVID-19), and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (Boyd, 2011; Sarkar et al., 2015; 
Bharadwaj & Bradford, 2018; Stoler et al., 2020). In a scoping review of drinking water quality in Indigenous 
communities and health outcomes in Canada, Bradford et al., (2016) found gastrointestinal infections were 
the most commonly reported health concern in the studies reviewed. Other health concerns reported in 
relation to contaminated drinking water included skin conditions, such as eczema and skin cancer, increased 
infant mortality and birth defects, as well as elevated levels of obesity, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases 
resulting from a reliance on carbonated and sugary drinks in the absence of clean drinking water (Bradford et 
al., 2016). 
The potential mental and spiritual health impacts of climate change on water security cannot be overstated. 
Several studies across Canada indicate that water insecurity is linked to mental health issues and 
psychosocial distress in Indigenous individuals (Anderson, 2010; Hanrahan et al., 2014; Sarkar et al., 2015; 
Cruddas, 2017). Considered life-giving and sacred by First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, water is often 
used for ceremonial and cultural purposes (Anderson, 2010; McGregor, 2012; AFN, 2013; Omosule, 2017). It is 
also needed to pursue cultural practices and livelihoods (Bharadwaj & Bradford, 2018). Gathering water from 
the land is an important part of subsistence culture and Inuit identity, as well as a potential source of healing 
(Watson, 2017; Wright et al., 2018b). Negative impacts on water security can thus affect mental and spiritual 
well-being (Powys Whyte, 2014; Lam et al., 2017). Given the physical, emotional, and spiritual importance of 
water, greater Indigenous sovereignty is needed to protect First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities from 
environmental harms to the quantity, quality, and accessibility of water resources arising from climate change 
and natural resource development projects in their territories.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 83 
Box 2.7 Water quality, safety, and security adaptations in the Yukon 
and Inuvialuit Settlement Region 
Yukon
The Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council conducted three phases of work to address water-quality 
concerns from the release of environmental contaminants as a result of climate change impacts (Wilson et 
al., 2015; Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council, 2017). In Phase 1, Indigenous knowledge was used in 
conjunction with scientific data collection processes to identify 95 sites of concern. Activities included focus 
groups, a mapping exercise, and key informant interviews. Phase 2 also brought together TK and Western 
science to develop climate adaptation strategies. This work also included training youth and community 
members in field methods for contaminant monitoring and water sampling, along with data collection 
and manipulation technologies (e.g., databases, geographic information systems). In total, water samples 
were collected at 25 sites. Phase 3 brought First Nations leaders from across the Yukon to a workshop in 
which results from Phase 1 and 2 were presented, and actions to address concerns related to water and 
climate change were discussed. A regional, Indigenous-centred climate adaptation plan for water health and 
governance was then developed.
Inuvialuit Settlement Region 
The Monitoring and Surveillance of Water Borne Diseases in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region: Adapting to a 
Changing Climate in the North project took place from 2009 to 2010. The project included the development 
of a water sampling program in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region to determine the level of microbes and 
contaminants in the water, including heavy metals, parasites, and bacteria. Youth were brought into the 
project to learn about taking care of water and water testing in the communities of Atlavik, Tuktoyaktuk, and 
Ulukhaktok (Institute for Circumpolar Health Research, 2017). 
2.4.6 Infectious Diseases
Changes in weather patterns, such as warmer temperatures, increased precipitation, and more frequent 
drought and wildfires, are expected to affect the incidence and distribution of water-borne, food-borne, vector-
borne, and zoonotic diseases (Greer et al., 2008; Berry et al., 2014; Chen, 2016) (see Chapter 6: Infectious 
Diseases). Indigenous Peoples globally and across Canada have significantly higher rates of infectious 
diseases than non-Indigenous populations (Gracey & King, 2009; Hotez, 2010), placing them at greater risk for 
climate-related infectious diseases. Determinants of health, such as poverty, malnutrition, decreased access 
to health care, and poor socio-economic conditions, influence an individual’s resistance to infection, the 
progression of disease, and the treatment and management of disease (CPHO, 2013).
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are at an increased risk of exposure to climate-related infectious 
diseases because of a strong reliance on traditional or country foods. Recent studies, for example, indicate 
an increased prevalence of parasites in wildlife, causing trichinellosis in walrus and polar bear, brucellosis in 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 84 
caribou, lungworm infection in muskox, giardiasis in beaver, as well as tularemia, rabies, and cryptosporidiosis 
(Jenkins et al., 2013; Jenkins et al., 2015; Quinn, 2016a; Quinn, 2016b; Yansouni et al., 2016; Tomaselli et al., 
2017; Sheedy, 2018). These diseases have the potential to be transmitted from animals to humans, either 
directly, from the consumption of traditional foods, or indirectly, through exposure to domestic animals 
carrying these pathogens (Himsworth et al., 2010; Goyette et al., 2014; Bowser & Anderson, 2018).
A high burden of parasitic and food-borne infectious diseases has been detected among some Indigenous 
populations in Arctic regions. Associations have been found between the consumption of marine 
mammals and outbreaks of trichinellosis (Yansouni et al., 2016). A disproportionately high burden of acute 
gastrointestinal illness, which can be related to both water- and food-borne disease, has been reported in 
several Inuit communities (Harper et al., 2015a; Harper et al., 2015b). More specifically, a high prevalence 
of giardiasis has been detected in Northern Canada (Yansouni et al., 2016), while rates of cryptosporidiosis 
appear to be extremely high among Inuit in the Qikiqtani region of Nunavut (Goldfarb et al., 2013) and 
the Nunavik region of Quebec (Thivierge et al., 2016) compared to the Canadian average. While acute 
gastrointestinal illness is generally mild and easily self-resolves, it remains a leading contributor to infant 
mortality among young children in the Arctic (Yansouni et al., 2016). There is also some evidence that 
increasing exposure to infected marine and terrestrial animals may be contributing to increasing prevalence 
of toxoplasmosis among Inuit, with rates ranging from 60% to 87% in some communities (Lavoie et al., 2007; 
Messier et al., 2009; Elmore et al., 2012; Jenkins et al., 2013; Goyette et al., 2014). Toxoplasmosis manifests 
most severely in immunocompromised people and in women infected for the first time during pregnancy, 
leading to miscarriage, stillbirth, and fetal deformities (Jenkins et al., 2015). In addition to physical health 
impacts, the potential increase in environmentally transmitted parasites and pathogens can have a significant 
impact on the sustainability, availability, and suitability of animal species that have nutritional, material, 
cultural, and economic importance to Indigenous Peoples (Government of Nunavut, 2010; Dudley et al., 2015; 
Sheedy, 2018), which can have implications for mental and spiritual health as well.
A rise in the abundance of mosquitoes, ticks, and other biting insects is also evident across Canada, including 
in Northern regions, with the potential to transmit new vector-borne diseases, such as Lyme disease and 
West Nile virus (Nickels et al., 2002; Cuerrier et al., 2015; Chen, 2016; Wudel & Shadabi, 2016; Nelder et al., 
2018; Awuor et al., 2019; Bouchard et al., 2019). West Nile virus and Lyme disease have already expanded 
across all provinces and are recognized as potential health risks by some First Nations (First Nations Centre, 
2004; PHAC, 2018b). While enhanced surveillance and monitoring for vector-borne diseases in Canada is 
needed (Awuor et al., 2019), it appears that Arctic communities are not yet at risk of sustained transmission 
of such diseases (Chen, 2016).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 85 
Box 2.8 A potential role for Indigenous knowledges in mitigating 
the spread of Toxoplasma gondii and other climate-related 
infectious diseases
Toxoplasmosis, caused by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii), is an important health issue in the 
Arctic, and is expected to increase in prevalence due to climate change. Warming temperatures are expected 
to expand the habitat of felid (wild cat) hosts and the migrating range of infected intermediate hosts such as 
birds and mammals, opening up new transmission routes to humans, including contaminated water (Reiling 
& Dixon, 2019). The disease can pose serious health risks, especially in immunocompromised individuals and 
women infected for their first time during pregnancy (BC Centre for Disease Control, n.d.; Jenkins et al., 2013). 
Northern Indigenous populations are at increased risk of acquiring the disease and experiencing adverse 
health outcomes because of the harvesting, processing, and consumption of country foods, sometimes raw 
(Reiling & Dixon, 2019), and because many of these communities have poor water-treatment infrastructure 
and lack access to safe and clean drinking water (Douglas, 2017). Some adaptations to address this health 
risk include cooking the meat or freezing it for several days to kill the pathogens present in the tissue cysts 
(El-Nawawi et al., 2008); improving climate and T. gondii information collection and monitoring to enable 
better prediction and early detection of risk; strengthening drinking water treatment systems, water quality 
monitoring, and operator training; and implementing community education campaigns related to safe food 
preparation and storage (Douglas, 2017; Bachand et al., 2019). 
Indigenous knowledges can be used with scientific knowledge and methods to determine the health of 
country foods and inform adaptation measures. For example, in a study by Sudlovenick (2019), hunters from 
Iqaluit were interviewed about the health of ringed seals (nattit) to determine whether they were safe to eat 
based on the presence of five pathogens (Brucella canis, B. abortus, Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae, Leptospira 
interrogans, and T. gondii) and heavy metals. This information was combined with a serological survey 
to determine the presence of these pathogens in seals. Some clinical signs of T. gondii include lethargy, 
anorexia, and a rash at the flippers. While participating hunters were unable to identify the presence of 
specific pathogens such as T. gondii, they were able to identify and reject sick seals or parts of seals that 
should not be consumed because they could be unhealthy. They also expressed concerns about the health of 
harp seals, many of which appeared to be ill. As one hunter noted, “The one thing that I’ve seen really increase 
in illness is the harp seals. Young seals you’ll see that they are covered in algae, they’re covered in lesions, 
they’re skinny. ... But, really sickly. If I see one, I’ll shoot them and leave them. I don’t even want to touch them 
with my hook. Cause it would contaminate.”19 
The serological survey identified T. gondii antibodies present in nearly 10% of the seal samples. While small 
scale, the study highlights the potential value of Indigenous knowledge in mitigating the spread of infectious 
diseases like T. gondii and the importance of intergenerational knowledge transmission about the health of 
country foods as a climate change adaptation strategy.
19	 As quoted in Sudlovenick (2019, p. 50).
 
I
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 86 
2.4.7 Health Systems
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples face unique challenges in accessing health care, including mental 
health services. Inadequate health human resources, high staff turnover, low population density, geographic 
remoteness, jurisdictional conflicts over health care provision, lack of health and/or transportation 
infrastructure, reduced political power, increased travel costs, and a deficit of information on Indigenous 
Peoples’ health to inform evidence-based practices all present significant challenges (Ford et al., 2010b; NCCIH, 
2019). In rural and remote Indigenous communities, individuals and families must often leave the community 
for medical emergencies, hospitalization, or appointments with medical specialists, and to access mental health 
counselling and addictions rehabilitation services (Rondeau, 2012; Harper et al., 2015c; NCCIH, 2019). 
Climate-related events can disrupt or damage communication, hospital, and transportation infrastructure, 
which can restrict travel for health services outside the community. They can also delay the supply of 
essential pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, compromise patient safety, leave communities isolated and 
unable to reach help in an emergency, and make it challenging to implement cultural land-based programs 
focused on promoting health and well-being (Health Care without Harm, n.d.; Paterson et al., 2014; Harper et 
al., 2015c; Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2020) (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System 
Resilience). With climate change expected to have considerable impacts on human health, especially in 
Northern populations, existing health systems may be strained beyond capacity to address emerging health 
issues such as pandemics. To withstand respond to climate risks, it will be important to draw on local, 
Indigenous, and scientific knowledges to develop climate change responses that meet needs in locally 
specific contexts and build the capacity of the health sector and emergency response systems (Kipp et al., 2019b).
Additionally, to ensure Indigenous health systems and services can effectively respond to extreme weather 
and climate events, broader-level determinants of health need to be addressed. Specifically, there is a need to 
(Ford et al., 2010a):
•	
address the material conditions and behaviours associated with poverty that increase Indigenous 
Peoples’ sensitivity to climate change and capacity to adapt;
•	
enhance surveillance in remote regions to more quickly identify emerging health risks 
and vulnerabilities;
•	
develop comprehensive, culturally specific, health assessment measures to assess climate 
change impacts;
•	
address issues related to inequitable access to health information, diagnosis, and treatment in 
Indigenous communities;
•	
respect the rights and needs of Indigenous Peoples to address continued and persistent 
inequalities that exacerbate climate change health vulnerability; and
•	
resolve the jurisdictional issues that limit the ability to identify and prepare for climate change 
risks and address inequalities. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 87 
Box 2.9 Health system adaptations to reduce risks facing First Nations 
and Inuit peoples
Arctic Climate Change Vulnerability Index
Aviation and marine transportation systems play invaluable roles in the Arctic, not only in supplying 
perishable goods, food, and mail, but also in accessing timely medical care (Debortoli et al., 2019). Climate 
change has the potential to disrupt these transportation systems, with significant impacts on health, well-
being, and economic vitality in the region. Researchers have developed an Arctic Climate Change Vulnerability 
Index to assess the physical and social factors that influence exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity 
to climate change that is reflective of Inuit values and sensitive to the ways in which communities are 
represented (Debortoli et al., 2019). The index draws on scientific indicators to assess exposure, sensitivity, 
and vulnerability, as well as qualitative data from Statistics Canada and ISC’s Community Well-Being Index 
to reflect adaptive capacity and resilience. This includes data on socio-economic and housing conditions, 
age demographics, and Indigenous knowledges. The latter was determined using data on the ability to speak 
Inuktitut coupled with data on the proportion of the community that consists of new immigrants, who were 
seen as having limited land skills or knowledge of the Arctic and no Inuit traditional knowledge. The index 
allows the effects of various climate change scenarios to be projected on air and marine transportation 
systems and may be useful for health system decision makers to inform adaptation plans. 
2.5 Indigenous Knowledges
Indigenous knowledge, traditional ecological knowledge (TEK), traditional knowledge (TK), and Inuit 
knowledge or Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit20 are all dynamic and living concepts that denote the understanding, 
interdependence, and relationality between Indigenous Peoples and the lands they call home, including 
all Creation and beings (animate and inanimate) within that land (McGregor, 2014). According to the Inuit 
Circumpolar Council (n.d., para. 4), Indigenous knowledge can be defined as “a systematic way of thinking 
applied to phenomenon across biological, physical, cultural and spiritual systems. It includes insights 
based on evidence acquired through direct and long-term experiences and extensive and multigenerational 
observations, lessons and skills. It has developed over millennia and is still developing in a living process, 
including knowledge acquired today and in the future, … [as] passed on from generation to generation.” TEK 
is the “knowledge, practice, and belief, evolving by adaptive processes and handed down through generations 
by cultural transmission, about the relationship of living beings, including humans, with one another and with 
their environment” (Berkes, 2012, p. 7). The direct translation of Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit is “that which Inuit 
have always known to be true” and it is governed by four natural laws: “1) working for the common good; 
2) respecting all living things; 3) maintaining harmony and balance; and 4) continually planning and preparing 
20	 Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit is the preferred term for Inuit knowledge in Nunavut.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 88 
for the future” (Nunavut Department of Education, 2007; Tagalik, 2010, p. 1). According to concepts around 
Métis peoples’ TEK, “understanding the natural world, building skills and behaviour adaptable and applicable 
to other facets of Métis life…contribute[s] to personal and community spiritual, physical, intellectual and 
emotional health and development” (Vizina, 2010, p. 13).
Indigenous knowledges are embedded within Indigenous languages and transmitted to younger generations 
through community knowledge (Task Force on Aboriginal Languages and Cultures, 2005; Battiste, 2010; 
Tagalik, 2010; Wilder et al., 2016). This includes observations about the land, plants, insects, forests, 
waterways, sea, sea ice, soil, weather conditions, and migratory patterns of animals (Tagalik, 2010; McGregor, 
2014; Sandoval et al., 2016; Windchief & Ryan, 2018). Cosmological, medicinal, pharmacological, agricultural, 
and botanical knowledges, for example, are shared through direct observation and participation in them, as 
well as through storytelling, prayers, dance, art, protocols, teachings, and ceremonies (Neeganagwedgin, 
2013; Kulnieks et al., 2016; Reo et al., 2017). Indigenous knowledges inform ethical, social, political, legal, 
governance and moral practices, and are pivotal for community survival and continuity, as well as resource 
management and sustainability (Alexander et al., 2011; McGregor, 2012; Windchief & Ryan, 2018).
2.5.1 Indigenous Knowledges and Climate Change
“Indigenous people have drawn on Indigenous knowledge and science for millennia 
to understand respond to climate and environmental changes they faced.… What 
is different and challenging today is the rate of manmade climate change and our 
ability to respond to it. We must correct the path we are walking on and return to 
the special relationships, the teachings, the knowledge and practice that maintains 
respect, honor, and relationship with the natural world.” 21
Indigenous knowledges have been critical to the survival and resilience of Indigenous Peoples since time 
immemorial. Although these knowledges are increasingly recognized as equal to scientific information in 
understanding and adapting to climate change, the meaningful engagement of Indigenous Peoples and 
their knowledge systems in climate change research and policy remains a challenge. Indigenous-focused 
content has, for example, been under-represented in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
assessment reports, as well as in policy discussions surrounding the UNFCCC (Ford, 2012; Ford et al., 2016b; 
Belfer et al., 2019). This disconnect is rooted, in part, in how Indigenous Peoples and Indigenous knowledge 
systems have been framed in the Western climate change discourse — as powerless victims with static 
knowledge that is increasingly undermined or made irrelevant by the rapid pace of climate change (Ford et 
al., 2016b). Critiques of the IPCC and  UNFCCC suggest this contributes to the homogenizing of knowledge, 
cultures, and ways of knowing, and situates Indigenous Peoples alongside marginalized or vulnerable social 
groups without contextualizing their unique lived experiences or cultural and colonial realities (Ford et al., 
2016b). Increased participation of Indigenous scholars, knowledge holders, and organizations is slowly 
expanding through procedural changes, such as the establishment of the Local Communities and Indigenous 
Peoples Platform (LCIPP) at the UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP) 21 in 2015 and the Facilitative 
21	 Suzanne Benally, as quoted in Frank (2017, para. 4).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 89 
Working Group at UNFCCC COP 24 in 2018. The LCIPP is the first “formal, permanent, and distinct space” 
created for Indigenous Peoples and is focused on knowledge, capacity for engagement, and climate change 
policies and actions (Belfer et al., 2019, p. 27). Although recognized as an important first step, the LCIPP has 
the potential to “silo” Indigenous Peoples’ concerns exclusively to the platform (Reed, 2019) and arguably 
undermines Indigenous Peoples’ status and rights by “grouping and conflating Indigenous Peoples with local 
communities” (Inuit Circumpolar Council, 2020, p. 2).
The use of Indigenous knowledges in climate change and health research is evolving. Indigenous 
knowledges were initially used in conjunction with scientific knowledge to document observations of 
climate and environmental changes (Riedlinger & Berkes, 2001). More recently, they have been used as part 
of community-based studies that engage and are led by Indigenous Peoples in identifying their exposure 
and vulnerability to climate change effects, real and perceived impacts to their health and well-being, and 
potential adaptation strategies (Cameron, 2012; Donatuto et al., 2014; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Rosol et 
al., 2016; Ford et al., 2018; Sawatzky et al., 2018; Kipp et al., 2019a; Sawatzky et al., 2020). Indigenous and 
scientific knowledge systems can accentuate and strengthen one another, since they identify different types 
of impacts brought about by climate change (Royer et al., 2013; Baldwin et al., 2018; Makondo & Thomas, 
2018). Indigenous knowledges can enrich understanding of environmental change because they focus on the 
dynamics of the whole system under multiple stressors rather than on a single phenomenon (Mantyka-Pringle 
et al., 2017).
Indigenous knowledges can inform climate change and health-related decision-making at a variety of levels 
to benefit diverse stakeholders, including researchers, decision makers and community members (Finn et 
al., 2017; Mantyka-Pringle et al., 2017). They have been used to establish multiple ecosystem indicators 
and baselines, which are useful for identifying priority areas for environmental monitoring, protection, and 
potential remediation (Uprety et al., 2012; Sanderson et al., 2015; York et al., 2016; Baldwin et al., 2018; 
Gérin-Lajoie et al., 2018). Indigenous knowledges have been used to develop predictive models for identifying 
climate change vulnerabilities and adaptation options, such as potential impacts on traditional livelihoods 
and subsequent health implications (Turner & Spalding, 2013; Research Northwest & Herschfield, 2017; 
Flynn et al., 2018). Indigenous knowledges can and have been used with scientific knowledge to improve 
risk assessments, enabling individuals to make informed decisions about weather-related risks and hazards 
associated with traditional harvesting and land-use activities (Riedlinger & Berkes, 2001; Pennesi et al., 2012; 
Deemer et al., 2018), and aiding the planning and location of future infrastructure (Turner & Spalding, 2013; 
Flynn et al., 2019). The foundational values and traditional teachings related to Indigenous knowledges 
around reciprocity, inter-relationships, and spirituality can teach environmental stewardship and enhance 
governance of biodiversity and ecosystems for human health and well-being (Tengö et al., 2014; Hansen & 
Antsanen, 2018). This aspect of Indigenous knowledges is relevant not just for Indigenous communities, but 
also for non-Indigenous communities, nationally and globally (Maldonado et al., 2016; Hansen & Antsanen, 2018). 
In the past, the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge systems in adaptation interventions has been variable 
(Ford et al., 2017). This stems not only from the fact that climate change considerations are often secondary 
in decision-making, but also from confusion remaining across all levels of government about what it means to 
include Indigenous knowledge systems in these interventions and how best to do so (MacDonell, 2015; Ford 
et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2018). Examples are emerging in which Indigenous knowledge has been incorporated 
into the design, monitoring, and evaluation of adaptation interventions (Debels et al., 2009; Champalle et al., 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 90 
2015; Ford et al., 2018). Key tenets of these interventions are the adoption of community-driven, participatory, 
and collaborative approaches and the integration of science and Indigenous knowledge systems, using 
knowledge co-production22 frameworks that seek to address the challenge of inequitable power differentials. 
Several knowledge co-production case studies suggest this approach helps foster community engagement 
and buy-in, ensures Indigenous Peoples’ needs and interests are meaningfully incorporated, reflects local 
context in terms of available resources and capacity for implementation, and enables learning to maximize 
adaptive capacity (Armitage et al., 2011; Reid et al., 2014; Schuttenberg & Guth, 2015; Ford et al., 2016a; 
Diver, 2017). Latulippe & Klenk (2020) caution knowledge co-production scholars, however, to “move away 
from seeking to better ‘integrate’ Indigenous knowledges into western science” and instead make way for 
Indigenous research leadership and Indigenous knowledge sovereignty. 
Indigenous Peoples in Canada and globally have increasingly reframed the discussion around climate change, 
research, and policy within a rights-based, distinctions-based approach. For well over two decades, Inuit have 
reported how a rapidly changing climate has affected their practices and knowledge around a way of life that 
is based on the land, sea, and ice. They have also voiced the direct and indirect impacts to their health and 
human rights caused by climate change (Prior & Heinämäki, 2017; ITK, 2019b). For example, in 2005, Sheila 
Watt-Cloutier, then chair of the Inuit Circumpolar Conference, presented an “Inuit Petition” on behalf of Inuit 
in Canada and the United States to the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights that sought “relief from 
human rights violations resulting from the impacts of climate change” due to greenhouse gas emissions 
from the United States (Sabine Center for Climate Change Law, 2005). Although the petition was never 
resolved, various bodies of the United Nations have acknowledged the threat that climate change poses to 
“the enjoyment of all human rights, including the rights to health, water, food, housing, self-determination, and 
life itself” (Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, 2018, p. 1). The need for climate justice,23 and 
the participation of those disproportionately impacted in finding solutions to climate change, have also been 
recognized. Climate change is “inherently discriminatory” in that Indigenous Peoples, like other populations, 
are the most vulnerable to climate change, yet have contributed the least to it (UNHRC, 2016, p. 19). As a 
consequence, decisions around climate change adaptation interventions, “must accord with the obligations 
owed to those peoples, including, where applicable, the duties to facilitate their participation in the decision-
making process and not to proceed without their free, prior and informed consent” (UNHRC, 2016, p. 20). 
22	 Knowledge co-production is a research practice that seeks to co-produce, with local decision makers and 
stakeholders, knowledge that is useful and usable (Latulippe & Klenk, 2020).
23	 The Mary Robinson Foundation – Climate Justice (2020) defines climate justice as a human-centred approach to 
addressing climate change that safeguards the “rights of the most vulnerable people and [shares] the burdens and 
benefits of climate change and its impacts equitably and fairly” (para. 1).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 91 
Box 2.10 Using Indigenous knowledges in climate change adaptation
“Our land is very important to us. We live on it. We breathe it. 
We work on it. It gives us life. Without it we don’t have an identity.” 24
Indigenous knowledges and worldviews provide important teachings about environmental stewardship to 
reduce the severity of climate change (Hansen & Antsanen, 2018). The Indigenous Guardians Pilot Program 
“supports Indigenous rights and responsibilities in protecting and conserving ecosystems, developing and 
maintaining stable economies, and continuing the profound connections between Canadian landscape and 
Indigenous culture” (ECCC, 2020a, para. 2). The program establishes guardians in Indigenous communities 
to monitor, manage, and provide stewardship over their lands and waters (Nature United, 2020). Funded 
by a $25 million federal government investment over a five-year period (2017 to 2021), the program is 
implemented jointly with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples to ensure that their distinct perspectives, 
rights, responsibilities, and needs are respected and recognized. 
Global in scope, these programs are Indigenous-led and -managed community-based initiatives that focus 
on intergenerational capacity building, leadership and knowledge sharing, and provide First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis peoples with greater opportunities to exercise responsibility in stewardship of their traditional 
lands, waters, and ice (Government of Canada, 2019). Each program is different, but they all employ staff to 
undertake some or all of the following activities: educate, conduct outreach, inform, influence, implement, 
collaborate, connect, analyze, monitor, patrol, observe, collect data, research, protect, report, enforce, and 
undertake cultural activities (Nature United, 2020). In the first year of the program, 28 communities (24 First 
Nations, three Inuit, and one Métis) received funding, and 33 communities (22 First Nations, six Inuit, and five 
Métis) received funding in the second year (ECCC, 2020a).
A recent report identified a range of social, economic, cultural, and environmental values and benefits 
of Indigenous Guardians programs for First Nations communities along coastal British Columbia. The 
report noted that, for First Nations people participating in the study, the program contributed to taking 
care of their territory, nurturing cultural well-being, improving general health and community well-being, 
advancing governance authority for the respective Nations, increasing community capacity, opening and 
promoting economic opportunities, and providing financial capital inflows to the community (Epi EcoPlan 
International Inc., 2016). A return of a least 10 times on each dollar invested was estimated for participating 
First Nations communities. The Indigenous Guardians Toolkit (Nature United, 2020) provides a forum that 
allows Indigenous communities to share their experiences, learn from each other and get support for their 
community projects. 
24	 Norway Rabliauskas, Councillor, Poplar First Nation, Manitoba, as quoted Indigenous guardians — caring for the land 
(YouTube video) (n.d). <https://www.indigenousguardianstoolkit.ca/node/40/resources>.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 92 
2.6 Indigenous Peoples’ Rights and National and 
International Commitments
“It is our right to keep on living the way we used to and also 
the right to adapt for a better future.” 25
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples have a distinct constitutional relationship with the Crown as rights-
holders under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982, including the inherent right to self-government over 
their lands, natural resources, and ways of life (Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada, 2018). 
In line with the Government of Canada’s commitment to reconciliation and the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s Calls to Action (2015), 10 overarching principles were developed in 2018 to support a 
renewed “nation-to-nation, government-to-government, and Inuit-Crown relationship based on recognition 
of rights, respect, co-operation, and partnership as the foundation for transformative change” (Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General of Canada, 2018, p. 3). The Principles Respecting the Government of Canada’s 
Relationship with Indigenous Peoples address national commitments, such as treaties or other agreements 
and negotiations between the Crown and Indigenous Peoples, and acknowledge that distinctions-based 
approaches are needed to “ensure that the unique rights, interests and circumstances of the First Nations, 
the Métis Nation and Inuit are acknowledged, affirmed, and implemented” (Minister of Justice and Attorney 
General of Canada, 2018, p. 17). 
The principles also address international commitments, including the United Nations Declaration on the 
Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which was adopted by Canada without qualifications in 2016. This declaration 
recognizes the urgent “need to respect and promote the inherent rights of Indigenous Peoples which derive 
from their political, economic and social structures and from their cultures, spiritual traditions, histories and 
philosophies, especially their rights to their lands, territories and resources” (United Nations, 2007, p. 3). 
Additionally, it states that “Indigenous knowledge, cultures and traditional practices contribute to sustainable 
and equitable development and proper management of the environment,” and that Indigenous Peoples 
have “the right to the conservation and protection of the environment and the productive capacity of their 
lands or territories and resources” (United Nations, 2007, p. 4, 21). Similarly, the United Nation’s Sustainable 
Development Goals articulate a 15-year agenda to eradicate poverty in all its forms and address the global 
challenge of sustainable development, including goal 13, to take urgent action to combat climate change 
and its impacts by strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity. Respecting and promoting these rights 
supports Canada in meeting its domestic and international commitments and is central to climate change 
efforts going forward. 
25	 Sam Hunter, Weenusk First Nation, Ontario, as quoted in Human Rights Watch (2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 93 
2.6.1 Roles and Responsibilities in Indigenous Peoples’ Health and 
Climate Change
Robust adaptation requires collaboration at all levels of government and across a range of sectors (see 
Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). At the federal level, the Pan-Canadian Framework on 
Clean Growth and Climate Change (PCF) (ECCC, 2018) and the report A Healthy Environment and a Healthy 
Economy: Canada’s Strengthened Climate Plan to Create Jobs and Support People, Communities and the Planet 
(ECCC, 2020b) articulate Canada’s commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet 2030 targets, 
to build capacity to adapt to the impacts of climate change, including risks to human health, and to support 
clean technology in collaboration with provinces and territories. The PCF reiterates Canada’s commitment to 
a renewed relationship with Indigenous Peoples, including mitigation and adaptation action that is based on 
the recognition of rights, respect, cooperation, and partnership, and the importance of Indigenous knowledges 
in understanding climate impacts and adaptation measures (ECCC, 2018). As part of this process, the 
Assembly of First Nations, Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, and the Métis National Council are working collaboratively 
with government through distinctions-based senior bilateral tables to ensure a structured, collaborative 
approach for ongoing engagement in the implementation of the PCF (ECCC, 2019). The proposed objectives 
of the distinctions-based senior bilateral tables are to (Trudeau, 2016):
•	
jointly develop real and meaningful approaches for Indigenous Peoples that position them as 
leaders of climate action, with clear timelines, objectives, and reporting in support of the PCF and 
other climate change activities;
•	
ensure inclusive, meaningful, and adequately resourced Indigenous engagement that emphasizes 
collaborative planning and participation in decision-making;
•	
advise on and track progress on the implementation of relevant acts, regulations, policies, and 
programs, such as advancing clean energy solutions for Indigenous Peoples;
•	
share information and jointly identify and monitor levers, indicators, and results, contributing to 
transparent reporting on the implementation of the PCF; and
•	
provide local and regional views, perspectives, and proposals on the implementation of the PCF to 
federal, provincial, and territorial intergovernmental structures.

These tables also support broader First Nations, Inuit, and Métis-specific clean growth and climate change 
priorities and actions, including those related to human health and well-being. In 2019, Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami 
(ITK) developed a National Inuit Climate Change Strategy that laid out objectives, actions, and long-term 
outcomes for the following five priority areas: 
•	
knowledge and capacity; 
•	
health and well-being, and the environment; 
•	
food systems;
•	
infrastructure; and 
•	
energy. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 94 
A rights-based approach to the development of any climate policies and actions affecting Inuit Nunangat 
is central to this strategy, with the understanding that climate change is one of many socio-economic and 
health inequities that challenge their populations and communities (Huntington et al., 2019). 
In addition to the work of the Assembly of First Nations, Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, and the Métis National 
Council at the national level, grassroots Indigenous-led organizations, such as Indigenous Climate Action, are 
also playing an important role in climate change in Canada by pushing for the incorporation of Indigenous 
rights and knowledges in climate change discussions and solutions. Through a series of community 
engagement activities and grounded in Indigenous rights and knowledge, the organization is developing 
resources and programs to assist Indigenous communities to take action on climate change. 
Several federal policies, programs, and services are already in place to support Indigenous Peoples’ health 
and climate change mitigation and adaptation. At the federal level, the Department of Crown-Indigenous 
Relations and Northern Affairs Canada (CIRNAC)26 is responsible for the Climate Change Preparedness in the 
North27 and First Nations Adapt28 programs that work with Indigenous communities, territorial and regional 
governments, and other relevant stakeholders to identify climate change vulnerabilities and adaptation 
priorities (INAC, 2018a; INAC, 2018b). CIRNAC also funds the Indigenous Climate Hub,29 which includes 
stories, tools, and resources by Indigenous Peoples across Canada in order to exchange information on how 
they can monitor and adapt to climate change. Other CIRNAC programs include the Indigenous Community-
Based Climate Monitoring Program, which supports the use of Indigenous knowledges and scientific 
knowledge, collaborative approaches to data management and information sharing systems, as well as 
the Northern Responsible Energy Approach for Community Heat and Electricity to reduce diesel fuel use 
for electricity and heating in Northern communities. CIRNAC also has several initiatives that address the 
determinants of health and can enhance First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ resilience to climate change 
effects. These include the Nutrition North Program, which subsidizes the cost of healthy foods to address 
food insecurity in the North; the Harvesters Support Grant Program, to help lower the costs associated with 
traditional hunting and harvesting activities; and a Working Group on Food Security to focus on sustainable 
food systems. An Arctic and Northern Policy Framework has also been developed in collaboration with 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities; national Indigenous organizations; and provincial and territorial 
governments. The framework aims to reorganize and reprioritize federal activities in the Arctic related 
to infrastructure, sustainable and diversified economies, environmental protection and conservation, the 
strengthening of peoples and communities, Arctic science and Indigenous knowledge, and Arctic sovereignty 
and leadership (Government of Canada, 2018). 
26	 In 2017, the federal department of Indigenous and Northern Affairs was dissolved and two separate departments 
were created to deal with Indigenous matters — Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada and 
Indigenous Services Canada.
27	 For Indigenous communities north of 60 degrees north latitude.
28	 For First Nations communities south of 60 degrees north latitude.
29	 See <https://indigenousclimatehub.ca/>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 95 
Box 2.11 Indigenous Services Canada’s Climate Change and Health 
Adaptation Program
Indigenous Services Canada works collaboratively with partners to improve access to services for First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities, including access to health services, water and wastewater systems, 
community infrastructure, housing, education, social programs, and emergency management. Each of 
these areas plays a critical role in the ability of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities to adapt to 
climate change. In 2008, the Department implemented the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program 
(CCHAP), which provides funding to Inuit and First Nations communities north of 60 degrees north latitude 
to engage in community-based participatory research aimed at identifying climate change–related health 
issues and developing health-related adaptation plans and communication materials. In 2016, the program 
was expanded to include First Nations communities south of 60 degrees north latitude. The projects are 
community-led and employ a multidisciplinary, collaborative approach that incorporates various approaches 
to science, including Indigenous knowledge and Western science (ISC, 2019d; Richards et al., 2019).
Since the beginning of the program, the CCHAP has funded 227 climate change and health projects, such as 
numerous film and photo-voice projects that engaged Elders, youth, and community members; community-
based ice monitoring, surveillance, and communication networks; adaptation plans; assessments of the 
impacts of climate change on food security and on the health impacts of wildfire smoke; and information 
products related to land, water, and ice safety, drinking water, food safety and security, and traditional 
medicines. Profiles of many of these projects are available at Climate Telling (Climate Telling, 2020) and are 
summarized in Community Voices on Climate Change and Health Adaptation in Northern Canada (ISC, 2019d). 
Other stakeholders have a role to play in supporting Indigenous Peoples’ health in relation to climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. Provincial governments, for example, work with the federal government to adapt their 
own targets and take their own actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from various economic sectors. They 
may also take actions to improve health outcomes, develop comprehensive strategies to address climate change, 
undertake climate change disaster mitigation and infrastructure planning, and develop new technologies and 
zero emission strategies. All sectors of the economy, including the natural resources sector, have a responsibility 
to help reduce greenhouse gas emissions, which can be done through the adoption of more environmentally 
friendly practices. In remote Northern Indigenous communities, mitigating greenhouse gas emissions will have 
limited impact on slowing the speed of climate change, given the absence of a sizeable industrial base and limited 
consumption levels; thus, priority must be given to adaptation in these areas (Ford et al., 2010b). In this process, 
Indigenous stakeholders and communities play important roles in monitoring climate change effects, as they are 
often the first to observe and experience them. They must also work cooperatively with decision makers to assess 
vulnerability and develop effective interventions to reduce risks and adapt to climate change (Ford et al., 2010b). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 96 
2.7 Knowledge Gaps
There are significant knowledge gaps regarding climate change and First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ 
health in Canada. Both the population and geographic focus of the research is uneven, with the majority 
focused on Inuit populations and the Canadian Arctic, which is recognized as a “global hotspot” for climate 
change (Ford et al., 2014; ITK, 2019b). Relatively little research exists on First Nations communities outside 
the North, especially First Nations communities in the Prairies and the Atlantic provinces. Métis peoples 
across Canada are significantly under-represented in climate change research. There is also limited research 
on climate change in the context of urban First Nations, Inuit, and Métis populations, which is problematic, 
given that over 50% of Indigenous Peoples in Canada live in urban centres. Similarly, few studies examine 
the intersection of climate change and gender, particularly the experiences of gender-diverse people. The 
perspectives of Indigenous Elders and natural resource users are over-represented in the literature, with fewer 
studies looking at children and youth. These gaps are linked, in part, to the inadequacies of health data and 
research in Canada, including a lack of disaggregated and longitudinal data specific to First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis peoples; the absence of relevant, consistent, and inclusive Indigenous identifiers in population 
health data sources; and a lack of strength-based and community-driven health indicators (Smylie, 2010; 
Smylie & Firestone, 2015). As noted in Box 2.1, Indigenous health research also continues to be dominated by 
non-Indigenous researchers and scientific knowledge paradigms (Saini, 2012; Brown, 2018; Hyett et al., 2018; 
Anderson, 2019). 
In terms of climate change risks to Indigenous health, more research is needed to understand the holistic 
and long-term impacts of changing temperature and precipitation regimes on food and water safety and 
security, air quality, health infrastructure, personal safety, mental health, livelihoods, and identity within and 
among diverse First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and communities. These climate-related risks to health 
also need to be examined in the context of existing First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ health inequalities 
and inequities, and related determinants of health. For example, more research is needed to understand how 
increases in air pollutants and aeroallergens will affect First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples who already 
experience a disproportionate burden of chronic and infectious diseases and poor housing conditions (e.g., 
homes in need of repair, overcrowding, and poor ventilation). Similarly, little is known about how infectious 
diseases, such as COVID-19, will affect Indigenous food systems that are already compromised by climate 
extremes (e.g., drought, record-breaking temperatures, and wildfires) and undermined by historic and ongoing 
colonization (e.g., land dispossession, social exclusion) (Zavalete-Cortijo et al., 2020). Although Indigenous 
Peoples are often described as simultaneously vulnerable and resilient in climate change research (Vinyeta et 
al., 2015), there are few studies that examine resilience and protective factors in regard to climate change. 
Research on the direct impacts of climate change on traditional harvesting also dominates the literature, 
although few examine the indirect effects of potential new economic development opportunities arising from 
climate change and how they may mediate the negative impacts of climate change to Indigenous Peoples’ 
economy, health, and culture (Ford & Pearce, 2012). Studies on the determinants of adaptive capacity are also 
limited, including access to financial resources, social networks, flexibility in resource management regimes, 
the role and potential of social learning in adaptation, and the role of government policies and programs in 
adaptive capacity (Ford & Pearce, 2012). Similarly, there is a lack of research on the effectiveness of community-
based adaptation initiatives and how Indigenous knowledges have been used in adaptation initiatives. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 97 
2.8 Conclusion
“Climate change is bad…we feel it in the north a lot more than people in the 
south…I’ve noticed in my 16 years of life that snow doesn’t get as high as possible 
because around my house we always had this big huge snowbank, like bigger 
than the house, about the size of the house. But now it barely comes up to your 
hips. That’s the one thing I’ve noticed as a child, that my favourite snowdrift 
hasn’t come back. If I’ve noticed this in such a young stage of life, I can’t imagine 
how the Elders would feel because they obviously have much more experience 
with the land around me. I am worried because I have noticed this change. 
Noticing it is the first thing, the next thing is to solve it.” 30
Climate change represents one of the greatest threats to global health in the 21st century (WHO, 2018). For 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples in Canada, this threat is exacerbated by their close relationships with 
and reliance on land, waters, animals, plants, and natural resources for their sustenance, livelihoods, cultures, 
identities, and health and well-being (Ford, 2012; ILO, 2017; Jones, 2019). Although First Nations, Inuit, and 
Métis peoples in Canada, and Indigenous Peoples globally, contribute very little to greenhouse gas emissions, 
they are disproportionately affected by climate change due to pervasive health inequalities, inequities, and 
determinants of health, including historic and ongoing colonial oppression (Ford, 2012; ILO, 2017). The direct 
and indirect impacts of climate change are already being felt in First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities 
from coast to coast to coast, particularly in geographic areas experiencing rapid change (Ford, 2012; ISC, 
2019a). These impacts are interconnected and far-reaching, from increased food and water insecurity and 
infrastructure damage, to threats to personal safety and basic human rights, all of which are experienced 
differently within and among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and communities. To address the growing 
threat of climate change, Indigenous Peoples are drawing on their unique and diverse knowledge systems 
and practices, passed down from one generation to the next, that have enabled them to respond, adapt, 
and survive changing environments for millennia. Indigenous knowledge systems are equal to scientific 
knowledge and are increasingly recognized as important to climate change mitigation, adaption, research, 
and policy in Canada and internationally. 
Significant knowledge gaps hinder effective adaptation and reflect a lack of distinctions-based, Indigenous-
led, community-based participatory research on climate change and health in Canada. Continued focus 
and sustained research to address these gaps will ensure that First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ 
perspectives, experiences, knowledges, and voices are centred within climate change discussions, 
negotiations, and actions at all levels moving forward.  
30	 Jordan Takkiruq quoted in ITK (2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 98 
2.9 References
Adger, W. N., Barnett, J., Brown, K., Marshall, N., & O’Brien, K. 
(2013). Cultural dimensions of climate change impacts and 
adaption. Nature Climate Change, 3, 112-7.
Aguiar, W., & Halseth, R. (2015). Aboriginal peoples and historic 
trauma: The processes of intergenerational transmission. Prince 
George, BC: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Alexander, C., Bynum, N., Johnson, L., King, U., Mustonen, T., 
Neofotis, P., Oettlé, N., Rosenzweig, C., Sakakibara, C., Shadrin, 
V., Vicarelli, M., Waterhouse, J., & Weeks, B. (2011). Linking 
Indigenous and scientific knowledge of climate change. 
BioScience, 61(6), 477-85. 
Allaire, M., Mackay, T., Zheng, S. and Lall, U. (2019). Detecting 
community response to water quality violations using bottled 
water sales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 116(42), 20917-20922.
Anderson, K. (2010). Aboriginal women, water and health: 
Reflections from eleven First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
grandmothers. Halifax, NS & Winnipeg, MB: Atlantic Centre of 
Excellence for Women’s Health & Prairie Women’s Health Centre 
of Excellence. Retrieved from <http://www.pwhce.ca/pdf/
womenAndWater.pdf> 
Anderson, M. (2019). Indigenous health research and 
reconciliation. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 191, E930-1.
Andrachuk, M., & Smit, B. (2012). Community-based vulnerability 
assessment of Tuktoyaktuk, NWT, Canada to environmental 
and socio-economic changes. Regional Environmental Change, 
12(40), 867-85. doi: 10.1007/s10113-012-0299-0
Archer, L. (2016). A decadal reanalysis of climate vulnerability 
in the Canadian Arctic: The case of Arctic bay. Unpublished MA 
thesis. Montreal, QC: McGill University.
Arias-Bustamante, J. (2013). Indigenous knowledge, climate change 
and forest management: The Nisga’a Nation approach. Unpublished 
MSc thesis. Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia. 
Armitage, D., Berkes, F., Dale, A., Kocho-Schellenberg, E., & 
Patton, E. (2011). Co-management and the co-production 
of knowledge: Learning to adapt in Canada’s Arctic. Global 
Environmental Change, 21(3), 995-1004.
Asfaw, H. W. (2018). Wildfire evacuation and emergency 
management in remote First Nations; The case of Sandy Lake 
First Nation, northern Ontario. Unpublished PhD dissertation. 
Edmonton, AB: University of British Columbia.
Assembly of First Nations (AFN). (2013). Strategy to 
protect and advance Indigenous water rights. Ottawa, ON 
Retrieved from <https://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/water/
firstnationswaterstrategy.pdf>
Assembly of First Nations (AFN). (2017). The First Nations 
health transformation agenda. Ottawa, ON.
Assembly of First Nations (AFN). (2019). Declaring a First 
Nations climate emergency. Resolution no. 05/2019. Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved from <https://www.afn.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/08/19-05-Declaring-a-First-Nations-Climate-
Emergency.pdf>
Assembly of First Nations (AFN). (2020). National Climate 
Gathering Report: Drive change, Leading Solutions. Retrieved 
from <https://www.afn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/
Climate_Gathering_Report_ENG.pdf>
Auger, M.D. (2019). ‘We need to not be footnotes anymore’: 
Understanding Métis people’s experiences with mental health 
and wellness in British Columbia. Public Health, 176, 92-97.
Avery, H. (2019). Old Crow, Yukon, declares climate change 
state of emergency. CBC News, May 21. Retrieved from <https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/old-crow-climate-change-
emergency-1.5144010>
Awuor, L., Meldrum, R., & Liberda, E.N. (2019). Prospects of 
leveraging an existing mosquito-borne disease surveillance 
system to monitor other emerging mosquito-borne diseases: 
A systematic review of West Nile Virus surveillance in Canada 
(2000-2016). Environmental Health Review, 62(3), 82-91.
Bachand, N., Aenishaenslin, C., Ravel, A., Reeder, B., & Jenkins, 
E. (2019). Food safety behavior, awareness and perception 
of parasites in Inuit exposed to wildlife. In preparation for 
the Science of the Total Environment. In N. Bachand (Ed.), 
Toxoplasma Gondi in wildlife traditionally harvested by Inuit of 
Nunavik, Canada (pp. 138-78). Unpublished PhD dissertation, 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Regina, Canada.
Bakaic, M., & Medeiros, A.S. (2016). Vulnerability of northern 
water supply lakes to changing climate and demand. Arctic 
Science, 3(1), 1-16. 
Baldwin, C., Bradford, L., Carr, M. K., Doig, L. E., Jardine, T. D., & 
Jones, P.D. (2018). Ecological patterns of fish distribution in the 
Slave River Delta region, Northwest Territories, Canada, as relayed 
by traditional knowledge and Western science. International Journal 
of Water Resources Development, 34(2), 305-24.
Battiste, M. (2010). Nourishing the learning spirit: Learning is 
our purpose in life. Education Canada, 50(1), 14-18.
BC Centre for Disease Control. (n.d.). Toxoplasmosis. Vancouver, 
BC. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.ca/health-info/diseases-
conditions/toxoplasmosis>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 99 
Bedard, A., & Richards, G. (2018). Addressing mental health 
impacts in Indigenous communities due to evacuations 
caused by extreme weather events. Emergency management 
in Indigenous communities: Addressing mental health and 
cultural safety in evacuation processes. Ottawa, ON: Indigenous 
Services Canada, Climate Change and Adaptation Program 
webinar series. Retrieved from <http://www.climatetelling.info/
uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/fsp_webinar_presentation_16_
nov_18.pdf>
Belfer, E., Ford, J. D., & Maillet, M. (2017). Representation 
of Indigenous peoples in climate change reporting. Climatic 
Change, 145(1-2), 57-70. 
Belfer, E., Ford, J. D., Maillet, M., Araos, M., & Flynn, M. (2019). 
Pursuing an Indigenous platform: Exploring opportunities and 
constraints for Indigenous participation in the UNFCCC. Global 
Environmental Politics, 19, 1.
Berkes, F. (2012). Sacred ecology, 3rd Edition. New York, NY: 
Routledge Press.
Berner, J., Brubaker, M., Revitch, B., Kreummel, E., Tcheripanoff, 
M., & Bell, J. (2016). Adaptation in Arctic circumpolar 
communities: Food and water security in a changing climate. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75, 33820. DOI: 
10:3402/ijch.v75.33820.
Berry, P., Clark, K.-L., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014). Human 
health. In F.J. Warren & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada in a 
changing climate: Sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation 
(pp. 191-232). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Bharadwaj, L., & Bradford, L. (2018). Indigenous water poverty: 
Impacts beyond physical health. In H. Exner-Pirot, B. Norbye, & 
L. Butler (Eds.), Northern and Indigenous health and healthcare. 
Saskatoon, SK: University of Saskatchewan. Retrieved from 
<https://openpress.usask.ca/northernhealthcare/chapter/chapter-
4-indigenous-water-poverty-impacts-beyond-physical-health/>
Bhawra, J., Cooke, M. J., Guo, Y., & Wilk, P. (2017). The 
association of household food security, household 
characteristics and school environment with obesity status 
among off-reserve First Nations and Métis children and youth 
in Canada: Results from the 2012 Aboriginal Peoples Survey. 
Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada, 
37(3), 77-86.
Bird, Y., Moraros, J., Mahmood, R., Esmaeelzadeh, S., & Soe, N. 
M. K. (2017). Prevalence and associated risk factors of COPD 
among Aboriginal Peoples in Canada: A cross-sectional study. 
International Journal of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, 
12, 1915-22.
B.J. Stocks Wildfire Investigations Ltd. (2013). Evaluating past, 
current and future forest fire load trends in Canada. Sault Ste. 
Marie, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.ccfm.org/pdf/2%20
Fire%20Load%20Trends.pdf> 
Boksa, P., Joober, R., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2015). Mental wellness in 
Canada’s Aboriginal communities: Striving toward reconciliation. 
Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience, 40(6), 363-5.
Bouchard, C., Dibernardo, A., Koffi, J., Wood, H., Leighton, P. A., 
& Lindsay, L. R. (2019). Increased risk of tick-borne diseases with 
climate change. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 45(4), 81-9.
Bourque, F., & Cunsolo Willox, A. (2014). Climate change: The 
next challenge for public mental health? International Review of 
Psychiatry, 26(4), 415-22.
Bowser, N.H., & Anderson, N.E. (2018). Dogs (Canis familiaris) 
as sentinels for human infectious disease and application to 
Canadian populations: A systematic review. Veterinary Sciences, 
5, 83. doi: 10.3390/vetsci5040083 
Boyd, D. (2011). No taps, no toilets: First Nations and the 
constitutional right to water in Canada. McGill Law Journal, 
57(1), 81-134.
Bradford, L. E. A., Bharadwaj, L. A., Okpalauwaekwe, U, & 
Waldner, C. L. (2016). Drinking water quality in Indigenous 
communities in Canada and health outcomes: A scoping review. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75(1), 32336. DOI: 
10.3402/ijch.v75.32336.
Brown, C. (2018). Self-determination and data control vital 
to Indigenous health research. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal, 190(29), E893.
Bunce, A. (2015). Gender and the human dimensions of climate 
change: Global discourse and local perspectives from the 
Canadian Arctic. Unpublished Master of Arts thesis, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
Bunce, A., Ford, J.D., Harper, S., Edge, V., & IHACC Research 
Team. (2016). Vulnerability and adaptive capacity of Inuit 
women to climate change: A case study from Iqaluit, 
Nunavut. Natural Hazards, 83(3), 1419-41.
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s changing 
climate report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Cameron, E. S. (2012). Securing Indigenous politics: A critique 
of the vulnerability and adaptation approach to the human 
dimensions of climate change in the Canadian Arctic. Global 
Environmental Change, 22(1), 103-14.
Canadian Association of University Teachers. (2018). 
Underrepresented and underpaid: Diversity and equity among 
Canada’s post-secondary education teachers. Ottawa, ON.
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation News (CBC News). (2021). 
Don't drink the tap water, Iqaluit mayor tells residents. CBC 
News. Retrieved from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north/
iqaluit-water-emergency-council-meeting-1.6208466> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 100 
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2020). Climate-
related hazards can have significant implications for demand 
on health care services. Halifax, NS. Retrieved from <https://
greenhealthcare.ca/climate-change/>
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR). (2013). 
Guidelines for health research involving Aboriginal people. 
Ottawa, ON.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Natural Sciences 
and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC). 
(2018). Tri-council policy statement: Ethical conduct for research 
involving humans – TCPS2 2018. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://ethics.gc.ca/eng/documents/tcps2-2018-en-interactive-
final.pdf>
Carrière, G. M., Bougie, E., & Kohen, D. (2018). Acute care 
hospitalizations for mental and behavioural disorders among 
First Nations people. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Catalogue 
82-003-X.
Carrière, G.M., Garner, R., & Sanmartin, C. (2017). Housing 
conditions and respiratory hospitalizations among First Nations 
people in Canada. Health Reports, 28(4), 9-15.
Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources (CIER). 
(2008). Climate change and First Nations south of 60: Impacts, 
adaptation, and priorities. Winnipeg, MB: Submitted to Indian and 
Northern Affairs Canada. Retrieved July 17, 2020 from <http://
caid.ca/CliChaImp2008.pdf>
Champalle, C., Ford, J.D., & Sherman, M. (2015). Prioritizing 
climate change adaptations in Canadian Arctic communities. 
Sustainability, 7(7), 9268-92.
Chandler, M.J., & Lalonde, C.E. (1998). Cultural continuity as a 
hedge against suicide in Canada’s First Nations. Transcultural 
Psychiatry, 35(2), 191-219.
Chen, S. (2016). Climate change and infectious disease risk in the 
Canadian North. Vancouver, BC: National Collaborating Centre 
for Environmental Health.
Chief Public Health Officer of Canada (CPHO). (2013). Report on 
the state of public health in Canada 2013: Infectious disease – the 
never-ending threat. Ottawa, ON: Public Health Agency of Canada.
Christianson, A., McGee, T.K., & L’Hirondelle, L. (2012). 
Community support or wildfire mitigation at Peavine Métis 
settlement, Alberta, Canada. Environmental Hazards, 11(3), 177-
93. DOI: 10.1080/17477891.2011.649710
Christianson, A., McGee, T.K., & L’Hirondelle, L. (2014). The 
influence of culture on wildfire mitigation at Peavine Métis 
Settlement, Alberta, Canada. Society & Natural Resources: An 
International Journal, 27(9), 931-47.
Cidro, J., Adekunle, B., Peters, E., & Martens, T. (2015). Beyond 
food security: Understanding access to cultural food for urban 
Indigenous people in Winnipeg as Indigenous food sovereignty. 
Canadian Journal of Urban Research, 24(1), 24-43.
Clark, D.G., Ford, J.D., Berrang-Ford, L., Pearce, T., Kowal, S., & 
Gough, W.A. (2016a). The role of environmental factors in search 
and rescue incidents in Nunavut, Canada. Public Health, 137, 44-9.
Clark, D.G., Ford, J.D., Pearce, T., & Berrang-Ford, L. (2016b). 
Vulnerability to unintentional injuries associated with land-use 
activities and search and rescue in Nunavut, Canada. Social 
Science & Medicine, 169, 18-26.
Climate Telling. (2020). Climate Telling. <http://www.
climatetelling.info/about-the-site.html.>
Collier, B. (2015). Emergency management on First Nations 
reserves. Ottawa, ON: Library of Parliament. Retrieved from 
<https://lop.parl.ca/sites/PublicWebsite/default/en_CA/
ResearchPublications/201558E>
Commission on the Social Determinants of Health (CSDH). 
(2008). Closing the gap in a generation: Health equity through 
action on the social determinants of health. Final report of the 
Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Geneva: World 
Health Organization.
Council of Canadian Academies. (2019). Canada’s top climate 
change risks: Report of the Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks 
and Adaptation Potential. Ottawa, ON.
Coté, C. (2016). “Indigenizing” food sovereignty. Revitalizing 
Indigenous food practices and ecological knowledges in 
Canada and the United States. Humanities, 5, 57. DOI: 10.3390/
h5030057.
Cruddas, E. (2017). Tapping into mental health: Exploring 
Indigenous water and mental health issues through Canadian 
media. Unpublished Sociology Honours Thesis, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
Cuerrier, A., Brunet, N.D., Gérin-Lajoie, J., Downing, A., & 
Lévesque, E. (2015). The study of Inuit knowledge of climate 
change in Nunavik, Quebec: A mixed methods approach. Human 
Ecology, 43(3), 379-94.
Cunsolo, A., Borish, D., Harper, S.L., Snook, J., Shiwak, I., Wood, 
M., & The Herd Caribou Project Steering Committee. (2020). “You 
can never replace the caribou”: Inuit experiences of ecological grief 
from caribou declines. American Imago, 77(1), 31-59.
Cunsolo, A., & Ellis, N.R. (2018). Ecological grief as a mental 
health response to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate 
Change, 8, 275-81.
Cunsolo, A., & Rigolet Inuit Community Government. (2014). 
Attutauniujuk Nunami/Lament for the Land. Sydney, NS: Cape 
Breton University, <https://ashleecunsolo.ca/film/>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 101 
Cunsolo Willox, A. (2012a). Lament for the land: On the impacts 
of climate change on mental and emotional health and well-being 
in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Unpublished PhD dissertation, 
University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
Cunsolo Willox, A. (2012b). Climate change as the work of 
mourning. Ethics and the Environment, 17(2), 137-64.
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S.L., Edge, V.L., Landman, K., Houle, 
K., Ford, J.D., & the Rigolet Inuit Community Government. 
(2013a). The land enriches the soul: On climatic and 
environmental change, affect, and emotional health and well-
being in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Emotion, Space and 
Society, 6, 14-24.
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S.L., Ford, J.D., Edge, V.L., Landman, 
K., Houle, K. Blake, S., & Wolfrey, C. (2013b). Climate change 
and mental health: An exploratory case study from Rigolet, 
Nunatsiavut, Canada. Climatic Change, 121(1-2), 255-70.
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S. L., Ford, J. D., Landman, K., 
Houle, K., Edge, V.L., & Rigolet Inuit Community Government. 
(2012). “From this place and of this place:” Climate change, 
sense of place, and health in Nunatsiavut, Canada. Social 
Science & Medicine, 75(3), 538-47.
Cunsolo Willox, A., Stephenson, E., Allen, J., Bourque, F., 
Drossos, A., Elgarøy, S., Kral, M.J., Mauro, I., Moses, J., Pearce, 
T., MacDonald, J.P., & Wexler, L. (2015). Examining relationships 
between climate change and mental health in the Circumpolar 
North. Regional Environmental Change, 15(1), 169-82.
Cyre, M., & Slater, J. (2019). Honouring the grandmothers 
through (re)membering, (re)learning, and (re)vitalizing Métis 
traditional foods and protocols. Canadian Food Studies, 6(2), 51-72.
Daley, K., Castleden, H., Jamieson, R., Furgal, C., & Ell, L. (2015). 
Water systems, sanitation, and public health risks in remote 
communities: Inuit residents’ perspectives from the Canadian 
Arctic. Social Science & Medicine, 135, 124-32.
Debels, P., Szlafsztein, C., Aldunce, P., Neri, C., Carvajal, Y., 
Quintero-Angel, M., Celis, A., Bezanilla, A., & Martínez, D. (2009). 
IUPA: A tool for the evaluation of the general usefulness of 
practices for adaptation to climate change and variability. 
Natural Hazards, 50(2), 211-33.
Debortoli, N.S., Clark, D.G., Ford, J.D., Sayles, J.S., & Diaconescu, 
E.P. (2019). An integrative climate change vulnerability 
index for Arctic aviation and marine transportation. Nature 
Communications, 10, 2596.
Deemer, G.J., Bhatt, U.S., Eicken, H., Posey, P.G., Hutchings, J.K., 
Nelson, J., Heim, R., Allard, R.A., Wiggins, H., & Creek, K. (2018). 
Broadening the sea-ice forecaster toolbox with community 
observations: A case study from the northern Bering Sea. Arctic 
Science, 4(1), 42-70.
Dicken, E. (2018). Emergency management in BC. Emergency 
management in Indigenous communities: Addressing mental 
health and cultural safety in evacuation processes. Ottawa, 
ON: Indigenous Services Canada, Climate Change and Health 
Adaptation Program webinar series. Retrieved from <http://
www.climatetelling.info/uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/fncu_
presentation_fnihb_final.pdf>
Diver, S. (2017). Negotiating Indigenous knowledge at the 
science-policy interface: Insights from the Xáxli’p Community 
Forest. Environmental Science & Policy, 73, 1-11.
Dodd, W., Howard, C., Rose, C., Scott, C., Scott, P., Cunsolo, A., 
& Orbinski, J. (2018a). The summer of smoke: Ecosocial and 
health impacts of a record wildfire season in the Northwest 
Territories, Canada. The Lancet Global Health, 6(Suppl. 2), S30.
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., 
& Orbinski, J. (2018b). Lived experience of a record wildfire 
season in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health, 109(3), 327-37.
Donatuto, J., Grossman, E.E., Konovsky, J., Grossman, S., 
& Campbell, L.W. (2014). Indigenous community health 
and climate change: Integrating biophysical and social 
science indicators. Coastal Management, 42(4), 355-73. DOI: 
10.1080/08920753.2014.923140
Douglas, A. (2017). Effects of climate change and cultural 
practices on the risk of toxoplasmosis in Canada’s North: 
Recommendations for public health. Burnaby, BC: Simon Fraser 
University Faculty of Health Sciences, Master of Public Health 
Capstone project. 
Downing, A., & Cuerrier, A. (2011). A synthesis of the impacts of 
climate change on the First Nations and Inuit of Canada. Indian 
Journal of Traditional Knowledge, 10(1), 57-70.
Dowsley, M., Gearheard, S., Johnson, N., & Inksetter, J. (2010). 
Should we turn the tent? Inuit women and climate change. 
Études/Inuit/Studies, 34(1), 151-65. 
Dudley, J.P., Hoberg, E.P., Jenkins, E.J., & Parkinson, A.J. (2015). 
Climate change in the North American Arctic: A One Health 
perspective. EcoHealth, 12(4), 713-25. DOI: 10.1007/s10393-
014-1035-1.
Durkalec, A., Furgal, C., Skinner, M.W., & Sheldon, T. (2015). 
Climate change influences on environment as a determinant of 
Indigenous health: Relationships to place, sea ice, and health in 
an Inuit community. Social Science & Medicine, 136-7, 17-26.
Earle, L. (2011). Traditional Aboriginal diets and health. Prince 
George, BC: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Ekos Research Associates. (2011). Perceptions of drinking water 
quality in First Nations communities and general population. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 102 
El-Nawawi, F.A., Tawfik, M.A., & Shaapan, R.M. (2008). Methods 
for inactivation of Toxoplasma gondii cysts in meat and tissues 
of experimentally infected sheep. Foodborne Pathogens and 
Disease, 5(5), 687-90. 
Elmore, S.A., Jenkins, E.J., Huyvaert, K.P., Polley, L., Root, J.J., 
& Moore, C.G. (2012). Toxoplasma gondii in circumpolar people 
and wildlife. Vector Borne Zoonotic Diseases, 12(1), 1-9. DOI: 
10.1089/vbz.2011.0705
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2018). 
Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change: 
Second annual synthesis report on the status of implementation. 
Gatineau, QB: Environment and Climate Change Canada.
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2019). 7.0 
Federal engagement and partnership with Indigenous Peoples. 
In Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change 
second annual report (Section 8). Gatineau, QC. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/
services/climate-change/pan-canadian-framework-reports/
second-annual-report/section-8.html>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2020a). 
Indigenous Guardians Pilot Program. Gatineau, QC. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/
services/environmental-funding/indigenous-guardians-pilot-
program.html>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2020b). 
A healthy environment and a healthy economy: Canada’s 
strengthened climate plan to create jobs and support people, 
communities and the planet. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/
climatechange/climate-plan/climate-plan-overview/healthy-
environment-healthy-economy.html>
Environment and Natural Resources. (2015). Canadian Boreal 
Community FireSmart Project, 2015 Operations Plan. Yellowknife, 
NWT: Prepared in consultation with ENR South Slave Region, 
Fort Providence Resource Management Board, FP Innovations, and 
ENR FMD Science Section. Retrieved from <https://www.enr.gov.
nt.ca/sites/enr/files/2015_cbcfs_project_operations_plan_1.pdf>
Environment and Natural Resources. (2016). Canadian Boreal 
Community Firesmart (CBCFS) Project Draft 5-7ear plan 2016-
2021. Yellowknife, NWT. Retrieved from <http://registry.mvlwb.
ca/Documents/MV2016X0008/MV2016X0008%20-%20GNWT-
ENR%20-%20New%20LUP%20Application%20-%20May2-16.pdf>
Epi EcoPlan International, Inc. (2016). Valuing coastal guardian 
watchmen programs: A business case. Vancouver, BC: Prepared 
for the Coastal Steward Network and TNC Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://www.indigenousguardianstoolkit.ca/sites/default/
files/Community%20Resource_Guardians-valuationreport_v10_
Final_TNC%20Canada.pdf>
Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience. 
(2018). Measuring progress on adaptation and climate resilience: 
Recommendations to the Government of Canada. Ottawa, ON: 
Environment and Climate Change Canada.
Faris, N. (2019). Eroding Tuktoyaktuk: Every year homes in this 
northern hamlet are getting closer to the sea. National Post, 
February 28. Retrieved from <https://nationalpost.com/news/
canada/eroding-tuktoyaktuk-every-day-homes-in-this-northern-
hamlet-are-getting-closer-to-the-sea>
Finn, S., Herne, M., & Castille, D. (2017). The value of traditional 
ecological knowledge for the environmental health sciences and 
biomedical research. Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(8), 
085006.
FiresSmart Canada. (2020). What is FireSmart? Retrieved from 
<https://firesmartcanada.ca/what-is-firesmart/>
First Nations Centre. (2004). First Nations’ knowledge of and 
protection from the West Nile virus. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://fnigc.ca/sites/default/files/ENpdf/WNV/west_nile_
virus_2004.pdf>
First Nations Health Authority. (2021). Drinking water advisories. 
West Vancouver, BC. Retrieved from <https://www.fnha.ca/
what-we-do/environmental-health/drinking-water-advisories>. 
Accessed July 16, 2021.
First Nations Information Governance Centre. (2014). Ownership, 
Control, Access and Possession (OCAP™): The Path to First 
Nations Information Governance. Akwesasne, ON.
Flynn, M., Ford, J.D., Labbé, J., Schrott, L., & Tagalik, S. (2019). 
Evaluating the effectiveness of haard mapping as climate 
change adaptation for community planning in degrading 
permafrost terrain. Sustainability Science, 14(4), 1041-56.
Flynn, M., Ford, J.D., Pearce, T., Harper, S.L., & IHACC Research 
Team. (2018). Participatory scenario planning and climate 
change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability research in the 
Arctic. Environmental Science & Policy, 79, 45-53.
Ford, J.D. (2012). Indigenous Health and Climate Change. 
American Journal of Public Health, 102(7), 1260-6.
Ford, J.D., Berrang-Ford, L., King, M., & Furgal, C. (2010a). 
Vulnerability of Aboriginal health systems in Canada to climate 
change. Global Environmental Change, 20(4), 668-80.
Ford, J.D., Cameron, L., Rubis, J., Maillet, M., Nakashima, 
D., Willox, A.C., & Pearce, T. (2016b). Including Indigenous 
knowledge and experience in IPCC assessment reports. Nature 
Climate Change, 6, 349-53.
Ford, J.D., Cunsolo Willox, A., Chatwood, S., Furgal, C., Harper, S., 
Mauro, I., & Pearce, T. (2014). Adapting to the effects of climate 
change on Inuit health. American Journal of Public Health, 104, 
e9-e17.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 103 
Ford, J.D., Kind, N., Galappaththi, E.K., Pearce, T., McDowell, G., 
& Harper, S.L. (2020). The resilience of Indigenous Peoples to 
Environmental Change. One Earth, 2(6), 532-43.
Ford, J.D., Labbé, J., Flynn, M., Araos, M., & IHACC Research 
team. (2017). Readiness for climate change adaptation in the 
Arctic: A case study from Nunavut, Canada. Climatic Change, 
145, (1-2), 85-100.
Ford, J.D., & Pearce, T. (2012). Climate change vulnerability 
and adaptation research focusing on the Inuit subsistence 
sector in Canada: Directions for future research. The Canadian 
Geographer, 56(2), 275-87.
Ford, J.D., Pearce, T., Duerden, F., Furgal, C., & Smit, B. (2010b). 
Climate change policy responses for Canada’s Inuit population: 
The importance of and opportunities for adaptation. Global 
Environmental Change, 20(1), 177-91.
Ford, J.D., Sherman, M., Berrang-Ford, L., Llanos, A., Carcamo, 
C., Harper, S., Lwasa, S. Namanya, D., Marcello, T., Maillet, M., 
& Edge, V. (2018). Preparing for the health impacts of climate 
change in Indigenous communities: The role of community-
based adaptation. Global Environmental Change, 49, 129-39.
Ford, J.D., Stephenson, E., Cunsolo Willox, A., Edge, V., 
Farahbakhsh, K., Furgal, C., Harper, S. Chatwood, S., Maura, I., 
Pearce, T., Austin, S., Bunce, A., Bussalleu, A.,……Sherman, M. 
(2016a). Community-based adaptation research in the Canadian 
Arctic. WIREs Climate Change, 7, 175-91.
Four Rivers Matawa First Nations Management Environmental 
Services (FRMFNMES). (2016). Northern Ontario First Nation 
climate change workshop. Ottawa, ON: For Indigenous and 
Northern Affairs Canada and Health Canada. Retrieved from 
<http://www.nokiiwin.com/upload/documents/climate-
change/2016_december_northern-ontario-climate-c.pdf>
Fournier, S., & Crey, E. (1997). Stolen from our embrace. 
Vancouver, BC: Douglas and McIntyre. 
Frank, M.A. (2017). Rising voices: Collaborative science with 
Indigenous knowledge for climate solutions, Cultural Survival 
Quarterly Magazine, June, <https://www.culturalsurvival.
org/publications/cultural-survival-quarterly/rising-voices-
collaborative-science-indigenous-knowledge>
Gérin-Lajoie, J., Herrmann, T.M., MacMillan, G.A., Hébert-Houle, 
E., Monfette, M., Rowell, J.A., Soucie, T.A., Snowball, H., Townley, 
E., Lévesque, E., Amyot, M., Franssen, J., & Dedieu, J. P. (2018). 
Imalirijiit: A community-based environmental monitoring 
program in the George River watershed, Nunavik, Canada. 
Ecoscience, 25(4), 381-99. DOI: <https://doi.org/10.1080/119568
60.2018.1498226>
Gershon, A.S., Khan, S., Klein-Geltink, J., Wilton, D., To, T., 
Crighton, E.J., Pigeau, L., Macquarrie, J., Allard, Y., Russell, S.J., & 
Henry, D. A. (2014). Asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD) prevalence and health service use in Ontario 
Métis: A population-based cohort study. PLoS One, 9(4), e95899.
Goldfarb, D.M., Dixon, B., Moldovan, I., Barrowman, N., Mattison, 
K., Zentner, C., Baikie, M., Bidawid, S., Chan, F., & Slinger, R. 
(2013). Nanolitre real-time PCR detection of bacterial, parasitic, 
and viral agents from patients with diarrhea in Nunavut, Canada. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 72, 19903. DOI: 
10.3402/ijch.v72i0.19903.
Goldhar, C., Bell, T., & Wolf, J. (2014). Vulnerability to freshwater 
changes in the Inuit Settlement Region of Nunatsiavut, Labrador: 
A case study from Rigolet. Arctic, 67(1), 71-83.
Government of Canada. (2018). Crown-Indigenous Relations and 
Northern Affairs Canada, <https://www.canada.ca/en/crown-
indigenous-relations-northern-affairs.html>
Government of Canada. (2019). Indigenous Guardians Pilot 
Program. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.
ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/environmental-
funding/indigenous-guardians-pilot-program.html>
Government of the Northwest Territories. (2010). Environment 
and natural resources framework for action 2008-2012: Status 
report to December 2010. Yellowknife, NWT. Retrieved from 
<https://www.assembly.gov.nt.ca/sites/default/files/11-03-
01td160-165.pdf>
Government of Nunavut. (2010). Upagiaqtavut: Setting the course 
– Climate change impacts and adaptation in Nunavut. Iqaluit, NU. 
Retrieved from <https://www.climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/
default/files/3154-315_climate_english_reduced_size_1_0.pdf>
Government of Nunavut. (2012). Changing times: Climate change 
impacts and adaptation in Nunavut. Iqaluit, NU. Retrieved from 
<http://www.climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/
summer_2012_newsletter.pdf>
Government of Nunavut. (2014). Climate change adaptation 
resource guide: Nunavut’s built infrastructure. Iqaluit, NU. 
Retrieved from <https://www.climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/
default/files/rg3_built_infrastructure_0.pdf>
Goyette, S., Cao, Z., Libman, M., Ndao, M., & Ward, B.J. (2014). 
Seroprevalence of parasitic zoonoses and their relationship 
with social factors among the Canadian Inuit in Arctic regions. 
Diagnostic Microbiology & Infectious Diseases, 78, 404-10.
Gracey, M., & King, M. (2009). Indigenous health Part 1: 
Determinants and disease patterns. The Lancet, 374, 65-75.
Greenwood, M., de Leeuw, S., & Lindsay, N. (2018). Challenges 
in health equity for Indigenous peoples in Canada. The Lancet, 
391(10131), 1645-1648.
Greer, A., Ng, V., & Fisman, D. (2008). Climate change and 
infectious diseases in North America: The road ahead. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 178(6), 715-22.
Guyot, M., Dickson, C., Paci, C., Furgal, C., & Chan, H.M. 
(2006). Local observations of climate change and impacts on 
traditional food security in two northern Aboriginal communities. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 65(5), 403-15.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 104 
Hania, P. (2019). Revitalizing Indigenous women’s water 
governance roles in impact and benefit agreement processes 
through Indigenous legal orders and water stories. Les Cahiers 
de droit, 60(2), 519-56.
Hanrahan, M., Sarkar, A., & Hudson, A. (2014). Water insecurity in 
Indigenous Canada: A case study of illness, neglect, and urgency. St. 
John’s, NF: Paper presented at the 2014 International Conference 
on Marine and Freshwater Environments. Retrieved from <http://
nlwater.ruralresilience.ca/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/iMFE-
Paper-Submission-Revised-August-2014.pdf>
Hansen, J.G., & Antsanen, R. (2018). What can traditional 
Indigenous knowledge teach us about changing our approach 
to human activity and environmental stewardship in order to 
reduce the severity of climate change? International Indigenous 
Policy Journal, 9(3), 6.
Harper, S.L., Edge, V.L., Ford, J., Cunsolo Willox, A., Wood, M., 
IHACC Research Team, RICG, & McEwen, S.A. (2015c). Climate-
sensitive health priorities in Nunatsiavut, Canada. BMC Public 
Health, 15, 605.
Harper, S.L., Edge, V.L., Ford, J., Thomas, M.K., IHACC Research 
Group, Rigolet Inuit Community Government, & McEwen, S.A. 
(2015a). Lived experience of acute gastrointestinal illness in 
Rigolet, Nunatsiavut: “Just suffer through it”. Social Science & 
Medicine, 126, 86-98.
Harper, S.L., Edge, V.L., Ford, J., Thomas, M.K., Pearl, 
D.L., Shirley, J., IHACC, & McEwen, S.A. (2015b). Acute 
gastrointestinal illness in two Inuit communities: Burden of 
illness in Rigolet and Iqaluit, Canada. Epidemiology & Infection, 
143, 3048-63.
Hassler, P., Watson, G., & Ndubuka, N. (2019). Mental health 
impacts of community evacuation – Lac La Ronge wildfire 
case study [webinar]. Prince Albert, SK: Northern Inter-Tribal 
Health Authority, <https://www.prairiesrac.com/wp-content/
uploads/2019/02/Climate-Change-Impacts-on-Mental-
Health_6Mar19.pdf>
He, S., Kosatsky, T., Smargiassi, A., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., & 
Auger, N. (2018). Heat and pregnancy-related emergencies: Risk 
of placental abruption during hot weather. Environ Int., 111, 295-
300. DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2017.111.004
Health Care without Harm Physician Network. (n.d.). Climate 
change, health, and health care: How physicians can help. 
Retrieved from <https://noharm-uscanada.org/sites/default/
files/Climate.Physician.Network.pdf>
Henry, G.H.R., Harper, K.A., Chen, W., Deslippe, J.R., Grant, R.F., 
Lafleur, P.M., Lévesque, E., Siciliano, S.D., & Simard, S. (2012). 
Effects of observed and experimental climate change on 
terrestrial ecosystems in northern Canada: Results from the 
Canadian IPY program. Climatic Change, 115(1), 207-34.
Hermann, T.M., Royer, M.-J.S., & Cuciurean, R. (2012). 
Understanding subarctic wildlife in Eastern James Bay under 
changing climatic and socio-environmental conditions: Bringing 
together Cree hunters’ ecological knowledge and scientific 
observations. Polar Geography, 35(3-4), 245-70.
Himsworth, C.G., Skinner, S., Chaban, B., Jenkins, E., Wagner, 
B.A., Harms, N.J. Leighton, F.A., Thompson, R. C., & Hill, J. E. 
(2010). Multiple zoonotic pathogens identified in canine feces 
collected from a remote Canadian Indigenous community. 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene, 83(2), 338-41.
Hirsch, R., Furgal, C., Hackett, C., Sheldon, T., Bell, T., Angnatok, 
D., Winters, K., & Pamak, C. (2016). Going off, growing strong: A 
program to enhance individual youth and community resilience 
in the face of change in Nain, Nunatsiavut. Etudes/Inuit/Studies, 
40(1), 63-84.
Hotez, P.J. (2010). Neglected infections of poverty among 
the Indigenous peoples of the Arctic. PLoS Neglected Tropical 
Diseases, 4(1), e606.
Howard, C., Rose, C., Dodd, W., Scott, P., Cunsolo-Willox, A., & 
Orbinski, J. (2017). PO62: SOS: Summer of Smoke – A mixed-
methods, community-based study investigating the health 
effects of a prolonged, severe wildfire season on a subarctic 
population. Canadian Journal of Emergency Medicine, 19(S1), p. 
S99.
Human Rights Watch. (2020). “My fear is losing everything”: The 
climate crisis and First Nations’ right to food in Canada. New 
York, NY. Retrieved from <https://www.hrw.org/sites/default/
files/media_2020/10/canada1020_web_1.pdf>
Hunt, S. (2016). An Introduction to the Health of Two-Spirit 
People: Historical, contemporary and emergent issues. Prince 
George, BC: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Huntington, H.P., Carey, M., Apok, C., Forbes, B.C., Fox, S., Holm, 
L.K., Ivanova, A., Jaypoody, J., Noongwook, G., & Stammler, F. 
(2019). Climate change in context: Putting people first in the 
Arctic. Regional Environmental Change, 19, 1217-23.
Huseman, J., & Short, D. (2012). ‘A slow industrial genocide’: 
Tar sands and the Indigenous peoples of northern Alberta. The 
International Journal of Human Rights, 16(1), 216-37.
Hyett, S., Marjerrison, S., & Gabel, C. (2018). Improving health 
research among Indigenous peoples in Canada. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 190(20), E616-21.
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC). (2018a). 
Climate change preparedness in the North Program. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/14813055
54936/1481305574833>
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada (INAC). (2018b). First 
Nation Adapt Program. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/eng/1481305681144/1481305709311>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 105 
Indigenous Guardians – caring for the land [YouTube 
video] (n.d). Indigenous Guardians toolkit, <https://www.
indigenousguardianstoolkit.ca/node/40/resources>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2018, November 
26). Emergency management in Indigenous communities: 
Addressing mental health and cultural safety in evacuation 
processes. Ottawa, ON: ISC and Climate Change and Health 
Adaptation Program webinar series. Retrieved from <http://
www.climatetelling.info/uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/fncu_
presentation_fnihb_final.pdf>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2019a). Community voices 
on climate change and health adaptation in northern Canada: 
Research and action and the stories behind them 2012-2016. 
Ottawa, ON.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2019b). News release: 
Government of Canada announces new investments 
in wildfire protection for First Nations communities. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/
eng/1565705092824/1565705114188?wbdisable=true> 
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2019c). Mental health and 
wellness in First Nations and Inuit communities. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1576089278958
/1576089333975>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2021a). Short-term drinking 
water advisories. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-
isc.gc.ca/eng/1562856509704/1562856530304>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2021b). Ending long-term 
drinking water advisories. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1506514143353/1533317130660> 
Institute for Circumpolar Health Research. (2017). Water 
Quality - Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Northwest Territories. 
ClimateTelling. Retrieved from <http://www.climatetelling.info/
inuvialuit-settlement-region.html>
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Climate change 2014: Synthesis report. Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Core Writing Team, 
R.K. Pachauri and L.A. Meyer, Eds.) Geneva, Switzerland.
International Labour Organization (ILO). (2017). Indigenous 
peoples and climate change: From victims to change agents 
through decent work. Geneva, Switzerland.
International Labor Organization (ILO). (2019). Indigenous 
Peoples and climate change: Emerging research on Traditional 
Knowledge and livelihoods. Geneva, Switzerland.
Inuit Circumpolar Council (ICC). (n.d.). Indigenous knowledge. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.inuitcircumpolar.com/
icc-activities/environment-sustainable-development/indigenous-
knowledge/>
Inuit Circumpolar Council. (2020). Policy paper on the matter 
of “local communities”. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
secureservercdn.net/104.238.71.250/hh3.0e7.myftpupload.
com/wp-content/uploads/FINAL-ICC-Policy-Paper-on-matter-of-
local-communities-2.pdf>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2014). Social determinants of Inuit 
health in Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2016). Inuit Priorities for Canada’s 
Climate Change Strategy: A Canadian Inuit Vision for Our 
Common Future in Our Homelands. Ottawa, ON. 
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2018). National Inuit strategy on 
research. Ottawa, ON.
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2019a). ITK Board of Directors 
adopts Inuktut Qaliujaaqpait as unified orthography for Inuktut. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.ca/itk-board-of-
directors-adopts-inuktut-qaliujaaqpait-as-unified-orthography-
for-inuktut/>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2019b). National Inuit Climate 
Change Strategy. Ottawa, ON. 
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2020). Access to drinking water in 
Inuit Nunangat. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.ca/
access-to-drinking-water-in-inuit-nunangat/>
Islam, N.S, & Winkel, J. (2017). Climate change and social 
inequality. New York, NY: United Nations, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs Working Paper, No. 152.
Jacob, C., McDaniels, T., & Hinch, S. (2010). Indigenous culture 
and adaptation to climate change: Sockeye salmon and the 
St’á’imc people. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global 
Change, 15, 859-76.
Jenkins, E.J., Castrodale, L.J., de Rosemond, S.J., Dixon, B.R., 
Elmore, S.A., Gesy, K.M., Hoberg, E.P., Polley, L., Schurer, J.M., 
Simard, M., & Thompson, R.C. (2013). Traditional and transition: 
Parasitic zoonoses of people and animals in Alaska, northern 
Canada, and Greenland. Advances in Parasitology, 82, 33-204.
Jenkins, E.J., Simon, A., Bachand, N., & Stephen, C. (2015). 
Wildlife parasites in a One Health world. Trends in Parasitology, 
31(5), 174-80.
Jetñil-Kijiner, K., & Niviâna, A. (n.d.). Rise. 350.org. Retrieved 
from <https://350.org/rise-from-one-island-to-another/#poem>
JF Consulting. (2020). Metis National Climate Change and Health 
Vulnerability Assessment. Not publicly available.
Jones, R. (2019). Climate change and Indigenous health 
promotion. Global Health Promotion, 26(Supp. 3), 73-81.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 106 
Kamal, A.G., Linklater, R., Thompson, S., Dipple, J., & Ithinto 
Mechisowin Committee. (2015). A recipe for change: 
Reclamation of Indigenous food sovereignty in O-Pipon-Na-Piwin 
Cree Nation for decolonization, resources sharing, and cultural 
restoration. Journal of Globalizations, 12(4), 559-75.
Khalafzai, M.-A.K., McGee, T.K., & Parlee, B. (2019). Flooding 
in the James Bay region of northern Ontario, Canada: Learning 
from traditional knowledge of Kashechewan First Nation. 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction, 36, 101100.
Kielland, N., & Simeone, T. (2014). Current issues in mental 
health in Canada: The mental health of First Nations and Inuit 
communities. Ottawa, ON: Library of Parliament.
Kilian, A., Fellows, T.Y., Giroux, R., Pennington, J., Kuper, A., 
Whitehead, C., & Richardson, L. (2019). Exploring the approaches 
of non-Indigenous researchers to Indigenous research: a 
qualitative study. CMAJ OPEN, 7(3), E504-E509.
Kinney, P. (2008). Climate change, air quality, and human health. 
American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 35(5), 459-67.
Kipp, A., Cunsolo, A., Gillis, D., Sawatzky, A., & Harper, S.L. 
(2019a). The need for community-led, integrated and innovative 
monitoring programs when responding to the health impacts 
of climate change. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 
78(2), 1517581.
Kipp, A., Cunsolo, A., Vodden, K., King, N., Manners, S., & Harper, 
S.L. (2019b). Climate change impacts on health and wellbeing 
in rural and remote regions across Canada: A synthesis of the 
literature. Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in 
Canada, 39(4), 122-26.
Kirmayer, L.J., Brass, G.M., & Tait, C.L. (2000). The mental 
health of Aboriginal peoples: Transformations of identity and 
community. The Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 45, 607-16.
Kluane First Nations, & Arctic Institute of Community-Based 
Research (AICBR). (2016). Nourishing our future: Building on 
Kluane First Nations community food security strategy & youth 
engagement in traditions related to fisheries and fish health in 
Kluane Lake. Burwash Landing, YK. 
Kolahdooz, F., Sadeghirad, B., Corriveau, A., & Sharma, S. 
(2015). Prevalence of overweight and obesity among Aboriginal 
populations in Canada: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Critical Review of Food Science & Nutrition, 57(7), 1316-27. DOI: 
10.1080/10408398.2014.913003
Koleade, A., Farrell, J., Mugford, G., & Gao, Z. (2018). Prevalence 
and risk factors of ACO (Asthma-COPD Overlap) in Aboriginal 
people. Journal of Environmental and Public Health, Article ID 
4657420. <https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/4657420>
Kohlitz, J., Chong, J., & Willetts, J. (2020). Rural drinking water 
safety under climate change: The importance of addressing 
physical, social, and environmental dimensions. Resources, 9(6), 
1-18.
Konrad, S., Hossain, A., Senthilselvan, A., Dosman, J.A., & Pahwa, 
P. (2013). Chronic bronchitis in Aboriginal people – prevalence 
and associated factors. Chronic Diseases and Injuries in Canada, 
33(4), 218-25.
Kovats, R.S., & Hajat, S. (2007). Heat stress and public health: A 
critical review. Annual Review of Public Health, 29, 41-55.
Kovesi, T. (2012). Respiratory disease in Canadian First Nations 
and Inuit Children. Paediatrics and Child Health; 17(7), 376-80
Kral, M.J., & Idlout, LO. (2009). Community wellness and social 
action in the Canadian Arctic: Collective agency as subjective 
wellbeing. In L.J. Kirmayer, & G.G. Vasaskakis (Eds.), Healing 
traditions: The mental health of Aboriginal peoples in Canada (pp. 
315-34). Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia Press.
Kulnieks, A., Longboat, D. R., & Young, K. (2016). Engaging 
eco-hermeneutical methods: Integrating Indigenous and 
environmental curricula through an eco-justice-arts-informed 
pedagogy. AlterNative: An International Journal of Indigenous 
Peoples, 12(1), 43-56.
Kumar, M.B., Furgal, C., Hutchinson, P., Roseborough, W., 
& Kootoo-Chiarello, S. (2019). Aboriginal Peoples Survey: 
Harvesting activities among First Nations people living off 
reserve, Métis and Inuit: Time trends, barriers and associated 
factors. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada, Catalogue no. 89-653-
X2019001. 
Kumar, M.B., & Tjepkema, M. (2019). Suicide among First Nations 
people, Métis and Inuit (2011-2016): Findings from the 2011 
Canadian Census Health and Environment Cohort (CanCHEC), 
National Household Survey. Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada. 
Retrieved July 17, 2020 from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/
n1/pub/99-011-x/99-011-x2019001-eng.htm>
Kumar, M. B., Wesche, S., & McGuire, C. (2012). Trends in Métis-
related health research (1980-2009): Identification of research 
gaps. Canadian Journal of Public, 103(1), 23-8.
Lam, S., Cunsolo, A., Sawatzky, A., Ford, J., & Harper, S. 
(2017). How does the media portray drinking water security 
in Indigenous communities in Canada? An analysis of Canadian 
newspaper coverage from 2000-2015. BMC Public Health, 17, 282.
Lane, K., & Gagnon, G. (2020). Evaluating the use and intent of 
drinking water advisories in Atlantic Canada. Water Policy, 22(5), 
908-924.
Latulippe, N., & N. Klenk. (2020). Making room and moving over: 
Knowledge co-production, Indigenous knowledge sovereignty 
and the politics of global environmental change. Current Opinion 
in Environmental Sustainability, 42, 7-14.
Lavoie, E., Lèvesque, B., Proulx, J., Grant, J., Ndassebe, A.D., 
Gingras, S., Hubert, B., & Libman, M. (2007). Evaluation of the 
toxoplasmosis screening program among pregnant Nunavik 
(Canada) women between 1994-2003. Epidemiology, 18(5), S32-33.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 107 
Lemelin, H., Matthews, D., Mattina, C., McIntyre, N., Johnston, 
M., Koster, R., & Weenusk First Nation. (2010). Climate change, 
wellbeing and resilience in the Weenusk First Nation at 
Peawanuck: The Moccasin Telegraph goes global. Rural and 
Remote Health, 10(2), 1333.
Liu, J.C., Pereira, G., Uhl, S.A., Bravo, M.A., & Bell, M.L. (2015). 
A systematic review of the physical health impacts from 
non-occupational exposure to wildlife smoke. Environmental 
Research, 136, 120-32.
Longboat, S. (2013). Security for Mother Earth. Canadian Woman 
Studies, 30(2/3), 6-13.
Loring, P.A., & Gerlach, S.G. (2015). Searching for progress on 
food security in the North American North: A research synthesis 
and meta-analysis of the peer-reviewed literature. Arctic, 68(3), 
380-92.
Lux, M. (2016). Separate beds: A history of Indian hospitals in 
Canada, 1920s-1980s. Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press.
Maar, M.A., Erskine, B., McGregor, L., Larose, T.L., Sutherland, 
M.E., Graham, D., Shawande, M., & Gordon, T. (2009). Innovations 
on a shoestring: A study of collaborative community-based 
Aboriginal mental health service model in rural Canada. 
International Journal of Mental Health Systems, 3, 27.
MacDonell, H. (2015). Examining community adaptation readiness 
to climate change in the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, Northwest 
Territories. Unpublished Masters of Marine Management thesis, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
Makondo, C.C., & Thomas, D.S.G. (2018). Climate change 
adaptation: Linking Indigenous knowledge with western science 
for effective adaptation. Environmental Science & Policy, 88, 
83-91.
Maldonado, J., Bull Bennett, T.M., Chief, K., Cochran, P., Cozzetto, 
K., & Gough, B. (2016). Engagement with Indigenous peoples 
and honoring traditional knowledge systems. Climatic Change, 
135(1), 111-26.
Mallory, C.D., & Boyce, M. S. (2017). Observed and predicted 
effects of climate change on Arctic caribou and reindeer. 
Environmental Reviews, 26(1), 13-25. https://doi.org/10.1139/
er-2017-0032
Manning, C., & Clayton, S. (2018). Threats to mental health 
and wellbeing associated with climate change. In S. Clayton 
& C. Manning (Eds.), Psychology and Climate change: Human 
perceptions, impacts and responses (pp. 217-44). Amsterdam: 
Academic Press.
Mantyka-Pringle, C.S., Jardine, T.D., Bradford, L., Bharadwaj, L., 
Kythreotis, A.P., Fresque-Baxter, J., Kelly, E., Somers, G., Doig, 
L.E., Jones, P.D., & Lindenschmidt, K.E. (2017). Bridging science 
and traditional knowledge to assess cumulative impacts on 
stressors in ecosystem health. Environment International, 102, 
125-37. 
Marmot, M. (2007). Achieving health equity: From root causes to 
fair outcomes. Lancet, 370, 1153-63.
Mary Robinson Foundation – Climate Justice. (2020). Principles 
of climate justice. Dublin, Ireland. Retrieved from <https://www.
mrfcj.org/principles-of-climate-justice/>
Martens, P., Bartlett, J., Burland, E., Prior, H., Burchill, C., Huq, S., 
Romphf, L., Sanguins, J., Carter, S., & Bailly, A. (2010). Profile 
of Metis health status and healthcare utilization in Manitoba: 
A population-based study. Winnipeg, MB: Manitoba Centre 
for Health Policy in collaboration with the Manitoba Metis 
Federation, University of Manitoba.
Martens, T. (2015). Understanding the value and promise of 
Indigenous food sovereignty in western Canada. Unpublished 
Master’s thesis, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada.
McCallum, M.J., & Perry, A. (2018). Structures of indifference: 
An Indigenous life and death in a Canadian city. Winnipeg, MB: 
University of Manitoba Press.
McGrath-Hanna, N. K., Greene, D. M., Tavernier, R. J., & Bult-
Ito, A. (2003). Diet and mental health in the Arctic: is diet an 
important risk factor for mental health in circumpolar peoples?-
-a review. International journal of circumpolar health, 62(3), 
228–241. <https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v62i3.17560>
McGregor, D. (2012). Traditional knowledge: Considerations 
for protecting water in Ontario, International Indigenous Policy 
Journal, 3(3), 1-21.
McGregor, D. (2014). Traditional knowledge and water 
governance: The ethic of responsibility. AlterNative: An 
International Journal of Indigenous Peoples, 10(5), 493-507.
McLeod-Shabogesic, P. (2013). Good food is good medicine. 
Anishinabek News, November 13, <http://anishinabeknews.
ca/2013/11/13/good-food-is-good-medicine/>
McNeill, K., Binns, A., & Singh, A. (2017). Flood history analysis 
and socioeconomic implications of flooding for Indigenous 
Canadian communities. Winnipeg, MB: Paper presented at 
the CSBE/SCGAB 2017 Annual Conference, August 6-10, 
2017. Retrieved from <http://www.csbe-scgab.ca/docs/
meetings/2017/CSBE17137.pdf>
Mecredi, T. (2010). Our changing homeland, our changing lives. 
Vuntut Gwichin Government & Arctic Health Research Network 
- Yukon. Culture Unplugged Foundation. Retrieved from <http://
www.cultureunplugged.com/documentary/watch-online/
play/53398/Our-Changing-Homelands-Our-Changing-Lives>
Medeiros, A.S., Wood, P., Wesche, S.D., Bakaic, M., & Peters, J.F. 
(2016). Water security for northern peoples: Review of threats 
to Arctic freshwater systems in Nunavut, Canada. Regional 
Environmental Change, 17, 635-47.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 108 
Meloche, K. (2018). Mourning landscapes and homelands: 
Indigenous and Non-Indigenous Peoples’ ecological griefs. 
Edmonton, AB: Canadian Mountain Network. Retrieved from 
<http://canadianmountainnetwork.ca/mourning-landscapes-and-
homelands-indigenous-and-non-indigenous-peoples-ecological-
griefs/>
Mental Health Commission of Canada. (2016). Towards creating 
a mental health action plan for Canada: Roundtable report – 
2015. Ottawa, ON.
Messier, V., Lévesque, B., Proulx, J.F., Rochette, L., Libman, 
M.D., Ward, B.J., Serhir, B., Couillard, M., Ogden, N. H., Dewailly, 
E., Hubert, B., Déry, S., Barthe, C., Murphy, D., & Dixon, B. 
(2009). Seroprevalence of toxoplasma gondii among Nunavik 
Inuit (Canada). Zoonoses Public Health, 56(4), 188-97. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1683-2378.2008.01177.x
Métis National Council. (2016). Resolution on climate change 
and environment. Vancouver, BC: Special sitting of the 
General Assembly, October 13-15. Retrieved from <https://
www.metisnation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/FINAL-
20161015-MNC-Special-GA-Resolution-on-Climate-Change-and-
Environment-0915am.pdf>
Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada. (2018). 
Principles respecting the government of Canada’s relationship 
with Indigenous Peoples. Ottawa, ON.
Natcher, D.C. (2013). Gender and resource co-management in 
northern Canada. Arctic, 66(2), 218-221. 
National Aboriginal Health Organization (NAHO). (2011). 
Principles of ethical Métis research. Ottawa, ON.
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health (NCCAH). 
(2012). The state of knowledge of Aboriginal health: A review of 
Aboriginal public health in Canada. Prince George, BC: NCCAH.
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health (NCCAH). 
(2017). Housing as a social determinant of First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis health. Prince George, BC. NCCAH.
National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health (NCCIH). 
(2019). Access to health services as a social determinant of First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis health. Prince George, BC.
Nature United. (2020). Indigenous Guardians toolkit. Toronto, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www.indigenousguardianstoolkit.ca/>
Neeganagwedgin, E. (2013). Ancestral knowledges, spirituality 
and Indigenous narratives as self-determination. AlterNative: An 
International Journal of Indigenous Peoples, 9(4), 322-34.
Nelder, M.P., Wijayasri, S., Russell, C.B., Johnson, K.O., 
Marchand-Austin, A., Cronin, K., Johnson, S., Badiani, T., Patel, 
S. N., & Sider, D. (2018). The continued rise of Lyme disease in 
Ontario Canada: 2017. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 
44(10), 231-6.
Nickels, S., Furgal, C., Castelden, J., Moss-Davies, P., Buell, M., 
Armstrong, B., Dillon, D., & Fonger, R. (2002). Putting the human 
face on climate change through community workshops: Inuit 
knowledge, partnerships, and research. In I. Krupnick, & D. Jolly 
(Eds.), The Earth is faster now: Indigenous observations of Arctic 
environmental change (pp. 300-33). Washington, DC: Arctic 
Research Consortium of the United States, Arctic Studies Centre, 
Smithsonian Institute.
Nilsson, L.M., Destouni, G., Berner, J., Dudarev, A.A., Mulvad, G., 
Odland, J.Ø., Parkinson, A., Tikhonov, C., Rautio, A., & Evengård, 
B. (2013). A call for urgent monitoring of food and water security 
based on relevant indicators for the Arctic. Ambio, 42(7), 816-22.
Nisga’a First Nation. (2012). Healthy foods and shelters in the 
alpine permafrost: Nisga’a women remember. Climate Telling. 
Retrieved from <https://vimeo.com/39303445> 
Norris, M.J., & Clatworthy, S. (2011). Urbanization and migration 
patterns of Aboriginal populations in Canada: A half century in 
review (1951 to 2006). Aboriginal Policy Studies, 1(1), 13-77.
North Slave Métis Alliance community members, Shiga, S., 
Evans, P., King, D., & Keats, B. (2018). Continual change and 
gradual warming: A summary of the North Slave Métis Alliance’s 
recorded cultural knowledge on climate and environmental 
change. In J.M. Galloway & R.T. Patterson (compilers), Report 
prepared for Geological Survey of Canada Geoscience Tools for 
Environmental Assessment of Metal Mining (pp. 99-116). Ottawa, 
ON: Geological Survey of Canada, Project Number #1519-
149, Polar Knowledge: Aqhaliat 2018, Polar Knowledge Canada. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/polar-
polaire/documents/pdf/aqhaliat/Aqhaliat-2018-13-NSMA-et-al.pdf>
Nunavut Department of Education. (2007). Inuit 
Qaujimajatuqangit education framework. Iqaluit, NU.
Office of the Auditor General of Canada. (2021). Report 3 
– Access to safe drinking water in First Nations ommunities 
- Indigenous Services Canada. Parliament of Canada. 
<https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_
oag_202102_03_e_43749.html>
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. (2018). 
The climate crisis is a human rights crisis. Geneva, Switzerland: 
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner. Retrieved from 
<https://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/ClimateChange/
FactSheetClimateChange.pdf>
Omosule, A. (2017). Exploring water insecurity in 
Canadian Indigenous communities. Rural Policy Learning 
Commons. Retrieved from <http://rplc-capr.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2015/04/ExploringWate-InsecurityInCanadianIndigenou
sCommunities_LiteratureReview_AyoOmosule.pdf>
Organ, J., Castleden, H., Furgal, C., Sheldon, T., & Hart, C. 
(2014). Contemporary programs in support of traditional ways: 
Inuit perspectives on community freezers as a mechanism to 
alleviate pressures of wild food access in Nain, Nunatsiavut. 
Health & Place, 30, 251-59.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 109 
Ospina, M.B., Voaklander, D., Senthilselvan, A., Stickland, 
M.K., King, M., Harris, A.W., & Rowe, B.H. (2015). Incidence 
and prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
among Aboriginal peoples in Alberta, Canada. PLoS One, 10(4), 
e0123204.
Parlee, B.L., & Caine, K.J. (Eds.). (2018). When the caribou do not 
come: Indigenous knowledge and adaptive management in the 
western Arctic. Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia Press.
Parliamentary Information and Research Service. (2020). 
Climate change: Its impact and policy implications. Ottawa, ON: 
Economics, Resources and International Affairs Division, Legal 
and Social Affairs Division, Government of Canada, Publication 
No. 2019-460E.
Paterson, J., Berry, P., Ebi, K., & Varangu, L. (2014). Health care 
facilities resilient to climate change impacts. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(12), 
13097-116.
Patrick, R.J. (2011). Uneven access to safe drinking water for 
First Nations in Canada: Connecting health and place through 
source water protection. Health & Place, 17(1), 386-89.
Pauktuutit Inuit Women of Canada (Pauktuutit). (2011). Inuit 
women’s perspectives on climate change. Ottawa, ON.
Pearce, T., Ford, J.D., Caron, A., & Kudlak, B.P. (2012). Climate 
change adaptation planning in remote, resource-dependent 
communities: An Arctic example. Regional Environmental 
Change, 12(4), 825-37.
Penner, S., Kevany, K., & Longboat, S. (2019). Indigenous food 
sovereignty in Canada: Policy paper 2019. Rural Policy Learning 
Commons.
Pennesi, K., Arokium, J., & McBean, G. (2012). Integrating local 
and scientific weather knowledge as a strategy for adaptation 
to climate change in the Arctic. Mitigation and Adaptation 
Strategies for Global Change, 17(8), 897-922.
Petrasek MacDonald, J., Ford, J.D., Cunsolo Willox, A., & 
Ross, N.A. (2013a). A review of protective factors and causal 
mechanisms that enhance the mental health of Indigenous 
Circumpolar youth. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 
72, 21775. DOI: 10.3402/ijch.v72i0.21775.
Petrasek MacDonald, J., Harper, S.L., Cunsolo Willox, A., 
Edge, V.L., & Rigolet Inuit Community Government. (2013b). A 
necessary voice: Climate change and lived experiences of youth 
in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Global Environmental Change, 
23(1), 360-71.
Powys Whyte, K. (2014). Indigenous women, climate change 
impacts, and collective action. Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist 
Philosophy, 29(3), 599-616.
Prior, T.L., & Heinämäki, L. (2017). The rights and role of 
Indigenous women in the climate change regime. Arctic Review 
on Law and Politics, 8, 193-221.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2018a). Key health 
inequalities in Canada: A national portrait. Ottawa, ON.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2018b). 
Multidisciplinary roundtable discussion on Lyme Disease. 
WebEx meeting. Wednesday, October 24, 2018, Information 
package for participants. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www.lymehope.ca/uploads/8/4/2/8/84284900/follow-up_
information_package-mulitdisciplinary_rountable_en.pdf>
Quinn, E. (2016a). Video documentary: How Indigenous knowledge 
is changing what we know about the Arctic. Eye on the Arctic, 
December 23. Radio Canada, International. <http://www.rcinet.ca/
en/2016/12/23/video-documentary-how-indigenous-knowledge-is-
changing-what-we-know-about-the-arctic/>
Quinn, E. (2016b). Is climate change making the muskoxen sick 
on Victoria Island? Eye on the Arctic, October 31. Radio Canada, 
International. Retrieved from <http://www.rcinet.ca/eye-on-the-
arctic/2016/12/05/is-climate-change-making-the-muskoxen-
sick-on-victoria-island/>
Ray, L., Burnett, K., Cameron, A., Joseph, S., LeBlanc, J., Parker, 
B., Recollet, A., & Sergerie, C. (2019). Examining Indigenous food 
sovereignty as a conceptual framework for health in two urban 
communities in northern Ontario, Canada. IUHPE – Global Health 
Promotion, 26(Suppl 3), 54-63.
Reading, C. (2018). Structural determinants of Aboriginal 
Peoples’ health. In M. Greenwood, S. de Leeuw, & N.M. Lindsay 
(Eds.), Determinants of Indigenous Peoples’ health, Second 
Edition (Chapter 1). Toronto, ON: Canadian Scholar’s Press.
Reading, C., & Wien, F. (2009). Health inequalities and social 
determinants of Aboriginal peoples’ health. Prince George, BC: 
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Reading, J. (2015). Confronting the growing crisis of cardiovascular 
disease and heart health among Aboriginal peoples in Canada. 
Canadian Journal of Cardiology, 31(9), 1077-80.
Receveur, O., & Kuhnlein, H. (1998). Benefits of traditional food 
in Dene/Métis communities. International Journal of Circumpolar 
Health, 57(Suppl), 219-21. 
Reed, G. (2019). Connecting the local communities and Indigenous 
Peoples platform to domestic climate challenges in Canada. 
Waterloo, ON: Centre for International Governance Innovation. 
Reid, C.E., Brauer, M., Johnston, F.H., Jerrett, M., Balmes, J.R., & 
Elliott, C.T. (2016). Critical review of health impacts of wildfire 
smoke exposure. Environmental Health Perspectives, 124, 1334-43.
Reid, M.G., Hamilton, C., Reid, S.K., Trousdale, W., Hill, C., Turner, 
N., Picard, C.R., Lamontagne, C., & Matthews, H.D. (2014). 
Indigenous climate change adaptation planning using a values-
focused approach: A case study with the Gitga’at Nation. Journal 
of Ethnobiology, 343), 401-24. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 110 
Reiling, S.J., & Dixon, B.R. (2019). Toxoplasma gondii: How 
an Amazonian parasite became an Inuit health issue. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 45(7/8), 183-90.
Reo, N.J., Whyte, K.P., McGregor, D., Smith, M.A., & Jenkins, J.F. 
(2017). Factors that support Indigenous involvement in multi-
actor environmental stewardship. AlterNative, 13(2), 58-68.
Research Northwest & Hershfield, M. (2017). Yukon ‘state 
of play’: Analysis of climate change impacts and adaptation. 
Whitehorse, YK: Environment Yukon Climate Change Secretariat, 
<https://yukon.ca/sites/yukon.ca/files/env/env-yukon-state-
play-analysis-climate-change-impacts-adaptation.pdf>
Richards, G., Frehs, J., Myers, E., & Van Bibber, M. (2019). 
Commentary - the Climate Change and Health Adaptation 
Program: Indigenous climate leaders’ championing adaptation 
efforts. Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in 
Canada, 39(4), 127-130.
Riedlinger, D., & Berkes, F. (2001). Contributions of traditional 
knowledge to understanding climate change in the Canadian 
Arctic. Polar Record, 37, 315-28.
Robin, T. (2019). Our hands at work: Indigenous food sovereignty 
in Western Canada. Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and 
Community Development, 9(Suppl. 2), 85-99.
Rondeau, K.V. (2012). Critical resource requirements for the delivery 
of primary health care services in rural, remote and isolated First 
Nations communities: A discussion paper. Edmonton, AB: Prepared 
for First Nations Inuit Health Branch – Alberta.
Rosol, R., Powell-Hellyer, S., & Chan, H. M. (2016). Impacts 
of decline harvest of country food on nutrient intake among 
Inuit in Arctic Canada: Impact of climate change and possible 
adaptation plan. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 
75(1), 31127.
Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples (RCAP). (1996). Ethical 
guidelines for research. Ottawa, ON. 
Royal Canadian Geographical Society, the. (2018). Canadian 
geographic Indigenous Peoples of Canada atlas – Inuit. Ottawa, 
ON: The Royal Canadian Geographic Society.
Royer, M.J.S., Hermann, T.M., Sonnentag, O., Fortier, D., Delusca, 
K., & Cuciurean, R. (2013). Linking Cree hunters’ and scientific 
observations of changing inland ice and meteorological 
conditions in the subarctic eastern James Bay region, Canada. 
Climatic Change, 119(3-4), 719-32.
Sabine Center for Climate Change Law, in collaboration with 
Arnold & Porter Kay Scholer LLP. (2005). Petition to the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights seeking relief from 
violations resulting from global warming caused by acts and 
omissions of the United States. New York, NY: Columbia 
University Law. Retrieved from <http://climatecasechart.com/
non-us-case/petition-to-the-inter-american-commission-on-
human-rights-seeking-relief-from-violations-resulting-from-
global-warming-caused-by-acts-and-omissions-of-the-united-
states/?cn-reloaded=1>
Saini, M. (2012). A systematic review of western and Aboriginal 
research designs: Assessing cross-validation to explore 
compatibility and convergence. Prince George, BC: National 
Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Sanderson, D., Picketts, I.M., Déry, S.J., Fell, B., Baker, S., Lee-
Johnson, E., & Auger, M. (2015). Climate change and water 
at Stellat-en First Nation, British Columbia, Canada: Insights 
from western science and traditional knowledge. The Canadian 
Geographer, 59(2), 136-50.
Sandoval, C.D.M., Lagunas, R.M., Montelongo, L.T., & Díaz, M.J. 
(2016). Ancestral knowledge systems - A conceptual framework 
for decolonizing research in social science. AlterNative: An 
International Journal of Indigenous Peoples, 12(1), 18-31.
Santisteban, R.S. (Ed.). (2020). Indigenous women & climate 
change. Copenhagen: International Work Group for Indigenous 
Affairs. Retrieved from <https://www.iwgia.org/images/
publications/new-publications/Indigenous_Women_and_
Climate_Change_IWGIA.pdf>
Sarkar, A., Hanrahan, M., & Hudson, A. (2015). Water insecurity 
in Canadian Indigenous communities: Some inconvenient truths. 
Rural and Remote Health, 15, 3354.
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Gillis, D., Wood, 
M., Flowers, C., Shiwak, I., & Harper, S. L. (2020). “The best 
scientists are the people that’s out there”: Inuit-led integrated 
environment and health monitoring to respond to climate 
change in the Circumpolar North. Climatic Change, 160, 45-66. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02647-8>
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Middleton, J., & 
Harper, S.L. (2018). Responding to climate and environmental 
change impacts on human health via integrated surveillance 
in the Circumpolar North: A systematic realistic review. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 15(12), 2706. DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15122706.
Scharbach, J., & Waldram, J.B. (2016). Asking for a disaster: 
Being ‘at risk’ in the emergency evacuation of a northern Canadian 
Aboriginal community. Human Organization, 75(1), 59-70.
Schuttenberg, H.Z., & Guth, H.K. (2015). Seeking our shared 
wisdom: A framework for understanding knowledge co-
production and coproductive capacities. Ecology and Society, 
20(1), 15. <http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-07038-200115>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 111 
Selkirk First Nation, Yukon Territory, in collaboration with 
the Arctic Institute of Community-Based Research. (2016). 
Adapting to climate change and keeping our traditions. 
Selkirk First Nation. Retrieved from <https://static1.
squarespace.com/static/56afc7218259b53bd8383cb8/t/
57ab923e59cc68307527742f/1470861914849/
Selkirk+Climate+Change+Adaptation+Plan_CommunityReport_
final%5B2%5D.compressed.pdf>
Selkirk First Nation, & Arctic Institute of Community-Based 
Research. (2019). Keeping our traditions for the health and 
wellbeing of future Selkirk First Nation generations: “What do we 
do at the fish camp when there are no fish?”. Whitehorse, YK. 
Retrieved from <https://www.aicbr.ca/selkirk-project>
Sellers, S. (2018). Climate change and gender in Canada: A 
review. New York, NY: Women’s Environment and Development 
Organization. Retrieved from <https://wedo.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/GGCA-CA-RP-07.pdf>
Sheedy, A. (2018). The impacts of climate change on traditional 
and local food consumption in the Yukon. Whitehorse, YK: Arctic 
Institute of Community-based Research for Northern Health and 
Well-Being. 
Shkagamik-Kwe Health Centre. (2015). 2015 calendar. 
Sudbury, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.skhc.ca/books/
AnnualCalendars/2015/SKHC_Calendar_2015_LOW.pdf>
Sinclair, R. (2007). Identity lost and found: Lessons from the 
Sixties Scoop. First Peoples Child & Family Review, 3(1), 65-82.
Smylie, J. (2010). Achieving strength through numbers: First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis health information. Prince George, BC: 
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Smylie, J., & Firestone, M. (2015). Back to the basics: Identifying 
and addressing underlying challenges in achieving high quality 
and relevant health statistics for Indigenous populations in 
Canada. Statistical Journal of the International Association for 
Official Statistics, 31(1), 67-87.
Snyder, M., & Wilson, K. (2015). “Too much moving … there’s 
always a reason”: Understanding urban Aboriginal peoples’ 
experiences of mobility and its impact on holistic health. Health 
& Place, 34, 181-9.
Spring, A., Carter, B., & Blay-Palmer, A. (2018). Climate 
change, community capitals, and food security: Building a 
more sustainable food system in a northern Canadian boreal 
community. Canadian Food Studies, 5(2), 111-41.
Standing Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs. (2017). 
Breaking point: The suicide crisis in Indigenous communities. 
Ottawa, ON: House of Commons.
Standing Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs 
(2018). From the ashes: Reimagining fire safety and emergency 
management in Indigenous communities. Ottawa, ON: House of 
Commons.
Staples, K., & Natcher, D.C. (2015a). Gender, decision-making, 
and natural resource co-management in Yukon. Arctic, 68(3), 
356-66.
Staples, K., & Natcher, D.C. (2015b). Gender, critical mass, and 
natural resource co-management in the Yukon. Northern Review, 
41. 139.
Statham, S., Ford, J.D., Berrang-Ford, L., Lardeau, M.-P., Gough, 
W., & Siewierskia, R. (2015). Anomalous climatic conditions 
during winter 2010–2011 and vulnerability of the traditional Inuit 
food system in Iqaluit, Nunavut. Polar Record, 51(3), 301-17.
Statistics Canada. (2016). Infographic - The Aboriginal 
population in Canada, 2016 Census of population. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/11-627-
m/11-627-m2017027-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2017). Aboriginal peoples in Canada: Key 
results from the 2016 Census. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/171025/
dq171025a-info-eng.htm>
Stoler, J., Jepson, W.E., & Wutich, A. (2020). Beyond 
handwashing: Water insecurity undermines COVID-19 response 
in developing areas. Journal of Global Health, 10(1), 1-4.
Sudlovenick, E. (2019). A serological survey and Inuit 
Qaujimajatuqangit of ringed seals (nattit) in Frobisher Bay, 
Nunavut. Unpublished Masters of Science thesis, University of 
Prince Edward Island, Charlottetown, PEI, Canada.
Szach, N.J. (2013). Keepers of the water: Exploring Anishinaabe 
and Métis women’s knowledge of water and participation in 
water governance in Kenora, Ontario. Unpublished Masters of 
Natural Resources Management thesis, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
Tagalik, S. (2010). Inuit Qaujimajatuqangit: The role of Indigenous 
Knowledge in supporting wellness in Inuit communities in 
Nunavut. Prince George, BC: NCCAH.
Tam, B. (2013). The effects of weather and climate variability on 
the well-being of a rural and urban Aboriginal group in Ontario, 
Canada. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Tarasuk, V., Mitchell, A., & Dachner, N. (2014). Household food 
insecurity in Canada. Toronto, ON: PROOF: Research to identify 
policy options to reduce food insecurity.
Task Force on Aboriginal Languages and Cultures. (2005). 
Towards a new beginning: A foundational report for a strategy to 
revitalize First Nation, Inuit, and Métis languages and cultures. 
Ottawa, ON: Minister of Canadian Heritage.
Tengö, M., Brondizio, E.S., Elmqvist, T., Malmer, P., & Spierenburg, 
M. (2014). Connecting diverse knowledge systems for enhanced 
ecosystem governance: The multiple evidence base approach. 
Ambio, 43(5), 579-91.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 112 
Teslin Tlingit Council. (2012). Teslin’s voice [documentary]. 
Climate Telling. Retrieved from <https://vimeo.com/39303443>
Thivierge, K., Iqbal, A., Dixon, B., Dion, R., Levesque, B., Cantin, 
P., Cédilotte, L., Ndao, M., Proulx, J. F., & Yansouni, C. P. (2016). 
Cryptosporidium hominis is a newly recognized pathogen in the 
Arctic Region of Nunavik, Canada: Molecular characterization of 
an outbreak. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 10(4), e0004534.
Thompson, S., Ballard, M., & Martin, D. (2014). Lake St. Martin 
First Nation community members’ experiences of induced 
displacement: “We’re like refugees”. Refuge, 29(2), 75-86.
Thompson, S., Gulrukh, A., Ballard, M., Beardy, B., Islam, D., 
Lozeznik, V., & Wong, K. (2011). Is community economic 
development putting healthy food on the table? Food 
sovereignty in northern Manitoba’s Aboriginal communities. 
Journal of Aboriginal Economic Development, 7(2), 14-39. 
Thompson, S., Kamal, A., Alam, M.A., & Wiebe, J. (2012). 
Community development to feed the family in northern Manitoba 
communities: Evaluating food activities based on their food 
sovereignty, food security, and sustainable livelihood outcomes. 
Canadian Journal of Nonprofit and Social Economy Research, 
3(2), 43-66.
Tobias, J.K., & Richmond, C.A.M. (2014). “That land 
means everything to us as Anishinaabe….”: Environmental 
dispossession and resilience on the North Shore of Lake 
Superior. Health & Place, 29, 26-33.
Tomaselli, M., Kutz, S., Gerlach, C., & Checkley, S. (2017). Local 
knowledge to enhance wildlife population health surveillance: 
Conserving muskoxen and caribou in the Canadian Arctic. 
Biological Conservation, 217, 337-48. 
Trudeau, J., Prime Minister of Canada. (2016). Process 
document for ongoing engagement on the Pan-Canadian 
Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. Ottawa, ON: 
Prime Minister’s Office.
Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada (TRC). (2015). 
Honouring the truth, reconciling for the future: Summary of 
the final report of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of 
Canada. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Turner, N., & Spalding, P.R. (2013). “We might go back to this”: 
Drawing on the past to meet the future in Northwestern North 
American Indigenous communities. Ecology and Society, 18(4), 29.
Ulturgasheva, O., Rasmus, S., Wexler, L., Nystad, K., & Kral, M. 
(2014). Arctic Indigenous youth resilience and vulnerability: 
Comparative analysis of adolescent experiences across five 
circumpolar communities. Transcultural Psychiatry, 51(5), 735-56.
United Nations. (2007). United Nations Declaration on the Rights 
of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP). New York, NY. Retrieved from 
<https://www.un.org/development/desa/indigenouspeoples/wp-
content/uploads/sites/19/2018/11/UNDRIP_E_web.pdf> 
United Nations Human Rights Council (UNHRC). (2016). 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the issue of human rights 
obligations relating to the enjoyment of a safe, clean, healthy and 
sustainable environment. New York, NY: United Nations General 
Assembly, Thirty-first session A/HRC/31/52.
Uprety, Y., Asselin, H., Bergeron, Y., Doyon, F., & Boucher, J.-F. 
(2012). Contribution of traditional knowledge to ecological 
restoration: Practices and applications. Ecoscience, 19(3), 225-37.
Vinyeta, K. Whyte, K.P., & Lynn, K. (2015). Climate change through 
an intersectional lens: Gendered vulnerability and resilience 
in Indigenous communities in the United States. Portland, OR: 
United States Department of Agriculture Pacific Northwest 
Research Station.
Vinyeta, K., Whyte, K. P., & Lynn, K. (2016). Indigenous 
masculinities in a changing climate: Vulnerability and resilience 
in the United States. In E. Enarson, & B. Pease (Eds.), Men, 
masculinities and disaster (Chapter 12). Routledge. Retrieved 
from <https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Kyle_Whyte/
publication/304386709_Indigenous_masculinities_in_a_
changing_climate_vulnerability_and_resilience_in_the_
United_States/links/576dec5608ae0b3a3b75573b/
Indigenous-masculinities-in-a-changing-climate-vulnerability-
and-resilience-in-the-United-States.pdf>
Vizina, Y. (2010). Métis traditional environmental knowledge 
and science education. Unpublished Master of Education 
theses, Department of Educational Foundations, University of 
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK. 
Watson, V. (2017). Perceptions of water among the Inuit 
community in Iqaluit, Nunavut: An anti-colonialist, feminist 
political ecology. Unpublished Master of Arts thesis, York 
University, Toronto, ON.
Waugh, D., Pearce, T., Ostertag, S.K., Pokiak, V., Collings, P., & 
Loseto, L.L. (2018). Inuvialuit traditional ecological knowledge of 
beluga whale (Delphinapterus leucas) under changing climatic 
conditions in Tuktoyaktuk, NT. Arctic Science, 4, 242-58.
Wexler, L. (2013). Looking across three generations of Alaska 
Natives to explore how culture fosters Indigenous resilience. 
Transcultural Psychiatry, 51(1), 73-92.
White, J.P., Murphy, L., & Spence, N. (2012). Water and 
Indigenous peoples: Canada’s paradox. The International 
Indigenous Policy Journal, 33, Article 3.
Wilder, B.T., O’Meara, C., Monti, L., & Nabhan, G.P. (2016). The 
importance of Indigenous Knowledge in curbing the loss of 
language and biodiversity. BioScience, 66(6), 499-509.
Williams, L., Fletcher, A., Hanson, C., Neapole, J., & Pollack, 
M. (2018). Women and climate change impacts and action in 
Canada: Feminist, Indigenous, and intersectional perspectives. 
Ottawa, ON: Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement 
of Women.  
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 113 
Wilson, K., & Young, K. (2008). An overview of Aboriginal health 
research in the social sciences: Current trends and future 
directions. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 67(2-3), 
179-89.
Wilson, N.J., Inkster, J., Mutter, E., Jochum, K., & McGrath, K. 
(2015). Water action planning workshop report. Whitehorse, 
YK: Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council. Retrieved 
from <https://riskcultureandenvironment.files.wordpress.
com/2014/08/final_waterreport_2014-2015.pdf>
Windchief, S., & Ryan, K. E. (2018). The sharing of indigenous 
knowledge through academic means by implementing 
self-reflection and story. AlterNative: An International 
Journal of Indigenous Peoples, 15(1), 82-89. DOI: 
10.1177/1177180118818188.
World Health Organization. (2014). Gender, climate change and 
health. Geneva, Switzerland.
World Health Organization. (2018). COP24 Special report: Health 
& climate change. Geneva, Switzerland.
Wright, C.J., Sargeant, J.M., Edge, V.L., Ford, J.D., Farahbakhsh, 
K., RICG, Shiwak, I., Flowers, C., IHACC Research Team, & Harper, 
S. L. (2018a). Water quality and health in northern Canada: 
Stored drinking water and acute gastrointestinal illnesses in 
Labrador Inuit. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 
25(33), 32975-87.
Wright, C.J., Sargeant, J.M., Edge, V.L., Ford, J.D., Farahbakhsh, 
K., Shiwak, I., Flowers, C., Gordon, A. C., RICG, IHACC Research 
Team, & Harper, S. L. (2018b). How are perceptions associated 
with water consumption in Canadian Inuit? A cross-sectional 
survey in Rigolet, Labrador. Science of the Total Environment, 
618, 369-78.
Wudel, B., & Shadabi, E. (2016). A short review of literature on the 
effects of climate change on mosquito-borne illnesses in Canada. 
Winnipeg, MB: National Collaborating Centre for Infectious 
Diseases. 
Yansouni, C.P., Pernica, J.M., & Goldfarb, D. (2016). Enteric 
parasites in Arctic communities: Tip of the iceberg? Trends in 
Parasitology, 32(11), 834-38.
Yeednoo Diinehdoo Ji’heezrit Nits’oo Ts’o’ Nan He’aa Declaration. 
(n.d.). Retrieved from <http://www.vgfn.ca/pdf/CC%202019%20
Declaration.pdf>
York, J., Dowsley, M., Cornwell, A., Kuc, M., & Taylor, M. (2016). 
Demographic and traditional knowledge perspectives on the 
current status of Canadian polar bear subpopulations. Ecology 
and Evolution, 6(9), 2897-2924.
Young, T.K. (2003). Review of research on Aboriginal populations 
in Canada: Relevance to their health needs. British Medical 
Journal, 327, 419-22.
Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council. (2017). Water 
Quality - Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed, Yukon project. 
ClimateTelling. Retrieved from <http://www.climatetelling.info/
yukon-river.html>
Yusa, A., Berry, P., Cheng, J.J., Ogden, N., Bonsal, B., Stewart, R., 
& Waldick, R. (2015). Climate change, drought and human health 
in Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 12(7), 8359-8412.
Zavalete-Cortijo, C., Ford, J., Arotoma-Rojas, I., Lwasa, S., 
Lancha-Rucoba, G., Garcia, P., Miranda, J., Namanya, D. B., New, 
M., Wright, C. J., Berrang-Ford, L., Indigenous Health Adaptation 
to Climate Change Research Team, & Harper, S. L. (2020). 
Climate change and COVID-19: Reinforcing Indigenous food 
systems. The Lancet Planetary Health, 4(9): E381-E382. <https://
doi.org/10.1177/1177180118818188>
CHAPTER 3
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Natural Hazards 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 115 
Lead Authors
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé publique du Québec and 
Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national de la recherche 
scientifique
Céline Campagna, Institut national de santé publique du Québec and 
Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national de la recherche 
scientifique
Contributing Authors
David Demers-Bouffard, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
Sami Qutob, Health Canada
Mike Flannigan, University of Alberta
Suggested Citation
Gosselin, P., Campagna, C., Demers-Bouffard, D., Qutob, S., & Flannigan, 
M. (2022). Natural Hazards. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), Health of 
Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 116 
Table of Contents
Summary
122
Key Messages
122
3.1 Introduction 
128
3.2 Methods and Approach
128
3.3 General Trends in the Intensity and Frequency of Natural Hazards Influenced by Climate Change, 
and Links to Health
129
3.4 Average Warming and Extreme Heat Events
130
3.4.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Heat – Trends and Projections
130
3.4.1.1 Annual Average Temperatures
130
3.4.1.2 Extreme Heat Events
131
3.4.2 Effects of Heat on Health
132
3.4.2.1 All-Cause Mortality During Extreme Heat Events
133
3.4.2.2 Characterization of the Relationship Between Mortality and Heat
133
3.4.2.3 Mortality Related to Climate Projections
134
3.4.2.4 All-Cause and Cardiovascular Disease Hospitalizations
134
3.4.2.5 Cardiovascular and Other Diseases
134
3.4.2.6 Perinatal Effects
135
3.4.2.7 Indirect Impacts from Lower Water and Air Quality
135
3.4.2.8 Psychosocial Health
135
3.4.2.9 Beneficial Impacts
136
3.4.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Heat
136
3.4.3.1 Seniors
136
Box 3.1 Heat and COVID-19
137
3.4.3.2 Children
138
3.4.3.3 Sex and Gender
138
3.4.3.4 Chronic Diseases
139
3.4.3.5 Medication Use or Substance Misuse
139
3.4.3.6 Occupational Exposure
139
3.4.3.7 Urban Heat Islands
140
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 117 
3.4.3.8 Indigenous Populations
140
3.4.3.9 Material and Social Deprivation
141
3.4.3.10 People Experiencing Homelessness
141
3.4.3.11 Ethnicity and Race
142
3.4.4 Heat Adaptation Measures
142
3.4.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
142
Box 3.2 Adjusting heat adaptation measures in the COVID-19 context
144
3.4.4.2 Public Health Adaptation Measures
145
Box 3.3 Improving practices through the Montréal heat response action plan
146
3.4.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
146
Box 3.4 Co-benefits of greening communities
147
3.5 Exposure to Ultraviolet Radiation
148
3.5.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Ultraviolet Light — Trends and Projections
148
3.5.2 Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on Health
149
3.5.2.1 Skin Cancer
149
3.5.2.2 Cataracts and Eye Tumours
149
3.5.2.3 Immunosuppression
149
3.5.2.4 Vitamin D and Blood Pressure
150
3.5.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Ultraviolet Radiation
150
3.5.4 Ultraviolet Adaptation Measures
151
3.5.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
151
3.5.4.2 Public Adaptation Measures
151
3.5.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
152
3.6 Average Cold and Extreme Cold Events
152
3.6.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Cold — Trends and Projections
152
3.6.2 Effects of Cold Weather on Health
153
3.6.2.1 Mortality
153
3.6.2.2 Infections
153
3.6.2.3 Hospitalizations and Emergency Department Visits
153
3.6.2.4 Overall Impact on Health
154
3.6.3 Annual Cold and Heat Mortality Comparison
154
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 118 
3.6.3.1 Geography
154
3.6.3.2 Mortality Projections Up to 2100
155
3.6.4 Populations at Increased Risk to Cold
156
3.6.4.1 Age, Sex, and Gender
156
3.6.4.2 Chronic Diseases
157
3.6.4.3 Material and Social Deprivation
157
3.6.4.4 People Experiencing Homelessness
158
3.6.5 Cold Adaptation Measures
158
3.6.5.1 Public Warning System
158
3.6.5.2 Housing Insulation
158
3.6.5.3 Occupational Health and Safety
159
3.7 Drought
159
3.7.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Drought — Trends and Projections
159
3.7.2 Effects of Drought on Health
160
3.7.2.1 Indirect Health Impacts from Lower Air Quality
160
3.7.2.2 Infectious Diseases
161
3.7.2.3 Water-Borne Diseases
161
3.7.2.4 Food Security
161
3.7.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Drought
162
3.7.3.1 Rural Living
162
3.7.3.2 Psychosocial Health
162
3.7.3.3 Food Insecurity and Malnutrition
162
3.7.3.4 Age, Sex, and Gender
163
3.7.4 Drought Adaptation Measures
163
3.7.4.1 Awareness of Psychosocial Impacts
163
3.7.4.2 Financial Support Programs and Monitoring and Warning Systems
163
3.7.4.3 Monitoring the Indirect Impacts of Drought on Air and Water Quality
164
3.8 Wildfires
165
3.8.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Wildfire — Trends and Projections
165
3.8.2 Effects of Wildfires on Health
165
3.8.2.1 Wildfire Smoke Characterization
166
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 119 
3.8.2.2 Smoke from Wildfires and Mortality
166
3.8.2.3 Wildfire Smoke and Respiratory and Cardiovascular Disease
166
3.8.2.4 Direct Exposure to Wildfires and Psychosocial Health
167
3.8.2.5 Water-Borne Diseases
167
3.8.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Wildfires
168
3.8.3.1 Pre-Existing Morbidity
168
3.8.3.2 Seniors
168
3.8.3.3 Children
168
3.8.3.4 Social Inequities
168
3.8.3.5 Indigenous Populations
169
3.8.3.6 Safety of Wildland Firefighters
169
3.8.4 Wildfire Adaptation Measures
169
3.8.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
169
3.8.4.2 Public Adaptation Measures
170
3.8.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
171
3.9 Precipitation and Storms
172
3.9.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Precipitation and Storms — Trends and Projections
172
3.9.2 The Effects of Precipitation and Storms on Health
174
3.9.2.1 Unintentional Trauma – Precipitation
174
3.9.2.2 Unintentional Trauma – Storms
174
3.9.2.3 Road Accidents – Precipitation
174
3.9.2.4 Physical Activity
175
3.9.2.5 Water-Borne Diseases
175
3.9.2.6 Indirect Impacts – Power Outages
176
3.9.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Storms and Precipitation
176
3.9.3.1 Precipitation
176
3.9.3.2 Storms
177
3.9.4 Storm and Precipitation Adaptation Measures
178
3.9.4.1 Public Adaptation Measures
178
3.10 Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion
180
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 120 
3.10.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion — Trends 
and Projections
180
3.10.2 Effects of Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion on Health
181
3.10.2.1 Floods – Physical Impacts
181
3.10.2.2 Floods – Psychosocial Impacts
181
3.10.2.3 Coastal Flooding
182
3.10.2.4 Coastal Erosion
182
3.10.2.5 Indirect Impacts – Power Outages
183
3.10.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion
183
3.10.3.1 Age
183
3.10.3.2 Sex and Gender
183
3.10.3.3 Presence of Pre-Existing Diseases
184
3.10.3.4 Indigenous Populations
184
3.10.3.5 Rural Living and Low Socio-Economic Status
184
3.10.3.6 Insurance
184
3.10.4 Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion Adaptation Measures
185
3.10.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
185
3.10.4.2 Public Adaptation Measures
186
3.10.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
187
3.10.4.4 Evaluation of Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion Adaptation Measures
187
3.11 Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost
188
3.11.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost — Trends 
and Projections
188
3.11.2 Effects of Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost on Health
189
3.11.2.1 Impacts of Landslides on Health
189
3.11.2.2 Impacts of Avalanches on Health
189
3.11.2.3 Effects of Thawing Permafrost on Health
189
3.11.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost
190
3.11.4 Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost Adaptation Measures
191
3.11.4.1 Landslide Adaptation Measures
191
3.11.4.2 Avalanches Adaptation Measures
191
3.11.4.3 Thawing Permafrost Adaptation Measures
191
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 121 
3.12 Gaps in the Literature and Uncertainty of Scientific Evidence Related to the Impacts on Health of 
Natural Hazards Influenced by Climate Change 
192
3.12.1 Health and Natural Hazards Data
192
3.12.2 Type of Natural Hazards Considered
193
3.12.3 Direct and Indirect Impacts on Health
193
3.12.4 Impacts of Combined Natural Hazard Events
193
3.12.5 Cascading Impacts of Hazards and Health System Impacts
194
3.12.6 Behaviours and Lifestyle
194
3.12.7 Assessment of Adaptation Measures
194
3.12.8 Economic Impacts of Health Effects and Adaptation and Mitigation Measures
194
3.12.9 Relative Importance of Vulnerability and Protection Factors
195
3.12.10 Equitable Representation in the Literature
195
3.12.11 Indigenous Populations
195
3.12.12 Factors Supporting Adaptation
196
3.12.13 Communication on Climate Change
196
3.13 Conclusion
197
3.14 References
198
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 122 
Summary
Heatwaves, major floods, wildfires, coastal erosion, and droughts are examples of natural hazards whose 
frequency and intensity are influenced by climate change. These hazards can cause loss of life, injury 
and various health problems, damage to property, social and economic disruption, or environmental 
degradation. The impacts of natural hazards on human health are of particular concern. From heat stroke 
to cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, including psychological and social impacts, the health impacts 
of natural hazards can be serious and depend on complex processes involving individual, social, economic, 
and environmental factors. Canada has seen many examples of severe impacts from these hazards on the 
health and safety of the population in the last few years (e.g., heatwave and drought in British Columbia, 
Fort McMurray fires in Alberta, heatwaves and floods of 2018 in Ontario and Quebec, storms in the Maritime 
provinces). As climate change accelerates, these impacts on populations will increase unless effective 
adaptation measures are implemented to reduce them and to protect populations most at risk of being 
affected. Examples of these adaptation measures specific to each hazard already exist, and should be vigorously 
implemented by civil society, municipalities, health authorities, provinces, and the federal government.
Key Messages
•	
Many extreme weather events, and their health impacts on Canadians, are expected to increase in 
the coming decades, driven by the widespread warming. For example, extreme heat will become 
more frequent and more intense. This will increase the severity of heatwaves, and contribute to 
increased drought and wildfire risks. For most of Canada, precipitation is projected to increase, 
on average, although summer rainfall may decrease in some areas. Urban flood risks will increase 
due to more intense rainfalls. 
•	
Deaths in Canada are projected to increase significantly by the end of the century due to the 
effects of rising temperatures (and extreme heat) if greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions continue to 
rise at the same rate seen over the past 30 years. Added to this are potential health effects of the 
changing pattern of some extreme weather events (e. g., wildfires, droughts, heatwaves, extreme 
precipitation) such as an increase in accidental injuries, anxiety and depression, water-borne 
diseases, cardiovascular problems, and respiratory illnesses. Workers directly exposed to those 
extreme events are already experiencing an increased burden of illness and injuries.
•	
Coastal regions face a multitude of increased risks to communities. Coastal flooding is expected 
to increase in many areas of Canada due to local sea level rise. The loss of sea ice in the 
Arctic, Eastern Quebec, and Atlantic Canada further increases the risk of damage to coastal 
infrastructure and ecosystems as a result of larger storm surges and waves.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 123 
•	
Some populations in urban and rural areas have limited access to the financial, social, health, 
and human resources needed to adapt to natural hazards influenced by climate change. Many 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities experience a greater existing burden of health 
inequities and related determinants of poor health. This, combined with their close reliance on 
the environment for their sustenance, livelihoods, and cultural practices means they are uniquely 
sensitive to the impacts of climate change, including from natural hazards. 
•	
Seniors are particularly at risk of suffering from the health impacts of climate change related 
events, such as heatwaves, cold snaps, drought, wildfire smoke, and floods. Age and chronic 
diseases are the main factors of vulnerability, and the fact that our society is aging rapidly will 
increase this risk in the next few decades. Seniors' vulnerability can be compounded by loss of 
community cohesion, socio-economic inequality and unhealthy behaviours.
•	
Provinces, municipalities, civil society, health authorities, and the federal government all have 
a key role to play in adapting to climate change. Despite progress on many efforts, adaptation 
measures are still lacking, especially for droughts, storms, and heavy precipitation. Moreover, 
populations at increased risk, and the preventable conditions that increase those risks,  are often 
neglected by stakeholders when implementing adaptation measures.
•	
Many solutions that can reduce human exposure and vulnerability to natural hazards influenced 
by climate change are already known and should be better promoted. Those solutions include 
greening living environments, identifying at-risk areas, using early warning systems, improving 
access to resources, practising integrated land-use planning, updating infrastructure, and raising 
public awareness.
•	
The pace, nature, and extent of adaptation measures must increase rapidly and substantially to 
reduce the current and future health impacts in Canada, including climate-related evacuations and 
forced displacement.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 124 
Observed changes (°C) in seasonal mean temperatures from 1948 to 2016 for four seasons. Source: Zhang et 
al., 2019.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 125 
Overview of Climate Change Impacts of Natural Hazards on Health 
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Temperature extremes 
and gradual warming
•	
More frequent, more severe 
and longer heatwaves
•	
Increased urban heat island 
effect
•	
Combined climate-related 
hazards (e.g., heat, wildfires, 
drought, flooding)
•	
Decrease in cold extremes 
and averages
•	
Long-term warming and 
heatwaves
•	
Increase in direct heat-related 
illnesses (e.g., heat edema, 
heat rash, heat exhaustion, heat 
stroke) and deaths, especially for 
workers
•	
Increase in respiratory disorders
•	
Increase in cardiovascular 
disorders, especially for seniors 
and people with chronic diseases
•	
Perinatal care complications 
(such as miscarriage, 
premature birth, congenital 
complications)
•	
Increase emergency visits for 
mental health problems 
•	
Psychosocial impacts
•	
Possible changed patterns 
of illness and death due to 
gradually warming temperatures 
(e.g., due to increased outdoor 
activity levels)
•	
Impacts on health 
infrastructure
•	
Impacts on health and 
social services
•	
Potential decrease in cold-
related morbidity and mortality
•	
Increased risk of zoonotic 
infectious diseases directly 
transmitted from animals 
and arthropod vectors; and 
acquired by inhalation from 
environmental sources
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 126 
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Extreme weather 
events and natural 
hazards
•	
More frequent, longer, and 
more violent thunderstorms, 
more severe hurricanes and 
other types of severe weather
•	
Increased extreme 
precipitations and related 
flooding events, except for 
spring flooding events which 
will decrease
•	
Landslides and avalanches
•	
Increased coastal flooding, 
coastal erosion, and storm 
surge episodes
•	
Increased drought especially 
in the Prairies, Quebec, and 
Interior British Columbia
•	
Increased damage to the 
natural and built environments
•	
Increased frequency, severity, 
and area burned of wildfires
•	
Combined or cascading 
climate-related hazards (such 
as heat, wildfires, drought, 
flooding)
•	
Deaths, injuries and illnesses 
from violent storms, floods, 
and other hazards
•	
Increase mortality and 
respiratory illnesses related to 
wildfire smoke
•	
Psychological health effects, 
including mental health 
effects and stress-related 
illnesses due to extreme 
events (such as flood, wildfire, 
drought) 
•	
Physical and mental health 
impacts of food insecurity 
and/or water shortages
•	
Illnesses related to drinking 
and recreational water 
contamination (mostly 
infectious)
•	
Deaths, illnesses, and 
injuries due to evacuation or 
displacement of populations, 
and related pressures on 
civil protection, emergency 
shelters, and health 
infrastructure
•	
Indirect health impacts 
from ecological changes, 
infrastructure damage 
and interruptions in health 
services from extreme events 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 127 
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Extreme weather 
events and natural 
hazards
(continued)
•	
Exacerbation of chronic 
and infectious diseases and 
injuries due to infrastructure 
damage (such as to housing, 
water, sanitation, health 
facilities)
•	
Poorer health outcomes 
due to restrictions on travel 
for health and emergency 
services, delayed supply of 
essential pharmaceuticals 
and medical supplies, and 
compromised patient safety 
•	
Epidemics of mosquito-borne 
diseases 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 128 
3.1 Introduction 
Climate change is projected to increase the frequency, intensity, and overall consequences of many extreme 
weather conditions in Canada, even under a low emissions scenario (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). In this chapter, 
these conditions are referred to as natural hazards, although they are not entirely natural since they are 
influenced by several human factors, including greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. A natural hazard is a 
phenomenon — often an extreme meteorological or hydrometeorological condition (e.g., heavy precipitation 
or extreme temperatures) — that is likely to cause loss of life, injury, property damage, social and economic 
disruption, or environmental degradation (Morin, 2008). Thus, natural hazards involve impacts on humans or 
on infrastructure communities rely on. 
The impacts of natural hazards on human health are of particular concern. From heat strokes to 
cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, and psychological and social impacts, the health impacts of 
natural hazards are numerous and depend on complex processes involving individual, social, economic, and 
environmental factors. With growing recognition of these impacts, a significant number of research studies 
on such impacts have been carried out in Canada and abroad.
This chapter describes the state of knowledge on past and projected climate change on natural hazards, the 
links between those hazards and population health in Canada or similar countries (by demography, gross 
domestic product [GDP], climate), and key health vulnerabilities or risks. It also examines possible adaptation 
measures to these hazards to reduce their impact on the health of the population, based on published 
scientific studies. This chapter is therefore neither a descriptive nor exhaustive picture of the impacts 
experienced by communities in Canada, of the programs available to adapt, or of the measures put in place 
by decision makers. Only natural hazards influenced by climate change have been considered in this analysis.
3.2 Methods and Approach
A review of scientific literature, published between 2008 and 2019, was conducted on knowledge related to natural 
hazards, health, and adaptation in developed countries with a temperate or polar climate, such as in Canada. To be 
included, a study had to demonstrate the relationships between health and a natural hazard influenced by climate 
change, for example, address vulnerability to a natural hazard or the effect of adaptation measures on these 
hazards and their potential to directly or indirectly minimize impacts on health.
The information in this chapter provides an update to previous Health Canada assessments from 2008 and 2014. 
Information on Canada’s changing climate and its changes in average conditions as well as changes in extremes 
(referred here as natural hazards) were obtained from the relevant chapters of Canada’s Changing Climate Report 
published by the Government of Canada (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Other relevant studies were identified after the 
literature search phase and were included in the literature review. Grey literature was used to supplement existing 
scientific literature or to highlight relevant case studies. Studies conducted in Canada have been given priority, and 
studies from other similar countries (e.g., the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD]) 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 129 
were used when information specific to the Canadian context was lacking. Some were used for comparison with 
the Canadian context. Uncertainty in current data (e.g., unknown or little-known data) is taken into consideration by 
highlighting gaps in the scientific literature, limitations of some studies, or conflicting results. Research gaps and 
uncertainty in scientific evidence were also highlighted.
3.3 General Trends in the Intensity and Frequency of 
Natural Hazards Influenced by Climate Change, and 
Links to Health
As concluded in Canada’s Changing Climate Report (Bush & Lemmen, 2019), warming of the Earth during the 
Industrial Era is unequivocal, and it is extremely likely that human activities, especially emissions of greenhouse 
gases (GHGs), have been the main cause of this warming since the middle of the 20th century. This global-scale 
warming has also been accompanied by increases in extreme heat and decreases in cold extremes, increases in 
atmospheric water vapour, warming of the ocean, and decreases in snow and ice cover. Global mean sea level has risen 
due to the expansion of ocean water caused by warming and by the addition of meltwater previously stored in glaciers 
and ice sheets on land. These global changes driven by warming of the climate system affect Canada (Figure 3.1). 
Figure 3.1 Observed changes (°C) in annual temperature across Canada between 1948 and 2016, based on linear 
trends. Source: Zhang et al., 2019.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 130 
This widespread warming drives changes to, including increases in, many natural hazards: extreme heat, 
extreme precipitation and storms, drought, wildfires, flood risk, landslides, avalanches, and permafrost melt. 
These changes alter many ecosystems that then affect different populations. The climate and climatic events 
are determinants of health in many ways. They can affect the health of individuals directly (for example, 
through extreme heat or cold) or indirectly (by altering ecosystems which, in turn, lead to the emergence 
of new diseases), or by influencing other determinants including social determinants of health (e.g., loss of 
income during an extreme event) (Bélanger et al., 2019).
However, individuals and social groups do not have the same ability to adapt to climate change (Bélanger 
et al., 2019) and some populations are at greater risk of the direct, indirect or social effects. This risk is a 
concept built around three variables: the occurrence of a natural hazard, the actual exposure of populations, 
and pre-existing vulnerability, which includes sensitivity to impacts and the adaptive capacity of individuals, 
populations and communities. To address public health challenges related to climate change, research and 
response must focus on these three parameters: understanding and delineating future hazards, identifying 
at-risk groups, and understanding their adaptive capacity. The following sections provide information on the 
impact of these past and projected changes on the health and safety. Public health officials can use this 
information to develop or update needed policies and programs with partners to protect Canadians. 
3.4 Average Warming and Extreme Heat Events
3.4.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Heat – Trends and Projections
3.4.1.1 Annual Average Temperatures
The consequences of climate change are essentially the result of an increase in global average temperatures. 
Canada is no exception, having experienced an increase in average temperatures of 1.7°C between 1948 and 
2016 (Figure 3.1), about twice the average warming observed globally (Zhang et al., 2019). Canada’s Northern 
regions (Northern Canada) are particularly affected, with an average increase of 2.3°C – about three times 
the global rate of warming (Zhang et al., 2019). Average temperatures for Canada as a whole are projected 
to rise by 1.8°C, under a low emissions scenario, and by 6.3°C, under a high emissions scenario, for the end 
of century (2081–2100) compared to 1986–2005. As a result, average summer temperatures will rise across 
Canada, albeit with large variations depending on region and climate scenario (Jeong et al., 2016). Under a 
high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5), southern cities such as Fredericton, Quebec City, Calgary, and Victoria 
could see their average summer temperatures rise by 4°C to 5°C for the 2051–2080 period, compared to 
observed temperatures between 1976 and 2005 (Prairie Climate Centre, 2019). In all cases, Northern Canada 
will continue to warm faster than Southern Canada, particularly in winter (Figure 3.2). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 131 
Figure 3.2 Observed changes (°C) in seasonal mean temperatures from 1948 to 2016 for four seasons. Source: 
Zhang et al., 2019.
3.4.1.2 Extreme Heat Events
There is no universal definition for extreme heat events (also sometimes referred to as heatwaves), and 
there is no consensus on terminology to describe hot weather (Gachon et al., 2016). The average increase in 
temperature also increases the frequency and duration of extreme heat events. Hot days with a maximum 
temperature above 30°C are rarely observed in regions north of 60° north latitude (Zhang et al., 2019). In 
Southern Canada, the number of hot days above 30°C increased annually by about one to three days over 
the period 1948–2016 at some stations, and is expected to increase there by up to 50 days annually by the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 132 
late century under RCP8.5 (Zhang et al., 2019). Under this scenario, the annual median number of hot days is 
expected to vary from about 3 to 38 across Canada for the 2081–2100 period, with the Prairies and Ontario 
regions being more affected. As extreme hot temperatures will become more frequent and intense, it will 
increase the severity of extreme heat events (Zhang et al., 2019). The number of extreme heat events of at 
least three days above 32°C1 is likely to increase in regions of Southern Canada, where most Canadians live 
(Jeong et al., 2016). Some regions, such as the St. Lawrence Lowlands (in Quebec) and the Prairies, may 
experience two to three additional events per summer for the 2049–2070 period, compared to the 1970–1999 
period (Jeong et al., 2016). The intensity and duration of these extreme heat events are also projected to 
increase (Sillmann et al., 2013).
3.4.2 Effects of Heat on Health
Figure 3.3 Conceptual framework showing the direct and indirect effects of extreme heat and increased 
temperatures on population health in Canada. The orange boxes indicate that the health risk is increased, the 
green boxes indicate that the risk is reduced, while the grey boxes indicate that the direction of health effects 
based on current knowledge cannot be determined. Solid and dashed lines distinguish among clusters of 
impacts. Source: Credit – David Demers-Bouffard, INSPQ.
1	
Environment and Climate Change Canada’s definition of a heatwave. <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/sky-watchers/glossary.html>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 133 
In Canada, the natural hazards with the best-documented health consequences are extreme heat events. 
Around the world, extreme heat is associated with increased all-cause mortality (Gasparrini et al., 2015; Xu 
et al., 2016) and an increased risk of hospitalization for cardiovascular and pulmonary disease (Basu et al., 
2012; Turner et al., 2012b; Lavigne et al., 2014; Moghadamnia et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018). The following 
subsections describe the observed or projected health impacts of extreme heat (Figure 3.3).
3.4.2.1 All-Cause Mortality During Extreme Heat Events
Between 1986 and 2010, the average percentage of all-cause mortality attributed to extreme heat events in 
Canada was 0.53% (varying between 0.18% and 0.72% depending on the region) (Gasparrini et al., 2015). In 
26 Canadian cities for which risk has been assessed, an extreme heat event appears to increase the risk of 
mortality by an average ranging from 2% to 13% (Guo et al., 2018). Another meta-analysis also found that the 
risk of mortality related to extreme heat events increases between 3% and 16%, depending on the definition of 
extreme heat event or heatwave used (Xu et al., 2016).
In British Columbia, 815 deaths could be attributed to extreme heat between 1986 and 2010. These deaths 
represent a 4% to 19% increase in the mortality rate the day after the event and a 2% to 19% increase within a 
week of the event (Henderson et al., 2013), depending on the city. An extreme heat event of nearly five days in 
Quebec in 2010 increased daily mortality by 33% in Greater Montréal and the rate of emergency department 
visits by 4% compared to similar periods (Bustinza et al., 2013). A very similar event at the end of the same 
summer had no measurable impact, which seems to indicate a physical and behavioural acclimatization to 
heat. Such impacts were also not detected during subsequent extreme heat events in Quebec from 2011 to 
2015, except in the Montréal region (Lebel et al., 2017). It is essential to take into account night temperatures 
and the local environment to understand the impacts of heat on health. In British Columbia, a 5% increase in 
mortality was associated with forecast daytime temperatures of 29°C to 35°C and overnight temperatures of 
14°C to 18°C, depending on the region (McLean et al., 2018). Humidity may have a significant effect on the 
relationship between heat and mortality, but the evidence is inconsistent in the literature (Barnett et al., 2010; 
Barreca, 2012; Xu et al., 2012; Parsons, 2014; Ho et al., 2016; Zeng et al., 2017).
3.4.2.2 Characterization of the Relationship Between Mortality and Heat
In general, mortality associated with an extreme heat event increases as intensity and duration increases, with 
intensity having a greater effect (Xu et al., 2016). For example, an extreme heat event in Quebec in the summer 
of 2018 caused 86 deaths, while 291 excess deaths were recorded during the 2010 extreme heat event (Lebel 
et al., 2019). Although the two events were similar in scope, duration, and timing, the 2010 extreme heat event 
was more intense. Worldwide, heat-related mortality tends to decrease with warming global temperatures 
independently of the level of air conditioning use, indicating that people can become less susceptible to heat 
as a result of physical acclimatization, behavioural changes, and the implementation of structural adaptation 
measures (Arbuthnott et al., 2016) (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 134 
3.4.2.3 Mortality Related to Climate Projections
As noted above, as climate warming continues, in addition to increases in average annual and seasonal 
temperatures, the intensity and frequency of extreme heat events will increase, as well as their impact on 
mortality in the absence of further adaptations. Compared to 1971–2020, mean excess mortality2 in 2031–
2080 related to extreme heat events across Canada is expected to increase from 155% to 390%, depending 
on the GHG emission scenario (RCP2.6 for the lowest estimate and RCP8.5 for the highest). With high 
population growth in the future, these percentages range from 188% to 455% (Guo et al., 2018).
3.4.2.4 All-Cause and Cardiovascular Disease Hospitalizations
In Ontario, the hottest days (99th percentile) between 1986 and 2013 showed a 6% increase in 
hospitalizations for cardiovascular disease compared to optimal temperatures, which showed the 
lowest mortality rate (Bai et al., 2017). For this period, an estimated 1.2% of overall hospitalizations for 
cardiovascular disease can be attributed to heat, with the majority of these admissions being related to 
moderate rather than extreme heat. In Toronto specifically, the number of heat-related ambulance calls was 
12.3% higher during extreme heat events in 2005, 2006, and 2010 than during the week before and after 
(Graham et al., 2016). Increases in potentially heat-related hospitalizations and emergency department 
visits were also observed during regional heatwaves in some Quebec regions between 2010 and 2015 
(Lebel et al., 2017). The 2018 extreme heat event in Quebec increased the number of ambulance trips in all 
affected regions by 11% to 23%, with some also seeing an increase in emergency department visits and 
hospitalizations (Lebel et al., 2019). Physiological acclimatization to heat appears to play a role: between 
1989 and 2006, Quebec hospitalizations for ischemic heart disease were higher among seniors in early 
summer and decreased as the season progressed (Bayentin et al., 2010).
3.4.2.5 Cardiovascular and Other Diseases
As described above, extreme heat events increase the risk of cardiovascular-related hospitalizations and 
excess deaths. In Ontario, for example, each 5°C increase in temperature during the summer from 1996 
to 2010 was associated with a 2.5% increase in deaths, especially those related to cardiovascular disease 
(Chen et al., 2016). On the other hand, the duration of an extreme heat event also seems to play a role in the 
impact on cardiovascular disease. The association between cardiovascular disease and point days (one day) 
of extreme heat is more ambiguous than that associated with extreme heat events (Phung et al., 2016). In 
addition, various cardiovascular diseases do not appear to be similarly affected by heat (Phung et al., 2016). 
The effects of individual extreme-heat point days (one or two days) on cardiovascular mortality can generally 
persist to a week after the event, but not all studies agree (Huang et al., 2011; Martin et al., 2012; Ye et al., 
2012; Huynen & Martens, 2015). In addition to these effects, extreme heat aggravates diabetes- and kidney-
related complications (Hajat et al., 2017; Lim et al., 2018) as well as increases the risk of unintentional injury 
(accidents) (Kampe et al., 2016), renal colic (Ordon et al., 2016), retinal detachment (Auger et al., 2017f), 
2	
Excess mortality is defined in this study as all-cause mortality due to non-optimal temperatures, with optimal 
temperature considered the temperature at which the minimum mortality is observed.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 135 
and cocaine overdose (Auger et al., 2017a). In an Ontario study, however, heat did not appear to affect 
hospitalizations for high blood pressure or heart arrhythmia (Bai et al., 2016). 
3.4.2.6 Perinatal Effects
Several perinatal complications are also associated with heat, such as premature birth and early delivery 
during exposure in the third trimester (Auger et al., 2014), miscarriage (Auger et al., 2017d), and congenital 
complications, such as heart or neural tube defects, from exposure in the first trimester (Auger et al., 2017b; 
Auger et al., 2017c).
3.4.2.7 Indirect Impacts from Lower Water and Air Quality
Heat also has indirect impacts on water and air quality (see Chapter 5: Air Quality and Chapter 7: Water 
Quality, Quantity, and Security). Among these impacts, it increases the risk of water-borne diseases in the 
population by promoting the proliferation of bacteria and cyanobacteria in freshwater sources (Funari et al., 
2012; Sterk et al., 2013; Herrador et al., 2015; Chapra et al., 2017; Mayer-Jouanjean & Bleau, 2018). Increased 
temperatures also increase recreational water activities (e.g., swimming, kayaking, sailing, surfing), increasing 
the risk of skin (e.g., dermatitis) or gastrointestinal symptoms (Lévesque et al., 2014; Boyer et al., 2017; 
Askew & Bowker, 2018). A full review of health impacts related to the degradation of water quality or quantity 
in Canada is provided in Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security.
In terms of air quality, heat promotes the formation of air pollutants such as ozone, which are known to 
increase lung and cardiovascular disease morbidity and mortality (World Health Organization, 2013a; Beelen 
et al., 2014). A comprehensive review of health impacts related to the degradation of air quality due to climate 
change in Canada is available in Chapter 5: Air Quality.
3.4.2.8 Psychosocial Health
Hot temperatures also affect psychological and social health. Among their effects, high temperatures 
increase stress and people’s propensity for aggressive behaviour, as reflected in increased crime and 
violent crime rates observed in certain U.S. cities, particularly in deprived neighbourhoods; in 20% of 
these neighbourhoods, half of the increase in crime during specific periods has been attributed to high 
temperatures (Mares, 2013; Ranson, 2014). Extreme heat can also lead to isolation at home by discouraging 
outdoor activities such as sports and recreation (Zivin & Neidell, 2014), which can in turn reduce social 
interaction and physical activity. Isolation can also endanger the health of individuals who depend on their 
social network to cope with hazards, particularly seniors, minority groups, or low-income individuals (Bolitho 
& Miller, 2017; Williams et al., 2017).
Extreme heat also contributes to the development of psychological and behavioural problems. In Toronto, 
for example, the highest temperatures (99th percentile) between 2002 and 2010 corresponded with a 29% 
increase in emergency department visits for schizophrenia, mood disorders, and neurotic disorders over a 
seven-day period compared to visits during average temperatures (Wang et al., 2014). A similar trend was 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 136 
seen in the southern region of Quebec (Vida et al., 2012), where in addition to heat, high humidity was associated 
with emergency department visits for mental health problems among those under 65 years of age.
In about 15 studies, high ambient temperatures were positively correlated with an increase in the suicide rate, 
with relative risk increasing by 1% to 37% on average for every 1°C increase in annual average temperature 
(Thompson et al., 2018). A meta-analysis covering 341 cities in 12 countries estimated that the highest risk of 
suicide was observed at an average temperature of 27°C (93rd percentile), but that each country was unique 
(Kim et al., 2019). In Canada, this maximum risk was observed at an average temperature 24°C, the 99th 
annual temperature percentile (Kim et al., 2019). The authors note that these analyses have limitations, and 
that further studies are needed. The exact cause of the increase in suicides on hot days is unknown.
The increased demand for social services and care in health care facilities due to the effects of heat 
increases the burden on these institutions, which may be challenged to meet these demands (Curtis et al., 
2017). Increases in the health care demand related to heat also result in additional stress on social service 
and health care workers by increasing their workload (more clients); this stress can also increase the risk 
of reduced quality of care (Curtis et al., 2017). See also Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being for an 
assessment of the impacts of climate change on mental health in Canada.
3.4.2.9 Beneficial Impacts
The increase in temperatures, apart from extreme events, may have some positive impacts. Extending the 
summer season and increasing the number of days conducive to outdoor activity could encourage people 
to be more physically active or participate in more social events (Baert et al., 2011; Witham et al., 2014; 
Remmers et al., 2017). However, this effect will be partially or fully offset by the deterrent effect of extreme 
heat; time spent on outdoor activities plateaus and decreases when temperatures exceed 30°C (Zivin & 
Neidell, 2014).
3.4.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Heat
3.4.3.1 Seniors
Seniors (generally 65 years and over) are at higher risk of the health effects of heat compared to younger 
adults because of their diminished ability to adapt physically, the fact that they adopt fewer preventive 
behaviours, and their higher level of social isolation and dependence (Bélanger et al., 2015; Laverdière et 
al., 2015; Laverdière et al., 2016; Valois et al., 2017b). Pre-existing chronic diseases such as cardiovascular 
disease, high blood pressure, and diabetes, which are more prevalent in seniors, are also risk factors 
for heat-related impacts on seniors (Laverdière et al., 2015; Laverdière et al., 2016; Hajat et al., 2017). In 
addition, people aged 70 and older do not always see themselves as vulnerable, which may make them less 
predisposed to engage in preventive behaviours (Boeckmann & Rohn, 2014; Valois, et al., 2020b). As the 
population ages in Canada, it is expected that the extent of heat-related health impacts will increase, in the 
absence of further adaptations.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 137 
Risk factors, such as low socio-economic status, pre-existing conditions, use of medications, living in an 
urban heat island, social isolation, and loss of autonomy, can increase impacts from extreme heat. For 
example, seniors in southern Quebec (south of 49 degrees north latitude) with six or more of the above risk 
factors are eight times more likely to be admitted to emergency and seven times more likely to die or be 
hospitalized during extreme heat compared to those with no risk factors or only one (Laverdière et al., 2016).
The health risks for seniors also seem to be modulated by increasing temperatures or temperature variations 
between night and day. From 2006 to 2010, Quebec seniors were admitted to emergency departments and 
hospitalized 1.7 and 2.7 times more often on hot days, respectively, compared to normal summer days 
(Laverdière et al., 2016). According to meta-analyses, every one-degree increase in temperature increases 
all-cause mortality rates by 2% to 5%, cardiovascular illness rates by 3.4%, respiratory illness rates by 3.6%, 
and stroke rates by 1.4% on average among seniors, in addition to increasing the risk of diabetic, genito-
urinary and infectious complications (Yu et al., 2012; Bunker et al., 2016). Variations in daytime temperatures 
also affect senior mortality, in part because of their decreased ability to adapt physically. A study examining 
impacts of heat on health in Montréal between 1984 and 2007 showed that a temperature change of 6°C 
to 11°C over 30 days increased daily mortality by 5% among seniors, and this increase reached 11% for a 
change of 11°C to 17.5°C (Vutcovici et al., 2014).
Box 3.1 Heat and COVID-19
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has compounded the risk of extreme heat impacts for some 
population groups. Canada’s hot days began very early in spring 2020 and lasted until September, and 
Canada’s number of extreme heat events broke new records that year. Some people who are at increased 
risk to heat are also among those most at risk of hospitalization and death due to COVID-19: seniors and 
people with one or more chronic health condition, such as cardiovascular, pulmonary or kidney disease, 
high blood pressure, or obesity (Public Health Agency of Canada, 2020a). In addition, heat stroke symptoms 
can be confused with COVID-19 symptoms, such as muscle pain, headache, unusual fatigue or exhaustion, 
generalized discomfort, difficulty breathing, vomiting or nausea, and fever or an increase in body temperature 
(Health Canada, 2020a). These issues can lead to poor management of problems related to extreme heat and 
COVID-19.
At the time of writing, epidemiological analyses of the health impacts of extreme heat events in Canada in the 
context of COVID-19 had not been conducted. Yet, long-term care homes for seniors, or those who require 
continuous care, have been outbreak sites in Canada (Public Health Agency of Canada, 2020b). These centres 
often have little or no access to centralized air conditioning during extreme heat events, putting additional 
pressure on an already fragile population. In addition, COVID-19 has led to a reduction in the use of fans to 
cool off in these establishments during heatwaves, in order to minimize the risk of airborne transmission of 
the disease when more than one person is in the same room (INSPQ, 2020a).
The widespread closure of several sectors of the economy, coupled with recommendations for isolation and 
physical distancing to control the pandemic, can also increase feelings of exclusion and stress among people 
already at increased risk to extreme heat due to physical or mental health issues (Findlay et al., 2020).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 138 
The majority of available studies do not compare seniors with other age groups; as a result, it is difficult 
to state with certainty that seniors are more affected. According to a meta-analysis comparing seniors to 
younger groups (15 to 64 years), the risk of heat-related death is only 2% higher for seniors (Benmarhnia et 
al., 2015). Other research indicates that people under 65 years of age are sometimes the most affected, as 
they spend more time outdoors (Alberini et al., 2011; Song et al., 2017). As a result, although older adults’ 
sensitivity to heat tends to increase with age, exposure may decrease. In Vancouver, for example, persons 
aged 65 to 74 had a higher risk of death than those aged 85 and over during the hottest week of 2009; the 
risk was highest for persons not living in institutions (senior residences, hospitals, clinics, etc.) (Kosatsky 
et al., 2012). Other vulnerability co-factors (e.g., chronic diseases) sometimes associated with seniors are 
discussed in the following sections.
3.4.3.2 Children
Children are at an increased risk of extreme heat impacts due to their limited ability to acclimatize physically 
and to respond appropriately to stress. For example, the rate of temperature-related physical trauma visits 
and fractures is higher in children than in adults (Ali & Willett, 2015). Also, the incidence of kidney problems, 
fever, electrolyte imbalance, and respiratory diseases (e.g., asthma) in children increases significantly during 
extreme heat events (Xu et al., 2014b).
In regard to mortality, a systematic review of extreme heat events found that the existing literature is 
inconclusive about the relationships between child mortality and extreme heat events (Xu et al., 2014b). 
Although infant mortality associated with extreme heat events is low overall, it increases as age decreases, 
with children under the age of one being the most vulnerable, compared to children aged up to four years 
and aged five to 14 years (Xu et al., 2012). In Quebec, temperatures above 29°C were associated with almost 
three times the risk of sudden infant death (Auger et al., 2015). Finally, children living in urban areas are at 
increased risk of extreme heat event impacts, owing to increased exposure in urban heat islands and higher 
concentrations of air pollutants in cities (Vanos, 2015).
3.4.3.3 Sex and Gender
Men appear to be more at risk from the impacts of heat, but the causes are not well characterized. Quebec 
men aged 45 to 64 had a higher risk of hospitalization due to ischemic heart disease during extreme heat 
events from 1989 to 2006 (Bayentin et al., 2010). In addition, men between the ages of 40 and 69 also appear 
to be at greater risk of developing renal colic in extreme heat (Ordon et al., 2016). The current proposed 
hypothesis is that men are more likely to be employed in occupations with higher risks of exposure. In heat, 
there is an increased risk of placental abruption in full-term pregnancies, which can be fatal to both the 
mother and fetus (He et al., 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 139 
3.4.3.4 Chronic Diseases
People with certain pre-existing diseases or reduced mobility are another population group vulnerable 
to the effects of heat. For example, in Fredericton, Winnipeg, Windsor, Regina, and Sarnia, people with 
cardiovascular or lung disease reported feeling ill more often during the previous extreme heat event (Alberini 
et al., 2011). In a study in Toronto, diabetes increased the likelihood of going to the emergency department 
or being admitted for a cardiovascular problem during heat events: other factors (high blood pressure, kidney 
problems, cancers, etc.) were also correlated, but were not significant (Lavigne et al., 2014). Respiratory 
diseases, and pre-existing cancer, have also been identified as comorbidity factors associated with going to 
or being admitted to emergency for a cardiovascular problem during heat events (Lavigne et al., 2014). Age 
can also influence the relationship between heat and comorbidity. In Quebec, people aged 65 and under in 
the most deprived neighbourhoods with at least two chronic diseases reported 4.2 times more heat-related 
health problems (Bélanger et al., 2014). Reporting of health problems was 5.6 times higher for people aged 
65 and over. Between 2006 and 2010, seniors in Southern Quebec with significant disabilities (who require 
assistance to carry out daily activities) were 2.5 times more likely to be admitted to emergency and 2.7 times 
more likely to be physically affected by heat (Laverdière et al., 2016).
3.4.3.5 Medication Use or Substance Misuse
Medication can increase an individual’s risk of extreme heat impacts by accelerating dehydration and body 
heat production. Certain medications affecting the central nervous system (anticonvulsants, antidepressants, 
anticholinergics, and psychotropic drugs in general), diuretics, immunosuppressants, interferons, and some 
anticoagulants may increase the risk of hyperthermia (Health Canada, 2011; Bélanger et al., 2015).
Excessive drug or alcohol use can also make individuals more sensitive to the effects of heat. In England, 
people with substance misuse problems were at higher risk of dying at temperatures above the 93rd 
percentile of annual temperature distribution (Page et al., 2012). Similarly, increased risk of mortality was 
associated with cocaine use during extreme heat events in Montréal (Auger et al., 2017a).
3.4.3.6 Occupational Exposure
Outdoor workers in construction, agriculture, forestry, and similar work environments have higher exposure to 
heat and its health risks, although some indoor workplaces, such as industrial settings and restaurants, may 
also be conducive to hyperthermia. The risk of injury and illness or disease at work increases during extreme 
heat, while worker productivity decreases (Adam-Poupart et al., 2014; Acharya et al., 2018; Levi et al., 2018; 
Adam-Poupart et al., 2021). In Ontario, from 2004 to 2010, every degree above 22°C increased the median 
number of hospitalizations for heat-related occupational illnesses and diseases by 75% (Fortune et al., 2014). 
In the provinces of Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta from 2001 to 2016, each 1°C 
increase in the maximum daily summer temperature increased the number of daily heat-related illness claims 
(e.g., edema, syncope, exhaustion, sunstroke/heatstroke) from occupational health and safety compensation 
agencies by 28% to 51%, depending on the province and the meteorological heat indicator (Adam-Poupart 
et al., 2021). The claims for traumatic injuries (e.g., fractures, cuts, burns) also increase by 0.2% to 0.6% for 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 140 
each 1°C increase in summer temperature — where a 0.2% increase represents 64 additional traumatic injury 
claims by summer in Quebec, for example (Adam-Poupart et al., 2021). This risk of injuries is not influenced 
by the type of task (manual vs. non-manual tasks) (Adam-Poupart et al., 2015), but heat-related injuries are 
more frequent for men and younger workers (Adam-Poupart et al., 2021). Jobs requiring work outdoors, or in 
environments conducive to heat accumulation, place workers at higher risk of heat-related injuries (Adam-Poupart 
et al., 2015; Acharya et al., 2018; Varghese et al., 2018; Adam-Poupart et al., 2021).
3.4.3.7 Urban Heat Islands
Urban heat islands represent the observed temperature difference between urban and surrounding rural 
areas, as well as between areas of a given city — for example, between a park and an adjacent parking lot 
(intra-urban islands). These intra-urban heat islands are formed as a result of impervious surfaces and low 
albedo (solar reflectivity level) of urban spaces, combined with a low level of vegetation (Beaudoin & Gosselin, 
2016). Albedo in cities like Toronto and Montréal hover around 0.2 on a scale of 1, indicating that the 
materials and colours used, such as dark roofs and asphalt, absorb a lot of heat during the day and release it 
at night (Touchaei & Akbari, 2015; Graham et al., 2016). These characteristics, combined with heat produced 
by motor vehicles, industry, appliances and air conditioning, raise the ambient temperature.
This results in higher rates of heat-related mortality in urban areas than in rural areas (Tan et al., 2010; Gabriel 
& Endlicher, 2011; Wouters et al., 2017). Although heat exposure is higher in urban centres, heat sensitivity 
in rural and remote communities may be higher (Liang & Kosatsky, 2020). Health consequences of heat 
exposure are therefore closely associated with the intensity gradient of intra-urban heat islands. In Montréal, 
for example, the mortality rate for respiratory diseases from 1990 to 2003 was higher in high-intensity heat 
islands than in cooler locations (difference of 6°C to 8°C), with rates being 1.4 to 14 times higher, depending 
on the intensity of the island as well as on ground-level ozone concentrations (Smargiassi et al., 2009). 
In addition, home property value was negatively associated with mortality: a higher value was generally 
representative of higher housing quality and better insulation, greater ventilation and air conditioning and 
possibly better health and, therefore, lower vulnerability. Urban heat islands also exacerbate health inequities. 
Individuals with low socio-economic status tend to live in neighbourhoods with high-intensity heat islands 
where the prevalence of greenspace is low, increasing their risk of heat exposure (Bélanger et al., 2014; Ngom 
et al., 2016).
3.4.3.8 Indigenous Populations
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis are particularly sensitive to the impacts of climate change, including the 
indirect impacts of rising temperatures on the environment and the direct and indirect impacts of extreme 
heat (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). Indigenous Peoples have 
close ties to the land, sea, animals, and natural resources that are being disrupted by climate change, 
particularly in Northern regions where many communities are located.
Despite the lack of extreme heat in Northern Canada, Arctic and sub-Arctic Indigenous Peoples are being 
affected by warming temperatures. Reduced and weakened sea ice, permafrost, and ground snow cover, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 141 
for example, have a wide range of impacts such as increased risk of injury and an increase in the number 
of search-and-rescue operations, and impacts on transportation, hunting, the ability to access traditional/
country foods, and loss of Indigenous knowledge (Durkalec et al., 2014; Clark et al., 2016a; Clark et al., 2016b) 
(see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). Warmer temperatures could 
also increase the incidence of food-borne illnesses by promoting bacterial growth and toxin formation in 
food storage sites (Hedlund et al., 2014; Bruce et al., 2016) (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). Inuit 
populations, who use natural conservation methods and consume raw meats, are primarily at risk. These 
consequences could lead to a decrease in traditional food consumption among Inuit, Métis, and First Nations 
peoples. Traditional food is generally more nutritious and utilized more for spiritual traditions, compared to 
store-bought or processed foods. Inuit are already experiencing impacts of warming on traditional foods 
which is affecting food security in many communities. Nearly half of the First Nations populations in Canada 
experience severe or moderate food insecurity (First Nations Information Governance Centre, 2018). As a 
result of warming temperatures, First Nations peoples may reduce the quantity or quality of consumed food. 
3.4.3.9 Material and Social Deprivation
In addition to having more pre-existing illnesses, low-income individuals more often live in housing that is 
poorly insulated, poorly ventilated, and lacking air conditioning (Kosatsky et al., 2009; Bélanger et al., 2014; 
Bélanger et al., 2016). In Vancouver, the mortality rate in neighbourhoods with over 20% of residents living 
below the poverty line was 23% higher than other neighbourhoods during the 2009 extreme heat event 
(Kosatsky et al., 2012). However, a meta-analysis has indicated that the risk of heat-related death is not 
different between people living in areas considered deprived and those living in areas considered privileged 
(Benmarhnia et al., 2015). This finding was also observed in Quebec when comparing deprived to very 
deprived distribution areas and other distribution areas for the 2010 and 2011 extreme heat events (Lebel et 
al., 2015). While the impact of socio-economic status on deaths during hot periods is less established, the 
impact on medical or hospital visits is more obvious. In Quebec, people in the lowest income quintile were 
20% more likely to see a doctor during extreme heat events because they were more affected by the health 
consequences of such events (Bélanger et al., 2014). From 2006 to 2010, seniors in southern Quebec with a 
household income under $20,000 were almost three times more likely to go to the emergency department, be 
hospitalized, or die from heat when temperatures exceeded 30°C (Laverdière et al., 2016).
3.4.3.10 People Experiencing Homelessness
People experiencing homelessness are more affected by extreme heat, which exacerbates existing health 
problems or causes new ones (Ramin & Svoboda, 2009; Cusack et al., 2013; Pendrey et al., 2014). A large 
proportion of the people experiencing homelessness experience mental health and substance misuse 
issues, ranging from 23% to 67% by city (CICH, 2007). They also have a higher prevalence of chronic 
diseases. However, this population’s health conditions remain poorly documented in Canada (Mental Health 
Commission of Canada, 2014). Between 136,000 and 156,000 Canadians use emergency shelters each year 
(Advisory Committee on Homelessness, 2018). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 142 
3.4.3.11 Ethnicity and Race
The effects of heat on the health of racialized populations have not been studied in depth in Canada; relevant 
studies have mainly been conducted in the United States. For example, Black people were at a higher risk 
of being hospitalized during extreme heat events between 2001 and 2010 in the United States (Schmeltz et 
al., 2015). In most of 175 largest U.S. cities, racialized people have an average urban heat island exposure 
greater than non-Hispanic White people and people below the poverty line (in half of the cities), suggesting 
widespread inequalities in heat exposure in racialized people may not be well explained by differences in 
income alone (Hsu et al., 2021). However, the relationship between heat and mortality among racialized 
people is rather complex, according to current literature, which indicates decreased, increased, or no effects 
across different groups (Gronlund, 2014).
For Indigenous Peoples, heat may cause significant health problems because of a number of compounding 
factors. Existing health inequality and inequities related to determinants of health among First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis peoples increase their sensitivity to the health impacts of extreme heat. Indigenous populations 
generally have a higher prevalence of certain diseases, such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes (Chu 
et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2019), low income, and substandard housing, and all of these factors are associated 
with exacerbated effects of significant heat (Chief Public Health Officer of Canada, 2016). A disproportionate 
share of people experiencing homelessness in Canadian cities are Indigenous (Patrick, 2014) and, as 
highlighted above, homelessness is associated with higher risk of heat impacts on health. 
3.4.4 Heat Adaptation Measures
3.4.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
Air Conditioning
Air conditioning is often cited as a heat adaptation measure that should be prioritized. In buildings without 
air conditioning, indoor temperatures can reach 1.5 times the outside temperature (Lundgren Kownacki et 
al., 2019). In the United States, the risk of heat-related death is affected by temperature and the use of air 
conditioning (Nordio et al., 2015). The risk of heat stroke hospitalizations is also lower in counties with a 
higher prevalence of central air conditioning during an extreme heat event (Wang et al., 2016b). In the most 
deprived neighbourhoods of the largest Quebec cities, fewer people with indoor air conditioning reported 
experiencing adverse effects during extreme heat (Bélanger et al., 2015). Nevertheless, current literature in 
Canada and the United States also appears to indicate insignificant effects or no correlation between air 
conditioning and self-reported impacts of heat on health (Alberini et al., 2011; Bobb et al., 2014; Bélanger et 
al., 2015; Arbuthnott et al., 2016).
Widespread use of air conditioning can also increase outdoor temperature due to increased electricity 
demand and the release of hot air outside the home. Simulations in Paris and Houston showed that 
widespread air conditioning could lead to a 2°C increase in outdoor temperatures in dense urban 
environments (de Munck et al., 2013; Salamanca et al., 2014). For low-income individuals, prolonged use of 
air conditioning in the home can significantly increase their electricity bills, meaning they have to choose 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 143 
between paying electricity or other expenses like rent (Ng et al., 2015). Thus, access to or the use of air-
conditioned or cooling-off areas (public swimming pools, water play areas, parks) may be preferable for 
this type of population. Last, moderate use of air conditioning combined with other measures (structural 
modifications to roofs and windows, use of reflective materials, greening of the home or neighbourhood) 
may limit the negative effects of air conditioning (Mavrogianni et al., 2012; Fisk, 2015; Raji et al., 2015). The 
effect on GHG emissions, based on the electricity source used, must also be considered, given the effects on 
climate change and air pollution, which could significantly increase in Canada (Berardi & Jafarpur, 2020).
Fans
Some studies report that fans are ineffective in reducing heat health impacts when temperatures are too 
high or when humidity is high. In Canada, however, using fans may be beneficial for individuals who are well 
hydrated given that observed temperature levels are often lower during extreme heat events than elsewhere in the 
world (around 31°C to 33°C) (Gupta et al., 2012; Jay et al., 2015; Ravanelli et al., 2015; Gagnon et al., 2016).
Behaviours and Lifestyle
Several other preventive measures can be adopted by individuals to reduce risks related to extreme heat, 
such as decreasing the use of certain electrical appliances (computer, dryer, oven, etc.), taking additional 
showers or baths, drinking more water, going out to cool places, and decreasing physical activity (Valois et 
al., 2017b). In Quebec, a heat adaptation index was developed with 18 adaptation measures associated with 
various variables, such as income, age, sex, and perception, to monitor these behaviours over time (Valois et 
al., 2017b). Perceptions of risk, control and personal vulnerability also influence individuals’ predisposition 
to adopt heat-prevention measures (Valois et al., 2020b). Whether people adopt preventive behaviours could 
explain the complex relationship between the risk of cardiovascular disease and occasional short-term 
exposure to extreme heat (Phung et al., 2016).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 144 
Box 3.2 Adjusting heat adaptation measures in the COVID-19 context
Although measures to adapt to heat or reduce its health risks have been known and implemented for several 
years, the COVID-19 pandemic forced a revision of these measures. Several heat adaptation measures are 
incompatible with COVID-19’s close-contact mode of transmission. For example, public health authorities 
across Canada, along with their counterparts around the world, have revised their action plans and population 
heat-protection recommendations for extreme heat events (B.C. Centre for Disease Control, 2020; Bustinza, 
2020; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020; Public Health England, 2020). Examples of 
adjustments include:
•	
Recommendations to use cool, air-conditioned locations such as libraries, community centres, 
and shopping centres, may not be able to be applied, as these locations are often inaccessible 
or restricted. Instead, it is advisable to go to cool or air-conditioned places in your own home, 
to spend time in a shaded green space while respecting physical distancing, or to use cooling 
centres established by local authorities for high-risk populations, while respecting appropriate 
public health and ventilation recommendations.
•	
Swimming pools and splash pads should be used to cool off, in accordance with hygiene and 
physical distancing guidelines. Unsafe use of swimming areas (e.g., closed beach, river) may lead 
to increased risk of injury or drowning. In addition, children and parents staying at home while 
teleworking during the summer can also lead to increased risk of children drowning due to a lack 
of supervision.
•	
The ventilation and air conditioning of congregate settings and shelters (seniors’ homes, 
prisons, youth centres, child care centres etc.), day camps, schools, and health care facilities 
must be maintained in order to keep people cool during extreme heat events. However, 
ventilation or air conditioning needs to be adapted so as not to promote the spread of 
disease among individuals (residents, patients, workers, etc.). Canadian and provincial 
recommendations are available (Alberta Health Service, 2020; Health Canada, 2020a; INSPQ, 
2020a, INSPQ, 2020b; INSPQ, 2020c).
•	
Parks and green spaces can promote heat adaptation despite the COVID-19 pandemic. When 
physical distancing measures are followed, parks and green spaces are among the few safe 
places to engage in various physical and social activities. They improve several dimensions of 
physical and mental health, as well as offer cooling sites during an extreme heat event (INSPQ, 
2020d). Several Canadian municipalities have reopened parks and green spaces, as well as 
allowing people to walk freely in the streets, with measures in place to minimize the risk of 
infection (Freeman & Eykelbosh, 2020; INSPQ, 2020d).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 145 
3.4.4.2 Public Health Adaptation Measures
Heat Warning Systems and Action Plans
Following deadly extreme heat events in recent decades, several governments around the world have 
developed heat (or extreme heat event) health action plans, usually coupled with weather and health watch 
and warning systems. Heat action plans and warning systems should be based on pre-determined weather 
thresholds at which severe health risks increase, to ensure optimal implementation. Various guides are 
available in Canada on this topic, including a guide on determining warning thresholds for extreme heat 
events that was developed to help health authorities, municipalities, and all other stakeholders implement 
warning systems (Gachon et al., 2016); a guide on best practices for implementing a warning system and an 
extreme heat response plan (Health Canada, 2012); and a set of guidelines on medications, risk factors, and 
symptoms related to extreme heat stress to help health care professionals respond appropriately to extreme 
heat (Health Canada, 2011).
In Quebec, a semi-real-time weather and health monitoring and early warning system called SUPREME has 
been implemented since 2010. This may partially explain the significant decrease in mortality observed 
between the 2010 and 2018 extreme heat events, in addition to action plans implemented since then (Toutant 
et al., 2011; Canuel et al., 2019; Lebel et al., 2019).
Public health alerts issued through a variety of media and mechanisms (e.g., smartphones, radio, television, 
social media, community associations) activated when the outside temperature reaches a certain threshold 
and indicating preventive measures to be taken before and during extreme heat, are a way to quickly reach 
and inform people at higher risk. Research suggests that this type of system can decrease mortality and 
the number of people transported by ambulance to health centres for care (Toloo et al., 2013; Boeckmann 
& Rohn, 2014). However, the challenge for these warning systems is reaching the most vulnerable people, 
such as those who are isolated and experiencing homelessness, or those without electronic or telephone 
communication methods. In the Montérégie region of Quebec, this type of system was designed for seniors 
or those with certain pre-existing conditions. It increased people’s intention to go to cool locations during 
an extreme heat event, or to stay inside among participants, who adopted measures to keep cool at home 
(Mehiriz & Gosselin, 2017; Mehiriz et al., 2018). Women participating in a study on the system consulted a 
health care provider half as often as those in a control group.
Action plans should also include provisions to support the most socially isolated individuals. For example, 
in Rome, the proportional increase in all-cause mortality among people aged 75 and above was 50% lower 
in neighbourhoods where a social outreach program had been implemented to improve social support for 
isolated and sick individuals (Liotta et al., 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 146 
Box 3.3 Improving practices through the Montréal heat response 
action plan
In the Montréal region, health and municipal authorities have implemented an extreme heat response action 
plan that is triggered by a temperature that stays at or above 33°C (cumulative average) during the day 
and does not go below 20°C at night, for three consecutive days or a temperature at or above 25°C for two 
consecutive nights (City of Montréal, 2021). It includes measures targeting awareness campaigns at the 
highest-risk neighbourhoods; making cooling centres and areas available; extending opening hours of public 
pools; as well as checking on households door-to-door. Compared to extreme heat events before the plan was 
implemented, these measures have decreased the number of daily deaths fivefold, with the effect being most 
apparent among seniors (Benmarhnia et al., 2016). By targeting neighbourhoods with low socio-economic 
status, the plan has also reduced the gap in heat-related mortality between communities with high and low 
socio-economic status.
Occupational Health and Safety
The decrease in the number of claims during extreme heat events in Australia, Europe and the USA seems 
to indicate that adaptation measures that are mandatory at a certain threshold (e.g., longer rest periods, 
more worker turnover, and better monitoring of worker hydration or level of physical effort) are effective in 
decreasing the effects of heat on workers (Xiang et al., 2014; Varghese et al., 2018).
3.4.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
Greening Neighbourhoods
Greening is an adaptation measure that can reduce the urban heat island effect (Giguère, 2012; Health 
Canada, 2020b). During extreme heat events in Toronto, the number of heat-related ambulance calls was five 
times higher in neighbourhoods with a tree canopy less than 5% compared to other neighbourhoods (Graham 
et al., 2016). This difference is 18 times higher compared to neighbourhoods with a tree canopy of over 70%. 
According to a simulation, a 10% increase in vegetation in the City of Toronto could cool daytime summer 
temperatures by 0.5°C to 0.8°C (Wang et al., 2015).
The benefits of vegetation can lead to a reduced mortality rate for people who live near greening projects and 
parks in general. A cohort study conducted over 11 years in 30 Canadian cities, with adjustments made for 
confounding variables found that increasing vegetation by one quartile in an area less than 500 metres from 
a residence decreased all-cause mortality related to diabetes and cardiovascular or respiratory systems by 
8% to 12% (Crouse et al., 2017).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 147 
Box 3.4 Co-benefits of greening communities
In addition to reducing discomfort and health impacts from heat, greening measures offer many co-benefits, 
such as reducing stress, reducing concentrations of fine particle matter in the air, providing better water 
management (Tallis et al., 2011; Nowak et al., 2013; Beaudoin & Levasseur, 2017). Access to parks and green 
spaces is not always equal. For example, In Toronto, Ontario, low-income and racialized communities have 
less access to tree canopy cover and public green spaces, which can increase their exposure to extreme heat 
(Greene et al., 2018; Conway & Scott, 2020). Equitable access to green spaces must be considered when 
implementing greening strategies (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity).
Several dozen greening and soil permeability projects have been implemented across Quebec to combat 
urban heat islands in low socio-economic neighbourhoods. People affected by these measures reported an 
improvement in their quality of life through an increased sense of security, social cohesion, and autonomy for 
the communities involved (Beaudoin & Gosselin, 2016; Health Canada, 2020b). 
Material Reflectivity (Albedo)
Increasing cities’ ability to cool down in hot weather is optimized when greening urban environments is 
combined with installing coatings and using high-albedo3 materials (Health Canada, 2020b). In general, a 
0.1 increase in albedo (solar reflectivity) can reduce ambient temperatures by approximately 1°C during 
extreme heat (Santamouris, 2014). In a simulation, increasing ground albedo by 0.2 to 0.4, roof albedo by 0.3 
to 0.7, and increasing vegetation in the City of Toronto by 10% could decrease perceived summer daytime 
temperatures by 3.6°C to 4.6°C (Wang et al., 2015). In Montréal, increasing albedo from 0.2 to 0.65 would 
decrease annual temperatures by 0.2°C and reduce temperatures on hot days up to 4°C (Touchaei & Akbari, 
2015). This impact on ambient temperature has a direct effect on health. In three U.S. metropolitan areas 
(Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Phoenix), substantial greening (at least 50% of urban area) or a significant increase 
in albedo (above 0.45) could reduce projected increases in heat-related mortality by 40% to 99% by 2050 (Stone et 
al., 2014). In California, widespread installation of reflective roofs could reduce the increase in heat exposure from 
climate change by 51% to 100% by 2050, depending on the emission scenario (Vahmani et al., 2019).
Built Environment, Urbanization, and Community Infrastructure
Urban design can also influence the health effects of extreme heat (Health Canada, 2020b). In Vancouver, 
the risk of death in dense areas (≥1,000 people per square kilometre) is 43% higher than in less dense areas 
(Kosatsky et al., 2012). This effect is mainly explained by the low prevalence of residential air conditioning 
and the higher deprivation level of these neighbourhoods. In contrast, in Massachusetts, the heat-related 
mortality risk between 1990 and 2008 was not associated with urbanization measures (Hattis et al., 2012). 
Although population density is associated with the urban heat island phenomenon, urban sprawl increases 
the area with less reflective surfaces (e.g., roads, sidewalks, rooftops) and decreases in overall vegetated 
3	
Albedo is the ability to reflect light energy; it is measured on a unitless scale ranging from 0 (total energy absorption, 
such as black surfaces) to 1 (total reflection, such as a mirror).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 148 
areas. For example, U.S. cities with greater sprawl experienced a larger increase in extreme heat events 
between 1956 and 2005 (Stone et al., 2010). To reduce the potential for heat storage in communities and 
associated mortality, urban densification should be combined with measures involving greening as well as 
increasing shade cover and solar reflectivity (Stone et al., 2014).
The quality of housing can also affect risks to health from heat. Using reflective materials (e.g., white-roof 
membrane), improving the insulation and ventilation in housing (active or passive), particularly in dilapidated 
housing in deprived neighbourhoods, and adding solar protection to windows (shutters, curtains, etc.) can 
substantially reduce residents’ heat exposure In addition, these measures are cost-effective in the medium 
and long term in terms of energy consumption (Mavrogianni et al., 2012; Porritt et al., 2012; Bélanger et al., 
2014; Ngom et al., 2016).
3.5 Exposure to Ultraviolet Radiation
3.5.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Ultraviolet Light 
— Trends and Projections
The level and intensity of ultraviolet radiation that is reaching the surface of the earth in a particular location 
is influenced by numerous factors, such as the time of the day, the season, ozone layer thickness, type of 
cloud cover, snow reflection, altitude, and latitude. Therefore, projections of ultraviolet radiation in future 
climate scenarios come with several uncertainties. The Montréal Protocol ozone-depleting substances 
international agreement was effective in protecting the stratospheric ozone layer4 and preventing global-
scale increases in solar ultraviolet radiation (Neale et al., 2021). However, in “the Arctic, springtime episodes 
of stratospheric ozone depletion, identified first in the early 2010s, continue to occur. The last episode in the 
spring of 2020 led to the largest ozone loss measured to date and resulted in UV indices that were twice as 
high as typical at several Arctic locations,” such as in Northern Canada (Neale et al., 2021, p. 3). Outside the 
Arctic region, small changes in UV radiation trends over the last 20 years were mainly influenced by clouds, 
aerosols, and surface reflectivity (Neale et al., 2021).
The potential impacts of climate change on stratospheric ozone levels are complex and uncertain. With 
climate change, changes in stratospheric ozone and cloud cover could lead to a decrease in ambient 
ultraviolet (UV) radiation, particularly at Northern latitudes. Cloud cover is projected to increase north of 
50 degrees north latitude and consequently decrease UV radiation reaching the Earth’s surface (Bais et al., 
2015). Solar reflectance at ground level and concentrations of aerosols and nitrogen oxides also affect UV 
radiation reaching humans. In Northern Canada, warming temperatures will decrease solar reflectance at 
ground level and UV radiation by reducing snow and ice cover (Bais et al., 2015; Bais et al., 2018). 
4	
The stratosphere is the second layer of the atmosphere and contains the ozone layer, which is different from ground-
level or tropospheric ozone — a source of air pollution in the lower atmosphere.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 149 
South of 50 degrees north latitude, which is where the vast majority of Canadians live, cloud cover is expected 
to decrease, mainly resulting from an increase in GHG concentrations (Neale et al., 2021). In addition, at 
mid-latitudes (Southern Canada), increased GHG emissions are expected to stimulate ozone formation in 
the mid- and upper stratosphere (Bais et al., 2015), decreasing lower-atmosphere UV rays. The projected 
reduction in anthropogenic concentrations of certain air pollutants and aerosols could, by contrast, increase 
the intensity of UV rays, given that they are currently partially blocked by these pollutants. In addition, risky 
behaviours related to sun exposure, such as increased time spent outdoors and wearing clothing with little 
sun protection, tend to increase as temperatures rise (Zivin & Neidell, 2014; Pinault & Fioletov, 2017). The 
net effect of all these factors on the intensity and level of future UV exposure, and resulting health risks to 
Canadians, is therefore difficult to determine.
3.5.2 Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on Health
3.5.2.1 Skin Cancer
Overexposure to UV radiation is the leading cause of skin cancer. The World Health Organization has 
classified UV radiation as a Group 1 carcinogen — sufficient scientific evidence of cancer in humans 
(International Agency for Research on Cancer, 1992). The risk of developing malignant melanoma, the 
deadliest form of skin cancer, has been associated with exposure to ambient UV radiation in several countries 
including Canada (Watson et al., 2016; Pinault et al., 2017). Sunburns in children may increase the risk of 
melanoma later in life (Benedetti, 2019). UV exposure and the incidence of skin cancers are worsening as 
temperatures increase (Freedman et al., 2015; Kimeswenger et al., 2016; Kaffenberger et al., 2017). For 
example, a 2°C increase was estimated to increase the number of skin cancers by 10% annually (van der Leun 
et al., 2008; Kaffenberger et al., 2017). Although the incidence of melanoma in the last decade (2005–2015) 
has increased in many countries including Canada, a model indicates that if the Montréal Protocol would be 
fully implemented, about 430 million cases of keratinocyte cancer and 11 million cases of melanoma would 
be prevented just in the U.S., for people born between 1890 and 2100 (Neale et al., 2021).
3.5.2.2 Cataracts and Eye Tumours
UVA radiation can lead to premature aging of the eye, in turn contributing to the development of cataracts 
(Yam & Kwok, 2014; Delic et al., 2017; Bais et al., 2018; Ivanov et al., 2018). Repeated exposure can also lead 
to the development of skin cancer cells around the eye, precancerous sclera growth, conjunctival cancer, and 
intraocular melanoma (Yam & Kwok, 2014; Bais et al., 2018; Ivanov et al., 2018).
3.5.2.3 Immunosuppression
Excessive UV exposure can promote immunosuppression, both in the skin and throughout the body. A 
weakened immune system limits the body’s ability to defend itself against bacteria, viruses, and serious 
diseases such as cancer (Hart & Norval, 2018). That said, immunomodulation by solar UV radiation may also 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 150 
be beneficial to certain individuals: it can reduce the incidence of autoimmune disease, such as multiple 
sclerosis, type 1 diabetes, chronic inflammatory bowel disease (e.g., Crohn’s disease), arthritis, and allergies 
(Sloka et al., 2008; Gorman et al., 2010; Lucas, 2010; Holmes et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2015; Lucas et al., 2015; 
Bais et al., 2018; Simpson et al., 2018).
3.5.2.4 Vitamin D and Blood Pressure
Despite its harmful effects, UV exposure from the sun is the most significant source of vitamin D in humans. 
Considerable scientific literature has documented the benefits of vitamin D in reducing bone problems such 
as rickets, osteomalacia, and osteoporosis (Ross et al., 2011; Wintermeyer et al., 2016). In 2009, 10% of the 
Canadian population had vitamin D deficiency, and 32% had sub-optimal blood levels for bone health, with 
these percentages increasing significantly during the winter months. (Vieth et al., 2001; Rucker et al., 2002; 
Janz & Pearson, 2013). Vitamin D may also promote cardiovascular health, and heart disease is the leading 
cause of death in Canada. Among its effects, exposure to solar UV rays releases nitric oxide into the skin, 
reducing blood pressure (Juzeniene & Moan, 2012; Halliday & Byrne, 2014; Liu et al., 2014). Assessments 
have suggested that 30-minute exposure to sunlight reduces blood pressure by 5 to 7 mm Hg and could 
therefore decrease the risk of heart attack by 34% (Cabrera et al., 2016; Weller, 2017). Other suggested 
benefits of an adequate blood vitamin D concentration include reducing the incidence of type 2 diabetes, 
obesity, metabolic syndromes, and cancers, although the causal process remains to be determined (Mitchell, 
2011; Pludowski et al., 2013; Shore-Lorenti et al., 2014; Gorman et al., 2017; Bais et al., 2018).
3.5.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Ultraviolet Radiation
Some subpopulations tend to be more exposed to UV rays or are less likely to protect themselves from the 
sun, while others may be under-exposed. In Canada, sunburns occurred more frequently from 2005 to 2014 
among men, younger age groups, people who were not members of visible minority groups, people living in 
higher-income households, and employed individuals (Haider et al., 2007; Pinault & Fioletov, 2017). Outdoor 
workers often exceed recommended levels of UV exposure and are therefore at higher risk of developing skin 
cancer (Schmitt et al., 2011; Fartasch et al., 2012; Peters et al., 2012; Modenese et al., 2018).
Groups that may experience increased UV exposure are those with fair skin (e.g., Caucasian/White, with blond 
or red hair); conversely, individuals with dark skin who live in areas with low UV exposure are more likely 
to have a vitamin D deficiency (Jablonski & Chaplin, 2012; Correia et al., 2014). Travel to tropical climates, 
certain medications that make skin more sensitive, and the male sex were also factors for increased risk 
of UV exposure (Pinault & Fioletov, 2017; Pinault et al., 2017). The more fragile skin of young people was 
also a factor, especially when they play a lot outdoors without protection (The Ontario Sun Safety Working 
Group, 2010; Joshua, 2012). In addition, people who use certain medications or products that make skin 
sensitive to UV rays (such as antidepressants, antibiotics, diabetes medications, oral contraceptives, 
immunosuppressants, and some cosmetics) are more susceptible to photoallergic or phototoxic reactions 
(Monteiro et al., 2016).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 151 
3.5.4 Ultraviolet Adaptation Measures
3.5.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
Behaviours and Lifestyle
Applying sunscreen is known to be effective in protecting the skin from UV radiation, and wearing sunglasses 
is effective in protecting the eyes. The shade provided by a hat, long clothing, and infrastructure would be 
more effective than sunscreen in preventing sunburn and reducing UV exposure (Linos et al., 2012). Several 
factors can influence the adoption of protective behaviours to reduce exposure to the sun. One of the main 
barriers is a lack of general knowledge about the risks of solar UV exposure and the appropriate application 
of sunscreen (Weinstein et al., 2001; Dadlani & Orlow, 2008; Bränström et al., 2010). Other barriers include 
the thermal discomfort associated with wearing sun-protective (long and thick) clothing in hot temperatures, 
a positive attitude towards tanning for esthetic reasons, the belief that sun protection results in vitamin D 
deficiency, the cost of purchasing sun screen, and the perceived ineffectiveness or toxicity of sunscreen 
(Saraiya et al., 2004; Dadlani & Orlow, 2008; Youl et al., 2009; Bränström et al., 2010; Burnett & Wang, 2011). In 
practice, most people do not apply enough sunscreen, or apply it unevenly or only to certain parts of their exposed 
body.
3.5.4.2 Public Adaptation Measures
Awareness
Awareness campaigns have been somewhat effective in encouraging sun protection behaviours, especially 
when they are widespread and accompanied by more structural changes, such as building shady areas, 
reducing outdoor time at schools, or distributing sunscreen (Sandhu et al., 2016). This combination of 
large-scale interventions is associated with a median 11% increase in sunscreen use (Sandhu et al., 2016). 
A number of governmental and private organizations in Canada promote this type of intervention (Health 
Canada, 2018). For example, the Sun Safety at Work Canada project aims to support the implementation of sun 
protection programs in the workplace in collaboration with employers and decision makers (Kramer et al., 2015).
Environmental Monitoring
In terms of monitoring, Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) created the UV Index as a tool 
to inform Canadians of the harmful potential of UV radiation (Fioletov et al., 2010). In 2018, ECCC began 
developing a new UV Index forecasting system that would provide hourly and longer-term (four days or more) 
forecasts, as well as regional and continental maps of UV radiation levels (Tereszchuk et al., 2018). Melanoma 
monitoring is also conducted by several organizations in Canada, such as the Canadian Cancer Society and the 
Public Health Agency of Canada (Canadian Cancer Society, 2019; Government of Canada, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 152 
3.5.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
Several physical factors can also affect the level of solar UV exposure, such as artificial (e.g., buildings) or 
natural (e.g., large trees) structures that provide shady areas. Sun protection, in combination with thermal 
comfort, should be considered in urban planning. Green spaces, for example, can both reduce UV exposure 
through the shade they provide and increase it by encouraging people nearby to spend more time outdoors 
(Astell-Burt et al., 2014; Na et al., 2014; Porcherie et al., 2018). The City of Toronto is the first jurisdiction in 
Canada to include a shade policy in its planning (Kapelos & Patterson, 2014; Holman et al., 2018). Structures 
that provide shade can also result in reduced vitamin D production by limiting UV exposure. The vitamin D 
blood levels of individuals living in very dense areas with tall buildings may be up to four times lower than 
those of people living in an unshaded area (McKinley et al., 2011; Wai et al., 2015).
3.6 Average Cold and Extreme Cold Events
3.6.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Cold — Trends and Projections
Over the past 70 to 100 years, the average winter temperature has increased and there have been fewer 
extreme cold days, a trend that will continue in the future (Zhang et al., 2019). Warmer temperatures will 
reduce the length of the cold season across Canada and the intensity and frequency of extreme cold (Zhang 
et al., 2019). Compared to 1976–2000, most projected decreases in the annual number of frost days (<0°C) 
under a moderate climate warming scenario (RCP4.5) fall between 25 and 40 days for 2051–2080 and 
may reach 50 days along the Pacific coast (Prairie Climate Centre, 2019). Under a high-emission scenario 
(RCP8.5), these reductions are more than 45 days per year in most cases. The reductions tend to be smaller 
in the Prairies region and more intense in British Columbia and the Maritime provinces.
Continuing the comparison between the 2051–2080 time horizon and the 1976–2000 period, simulations 
project a decrease in the number of extreme cold days (< −30°C) with climate change. While regions such as 
Southern Ontario, the Atlantic provinces, and the Pacific coast no longer reach those temperature levels, the 
Northern Prairies, Northern Ontario, and Northern Quebec are expected to see the number of extreme cold days 
reduced by 15 to 35 days per year under a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) (Prairie Climate Centre, 2019). 
The number of cold days would be virtually reduced to zero in the St. Lawrence Valley and the Southern Prairies 
(Prairie Climate Centre, 2019). For example, extreme cold days are projected to drop from 52 to 14 in the 
Northwest (e.g., Yellowknife) and from 13 to two days in the Prairies (e.g., Saskatoon). Even if the reduction was 
less significant under less severe climate warming, few differences would be observed in Southern Canada.
Projections for the duration of cold spells also vary widely across Canada. Under a moderate emission 
scenario (RCP4.5), projections for the reduction in the total duration of cold spells range from a single day 
in Quebec to approximately five fewer days in Northern British Columbia and the Yukon for 2081–2100 
(Sillmann et al., 2013). The results under the high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) are similar; the difference 
between the two scenarios is less than one day for most Canadian regions.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 153 
3.6.2 Effects of Cold Weather on Health
Cold temperatures — whether they are extreme or not — are known to increase the risk of cardiovascular, 
respiratory, and stroke-related illness and mortality (Turner et al., 2012b; Gill et al., 2013; Phung et al., 2016; 
Ryti et al., 2016; Moghadamnia et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018) as well as general mortality (Gasparrini et al., 
2015; Liddell et al., 2016; Hajat, 2017; Song et al., 2017). The duration of individual cold exposure that lead to 
these health effects is not well known (Ryti et al., 2016); some effects can be seen up to two weeks following 
extreme cold, and some take even longer (Kinney et al., 2015; Liddell et al., 2016; Phung et al., 2016; Ryti et al., 
2016). Humidity can also influence the effects of cold on health, as both extremes (low and high humidity) appear 
to exacerbate cold-related mortality and morbidity (Mäkinen et al., 2009; Barreca, 2012; Davis et al., 2016).
3.6.2.1 Mortality
According to a study conducted of 15 Canadian cities, the mortality risk associated with the minimum 
temperature in Vancouver, Ottawa, Edmonton, and Montréal for the time period 1981 to 2000 was between 
19% and 72% higher than the optimal mortality temperature (Martin et al., 2012). In Ontario, each 5°C 
reduction in winter temperatures corresponded to an average 2.5% increase in fatalities from 1996 to 
2010 (Chen et al., 2016). However, another study, using a 30-day lag period, found no relationship between 
cold temperatures and mortality in Montréal (Goldberg et al., 2011). In Quebec, all-cause mortality is not 
associated with average temperatures below 18°C, when seasonality and influenza are taken into account 
(Doyon et al., 2008). The percentage of all-cause deaths due to cold was calculated for 21 Canadian cities and 
ranged by city from 1.96% to 5.53% between 1986 and 2012 (Gasparrini et al., 2015). 
3.6.2.2 Infections
Individuals also change their behaviour during extreme cold events, notably by increasing their time indoors. 
Cold temperatures thus coincide with the maximum incidence of influenza and respiratory infections such as 
pneumonia and bronchitis because they seem to promote the spread of such diseases (Mäkinen et al., 2009; 
World Health Organization, 2013b; Xu et al., 2014a; Bunker et al., 2016) (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases). 
Other infectious diseases can also be more easily transmitted in this way, although cold is also associated 
with a decrease in the spread of water-borne diseases, as observed in Arctic and sub-Arctic regions (Hedlund 
et al., 2014; Herrador et al., 2015; Bruce et al., 2016).
3.6.2.3 Hospitalizations and Emergency Department Visits
In a systematic review, the risk of hospitalization was found to increase on average by 2.8% for each 
degree the temperature decreased below optimal conditions (Phung et al., 2016). In Quebec, the coldest 
temperatures between 1989 and 2006 were associated with a maximum 12% increase in excess hospital 
visits for ischemic diseases in winter (Bayentin et al., 2010). There are also more emergency department 
visits for ischemic heart disease in Quebec in the early winter, and these decrease as the season progresses, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 154 
indicating a physical and social acclimatization effect (Bayentin et al., 2010). However, cold does not appear 
to have any particular effect on kidney problems and mental health disorders (Wang et al., 2014; Lim et 
al., 2018). Furthermore, no relationship was found between extreme cold (first percentile) and emergency 
department visits for psychological or behavioural problems in Toronto (Wang et al., 2014).
3.6.2.4 Overall Impact on Health
Climate change is expected to have a net effect of mitigating some of the adverse health effects of the 
cold in Canada. Projections under an average global warming scenario for 15 Canadian cities indicated 
that the annual rate of deaths due to cold could decrease from three to 19 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants 
by 2079, compared to current rates, depending on the city (Martin et al., 2012). In addition, warmer winter 
temperatures encourage individuals to spend more time participating in outdoor activities, which promotes 
physical activity and social connections. This increased time spent outdoors could also reduce the risk of 
spreading infectious diseases such as colds, influenza, and lung infections (Mäkinen et al., 2009; Bunker et al., 
2016). However, warmer winter temperatures may increase the number of fractures, given that temperatures 
near freezing and rainfall followed by a significant drop in temperature have been associated with a higher 
risk of falling, according to a study in Montréal (Morency et al., 2012). Since winter is often associated with 
increased smog and concentrations of fine particulate matter, this increase could also increase exposure to 
air pollutants (Jerrett et al., 2005).
3.6.3 Annual Cold and Heat Mortality Comparison
Both globally and in Canada, deaths from cold winter temperatures currently outnumber deaths from heat in 
summer (Martin et al., 2012; Gasparrini et al., 2015). From 1985 to 2012, 4.5% of all-cause deaths in Canada 
could be attributed to cold, compared to only 0.5% attributed to heat (Gasparrini et al., 2015). For Canada as a 
whole, this increases to 6.2% (for cold) and 0.7% (for heat) for the 2010—2019 period (Gasparrini et al., 2017), 
partly due to the aging of the population. This effect was also observed in Ontario, where, during summer, 
every 5°C increase was associated with four excess daily deaths; during the winter, every 5°C decrease was 
associated with seven additional daily deaths (Chen et al., 2016). The effect of cold or heat is often calculated 
based on the percentiles of average temperatures in a year (fifth percentile and under or first percentile for 
cold; 95th percentile and over or 99th percentile for heat) to estimate the effect of extreme temperatures. 
3.6.3.1 Geography
Unlike heat, which affects cities more because of the presence of urban heat islands, cold appears to have a 
greater impact in rural areas (Bayentin et al., 2010; Conlon et al., 2011). The effects of cold on health can be 
felt for weeks after an extreme cold event, while the same can be said for only a week after an extreme heat 
event (Turner et al., 2012b; Bunker et al., 2016; Ryti et al., 2016; Moghadamnia et al., 2017; Sun et al., 2018). 
For both heat and cold, daily, weekly, or monthly temperature changes coincide with increased mortality and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 155 
events, especially cardiac and respiratory events (Lim et al., 2012; Cheng et al., 2014; Vutcovici et al., 2014; 
Vanasse et al., 2016b).
3.6.3.2 Mortality Projections Up to 2100
A few studies have examined the projected net effect of climate change in Canada on mortality associated 
with ambient temperatures. These studies suggest that the increase in heat-related mortality is expected to 
outpace the reduction in cold-related mortality in most, if not all regions. In Quebec, a net increase of 3% in 
annual mortality was projected for 2080 compared to 1981–1999 (Doyon et al., 2006; Doyon et al., 2008). 
Conversely, a study of 15 Canadian cities estimated that only four would see a net increase in mortality: 
London, Hamilton, Regina, and Montréal (Martin et al., 2012). Thus, the net impacts of temperature on excess 
mortality appear to vary across geographic regions. Temperature-related excess mortality between 2090 and 
2099 in Canada is expected to increase compared to the 2010–2019 period under climate change scenarios 
RCP4.5, RCP6.0, and RCP8.5 (Gasparrini et al., 2017; Lavigne, 2020). Figure 3.4 shows the projected net 
mortality change across Canada for RCP8.5. Although in simulations some regions show improvements in 
mortality, the vast majority of health regions, both urban and rural, are expected to experience a net negative 
impact on health (Gasparrini et al., 2017; Lavigne, 2020). In these two studies, the percentage of all-cause 
deaths due to heat is lower than those due to cold, regardless of the scenario used.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 156 
Figure 3.4 Net mortality trends 2090–2099 compared to 2010–2019 under RCP 8.5, simulated across Canadian 
health administrative regions. The map presents the net result of the combined changes in cold and heat 
mortality, mainly related to cardiovascular (+2.34% for the country) and respiratory (+7.82% for the country) 
disease. Source: Lavigne, 2020.
3.6.4 Populations at Increased Risk to Cold
3.6.4.1 Age, Sex, and Gender
Overall, seniors are at a higher risk of experiencing the effects of the cold (Ryti et al., 2016). A meta-analysis 
calculated that cardiovascular and respiratory mortality in people aged 65 and older increases by 1.7% and 
2.9%, respectively, with a reduction of 1°C below optimal temperature (Bunker et al., 2016). On the other 
hand, some results in Canada indicate that people under 65 are more at risk than seniors. A study in Ontario 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 157 
found that each 5°C decrease in temperature between 1996 and 2010 increased the risk of dying from 
cardiovascular disease by 8% for those aged 65 and younger, and by 3% for those aged 65 years and older 
(Chen et al., 2016). Few studies have examined the effects of the cold on children’s health (Xu et al., 2012; 
Song et al., 2017).
A Quebec study corroborated these results and estimated that men under age 65, particularly those aged 
45 to 64, are at higher risk than those aged 65 and older and were more likely to have or die from ischemic 
heart disease during periods of intense cold between 1989 and 2006 (Bayentin et al., 2010). This could be 
explained by the fact that men generally spend more time outdoors for work or snow removal. This increases 
their exposure to adverse weather conditions and requires increased cardiovascular effort (Ali & Willett, 2015; 
Auger et al., 2017e). In Ontario, each 1°C reduction below 0°C between 2004 and 2010 led to a median 15% 
increase in the median number of visits to the emergency department related to outdoor work (frostbite or 
hypothermia) (Fortune et al., 2014).
Pregnancy and perinatal periods are critical windows of exposure to cold negative impacts to health. Cold 
appears to increase the likelihood of adverse effects at birth or during pregnancy, such as eclampsia, low 
birth weight, and premature birth (Strand et al., 2011; Poursafa et al., 2015).
3.6.4.2 Chronic Diseases
Some pre-existing diseases may also make people more susceptible to the effects of the cold. In Quebec, one 
study suggested that regions with higher smoking rates among those 45 to 64 years old have higher rates of 
hospitalization for ischemic heart disease in winter (Bayentin et al., 2010). This increase was also observed 
among smokers and alcohol drinkers in the United Kingdom (Sartini et al., 2016). In Toronto, people with pre-
existing kidney or cardiac conditions had a higher probability of being admitted to the emergency department 
for cardiovascular reasons in extreme cold compared to those without this type of problem (Lavigne et al., 
2014). This was observed in China among those with pre-existing respiratory diseases (Wang et al., 2016a). 
The impact of pre-existing morbidity on susceptibility to cold is also age-dependent.
3.6.4.3 Material and Social Deprivation
The impacts of cold on individuals with low socio-economic status has not been studied extensively. In 
Quebec, the effects of cold on emergency department visits for ischemic heart disease are most significant 
in areas of low socio-economic status (Bayentin et al., 2010). In Portugal, low socio-economic status has 
been associated with winter mortality, with the relative risk being 1.75 times higher among those with low 
socio-economic status compared to those with high socio-economic status (Almendra et al., 2017). Winter 
heating costs can lead low-income and even middle-class individuals to turn down the heat to meet other 
needs (rent, food, etc.), forcing them to live in a cold home (Liddell & Morris, 2010; Howden-Chapman et al., 
2012; Rezaei, 2017). A cold home increases the risk of exposure to outdoor cold and affects the perceived 
mental well-being and emotional resilience of residents (Marmot Review Team, 2011). Children appear to 
have a higher risk of developing respiratory problems, eating fewer calories, and spending more time indoors 
when the home is cold, which jeopardizes their physical and cognitive development (Liddell & Morris, 2010; 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 158 
Marmot Review Team, 2011). Energy insecurity in Canada averaged 8% in 2015, with peaks in the Maritimes 
and Saskatchewan (Canada Energy Regulator, 2017). This rate is three to four times higher than that in 
Scandinavian countries, but comparable to the European average (Thomson et al., 2017).
3.6.4.4 People Experiencing Homelessness
People experiencing homelessness are also very exposed to cold. A study in Paris, France, estimated that 
people experiencing homelessness accounted for 62% of those admitted to emergency departments for 
hypothermia or frostbite in winter from 2005 to 2009 (Rouquette et al., 2011). Many Indigenous peoples live in 
inadequate housing that require minor to major repairs (Statistics Canada, 2020), and may not be protective 
of cold temperatures. Indigenous peoples account for 10% to 90% of people experiencing homelessness in 18 
Canadian cities, from Halifax to Vancouver (Patrick, 2014). They are therefore disproportionately affected by 
the effects of cold.
3.6.5 Cold Adaptation Measures
3.6.5.1 Public Warning System
Warning systems should consider wind chill and the temperature felt when setting thresholds, since these 
variables are associated with the cardiovascular effects of cold on health (Lin et al., 2018). It is difficult, 
however, to make cold thresholds operational for preventive warning systems, given that wind and humidity 
forecasts have limited accuracy (Laaidi et al., 2013). Forecasting models do exist, nevertheless. In Quebec, 
depending on the climate region and based on the 1994–2015 period, health thresholds for a 2-day forecast 
based upon 25% excess mortality were set at between −15°C and −23°C during the day and −20°C and −29°C 
at night (Yan et al., 2020). In addition, thresholds based upon a 7% excess hospitalization, were identified as 
between −13°C and −23°C during the day, and between −17°C and −30°C at night. The thresholds used should 
also consider the climatic and anthropogenic characteristics of different regions. In Ontario, for example, the 
temperature threshold below which emergency department visits increase is lower in the North than in the 
South (VanStone et al., 2017). Health authorities should also consider that intense cold periods can affect the 
volume of emergency department visits for at least one week and should adjust their capabilities accordingly 
(Ryti et al., 2016; Lin et al., 2018; Sun et al., 2018). In Canada, schools can also close in extreme cold as part 
of efforts to keep students safe. 
3.6.5.2 Housing Insulation
The most common cold adaptation measures for individuals include wearing warm clothing and increasing 
time spent indoors, but people with cold homes will still be affected by staying indoors. Housing insulation 
reduces energy costs and makes it easier to maintain optimal indoor temperatures. Individuals who have 
benefited from a housing insulation program report better overall health and mental well-being after these 
renovations (Liddell & Morris, 2010; Howden-Chapman et al., 2012). For example, in New Zealand people aged 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 159 
65 and over who had previously been hospitalized for cardiovascular or respiratory reasons were at a lower risk of 
death as a result of improved insulation in their homes, compared to a control group (Preval et al., 2017).
3.6.5.3 Occupational Health and Safety
The Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety sets acceptable working temperature thresholds 
based on weather variables and the type of work (Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety, 2017). 
All provinces and territories have adopted these measures as legal limits or guidelines. In addition, several 
international standards for best practices in cold weather risk assessment and prevention are available (ISO 
11079, ISO 15743, etc.) (Holmer, 2009; Mäkinen et al., 2009).
3.7 Drought
3.7.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Drought — Trends and Projections
Past observations do not indicate an increasing trend in the occurrence and severity of droughts in Canada 
(Bonsal et al., 2019). Climate change may change this trend, however. Although annual rainfall amounts will 
continue to increase (mainly due to the increase in rain outside the summer months), summer precipitation 
is projected to decrease in Southern Canada in the late century, under the high emissions scenario (Zhang 
et al., 2019; see also section 3.9 Precipitation and Storms). As a result, precipitation quantities will be 
reduced during the season when plants and agriculture need it most, particularly in the Prairie provinces 
(Prairie Climate Centre, 2019). Figure 3.5 shows projected average annual precipitation for Canada for 
2021–2050. In addition, warming temperatures will increase water evaporation. As a result, the impact of 
climate change on drought in Canada will depend on the net effect of changes in the frequency, duration, 
and intensity of these conflicting drivers and is therefore difficult to estimate (Bonsal et al., 2019). Still, 
the Southern Prairies and interior regions of British Columbia are expected to experience an increase in 
droughts and water shortages in the summer through the end of this century (Bonsal et al., 2019). A similar 
projected has been made for Southern Quebec, where the maximum number of consecutive days without 
precipitation is expected to increase in summer and the annual number of unusual humidity events is 
expected to increase (Ouranos, 2015). Environments that rely on melting snow or ice for their water supply 
during dry seasons are also more likely to experience an increase in the number and intensity of droughts 
due to decreased overall snow and ice cover (including glacier loss), and change in streamflow seasonality 
due to increased winter flows, earlier snow melt, and reduced summer streamflow (Bonsal et al., 2019) (see 
Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 160 
Figure 3.5 Total annual precipitation, average projected for 2021–2050, under a high emissions scenario (RCP 8.5). 
Blue areas correspond to areas with significant amounts of precipitation, while brown areas correspond to areas 
with very low precipitation, increasing the risk of drought. Source: Prairie Climate Centre, 2019.
3.7.2 Effects of Drought on Health
3.7.2.1 Indirect Health Impacts from Lower Air Quality
Drought increases the amount of dust (PM2.5
5 and PM10) in the air, as particles are more mobile when not 
weighed down by moisture (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). In the United States, overall PM2.5 concentrations are 
projected to increase by 16% in 2100 compared to 2000, simply due to the increased number of droughts 
(Wang et al., 2017). Because fine particulate matter increases the risk of mortality from respiratory and 
cardiovascular diseases (Kim et al., 2015), the increased frequency and intensity of droughts could increase 
overall mortality. For example, it has been estimated that the increase in fine dust concentrations in the air 
5	
PM2.5 is particulate matter (PM) with a median diameter of 2.5 microns or less. PM2.5 can penetrate deeply into 
human lungs.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 161 
in the Southwestern United States could increase mortality from 24% to 130% from 2076–2095, compared 
to 1996–2015 (Achakulwisut et al., 2018). This trend was observed in the United States, where periods of 
worsening drought conditions increased the mortality rate by 1.55% between 2000 and 2013 compared to 
other periods (Berman et al., 2017). Droughts also indirectly affect air pollutant concentrations by increasing 
wildfires (see Chapter 5: Air Quality).
3.7.2.2 Infectious Diseases
Winds, combined with dry weather, can also facilitate the transport of pollens, mould, fungi, bacteria, and other 
organic matter (Stanke et al., 2013). Droughts can cause and exacerbate allergic and respiratory symptoms and 
promote the spread of infectious diseases. Related respiratory diseases include bronchitis, sinusitis, pneumonia, 
and asthma (Yusa et al., 2015; Doede & Davis, 2018). Some evidence points to an increase in cases of vector-
borne diseases such as West Nile virus and encephalitis, during droughts, although a decrease is observed for 
other diseases, such as Lyme disease (Yusa et al., 2015) (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases).
3.7.2.3 Water-Borne Diseases
Droughts can increase pathogen concentrations in water and facilitate the transport of organic matter to 
water bodies during subsequent rainfall (Funari et al., 2012; Cann et al., 2013). As a result, they may increase 
the risk of water-borne diseases through surface water, although few studies have evaluated the effects 
of droughts in this regard (Levy et al., 2016) (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). In some 
rural Quebec municipalities, the risk of gastrointestinal disease was at least twice as high within four weeks 
of very low precipitation events (Febriani et al., 2010). In Greater Vancouver, the number of Cryptosporidium 
and Giardia cases increased significantly up to six weeks after a heavy rainfall day following a severe drought 
(Chhetri et al., 2017).
3.7.2.4 Food Security
Droughts weaken crops, predisposing them to mycotoxin contamination (toxins produced by certain moulds) 
and making them vulnerable to insect attacks (van der Kamp, 2016; Medina et al., 2017). Declining agricultural 
yields can increase consumer prices and affect people experiencing food insecurity due to social disparities 
(see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security).
Areas such as the Southern Prairies and Prince Edward Island, where agriculture is a significant part of their 
economy and identity, are more vulnerable to droughts. For example, droughts in 1980 and 2001–2002 each 
cost Canadians an estimated $5.8 billion, excluding health costs (Wheaton et al., 2008; Diaz et al., 2016). 
Droughts reduce agricultural productivity, increase personal debt for farmers, devalue land, and reduce 
employment opportunities in rural areas (Guiney, 2012). By reducing the economic viability of rural areas, 
droughts can result in rural exodus and perpetuate a vicious cycle of vulnerability (Vins et al., 2015). This loss 
of viability in rural areas can ultimately affect the mental and social health of the people living there. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 162 
3.7.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Drought
3.7.3.1 Rural Living
Rural populations are at increased risk to impacts of droughts compared to urban populations because 
they are generally more dependent on agricultural activities for their economic well-being and because 
their proximity to natural environments means that the deterioration of the environment affects them more 
directly. The resulting financial, social, and emotional stress can negatively affect the psychosocial well-
being of rural populations. However, these effects have not been studied extensively in a Canadian context; 
most studies on the subject have been conducted in Australia and may not be representative of Canada (see 
Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being).
3.7.3.2 Psychosocial Health
Australian farmers who report that droughts have significantly reduced their agricultural productivity have 
more mental health problems and a lower level of psychological well-being compared to unaffected farmers 
(Edwards et al., 2015). Rural children and adolescents affected by Australian droughts report higher-than-
normal levels of emotional and relationship distress (Dean & Stain, 2010; Carnie et al., 2011).
Drought duration and intensity are determining factors of the impact a drought can have on the psychological 
distress of affected populations. In Australia, a drought of more than one year increased the incidence of 
psychological distress among rural residents by 6% (OBrien et al., 2014). In extreme cases, droughts may 
also increase the suicide rate in some population subgroups (Gunn et al., 2012; Hanigan et al., 2012). For 
example, rural men aged 10 to 49 had a higher risk of suicide during intense droughts (up to 15%) (Hanigan 
et al., 2012). On the other hand, available data are somewhat contradictory for women and seniors, who, in 
some cases, were at a lower risk of suffering from psychological problems or committing suicide (Hanigan et 
al., 2012; Powers et al., 2015; Crnek-Georgeson et al., 2017). For urban populations, mental health risks do not 
appear to be affected by droughts regardless of their duration or intensity (Gunn et al., 2012; Hanigan et al., 
2012; OBrien et al., 2014).
3.7.3.3 Food Insecurity and Malnutrition
Drought-related stress and financial insecurity can also have a negative impact on food quality, as 
demonstrated by studies in Australia (see also Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). Rural populations 
affected by a particularly long and intense drought between 2001 and 2008 ate more high-sugar and 
high-fat foods compared to those who were not affected or for whom the drought was shorter (Friel et 
al., 2014). Children are particularly at risk because the quality of their diet is critical to their physiological 
and cognitive development (Martinez Garcia & Sheehan, 2016). In addition to the agricultural sector, the 
economic viability of the forest industry and its workers may also be compromised by droughts, as they 
fuel wildfires (Bonsal et al., 2011).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 163 
3.7.3.4 Age, Sex, and Gender
People vulnerable to the effects of droughts are also vulnerable because of associated increases in pollutant 
concentrations in the air and water. In children, droughts can increase the risk of developing and exacerbating 
respiratory problems. In California, the number of emergency department visits for childhood asthma doubled 
in the years of severe drought from 2012 to 2016 compared to previous years, with children close to farmland 
at greater risk (Doede & Davis, 2018). Seniors, people with chronic diseases, fetuses during pregnancy, low-
income individuals, and outdoor workers are also more exposed or sensitive to air pollutants, which can be 
amplified during droughts (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). In addition, children, seniors, and immunocompromised 
people are at higher risk of contracting water-borne diseases (Funari et al., 2012; Cann et al., 2013).
3.7.4 Drought Adaptation Measures
3.7.4.1 Awareness of Psychosocial Impacts
Rural populations are more reluctant to seek help when they need it (Berry et al., 2011; Gunn et al., 2012). In 
particular, the stigma attached to mental health problems decreases the likelihood of people seeking help 
for these types of problems. Promoting mental health literacy, organizing social events in times of drought, 
establishing a telephone support line, as well as creating psychosocial programs, can promote social 
acceptance of mental health problems and of seeking help, if necessary (Hart et al., 2011).
3.7.4.2 Financial Support Programs and Monitoring and Warning Systems
Several rural Canadian communities have implemented drought adaptation measures. Provinces such as 
Saskatchewan and Alberta have implemented drought monitoring systems, emergency plans for extended 
dry conditions, and programs to improve environmental management infrastructure (irrigation, reservoir, etc.) 
(Hurlbert & Gupta, 2016). A drought monitoring and reporting tool is also available across Canada (Agriculture 
and Agri-Food Canada, 2021). Low-labour agriculture, crop diversification and rotation, as well as the use of 
species more resistant to dry conditions, are other options to reduce the vulnerability of crops and people 
working in agriculture. These measures were used during droughts in the Prairies in 2001 and 2003, where 
they reduced losses (Abbasi, 2014; Diaz et al., 2016). Nevertheless, infrastructures and strategies are often 
implemented on the basis of past climate data and are therefore not adapted to the increasing frequency 
and intensity of drought (Mcmartin et al., 2018). In California, it was estimated that a water management 
policy using past data would not meet water demands in future droughts. It would underestimate water 
supply needs by up to 58% compared to an adaptive policy that takes account of future climate conditions 
(Georgakakos et al., 2012). Vodden & Cunsolo (2021) identify adaptation options to better prepare for future 
drought impacts and reduce financial stress they cause. Such options include winter water storage to feed 
summer irrigation, agroclimatic atlas to support the development of drought-adapted crop varieties and 
improved infrastructure such as dams or intake pipes (Warren & Lulham, 2021). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 164 
3.7.4.3 Monitoring the Indirect Impacts of Drought on Air and Water Quality
Monitoring air quality and water-borne diseases that may be affected by droughts makes it easier to 
implement preventive or reactive responses to protect health. For example, Environment and Climate 
Change Canada’s Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) informs the public in semi-real-time about the immediate 
risks associated with air quality in some 60 communities across 10 Canadian provinces (Environment and 
Climate Change Canada, 2019a). The AQHI provides information about when certain thresholds are exceeded, 
including on adaptation measures for the general public and certain subgroups of vulnerable populations 
(Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2019a) (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). Air quality maps are also 
available in quasi-real-time across North America through automated analysis of satellite images (AirNow, 
2021). However, pollen monitoring remains seriously lacking in several Canadian regions compared to Europe 
or the United States, as shown in Figure 3.6 (Buters et al., 2018). Improving water treatment facilities could 
also reduce the incidence of water-borne diseases in the event of drought (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, 
Quantity, and Security). Other strategies to restrict water consumption voluntarily or in a mandatory way during 
droughts can also help to better allocate water resources and limit agricultural losses (Yusa et al., 2015).
Figure 3.6 Global map of pollen and fungal spore monitoring stations. Blue points (Hirst sampling station), red 
(automatic sampling station), orange (other manual sampling station). Source: Buters et al., 2018 and 
<https://oteros.shinyapps.io/pollen_map/>.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 165 
3.8 Wildfires
3.8.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Wildfire — Trends and Projections
Forest area affected by fires doubled in Canada between the 1970s and early 2000s, mainly due to climate 
change (Gillett et al., 2004). One study estimated that the fire risk for 2010–2020 in Western Canada would 
increase more than it would have been without the anthropogenic influence of climate change (Kirchmeier-
Young et al., 2017). Western Canada experienced significant increases in the number of major fires and the 
area burned between 1959 and 2015 (Hanes et al., 2019). Climate change has reportedly increased the area 
burned seven- to 11-fold during the extreme 2017 fire seasons in British Columbia (Kirchmeier-Young et al., 
2019). This trend is expected to continue and grow with climate change in all regions of Canada by the end of 
the century (Flannigan et al., 2005; Flannigan et al., 2009). The number of days of uncontrolled wildfire could 
double or even triple by 2100 in British Columbia and the boreal forest (Wotton et al., 2017).
There are three reasons for these increases. First, warmer temperatures mean a longer fire season. For 
example, the fire season has been extended in the interior of British Columbia, Alberta, and Northern Ontario 
(Albert-Green et al., 2013; Hanes et al., 2019). Second, warmer conditions increase lightning strikes, driven 
by increased thunderstorms in a warmer/more humid environment, which increase the risk of fire (Romps et 
al., 2014). Third, warmer temperatures, coupled with earlier spring snow and higher spring/summer extreme 
temperatures, dry out forest fuels unless there is a significant increase in precipitation (Flannigan et al., 
2016). Furthermore, burning forests releases GHGs that are responsible for climate change, creating a vicious 
cycle (Prairie Climate Centre, 2019). Most climate change scenarios in Canada do not project increases in 
precipitation that would offset the drying effect of warmer temperatures. Finally, climatologists do not always 
include behavioural factors in their projections, although humans are responsible for about 50% of bush or 
wildfires (Van Wagner, 2015). The greater proximity of the forests to where people live due to the expansion 
of urban areas and roads can also contribute to an increase in wildfires, particularly in the southern part of 
the country.
Air pollutant emissions from wildfires are a health concern. Four factors influence the amount of pollutant 
emissions from wildfires: the area burned, the amount of fuel burned, the completeness of combustion, and 
the amount of pollutant emissions in relation to the amount of fuel burned (emission factor). The amount of 
fuel burned and area burned are projected to increase in all Canadian forests by 2100 as a result of climate 
change (Wotton et al., 2017). Ultimately, wildfire pollutant emissions could double across Canada by the end 
of this century.
3.8.2 Effects of Wildfires on Health
The health risks associated with air pollution generated by wildfires are addressed more fully in Chapter 5: 
Air Quality, along with a discussion of populations at increased risk, and adaptation measures. A summary of 
pertinent information for this chapter is provided below. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 166 
3.8.2.1 Wildfire Smoke Characterization
The health burden associated with wildfires is related mainly to emissions of air pollutants such as fine 
particulate matter (PM2.5), carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile organic compounds (Black et al., 
2017). The composition of wildfire smoke is highly variable and depends on vegetation type and weather 
conditions. Wildfire smoke can spread over long distances, and consequently affect populations several 
thousand kilometres from the combustion site (Le et al., 2014; Lutsch et al., 2016). The adverse effects of 
wildfire smoke on human health are likely the result of similar mechanisms as for ambient fine particles, such 
as causing inflammation and oxidative stress as well as suppressing immune responses (Reid et al., 2016; 
Black et al., 2017; Cascio, 2018).
3.8.2.2 Smoke from Wildfires and Mortality
Studies have demonstrated a link between all-cause mortality and exposure to wildfire smoke (Youssouf 
et al., 2014; Reid et al., 2016; Cascio, 2018). Using its Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool, Health Canada 
estimated 54–240 premature deaths due to short-term exposure and 570–2500 premature deaths due to 
long-term exposure could be attributed annually to fine particulate matter emissions from wildfires between 
2013 and 2018, excluding 2016 (Matz et al., 2020). Although results vary depending on year and location and 
intensity of the fires, the majority of the premature deaths were associated with British Columbia and Alberta, 
followed by the Western provinces of Saskatchewan and Manitoba, and the Northwest Territories. For the 
continental United States, an estimated 1500 to 2000 and 8700 to 32,000 premature deaths per year were 
attributed to short-term and long-term exposure to PM2.5 from wildfires, respectively, from 2008 to 2012 (Fann 
et al., 2018).
Considering both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 climate scenarios compared to the early 21st century, premature 
mortality from wildfire-PM2.5 was estimated to double for the continental United States by late 21st century, 
even as total premature mortality attributable to all PM2.5 (anthropogenic emissions) is expected to decrease 
(Ford et al., 2018). 
3.8.2.3 Wildfire Smoke and Respiratory and Cardiovascular Disease
Exposure to wildfire smoke has increased the exacerbation of respiratory diseases, particularly asthma, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, bronchitis, and pneumonia (Henderson & Johnston, 2012; Cascio, 
2018). In comparison, the relationship between wildfire smoke exposure and cardiovascular disease remains 
inconclusive in the literature, as some studies demonstrate an association, while others report null findings 
(Reid et al., 2016; Cascio, 2018). 
Wildfire-related health studies in Canada have been conducted primarily in British Columbia. For the 2003 fire 
season, a study estimated that every 30 μg/m3 increase in PM10 concentrations increased the likelihood of 
consulting a physician for respiratory problems by 5%, for asthma specifically by 16%, and of being admitted 
to the hospital for respiratory issues by 15% (Henderson et al., 2011). No association with physician visits or 
hospital admissions for cardiovascular outcomes was observed in this study. Another study also determined 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 167 
that most days with air concentrations of PM2.5 over 25 μg/m3 during the 2014 fire season were associated 
with greater than anticipated increases in doctor visits for asthma and in salbutamol (asthma medication) 
dispensations (McLean et al., 2015). In the Northwest Territories, primary care visits for asthma, cough, 
pneumonia, and salbutamol prescriptions increased in 2014 during a severe fire season, compared to 2013 
and 2012 (Dodd et al., 2018a).
3.8.2.4 Direct Exposure to Wildfires and Psychosocial Health
The effects of wildfires on psychosocial health, including property loss, evacuations, and environmental 
degradation, have also been investigated. Six months after the 2016 Fort McMurray fires, 20% of residents 
surveyed met the criteria for generalized anxiety disorder (Agyapong et al., 2018). People with certain 
risk factors (pre-existing anxiety disorder, having witnessed the destruction of one’s own home, living in 
other accommodations after the fires, limited family or government support, and seeking psychological 
counselling) were two to seven times more likely to meet the criteria for the disorder. This incidence of 
depression and anxiety increased with the duration of evacuation and the extent of financial loss (Cherry 
& Haynes, 2017). In the Northwest Territories, the 2012 and 2013 wildfires appear to have exacerbated 
feelings of loneliness, fear, stress, and uncertainty in the population, including in the First Nations, Inuit, and 
Métis Indigenous populations (Dodd et al., 2018a; Dodd et al., 2018b). Prolonged smoke episodes related 
to these wildfires would have increased indoor time and caused respiratory problems (Dodd et al., 2018b). 
Some studies in Australia and Greece have also shown that people who suffered loss or health problems, 
or who were evacuated as a result of wildfires, are more likely to experience trouble sleeping, anxiety, and 
hostile feelings as well as depressive and post-traumatic symptoms (Finlay et al., 2012; Psarros et al., 
2017; Thompson et al., 2017). Wildfire smoke on its own has not been associated with hospitalizations and 
counselling for mental illness (Reid et al., 2016). Mixed results about the relationship between wildfire smoke 
exposure and cardiovascular health could be explained by the level of psychosocial impacts felt during an 
event; the combined effect of air pollutant inhalation and psychological stress may be conducive to adverse 
cardiovascular effects (Reid et al., 2016).
3.8.2.5 Water-Borne Diseases
Wildfires can also raise levels in water of organic matter, sediment, and heavy metals, such as nitrogen, 
phosphorus, arsenic, mercury, and manganese (Smith et al., 2011; Khan et al., 2015). Wildfires followed by 
heavy rainfall are particularly conducive to deteriorating water quality (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, 
and Security). These increases can be harmful to people who draw their water from unfiltered sources and 
problematic for filtration plants during intense wildfires. Wildfires can also weaken coastal environments, 
making them vulnerable to erosion and flooding, which can also affect water quality.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 168 
3.8.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Wildfires
While the effects of wildfire smoke are important, there are other factors important to health that can 
compound the overall impacts of fire.
3.8.3.1 Pre-Existing Morbidity
Studies of populations at increased risk to wildfire smoke are rare (Reid et al., 2016). Populations at risk 
are often inferred from studies of the health effects of air pollutants from all sources (Rappold et al., 2017; 
Cascio, 2018) (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). However, several studies have suggested that people with asthma, 
chronic obstructive respiratory diseases, or lung infections are more likely to experience the harmful effects 
of smoke (Henderson & Johnston, 2012; Reid et al., 2016).
3.8.3.2 Seniors
Seniors seem more susceptible to wildfire smoke health impacts (Liu et al., 2017) and several studies, both 
in animal and human models and studies, suggest that oxidative stress and systemic inflammation from 
exposure to biomass particles could be involved (Youssouf et al., 2014). In the Northeastern United States, 
hospitalization rates for respiratory and cardiovascular problems in people aged 65 years and older during 
smoke events increased by 49.6% and 64.9%, respectively, compared to the period before smoke events (Le 
et al., 2014). In the Western United States, climate change could lead to a modest increase of 178 respiratory 
hospital admissions among people aged 65 and older from 2046 to 2051 (Liu et al., 2016b).
3.8.3.3 Children
In the 2011 wildfires near Slave Lake, Alberta, affected children experienced symptoms of post-traumatic 
stress six months after the event, but these symptoms disappeared after a year (Townshend et al., 2015). 
Younger children with several stress factors (death of a loved one, disease, academic problems, etc.) or 
whose home was destroyed in a wildfire were at higher risk of experiencing symptoms without resolution 
(Felix et al., 2015; Townshend et al., 2015). During the Fort McMurray wildfires in 2016, grades 7 to 12 
students who were exposed to the wildfire showed a higher prevalence of depressive symptoms, suicidal 
ideation, and smoking than students the same age living in Red Deer, an Alberta city unaffected by these 
events (Brown et al., 2019). These children also had lower self-esteem and quality of life scores.
3.8.3.4 Social Inequities
In the United States, Black people, those with incomes below the median, and women were at a higher risk 
of being admitted to the emergency department for respiratory problems on smoke days (Liu et al., 2017). 
During a 2008 wildfire in North Carolina, rural counties with lower education, employment, income, and 
social capital levels presented a higher risk of emergency department admissions for asthma and heart 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 169 
failure compared to counties more privileged along those measures (Rappold et al., 2012). The two factors 
explaining the strongest correlations were income and income inequality. Women appear to be more likely 
than men to experience depression as a result of evacuation due to wildfire or related job loss (Cherry & 
Haynes, 2017).
3.8.3.5 Indigenous Populations
In addition to impacts on respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, wildfires can also disrupt traditional 
and subsistence activities in northern First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities, leading to psychological 
impacts such as stress, anxiety, and depression (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2015; Manning & Clayton, 2018). 
Persistent smoke from the wildfires in summer 2014 disproportionately affected the physical, and 
psychosocial health of people living in First Nations communities in Northwest Territories (Dodd et al., 2018a; 
Dodd et al., 2018b). 
3.8.3.6 Safety of Wildland Firefighters
Wildland or forest fire fighters are at greater risk of health effects from fires. They are more likely to 
experience decreased lung capacity as well as increased oxidative stress and respiratory symptoms, but 
there is little evidence to suggest that related mortality and morbidity are higher in the long term (Adetona et 
al., 2016; Black et al., 2017). A study in Greece also indicated that more of these workers experienced post-
traumatic symptoms, particularly seasonal workers or workers fearful of dying in a fire, workers exhibiting 
symptoms of depression, or workers with personality characteristics of neuroticism (Psarros et al., 2018).
3.8.4 Wildfire Adaptation Measures
3.8.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
For clean air shelters and homes, high-performance filters can substantially reduce the amount of fine 
particulate matter in the air, which could mitigate effects on respiratory and cardiovascular health, depending 
on sources of pollution in the building, the size of the building, and the ventilation rate (Barn, 2014). To 
encourage people to adopt needed action to protect health, simple messages like “Don’t go outside” or “Don’t 
do outdoor physical activity” can be used. It is also best to not require infrastructure changes such as buying 
portable air filters or air conditioners (Dix-Cooper et al., 2014). The health effects of reduced time outdoors 
during an event have not been adequately assessed but are likely to depend on the quality of the home and 
its facilities. Seniors, people who do not understand the language used in messages sent out, and people who 
are more isolated are more difficult to reach and therefore less likely to follow these measures.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 170 
3.8.4.2 Public Adaptation Measures
Monitoring and Warning System
Given the complexity of calculating source emissions and the relative cohesion of a smoke plume over 
large distances, including wildfires in air quality forecasts is a significant challenge (see Chapter 5: Air 
Quality). Environment and Climate Change Canada has implemented Canada’s Wildfire Smoke Prediction 
System (FireWork) to estimate wildfire smoke trajectory across North America over the coming 48 hours 
(Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2019b). In British Columbia, adjustments have been adopted for 
the AQHI to more accurately reflect the impacts of wildfire smoke on air quality, public perception of risk, 
and population health in British Columbia. The AQHI and the modified index (AQHI+) were both associated 
with all-cause mortality, physician visits for circulatory and respiratory causes, and with prescription of 
asthma medication. During the wildfire season, the modified index exhibited a better fit for asthma-related 
outcomes and, during periods with intense wildfire activity, for all respiratory outcomes (Yao et al., 2020). Air 
quality forecasts for wildfires continue to improve (Chen et al., 2019) and forecasts have been associated 
with some respiratory health outcomes (Yao et al., 2013; Yao et al., 2020). Action levels for interventions 
to reduce exposure can be based upon air quality indexes values or pollutant concentrations. Assuming 
fairly widespread adoption of measures by the public, a North Carolina simulation found that 24- or 48-hour 
forecasts could help reduce emergency department visits for asthma and heart failure if the threshold level 
is for forecasted concentrations of 20 μg/m3 PM2.5 compared to higher concentrations such as 50 μg/m3 
(Rappold et al., 2014).
Preparation and Action Plan
To better prepare the health care system and population for wildfires, the National Collaborating Centre for 
Environmental Health and British Columbia Centre for Disease Control recommended 13 priority actions 
based on consultations with 29 health care professionals (Maguet, 2018). These priorities relate to the 
following themes: documenting the experiences in implementing smoke shelters and establishing guidelines 
for identifying and using them; soliciting the active participation of local public health care professionals in 
planning emergency responses; and raising awareness among health care professionals about the effects 
of wildfires and associated adaptation measures. Allowing pharmacists to prescribe or renew certain 
medications without a physician’s prescription in emergency situations could also reduce the vulnerability of 
some people with pre-existing diseases that need to be treated with medication (Mak & Singleton, 2017).
Evacuations
The effects on health of wildfire evacuations as an adaptation measure are mixed and should only be 
undertaken when public safety is not compromised. Several studies have shown that some evacuations have 
resulted in increased mortality and morbidity among institutionalized individuals, in spreading infectious 
disease in shelters, and in compromised health and mental well-being in both adults and children (Stares, 
2014). Indigenous Peoples often experience disproportionate adverse impacts related to evacuation (see 
Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). The positive effects of evacuations 
have not been assessed and are difficult to document. These results are consistent with other studies 
on the health effects of evacuations (Munro et al., 2017; Thompson et al., 2017). In short, the harmful 
effects of wildfire smoke can be reduced by distributing high-performance filters, making smoke shelters 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 171 
available in affected communities, sending out simple messages encouraging people to stay indoors using 
communication methods that reach the most isolated people of society or those who are less likely to 
understand, and evacuating populations for whom the health risks of staying outweigh those associated 
with evacuation. High perception of risk and past property damage increases the likelihood that an individual 
will evacuate before and during a wildfire, which underscores the importance of raising awareness among 
affected populations (Thompson et al., 2017).
3.8.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
Land-Use Planning
Containing urban sprawl is an adaptation measure that limits both direct exposure (heat) and indirect 
exposure (smoke) to wildfire health hazards. To limit wildfire exposure, municipalities can limit their urban 
perimeter and keep construction projects, as well as identifying natural buffer zones to restrict development 
in the wildland urban interface. Cities that now have agricultural activities in the surrounding area are 
also less at risk of wildfire damage because agricultural land can create a buffer zone (Darques, 2015). 
Planting more fire-resistant vegetation at the edge of a forest can also reduce the severity of some wildfires 
(Fernandes, 2013).
Built Environment
Home adaptation is also a key factor in mitigating wildfire risk. Most infrastructure losses are caused by 
wind-propelled ash deposited on buildings and by vegetation burning near buildings. As a result, using non-
combustible materials for homes and thinning the surrounding vegetation up to 30 metres from the building 
are both associated with a significant decrease in infrastructure losses during a wildfire (Moritz et al., 2014). 
Programs, such as FireSmart (<https://firesmartcanada.ca/>), offer a variety of effective methods for adaptation.
Prescribed Burning
Prescribed burning of combustible material has been presented as an adaptation option to reduce the 
occurrence and intensity of wildfires (Fernandes, 2013). Results of its effectiveness are mixed, however. Since 
organic combustible materials renew quickly in the forest, prescribed burning is most effective as part of 
the initial response when a wildfire occurs or when it involves permanent reduction in combustible materials 
(Enright & Fontaine, 2014). Prescribed burning requires treatment of a significant portion of the forest to be 
effective, which incurs substantial costs. Repeated burning also increases the amount of pollutants in the 
air, exposing nearby residents to the associated health risks (Navarro et al., 2018). Without assessing the 
associated costs, a study in Europe found that systematic and widespread use of prescribed burning could 
reduce the projected increase in the area burned under future climate change from 200% to less than 50% in 
2090, compared to the beginning of the century (Khabarov et al., 2016).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 172 
3.9 Precipitation and Storms
3.9.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Precipitation and Storms 
— Trends and Projections
Annual average precipitation in Canada increased by 20% between 1948 and 2012, with a larger increase in 
Northern Canada (Zhang et al., 2019). Heavy precipitation over a day or less can cause localized damage to 
infrastructure, such as roads and buildings, while multi-day episodes of precipitation can produce flooding 
over a large region. For Canada as a whole, no trends were detectable in extreme precipitation accumulated 
over periods of a day or less. More locations have experienced an increase rather than a decrease in the 
highest amount of one-day rainfall each year, but the direction of trends is random over the country.
Projections indicate with a high degree of confidence that both annual average precipitation and extreme 
precipitation events (Figure 3.7) are expected to increase over the course of the century regardless of the 
GHG emission scenario. In addition, changes in rainfall patterns vary according to the season (Zhang et al., 
2019). Winter precipitation in the form of rain has increased, and this trend is expected to continue. The 
projected increase in annual mean precipitation (about 24% higher under RCP 8.5) is mainly due to increased 
non-summer precipitation in all regions of Canada, particularly in Northern regions. Conversely, summer 
precipitation is expected to decrease over Southern Canada, especially under RPC 8.5 (Zhang et al., 2019). 
As the climate warms, particularly in Northern Canada, there will inevitably be an increased likelihood of 
precipitation falling as rain rather than snow, as it is already observed (Zhang et al., 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 173 
Figure 3.7 Annual number of heavy precipitation days projected for 2021–2050 in Canada, based on current 
GHG emission trends (RCP 8.5). Blue areas correspond to areas with more than 10 days per year of extreme 
precipitation, while brown areas correspond to areas with less than 4 days per year of extreme precipitation. A 
Heavy Precipitation Day (HPD) is a day on which a total of at least 20 mm of rain or precipitation falls. Frozen 
precipitation is measured by its liquid equivalent: 20 cm of snow equals about 20 mm of precipitation. Source: 
Prairie Climate Centre, 2019.
The effect of climate change on winds and tornadoes is uncertain. For hail events in Canada, one study 
projected that, by 2070, the number of hail days will decrease (compared to the 1971–2000 period); the 
confidence for such projections are low — the lowest among extreme event types (Brimelow et al., 2017). In 
contrast, large hailstones might increase in summer, creating more damage than previously, particularly in 
Central and Western Canada (Brimelow et al., 2017). Winds and precipitation also cause flooding, erosion, 
and coastal submergence, which are addressed separately in the section 3.10 Floods, Coastal Flooding, and 
Coastal Erosion.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 174 
3.9.2 The Effects of Precipitation and Storms on Health
3.9.2.1 Unintentional Trauma – Precipitation
Snow, rain, and freezing rain increase the risk of falling outdoors by reducing traction or creating obstacles to 
travel. Precipitation increases the risk of hip and wrist fractures, in particular (Ali & Willett, 2015). In Montréal, 
only three freezing rain or rain events, followed by significant temperature drops, caused nearly half of the 
falls that occurred during the months of December and January in 2008–2009 (Morency et al., 2012). Another 
study of people 40 years and older in Montréal indicated that snowfall could have a greater impact on hip 
fractures than rainfall (Modarres et al., 2014). The risk of hip fractures related to weather variables appears 
to increase exponentially during extreme conditions. In England, medical visits for accidental injury from 
1996 to 2006 increased by 2.2% for every 10 millimetres of rain and by 7.9% on snowy days (Parsons et al., 
2011). Freezing rain seems to have the greatest impact on injuries, with the effect lasting up to three days 
following precipitation (Modarres et al., 2014). During the ice storm that swept across Ontario in December 
2013, Ottawa and Toronto residents were 2.5 times more likely to be hospitalized for environmental reasons 
than in previous years (Rajaram et al., 2016). In addition to injuries, snow can indirectly increase the risk of 
heart attack, given that snow removal and walking in the snow increases hear rate and that the cold promotes 
vasoconstriction (Auger et al., 2017e).
3.9.2.2 Unintentional Trauma – Storms
Despite its destabilizing effect, average wind speed does not appear to be significantly associated with an 
increase in the number of injuries below the storm threshold (Ali & Willett, 2015). Wind gusts of 70 km/h or 
more appear to increase the risk of injury (Saulnier et al., 2017). There is also an increase in injuries during 
the recovery effort following a storm. These include lacerations, punctures, electrocutions, and falls due to 
infrastructure fragility and insecurity (Goldman et al., 2014). Although precipitation generally keeps pollen on 
the ground, periods of extreme precipitation and storms lift massive amounts of pollen into the air through 
osmotic shock. This can lead to a sharp increase in asthma symptoms among those with pollen allergies 
(D’Amato et al., 2012).
3.9.2.3 Road Accidents – Precipitation
Precipitation increases the risk of road injuries by making the roadway slippery (Koetse & Rietveld, 2009; Ali 
& Willett, 2015). In the Greater Vancouver area, an estimated 17% to 28% increase in collisions is expected 
by 2055 due to increased maximum and total precipitation; the effect is more pronounced during heavy 
precipitation events (Hambly et al., 2013). However, precipitation also reduces the risk of road fatalities 
because drivers adjust their driving on snow-covered or wet roads by reducing speed, among other measures 
(Koetse & Rietveld, 2009; Ali & Willett, 2015). Across Canada, the relative risk of rainfall-related mortality 
decreased in 10 Canadian cities between 1984 and 2002, but there was no change for snowfall (Andrey, 
2010). This trend could continue in the future, depending on precipitation patterns and improvements in 
vehicle and road safety. By contrast, the increase in freeze–thaw cycles and in winter thaws could make 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 175 
travel less safe, as a water-coated ice surface is more slippery and winter tires are less effective under these 
conditions (TIRF, 2012). Stronger winds could also intensify blowing snow, decrease road visibility, and reduce 
vehicle control of drivers (Goldman et al., 2014). The net effect of climate change on the risk of road travel 
injuries in Canada therefore remains to be determined.
3.9.2.4 Physical Activity
Increased summer precipitation may also influence physical activity. A study in Canada found that the 
number of footsteps among 8125 participants decreased by 8.3% when rainfall totals reached 14 millimetres 
(Chan et al., 2006). Children can spend up to 15 minutes less per day on moderate- or high-intensity physical 
activity on rainy days compared to dry days (Harrison et al., 2015). This plateaus, however, after which point 
the amount of rain no longer affects level of physical activity. As a result, an increase in heavy rainfall events 
rather than days of rain may not have much impact on physical activity levels. 
3.9.2.5 Water-Borne Diseases
Stormwater from precipitation carries many pollutants from anthropogenic and natural environments to locations 
conducive to water concentration. This results in significant bacterial loads in surface water and stormwater can 
contaminate groundwater upon mixing (Cann et al., 2013). This increases the risk of water-borne disease agents, 
particularly gastrointestinal diseases such as viruses (e.g., enterovirus), bacteria (e.g., Campylobacter) and enteric 
protozoa (e.g., Giardia) (Levy et al., 2016; Ghazani et al., 2018) (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases and Chapter 
7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). In addition, both precipitation highs (e.g., heavy precipitation) and lows 
(drought) increase the risk of water-borne diseases spreading, and climate change is expected to increase the 
frequency of these two extremes in Canada (Herrador et al., 2015; Ghazani et al., 2018).
Legionellosis cases are positively correlated with the amount of precipitation. Legionellosis is mainly 
transmitted through the respiratory tract, and precipitation increases the formation of bacteria-infected 
airborne particles (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases). In Connecticut, each 5 millimetre increase in rainfall 
was found to have raised the risk of legionellosis by 48%, which is a higher incidence than observed for 
changes in temperature or humidity (Cassell et al., 2018). In fact, about half of pathogens that significantly 
affect human or animal health are sensitive to precipitation or moisture (McIntyre et al., 2017). Extreme 
precipitation in particular affects some bacteria or parasites that are agents of water-borne diseases, 
such as Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and Legionnella, but this is not the case for non-extreme 
precipitation (Sakamoto, 2015; Young et al., 2015). In Vancouver, days that exceed the 90th percentile of 
precipitation increased the number of Cryptosporidium and Giardia cases up to six weeks after the event 
(Chhetri et al., 2017). Heavy rainfall and storms can also increase the risk of food-borne pathogens, such as 
norovirus, Campylobacter, Toxoplasma gondii, and Listeria monocytogenes (Smith & Fazil, 2019).
Runoff from extreme precipitation also affects recreational waters (e.g., beaches), exposing users to several 
infectious agents of water-borne diseases (Sanborn & Takaro, 2013) (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, 
and Security). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 176 
3.9.2.6 Indirect Impacts – Power Outages
Strong winds and precipitation such as freezing rain can cause power outages. A prolonged and widespread 
outage can cause significant social disruption and affect the psychosocial health of those affected (Silver & 
Grek-Martin, 2015). In winter, power outages can also force some people to live in cold homes and suffer the 
resulting health consequences. During winter power outages, the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning is high 
due to the use of portable generators and heating/cooking units (Goldman et al., 2014; Johnson-Arbor et al., 
2014). Poisoning can also occur when the exhaust pipe of a running car is blocked by snow, which occurs 
mainly on the same day as a snowstorm (Johnson-Arbor et al., 2014).
3.9.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Storms and Precipitation
3.9.3.1 Precipitation
Sex and Gender
Heavy snowfalls have been linked to cardiovascular complications. In a Quebec study examining the period 
from 1981 to 2014, men were at a 16% higher risk of being hospitalized and a 34% higher risk of dying due to 
myocardial infarction on the day following a 20 centimetre snowfall, compared to a day without snow (Auger 
et al., 2017e). This could be related most likely to the increased cardiac demands of snow shovelling coupled 
with cold, with men being potentially more likely than women to shovel, particularly after heavy snowfalls 
(Auger et al., 2017e). 
Age
Studies suggest that children and adults over 40 are primarily at risk of falling during precipitation and of 
being injured. In Montréal, freezing rain was identified as a more significant weather factor than average 
temperature or snow to explain the number of falls among those aged 50 and over, while other studies seem 
to indicate a decreasing risk beyond 75 years of age due to loss of mobility, and thus a decrease in travel 
when freezing rain occurs (Morency et al., 2012; Ali & Willett, 2015). A study in Quebec found that people aged 
40 to 74 are more likely to be injured due to weather conditions than those aged 75 and over (Martel et al., 
2010). Children in Finland were found to be 50% more likely to injure their wrists on rainy days than on dry 
days (Ali & Willett, 2015).
Rural Living
In Canada, residents of small towns and of rural and remote areas are also at greater risk of contracting 
water-borne disease, with a relatively high proportion of outbreaks estimated to have occurred in 
municipalities with populations of 5000 or less following unusual weather events such as drought or heavy 
precipitation events (Febriani et al., 2010; Moffatt & Struck, 2011). These municipalities and private well water 
supplies often rely on groundwater with little or no treatment to supply their residents with drinking water. 
Small systems and private individuals often have less means to invest sufficiently in water treatment and 
protection measures. In Canada, one in eight people are supplied from private supplies, most of which rely 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 177 
on rural groundwater sources (Charrois, 2010), and about 1.7 million (4·9%) Canadians are served by small 
community groundwater (3.1%) and surface water (1.8%) supplies (Murphy et al., 2016). 
Indigenous Populations
Many Indigenous populations are also at greater risk of water-borne diseases, especially since most water 
management infrastructure in these communities are considered at moderate- or high-risk to the impacts of 
heavy precipitation (Neegan Burnside Ltd., 2011). In addition, many communities lack access to safe drinking 
water, and continue to experience boil water/drinking advisories; this increases health risks from extreme 
rainfall events. Inuit communities have the highest prevalence and incidence of gastrointestinal disease 
(Wright et al., 2018). See Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada and Chapter 
7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security for more discussion of the increased risks of extreme precipitation or 
storms for First Nations, Inuit, or Métis people and vulnerability factors that exacerbate the direct and indirect 
impacts of these hazards on their health.
3.9.3.2 Storms
Some population groups are more affected by storms that cause significant social disruption and have more 
severe health impacts. Because medications may be more difficult to obtain during and following a storm, 
those whose physical or mental health depends on them may be more negatively affected (McClelland et al., 
2017). Seniors, men, smokers, and people who already have respiratory problems are more likely to develop 
legionellosis and other water-borne diseases during heavy rainfall events, usually a few weeks after the event 
(Hicks et al., 2007; Sakamoto, 2015; Cassell et al., 2018).
Age
Children are at risk for post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of storm events, particularly children who 
previously had anxiety or depressive symptoms (Furr et al., 2010). Older people are also more affected by 
tornadoes and high winds. For example, the 2011 tornadoes in the United States increased the number of 
hospitalizations and intensive care visits among seniors from 4% to 9% within 30 days after the events (Bell et 
al., 2018).
Perinatal Effects
Stress during pregnancy caused by a storm with prolonged effects on essential services can also have 
long-term consequences for the unborn child. For example, the Ice Storm Project examined the impacts 
of prenatal stress associated with the January 1998 ice storm that plunged 3 million people into the dark 
in Southern Quebec. Some homes had no electricity for up to 40 days during one of the coldest months of 
the year. In this study, children of pregnant women who were significantly affected (stress) by this event 
were at higher risk for several physical and mental health problems, including exhibiting warning signs of 
eating disorders (St-Hilaire et al., 2015) and autism (Walder et al., 2014). They are also more likely to have a 
weakened immune system (Veru et al., 2015), to develop asthma problems (Turcotte-Tremblay et al., 2014), to 
have a higher body mass index (Liu et al., 2016a), and, in young girls, to have their first period at an older age 
(Duchesne et al., 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 178 
Crop and Animal Farmers
Crop and animal farmers typically have to stay on their property during power outages because they have to 
take care of their livestock and infrastructures. During the 1998 ice storm, 49% of Eastern Ontario farmers 
without electricity for a week or less reported symptoms of stress throughout the event, and this rate rose 
to 76% for farmers without electricity for more than 15 days (Sutherland & Glendinning, 2008). Furthermore, 
13% of farmers without electricity for a week or less and 37% of those without electricity for more than 15 
days experienced health effects other than persistent stress after the event, indicating an increasing impact 
associated with the duration of the power outage.
3.9.4 Storm and Precipitation Adaptation Measures
3.9.4.1 Public Adaptation Measures
Action Plans and Multi-Barrier Approach for Water Management
Several measures are being taken to reduce the health risks associated with precipitation, particularly in the 
area of drinking water. A multi-barrier approach reduces the risk of water contamination for municipalities 
with a drinking water treatment facility, providing multiple operational redundancies in the event of 
system failure (Patrick, 2018) (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). On a smaller scale, a 
participatory approach involving environmental representatives and experts could help better identify drinking 
water contamination risks and improve knowledge of watershed-related issues (Dykman, 2013). Alberta and 
Saskatchewan have adopted this type of collaborative approach in their planning to protect water sources 
in several Indigenous communities (Patrick, 2018). Integrated watershed management, used in several 
provinces across Canada, adheres to the principles of Indigenous governance, community engagement, 
as well as inclusive decision-making (Conservation Ontario, 2010; Canadian Council of Ministers of the 
Environment, 2016; Regroupement des organismes de bassins versants du Québec, 2019). It is also essential 
that future climate change impacts be considered in identifying risks to ensure the effectiveness and 
sustainability of the strategies put in place, particularly with respect to drinking water (Canadian Council of 
Ministers of the Environment, 2016).
Evacuations During Floods or Storms
Evacuations are one of the adaptation measures to reduce post-disaster damage. On an individual level, risk 
perception, past evacuation behaviours, and having an evacuation plan are all factors that make individuals 
more likely to evacuate, whereas likelihood of evacuation generally decreases as length of residency 
increases (Thompson et al., 2017). Issuing a mandatory evacuation notice also provides a greater incentive 
for people to evacuate than a voluntary evacuation notice. In addition to the influence of family and friends, 
having local community representatives issue this warning increases the likelihood of evacuation. Given 
their significant economic and psychosocial costs, evacuations should be limited to large-scale events. 
Evacuations may have more negative than positive health effects (Stares, 2014; Munro et al., 2017). To reduce 
these negative impacts, public authorities can encourage households to purchase essential items (non-
perishable food, first aid kit, flashlight, etc.) for an emergency kit. Evacuation criteria could also be reviewed 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 179 
to better reflect the health consequences of evacuations. For long-term care facilities, nursing homes, and 
retirement homes, pre-emptive evacuations during storms should be avoided: several studies show that 
people evacuated from these institutions have a higher risk of mortality and hospitalization than people who 
remain (Pierce et al., 2017; Willoughby et al., 2017). The mortality rate in nursing home residents reach 17% 
up to six months after the evacuation (Willoughby et al., 2017). Nursing home residents who are at increased 
risk of experiencing the negative impacts of an evacuation are male residents aged over 80 years, who have 
greater functional and cognitive impairment and a number of comorbidities (Willoughby et al., 2017).
Emergency Response and Organizational Preparedness
Several measures would reduce the impact of extreme events on patients in long-term care facilities, such as 
adopting a disaster management plan, training staff on responding to extreme weather events, anticipation 
of patient needs following the event, and implementation of redundancy systems (central generator, etc.). 
Implementing a municipal or provincial disaster management plan that clearly delineates the responsibilities 
of each department and includes predetermined shelters and services reduces response time and increases 
response effectiveness (Mehiriz & Gosselin, 2016). Disaster simulation activities can also provide critical 
insight into system shortcomings and areas for improvement in managing such events (Bayntun et al., 2012). 
Having adequately trained and an appropriate number of staff in health facilities has been identified as the 
most important factor in ensuring the resilience of health services during disasters (Ryan et al., 2016). A 2016 
Quebec study of health organizations indicated that they were much less prepared for certain frequent events 
such as flooding than for extreme heat events (Valois et al., 2017a). In addition, two studies have shown that 
Level 1 trauma centres in Canada are not adequately prepared for natural or human-caused disasters (e.g., 
terrorist attacks). In 2011, more than 40% of these centres, critical to emergency response, had not conducted a 
simulation exercise in the last two years, compared to 30% in 2019 (Gomez et al., 2011; Gabbe et al., 2020).
3.9.4.2	Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
Some measures related to residential or public infrastructure can help communities adapt to extreme storms 
or precipitation. Upgrading infrastructure, particularly roofs, to meet Canada’s building standards would 
reduce the vulnerability of infrastructure and its occupants to inclement weather. Other responses, such 
as installing weather-resistant shutters on windows, strengthening garage and front doors, and stabilizing 
outdoor objects, can prevent wind and the debris it carries from damaging property and endangering the 
people inside (Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2012a). Regular roof repairs and maintenance 
ensure sufficient capacity and slope to withstand snow, ice, or sleet build-up and are therefore other options 
to reduce the risk of collapse (Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2012b). However, these measures 
are not financially accessible to all owners.
Adaptation measures to reduce the likelihood of a power outage following a storm or heavy freezing rain 
include burying power lines, strengthening the support capacity of distribution poles and towers, integrating 
anti-cascading towers, and managing vegetation near power lines (Hydro-Québec, n.d.; Audinet et al., 
2014). Restoring damaged features in disaster areas that are aesthetically and culturally significant was 
also proposed as a potential way to promote psychosocial health of disaster victims and the post-disaster 
recovery effort. In Ontario, those with a strong sense of belonging to the area were more involved in the 
recovery effort following a tornado that struck the rural community of Goderich in 2011, thereby fostering 
social cohesion (Silver & Grek-Martin, 2015).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 180 
3.10 Floods, Coastal Flooding, and 
Coastal Erosion
3.10.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Floods, Coastal Flooding, 
and Coastal Erosion — Trends and Projections
The frequency and severity of flooding, coastal flooding, and coastal erosion will be influenced by increased 
average and extreme precipitation, early snowmelt, higher sea levels, and reduced ice cover (Derksen et 
al., 2019; Greenan et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2019). Warmer winter and spring temperatures, combined with 
more precipitation falling as rain rather than snow, are expected to result in earlier snowmelt in spring and 
earlier arrival of spring flooding, although the combined effect of this warming and of reduced snow cover 
on flooding is uncertain (Bonsal et al., 2019; Derksen et al., 2019). Due to changes in precipitation patterns, 
rainfall-related flooding is expected to increase while snowfall-related flooding is expected to decrease. In 
urban settings, increased extreme precipitation events will increase the risk of overflow6 and flash flooding.
The extent of sea-level rise will vary greatly across Canada depending on regional vertical land movement 
in response to the retreat of the last glacial ice sheet (Greenan et al., 2019). In the Atlantic Provinces, for 
example, sea levels are expected to rise more than the global average due to land subsidence (downward 
movement). Across Canada, sea levels are expected to rise for most of the Atlantic, Pacific, and Beaufort 
coasts, although some specific regions, such as Hudson Bay, may see lower sea levels due to the uplift of the 
land as a result of the uplift being higher than the rate of global sea-level rise (Greenan et al., 2019). Inland, 
there is no evidence that lake and wetland levels have changed at this time (Bonsal et al., 2019). However, 
accelerated evapotranspiration could lower the water level of inland water bodies if it exceeds the predicted 
increase in precipitation. Finally, wave activity in Atlantic and Arctic Canada will increase in response to the 
increased extent and duration of the ice-free period (Greenan et al., 2019). Combined with rising sea levels, 
this is expected to increase the number of coastal floods as well as the rate of coastal retreat. There is 
also a higher documented risk of fluvial, pluvial, and coastal flooding in Indigenous communities across the 
country. A recent study of 985 communities estimated that almost 22% of residential properties were at risk 
of flooding, with a 100-year recurrence (Thistlethwaite et al., 2020).
6	
Overflows of raw, untreated sewage into rivers and other possible sources of potable water can occur when extreme 
rainfall causes the capacity of combined sewers — sewers that transport both sewage and stormwater — to be 
exceeded (Ottawa Riverkeeper, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 181 
3.10.2 Effects of Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion 
on Health
3.10.2.1 Floods – Physical Impacts
Floods can cause injury, infect wounds, and result in electrocution, particularly during the recovery and 
cleanup period (Du et al., 2010; Lowe et al., 2013). Floods can also cause drowning and hypothermia, with 
greater danger during flash flooding. Mortality and injury are but a small part of the health burden caused by 
flooding in Canada, however. More significant effects are felt on physical and mental morbidity (Bartholdson 
& von Schreeb, 2018).
Floods have been associated with an increased incidence of water-borne, vector-borne, and other infectious 
diseases because it increases the likelihood of direct contact with water, drinking water contamination, and 
the reproduction of pathogens and disease vectors, such as insects and some pests (Funari et al., 2012; 
Brown & Murray, 2013; Cann et al., 2013; McMichael, 2015; Levy et al., 2016) (see Chapter 6: Infectious 
Diseases). Flooding in urban areas that results in sewer overflows promotes the spread of infectious 
agents, moulds, and other toxic contaminants that are harmful to human health. For the St. Lawrence River, 
the increase in overflows upstream (e.g., from the metropolitan Montréal area) is expected to increase 
Escherichia coli concentrations up to 87% by 2070 in drinking water sources downstream, such as those in 
the greater Quebec City area (Jalliffier-Verne et al., 2017). Flooded houses also support the development of 
fungi, bacteria, and moulds that increase the risk of developing and exacerbating skin, allergy, and respiratory 
problems (Tempark et al., 2013; Azuma et al., 2014; Saulnier et al., 2017).
3.10.2.2 Floods – Psychosocial Impacts
Floods impair living environments, disrupt social life, and increase financial uncertainty, given the associated 
material costs and economic disruption, often over many months. Flooding is therefore associated with 
compromised psychosocial impacts and quality of life (Turner et al., 2012a; Fernandez et al., 2015; French et 
al., 2019) (see Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being). Among its manifestations, flooding increases the 
incidence of symptoms of post-traumatic stress, depression, and anxiety in addition to suicidal ideation in 
exposed individuals (Alderman et al., 2012; Turner et al., 2012a; Warsini et al., 2014; Fernandez et al., 2015; 
Munro et al., 2017; Graham et al., 2019). According to some studies, the prevalence of post-traumatic stress 
in populations exposed to flooding in the previous two years ranges from 9% to 53% (Alderman et al., 2012). 
Repeated flooding does not necessarily increase the level of post-traumatic stress and depression; however, 
little research has been done on its health effects (French et al., 2019). According to a 2017 survey of 200 
households, 67% of the Eastern Montréal population affected by flooding reported feeling anxious or having 
trouble sleeping or concentrating, and that percentage was highest among evacuated individuals (CIUSSS du 
Centre-Sud-de-l’Île-de-Montréal, 2017). In addition, 24% of respondents felt that their mental health was fair 
or poor; that is nearly five times the prevalence of mental ill health than in Montréal’s population overall. Other 
studies using indices of psychological well-being have also observed an inverse relationship between these indices 
and the level of exposure to flooding (Fernandez et al., 2015). A study of approximately 100 residents affected 
by the 2014 floods in Burlington, Ontario, found that these residents experienced high levels of stress even three 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 182 
years after the flood (Decent, 2018). Nevertheless, the prevalence of psychological disorders can decrease and 
eventually resolve over time (Fernandez et al., 2015; Johal & Mounsey, 2016; Jermacane et al., 2018).
Exposure to flooding appears to increase excessive use of drugs, alcohol, or medication, and to decrease the 
sense of safety and belonging to the area (Tapsell & Tunstall, 2008; Fernandez et al., 2015). Relationships 
with neighbours, friends, and family can also deteriorate after a flood, as seen among seniors up to six 
months after the 1996 Saguenay flood (Maltais, 2006). The opposite can also be true, however. A survey of 
963 people after the 2013 Calgary flood found that those who supported others during or after the flood had 
a higher sense of social cohesion (Hetherington et al., 2018).
The stress from flooding can also affect physical health (Saulnier et al., 2017). For example, during the 
flooding of the Richelieu River in Quebec in 2011, exposed individuals were 25% more likely to have a cardiac 
event afterward, although this increase was not seen in the 1996 Saguenay flooding (Vanasse et al., 2015; 
Vanasse et al., 2016a). Indeed, these two floods were very different in terms of the number of people affected 
and the duration of the event. Complications associated with diabetes as well as high blood pressure and 
nutrition also increase post-flood (Saulnier et al., 2017).
3.10.2.3 Coastal Flooding
The impacts of coastal flooding on the health of populations are different than the consequences of flooding 
and of storms. It is less likely than flooding to spread vector- or water-borne diseases, although related 
precipitation may increase the risk. Like regular flooding, coastal flooding may require prolonged evacuations 
and cause significant damage to public infrastructure and property. The psychosocial and physical impacts 
associated with financial stress and social disruption therefore theoretically apply as much to coastal 
flooding as they do to freshwater flooding (Lane et al., 2013; Manuel et al., 2015). That said, few studies 
have actually examined the health effects of this hazard outside the context of hurricanes or tropical storms, 
which do not really apply to Canada other than the Atlantic provinces, which can experience the tail-end of 
hurricanes (Lane et al., 2013; Hung et al., 2016; Ryan et al., 2016; Saulnier et al., 2017).
3.10.2.4 Coastal Erosion
Unless landslides occur, there is little or no risk of injury from coastal erosion. However, it has the potential to 
cause psychosocial impacts and damage property. The effects of coastal erosion on health are more difficult 
to assess, as they are felt in the medium to long term and, in theory, they allow for preventive responses. 
Like coastal flooding, little research has been done on the health effects of coastal erosion. In some areas, 
however, it is clear that coastal erosion and flooding will increase the isolated nature of regions by making 
roads impassable and damaging other infrastructures along the coastline (Drejza et al., 2015; Manuel et 
al., 2015). By reducing the habitability of affected regions, they could also lead to a permanent community 
breakdown and encourage the exodus of populations.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 183 
3.10.2.5 Indirect Impacts – Power Outages
Regular and coastal flooding can also cause power outages. Although the effects of power outages in 
warmer weather are less of a threat, given that dangers are mainly associated with using backup heating and 
being exposed to the cold (Lane et al., 2013; Klinger et al., 2014), power outages during shoulder seasons 
could increase these risks compared to a normal situation, since outdoor temperatures are not optimal during 
those seasons. Flooding has been associated with an increase in carbon monoxide poisoning before and 
during the event and even in the recovery phase (Waite et al., 2014). In addition, a lack of air conditioning due 
to a power outage could increase heat exposure during periods of intense heat.
3.10.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Floods, Coastal Flooding, 
and Coastal Erosion
3.10.3.1 Age
Children and adolescents are also likely to experience symptoms of post-traumatic stress after a disaster, 
although it is unclear how much more affected they are than adults (Furr et al., 2010; Garcia & Sheehan, 
2016; Lai et al., 2017). Based on two literature reviews, the risk appears to be higher for young girls than for 
young boys and for children and adolescents who lack social support (Garcia & Sheehan, 2016; Lai et al., 
2017). Most related studies show that children tolerate low levels of post-traumatic stress over a long period 
of time (Lai et al., 2017). They seem to be less likely than adults to have post-traumatic stress symptoms 
worsen after an extreme event. In any case, this stress may have a significant impact on the child’s long-term 
development. Post-traumatic stress disorders in children have been associated with cognitive impairments, 
alcohol and drug problems, immunodeficiency, asthma, as well as learning, sleep, and behavioural problems 
(Garcia & Sheehan, 2016). Prenatal stress from flooding has also been associated with weight status in 
children (Dancause et al., 2015).
Seniors over 65 affected by a flood disproportionately experience symptoms of anxiety, depression and post-
traumatic stress compared to prime-age adults (Leyva et al., 2017; Decent, 2018). Based on a systematic 
review, the risk of mortality and morbidity during and after a flood is particularly high among adolescents and 
young adults (aged 10 to 29) and among those over the age of 60 (Lowe et al., 2013).
3.10.3.2 Sex and Gender
After a flood, women appear to have an increased risk of experiencing psychological impacts, while men 
seem to be more likely to experience physical impacts, such as cardiac events (Lowe et al., 2013). Following 
the 2011 Calgary floods, new prescriptions for anti-anxiety medications and sleep aids increased by a factor 
of 1.64 and 2.32, respectively, among women (Sahni et al., 2016). In addition, women are more likely to 
experience domestic violence as a result of extreme events such as flooding, and women who experience 
post-flood violence are more likely to report depression (First et al., 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 184 
3.10.3.3 Presence of Pre-Existing Diseases
People with pre-existing health problems are more susceptible to the effects of flooding (Lowe et al., 2013). 
During the 2011 flooding of the Richelieu River in Quebec, people with a history of cardiovascular disease 
were 70% more likely to experience a cardiac event following flooding, compared with 25% for all those 
affected (Vanasse et al., 2016a). Individuals taking medications are also at greater risk because access to 
them could be compromised during significant social disruptions such as flooding (Gaskin et al., 2017). 
Access to essential care for people with pre-existing physical or mental health problems could also be 
problematic. For post-traumatic stress, people with high levels of anxiety are more likely to experience high 
levels after extreme weather events, as seen after the 2011 floods in Calgary (Hetherington et al., 2018).
3.10.3.4 Indigenous Populations
First Nations and Métis peoples are particularly vulnerable to extreme events such as flooding, as they often 
live in isolated areas, with infrastructure in poor condition, and in low socio-economic settings (see Chapter 
2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). For example, between 2006 and 2016, nearly 
67 First Nations communities experienced close to 100 flood events, causing substantial property and 
infrastructure damage, community service failures, and individual health and wellness impacts. 
3.10.3.5 Rural Living and Low Socio-Economic Status
Municipalities with combined sewers (e.g., sewers that deliver both wastewater and storm water to a sewage 
treatment plant) are at increased risk of regular and wastewater overflows (Fortier, 2013). Areas affected 
by coastal erosion are also often remote or rural communities with low socio-economic status. These 
communities do not always have the financial or human resources to adapt to coastal hazards and therefore 
need external support (Chouinard et al., 2008). The proportion of seniors is also generally higher, and the 
current rural exodus and the aging population will continue to challenge the resilience of these communities 
(Manuel et al., 2015; Rapaport et al., 2015), while higher social cohesion and the ability to cope may lessen 
the psychological effects of flooding (Greene et al., 2015). In addition to residents, volunteers and emergency 
responders are also at risk to flood health effects during the recovery phase (Johanning et al., 2014).
3.10.3.6 Insurance
People without insurance are more likely to experience the psychosocial impacts of floods (Tunstall et al., 
2006; Mulchandani et al., 2019). People without specific flood insurance often have a higher economic 
deprivation profile, given the costs of flood protection (Poussin et al., 2015; Koerth et al., 2017). The time 
it takes to contact insurance companies can also increase stress among people whose homes have been 
flooded (Maltais, 2006).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 185 
3.10.4 Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion 
Adaptation Measures
3.10.4.1 Individual Adaptation Measures
Adaptation Behaviours
At the individual level, infrastructure adaptation measures to protect against the consequences of floods 
include elevation of the house (e.g., electricity meter, doors, furniture, baseboards and electrical outlets), 
moving objects from the basement to upper levels, and waterproofing foundations in the home (Poussin et 
al., 2015; Koerth et al., 2017; Valois et al., 2020a). However, it is important to choose measures adapted to the 
characteristics of the home and its environment to avoid unintended consequences and damage (e.g., uplift 
during very significant floods due to waterproofing of foundations). Staying informed about whether one’s 
home is in a flood zone, and about flooding-related consequences and adaptation measures, taking stock 
of assets, and obtaining flood insurance are non-infrastructure measures that can be beneficial. According 
to a nationwide survey, however, only 6% of people were aware they are living in flood-risk area, while 30% 
have implemented measures to protect their property from flooding (Thistlethwaite et al., 2017). Insured 
individuals may feel they can engage in more risky behaviours or take fewer actions to protect themselves 
less from insured hazards. Insurance is also an unaffordable option for some low-income households. 
Making insurance premiums dependent on implementation of protection measures would provide an 
incentive for insured individuals to protect themselves further (Botzen et al., 2009). In any case, financial 
incentives are essential to encourage individual adaptation measures because exposed individuals may be 
aware of the risk without having means to adapt to it (Wachinger et al., 2013; Poussin et al., 2014). Support 
programs should be tailored to reduce the financial burden on low socio-economic and at-risk households.
Risk Perception
Several factors associated with individual perceptions can also influence the adoption of adaptation 
measures for coastal hazards. These include risk perception, the perceived effectiveness of an adaptation 
measure, the perception of control over implementing that measure, the estimated cost of implementing 
that measure, and the perceived individual responsibility for taking action (Bubeck et al., 2012; Kellens et al., 
2013; Poussin et al., 2014; Valois et al., 2020a). The number of floods an individual has experienced in the 
past, factual knowledge of risks and adaptation measures, status as a homeowner, residing in a single-family 
home, and living permanently in a house increase an individual’s likelihood of adopting adaptation measures 
in a coastal environment (Koerth et al., 2017; Valois et al., 2019; Valois et al., 2020a). A sense of belonging 
to a living environment also intensifies risk perception for relatively frequent events (Bonaiuto et al., 2016). 
On the other hand, such a sense decreases the likelihood that an individual will move or evacuate, in addition 
to exacerbating any psychosocial impacts that might occur. Some people will also accept exposure to a risk 
because of habituation to the risk, or because they feel that the benefits of living in an at-risk nearshore area 
outweigh potential costs (Wachinger et al., 2013; Poussin et al., 2014; Koerth et al., 2017). A flood adaptation 
index is available that that can measure the extent of adaptation by linking pre- and post-flood adaptation and 
variables such as income, household type, and perception (Valois et al., 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 186 
3.10.4.2 Public Adaptation Measures
Evacuations
Evacuations are often mandated by public authorities when flooding is expected or occurs. However, similar 
to other hazards discussed in this chapter, evacuations are not always an appropriate adaptation measure: 
several studies show adverse effects for evacuees compared to those who remained in place. In the United 
Kingdom, flood-affected people who remained at home were at lower risk of depression than evacuees 
(Munro et al., 2017). Evacuees had higher rates of depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress. The 
intensity of mental health effects varies with the duration of separation from the living environment and with 
income — low-income individuals were at higher risk (Lowe et al., 2013; Lamond et al., 2015; Munro et al., 
2017). It is more difficult for people with reduced mobility or sensory and cognitive disabilities to evacuate 
or to prepare for and cope with flooding. As a result, there is a significant risk of injury and mortality among 
seniors during or after evacuation (Gamble et al., 2013; Thompson et al., 2017; Willoughby et al., 2017). These 
health consequences should be taken into account when public authorities make decisions about whether 
evacuation is the optimal solution. If evacuations are necessary, issuing an evacuation notice at least 12 
hours in advance appears to reduce the psychosocial impacts of flooding. A study showed that people who 
did not receive a warning or who received one less than 12 hours’ notice before the event had a higher level of 
psychological distress (Munro et al., 2017).
Permanent evacuation, or relocation, may also be considered as a preventive measure. The health impacts of 
voluntary or forced relocation outside of an at-risk area are more significant for people with a strong sense of 
belonging to the area and community or with a strong local social network (Uscher‐Pines, 2009; Lowe et al., 
2013; Munro et al., 2017). Employment stability and the costs associated with moving are important issues 
related to the vulnerability of lower-income individuals. A move within the same community limits effects on 
social connections, while public financial support for low-income people mitigates the consequences for this 
segment of the population. In the La Mitis region of Quebec, which was affected by major flooding in 2011, 
the government covered the costs of moving residents in areas at risk of coastal flooding or erosion to a 
nearby area specially built for that purpose, with a citizens’ support program managed by local authorities 
(Radio-Canada, 2018).
Preparation and Action Plan
Public weather alerts and other tools are available for individuals and public health authorities in Canada 
to use to prepare and plan for storms and floods (Government of Canada, 2019b). In terms of response, 
front-line and emergency management workers can increase their awareness of the relationships between 
domestic violence and disasters and of how to take action to help victims, including children (First et al., 
2017). For people with physical or mental disabilities, involvement in emergency planning and response 
through organizations working with these groups increases their ability to adapt (Gaskin et al., 2017). Health 
services in municipalities at flood risk should have disaster contingency plans and strategies, particularly 
for flooding (Burton et al., 2016). These plans should include measures to train staff, anticipate patients’ 
medical needs during a disaster, a decision-making process that considers evacuations as a last resort, 
and systematic evaluation of disaster response effectiveness (Pierce et al., 2017). Social workers and other 
psychosocial health professionals should also be better trained to better respond to feelings of loss and grief 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 187 
caused by weather events (Fulton & Drolet, 2018). In addition, increased monitoring of infectious diseases by 
public health authorities during and after flooding would also be beneficial (McMichael, 2015; Burton et al., 2016).
3.10.4.3 Infrastructural Adaptation Measures
Regular updating of maps of flood-prone areas, flood-vulnerable areas, and coastal erosion zones is key 
to managing these risks. Alterations to the built environment can reduce the risks of floods and overflows. 
Rainwater management measures such as retention ponds and making the urban environment more 
permeable to runoff can decrease these risks by reducing the burden on water treatment systems and 
encouraging the absorption of rainwater, thereby decreasing the risk of overflows (Houghton & Castillo-
Salgado, 2017). Requirements for such measures are found in some green building or neighbourhood 
development certifications, such as LEED, but not always. One study found that scenarios of moderately 
and intensely impervious urban surfaces can increase the risk of flooding two-fold and the risk of overflows 
four-fold, before taking climate change into account (Zimmermann et al., 2016). Making soil more permeable 
via green infrastructure are among the measures that could stabilize or reduce these risks (Farrugia et al., 
2013; Lennon et al., 2014; Zimmermann et al., 2016). Increasing riparian planting by 20% to 40% can also 
reduce river peak flow levels by up to 19%, while increasing planting by 10% to 15% can reduce levels by up 
to 6% (Dixon et al., 2016) and reduce erosion as well as the loss of property values (Moudrak et al., 2018). 
Prohibiting building in at-risk coastal areas through zoning bylaws or other legal means could progressively 
reduce exposure to coastal hazards, with the gradual loss of acquired rights and mitigation of urban 
expansion into high-risk areas. Green infrastructure is also an effective measure to prevent or slow coastal 
erosion (Keesstra et al., 2018).
3.10.4.4 Evaluation of Floods, Coastal Flooding, and Coastal Erosion 
Adaptation Measures
Unfortunately, the effectiveness of floods, coastal flooding, and coastal erosion adaptation measures 
on health has not been assessed in the Canadian context and has undergone very limited assessment 
internationally (Burton et al., 2016). Actions taken by municipalities and provinces are still largely reactive 
rather than proactive, although a reverse trend is beginning to emerge (Manuel et al., 2015; Burton et al., 2016; 
Hurlbert & Gupta, 2016). Some adaptation measures may not be advantageous to implement in that their 
costs may exceed the benefits, especially in areas where the potential damage and likelihood of occurrence 
are relatively low. To be better able to assess costs and benefits, programs like the Flood Ready platform, the 
National Disaster Mitigation Program and organizations like FloodSmart Canada (<http://floodsmartcanada.
ca>) are gathering detailed information to assist individuals, businesses, and the public sector to optimize 
investments in coastal hazard adaptation measures (Government of Canada, 2019a; Public Safety Canada, 
2019). Assessing, mapping, and updating coastal risks to account for climate trends is also essential to 
better focus interventions. In Canada, this mapping predates the turn of the century and would benefit 
from an update (Henstra & Thistlethwaite, 2018). In Quebec, a number of impact and cost-benefit studies 
of coastal adaptation options led the provincial government and municipalities to implement a relevant 
adaptation program for the entire St. Lawrence River, Gulf, and Estuary (Bernatchez et al., 2015; Circé et al., 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 188 
2016). This program includes stricter regulations and construction standards, along with compensation and 
relocation measures.
3.11 Landslides, Avalanches, 
and Thawing Permafrost
3.11.1 Impacts of Climate Change on Landslides, Avalanches, and 
Thawing Permafrost — Trends and Projections
A warmer, wetter climate generally increases the occurrence of landslides (Gariano & Guzzetti, 2016). Studies in 
Canada on the effects of climate change on landslides have mainly been conducted in British Columbia and seem 
to confirm that warming temperatures and increased precipitation have increased the frequency and magnitude of 
landslides over the past century (Jakob & Lambert, 2009; Geertsema, 2013; Gariano & Guzzetti, 2016).
The net effect of climate change on avalanches in Canada is unclear. Between 1981 and 2011, the number of 
avalanches reportedly decreased in Western Canada, while there does not appear to be a trend in Southern 
Quebec (Hetu et al., 2015; Sinickas et al., 2016). Warming temperatures, snow accumulation, freezing rain, 
wind strength, and the formation of a layer of frost or ice crystals at the beginning of the season affect the 
likelihood of avalanches and their intensity, which complicates projections of future impacts (Germain et al., 
2009; Bellaire et al., 2016; Sinickas et al., 2016).
Permafrost covers nearly 40% of Canada’s land mass and extends under the Arctic Ocean. Projected warming 
of ground temperatures is expected to promote thawing of permafrost over large areas — up to 20% in 
Northern regions by 2090 (compared to 1990) (Derksen et al., 2019). A few regional observations indicate 
that permafrost temperature has increased by 0.1°C to 1°C per decade, with warming being greater in Arctic 
Canada than in sub-Arctic regions. Thermokarst7 formation has also been observed over large areas in 
Northern Canada, an environment characterized by subsidence due to thawing permafrost. The land area 
supported by permafrost in Canada could decrease by 16% to 20% under low-to-moderate GHG emission 
scenarios (IPCC AR4 scenarios A2 and B2, used in 2007) compared to 1990, with some estimates being even 
more pessimistic (Derksen et al., 2019). The circumpolar Northern region of permafrost contains carbon 
reserves equivalent to the total amount of carbon already in the atmosphere (Derksen et al., 2019). The 
projected thawing of permafrost could release massive amounts of GHGs into the atmosphere, contributing 
to the acceleration of climate change and its consequences.
7	
Thermokarst refers to irregular topographies related to ice-rich thawing permafrost (Derksen et al., 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 189 
3.11.2 Effects of Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost 
on Health
3.11.2.1 Impacts of Landslides on Health
The risk of dying from a landslide is quite low in Canada and has decreased over the years while landslides 
seem to be increasing in number. From 1990 to 2018, 23 landslides caused fatalities across Canada, 
resulting in a total of 39 deaths, with an average of one to two deaths per year (Blais-Stevens et al., 2018). 
The probability of death is greater when landslides develop rapidly and when they affect people inside a 
building (Kennedy et al., 2015). Landslides can also result in some physical injuries and trauma, including 
cuts, bruises, concussions, and fractures. Some studies conducted outside of Canada (Italy, Greece, Puerto 
Rico, etc.) have also associated landslide exposure with an increased incidence of post-traumatic stress and 
deterioration of social cohesion up to two years after the event (Kennedy et al., 2015). However, these effects 
are generally observed during large-scale landslides, which are rare in Canada.
3.11.2.2 Impacts of Avalanches on Health
Physical Health
Avalanche-related health risks are primarily associated with the injuries and deaths they can cause. 
Across Canada, 123 people died as a result of an avalanche from 2009 to 2018 (Avalanche Canada, 2018). 
Avalanches pose a particular risk in Western Canada, with 102 of those 123 deaths occurring in British 
Columbia and 16 in Alberta, because mountain slopes in Western Canada are much steeper than the rest 
of the country. Asphyxia, severe trauma, and hypothermia account for the bulk of avalanche-related deaths 
(Boyd et al., 2009; Kornhall & Martens-Nielsen, 2016). In fact, one study found that avalanches were lethal 
in 23% of cases, with a 50% mortality rate when the victim was completely covered by snow (Kornhall & 
Martens-Nielsen, 2016).
Psychosocial Health
Avalanches can also have short- and long-term effects on the psychosocial health of affected people. A study 
in Iceland considered the psychosocial impacts on populations in two villages affected by deadly avalanches 
(Thordardottir et al., 2015). Some 16% of villagers affected by avalanches directly or indirectly had symptoms 
of post-traumatic stress related to the event 16 years after the event. Villagers were also at higher risk for 
sleep disorders and post-traumatic hyper-reactivity compared to a similar, unexposed population.
3.11.2.3 Effects of Thawing Permafrost on Health
Thawing permafrost is a hazard specific to Northern environments. The related health risks are more indirect 
than for avalanches and landslides — hazards that develop rapidly. Thawing permafrost is compromising 
the integrity of houses, public buildings, roads, and other infrastructures and Northern communities, such 
as many First Nations and Inuit communities, are already lacking infrastructure. They also depend on air 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 190 
transport to bring in food and essential goods such as medicine (Allard et al., 2012; Ford et al., 2014; Durkalec 
et al., 2015). In addition, thawing permafrost could affect the risk of water-borne disease by releasing 
infectious agents and significant concentrations of heavy metals such as mercury (Moquin & Wrona, 2015; Vonk et 
al., 2015; Schuster et al., 2018) (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases and Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). 
Across Canada, many Indigenous communities face serious water safety challenges due to inadequate 
water and wastewater systems, a lack of trained staff, and higher exposure to pollutants or environmental 
contaminants and many face short- and long-term boil water advisories (Wright et al., 2018; Indigenous 
Services Canada, 2020a; Indigenous Services Canada, 2020b). Thawing permafrost can increase exposure to 
health risks from contaminated water by further weakening water supply systems or water sources (Neegan 
Burnside Ltd., 2011). Finally, thawing permafrost can compromise the food security of Arctic communities, 
which use ice cellars dug from permafrost to safely store food, such as in the community of Inupiat, Alaska 
(U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit, 2017). Biodiversity, and thus access to traditional food, will also be negatively 
affected by thawing permafrost, which may further affect local populations (Berteaux et al., 2016).
3.11.3 Populations at Increased Risk to Landslides, Avalanches, and 
Thawing Permafrost
People living on clay soil or near steep slopes are at increased risk of landslides (Porter & Morgenstern, 
2013; Macciotta & Lefsrud, 2018). Some international studies have also shown that women are more likely to 
experience symptoms of post-traumatic stress following a major landslide (Kennedy et al., 2015). People who 
practise snowmobiling, skiing, snowshoeing, winter hiking, and any other winter activities on mountainous 
terrain are the most exposed to avalanches (Boyd et al., 2009). Almost half of all avalanche deaths between 
2009 and 2018 involved snowmobilers, and just over one-third involved skiers (Avalanche Canada, 2018); 88% 
of fatalities were males, a situation similar to most countries with snow (Page et al., 1999; Jamieson et al., 
2010; Berlin et al., 2019).
For thawing permafrost, Northern and Indigenous populations are at increased risk given their highly exposed 
infrastructure (such as roads, drinking water systems, buildings, pipelines) and limited access to some 
essential resources due to remoteness. In particular, Indigenous Peoples living in areas vulnerable to thawing 
permafrost are at increased risk of negative health and social impacts, given existing social and health 
inequities, such as poverty, poor quality of housing and infrastructure, and disproportionate burden of disease 
(see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). In addition, their proximity to 
nature and close connection to the land means that these climate change impacts affect their way of life 
and can destroy places that have cultural significance (Government of Nunavut, 2012). For example, in Inuit 
Nunangat,8 natural disturbances such as thawing permafrost, melting or thinning ice, and changes in sea 
level exacerbated the loss of Indigenous knowledge and skills related to hunting, road transportation, weather 
forecasting, and wildlife movement. These changes increase the risk of unintentional injury or death and the 
need for search-and-rescue missions, reduced access to traditional food, and impacts on mental health. 
8	
Inuit Nunangat is the Inuit homeland in Canada and is comprised for four regions: the Inuvialuit Settlement Region 
(northern Northwest Territories), Nunavut, Nunavik (northern Quebec) and Nunatsiavut (northern Labrador).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 191 
3.11.4 Landslides, Avalanches, and Thawing Permafrost 
Adaptation Measures
One of the first adaptation measures for landslides, avalanches, and permafrost melt is the production and 
updating of risk and vulnerability maps. Monitoring these events (e.g., avalanche) is also critical (Canadian 
Space Agency, 2016; Avalanche Canada, 2018; MFFP, 2019).
3.11.4.1 Landslide Adaptation Measures
Given the low risk of death from landslides, major adaptation measures such as relocation would only be 
warranted in the most at-risk areas (Macciotta & Lefsrud, 2018). Natural Resources Canada offers a best-
practices guide for assessing landslide risks based on physical, legal, economic, and risk acceptance criteria 
(Porter & Morgenstern, 2013). In addition, preventive warning systems that take account of the hydrological 
and physical properties of soils and precipitation forecasts have been developed in other countries and may 
be an option for limiting the exposure of populations to this risk in some cases (Chae et al., 2017).
3.11.4.2 Avalanches Adaptation Measures
The assessment of avalanche risk areas and the consequent adaptation of land-use planning have 
significantly reduced the number of deaths inside buildings (Hetu et al., 2015; Germain, 2016). In addition to 
choosing building locations strategically, the reforestation of the slopes is another management measure 
that reduces the risk of avalanche by obstructing the wind and avalanche corridor (Hetu et al., 2015). A 
downward trend in the risk of mortality has also been observed since avalanche-related weather monitoring 
organizations were created to raise public awareness of avalanche-related risks and provide mountain safety 
training (Avalanche Canada, 2018). Avalanches can be activated pre-emptively in a controlled manner before 
they become a threat, or when the risk becomes too high, as in Glacier National Park in the Canadian Rockies 
(Parks Canada, 2018).
3.11.4.3 Thawing Permafrost Adaptation Measures
Work by Natural Resources Canada has made it possible to characterize and determine temperature 
thresholds for thawing permafrost (Labbé et al., 2017). Adaptation measures such as using surfaces with 
high albedo, placing ventilation ducts or heat sinks below infrastructure, installing adjacent air convection 
levees or thermosyphons, and building an overhead solar shelter can cool the soil and thereby mitigate 
infrastructure damage (Calmels et al., 2016; Doré et al., 2016). Many of these measures have been 
implemented in Northern Canadian communities, although there is no national adaptation strategy to direct 
such activities (Labbé et al., 2017). The Alaska Highway in the Yukon is a well-documented example of 
risk characterization and subsequent infrastructure stabilization through adaptation (Stephani et al., 2014; 
Calmels et al., 2016). Characterizing permafrost-related risks can also better inform land-use planning. In 
Arviat, Nunavut, for example, an assessment has increased decision makers’ awareness of the risks posed 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 192 
by thawing permafrost and facilitated adaptation cooperation among stakeholders (Flynn et al., 2018). The 
ArcticNet Network of Centres of Excellence of Canada has been conducting a major research program on 
these impacts and applicable solutions for the past 15 years (ArcticNet, 2021). For example, a 2013 mapping 
of discontinuous permafrost areas in Nunavik allowed for risk-informed planning for infrastructure and health 
facilities for all levels of government involved (L’Hérault et al., 2013).
3.12 Gaps in the Literature and Uncertainty of 
Scientific Evidence Related to the Impacts on Health 
of Natural Hazards Influenced by Climate Change 
This section details the main gaps in the scientific literature and the uncertainties that remain about the 
impacts of natural hazards on health, individuals most at risk, and how they can protect themselves as the 
climate continues to warm in Canada.
3.12.1 Health and Natural Hazards Data
Several uncertainties persist in the literature about the impacts on health of natural hazards influenced by 
climate change. The projected health effects are highly dependent on GHG emission scenarios, demographic 
changes, and the future levels of adaptation by individuals, communities, and institutions, for example, health 
systems and facilities (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). These projections must 
therefore be interpreted with caution, since significant variability is to be expected, based on these factors. 
The literature also contains some conflictual findings regarding natural hazard impacts on health in the 
context of climate change. They are included in this chapter when applicable. The processes leading to health 
effects are also often indirect and complex. Some effects may not be evident or explored in studies because 
of the large number of variables and their complex interactions. Experimental (e.g., clinical studies) or quasi-
experimental9 designs are particularly difficult — and in some cases impossible — to implement to assess the 
effects of climate change. Designs are often observational or cross-sectional and are therefore offer slightly 
less robust evidence, although still acceptable for understanding risks and adaptation planning. In contrast, 
several rigorous meta-analyses and literature reviews have been documented. There exists an imbalance in 
researched topics and in the quality of documented studies, and a number of gaps remain. Nevertheless, the 
number of studies available for most natural hazards influenced by climate change is substantial and for the 
most part sufficient to provide a clear characterization of current health impacts in the short term.
9	
A quasi-experimental design describes pre-post, non-randomized studies (i.e., participants were not assigned 
randomized treatments, for example, unlike clinical studies).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 193 
However, climate impact models do not yet, or rarely, take health into account in their impact simulations, 
leading to uncertainty about projected global impacts (Gosling et al., 2017). In addition, these models do not 
take adaptation measures into account, resulting in additional uncertainty (Gosling et al., 2017).
3.12.2 Type of Natural Hazards Considered
There are a number of gaps in the scientific literature regarding the health effects of natural hazards in 
Canada. First, a number of natural hazards are under-represented. Health effects not directly associated with 
temperature, infectious diseases, or air quality are generally less well studied. Research on droughts, coastal 
erosion, coastal flooding, landslides, and thawing permafrost typically focuses on assessment methods or 
economic and ecological damage, and not on health impacts. The small size of the affected populations also 
makes health impact and vulnerability studies more difficult to conduct methodologically.
3.12.3 Direct and Indirect Impacts on Health
Most of the direct, but especially indirect, effects of these hazards on health, as described in this chapter, 
should be analyzed in more detail and for their specific characteristics. Although mental health impacts 
(post-traumatic stress, depression, etc.) are being studied more and more, the impacts of various hazards on 
social cohesion, environmental degradation, population movements, and financial insecurity are unknown and 
remain to be discovered. It is important to assess these psychosocial health effects, as they indirectly affect the 
physical health and adaptive capacity of affected individuals (see Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being).
3.12.4 Impacts of Combined Natural Hazard Events
In Canada, very few studies have focused on the effect of combined natural hazards occurring simultaneously 
or successively on population health. Assessing the health and social impacts associated with the repeated 
exposure to extreme events on the same populations is rare and should be prioritized given that climate 
change is expected to increase the frequency of many extreme weather events and disasters, thereby 
increasing the probability of combined and/or successive events. Examples of past events in Canada include 
the successive exposure to floods (2017 and 2019) and tornadoes or high winds (2018) in the Gatineau/
Ottawa area (CRC, 2020a), and wildfires (2016) and floods (2020) in Fort McMurray, Alberta (CRC, 2020b). 
The successive extreme heat events that struck Eastern Canada in 2020 are another example. Not only are 
more studies of the health effects of such combined events needed, but expected future trends also need 
to be projected. Traditional risk assessment assesses one danger/hazard at a time, which can lead to an 
underestimated risk for natural hazards events that often depend on each other (e.g., extreme heat and 
wildfires), are fed by the same hydro-meteorological variables (Zscheischler et al., 2018), or combine to 
overwhelm adaptive capacities that protect health. Climate projections would also benefit from the analysis 
of compound events, such as combined (or repeated) extreme heat event projections, which are expected to 
be amplified (Baldwin et al., 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 194 
3.12.5 Cascading Impacts of Hazards and Health System Impacts
Little research has yet been conducted on the cumulative impacts of natural hazards that can affect health, 
such as the likelihood of a power outage causing a water or medication shortage or road accidents due to 
a traffic light outage. Assessing the health system’s ability to cope with natural hazards is also essential, 
albeit poorly documented, to avoid disrupting services or overloading equipment or staff, particularly in 
areas that are rural or remote from urban centres. A health system that is itself vulnerable to natural hazards 
could exacerbate the health effects of at risk populations by being unable to meet the demand for care, 
medication, and social services (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). The current 
COVID-19 pandemic also illustrates a situation in which an already overloaded health system may have to 
simultaneously deal with the effects of a hurricane or extreme heat events.
3.12.6 Behaviours and Lifestyle
The effects of climate change on behaviour and lifestyle should require further study. For example, an 
analysis of the effects of heat and precipitation on physical activity, outdoor activity, travel habits, eating, 
social interactions, criminal behaviour, emotional strain, cognitive ability, and choice of living area are 
essential for a full and representative assessment of the consequences of climate change, but little related 
data are available for Canada and elsewhere in the world.
3.12.7 Assessment of Adaptation Measures
Retrospective assessment of the health effects of measures to adapt to natural hazards is also lacking, with 
the exception of greening. The scientific literature focuses more on health effects based on exposure and 
vulnerability to hazards. In the absence of a more accurate assessment, health effects must be inferred from 
the impacts of adaptation measures on the frequency, location, intensity, and timing of the natural hazards, 
which have been studied more extensively. Even in this literature, studies rarely control for implemented 
adaptation measures and individual or social adaptive abilities, or else do so indirectly through socio-
economic factors, such as income and education. Individuals respond in one way or another to extreme heat, 
intense cold, smog episodes, humidity, and precipitation by reducing their time outdoors, for example, which 
influences observed health effects.
3.12.8 Economic Impacts of Health Effects and Adaptation and 
Mitigation Measures
Although there are cost-benefit analyses for select climate change adaptation and mitigation measures, they 
fail to take into account health benefits associated with them. Estimates of the monetary value of the health 
benefits of proposed measures, including avoided health care costs, could help justify their adoption and 
implementation. Decision makers require information about whether costly adaptation measures would have 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 195 
sufficient economic payback, for example, the benefits of reducing fossil fuel combustion (less GHGs, less 
air pollution) compared to the costs of building infrastructure (bicycle path, tram) or setting up a monitoring 
system for health impacts. As well, there are very few studies that highlight the level of climate change 
adaptation and preparedness, and effectiveness of specific measures, whether at the municipal, provincial, or 
national level; yet these preparations and adaptations can greatly reduce the medical costs associated with 
natural disasters, in particular.
3.12.9 Relative Importance of Vulnerability and Protection Factors
Although vulnerability is central to the literature on the health impacts of natural hazards and adaptation to 
climate change, further research is needed to better understand and rank vulnerability factors in order to 
effectively prioritize adaptation measures. The assessment of the interactions between these factors and 
their cumulative effects on health outcomes in a climate change context is also lacking. The same applies 
to protective factors and their interactions with vulnerability factors. Currently, the way vulnerability is 
conceptualized is misunderstood, especially regarding social cohesion, sense of belonging, education, and 
certain cultural or cognitive factors.
3.12.10 Equitable Representation in the Literature
Some populations at higher risk from the health effects of natural hazards are studied less than others, 
particularly those already experiencing health inequities (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). 
People experiencing homelessness, people who have pre-existing chronic diseases or mental illness, people 
with reduced mobility, racialized populations, and socially isolated individuals are less represented in the 
literature compared to men, women, low-income individuals, children, workers, and seniors.
Sex is often included in impact studies,10 and each sex may have different vulnerability factors, but it is not 
clear whether one particular sex is more vulnerable overall. Consideration for gender11 and 2SLGBTQQIA+ 
populations are almost completely absent from the scientific literature on climate change (see Chapter 9: 
Climate Change and Health Equity).
3.12.11 Indigenous Populations
The literature on how climate change will impact Indigenous populations living in Canada is uneven in terms 
of population and geographic focus. Most research is on Inuit populations and the Canadian Arctic, while 
studies of people living in Southern Canadian or urban areas, and of Métis peoples across Canada, are 
sparse. While there is more research on Northern Indigenous populations, they are less documented than 
10	 In Western science, sex is typically considered binary (male and female), which overlooks intersex individuals.
11	 Gender refers to the socially constructed roles assigned to men and women. In Western science, gender is commonly 
conflated with sex, and presented as binary (man and woman), overlooking non-binary individuals. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 196 
the general populations living in Southern Canada. In addition, significant research gaps exist about climate 
change impacts on the health of First Nations communities in the Prairies and the Atlantic provinces. 
The vulnerability factors that increase risks of health impacts of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and the 
impacts of hazards may differ in important aspects from non-Indigenous populations (e.g., pervasive health 
inequalities, inequities, and determinants of health, including a shared history of colonization) and require more 
research, as do the factors on the determinants of adaptive capacity needed to build greater resilience to future 
impacts. Furthermore, research on Indigenous communities is seldom Indigenous-led, which can contribute to a 
sometimes biased interpretation of research findings on impacts or vulnerability to natural hazards.
3.12.12 Factors Supporting Adaptation
Political, societal, and structural factors that support effective adaptation to natural hazards, although studied 
elsewhere, have not been thoroughly assessed in a Canadian context. Factors influencing whether and 
how decision makers within and outside the health sector implement climate change adaptation measures 
are not well documented in a Canadian context. Legal and administrative organization, strategic planning, 
communication between different sectors and departments, resource allocation, windows of opportunity, the 
role of public opinion, as well as assessment and prioritization methods, are all relevant topics that should be 
studied more in-depth to facilitate adaptation to climate change and encourage optimal governance.
3.12.13 Communication on Climate Change
Strategies and measures to communicate climate change also requires further study in Canada. Knowledge 
of risk and adaptation measures influences the adoption of preventive behaviours. Thus, the use of the 
most effective communication tools and messages to reach populations at increased risk, who generally 
have less means to adapt, and the tailoring of messages according to each subpopulation are essential. 
Communication efforts related to climate change and health are not currently being assessed in Canada. 
Evaluation of such efforts would make it possible to optimize the impacts of awareness campaigns. Social 
marketing approaches and techniques are a potentially powerful tool to improve the effectiveness of climate 
change and health communication, but are not currently being widely utilized (Daignault et al., 2018). A better 
understanding of the psychological processes that lead individuals to adopt adaptation measures would 
help in efforts by public health officials to better tailor messages such as, for example, framing the issue to 
emphasize opportunities and benefits to encourage action. Several social psychology models, such as the 
theory of planned behaviour or the protection motivation theory, can be used for this purpose.
In summary, analysis of the impacts of natural hazards on health, risk factors, and vulnerability factors, as 
well as adaptation measures, need to successfully plan for climate change, is still piecemeal in Canada, 
despite more than 15 years of work and growing interest in this area. More research should be undertaken to 
fill these gaps.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 197 
3.13 Conclusion
This chapter discusses the impacts of natural hazards influenced by climate change on the health of 
Canadians with a special focus on populations at increased risk. All of the natural hazards identified already 
have significant impacts on people’s health, some major, and these impacts are expected to become more 
intense in the coming years in the absence of further adaptation measures. 
A few years ago, an external assessment noted that, while several provinces have adopted climate change 
action plans that recognize the impacts of climate change on population health, most remained in the early 
stages of adapting to the health impacts of climate change, with responses that are fragmented or focused 
on a limited number of hazards, particularly heat (Austin et al., 2015). Moreover, a provincial and federal 
auditors general report in 2018 criticized the limited progress on risk assessment and the lack of detailed 
adaptation plans across the country, despite some tangible successes (Office of the Auditor General of 
Canada, 2018). As extreme meteorological events constitute the most important element of climate change 
risks, this conclusion remains relevant for natural hazards.
Several adaptation measures do exist and some are being implemented by health authorities; they can be 
adopted more widely to reduce the effects of hazards on the health of Canadians, as this chapter has shown. 
However, monitoring and evaluation of these measures as they are implemented should be undertaken in the 
coming years to gain more evidence of their effectiveness and efficiency in diverse contexts and populations. 
Documenting and evaluating on a regular basis our health system risk levels and preparedness for natural 
hazards events should thus become a top priority, along with monitoring the implementation of preventive 
measures to reduce risks, especially for vulnerable populations. Preparing detailed adaptation plans, region 
by region throughout the country, would constitute an important first step towards improved preparedness. 
A very similar conclusion emerged from a recent international review that suggested inclusion of vulnerable 
subpopulations is low across all actions and diffusion of adaptation across sectors remains underdeveloped 
(Berrang-Ford et al., 2019). These authors also argue that an important disconnection exists between 
adaptation goals and the instruments and means proposed for implementation and reporting, including in 
Canada. Typically, preliminary actions (scenarios, conceptual tools, guides, assessment of potential impacts, 
etc.) far outweigh the systematic implementation of practical measures (financial support, technology, 
assessment of measures, etc.) by health authorities (Lesnikowski et al., 2015; Lesnikowski et al., 2016). 
Furthermore, significant regional differences exist in efforts to understand and adapt to the health impacts of 
national hazards in Canada. 
At the municipal level, an assessment of the climate change plans for the 63 most-populated cities in Canada 
found that GHG mitigation rather than adaptation measures were being prioritized, while the assessment of 
both types of measures in the plans, their implementation, and the involvement of a variety of stakeholders 
were lacking (Guyadeen et al., 2019). Ultimately, the current pace of implementation of adaptation measures 
to reduce the health impacts of natural hazards may be insufficient to substantially mitigate the future effects 
of climate change, as highlighted by recent dramatic events such as the 2021 summer extreme heat and 
severe wildfires in Western Canada, and their effects. Redoubling efforts to prepare for climate change is 
therefore essential to ensure sustainable health in all Canadian communities and regions.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 198 
3.14 References
Abbasi, S. (2014). Adaptation to drought in Saskatchewan 
rural communities : A case study of Kindersley and Maidstone, 
Saskatchewan [Master’s Thesis, University of Saskatchewan]. 
University of Saskatchewan. Retrieved from <http://hdl.handle.
net/10388/ETD-2014-01-1385> 
Achakulwisut, P., Mickley, L., & Anenberg, S. (2018). Drought-
sensitivity of fine dust in the US Southwest : Implications for 
air quality and public health under future climate change. 
Environmental Research Letters, 13(5), 054025.
Acharya, P., Boggess, B., & Zhang, K. (2018). Assessing heat 
stress and health among construction workers in a changing 
climate : A review. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(2). <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15020247>
Adam-Poupart, A., Smargiassi, A., Busque, M.-A., Duguay, P., 
Fournier, M., Zayed, J., & Labreche, F. (2014). Summer outdoor 
temperature and occupational heat-related illnesses in Quebec 
(Canada). Environmental Research, 134, 339‑344. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2014.07.018>
Adam-Poupart, A., Smargiassi, A., Busque, M.-A., Duguay, P., 
Fournier, M., Zayed, J., & Labrèche, F. (2015). Effect of summer 
outdoor temperatures on work-related injuries in Quebec 
(Canada). Occupational & Environmental Medicine, 72(5), 
338‑345. 
Adam-Poupart, A., Nicolakakis, N., Anassour Laouan Sidi, E., 
Berry, P., Campagna, C., Chaumont, D., Hamel, D., Labrèche, F., 
Sassine, M.-P., Smargiassi, A., Zayed, J. (2021). Climate change 
and heat vulnerabilities of Canadian workers: Focus on the 
Central and Western provinces of Canada. Institut national de 
santé publique du Québec.
Adetona, O., Reinhardt, T. E., Domitrovich, J., Broyles, G., 
Adetona, A. M., Kleinman, M. T., Ottmar, R. D., & Naeher, L. P. 
(2016). Review of the health effects of wildland fire smoke on 
wildland firefighters and the public. Inhalation Toxicology, 28(3), 
95‑139.
Advisory Committee on Homelessness. (2018). Final Report of 
the Advisory Committee on Homelessness on the Homelessness 
Partnering Strategy. Employment and Social Development 
Canada.
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (2021). Canadian Canadian 
Drought Monitor. Retrieved from <https://www-ep.agr.gc.ca/en/
agriculture-and-environment/drought-watch-and-agroclimate/
canadian-drought-monitor>
Agyapong, V. I. O., Hrabok, M., Juhas, M., Omeje, J., Denga, 
E., Nwaka, B., Akinjise, I., Corbett, S. E., Moosavi, S., Brown, 
M., Chue, P., Greenshaw, A. J., & Li, X.-M. (2018). Prevalence 
rates and predictors of generalized anxiety disorder symptoms 
in residents of Fort McMurray six months after a wildfire. 
Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9, 345. <https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyt.2018.00345> 
AirNow. (2021). AirNow. Retrieved from <https://airnow.gov/> 
Alberini, A., Gans, W., Alhassan, M. (2011). Individual and public-
program adaptation : Coping with heat waves in five cities in 
Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 8(12), 4679‑4701. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph8124679>
Alberta Health Service. (2020). Use of Portable Bedside Fans and 
Air Conditioners in Healthcare during the COVID-19 Pandemic. 
Infection and Prevention Control Continuing Care Working Group. 
Retrieved from <https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/assets/
healthinfo/ipc/if-hp-ipc-info-sheet-portable-fans.pdf>
Albert-Green, A., Dean, C. B., Martell, D. L., & Woolford, D. G. 
(2013). A methodology for investigating trends in changes in the 
timing of the fire season with applications to lightning-caused 
forest fires in Alberta and Ontario, Canada. Canadian Journal 
of Forest Research, 43(1), 39‑45. <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-
2011-0432> 
Alderman, K., Turner, L. R., & Tong, S. (2012). Floods and human 
health : A systematic review. Environment International, 47, 
37‑47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.06.003 
Ali, A. M., & Willett, K. (2015). What is the effect of the weather 
on trauma workload? A systematic review of the literature. Injury, 
46(6), 945‑953. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.injury.2015.03.016 
Allard, M., Lemay, M., Barrette, C., L’Hérault, E., Sarrazin, D., Bell, 
T., & Doré, G. (2012). Permafrost and climate change in Nunavik 
and Nunatsiavut : Importance for municipal and transportation 
infrastructures. In M. Allard, & M. Lemay (Eds.), Nunavik and 
Nunatsiavut: From science to policy. An Integrated Regional 
Impact Study (IRIS) of climate change and modernization, 
171‑197. Quebec City, QC.
Almendra, R., Santana, P., & Vasconcelos, J. (2017). Evidence 
of social deprivation on the spatial patterns of excess winter 
mortality. International Journal of Public Health, 62(8), 849‑856.
Andrey, J. (2010). Long-term trends in weather-related crash 
risks. Journal of Transport Geography, 18(2), 247‑258. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2009.05.002> 
Arbuthnott, K., Hajat, S., Heaviside, C., & Vardoulakis, S. (2016). 
Changes in population susceptibility to heat and cold over time : 
Assessing adaptation to climate change. Environmental Health, 
15(1), S33.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 199 
ArcticNet. (2021). ArcticNet. Retrieved from <http://www.
arcticnet.ulaval.ca/> 
Askew, A. E., & Bowker, J. M. (2018). Impacts of climate change 
on outdoor recreation participation : Outlook to 2060. Journal of 
Park & Recreation Administration, 36(2), 97‑120.
Astell-Burt, T., Feng, X., & Kolt, G. S. (2014). Neighbourhood 
green space and the odds of having skin cancer : Multilevel 
evidence of survey data from 267072 Australians. Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health, 68(4), 370‑374. <https://
doi.org/10.1136/jech-2013-203043> 
Audinet, P., Amado, J.-C., & Rabb, B. (2014). Climate risk 
management approaches in the electricity sector : Lessons from 
early adapters. In A. Troccoli, L. Dubus, & S. E. Haupt (Eds.), 
Weather Matters for Energy (p. 17‑64). New York, NY: Springer. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-9221-4_2> 
Auger, N., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., Labesse, M. E., & Kosatsky, 
T. (2017a). Association of elevated ambient temperature 
with death from cocaine overdose. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 178, 101‑105. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
drugalcdep.2017.04.019>
Auger, N., Fraser, W. D., Arbour, L., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., & 
Kosatsky, T. (2017b). Elevated ambient temperatures and risk of 
neural tube defects. Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 
74(5), 315‑320. <https://doi.org/10.1136/oemed-2016-103956> 
Auger, N., Fraser, W. D., Sauvé, R., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., & 
Kosatsky, T. (2017c). Risk of congenital heart defects after 
ambient heat exposure early in pregnancy. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 125(1), 8‑14. <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP171> 
Auger, N., Fraser, W. D., Smargiassi, A., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., & 
Kosatsky, T. (2017d). Elevated outdoor temperatures and risk of 
stillbirth. International Journal of Epidemiology, 46(1), 200‑208. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw077> 
Auger, N., Fraser, W. D., Smargiassi, A., & Kosatsky, T. (2015). 
Ambient heat and sudden infant death : A case-crossover 
study spanning 30 years in Montreal, Canada. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 123(7), 712‑716. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1307960> 
Auger, N., Naimi, A. I., Smargiassi, A., Lo, E., & Kosatsky, T. 
(2014). Extreme heat and risk of early delivery among preterm 
and term pregnancies. Epidemiology, 25(3), 344. <https://doi.
org/10.1097/EDE.0000000000000074> 
Auger, N., Potter, B. J., Smargiassi, A., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., 
Paris, C., & Kosatsky, T. (2017e). Association between quantity 
and duration of snowfall and risk of myocardial infarction. 
CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association Journal, 189(6), E235‑E242. 
<https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.161064>
Auger, N., Rhéaume, M.-A., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., Tang, T., & 
Kosatsky, T. (2017f). Climate and the eye : Case-crossover 
analysis of retinal detachment after exposure to ambient 
heat. Environmental Research, 157, 103‑109. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.05.017> 
Austin, S. E., Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Araos, M., Parker, S., & 
Fleury, M. D. (2015). Public health adaptation to climate change 
in Canadian jurisdictions. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 12(1), 623‑651. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph120100623> 
Avalanche Canada. (2018). 2017-2018 Annual report. Retrieved 
from <https://issuu.com/avalancheca/docs/ac_2018_annual_
reportissuu> 
Azuma, K., Ikeda, K., Kagi, N., Yanagi, U., Hasegawa, K., & Osawa, 
H. (2014). Effects of water-damaged homes after flooding : 
Health status of the residents and the environmental risk 
factors. International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 
24(2), 158‑175. <https://doi.org/10.1080/09603123.2013.800964> 
BC Centre for Disease Control (BC CDC). (2020). Warm weather 
safety in a time of COVID-19. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.
ca/about/news-stories/stories/2020/warm-weather-safety-in-a-
time-of-covid-19>
Baert, V., Gorus, E., Mets, T., Geerts, C., & Bautmans, I. (2011). 
Motivators and barriers for physical activity in the oldest old : 
A systematic review. Ageing Research Reviews, 10(4), 464‑474. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arr.2011.04.001>
Bai, L., Li, Q., Wang, J., Lavigne, É., Gasparrini, A., Copes, R., 
Yagouti, A., Burnett, R. T., Goldberg, M. S. & Cakmak, S. (2017). 
Increased coronary heart disease and stroke hospitalisations 
from ambient temperatures in Ontario. Heart, 104(8), 673‑679. 
Bai, L., Li, Q., Wang, J., Lavigne, E., Gasparrini, A., Copes, 
R., Yagouti, A., Burnett, R. T., Goldberg, M. S., Villeneuve, 
P. J., Cakmak, S., & Chen, H. (2016). Hospitalizations from 
hypertensive diseases, diabetes, and arrhythmia in relation to 
low and high temperatures : Population-based study. Scientific 
Reports, 6, 30283. <https://doi.org/10.1038/srep30283>
Bais, A. F., Lucas, R. M., Bornman, J. F., Williamson, C. E., 
Sulzberger, B., Austin, A. T., Wilson, S. R., Andrady, A. L., 
Bernhard, G., & McKenzie, R. L. (2018). Environmental effects 
of ozone depletion, UV radiation and interactions with climate 
change : UNEP Environmental Effects Assessment Panel, update 
2017. Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 17(2), 127‑179.
Bais, A. F., McKenzie, R., Bernhard, G., Aucamp, P., Ilyas, M., 
Madronich, S., & Tourpali, K. (2015). Ozone depletion and 
climate change : Impacts on UV radiation. Photochemical & 
Photobiological Sciences, 14(1), 19‑52.
Baldwin, J. W., Dessy, J. B., Vecchi, G. A., & Oppenheimer, M. 
(2019). Temporally compound heat wave events and global 
warming: An emerging hazard. Earth’s Future, 7(4), 411-427.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 200 
Barn, P. (2014). Evidence review: Home and community clean air 
shelters to protect public health during wildfire smoke events (C. 
Elliott, & K. Rideout, eds). BC Centre for Disease Control. 
Barnett, A. G., Tong, S., & Clements, A. (2010). What measure of 
temperature is the best predictor of mortality? Environmental 
research, 110(6), 604‑611. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2010.05.006> 
Barreca, A. I. (2012). Climate change, humidity, and mortality 
in the United States. Journal of Environmental Economics 
and Management, 63(1), 19‑34. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jeem.2011.07.004> 
Bartholdson, S., & von Schreeb, J. (2018). Natural Disasters and 
Injuries: What Does a Surgeon Need to Know? Current Trauma 
Reports, 4(2), 103–108. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40719-018-
0125-3>
Basu, R., Pearson, D., Malig, B., Broadwin, R., & Green, R. (2012). 
The effect of high ambient temperature on emergency room 
visits. Epidemiology, 23(6), 813. <https://doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0b013e31826b7f97> 
Bayentin, L., El Adlouni, S., Ouarda, T. B., Gosselin, P., Doyon, 
B., & Chebana, F. (2010). Spatial variability of climate effects 
on ischemic heart disease hospitalization rates for the period 
1989-2006 in Quebec, Canada. International Journal of Health 
Geographics, 9, 5. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-072X-9-5> 
Bayntun, C., Rockenschaub, G., & Murray, V. (2012). Developing 
a health system approach to disaster management: A 
qualitative analysis of the core literature to complement the 
WHO Toolkit for assessing health-system capacity for crisis 
management. PLoS Currents, 4, e5028b6037259a. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/5028b6037259a> 
Beaudoin, M., & Gosselin, P. (2016). An effective public 
health program to reduce urban heat islands in Québec, 
Canada. Revista Panamericana de Salud Publica = Pan American 
Journal of Public Health, 40(3), 160–166.
Beaudoin, M., & Levasseur, M.-È. (2017). Verdir les villes pour 
la santé de la population. Institut national de santé publique du 
Québec.
Beelen, R., Raaschou-Nielsen, O., Stafoggia, M., Andersen, Z. 
J., Weinmayr, G., Hoffmann, B., Wolf, K., Samoli, E., Fischer, 
P., Nieuwenhuijsen, M., Vineis, P., Xun, W. W., Katsouyanni, K., 
Dimakopoulou, K., Oudin, A., Forsberg, B., Modig, L., Havulinna, 
A. S., Lanki, T., … Hoek, G. (2014). Effects of long-term exposure 
to air pollution on natural-cause mortality : An analysis of 22 
European cohorts within the multicentre ESCAPE project. The 
Lancet, 383(9919), 785‑795. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(13)62158-3> 
Bélanger, D., Abdous, B., Valois, P., Gosselin, P., & Sidi, E. (2016). 
A multilevel analysis to explain self-reported adverse health 
effects and adaptation to urban heat: a cross-sectional survey in 
the deprived areas of 9 Canadian cities. BMC public health, 16, 
144. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-016-2749-y> 
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Valois, P., & Abdous, B. (2014). 
Perceived adverse health effects of heat and their determinants 
in deprived neighbourhoods : A cross-sectional survey of 
nine cities in Canada. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 11(11), 11028‑11053. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph111111028> 
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Valois, P., & Abdous, B. (2015). 
Caractéristiques et perceptions du quartier et du logement 
associées aux impacts sanitaires néfastes autorapportés lorsqu’il 
fait très chaud et humide en été dans les secteurs urbains les 
plus défavorisés : Étude transversale dans 9 villes du Québec. 
INRS, Institut National de Santé Publique, & Centre Eau Terre 
Environnement. 
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Bustinza., R., & Campagna, C. (2019). 
Changements climatiques et santé : prévenir, soigner et s’adapter. 
Québec, QC: Presses de l’Université Laval.
Bell, S. A., Abir, M., Choi, H., Cooke, C., & Iwashyna, T. (2018). 
All-cause hospital admissions among older adults after a natural 
disaster. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 71(6), 746‑754.
Bellaire, S., Jamieson, B., Thumlert, S., Goodrich, J., & 
Statham, G. (2016). Analysis of long-term weather, snow and 
avalanche data at Glacier National Park, B.C., Canada. Cold 
Regions Science and Technology, 121, 118‑125. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.coldregions.2015.10.010>
Benedetti, J. (2019). Sunburn. Merck Manuals. Retrieved from 
<https://www.merckmanuals.com/>
Benmarhnia, T., Bailey, Z., Kaiser, D., Auger, N., King, N., & 
Kaufman, J. S. (2016). A difference-in-differences approach to 
assess the effect of a heat action plan on heat-related mortality, 
and differences in effectiveness according to sex, age, and 
socioe-conomic status (Montreal, Quebec). Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 124(11), 1694‑1699. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
EHP203> 
Benmarhnia, T., Deguen, S., Kaufman, J. S., & Smargiassi, A. 
(2015). Review article : Vulnerability to heat-related mortality 
- a systematic review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression 
analysis. Epidemiology, 26(6), 781. <https://doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0000000000000375> 
Berardi, U., & Jafarpur, P. (2020). Assessing the impact of 
climate change on building heating and cooling energy demand 
in Canada. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 121, 
109681. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2019.109681> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 201 
Berlin, C., Techel, F., Moor, B. K., Zwahlen, M., Hasler, R. M., & 
Swiss National Cohort study group. (2019). Snow avalanche 
deaths in Switzerland from 1995 to 2014—Results of a nation-
wide linkage study. PloS One, 14(12), e0225735.
Berman, J. D., Ebisu, K., Peng, R. D., Dominici, F., & Bell, M. 
L. (2017). Drought and the risk of hospital admissions and 
mortality in older adults in western USA from 2000 to 2013 : A 
retrospective study. The Lancet Planetary Health, 1(1), e17‑e25. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30002-5>
Bernatchez, P., Dugas, S., Fraser, C., & Da Silva, L. (2015). 
Évaluation économique des impacts potentiels de l’érosion des 
côtes du Québec maritime dans un contexte de changements 
climatiques. Ouranos. <https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-
scientifique/RapportBernatchez2015_FR.pdf> 
Berrang-Ford, L., Biesbroek, R., Ford, J. D., Lesnikowski, A., 
Tanabe, A., Wang, F. M., Chen, C., Hsu, A., Hellmann, J. J., Pringle, 
P., Grecequet, M., Amado, J. C., Huq, S., Lwasa, S. & Heymann, 
S. J. (2019). Tracking global climate change adaptation among 
governments. Nature Climate Change, 9(6), 440-449.
Berry, H. L., Hogan, A., Owen, J., Rickwood, D., & Fragar, L. 
(2011). Climate change and farmers’ mental health : Risks and 
responses. Asia Pacific Journal of Public Health, 23(2 Suppl), 
119S-132S. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1010539510392556> 
Berteaux, D., Gauthier, G., Domine, F., Ims, R. A., Lamoureux, 
S. F., Lévesque, E., & Yoccoz, N. (2016). Effects of changing 
permafrost and snow conditions on tundra wildlife: critical 
places and times. Arctic Science, 3(2), 65-90. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.etap.2017.08.022> 
Black, C., Tesfaigzi, Y., Bassein, J. A., & Miller, L. A. (2017). 
Wildfire smoke exposure and human health : Significant gaps 
in research for a growing public health issue. Environmental 
Toxicology and Pharmacology, 55, 186‑195. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.etap.2017.08.022> 
Blais-Stevens, A., Behnia, O., & Castagner, A. (2018). Historical 
landslides that have resulted in fatalities in Canada (1771-2018). 
Natural Resources Canada.
Bobb, J. F., Peng, R. D., Bell, M. L., & Dominici, F. (2014). Heat-
related mortality and adaptation to heat in the United States. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 122(8), 811‑816.
Boeckmann, M., & Rohn, I. (2014). Is planned adaptation to heat 
reducing heat-related mortality and illness? A systematic review. 
BMC Public Health, 14, 1112. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2458-14-1112> 
Bolitho, A., & Miller, F. (2017). Heat as emergency, heat 
as chronic stress : Policy and institutional responses to 
vulnerability to extreme heat. Local Environment, 22(6), 682‑698.
Bonaiuto, M., Alves, S., De Dominicis, S., & Petruccelli, I. (2016). 
Place attachment and natural hazard risk : Research review and 
agenda. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 48, 33‑53.
Bonsal, B. R., Peters, D. L., Seglenieks, F., Rivera, A., & Berg, A. 
(2019). Changes in freshwater availability across Canada. In E. 
Bush, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Bonsal, B. R., Wheaton, E. E., Chipanshi, A. C., Lin, C., Sauchyn, 
D. J., & Wen, L. (2011). Drought research in Canada : A review. 
Atmosphere-Ocean, 49(4), 303‑319. <https://doi.org/10.1080/07
055900.2011.555103> 
Botzen, W. J. W., Aerts, J. C. J. H., & van den Bergh, J. C. J. M. 
(2009). Willingness of homeowners to mitigate climate risk 
through insurance. Ecological Economics, 68(8), 2265‑2277. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2009.02.019>
Boyd, J., Haegeli, P., Abu-Laban, R. B., Shuster, M., & Butt, J. C. 
(2009). Patterns of death among avalanche fatalities : A 21-year 
review. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 180(5), 507‑512. 
<https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.081327>
Boyer, T. A., Melstrom, R. T., & Sanders, L. D. (2017). Effects of 
climate variation and water levels on reservoir recreation. Lake 
and Reservoir Management, 33(3), 223‑233. <https://doi.org/10.1
080/10402381.2017.1285375>
Bränström, R., Kasparian, N. A., Chang, Y., Affleck, P., Tibben, A., 
Aspinwall, L. G., Azizi, E., Baron-Epel, O., Battistuzzi, L., Bergman, 
W., Bruno, W., Chan, M., Cuellar, F., Dębniak, T., Pjanova, D., 
Ertmański, S., Figl, A., Gonzalez, M., Hayward, N. K., … Brandberg, 
Y. (2010). Predictors of sun protection behaviors and severe 
sunburn in an international online study. Cancer Epidemiology 
and Prevention Biomarkers, 19(9), 2199‑2210. <https://doi.
org/10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0196> 
Brimelow, J. C., Burrows, W. R., & Hanesiak, J. M. (2017). 
The changing hail threat over North America in response to 
anthropogenic climate change. Nature Climate Change, 7(7), 
516-522.
Brown, L., & Murray, V. (2013). Examining the relationship 
between infectious diseases and flooding in Europe. Disaster 
Health, 1(2), 117‑127. <https://doi.org/10.4161/dish.25216> 
Brown, M., Agyapong, V., Greenshaw, A. J., Cribben, I., Brett-
MacLean, P., Drolet, J., McDonald-Harker, C., Omeje, J., 
Mankowsi, M., Noble, S., Kitching, D., & Silverstone, P. H. (2019). 
After the Fort McMurray wildfire there are significant increases 
in mental health symptoms in grade 7-12 students compared to 
controls. BMC Psychiatry, 19(1), 18. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12888-018-2007-1> 
Bruce, M., Zulz, T., & Koch, A. (2016). Surveillance of infectious 
diseases in the Arctic. Public health, 137, 5‑12.
Bubeck, P., Botzen, W. J., & Aerts, J. C. (2012). A review of risk 
perceptions and other factors that influence flood mitigation 
behavior. Risk Analysis: An International Journal, 32(9), 
1481‑1495.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 202 
Bunker, A., Wildenhain, J., Vandenbergh, A., Henschke, N., 
Rocklöv, J., Hajat, S., & Sauerborn, R. (2016). Effects of air 
temperature on climate-sensitive mortality and morbidity 
outcomes in the elderly; a systematic review and meta-analysis 
of epidemiological evidence. EBioMedicine, 6, 258‑268. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2016.02.034> 
Burnett, M. E., & Wang, S. Q. (2011). Current sunscreen 
controversies : A critical review. Photodermatology, 
Photoimmunology & Photomedicine, 27(2), 58‑67. <https://doi.or
g/10.1111/j.1600-0781.2011.00557.x> 
Burton, H., Rabito, F., Danielson, L., & Takaro, T. K. (2016). Health 
effects of flooding in Canada : A 2015 review and description 
of gaps in research. Canadian Water Resources Journal = Revue 
canadienne des ressources hydriques, 41(1‑2), 238‑249. <https://
doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1128854> 
Bush, E. & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019> 
Bustinza, R. (2020). COVID-19 : Adaptation des recommandations 
de santé publique lors de chaleur extrême conformément aux 
recommandations de distanciation physique. INSPQ. <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/covid/3024-chaleur-
extreme-recommandations-distanciation-physique-covid19.pdf> 
(version anglaise disponible)
Bustinza, R., Lebe,l G., Gosselin, P., Bélanger, D., & Chebana, 
F. (2013). Health impacts of the July 2010 heat wave in 
Québec, Canada. BMC Public Health, 13, 56. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-56> 
Buters, J. T. M., Antunes, C., Galveias, A., Bergmann, K. C., 
Thibaudon, M., Galán, C., Schmidt-Weber, C., & Oteros, J. 
(2018). Pollen and spore monitoring in the world. Clinical and 
Translational Allergy, 8(1), 9. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13601-
018-0197-8> 
Cabrera, S. E., Mindell, J. S., Toledo, M., Alvo, M., & Ferro, C. 
J. (2016). Associations of Blood Pressure With Geographical 
Latitude, Solar Radiation, and Ambient Temperature : Results 
From the Chilean Health Survey, 2009–2010. American Journal 
of Epidemiology, 183(11), 1071‑1073. <https://doi.org/10.1093/
aje/kww037> 
Calmels, F., Doré, G., Kong, X., & Roy, L. P. (2016). Vulnerability 
of the north Alaska Highway to permafrost thaw : Design options 
and climate change adaptation. Whitehorse, YT: Northern 
Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre.
Canada Energy Regulator. (2017). Market Snapshot: Fuel 
poverty across Canada – lower energy efficiency in lower income 
households. Retrieved from <https://www.cer-rec.gc.ca/en/
data-analysis/energy-markets/market-snapshots/2017/market-
snapshot-fuel-poverty-across-canada-lower-energy-efficiency-in-
lower-income-households.html> 
Canadian Cancer Society. (2019). Publications. Retrieved from 
<https://action.cancer.ca/en/cancer-information/resources/
publications> 
Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. (2017). 
Temperature conditions - Legislation. Retrieved from <https://
www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/phys_agents/temp_legislation.html> 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. (2016). 
Summary of Integrated Watershed Management Approaches 
Across Canada. Retrieved from <https://ccme.ca> 
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CICH). (2007). 
Improving the Health of Canadians: Mental Health and 
Homelessness. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://cpa.ca/
cpasite/UserFiles/Documents/Practice_Page/mental_health_
homelessness_en.pdf> 
Canadian Red Cross (CRC). (2020a). Quebec Major Responses. 
Retrieved from <https://www.redcross.ca/in-your-community/
quebec/quebec-major-responses> 
Canadian Red Cross (CRC). (2020b). Alberta Major Disaster 
Responses. Retrieved from <https://www.redcross.ca/in-your-
community/alberta/alberta-major-disaster-responses> 
Canadian Space Agency. (2016). Detecting landslide risks on 
a wide scale. Retrieved from <https://www.asc-csa.gc.ca/eng/
blog/2016/11/24/detecting-landslide-risks-on-a-wide-scale.asp>
Cann, K., Thomas, D. R., Salmon, R., Wyn-Jones, A., & Kay, D. 
(2013). Extreme water-related weather events and water-borne 
disease. Epidemiology & Infection, 141(4), 671‑686.
Canuel, M., Gosselin, P., Duhoux, A., Brunet, A. & Lesage, A. 
(2019). Surveillance and Prevention of the Impacts of Extreme 
Meteorological Events on Public Health System (SUPREME). In 
Post-Disaster Mental Health Impacts Surveillance Toolkit. Institut 
national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved from <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/en/publications/2676> 
Carnie, T.-L., Berry, H. L., Blinkhorn, S. A., & Hart, C. R. 
(2011). In their own words : Young people’s mental health in 
drought-affected rural and remote NSW. Australian Journal 
of Rural Health, 19(5), 244‑248. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1440-1584.2011.01224.x> 
Cascio, W. E. (2018). Wildland fire smoke and human health. 
Science of the Total Environment, 624, 586‑595. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.12.086> 
Cassell, K., Gacek, P., Warren, J. L., Raymond, P. A., Cartter, M., 
& Weinberger, D. M. (2018). Association Between Sporadic 
Legionellosis and River Systems in Connecticut. The Journal of 
Infectious Diseases, 217(2), 179‑187. <https://doi.org/10.1093/
infdis/jix531> 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2020). 
COVID-19 and cooling centers. Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.
gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/cooling-center.html> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 203 
Chae, B.-G., Park, H.-J., Catani, F., Simoni, A., & Berti, M. 
(2017). Landslide prediction, monitoring and early warning : A 
concise review of state-of-the-art. Geosciences Journal, 21(6), 
1033‑1070. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12303-017-0034-4>
Chan, C. B., Ryan, D. A., & Tudor-Locke, C. (2006). Relationship 
between objective measures of physical activity and weather : A 
longitudinal study. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition 
and Physical Activity, 3(1), 21. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-
5868-3-21> 
Chapra, S. C., Boehlert, B., Fant, C., Bierman, V. J., Henderson, J., 
Mills, D., Mas, D. M. L., Rennels, L., Jantarasami, L., Martinich, J., 
Strzepek, K. M., & Paerl, H. W. (2017). Climate change impacts 
on harmful algal blooms in US freshwaters : A screening-level 
assessment. Environmental Science & Technology, 51(16), 
8933‑8943. <https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b01498> 
Charrois, J. W. (2010). Private drinking water supplies : 
Challenges for public health. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal, 182(10), 1061‑1064.
Chen, H., Wang, J., Li, Q., Yagouti, A., Lavigne, E., Foty, R., 
Burnett, R. T., Villeneuve, P. J., Cakmak, S., & Copes, R. (2016). 
Assessment of the effect of cold and hot temperatures on 
mortality in Ontario, Canada : A population-based study. CMAJ 
Open, 4(1), E48‑E58. <https://doi.org/10.9778/cmajo.20150111> 
Chen, J., Anderson, K., Pavlovic, R., Moran, M. D., Englefield, 
P., Thompson, D. K., Munoz-Alpizar, R., Landry, H. (2019). The 
FireWork v2. 0 air quality forecast system with biomass burning 
emissions from the Canadian Forest Fire Emissions Prediction 
System v2.03. Geoscientific Model Development, 12(7), 3283-
310. <https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-12-3283-2019> 
Cheng, J., Xu, Z., Zhu, R., Wang, X., Jin, L., Song, J., & Su, H. 
(2014). Impact of diurnal temperature range on human health : 
A systematic review. International Journal of Biometeorology, 
58(9), 2011‑2024.
Cherry, N., & Haynes, W. (2017). Effects of the Fort McMurray 
wildfires on the health of evacuated workers : Follow-up of 2 
cohorts. CMAJ Open, 5(3), E638‑E645. <https://doi.org/10.9778/
cmajo.20170047> 
Chhetri, B. K., Takaro, T. K., Balshaw, R., Otterstatter, M., Mak, 
S., Lem, M., Zubel, M., Lysyshyn, M., Clarkson, L., Edwards, J., 
Fleury, M. D., Henderson, S. B., & Galanis, E. (2017). Associations 
between extreme precipitation and acute gastro-intestinal illness 
due to cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis in an urban Canadian 
drinking water system (1997–2009). Journal of Water and 
Health, 15(6), 898‑907. <https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2017.100> 
Chief Public Health Officer. (2016). Health Status of Canadians 
2016: Report of the Chief Public Health Officer. Public Health 
Agency of Canada. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/
en/public-health/corporate/publications/chief-public-health-
officer-reports-state-public-health-canada/2016-health-status-
canadians.html>
Chouinard, O., Plante, S., & Martin, G. (2008). The community 
engagement process : A governance approach in adaptation 
to coastal erosion and flooding in Atlantic Canada. Canadian 
Journal of Regional Science, 31(3), 507‑520.
Chu, A., Han, L., Roifman, I., Lee, D. S., Green, M. E., Jacklin, 
K., Walker, J., Sutherland, R., Khan, S., Frymire, E. & Tu, J. V. 
(2019). Trends in cardiovascular care and event rates among 
First Nations and other people with diabetes in Ontario, Canada, 
1996–2015. CMAJ, 191(47), E1291-E1298.
Circé, M., Da Silva, L., Boyer-Villemaire, U., Duff, G., Desjarlais, 
C., & Morneau, F. (2016). Analyse couts-avantages des options 
d’adaptation en zone côtière au Québec. Ouranos.
Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux 
(CIUSSS) du Centre-Sud-de-l’Île-de-Montréal. (2017). Le Directeur 
de santé publique de Montréal présente les principaux constats 
de l’enquête réalisée auprès des victimes des inondations. 
Retrieved from <https://santemontreal.qc.ca/population/
actualites/nouvelle/le-directeur-de-sante-publique-de-montreal-
presente-les-principaux-constats-de-lenquete-sant/>
Clark, D. G., Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Pearce, T., Kowal, S., 
& Gough, W. A. (2016a). The role of environmental factors in 
search and rescue incidents in Nunavut, Canada. Public Health, 
137, 44‑49. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2016.06.003> 
Clark, D. G., Ford, J. D., Pearce, T., & Berrang-Ford, L. (2016b). 
Vulnerability to unintentional injuries associated with land-use 
activities and search and rescue in Nunavut, Canada. Social 
Science & Medicine, 169, 18‑26. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2016.09.026> 
Conlon, K. C., Rajkovich, N. B., White-Newsome, J. L., Larsen, 
L., & Neill, M. S. O. (2011). Preventing cold-related morbidity 
and mortality in a changing climate. Maturitas, 69(3), 197‑202. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.maturitas.2011.04.004> 
Conservation Ontario. (2010). Overview of Integrated 
Watershed Management in Ontario. Retrieved from https://
conservationontario.ca/fileadmin/pdf/policy-priorities_section/
IWM_OverviewIWM_PP.pdf 
Conway, T., & Scott, J. L. (2020). Urban Forests in a 
Changing Climate. The Greenbelt Foundation. Retrieved 
from https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/greenbelt/
pages/14604/attachments/original/1600457503/
UrbanForestsChangingClimate_REPORT_E-ver_REV.
pdf?1600457503
Correia, A., Azevedo, M., Gondim, F., & Bandeira, F. (2014). 
Ethnic aspects of vitamin D deficiency. Arquivos Brasileiros de 
Endocrinologia e Metabologia, 58(5), 540–544. <https://doi.
org/10.1590/0004-2730000003320> 
Crnek-Georgeson, K. T., Wilson, L. A., & Page, A. (2017). Factors 
influencing suicide in older rural males : A review of Australian 
studies. Rural & Remote Health, 17(4), 1‑11.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 204 
Crouse, D. L., Pinault, L., Balram, A., Hystad, P., Peters, P. A., 
Chen, H., van Donkelaar, A., Martin, R. V., Ménard, R., Robichaud, 
A., & Villeneuve, P. J. (2017). Urban greenness and mortality in 
Canada’s largest cities : A national cohort study. The Lancet 
Planetary Health, 1(7), e289‑e297. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2542-5196(17)30118-3> 
Cunsolo Willox, A., Stephenson, E., Allen, J., Bourque, F., Drossos, 
A., Elgarøy, S., Kral, M. J., Mauro, I., Moses, J., Pearce, T., 
MacDonald, J. P., & Wexler, L. (2015). Examining relationships 
between climate change and mental health in the Circumpolar 
North. Regional Environmental Change, 15(1), 169-82.
Curtis, S., Fair, A., Wistow, J., Val, D. V., & Oven, K. (2017). Impact 
of extreme weather events and climate change for health and 
social care systems. Environmental Health, 16(1), 128.
Cusack, L., van Loon, A., Kralik, D., Arbon, P., & Gilbert, S. (2013). 
Extreme weather-related health needs of people who are 
homeless. Australian Journal of Primary Health, 19(3), 250‑255. 
<https://doi.org/10.1071/PY12048> 
Dadlani, C., & Orlow, S. J. (2008). Planning for a brighter future : 
A review of sun protection and barriers to behavioral change in 
children and adolescents. Dermatology Online Journal, 14(9). 
<https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6vs1r0r9> 
D’Amato, G., Cecchi, L., & Annesi-Maesano, I. (2012). A trans-
disciplinary overview of case reports of thunderstorm-related 
asthma outbreaks and relapse. European Respiratory Review, 
21(124), 82‑87. <https://doi.org/10.1183/09059180.00001712> 
Daignault, P., Boivin, M., & Champagne St-Arnaud, V. (2018). 
Communiquer l’action en changements climatiques au Québec: 
une étude de segmentation. VertigO: la revue électronique en 
sciences de l’environnement, 18(3). <https://www.erudit.org/
en/journals/vertigo/1900-v1-n1-vertigo04929/1065313ar/
abstract/> 
Dancause, K. N., Laplante, D. P., Hart, K. J., O’Hara, M. W., 
Elgbeili, G., Brunet, A., & King, S. (2015). Prenatal stress due to a 
natural disaster predicts adiposity in childhood : The Iowa Flood 
Study. Journal of Obesity, 2015, 570541‑570541. >https://doi.
org/10.1155/2015/570541> 
Darques, R. (2015). Mediterranean cities under fire. A critical 
approach to the wildland–urban interface. Applied Geography, 
59, 10‑21.
Davis, R. E., McGregor, G. R., & Enfield, K. B. (2016). Humidity : 
A review and primer on atmospheric moisture and human 
health. Environmental Research, 144, 106‑116. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.10.014> 
Dean, J. G., & Stain, H. J. (2010). Mental health impact for 
adolescents living with prolonged drought. Australian Journal of 
Rural Health, 18(1), 32‑37.
Decent, D. (2018). The mental and physical human health 
impacts of residential basement Flooding and associated 
financial costs : Interviews with households in Southern 
Ontario, Canada. UWSpace. Retrieved from <http://hdl.handle.
net/10012/13366> 
Delic, N. C., Lyons, J. G., Di Girolamo, N., & Halliday, G. M. 
(2017). Damaging Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on the Cornea. 
Photochemistry and Photobiology, 93(4), 920‑929. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/php.12686> 
de Munck, C., Pigeon, G., Masson, V., Meunier, F., Bousquet, P., 
Tréméac, B., Merchat, M., Poeuf, P., & Marchadier, C. (2013). How 
much can air conditioning increase air temperatures for a city 
like Paris, France? International Journal of Climatology, 33(1), 
210‑227. <https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.3415>
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., 
Smith, S., Thackeray, C., & Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). Changes 
in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada. In E. Bush, & D.S. 
Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: 
Government of Canada.
Diaz, H., Hurlbert, M., & Warren, J. (2016). Vulnerability and 
adaptation to drought : The Canadian Prairies and South America. 
University of Calgary.
Dix-Cooper, L., Johnston, F., Hasselback, P., & Rideout, K. (2014). 
Evidence review : Reducing time outdoors during wildfire smoke 
events : Advice to stay indoors, advice to reduce outdoor physical 
activity and cancelling. BC Centre for Disease Control.
Dixon, S. J., Sear, D. A., Odoni, N. A., Sykes, T., & Lane, S. N. 
(2016). The effects of river restoration on catchment scale 
flood risk and flood hydrology. Earth Surface Processes and 
Landforms, 41(7), 997‑1008. <https://doi.org/10.1002/esp.3919> 
Dodd, W., Howard, C., Rose, C., Scott, C., Scott, P., Cunsolo, A., 
& Orbinski, J. (2018a). The summer of smoke : Ecosocial and 
health impacts of a record wildfire season in the Northwest 
Territories, Canada. The Lancet Global Health, 6, S30. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(18)30159-1> 
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., 
& Orbinski, J. (2018b). Lived experience of a record wildfire 
season in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health = Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 109(3), 
327–337. <https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-0070-5> 
Doede, A., & Davis, R. (2018). Use of airborne PM10 
concentrations at air quality monitoring sites in Imperial County, 
California, as an indication of geographical influences on lung 
health during drought periods : A time-series analysis. The 
Lancet Planetary Health, 2, S10.
Doré, G., Niu, F., & Brooks, H. (2016). Adaptation methods for 
transportation infrastructure built on degrading permafrost. 
Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 27(4), 352‑364. <https://
doi.org/10.1002/ppp.1919> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 205 
Doyon, B., Bélanger, D., & Gosselin, P. (2006). Effets du climat sur 
la mortalité au Québec méridional de 1981 à 1999 et simulations 
pour des scénarios climatiques futures. Institut national de 
santé publique Québec.
Doyon, B., Belanger, D., & Gosselin, P. (2008). The potential 
impact of climate change on annual and seasonal mortality for 
three cities in Quebec, Canada. International Journal of Health 
Geographics, 7, 23. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-072X-7-23> 
Drejza, S., Friesinger, S., & Bernatchez, P. (2015). Vulnérabilité 
des infrastructures routières de l’Est du Québec à l’érosion 
et à la submersion côtière dans un contexte de changements 
climatiques : Développement d’une approche et d’un indice pour 
quantifier la vulnérabilité des infrastructures routières à l’érosion 
et à la submersion côtière dans un contexte de changements 
climatiques sur 9 sites témoins. Volume III. Projet X008.1. 
Laboratoire de dynamique et de gestion intégrée des zones 
côtières, Université du Québec à Rimouski. 
Du, W., FitzGerald, G. J., Clark, M., & Hou, X.-Y. (2010). Health 
impacts of floods. Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, 25(3), 
265‑272. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049023X00008141>
Duchesne, A., Liu, A., Jones, S. L., Laplante, D. P., & King, S. 
(2017). Childhood body mass index at 5.5 years mediates 
the effect of prenatal maternal stress on daughters’ age at 
menarche : Project Ice Storm. Journal of Developmental Origins 
of Health and Disease, 8(2), 168‑177. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S2040174416000726> 
Durkalec, A., Furgal, C., Skinner, M. W., & Sheldon, T. (2014). 
Investigating Environmental Determinants of Injury and Trauma 
in the Canadian North. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 11(2), 1536‑1548. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph110201536> 
Durkalec, A., Furgal, C., Skinner, M. W., & Sheldon, T. (2015). 
Climate change influences on environment as a determinant of 
Indigenous health : Relationships to place, sea ice, and health 
in an Inuit community. Social Science and Medicine, 136, 17‑26. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.04.026> 
Dykman, K. R. J. (2013). Integrated watershed management 
planning in Manitoba : A platform for social learning 
[Master’s Thesis, University of Manitoba]. University of 
Manitoba. Retrieved from <https://mspace.lib.umanitoba.
ca/bitstream/handle/1993/23231/dykman_kate.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y> 
Edwards, B., Gray, M., & Hunter, B. (2015). The impact of drought 
on mental health in rural and regional Australia. Social Indicators 
Research, 121(1), 177‑194.
Enright, N. J., & Fontaine, J. B. (2014). Climate change and 
the management of fire-prone vegetation in southwest and 
southeast Australia. Geographical Research, 52(1), 34‑44. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1745-5871.12026> 
Environment and Climate change Canada. (2019a). Air Quality 
Health Index. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/air-quality-health-index.
html> 
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2019b). Canada’s 
Wildfire Smoke Prediction System (FireWork). Retrieved from 
<https://weather.gc.ca/firework/>  
Fann, N., Alman, B., Broome, R. A., Morgan, G. G., Johnston, F. 
H., Pouliot, G., & Rappold, A. G. (2018). The health impacts and 
economic value of wildland fire episodes in the U.S. : 2008–
2012. The Science of the Total Environment, 610‑611, 802‑809. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.08.024>
Farrugia, S., Hudson, M. D., & McCulloch, L. (2013). An evaluation 
of flood control and urban cooling ecosystem services 
delivered by urban green infrastructure. International Journal of 
Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Services & Management, 9(2), 
136‑145. <https://doi.org/10.1080/21513732.2013.782342> 
Fartasch, M., Diepgen, T. L., Schmitt, J., & Drexler, H. (2012). 
The relationship between occupational sun exposure and 
non-melanoma skin cancer : Clinical basics, epidemiology, 
occupational disease evaluation, and prevention. Deutsches 
Ärzteblatt International, 109(43), 715.
Febriani, Y., Levallois, P., Gingras, S., Gosselin, P., Majowicz, S. 
E., & Fleury, M. D. (2010). The association between farming 
activities, precipitation, and the risk of acute gastrointestinal 
illness in rural municipalities of Quebec, Canada : A cross-
sectional study. BMC Public Health, 10(1), 48. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-10-48> 
Felix, E., Afifi, T., Kia-Keating, M., Brown, L., Afifi, W., & Reyes, G. 
(2015). Family functioning and posttraumatic growth among 
parents and youth following wildfire disasters. American Journal 
of Orthopsychiatry, 85(2), 191.
Fernandes, P. M. (2013). Fire-smart management of forest 
landscapes in the Mediterranean basin under global change. 
Landscape and Urban Planning, 110, 175‑182. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2012.10.014> 
Fernandez, A., Black, J., Jones, M., Wilson, L., Salvador-Carulla, 
L., Astell-Burt, T., & Black, D. (2015). Flooding and mental health : 
A systematic mapping review. PLOS ONE, 10(4), e0119929. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0119929> 
Findlay, L. C., Arim, R., & Kohen, D. (2020). Understanding the 
perceived mental health of Canadians during the COVTD-19 
pandemic. Health reports, 31(4), 22-27. (disponible en français 
également)
Finlay, S. E., Moffat, A., Gazzard, R., Baker, D., & Murray, 
V. (2012). Health impacts of wildfires. PLoS Currents, 4, 
e4f959951cce2c. <https://doi.org/10.1371/4f959951cce2c> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 206 
Fioletov, V., Kerr, J. B., & Fergusson, A. (2010). The UV Index : 
Definition, distribution and factors affecting It. Canadian 
Journal of Public Health, 101(4), I5‑I9. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF03405303> 
First, J. M., First, N. L., & Houston, J. B. (2017). Intimate partner 
violence and disasters : A framework for empowering women 
experiencing violence in disaster settings. Affilia, 32(3), 390‑403.
First Nations Information Governance Centre. 
(2018). National report of the First Nations Regional 
Health Survey. Phase 3: Volume One. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://fnigc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2020/09/713c8fd606a8eeb021debc927332938d_
FNIGC-RHS-Phase-III-Report1-FINAL-VERSION-Dec.2018.pdf>
Fisk, W. J. (2015). Review of some effects of climate change 
on indoor environmental quality and health and associated 
no-regrets mitigation measures. Building and Environment, 86, 
70‑80. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.12.024> 
Flannigan, M. D., Krawchuk, M. A., Groot, W. J. de, Wotton, B. M., 
& Gowman, L. M. (2009). Implications of changing climate for 
global wildland fire. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 18(5), 
483‑507. <https://doi.org/10.1071/WF08187> 
Flannigan, M. D., Logan, K. A., Amiro, B. D., Skinner, W. R., & 
Stocks, B. J. (2005). Future area burned in Canada. Climatic 
Change, 72(1), 1‑16. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-005-
5935-y> 
Flannigan, M. D., Wotton, B. M., Marshall, G. A., de Groot, W. J., 
Johnston, J., Jurko, N., & Cantin, A. S. (2016). Fuel moisture 
sensitivity to temperature and precipitation : Climate change 
implications. Climatic Change, 134(1), 59‑71. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-015-1521-0> 
Flynn, M., Ford, J. D., Labbé, J., Schrott, L., & Tagalik, S. (2018). 
Evaluating the effectiveness of hazard mapping as climate 
change adaptation for community planning in degrading 
permafrost terrain. Sustainability Science, 14(4), 1041–1056. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0614-x> 
Ford, B., Val Martin, M., Zelasky, S., Fischer, E., Anenberg, S., 
Heald, C., & Pierce, J. (2018). Future fire impacts on smoke 
concentrations, visibility, and health in the contiguous United 
States. GeoHealth, 2(8), 229‑247.
Ford, J. D., Willox, A. C., Chatwood, S., Furgal, C., Harper, S., 
Mauro, I., & Pearce, T. (2014). Adapting to the Effects of Climate 
Change on Inuit Health. American Journal of Public Health, 
104(S3), e9‑e17. <https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301724> 
Fortier, C. (2013). Impact des changements climatiques sur les 
débordements des réseaux d’égouts unitaires. Institut national 
de la recherche scientifique.
Fortune, M., Mustard, C., & Brown, P. (2014). The use of 
Bayesian inference to inform the surveillance of temperature-
related occupational morbidity in Ontario, Canada, 2004-
2010. Environmental Research, 132, 449‑456. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2014.04.022> 
Freeman, S., & Eykelbosh, A. (2020). COVID-19 and outdoor 
safety: Considerations for use of outdoor recreational spaces. 
National Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health. 
Retrieved from <https://ncceh.ca/documents/guide/covid-19-
and-outdoor-safety-considerations-use-outdoor-recreational-
spaces>
Freedman, D. M., Kitahara, C. M., Linet, M. S., Alexander, B. 
H., Neta, G., Little, M. P., & Cahoon, E. K. (2015). Ambient 
temperature and risk of first primary basal cell carcinoma : 
A nationwide United States cohort study. Journal of 
Photochemistry and Photobiology B: Biology, 148, 284‑289. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2015.04.025> 
French, C. E., Waite, T. D., Armstrong, B., Rubin, G. J., Group, E. 
N. S. of F. and H. S., Beck, C. R., & Oliver, I. (2019). Impact of 
repeat flooding on mental health and health-related quality of 
life : A cross-sectional analysis of the English National Study of 
Flooding and Health. BMJ Open, 9(11). <https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmjopen-2019-031562> 
Friel, S., Berry, H., Dinh, H., O’Brien, L., & Walls, H. L. (2014). The 
impact of drought on the association between food security and 
mental health in a nationally representative Australian sample. 
BMC Public Health, 14(1), 1102.
Fulton, A. E., & Drolet, J. (2018). Responding to disaster-related 
loss and grief : Recovering from the 2013 flood in Southern 
Alberta, Canada. Journal of Loss & Trauma, 23(2), 140‑158. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/15325024.2018.1423873> 
Funari, E., Manganelli, M., & Sinisi, L. (2012). Impact of climate 
change on water-borne diseases. Annali dell’Istituto superiore di 
sanita, 48, 473‑487.
Furr, J. M., Corner, J. S., Edmunds, J. M., & Kendall, P. C. 
(2010). Disasters and youth : A meta-analytic examination 
of posttraumatic stress. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 78(6), 765‑780. <https://doi.org/10.1037/a0021482> 
Gabbe, B. J., Veitch, W., Curtis, K., Martin, K., Gomez, D., Civil, 
I., ... & Fitzgerald, M. (2020). Survey of major trauma centre 
preparedness for mass casualty incidents in Australia, Canada, 
England and New Zealand. EClinicalMedicine, 21, 100322. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100322> 
Gabriel, K. M., & Endlicher, W. R. (2011). Urban and rural 
mortality rates during heat waves in Berlin and Brandenburg, 
Germany. Environmental Pollution, 159(8‑9), 2044‑2050.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 207 
Gachon, P., Bussières, L., Gosselin, P., Raphoz, M., Bustinza, R., 
Martin, P., Dueymes, G., Gosselin, D., Labrecque, S., Jeffers, S., 
& Yagouti, A. (2016). Guide to identifying alert thresholds for 
heat waves in Canada based on evidence. Université du Québec 
à Montréal, Environment and Climate Change Canada, Institut 
National de Santé Publique du Québec, and Health Canada. 
Retrieved from <https://archipel.uqam.ca/9073/1/Gachon_et_
al_2016_Guide_Heat_Waves_EN.pdf> 
Gagnon, D., Romero, S. A., Cramer, M. N., Jay, O., & Crandall, 
C. G. (2016). Cardiac and thermal strain of elderly adults 
exposed to extreme heat and humidity with and without electric 
fan use. JAMA, 316(9), 989‑991. <https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.2016.10550> 
Gamble, J. L., Hurley, B. J., Schultz, P. A., Jaglom, W. S., Krishnan, 
N., & Harris, M. (2013). Climate change and older Americans : State 
of the science. Environmental Health Perspectives, 121(1), 15.
Garcia, D. M., & Sheehan, M. C. (2016). Extreme weather-driven 
disasters and children’s health. International Journal of Health 
Services, 46(1), 79‑105. doi :10.1177/0020731415625254 
Gariano, S. L., & Guzzetti, F. (2016). Landslides in a changing 
climate. Earth-Science Reviews, 162, 227‑252. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2016.08.011> 
Gaskin, C. J., Taylor, D., Kinnear, S., Mann, J., Hillman, W., & 
Moran, M. (2017). Factors associated with the climate change 
vulnerability and the adaptive capacity of people with disability : 
A systematic review. Weather, Climate, and Society, 9(4), 
801‑814.
Gasparrini, A., Guo, Y., Hashizume, M., Lavigne, E., Zanobetti, A., 
Schwartz, J., Tobias, A., Tong, S., Rocklöv, J., Forsberg, B., Leone, 
M., De Sario, M., Bell, M. L., Guo, Y.-L. L., Wu, C., Kan, H., Yi, S.-
M., de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, M., Saldiva, P. H. N., … 
Armstrong, B. (2015). Mortality risk attributable to high and low 
ambient temperature : A multicountry observational study. The 
Lancet, 386(9991), 369‑375. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(14)62114-0>
Gasparrini, A., Guo, Y., Sera, F., Vicedo-Cabrera, A. M., Huber, V., 
Tong, S., de Sousa Zanotti Stagliorio Coelho, M., Nascimento 
Saldiva, P. H., Lavigne, E., Matus Correa, P., Valdes Ortega, N., 
Kan, H., Osorio, S., Kyselý, J., Urban, A., Jaakkola, J. J. K., Ryti, 
N. R. I., Pascal, M., Goodman, P. G., … Armstrong, B. (2017). 
Projections of temperature-related excess mortality under 
climate change scenarios. The Lancet Planetary Health, 1(9), 
e360‑e367. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30156-0> 
Geertsema, M. (2013). Quick clay landslides, landscape 
evolution, and climate change : A perspective from British 
Columbia. In C. Margottini, P. Canuti, & K. Sassa (Eds.), 
Landslide Science and Practice : Volume 4 : Global Environmental 
Change (p. 115‑120). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-642-31337-0_15> 
Georgakakos, A., Yao, H., Kistenmacher, M., Georgakakos, K., 
Graham, N., Cheng, F.-Y., Spencer, C., & Shamir, E. (2012). Value 
of adaptive water resources management in Northern California 
under climatic variability and change : Reservoir management. 
Journal of Hydrology, 412, 34‑46.
Germain, D. (2016). Snow avalanche hazard assessment and 
risk management in northern Quebec, eastern Canada. Natural 
Hazards, 80(2), 1303‑1321. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-
015-2024-z>
Germain, D., Filion, L., & Hétu, B. (2009). Snow avalanche regime 
and climatic conditions in the Chic-Choc Range, eastern Canada. 
Climatic Change, 92(1), 141‑167. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-008-9439-4> 
Ghazani, M., FitzGerald, G., Hu, W., & Xu, Z. (2018). Temperature 
variability and gastrointestinal infections : A review of impacts 
and future perspectives. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(4), 766. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph15040766> 
Giguère, M. (2012). Urban Heat Island Mitigation Strategies. 
Institut national de santé publique. Retrieved from <https://www.
inspq.qc.ca/en/publications/1513> 
Gill, R. S., Hambridge, H. L., Schneider, E. B., Hanff, T., Tamargo, 
R. J., & Nyquist, P. (2013). Falling temperature and colder 
weather are associated with an increased risk of aneurysmal 
subarachnoid hemorrhage. World Neurosurgery, 79(1), 136‑142.
Gillett, N. P., Weaver, A. J., Zwiers, F. W., & Flannigan, M. D. 
(2004). Detecting the effect of climate change on Canadian 
forest fires. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(18). <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2004GL020876> 
Goldberg, M. S., Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B., & Valois, M.-
F. (2011). The short-term influence of temperature on daily 
mortality in the temperate climate of Montreal, Canada. 
Environmental research, 111(6), 853‑860.
Goldman, A., Eggen, B., Golding, B., & Murray, V. (2014). The 
health impacts of windstorms : A systematic literature review. 
Public health, 128(1), 3‑28.
Gomez, D., Haas, B., Ahmed, N., Tien, H., & Nathens, A. (2011). 
Disaster preparedness of Canadian trauma centres: the 
perspective of medical directors of trauma. Canadian Journal of 
Surgery, 54(1), 9.
Gorman, S., Lucas, R. M., Allen-Hall, A., Fleury, N., & Feelisch, 
M. (2017). Ultraviolet radiation, vitamin D and the development 
of obesity, metabolic syndrome and type-2 diabetes. 
Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 16(3), 362‑373. 
<https://doi.org/10.1039/c6pp00274a> 
Gorman, S., McGlade, J. P., Lambert, M. J., Strickland, D. 
H., Thomas, J. A., & Hart, P. H. (2010). UV exposure and 
protection against allergic airways disease. Photochemical & 
Photobiological Sciences, 9(4), 571‑577.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 208 
Gosling, S. N., Hondula, D. M., Bunker, A., Ibarreta, D., Liu, J., 
Zhang, X., & Sauerborn, R. (2017). Adaptation to climate change: 
a comparative analysis of modeling methods for heat-related 
mortality. Environmental health perspectives, 125(8), 087008.
Government of Canada. (2019a). Flood Ready. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/campaign/flood-ready.html> 
Government of Canada (2019b). Severe weather. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/weather/
severeweather.html> 
Government of Canada. (2020). Public health infobase. Retrieved 
from <https://sante-infobase.canada.ca/>
Government of Nunavut. (2012). Changing times: Climate change 
impacts and adaptation in Nunavut. Iqaluit, NU. Retrieved from 
<http://www.climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/
summer_2012_newsletter.pdf> 
Graham, D. A., Vanos, J. K., Kenny, N. A., & Brown, R. D. (2016). 
The relationship between neighbourhood tree canopy cover 
and heat-related ambulance calls during extreme heat events in 
Toronto, Canada. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 20, 180‑186. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2016.08.005> 
Graham, H., White, P., Cotton, J., & McManus, S. (2019). Flood- 
and weather-damaged homes and mental health : An analysis 
using England’s mental health survey. International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(18), 3256. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16183256> 
Greenan, B. J. W., James, T. S., Loder, J. W., Pepin, P., Azetsu-
Scott, K., Ianson, D., Hamme, R. C., Gilbert, D., Tremblay, J.-É., 
Wang, X. L., & Perrie, W. (2019). Changes in oceans surrounding 
Canada. In E. Bush & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Greene, C. S., Robinson, P. J., & Millward, A. A. (2018). Canopy 
of advantage: Who benefits most from city trees? Journal 
of Environmental Management, 208(15), 24-35. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.12.015 
Greene, G., Paranjothy, S., & Palmer, S. R. (2015). Resilience and 
vulnerability to the psychological harm from flooding : The role 
of social cohesion. American Journal of Public Health, 105(9), 
1792‑1795. <https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2015.302709>
Gronlund, C. J. (2014). Racial and socioe-conomic disparities 
in heat-related health effects and their mechanisms : A review. 
Current Epidemiology Reports, 1(3), 165‑173. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40471-014-0014-4> 
Guiney, R. (2012). Farming suicides during the Victorian 
drought : 2001–2007. Australian journal of rural health, 20(1), 
11‑15.
Gunn, K. M., Kettler, L. J., Skaczkowski, G. L., & Turnbull, D. A. 
(2012). Farmers’ stress and coping in a time of drought. Rural & 
Remote Health, 12(4).
Guo, Y., Gasparrini, A., Li, S., Sera, F., Vicedo-Cabrera, A. M., 
Coelho, M. de S. Z. S., Saldiva, P. H. N., Lavigne, E., Tawatsupa, 
B., & Punnasiri, K. (2018). Quantifying excess deaths related to 
heatwaves under climate change scenarios : A multicountry time 
series modelling study. PLoS Medicine, 15(7), e1002629.
Gupta, S., Carmichael, C., Simpson, C., Clarke, M. J., Allen, C., 
Gao, Y., Chan, E. Y., & Murray, V. (2012). Electric fans for reducing 
adverse health impacts in heatwaves. The Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews, 2012(7), CD009888. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/14651858.CD009888.pub2>
Guyadeen, D., Thistlethwaite, J., & Henstra, D. (2019). Evaluating 
the quality of municipal climate change plans in Canada. 
Climatic Change, 152(1), 121‑143. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-018-2312-1>
Haider, A., Mamdani, M., & Shear, N. H. (2007). Socioeconomic 
status and the prevalence of melanoma in Ontario, Canada. 
Journal of Cutaneous Medicine and Surgery, 11(1), 1–3. <https://
doi.org/10.2310/7750.2007.00001>
Hajat, S. (2017). Health effects of milder winters : A review of evidence 
from the United Kingdom. Environmental Health, 16(1), 109.
Hajat, S., Haines, A., Sarran, C., Sharma, A., Bates, C., & Fleming, 
L. E. (2017). The effect of ambient temperature on type-2-
diabetes: case-crossover analysis of 4+ million GP consultations 
across England. Environmental Health : A Global Access Science 
Source, 16(1), 73. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017-0284-7> 
Halliday, G. M., & Byrne, S. N. (2014). An unexpected role : UVA-
induced release of nitric oxide from skin may have unexpected 
health benefits. Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 134(7), 
1791‑1794. <https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2014.33> 
Hambly, D., Andrey, J., Mills, B., & Fletcher, C. (2013). Projected 
implications of climate change for road safety in Greater 
Vancouver, Canada. Climatic Change, 116(3‑4), 613‑629. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-012-0499-0> 
Hanes, C. C., Wang, X., Jain, P., Parisien, M.-A., Little, J. M., & 
Flannigan, M. D. (2019). Fire-regime changes in Canada over the 
last half century. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 49(3), 
256‑269. <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfr-2018-0293> 
Hanigan, I. C., Butler, C. D., Kokic, P. N., & Hutchinson, M. F. 
(2012). Suicide and drought in New South Wales, Australia, 
1970–2007. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 109(35), 13950‑13955. <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1112965109> 
Harrison, F., van Sluijs, E. M., Corder, K., Ekelund, U., & Jones, A. 
(2015). The changing relationship between rainfall and children’s 
physical activity in spring and summer: a longitudinal study. The 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical 
Activity, 12, 41. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-015-0202-8> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 209 
Hart, C. R., Berry, H. L., & Tonna, A. M. (2011). Improving 
the mental health of rural New South Wales communities 
facing drought and other adversities. Australian Journal 
of Rural Health, 19(5), 231‑238. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1440-1584.2011.01225.x> 
Hart, P. H., & Norval, M. (2018). Ultraviolet radiation-induced 
immunosuppression and its relevance for skin carcinogenesis. 
Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 17(12), 1872-1884. 
doi: 10.1039/C7PP00312A 
Hattis, D., Ogneva-Himmelberger, Y., & Ratick, S. (2012). The 
spatial variability of heat-related mortality in Massachusetts. 
Applied Geography, 33, 45‑52. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apgeog.2011.07.008> 
He, S., Kosatsky, T., Smargiassi, A., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., & 
Auger, N. (2018). Heat and pregnancy-related emergencies : 
Risk of placental abruption during hot weather. Environment 
International, 111, 295‑300. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2017.11.004> 
Health Canada. (2011). Extreme heat events guidelines: 
technical guide for health care workers. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-
workplace-health/reports-publications/climate-change-health/
extreme-heat-events-guidelines-technical-guide-health-care-
workers.html> 
Health Canada. (2012). Heat alert and response systems to 
protect health: best practices guidebook. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-
workplace-health/reports-publications/climate-change-health/
heat-alert-response-systems-protect-health-best-practices-
guidebook.html>
Health Canada. (2018). Sun Safety. Retrieved from <https://www.
canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/sun-safety.html> 
Health Canada. (2020a). Extreme heat and COVID-19 : 
Considerations for Heat Health Programing in the Context of 
COVID-19. Advice for Public Health Officials.
Health Canada. (2020b). Reducing urban heat islands to protect 
health in Canada - An introduction for public health professionals. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/services/health/
publications/healthy-living/reducing-urban-heat-islands-protect-
health-canada.html> 
Hedlund, C., Blomstedt, Y., & Schumann, B. (2014). Association 
of climatic factors with infectious diseases in the Arctic and 
subarctic region—A systematic review. Global Health Action, 7, 
1‑16. <https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v7.24161> 
Henderson, S. B., Brauer, M., MacNab, Y. C., & Kennedy, S. M. 
(2011). Three measures of forest fire smoke exposure and 
their associations with respiratory and cardiovascular health 
outcomes in a population-based cohort. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 119(9), 1266‑1271.

Henderson, S. B., & Johnston, F. H. (2012). Measures of forest 
fire smoke exposure and their associations with respiratory 
health outcomes. Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 12(3), 221‑227.
Henderson, S. B., Wan, V., & Kosatsky, T. (2013). Differences 
in heat-related mortality across four ecological regions with 
diverse urban, rural, and remote populations in British Columbia, 
Canada. Health & Place, 23, 48‑53.
Henstra, D., & Thistlethwaite, J. (2018). Flood risk mapping 
in Canada : Moving forward on a national priority. Centre for 
International Governance Innovation. Retrieved from <https://
www.cigionline.org/publications/flood-risk-mapping-canada-
moving-forward-national-priority/> 
Herrador, B. R. G., De Blasio, B. F., MacDonald, E., Nichols, G., 
Sudre, B., Vold, L., Semenza, J. C., & Nygård, K. (2015). Analytical 
studies assessing the association between extreme precipitation 
or temperature and drinking water-related water-borne infections : 
A review. Environmental Health, 14(1), 29.
Hetherington, E., McDonald, S., Wu, M., & Tough, S. (2018). 
Risk and protective factors for mental health and community 
cohesion after the 2013 Calgary flood. Disaster Medicine 
and Public Health Preparedness, 12(4), 470‑477. <https://doi.
org/10.1017/dmp.2017.91> 
Hetu, B., Fortin, G., & Brown, K. (2015). Winter climate, land 
settlement and avalanche dynamics in southern Quebec : An 
analysis from the known accidents since 1825. Canadian Journal 
of Earth Sciences, 52(5), 307‑321. <https://doi.org/10.1139/cjes-
2014-0205> 
Hicks, L. A., Rose, C. E., Fields, B. S., Drees, M. L., Engel, 
J. P., Jenkins, P. R., Rouse, B. S., Blythe, D., Khalifah, A. P., 
Feikin, D. R., & Whitney, C. G. (2007). Increased rainfall is 
associated with increased risk for legionellosis. Epidemiology 
&amp; Infection, 135(5), 811‑817. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268806007552> 
Ho, H. C., Knudby, A., Xu, Y., Hodul, M., & Aminipouri, M. 
(2016). A comparison of urban heat islands mapped using 
skin temperature, air temperature, and apparent temperature 
(Humidex), for the greater Vancouver area. The Science of the 
Total Environment, 544, 929‑938.
Holman, D. M., Kapelos, G. T., Shoemaker, M., & Watson, 
M. (2018). Shade as an environmental design tool for skin 
cancer prevention. American Journal of Public Health, 108(12), 
1607‑1612. <https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2018.304700> 
Holmer, I. (2009). Evaluation of cold workplaces : An overview 
of standards for assessment of cold stress. Industrial Health, 
47(3), 228‑234.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 210 
Holmes, E. A., Xiang, F., & Lucas, R. M. (2015). Variation in 
incidence of pediatric Crohn’s disease in relation to latitude and 
ambient ultraviolet radiation : A systematic review and analysis. 
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, 21(4), 809‑817. <https://doi.
org/10.1097/MIB.0000000000000320> 
Houghton, A., & Castillo-Salgado, C. (2017). Health Co-
Benefits of Green Building Design Strategies and Community 
Resilience to Urban Flooding: A Systematic Review of the 
Evidence. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 14(12), 1519. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph14121519> 
Howden-Chapman, P., Viggers, H., Chapman, R., O’Sullivan, K., 
Telfar Barnard, L., & Lloyd, B. (2012). Tackling cold housing and 
fuel poverty in New Zealand : A review of policies, research, 
and health impacts. Energy Policy, 49, 134‑142. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.09.044> 
Hsu, A., Sheriff, G., Chakraborty, T., & Manya, D. (2021). 
Disproportionate exposure to urban heat island intensity across 
major US cities. Nature Communications, 12(1), 1-11.
Hu, X. F., Singh, K., Kenny, T. A., & Chan, H. M. (2019). Prevalence 
of heart attack and stroke and associated risk factors among 
Inuit in Canada: A comparison with the general Canadian 
population. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental 
Health, 222(2), 319-326.
Huang, C., Barnett, A. G., Wang, X., Vaneckova, P., FitzGerald, G., 
& Tong, S. (2011). Projecting future heat-related mortality under 
climate change scenarios : A systematic review. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 119(12), 1681‑1690. <https://doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1103456> 
Hung, L.-S., Wang, C., & Yarnal, B. (2016). Vulnerability 
of families and households to natural hazards : A case 
study of storm surge flooding in Sarasota County, Florida. 
Applied Geography, 76, 184‑197. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apgeog.2016.09.021> 
Hurlbert, M., & Gupta, J. (2016). Adaptive governance, 
uncertainty, and risk : Policy framing and responses to climate 
change, drought, and flood. Risk Analysis, 36(2), 339‑356.
Huynen, M. M., & Martens, P. (2015). Climate change effects on 
heat-and cold-related mortality in the Netherlands : A scenario-
based integrated environmental health impact assessment. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 12(10), 13295‑13320.
Hydro-Québec. (n.d.). L’après 1998 : Un réseau plus robuste. 
Retrieved from <http://www.hydroquebec.com/verglas-1998/
apres-la-tempete.html> 
Indigenous Services Canada. (2020a). Short-term drinking water 
advisories. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <http://www.fnha.ca/
what-we-do/environmental-health/drinking-water-advisories> 
Indigenous Services Canada. (2020b). Ending long-term drinking 
water advisories. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-
isc.gc.ca/eng/1506514143353/1533317130660> 
International Agency for Research on Cancer. (1992). 
Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risks to humans: 
Solar and ultraviolet radiation. Lyon, France. Retrieved from 
>https://publications.iarc.fr/Book-And-Report-Series/Iarc-
Monographs-On-The-Identification-Of-Carcinogenic-Hazards-To-
Humans/Solar-And-Ultraviolet-Radiation-1992> 
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). (2020a). 
Mesures de prévention et contrôle des infections pour l’utilisation 
des climatiseurs mobiles et des ventilateurs sur pied en milieux 
de soins dans un contexte de COVID-19. Retrieved from <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/3011-climatiseurs-mobiles-
ventilateurs-milieux-soin-covid19>
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). (2020b). 
COVID-19 : Climatisation et ventilation portative en milieu de 
travail. Groupe de travail SAT-COVID-19. Retrieved from <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/3021-ventilation-portative-travail-
covid19>
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). (2020c). 
Utilisation des climatiseurs et des ventilateurs électriques dans 
les milieux scolaires, les milieux de garde et les camps de jour 
lors des vagues de chaleur dans un contexte de COVID-19. 
Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/3034-
climatiseurs-ventilateurs-milieux-scolaires-garde-camps-jour-
covid19>
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). (2020d). 
COVID-19 : utilisation sécuritaire des parcs et espaces verts 
urbains en contexte de déconfinement graduel. Retrieved from 
<https://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/3043-utilisation-parcs-
espaces-verts-covid19>
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. (2012a). Protect your 
home from severe wind. Retrieved from <https://www.iclr.org/
wp-content/uploads/PDFS/ICLR_Severe-wind_2018.pdf> 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. (2012b). Your 
insurance broker’s guide to snow & ice storms. Retrieved from 
<https://www.ibans.com/_Library/Home_Owner_Safety_
Brochures/IBAC_ICLR_Snow-Ice_Book-E_Spreads.pdf> 
Ivanov, I. V., Mappes, T., Schaupp, P., Lappe, C., & Wahl, S. (2018). 
Ultraviolet radiation oxidative stress affects eye health. Journal 
of Biophotonics, 11(7), e201700377. <https://doi.org/10.1002/
jbio.201700377> 
Jablonski, N. G., & Chaplin, G. (2012). Human skin pigmentation, 
migration and disease susceptibility. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B, 367(1590), 785‑792.
Jakob, M., & Lambert, S. (2009). Climate change effects on 
landslides along the southwest coast of British Columbia. 
Geomorphology, 107(3), 275‑284. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
geomorph.2008.12.009> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 211 
Jalliffier-Verne, I., Leconte, R., Huaringa-Alvarez, U., Heniche, 
M., Madoux-Humery, A.-S., Autixier, L., Galarneau, M., Servais, 
P., Prevost, M., & Dorner, S. (2017). Modelling the impacts of 
global change on concentrations of Escherichia coli in an urban 
river. Advances in Water Resources, 108, 450‑460. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2016.10.001> 
Jamieson, J. B., Haegeli, P. & Gauthier, D. (2010). Avalanche 
Accidents in Canada (Volume 5, 1996-2007). Canadian Avalanche 
Association. Retrieved from <www.avalancheassociation.ca> 
Janz, T., & Pearson, C. (2013). Vitamin D blood levels of 
Canadians. Statistics Canada. Retrieved from <http://www.
statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-624-x/2013001/article/11727-eng.pdf> 
Jay, O., Cramer, M. N., Ravanelli, N. M., & Hodder, S. G. (2015). 
Should electric fans be used during a heat wave? Applied 
ergonomics, 46, 137‑143.
Jeong, D. I., Sushama, L., Diro, G. T., Khaliq, M. N., Beltrami, 
H., & Caya, D. (2016). Projected changes to high temperature 
events for Canada based on a regional climate model ensemble. 
Climate Dynamics, 46(9‑10), 3163‑3180. 
Jermacane, D., Waite, T. D., Beck, C. R., Bone, A., Amlôt, R., 
Reacher, M., Kovats, S., Armstrong, B., Leonardi, G., James 
Rubin, G., & Oliver, I. (2018). The English National Cohort Study 
of Flooding and Health : The change in the prevalence of 
psychological morbidity at year two. BMC Public Health, 18(1), 
330. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-018-5236-9> 
Jerrett, M., Arain, A., Kanaroglou, P., Beckerman, B., Potoglou, D., 
Sahsuvaroglu, T., Morrison, J., & Giovis, C. (2005). A review and 
evaluation of intraurban air pollution exposure models. Journal 
of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 15(2), 
185‑204. <https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500388> 
Johal, S., & Mounsey, Z. (2016). A research-based primer on the 
potential psychosocial impacts of flooding. Disaster Prevention 
and Management, 25(1), 104‑110. <https://doi.org/10.1108/
DPM-09-2015-0206> 
Johanning, E., Auger, P., Morey, P. R., Yang, C. S., & Olmsted, E. 
(2014). Review of health hazards and prevention measures for 
response and recovery workers and volunteers after natural 
disasters, flooding, and water damage : Mold and dampness. 
Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine, 19(2), 93‑99. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s12199-013-0368-0> 
Johnson-Arbor, K. K., Quental, A. S., & Li, D. (2014). A 
comparison of carbon monoxide exposures after snowstorms 
and power outages. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
46(5), 481‑486. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2014.01.006>
Joshua, A. M. (2012). Melanoma prevention : Are we doing 
enough? A Canadian perspective. Current Oncology, 19(6), 
e462‑e467. <https://doi.org/10.3747/co.19.1222> 
Juzeniene, A., & Moan, J. (2012). Beneficial effects of UV 
radiation other than via vitamin D production. Dermato-
Endocrinology, 4(2), 109‑117. <https://doi.org/10.4161/
derm.20013> 
Kaffenberger, B. H., Shetlar, D., Norton, S. A., & Rosenbach, M. 
(2017). The effect of climate change on skin disease in North 
America. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology, 
76(1), 140‑147. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2016.08.014> 
Kampe, E. O. I., Kovats, S., & Hajat, S. (2016). Impact of high 
ambient temperature on unintentional injuries in high-income 
countries : A narrative systematic literature review. BMJ Open, 
6(2), e010399. <https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2015-010399> 
Kapelos, G. T., & Patterson, M. R. S. (2014). Health, planning, 
design, and shade : A critical review. Journal of Architectural 
and Planning Research, 31(2), 91‑111. <https://www.jstor.org/
stable/43031028> 
Keesstra, S., Nunes, J., Novara, A., Finger, D., Avelar, D., 
Kalantari, Z., & Cerdà, A. (2018). The superior effect of nature 
based solutions in land management for enhancing ecosystem 
services. The Science of the Total Environment, 610, 997-1009.
Kellens, W., Terpstra, T., & Maeyer, P. D. (2013). Perception and 
communication of flood risks : A systematic review of empirical 
research. Risk Analysis, 33(1), 24‑49. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1539-6924.2012.01844.x> 
Kennedy, I. T., Petley, D. N., Williams, R., & Murray, V. 
(2015). A systematic review of the health impacts of 
mass Earth movements (landslides). PLoS Currents, 7, 
ecurrents.dis.1d49e84c8bbe678b0e70cf7fc35d0b77. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.
dis.1d49e84c8bbe678b0e70cf7fc35d0b77> 
Khabarov, N., Krasovskii, A., Obersteiner, M., Swart, R., Dosio, A., 
San-Miguel-Ayanz, J., Durrant, T., Camia, A., & Migliavacca, M. 
(2016). Forest fires and adaptation options in Europe. Regional 
Environmental Change, 16(1), 21‑30. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10113-014-0621-0> 
Khan, S. J., Deere, D., Leusch, F. D. L., Humpage, A., Jenkins, 
M., & Cunliffe, D. (2015). Extreme weather events : Should 
drinking water quality management systems adapt to changing 
risk profiles? Water Research, 85, 124‑136. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.08.018> 
Kim, K.-H., Kabir, E., & Kabir, S. (2015). A review on the human 
health impact of airborne particulate matter. Environment 
International, 74, 136‑143. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2014.10.005> 
Kim, Y., Kim, H., Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B., Honda, Y., Chung, 
Y., Ng, C. F. S., Tobias, A., Íñiguez, C., & Lavigne, E. (2019). 
Suicide and ambient temperature : A multi-country multi-city 
study. Environmental Health Perspectives, 127(11), 117007.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 212 
Kimeswenger, S., Schwarz, A., Födinger, D., Müller, S., 
Pehamberger, H., Schwarz, T., & Jantschitsch, C. (2016). Infrared 
A radiation promotes survival of human melanocytes carrying 
ultraviolet radiation-induced DNA damage. Experimental 
Dermatology, 25(6), 447‑452. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
exd.12968> 
Kinney, P. L., Schwartz, J., Pascal, M., Petkova, E., Le Tertre, A., 
Medina, S., & Vautard, R. (2015). Winter season mortality : Will 
climate warming bring benefits? Environmental Research Letters, 
10(6), 064016.
Kirchmeier‐Young, M. C., Gillett, N. P., Zwiers, F. W., Cannon, A. J., 
& Anslow, F. S. (2019). Attribution of the influence of human-
induced climate change on an extreme fire season. Earth’s 
Future, 7(1), 2‑10. <https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EF001050> 
Kirchmeier-Young, M. C., Zwiers, F. W., Gillett, N. P., & Cannon, 
A. J. (2017). Attributing extreme fire risk in Western Canada to 
human emissions. Climatic Change, 144(2), 365‑379. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10584-017-2030-0>
Klinger, C., Landeg, O., & Murray, V. (2014). Power 
outages, extreme events and health: a systematic review 
of the literature from 2011-2012. PLoS Currents, 6, 
ecurrents.dis.04eb1dc5e73dd1377e05a10e9edde673. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.
dis.04eb1dc5e73dd1377e05a10e9edde673> 
Koerth, J., Vafeidis, A. T., & Hinkel, J. (2017). Household-level 
coastal adaptation and its drivers : A systematic case study 
review. Risk Analysis, 37(4), 629‑646. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
risa.12663> 
Koetse, M. J., & Rietveld, P. (2009). The impact of climate 
change and weather on transport : An overview of empirical 
findings. Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
Environment, 14(3), 205‑221. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
trd.2008.12.004> 
Kornhall, D. K., & Martens-Nielsen, J. (2016). The prehospital 
management of avalanche victims. Journal of the Royal Army 
Medical Corps, 162(6), 406‑412. <https://doi.org/10.1136/
jramc-2015-000441> 
Kosatsky, T., Dufresne, J., Richard, L., Renouf, A., Giannetti, N., 
Bourbeau, J., Julien, M., Braidy, J., & Sauvé, C. (2009). Heat 
awareness and response among Montreal residents with chronic 
cardiac and pulmonary disease. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health = Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 100(3), 237–240. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03405548> 
Kosatsky, T., Henderson, S. B., & Pollock, S. L. (2012). Shifts 
in mortality during a hot weather event in Vancouver, British 
Columbia : Rapid assessment with case-only analysis. American 
journal of public health, 102(12), 2367‑2371.
Kramer, D. M., Tenkate, T., Strahlendorf, P., Kushner, R., Gardner, 
A., & Holness, D. L. (2015). Sun Safety at Work Canada : 
A multiple case-study protocol to develop sun safety and 
heat protection programs and policies for outdoor workers. 
Implementation Science, 10(1), 97. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13012-015-0277-2> 
Laaidi, K., Economopoulou, A., Wagner, V., Pascal, M., Empereur-
Bissonnet, P., Verrier, A., & Beaudeau, P. (2013). Cold spells and 
health : Prevention and warning. Public Health, 127(5), 492‑499. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2013.02.011> 
Labbé, J., Ford, J. D., Araos, M., & Flynn, M. (2017). The 
government-led climate change adaptation landscape in 
Nunavut, Canada. Environmental Reviews, 25(1), 12‑25. 
doi:10.1139/er-2016-0032 
Lai, B. S., Lewis, R., Livings, M. S., La Greca, A. M., & Esnard, 
A. (2017). Posttraumatic stress symptom trajectories among 
children after disaster exposure : A review. Journal of Traumatic 
Stress, 30(6), 571‑582.
Lamond, J. E., Joseph, R. D., & Proverbs, D. G. (2015). An 
exploration of factors affecting the long term psychological 
impact and deterioration of mental health in flooded 
households. Environmental Research, 140, 325‑334. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2015.04.008> 
Lane, K., Charles-Guzman, K., Wheeler, K., Abid, Z., Graber, N., & 
Matte, T. (2013). Health effects of coastal storms and flooding 
in urban areas : A review and vulnerability assessment. Journal 
of Environmental and Public Health, 2013(913064), 13. <https://
doi.org/10.1155/2013/913064> 
Liang, K. E., & Kosatsky, T. (2020). Protecting rural Canadians 
from extreme heat. CMAJ, 192(24), E657-E658. <https://doi.
org/10.1503/cmaj.200004> 
Laverdière, É., Généreux, M., Gaudreau, P., Morais, J. A., 
Shatenstein, B., & Payette, H. (2015). Prevalence of risk and 
protective factors associated with heat-related outcomes in 
Southern Quebec : A secondary analysis of the NuAge study. 
Canadian Journal of Public Health, 106(5), e315‑e321. <https://
doi.org/10.17269/cjph.106.5029> 
Laverdière, É., Payette, H., Gaudreau, P., Morais, J. A., 
Shatenstein, B., & Généreux, M. (2016). Risk and protective 
factors for heat-related events among older adults of Southern 
Quebec (Canada) : The NuAge study. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health-Revue Canadienne De Sante Publique, 107(3), E258‑E265. 
<https://doi.org/10.17269/CJPH.107.5599>
Lavigne, E., Gasparrini, A., Wang, X., Chen, H., Yagouti, A., Fleury, 
M. D., & Cakmak, S. (2014). Extreme ambient temperatures and 
cardiorespiratory emergency room visits : Assessing risk by 
comorbid health conditions in a time series study. Environmental 
Health, 13(1), 5. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-13-5> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 213 
Lavigne, E. (2020). Temperature-related mortality under climate 
change scenarios in health regions of Canada [Video]. Air Health 
Science Division of Health Canada. Presented at the NOAA-
ECCC webinar. Retrieved from <https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=JD-3rVL_5lY>
Le, G., Breysse, P., McDermott, A., Eftim, S., Geyh, A., Berman, 
J., & Curriero, F. (2014). Canadian forest fires and the effects 
of long-range transboundary air pollution on hospitalizations 
among the elderly. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-
Information, 3(2), 713‑731.
Lebel, G., Dubé, M. & Bustinza, R. (2015). Évaluation du Fichier 
hebdomadaire des décès pour l’estimation des impacts des 
vagues de chaleur: rapport. Institut national de santé publique 
du Québec. Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/
publications/1962> 
Lebel, G., Dubé, M. & Bustinza, R. (2017). Analyse des impacts 
des vagues régionales de chaleur extrême sur la santé au Québec 
de 2010 à 2015. Institut national de santé publique du Québec. 
Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/2221> 
Lebel, G., Dubé, M. & Bustinza, R. (2019). Surveillance des 
impacts des vagues de chaleur extrême sur la santé au Québec 
à l’été 2018. Institut national de santé publique du Québec. 
Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/bise/surveillance-des-
impacts-des-vagues-de-chaleur-extreme-sur-la-sante-au-quebec-
l-ete-2018>
Lennon, M., Scott, M., & O’Neill, E. (2014). Urban design and 
adapting to flood risk : The role of green infrastructure. Journal 
of Urban Design, 19(5), 745‑758. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13574
809.2014.944113>
Lesnikowski, A., Ford, J., Berrang-Ford, L., Barrera, M., & 
Heymann, J. (2015). How are we adapting to climate change ? 
A global assessment. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 20(2), 277‑293.
Lesnikowski, A., Ford, J., Biesbroek, R., Berrang-Ford, L., & 
Heymann, S. J. (2016). National-level progress on adaptation. 
Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 261‑264. <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2863> 
Lévesque, B., Gervais, M.-C., Chevalier, P., Gauvin, D., Anassour-
Laouan-Sidi, E., Gingras, S., Fortin, N., Brisson, G., Greer, C., & 
Bird, D. (2014). Prospective study of acute health effects in 
relation to exposure to cyanobacteria. The Science of the Total 
Environment, 466‑467, 397‑403. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2013.07.045> 
Levi, M., Kjellstrom, T., & Baldasseroni, A. (2018). Impact of 
climate change on occupational health and productivity : 
A systematic literature review focusing on workplace heat. 
Medicina Del Lavoro, 109(3), 163‑179. <https://doi.org/10.23749/
mdl.v109i3.6851> 
Levy, K., Woster, A. P., Goldstein, R. S., & Carlton, E. J. (2016). 
Untangling the impacts of climate change on water-borne 
diseases : A systematic review of relationships between 
diarrheal diseases and temperature, rainfall, flooding, and 
drought. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(10), 
4905‑4922.
Leyva, E. W. A., Beaman, A., & Davidson, P. M. (2017). Health 
impact of climate change in older people : An integrative review 
and implications for nursing. Journal of Nursing Scholarship, 
49(6), 670‑678. <https://doi.org/10.1111/jnu.12346> 
L’Hérault, E., Allard, M., Fortier, D., Carbonneau, A., Doyon-
Robitaille, J., Lachance, M. P., Ducharme, M.A., Larrivée, K., 
Grandmont, K., & Lemieux, C. (2013). Production de cartes des 
caractéristiques du pergélisol afin de guider le développement 
de l’environnement bâti pour quatre communautés du Nunavik. 
Centre d’études nordiques, Université Laval. Montréal, QC.
Liddell, C., & Morris, C. (2010). Fuel poverty and human health : 
A review of recent evidence. Energy Policy, 38(6), 2987‑2997. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2010.01.037> 
Liddell, C., Morris, C., Thomson, H., & Guiney, C. (2016). Excess 
winter deaths in 30 European countries 1980-2013 : A critical 
review of methods. Journal of Public Health, 38(4), 806‑814. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdv184>
Lim, Y.-H., Hong, Y.-C., & Kim, H. (2012). Effects of diurnal 
temperature range on cardiovascular and respiratory 
hospital admissions in Korea. The Science of the Total 
Environment, 417‑418, 55‑60. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2011.12.048> 
Lim, Y.-H., So, R., Lee, C., Hong, Y.-C., Park, M., Kim, L., & Yoon, 
H.-J. (2018). Ambient temperature and hospital admissions for 
acute kidney injury : A time-series analysis. The Science of the 
Total Environment, 616, 1134‑1138.
Lin, S., Lawrence, W. R., Lin, Z., DiRienzo, S., Lipton, K., Dong, 
G.-H., Leung, R., Lauper, U., Nasca, P., & Stuart, N. (2018). Are the 
current thresholds, indicators, and time window for cold warning 
effective enough to protect cardiovascular health? The Science 
of the Total Environment, 639, 860‑867.
Linos, E., Keiser, E., Kanzler, M., Sainani, K. L., Lee, W., 
Vittinghoff, E., Chren, M.-M., & Tang, J. Y. (2012). Sun protective 
behaviors and vitamin D levels in the US population : NHANES 
2003–2006. Cancer Causes & Control, 23(1), 133‑140. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10552-011-9862-0> 
Liotta, G., Inzerilli, M. C., Palombi, L., Madaro, O., Orlando, 
S., Scarcella, P., Betti, D., & Marazzi, M. C. (2018). Social 
interventions to prevent heat-related mortality in the older 
adult in Rome, Italy : A quasi-experimental study. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(4), 715. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15040715> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 214 
Liu, D., Fernandez, B. O., Hamilton, A., Lang, N. N., Gallagher, 
J. M. C., Newby, D. E., Feelisch, M., & Weller, R. B. (2014). UVA 
irradiation of human skin vasodilates arterial vasculature and 
lowers blood pressure independently of nitric oxide synthase. 
Journal of Investigative Dermatology, 134(7), 1839‑1846. 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2014.27> 
Liu, G. T., Dancause, K. N., Elgbeili, G., Laplante, D. P., & 
King, S. (2016a). Disaster-related prenatal maternal stress 
explains increasing amounts of variance in body composition 
through childhood and adolescence : Project Ice Storm. 
Environmental Research, 150, 1‑7. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2016.04.039> 
Liu, J. C., Mickley, L. J., Sulprizio, M. P., Yue, X., Peng, R. D., 
Dominici, F., & Bell, M. L. (2016b). Future respiratory hospital 
admissions from wildfire smoke under climate change in the 
Western US. Environmental Research Letters, 11(12), 124018.
Liu, J. C., Wilson, A., Mickley, L. J., Ebisu, K., Sulprizio, M. P., 
Wang, Y., Peng, R. D., Yue, X., Dominici, F., & Bell, M. L. (2017). 
Who among the elderly is most vulnerable to exposure to and 
health risks of fine particulate matter from wildfire smoke? 
American Journal of Epidemiology, 186(6), 730‑735. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/aje/kwx141> 
Lowe, D., Ebi, K. L., & Forsberg, B. (2013). Factors increasing 
vulnerability to health effects before, during and after 
floods. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 10(12), 7015‑7067. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph10127015>
Lu, C., Yang, J., Yu, W., Li, D., Xiang, Z., Lin, Y., & Yu, C. (2015). 
Association between 25(OH)D level, ultraviolet exposure, 
geographical location, and inflammatory bowel disease activity : 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Plos One, 10(7), 
e0132036. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132036> 
Lucas, R. (2010). Solar ultraviolet radiation : Assessing the 
environmental burden of disease at national and local levels. 
Organisation mondiale de la Santé. 
Lucas, R. M., Byrne, S. N., Correale, J., Ilschner, S., & Hart, P. H. 
(2015). Ultraviolet radiation, vitamin D and multiple sclerosis. 
Neurodegenerative Disease Management, 5(5), 413‑424. <https://
doi.org/10.2217/nmt.15.33> 
Lundgren Kownacki, K., Gao, C., Kuklane, K., & Wierzbicka, A. 
(2019). Heat stress in indoor environments of Scandinavian 
urban areas : A literature review. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(4). <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph16040560> 
Lutsch, E., Dammers, E., Conway, S., & Strong, K. (2016). Long-
range transport of NH3, CO, HCN, and C2H6 from the 2014 
Canadian wildfires. Geophysical Research Letters, 43(15), 
8286‑8297. <https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL070114> 
Macciotta, R., & Lefsrud, L. (2018). Framework for developing 
risk to life evaluation criteria associated with landslides in 
Canada. Geoenvironmental Disasters, 5(1), 10.
Maguet, S. (2018). Interventions liées à la santé publique 
en présence de fumée de feux de forêt. British Columbia 
Centre for Disease Control & National Collaborating Centre 
for Environmental Health. Retrieved from <https://ccnse.
ca/documents/evidence-review/interventions-li%C3%A9es-
%C3%A0-la-sant%C3%A9-publique-en-pr%C3%A9sence-de-
fum%C3%A9e-de-feux-de> 
Mak, P. W., & Singleton, J. (2017). Burning questions : Exploring 
the impact of natural disasters on community pharmacies. 
Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 13(1), 162‑171.
Mäkinen, T. M., Juvonen, R., Jokelainen, J., Harju, T. H., Peitso, 
A., Bloigu, A., Silvennoinen-Kassinen, S., Leinonen, M., & Hassi, J. 
(2009). Cold temperature and low humidity are associated with 
increased occurrence of respiratory tract infections. Respiratory 
Medicine, 103(3), 456‑462. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
rmed.2008.09.011> 
Maltais, D. (2006). Impact of the July 1996 floods on older persons 
in Quebec’s Saguenay region. Université du Québec à Chicoutimi.
Manning, C., & Clayton, S. (2018). Threats to mental health 
and wellbeing associated with climate change. In S. Clayton 
& C. Manning (Eds.), Psychology and Climate change: Human 
perceptions, impacts and responses (pp. 217-44). Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: Academic Press.
Manuel, P., Rapaport, E., Keefe, J., & Krawchenko, T. (2015). 
Coastal climate change and aging communities in Atlantic 
Canada : A methodological overview of community asset and 
social vulnerability mapping. The Canadian Geographer = Le 
Géographe Canadien, 59(4), 433‑446. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cag.12203> 
Mares, D. (2013). Climate change and levels of violence in 
socially disadvantaged neighborhood groups. Journal of Urban 
Health, 90(4), 768‑783. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-013-
9791-1> 
Marmot Review Team. (2011). The health impacts of cold 
homes and fuel poverty. Friends of the Earth & Marmot Review 
Team. Retrieved from <https://www.instituteofhealthequity.org/
resources-reports/the-health-impacts-of-cold-homes-and-fuel-
poverty/the-health-impacts-of-cold-homes-and-fuel-poverty.pdf> 
Martel, B., Ouarda, T. B., Vanasse, A., Chebana, F., Orzanco, M. 
G., Charron, C., Courteau, J., Asghari, S., & Gosselin, P. (2010). 
Modélisation des fractures de la hanche en fonction de variables 
météorologiques à l’aide du modèle GAM dans deux régions 
métropolitaines du Québec, Canada. INRS, Centre Eau, Terre et 
Environnement.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 215 
Martin, S. L., Cakmak, S., Hebbern, C. A., Avramescu, M.-L., & 
Tremblay, N. (2012). Climate change and future temperature-
related mortality in 15 Canadian cities. International Journal 
of Biometeorology, 56(4), 605‑619. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-011-0449-y>
Martinez Garcia, D., & Sheehan, M. C. (2016). Extreme 
weather-driven disasters and children’s health. International 
Journal of Health Services, 46(1), 79‑105. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0020731415625254> 
Matz, C. J., Egyed, M., Xi, G., Racine, J., Pavlovic, R., Rittmaster, 
R., Henderson, S. B., & Stieb, D. M. (2020). Health impact 
analysis of PM2.5 from wildfire smoke in Canada (2013-2015, 
2017-2018). The Science of the Total Environment, 725, 138506. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138506> 
Mavrogianni, A., Wilkinson, P., Davies, M., Biddulph, P., & 
Oikonomou, E. (2012). Building characteristics as determinants 
of propensity to high indoor summer temperatures in London 
dwellings. Building and Environment, 55, 117‑130.
Mayer-Jouanjean, I., & Bleau, N. (2018). Historique des sinistres 
d’inondations et d’étiages et des conditions météorologiques 
associées. Ouranos.
McClelland, E., Amlôt, R., Rogers, M. B., Rubin, G. J., Tesh, 
J., & Pearce, J. M. (2017). Psychological and physical 
impacts of extreme events on older adults : Implications 
for communications. Disaster Medicine and Public Health 
Preparedness, 11(1), 127‑134.
McIntyre, K. M., Setzkorn, C., Hepworth, P. J., Morand, S., Morse, 
A. P., & Baylis, M. (2017). Systematic assessment of the climate 
sensitivity of important human and domestic animals pathogens 
in Europe. Scientific reports, 7(1), 7134.
McKinley, A., Janda, M., Auster, J., & Kimlin, M. (2011). In vitro 
model of vitamin D synthesis by UV radiation in an Australian 
urban environment. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 87(2), 
447‑451. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-1097.2010.00865.x> 
McLean, K., Yao, J., & Henderson, S. (2015). An evaluation of 
the British Columbia Asthma Monitoring System (BCAMS) 
and PM2.5 exposure metrics during the 2014 forest fire 
season. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 12(6), 6710‑6724. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph120606710>
McMartin, D. W., Merino, B. H. H., Bonsal, B., Hurlbert, M., 
Villalba, R., Ocampo, O. L., Upegui, J. J. V., Poveda, G., & Sauchyn, 
D. J. (2018). Limitations of water resources infrastructure for 
reducing community vulnerabilities to extremes and uncertainty of 
flood and drought. Environmental Management, 62, 1038-1047.
McMichael, A. J. (2015). Extreme weather events and infectious 
disease outbreaks. Virulence, 6(6), 543‑547. <https://doi.org/10.
4161/21505594.2014.975022> 
Medina, A., Akbar, A., Baazeem, A., Rodriguez, A. & Magan, 
N. (2017). Climate change, food security and mycotoxins: 
do we know enough? Fungal Biology Reviews, 31(3), 143154. 
doi:10.1016/j.fbr.2017.04.002 
Mehiriz, K., & Gosselin, P. (2016). Municipalities’ Preparedness 
for Weather Hazards and Response to Weather Warnings. 
PLOS ONE, 11(9), e0163390. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0163390>
Mehiriz, K., & Gosselin, P. (2017). Évaluation du projet pilote 
d’alertes téléphoniques automatisées pour les personnes 
vulnérables à la chaleur et au smog. Institut national de la 
recherche scientifique, Centre Eau Terre Environnement. 
Retrieved from <http://espace.inrs.ca/6285/>
Mehiriz, K., Gosselin, P., Tardif, I., Lemieux, M.-A., Mehiriz, K., 
Gosselin, P., Tardif, I., & Lemieux, M.-A. (2018). The effect of 
an automated phone warning and health advisory system on 
adaptation to high heat episodes and health services use in 
vulnerable groups—Evidence from a randomized controlled 
study. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(8), 1581. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15081581> 
Mental Health Commission of Canada. (2014). Overview 
of Mental Health Data in Canada: Background, Needs, 
and Gaps. Calgary, AB. Retrieved from <https://www.
mentalhealthcommission.ca/sites/default/files/2017-05/
Overview_on_Mental_Health_Data_in_Canada.pdf> 
Ministère des Forêts, de la Faune et des Parcs (MFFP). (2019). 
Carte de susceptibilité aux affaissements de sol associés au 
dégel du pergélisol. Cartographie écologique du Nord québécois.  
Retrieved from <https://mffp.gouv.qc.ca/les-forets/inventaire-
ecoforestier/nord-quebecois/cartographie-ecologique/>
Mitchell, D. (2011). The relationship between Vitamin D and 
cancer. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 15(5), 557‑560. 
<https://doi.org/10.1188/11.CJON.557-560> 
Modarres, R., Ouarda, T. B., Vanasse, A., Orzanco, M. G., & 
Gosselin, P. (2014). Modeling climate effects on hip fracture rate 
by the multivariate GARCH model in Montreal region, Canada. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 58(5), 921‑930.
Modenese, A., Korpinen, L., & Gobba, F. (2018). Solar radiation 
exposure and outdoor work : An underestimated occupational 
risk. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 15(10), 2063. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15102063> 
Moffatt, H., & Struck, S. (2011). Water-borne disease outbreaks 
in Canadian small drinking water systems. National Collaboration 
Centre for Environmental Health. Retrieved from <https://ncceh.
ca/content/water-borne-disease-outbreaks-canadian-small-
drinking-water-systems>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 216 
Moghadamnia, M. T., Ardalan, A., Mesdaghinia, A., Keshtkar, A., 
Naddafi, K., & Yekaninejad, M. S. (2017). Ambient temperature 
and cardiovascular mortality : A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Peerj, 5, e3574. <https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.3574> 
Monteiro, A. F., Rato, M., & Martins, C. (2016). Drug-induced 
photosensitivity : Photoallergic and phototoxic reactions. Clinics 
in Dermatology, 34(5), 571‑581. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
clindermatol.2016.05.006> 
Moquin, P. A., & Wrona, F. J. (2015). Effects of permafrost 
degradation on water and sediment quality and heterotrophic 
bacterial production of Arctic tundra lakes : An experimental 
approach. Limnology and Oceanography, 60(5), 1484‑1497. 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/lno.10110> 
Morency, P., Voyer, C., Burrows, S., & Goudreau, S. (2012). 
Outdoor falls in an urban context: winter weather impacts and 
geographical variations. Canadian Journal of Public Health = 
Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 103(3), 218–222. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF03403816>
Morin, M. (2008). Concepts de base en sécurité civile. Québec, 
QC: Ministère de la Sécurité publique. Retrieved from <https://
www.securitepublique.gouv.qc.ca/fileadmin/Documents/
securite_civile/publications/concepts_base/concepts_base.pdf> 
Moritz, M. A., Batllori, E., Bradstock, R. A., Gill, A. M., Handmer, 
J., Hessburg, P. F., Leonard, J., McCaffrey, S., Odion, D. 
C., Schoennagel, T., & Syphard, A. D. (2014). Learning to 
coexist with wildfire. Nature, 515(7525), 58‑66. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature13946>
Moudrak, N., Feltmate, B., Venema, H., & Osman, H. (2018). 
Combatting Canada’s rising flood costs : Natural infrastructure 
is an underutilized option. Insurance Bureau of Canada, 
University of Waterloo, Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation, and 
International Institute for Sustainable Development. Retrieved 
from <http://www.ibc.ca/ab/resources/studies/natural-
infrastructure-is-an-underutilized-option> 
Mulchandani, R., Smith, M., Armstrong, B., English National 
Study of Flooding and Health Study Group, Beck, C. R., & Oliver, 
I. (2019). Effect of insurance-related factors on the association 
between flooding and mental health outcomes. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(7), 
1174. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16071174> 
Munro, A., Kovats, R. S., Rubin, G. J., Waite, T. D., Bone, A., & 
Armstrong, B. (2017). Effect of evacuation and displacement on 
the association between flooding and mental health outcomes : 
A cross-sectional analysis of UK survey data. The Lancet. 
Planetary Health, 1(4), e134‑e141. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2542-5196(17)30047-5> 
Murphy, H. M., Thomas, M. K., Schmidt, P. J., Medeiros, D. T., 
McFadyen, S., & Pintar, K. D. (2016). Estimating the burden of 
acute gastrointestinal illness due to Giardia, Cryptosporidium, 
Campylobacter, E. coli O157 and norovirus associated with 
private wells and small water systems in Canada. Epidemiology 
and infection, 144(7), 1355–1370. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268815002071> 
Na, H. R., Heisler, G. M., Nowak, D. J., & Grant, R. H. (2014). 
Modeling of urban trees’ effects on reducing human exposure 
to UV radiation in Seoul, Korea. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 
13(4), 785‑792. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ufug.2014.05.009>
Navarro, K. M., Schweizer, D., Balmes, J. R., & Cisneros, R. 
(2018). A review of community smoke exposure from wildfire 
compared to prescribed fire in the United States. Atmosphere, 
9(5), 185.
Neale, R. E., Barnes, P. W., Robson, T. M., Neale, P. J., Williamson, 
C. E., Zepp, R. G., ... & Zhu, M. (2021). Environmental effects of 
stratospheric ozone depletion, UV radiation, and interactions 
with climate change: UNEP Environmental Effects Assessment 
Panel, Update 2020. Photochemical & Photobiological Sciences, 
20(1), 1-67. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s43630-020-00001-x> 
Neegan Burnside Ltd. (2011). National Assessment of First 
Nations Water and Wastewater Systems. Retrieved from <https://
www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1313426883501/1533821951118> 
Ng, F., Wilson, L., & Veitch, C. (2015). Climate adversity and 
resilience : The voice of rural Australia. Rural and Remote Health, 
15(4), 1‑12.
Ngom, R., Gosselin, P., & Blais, C. (2016). Reduction of disparities 
in access to green spaces : Their geographic insertion and 
recreational functions matter. Applied Geography, 66, 35‑51. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2015.11.008> 
Nordio, F., Zanobetti, A., Colicino, E., Kloog, I., & Schwartz, 
J. (2015). Changing patterns of the temperature-mortality 
association by time and location in the US, and implications for 
climate change. Environment International, 81, 80‑86. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.04.009> 
Nowak, D. J., Hirabayashi, S., Bodine, A., & Hoehn, R. (2013). 
Modeled PM2.5 removal by trees in ten U.S. cities and 
associated health effects. Environmental Pollution, 178, 395‑402. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2013.03.050> 
OBrien, L., Berry, H., Coleman, C., & Hanigan, I. (2014). Drought 
as a mental health exposure. Environmental Research, 131, 
181‑187.
Office of the Auditor General of Canada. (2018). Perspectives 
on Climate Change Action in Canada—A Collaborative Report 
from Auditors General. Commissioner of the Environment and 
Sustainable Development from the Office of the Auditor General 
of Canada, and auditors general of provinces and territories. 
Retrieved from <https://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/
parl_otp_201803_e_42883.html>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 217 
Ordon, M., Welk, B., Li, Q., Wang, J., Lavigne, E., Yagouti, A., 
Copes, R., Cakmak, S., & Chen, H. (2016). Ambient temperature 
and the risk of renal colic : A population-based study of 
the impact of demographics and comorbidity. Journal of 
Endourology, 30(10), 1138‑1143. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
end.2016.0374> 
Ottawa Riverkeeper. (2020). Combined Sewer Overflows. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ottawariverkeeper.ca/what-we-
do-2/initiatives/watershed-health-assessment-and-monitoring/
combined-sewer-overflows/>
Ouranos. (2015). Vers l’adaptation: Synthèse des connaissances 
sur les changements climatiques au Québec – Édition 2015. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ouranos.ca/wp-content/uploads/
SyntheseRapportfinal.pdf> 
Page, C. E., Atkins, D., Shockley, L. W., & Yaron, M. (1999). 
Avalanche deaths in the United States: a 45-year analysis. 
Wilderness & Environmental Medicine, 10(3), 146-151.
Page, L. A., Hajat, S., Kovats, R. S., & Howard, L. M. (2012). 
Temperature-relkated deaths in people with psychosis, dementia 
and substance misuse. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 200(6), 
485‑490. <https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.111.100404> 
Parks Canada. (2018). Avalanche Control Program in Glacier 
National Park. Glacier National Park. Retrieved from <https://
www.pc.gc.ca/en/pn-np/bc/glacier/nature/AvCon2>
Parsons, K. (2014). Human thermal environments : The effects of 
hot, moderate, and cold environments on human health, comfort, 
and performance. CRC press.
Parsons, N., Odumenya, M., Edwards, A., Lecky, F., & Pattison, G. 
(2011). Modelling the effects of the weather on admissions to 
UK trauma units : A cross-sectional study. Emergency Medicine 
Journal, 28(10), 851‑855.
Patrick, C. (2014). Aboriginal homelessness in Canada : A 
literature review. Canadian Homelessness Research Network. 
Retrieved from <https://www.homelesshub.ca/sites/default/
files/AboriginalLiteratureReview.pdf> 
Patrick, R. J. (2018). Adapting to climate change through source 
water protection : Case studies from Alberta and Saskatchewan, 
Canada. The International Indigenous Policy Journal, 9(3), 1.
Pendrey, C. G. A., Carey, M., & Stanley, J. (2014). Impacts of 
extreme weather on the health and well-being of people who 
are homeless. Australian Journal of Primary Health, 20(1), 2‑3. 
<https://doi.org/10.1071/PY13136> 
Peters, C. E., Nicol, A. M., & Demers, P. A. (2012). Prevalence 
of exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) on the job in 
Canada. Canadian Journal of Public Health = Revue Canadienne 
de Sante Publique, 103(3), 223–226. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF03403817>   
Phung, D., Thai, P. K., Guo, Y., Morawska, L., Rutherford, S., & 
Chu, C. (2016). Ambient temperature and risk of cardiovascular 
hospitalization : An updated systematic review and meta-
analysis. The Science of the Total Environment, 550, 1084‑1102. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.154> 
Pierce, J. R., Morley, S. K., West, T. A., Pentecost, P., Upton, L. 
A., & Banks, L. (2017). Improving long-term care facility disaster 
preparedness and response : A literature review. Disaster 
Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 11(1), 140‑149.
Pinault, L., & Fioletov, V. (2017). Exposition au soleil, protection 
solaire et coup de soleil chez les adultes canadiens. Statistique 
Canada. <http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-x/2017005/
article/14792-fra.pdf> 
Pinault, L., Bushnik, T., Fioletov, V., Peters, C. E., King, W. D., & 
Tjepkema, M. (2017). The risk of melanoma associated with 
ambient summer ultraviolet radiation. Health reports, 28(5), 3–11. 
Pludowski, P., Holick, M. F., Pilz, S., Wagner, C. L., Hollis, B. 
W., Grant, W. B., Shoenfeld, Y., Lerchbaum, E., Llewellyn, D. 
J., Kienreich, K., & Soni, M. (2013). Vitamin D effects on 
musculoskeletal health, immunity, autoimmunity, cardiovascular 
disease, cancer, fertility, pregnancy, dementia and mortality—A 
review of recent evidence. Autoimmunity Reviews, 12(10), 
976‑989. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2013.02.004> 
Porcherie, M., Lejeune, M., Gaudel, M., Pommier, J., Faure, E., 
Heritage, Z., Rican, S., Simos, J., Cantoreggi, N. L., Roué Le Gall, 
A., Cambon, L., & Regnaux, J.-P. (2018). Urban green spaces 
and cancer : A protocol for a scoping review. BMJ Open, 8(2). 
<https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018851> 
Porritt, S. M., Cropper, P. C., Shao, L., & Goodier, C. I. (2012). 
Ranking of interventions to reduce dwelling overheating during 
heat waves. Energy and Buildings, 55, 16‑27. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2012.01.043> 
Porter, M. J., & Morgenstern, N. R. (2013). Landslide risk 
evaluation—Canadian technical guidelines and best practices 
related to landslides : A national initiative for loss reduction. 
Natural Resources Canada.
Poursafa, P., Keikha, M., & Kelishadi, R. (2015). Systematic 
review on adverse birth outcomes of climate change. Journal 
of Research in Medical Sciences: The Official Journal of Isfahan 
University of Medical Sciences, 20(4), 397.
Poussin, J. K., Botzen, W. J. W., & Aerts, J. C. J. H. (2014). 
Factors of influence on flood damage mitigation behaviour by 
households. Environmental Science & Policy, 40, 69‑77. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2014.01.013> 
Poussin, J. K., Wouter Botzen, W. J., & Aerts, J. C. J. H. 
(2015). Effectiveness of flood damage mitigation measures : 
Empirical evidence from French flood disasters. Global 
Environmental Change, 31, 74‑84. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2014.12.007>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 218 
Powers, J. R., Dobson, A. J., Berry, H. L., Graves, A. M., Hanigan, 
I. C., & Loxton, D. (2015). Lack of association between drought 
and mental health in a cohort of 45–61 year old rural Australian 
women. Australian and New Zealand journal of public health, 
39(6), 518‑523.
Prairie Climate Centre. (2019). The Climate Atlas of Canada (version 
2, July 10, 2019). Retrieved from <https://climateatlas.ca> 
Preval, N., Keall, M., Telfar-Barnard, L., Grimes, A., & Howden-
Chapman, P. (2017). Impact of improved insulation and 
heating on mortality risk of older cohort members with prior 
cardiovascular or respiratory hospitalisations. BMJ Open, 7(11), 
e018079. <https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018079> 
Psarros, C., Theleritis, C., Economou, M., Tzavara, C., Kioulos, K. 
T., Mantonakis, L., Soldatos, C. R., & Bergiannaki, J.-D. (2017). 
Insomnia and PTSD one month after wildfires : Evidence for an 
independent role of the “fear of imminent death”. International 
Journal of Psychiatry in Clinical Practice, 21(2), 137‑141. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/13651501.2016.1276192> 
Psarros, C., Theleritis, C., Kokras, N., Lyrakos, D., Koborozos, 
A., Kakabakou, O., Tzanoulinos, G., Katsiki, P., & Bergiannaki, 
J. D. (2018). Personality characteristics and individual factors 
associated with PTSD in firefighters one month after extended 
wildfires. Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 72(1), 17‑23. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/08039488.2017.1368703> 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2019). Public Health 
Infobase. Retrieved from <https://health-infobase.canada.ca/> 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2020a). People who 
are at risk of more severe disease or outcomes from COVID-19. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/
services/publications/diseases-conditions/people-high-risk-for-
severe-illness-covid-19.html>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2020b). Canada 
COVID-19 weekly epidemiology report (2 August to 8 August 
2020). Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-
health/services/diseases/coronavirus-disease-covid-19/
epidemiological-economic-research-data.html> 
Public Health England. (2020). Heatwave plan for England. 
Retrieved from <https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
heatwave-plan-for-england> 
Public Safety Canada. (2019). National Disaster Mitigation Program 
(NDMP).  Retrieved from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/ndmp/index-en.aspx> 
Radio-Canada. (2018). Érosion des berges : Sainte-Flavie aidera 
au déménagement d’une cinquantaine de résidences. Retrieved 
from <https://ici.radio-canada.ca/nouvelle/1122112/erosion-
berges-cotiere-sainte-flavie-relocalisation-residences> 
Rajaram, N., Hohenadel, K., Gattoni, L., Khan, Y., Birk-Urovitz, E., 
Li, L., & Schwartz, B. (2016). Assessing health impacts of the 
December 2013 ice storm in Ontario, Canada. BMC Public Health, 
16(1), 544.
Raji, B., Tenpierik, M. J., & van den Dobbelsteen, A. (2015). The 
impact of greening systems on building energy performance : A 
literature review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 45, 
610‑623.
Ramin, B., & Svoboda, T. (2009). Health of the homeless and 
climate change. Journal of Urban Health-Bulletin of the New York 
Academy of Medicine, 86(4), 654‑664. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11524-009-9354-7> 
Ranson, M. (2014). Crime, weather, and climate change. Journal 
of Environmental Economics and Management, 67(3), 274‑302. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeem.2013.11.008> 
Rapaport, E., Manuel, P., Krawchenko, T., & Keefe, J. (2015). 
How can aging communities adapt to coastal climate change ? 
Planning for both social and place vulnerability. Canadian Public 
Policy, 41(2), 166‑177.
Rappold, A. G., Cascio, W. E., Kilaru, V. J., Stone, S. L., Neas, L. 
M., Devlin, R. B., & Diaz-Sanchez, D. (2012). Cardio-respiratory 
outcomes associated with exposure to wildfire smoke are 
modified by measures of community health. Environmental 
Health, 11(1), 71.
Rappold, A. G., Fann, N. L., Crooks, J., Huang, J., Cascio, W. 
E., Devlin, R. B., & Diaz-Sanchez, D. (2014). Forecast-based 
interventions can reduce the health and economic burden 
of wildfires. Environmental Science & Technology, 48(18), 
10571‑10579. <https://doi.org/10.1021/es5012725> 
Rappold, A. G., Reyes, J., Pouliot, G., Cascio, W. E., & Diaz-
Sanchez, D. (2017). Community vulnerability to health impacts 
of wildland fire smoke exposure. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 51(12), 6674‑6682. <https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.
est.6b06200> 
Ravanelli, N. M., Hodder, S. G., Havenith, G., & Jay, O. (2015). 
Heart rate and body temperature responses to extreme heat and 
humidity with and without electric fans. JAMA, 313(7), 724‑725. 
<https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.153> 
Regroupement des organismes de bassins versants du Québec. 
(2019). Gestion intégrée de l’eau par bassin versant. La gestion 
intégrée de l’eau par bassin versant - GIEBV. Retrieved from 
<https://robvq.qc.ca/la-giebv/> 
Reid, C. E., Brauer, M., Johnston, F. H., Jerrett, M., Balmes, J. R., 
& Elliott, C. T. (2016). Critical review of health impacts of wildfire 
smoke exposure. Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(9), 1334.
Remmers, T., Thijs, C., Timperio, A., Salmon, J., Veitch, J., 
Kremers, S. P. J., & Ridgers, N. D. (2017). Daily weather and 
children’s physical activity patterns. Medicine & Science in 
Sports & Exercise, 49(5), 922‑929. <https://doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0000000000001181>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 219 
Rezaei, M. (2017). Power to the people : Thinking (and rethinking) 
energy poverty in British Columbia, Canada [Doctorate Thesis, 
University of British Columbia]. The University of British 
Columbia. Retrieved from <https://open.library.ubc.ca/cIRcle/
collections/ubctheses/24/items/1.0351974> 
Romps, D. M., Seeley, J. T., Vollaro, D., & Molinari, J. (2014). 
Projected increase in lightning strikes in the United States due 
to global warming. Science, 346(6211), 851‑854. <https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1259100> 
Ross, A. C., Manson, J. E., Abrams, S. A., Aloia, J. F., Brannon, P. 
M., Clinton, S. K., Durazo-Arvizu, R. A., Gallagher, J. C., Gallo, R. 
L., Jones, G., Kovacs, C. S., Mayne, S. T., Rosen, C. J., & Shapses, 
S. A. (2011). The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes 
for calcium and vitamin D from the institute of medicine : What 
clinicians need to know. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & 
Metabolism, 96(1), 53‑58. <https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2010-2704> 
Rouquette, A., Mandereau-Bruno, L., Baffert, E., Laaidi, K., 
Josseran, L., & Isnard, H. (2011). Surveillance hivernale des 
effets du froid sur la santé des populations sans-domicile 
en région Île-de-France : Utilisation des données du réseau 
d’Organisation de la surveillance coordonnée des urgences 
(Oscour®). Revue d’épidémiologie et de santé publique, 59(6), 
359‑368. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respe.2011.05.006> 
Rucker, D., Allan, J. A., Fick, G. H. & Hanley, D. A. (2002). Vitamin 
D insufficiency in a population of healthy western Canadians. 
CMAJ, 166(12), 1517‑1524.
Ryan, B. J., Franklin, R. C., Burkle, F. M., Watt, K., Aitken, P., Smith, 
E. C., & Leggat, P. (2016). Defining, describing, and categorizing 
public health infrastructure priorities for tropical cyclone, flood, 
storm, tornado, and tsunami-related disasters. Disaster Medicine 
and Public Health Preparedness, 10(4), 598‑610.
Ryti, N. R. I., Guo, Y., & Jaakkola, J. J. K. (2016). Global 
association of cold spells and adverse health effects : A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 124(1), 12‑22. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1408104>
Sahni, V., Scott, A. N., Beliveau, M., Varughese, M., Dover, D. 
C., & Talbot, J. (2016). Public health surveillance response 
following the southern Alberta floods, 2013. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health, 107(2), e142‑e148. https://doi.org/10.17269/
cjph.107.5188
Sakamoto, R. (2015). Legionnaire’s disease, weather and 
climate. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 93(6), 
435‑436. <https://doi.org/10.2471/BLT.14.142299> 
Salamanca, F., Georgescu, M., Mahalov, A., Moustaoui, M. 
& Wang, M. (2014). Anthropogenic heating of the urban 
environment due to air conditioning. Journal of Geophysical 
Research: Atmospheres, 119(10), 5949‑5965. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2013JD021225> 
Sanborn, M., & Takaro, T. (2013). Recreational water–related 
illness: Office management and prevention. Canadian Family 
Physician, 59(5), 491-495.
Sandhu, P. K., Elder, R., Patel, M., Saraiya, M., Holman, D. M., 
Perna, F., Smith, R. A., Buller, D., Sinclair, C., Reeder, A., Makin, J., 
McNoe, B., & Glanz, K. (2016). Community-based interventions 
to prevent skin cancer : Two community guide systematic 
reviews. American journal of preventive medicine, 51(4), 531‑539. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.03.020> 
Santamouris, M. (2014). Cooling the cities–a review of reflective 
and green roof mitigation technologies to fight heat island and 
improve comfort in urban environments. Solar Energy, 103, 
682‑703. 
Sartini, C., Barry, S. J. E., Wannamethee, S. G., Whincup, P. 
H., Lennon, L., Ford, I., & Morris, R. W. (2016). Effect of cold 
spells and their modifiers on cardiovascular disease events : 
Evidence from two prospective studies. International Journal 
of Cardiology, 218, 275‑283. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijcard.2016.05.012> 
Saulnier, D. D., Ribacke, K. B., & von Schreeb, J. (2017). No calm 
after the storm : A systematic review of human health following 
flood and storm disasters. Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, 
32(5), 568‑579.
Schmeltz, M. T., Sembajwe, G., Marcotullio, P. J., Grassman, 
J. A., Himmelstein, D. U., & Woolhandler, S. (2015). Identifying 
individual risk factors and documenting the pattern of heat-
related illness through analyses of hospitalization and patterns 
of household cooling. PLOS ONE, 10(3), e0118958. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0118958> 
Schmitt, J., Seidler, A., Diepgen, T. l., & Bauer, A. (2011). 
Occupational ultraviolet light exposure increases the risk for 
the development of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma : 
A systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of 
Dermatology, 164(2), 291‑307. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2133.2010.10118.x> 
Schuster, P. F., Schaefer, K. M., Aiken, G. R., Antweiler, R. C., 
Dewild, J. F., Gryziec, J. D., Gusmeroli, A., Hugelius, G., Jafarov, 
E., Krabbenhoft, D. P., Liu, L., Herman‐Mercer, N., Mu, C., Roth, D. 
A., Schaefer, T., Striegl, R. G., Wickland, K. P., & Zhang, T. (2018). 
Permafrost stores a globally significant amount of mercury. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 45(3), 1463‑1471. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2017GL075571> 
Shore-Lorenti, C., Brennan, S. L., Sanders, K. M., Neale, R. 
E., Lucas, R. M., & Ebeling, P. R. (2014). Shining the light 
on sunshine : A systematic review of the influence of sun 
exposure on type 2 diabetes mellitus-related outcomes. Clinical 
Endocrinology, 81(6), 799‑811.<https://doi.org/10.1111/
cen.12567> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 220 
Sillmann, J., Kharin, V., Zwiers, F., Zhang, X., & Bronaugh, D. 
(2013). Climate extremes indices in the CMIP5 multimodel 
ensemble : Part 2. Future climate projections. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 118(6), 2473‑2493.
Silver, A., & Grek-Martin, J. (2015). “Now we understand what 
community really means” : Reconceptualizing the role of 
sense of place in the disaster recovery process. Journal of 
Environmental Psychology, 42, 32‑41. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jenvp.2015.01.004> 
Simpson, S., van der Mei, I., Lucas, R. M., Ponsonby, A.-L., 
Broadley, S., Blizzard, L., & Taylor, B. (2018). Sun exposure 
across the life course significantly modulates early multiple 
sclerosis clinical course. Frontiers in Neurology, 9, 16. <https://
doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2018.00016> 
Sinickas, A., Jamieson, B., & Maes, M. A. (2016). Snow 
avalanches in western Canada : Investigating change in 
occurrence rates and implications for risk assessment and 
mitigation. Structure and Infrastructure Engineering, 12(4), 
490‑498. <https://doi.org/10.1080/15732479.2015.1020495> 
Sloka, J., Pryse-Phillips, W., & Stefanelli, M. (2008). The relation 
of ultraviolet radiation and multiple sclerosis in Newfoundland. 
Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences, 35(1), 69‑74.
Smargiassi, A., Goldberg, M. S., Plante, C., Fournier, M., 
Baudouin, Y., & Kosatsky, T. (2009). Variation of daily 
warm season mortality as a function of micro-urban heat 
islands. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 63(8), 
659–664. <https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.2008.078147> 
Smith, B. A., & Fazil, A. (2019). Increased risk of microbial 
foodborne diseases with climate change. Canada Communicable 
Disease Report, 45(4), 108–113. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.
v45i04a05> 
Smith, H. G., Sheridan, G. J., Lane, P. N., Nyman, P., & Haydon, S. 
(2011). Wildfire effects on water quality in forest catchments : A 
review with implications for water supply. Journal of Hydrology, 
396(1‑2), 170‑192.
Song, X., Wang, S., Hu, Y., Yue, M., Zhang, T., Liu, Y., Tian, J., & 
Shang, K. (2017). Impact of ambient temperature on morbidity 
and mortality : An overview of reviews. The Science of the 
Total Environment, 586, 241‑254. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.01.212> 
Stanke, C., Kerac, M., Prudhomme, C., Medlock, J., 
& Murray, V. (2013). Health effects of drought: a 
systematic review of the evidence. PLoS Currents, 5, 
ecurrents.dis.7a2cee9e980f91ad7697b570bcc4b004. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.
dis.7a2cee9e980f91ad7697b570bcc4b004> 
Stares, J. (2014). Evidence review : Use of evacuation to protect 
public health during wildfire smoke events (C. Elliott & K. Rideout, 
Eds.). British Columbia Center for Disease Control. Retrieved 
from <http://www.bccdc.ca/resource-gallery/Documents/
Guidelines%20and%20Forms/Guidelines%20and%20Manuals/
Health-Environment/WFSG_EvidenceReview_Evacuation_FINAL_
V3_edstrs.pdf> 
Statistics Canada. (2020). Chart 3 Dwelling conditions for First 
Nations, Métis and Inuit, Canada, 2016. Retrieved from <https://
www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/200417/cg-b003-eng.
htm> 
Stephani, E., Fortier, D., Shur, Y., Fortier, R., & Doré, G. (2014). 
A geosystems approach to permafrost investigations for 
engineering applications, an example from a road stabilization 
experiment, Beaver Creek, Yukon, Canada. Cold Regions 
Science and Technology, 100, 20‑35. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
coldregions.2013.12.006> 
Sterk, A., Schijven, J., de Nijs, T., & de Roda Husman, A. M. 
(2013). Direct and indirect effects of climate change on the 
risk of infection by water-transmitted pathogens. Environmental 
science & technology, 47(22), 12648–12660. <https://doi.
org/10.1021/es403549s> 
St-Hilaire, A., Steiger, H., Liu, A., Laplante, D. P., Thaler, L., Magill, 
T., & King, S. (2015). A prospective study of effects of prenatal 
maternal stress on later eating-disorder manifestations in 
affected offspring : Preliminary indications based on the project 
ice storm cohort. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 48(5), 
512‑516. 
Stone, B., Hess, J. J., & Frumkin, H. (2010). Urban form and 
extreme heat events : Are sprawling cities more vulnerable to 
climate change than compact cities? Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 118(10), 1425‑1428. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.0901879> 
Stone, B., Vargo, J., Liu, P., Habeeb, D., DeLucia, A., Trail, M., Hu, 
Y., & Russell, A. (2014). Avoided heat-related mortality through 
climate adaptation strategies in three US cities. Plos One, 9(6), 
e100852. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0100852> 
Strand, L. B., Barnett, A. G., & Tong, S. (2011). The influence of 
season and ambient temperature on birth outcomes : A review 
of the epidemiological literature. Environmental Research, 
111(3), 451‑462. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2011.01.023> 
Sun, Z., Chen, C., Xu, D., & Li, T. (2018). Effects of ambient 
temperature on myocardial infarction : A systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Environmental Pollution, 241, 1106‑1114. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.045> 
Sutherland, L.-A., & Glendinning, T. (2008). Farm family coping 
with stress : The impact of the 1998 ice storm. Journal of 
Comparative Family Studies, 39(4), 527‑543.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 221 
Tallis, M., Taylor, G., Sinnett, D., & Freer-Smith, P. (2011). 
Estimating the removal of atmospheric particulate pollution 
by the urban tree canopy of London, under current and future 
environments. Landscape and Urban Planning, 103(2), 129‑138. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2011.07.003> 
Tan, J., Zheng, Y., Tang, X., Guo, C., Li, L., Song, G., Zhen, X., 
Yuan, D., Kalkstein, A. J., & Li, F. (2010). The urban heat island 
and its impact on heat waves and human health in Shanghai. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 54(1), 75‑84.
Tapsell, S. M., & Tunstall, S. M. (2008). “I wish I’d never heard 
of Banbury” : The relationship between ‘place’ and the health 
impacts from flooding. Health & Place, 14(2), 133‑154. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2007.05.006> 
Tempark, T., Lueangarun, S., Chatproedprai, S., & Wananukul, 
S. (2013). Flood-related skin diseases : A literature review. 
International Journal of Dermatology, 52(10), 1168‑1176. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.12064>
Tereszchuk, K. A., Rochon, Y. J., McLinden, C. A., & Vaillancourt, 
P. A. (2018). Optimizing UV Index determination from broadband 
irradiances. Geoscientific Model Development, 11(3), 1093‑1113. 
<https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-11-1093-2018> 
The Ontario Sun Safety Working Group. (2010). Sun Exposure 
and Protective Behaviours in Ontario: An Ontario Report Based 
on the 2006 Second National Sun Survey. Toronto, ON: Canadian 
Cancer Society, Ontario Division. Retrieved from <https://
www.cancercareontario.ca/sites/ccocancercare/files/assets/
CCOSunExposure.pdf>
Thistlethwaite, J., Henstra, D., Peddle, S., & Daniel, S. (2017). 
Canadian voices on changing flood risk—Findings from a 
National Survey. University of Waterloo. Retrieved from <https://
uwaterloo.ca/climate-centre/news/canadian-voices-changing-
flood-risk-findings-national-survey> 
Thistlethwaite, J., Minano, A., Henstra, D., Scott, D. (2020). 
Indigenous Reserve Lands in Canada Face High Flood Risk. 
Centre for International Governance Innovation. Policy Brief No. 
159. Retrieved from <https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/
files/documents/PB%20no.159.pdf>
Thompson, R., Garfin, D. R., & Silver, R. C. (2017). Evacuation 
from natural disasters : A systematic review of the literature. 
Risk Analysis, 37(4), 812‑839.
Thompson, R., Hornigold, R., Page, L., & Waite, T. (2018). 
Associations between high ambient temperatures and heat 
waves with mental health outcomes : A systematic review. 
Public Health, 161, 171‑191. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
puhe.2018.06.008> 
Thomson, H., Snell, C., & Bouzarovski, S. (2017). Health, well-
being and energy poverty in Europe : A comparative study of 
32 European countries. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 14(6). <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph14060584> 
Thordardottir, E. B., Valdimarsdottir, U. A., Hansdottir, I., Resnick, 
H., Shipherd, J. C., & Gudmundsdottir, B. (2015). Posttraumatic 
stress and other health consequences of catastrophic 
avalanches : A 16-year follow-up of survivors. Journal of 
Anxiety Disorders, 32, 103‑111. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
janxdis.2015.03.005> 
Toloo, G., FitzGerald, G., Aitken, P., Verrall, K., & Tong, S. 
(2013). Evaluating the effectiveness of heat warning systems : 
Systematic review of epidemiological evidence. International 
Journal of Public Health, 58(5), 667‑681. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00038-013-0465-2> 
Touchaei, A. G., & Akbari, H. (2015). Evaluation of the seasonal 
effect of increasing albedo on urban climate and energy 
consumption of buildings in Montreal. Urban Climate, 14, 
278‑289. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.uclim.2015.09.007>
Toutant, S., Gosselin, P., Bélanger, D., Bustinza, R., & Rivest, S. 
(2011). An open source web application for the surveillance 
and prevention of the impacts on public health of extreme 
meteorological events: the SUPREME system. International 
Journal of Health Geographics, 10, 39. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1476-072X-10-39> 
Townshend, I., Awosoga, O., Kulig, J., Botey, A. P., Shepard, B., & 
McFarlane, B. (2015). Impacts of wildfires on school children : A 
case study of Slave Lake, Alberta, Canada. International Journal 
of Mass Emergencies & Disasters, 33(2), 148-187.
Traffic Injury Research Foundation (TIRF). (2012). Winter tires: 
A review of research on effectiveness and use. Retrieved from 
<https://tirf.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/2012_Winter_Tire_
Report_7.pdf>
Tunstall, S., Tapsell, S., Green, C., Floyd, P., & George, C. (2006). 
The health effects of flooding : Social research results from 
England and Wales. Journal of Water and Health, 4(3), 365‑380. 
<https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2006.031> 
Turcotte-Tremblay, A. M., Lim, R., Laplante, D. P., Kobzik, 
L., Brunet, A., & King, S. (2014). Prenatal maternal stress 
predicts childhood asthma in girls: project ice storm. BioMed 
Research International, 2014, 201717. <https://doi.
org/10.1155/2014/201717> 
Turner, L., Alderman, K., & Tong, S. (2012a). The 2011 Brisbane 
floods affected residents’ health. Medical Journal of Australia, 
197(4), 214‑216. 
Turner, L. R., Barnett, A. G., Connell, D., & Tong, S. (2012b). 
Ambient temperature and cardiorespiratory morbidity : A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiology, 23(4), 
594‑606. <https://doi.org/10.1097/EDE.0b013e3182572795>
Uscher‐Pines, L. (2009). Health effects of relocation following 
disaster : A systematic review of the literature. Disasters, 33(1), 
1‑22. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7717.2008.01059.x> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 222 
U.S. Climate Resilience Toolkit. (2017). Iñupiat Work to Preserve 
Food and Traditions on Alaska›s North Slope. Case study. Retrieved 
from <https://toolkit.climate.gov/case-studies/i%C3%B1upiat-work-
preserve-food-and-traditions-alaskas-north-slope>
Vahmani, P., Jones, A. D., & Patricola, C. M. (2019). Interacting 
implications of climate change, population dynamics, and 
urban heat mitigation for future exposure to heat extremes. 
Environmental Research Letters, 14(8), 084051. <https://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab28b0> 
Valois, P., Bouchard, D., Talbot, D., Caron, M., Renaud, J. S., 
Gosselin, P. & Jacob, J. (2020a). Adoption of flood-related 
preventive behaviours by people having different risks and 
histories of flooding. Natural Hazards, 102(3), 1155-1173. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-020-03950-9> 
Valois, P., Caron, M., Gousse-Lessard, A. S., Talbot, D., & Renaud, 
J. S. (2019). Development and validation of five behavioral 
indices of flood adaptation. BMC public health, 19(1), 1-17. 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-6564-0> 
Valois, P., Jacob, J., Mehiriz, K., Talbot, D., Renaud, J.-S. & Caron, 
M. (2017a). Portrait de l’adaptation aux changements climatiques 
dans les organisations du secteur de la santé au Québec. 
Université Laval. <http://www.monclimatmasante.qc.ca/Data/
Sites/1/publications/oqacc_rapport_sante_21_nov_final.pdf>
Valois, P., Talbot, D., Caron, M., Carrier, M.-P., Morin, A. J. S., 
Renaud, J.-S., Jacob, J. & Gosselin, P. (2017b). Development and 
Validation of a Behavioural Index for Adaptation to High Summer 
Temperatures among Urban Dwellers. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(7), 820. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14070820> 
Valois, P., Talbot, D., Bouchard, D., Renaud, J. S., Caron, M., 
Canuel, M. & Arrambourg, N. (2020b). Using the theory of 
planned behavior to identify key beliefs underlying heat 
adaptation behaviors in elderly populations. Population and 
Environment, 41, 480-506. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11111-020-
00347-5>  
Vanasse, A., Cohen, A., Courteau, J., Bergeron, P., Chebana, F., 
Gosselin, P., Rochette, L., Blais, C., & Ouarda, T. B. M. J. (2015). 
Impact des inondations importantes sur la santé cardiovasculaire 
au Québec : Les cas de Saguenay (1996) et de St-Jean-sur-
Richelieu (2011) : Rapport final. INRS, Centre Eau Terre 
Environnement. Retrieved from <http://espace.inrs.ca/2814/> 
Vanasse, A., Cohen, A., Courteau, J., Bergeron, P., Dault, R., 
Gosselin, P., Blais, C., Bélanger, D., Rochette, L., Chebana, F. 
(2016a). Association between floods and acute cardiovascular 
diseases : A population-based cohort study using a geographic 
information system approach. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 13(2), 168. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13020168> 
Vanasse, A., Talbot, D., Chebana, F., Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., 
Blais, C., Gamache, P., Giroux, J.-X., & Dault, R. (2016b). Impact 
des conditions météorologiques sur le délai de survenue des 
événements d’insuffisance cardiaque chez les personnes âgées 
de 65 ans et plus diagnostiquées avec cette condition médicale 
au Québec, de 2001 à 2011 : Rapport final. INRS, Centre Eau 
Terre Environnement. Retrieved from <http://espace.inrs.
ca/5789/> 
van der Kamp, D. (2016). Drought, wildfire, and climate change in 
Metro Vancouver’s water supply area. Metro Vancouver. Retrieved 
from <https://sustain.ubc.ca/about/resources/drought-wildfire-
and-climate-change-metro-vancouver%E2%80%99s-water-
supply-area> 
van der Leun, J. C., Piacentini, R. D., & Gruijl, F. R. de. (2008). 
Climate change and human skin cancer. Photochemical 
& Photobiological Sciences, 7(6), 730‑733. <https://doi.
org/10.1039/B719302E>
Vanos, J. K. (2015). Children’s health and vulnerability in 
outdoor microclimates : A comprehensive review. Environment 
International, 76, 1‑15.
VanStone, N., van Dijk, A., Chisamore, T., Mosley, B., Hall, G., 
Belanger, P., & Moore, K. M. (2017). Characterizing the effects 
of extreme cold using real-time syndromic surveillance, Ontario, 
Canada, 2010-2016. Public Health Reports, 132, 48S-52S. 
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0033354917708354> 
Van Wagner, C. (2015). Forest Fire in Canada. The Canadian 
Encyclopedia. Retrieved from <https://thecanadianencyclopedia.
ca/en/article/forest-fire>
Varghese, B. M., Hansen, A., Bi, P., & Pisaniello, D. (2018). Are 
workers at risk of occupational injuries due to heat exposure? A 
comprehensive literature review. Safety Science, 110, 380‑392. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssci.2018.04.027> 
Veru, F., Dancause, K., Laplante, D. P., King, S., & Luheshi, 
G. (2015). Prenatal maternal stress predicts reductions in 
CD4+lymphocytes, increases in innate-derived cytokines, and 
a Th2 shift in adolescents : Project Ice Storm. Physiology 
& Behavior, 144, 137‑145. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
physbeh.2015.03.016> 
Vida, S., Durocher, M., Ouarda, T. B. M. J., & Gosselin, P. (2012). 
Relationship between ambient temperature and humidity 
and visits to mental health emergency departments in 
Québec. Psychiatric Services, 63(11), 1150‑1153. <https://doi.
org/10.1176/appi.ps.201100485> 
Vieth, R., Cole, D. E., Hawker, G. A., Trang, H. M., & Rubin, L. A. 
(2001). Wintertime vitamin D insufficiency is common in young 
Canadian women, and their vitamin D intake does not prevent 
it. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 55(12), 1091‑1097. 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejcn.1601275> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 223 
Vins, H., Bell, J., Saha, S., & Hess, J. J. (2015). The mental health 
outcomes of drought : A systematic review and causal process 
diagram. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public health, 12(10), 13251‑13275.
Vodden, K., & Cunsolo, A. (2021). Rural and Remote 
Communities. In F. J. Warren & N. Lulham (Eds.), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report. Ottawa, 
ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
changingclimate.ca/national-issues/> 
Vonk, J. E., Tank, S. E., Bowden, W. B., Laurion, I., Vincent, W. F., 
Alekseychik, P., Amyot, M., Billet, M., Canario, J., & Cory, R. M. 
(2015). Reviews and syntheses : Effects of permafrost thaw on 
Arctic aquatic ecosystems. Biogeosciences, 12(23), 7129‑7167.
Vutcovici, M., Goldberg, M. S., & Valois, M.-F. (2014). Effects of 
diurnal variations in temperature on non-accidental mortality 
among the elderly population of Montreal, Quebec, 1984–2007. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 58(5), 843‑852.
Wachinger, G., Renn, O., Begg, C., & Kuhlicke, C. (2013). The 
risk perception paradox—Implications for governance and 
communication of natural hazards. Risk analysis, 33(6), 
1049‑1065.
Wai, K.-M., Yu, P. K. N., & Lam, K.-S. (2015). Reduction of solar 
UV radiation due to urban high-rise buildings – a coupled 
modelling study. PLoS ONE, 10(8), e0135562. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0135562> 
Waite, T., Murray, V., & Baker, D. (2014). Carbon monoxide 
poisoning and flooding : Changes in risk before, during and 
after flooding require appropriate public health interventions. 
PLoS Currents, 6. <https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.
dis.2b2eb9e15f9b982784938803584487f1> 
Walder, D. J., Laplante, D. R., Sousa-Pires, A., Veru, F., Brunet, 
A., & King, S. (2014). Prenatal maternal stress predicts autism 
traits in 61/2 year-old children : Project Ice Storm. Psychiatry 
Research, 219(2), 353‑360. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
psychres.2014.04.034> 
Wang, L., Liu, T., Hu, M., Zeng, W., Zhang, Y., Rutherford, S., Lin, 
H., Xiao, J., Yin, P., Liu, J., Chu, C., Tong, S., Ma, W., & Zhou, 
M. (2016a). The impact of cold spells on mortality and effect 
modification by cold spell characteristics. Scientific Reports, 6, 
38380. <https://doi.org/10.1038/srep38380> 
Wang, X., Lavigne, E., Ouellette-Kuntz, H., & Chen, B. E. (2014). 
Acute impacts of extreme temperature exposure on emergency 
room admissions related to mental and behavior disorders in 
Toronto, Canada. Journal of Affective Disorders, 155, 154‑161.
Wang, Yan., Bobb, J. F., Papi, B., Wang, Y., Kosheleva, A., Di, Q., 
Schwartz, J. D., & Dominici, F. (2016b). Heat stroke admissions 
during heat waves in 1,916 US counties for the period from 1999 
to 2010 and their effect modifiers. Environmental Health, 15(1), 
83. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-016-0167-3> 
Wang, Yupeng., Berardi, U., & Akbari, H. (2015). Comparing the 
effects of urban heat island mitigation strategies for Toronto, 
Canada. Energy and Buildings, 114, 2‑19.
Wang, Yuxuan., Xie, Y., Dong, W., Ming, Y., Wang, J., & Shen, L. 
(2017). Adverse effects of increasing drought on air quality via 
natural processes. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 17(20), 
12827‑12843. <https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-17-12827-2017> 
Warren, F. & Lulham, N. (Eds.). (2021). Canada in a Changing 
Climate: National Issues Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of 
Canada. Retrieved from <www.ChangingClimate.ca/National-
Issues> 
Warsini, S., West, C., Ed, G. D., Res Meth, G. C., Mills, J., & Usher, 
K. (2014). The psychosocial impact of natural disasters among 
adult survivors : An integrative review. Issues in Mental Health 
Nursing, 35(6), 420‑436.
Watson, M., Holman, D. M., & Maguire-Eisen, M. (2016). 
Ultraviolet radiation exposure and its impact on skin cancer 
risk. Seminars in Oncology Nursing, 32(3), 241‑254. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.soncn.2016.05.005> 
Weinstein, J. M., Yarnold, P. R., & Hornung, R. L. (2001). Parental 
knowledge and practice of primary skin cancer prevention : Gaps 
and solutions. Pediatric Dermatology, 18(6), 473‑477. <https://
doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-1470.2001.1861996.x> 
Weller, R. B. (2017). The health benefits of UV radiation exposure 
through vitamin D production or non-vitamin D pathways. 
Blood pressure and cardiovascular disease. Photochemical & 
Photobiological Sciences, 16(3), 374‑380.
Wheaton, E., Kulshreshtha, S., Wittrock, V., & Koshida, G. (2008). 
Dry times : Hard lessons from the Canadian drought of 2001 and 
2002. The Canadian Geographer = Le Géographe Canadien, 52(2), 
241‑262. doi:10.1111/j.1541-0064.2008.00211.x
Williams, S., Hanson-Easey, S., Robinson, G., Pisaniello, D., 
Newbury, J., Saniotis, A., & Bi, P. (2017). Heat adaptation and 
place : Experiences in South Australian rural communities. 
Regional environmental change, 17(1), 273‑283.
Willoughby, M., Kipsaina, C., Ferrah, N., Blau, S., Bugeja, L., 
Ranson, D., & Ibrahim, J. E. (2017). Mortality in nursing homes 
following emergency evacuation : A systematic review. Journal 
of the American Medical Directors Association, 18(8), 664‑670.
Wintermeyer, E., Ihle, C., Ehnert, S., Stöckle, U., Ochs, G., de 
Zwart, P., Flesch, I., Bahrs, C., & Nussler, A. K. (2016). Crucial 
Role of Vitamin D in the Musculoskeletal System. Nutrients, 8(6), 
319. <https://doi.org/10.3390/nu8060319> 
Witham, M. D., Donnan, P. T., Vadiveloo, T., Sniehotta, F. F., 
Crombie, I. K., Feng, Z., & McMurdo, M. E. T. (2014). Association 
of day length and weather conditions with physical activity 
levels in older community dwelling people. PLOS ONE, 9(1), 
e85331. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0085331> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 224 
World Health Organization. (2013a). Review of evidence on 
health aspects of air pollution–REVIHAAP Project. Retrieved from 
<http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/193108/
REVIHAAP-Final-technical-report-final-version.pdf?ua=1>  
World Health Organization. (2013b). Review of the 2012-
2013 winter influenza season, northern hemisphere. Weekly 
Epidemiological Record, 88(‎22)‎, 225 - 232. <https://apps.who.
int/iris/handle/10665/242074>
Wotton, B. M., Flannigan, M. D., & Marshall, G. A. (2017). 
Potential climate change impacts on fire intensity and key 
wildfire suppression thresholds in Canada. Environmental 
Research Letters, 12(9), 095003. <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/aa7e6e>
Wouters, H., De Ridder, K., Poelmans, L., Willems, P., Brouwers, 
J., Hosseinzadehtalaei, P., Tabari, H., Vanden Broucke, S., 
van Lipzig, N. P. M., & Demuzere, M. (2017). Heat stress increase 
under climate change twice as large in cities as in rural areas : 
A study for a densely populated midlatitude maritime region. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 44(17), 8997‑9007. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2017GL074889> 
Wright, C. J., Sargeant, J. M., Edge, V. L., Ford, J. D., 
Farahbakhsh, K., RICG, Shiwak, I., Flowers, C., IHACC 
Research Team, & Harper, S. L. (2018). Water quality and 
health in northern Canada: stored drinking water and acute 
gastrointestinal illness in Labrador Inuit. Environmental Science 
and Pollution Research International, 25(33), 32975–32987. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-017-9695-9> 
Xiang, J., Bi, P., Pisaniello, D., & Hansen, A. (2014). Health 
impacts of workplace heat exposure : An epidemiological review. 
Industrial Health, 52(2), 91‑101. <https://doi.org/10.2486/
indhealth.2012-0145> 
Xu, Z., Etzel, R. A., Su, H., Huang, C., Guo, Y., & Tong, S. 
(2012). Impact of ambient temperature on children’s health : 
A systematic review. Environmental Research, 117, 120‑131. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2012.07.002> 
Xu, Z., FitzGerald, G., Guo, Y., Jalaludin, B., & Tong, S. (2016). 
Impact of heatwave on mortality under different heatwave 
definitions : A systematic review and meta-analysis. Environment 
International, 89, 193‑203.
Xu, Z., Liu, Y., Ma, Z., Li, S., Hu, W., & Tong, S. (2014a). Impact of 
temperature on childhood pneumonia estimated from satellite 
remote sensing. Environmental Research, 132, 334‑341. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2014.04.021> 
Xu, Z., Sheffield, P. E., Su, H., Wang, X., Bi, Y., & Tong, S. (2014b). 
The impact of heat waves on children’s health : A systematic 
review. International Journal of Biometeorology, 58(2), 239‑247. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-013-0655-x> 
Yam, J. C. S., & Kwok, A. K. H. (2014). Ultraviolet light and ocular 
diseases. International Ophthalmology, 34(2), 383‑400. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10792-013-9791-x> 
Yan, B., Chebana, F., Masselot, P., Campagna, C., Gosselin, 
P., Ouarda, T. B., & Lavigne, E. (2020). A cold-health watch 
and warning system, applied to the province of Quebec 
(Canada). Science of The Total Environment, 741, 140188. 
<10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.140188>
Yao, J., Brauer, M., & Henderson, S. B. (2013). Evaluation of a 
wildfire smoke forecasting system as a tool for public health 
protection. Environmental health perspectives, 121(10), 1142.
Yao, J., Stieb, D. M., Taylor, E., & Henderson, S. B. (2020). 
Assessment of the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) and four 
alternate AQHI-Plus amendments for wildfire seasons in British 
Columbia. Canadian Journal of Public Health = Revue Canadienne 
de Sante Publique, 111(1), 96–106. <https://doi.org/10.17269/
s41997-019-00237-w> 
Ye, X., Wolff, R., Yu, W., Vaneckova, P., Pan, X., & Tong, S. 
(2012). Ambient temperature and morbidity : A review of 
epidemiological evidence. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
120(1), 19‑28. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1003198> 
Youl, P. H., Janda, M., & Kimlin, M. (2009). Vitamin D and sun 
protection : The impact of mixed public health messages in 
Australia. International Journal of Cancer, 124(8), 1963‑1970. 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.24154> 
Young, I., Smith, B. A., & Fazil, A. (2015). A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of the effects of extreme weather events and 
other weather-related variables on Cryptosporidium and Giardia 
in fresh surface waters. Journal of Water and Health, 13(1), 1‑17.
Youssouf, H., Liousse, C., Roblou, L., Assamoi, E.-M., Salonen, 
R. O., Maesano, C., Banerjee, S., & Annesi-Maesano, I. (2014). 
Non-accidental health impacts of wildfire smoke. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(11), 
11772‑11804.
Yu, W., Mengersen, K., Wang, X., Ye, X., Guo, Y., Pan, X., & 
Tong, S. (2012). Daily average temperature and mortality 
among the elderly : A meta-analysis and systematic review 
of epidemiological evidence. International Journal of 
Biometeorology, 56(4), 569‑581. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-011-0497-3> 
Yusa, A., Berry, P., J. Cheng, J., Ogden, N., Bonsal, B., Stewart, R., 
& Waldick, R. (2015). Climate change, drought and human health 
in Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 12(7), 8359‑8412. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph120708359> 
Zeng, J., Zhang, X., Yang, J., Bao, J., Xiang, H., Dear, K., Liu, Q., 
Lin, S., Lawrence, W. R., & Lin, A. (2017). Humidity may modify 
the relationship between temperature and cardiovascular 
mortality in Zhejiang Province, China. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(11), 1383.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 225 
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., & Kharin, V. V. (2019). 
Changes in temperature and precipitation across Canada. In E. 
Bush & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019>
Zimmermann, E., Bracalenti, L., Piacentini, R., & Inostroza, L. 
(2016). Urban flood risk reduction by increasing green areas 
for adaptation to climate change. Procedia Engineering, 161, 
2241‑2246. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2016.08.822> 
Zivin, J. G., & Neidell, M. (2014). Temperature and the allocation 
of time : Implications for climate change. Journal of Labor 
Economics, 32(1), 1‑26. <https://doi.org/10.1086/671766>
Zscheischler, J., Westra, S., Van Den Hurk, B. J., Seneviratne, 
S. I., Ward, P. J., Pitman, A., AghaKouchak, A., Bresch, D.N., 
Leonard, M., Wahl, T., & Zhang, X. (2018). Future climate risk 
from compound events. Nature Climate Change, 8(6), 469-477. 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0156-3>
CHAPTER 4
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Mental Health 
and Well-Being 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 227 
Lead Author
Katie Hayes, Health Canada
Contributing Authors
Ashlee Cunsolo, Memorial University 
Jura Augustinavicius, McGill University 
Rebecca Stranberg, Health Canada
Susan Clayton, College of Wooster
Maria Malik, Canadian Food Inspection Agency 
Shawn Donaldson, Health Canada and Carleton University 
Gabrielle Richards, University of Ottawa
Amber Bedard, University of Calgary 
Lewis Archer, Save the Children
Tyrone Munro, Four Arrows Regional Health Authority 
Carla Hilario, University of Alberta
Suggested Citation
Hayes, K., Cunsolo, A., Augustinavicius, J., Stranberg, R., Clayton, S., 
Malik, M., Donaldson, S., Richards, G., Bedard, A., Archer, L., Munro, 
T., & Hilario, C. (2022). Mental Health and Well-Being. In P. Berry & R. 
Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing 
our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 228 
Table of Contents
Summary
230
Key Messages
230
4.1 Introduction 
234
4.2 Key Terms
236
4.3 Methods and Approach
238
4.4 Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change
238
4.4.1 Causal Pathways
238
4.4.2 Timing of Impacts
240
4.4.3 Mental Health Impacts of Acute Hazards
240
4.4.3.1 Flooding 
241
4.4.3.2 Extreme Heat Events
241
4.4.3.3 Wildfires
242
4.4.3.4 Hurricanes
243
4.4.4 Mental Health Impacts of Slow-Onset Hazards
244
4.4.4.1 Drought
244
4.4.4.2 Melting Sea Ice and Sea-Level Rise
245
4.4.5 Overarching Issues Related to Mental Health and a Changing Climate 
245
4.4.5.1 Migration and Displacement
245
Box 4.1 Mental health and cultural safety in Indigenous communities affected by evacuations 
caused by extreme weather events
246
4.4.5.2 Impacts on Health Systems and Facilities
247
Box 4.2 Strengthening mental health care in High River, Alberta
248
4.4.5.3 Loss and Damage
249
4.5 Populations at Higher Risk
250
4.5.1 Indigenous Peoples
250
4.5.2 Sex and Gender
251
4.5.3 Children, Youth, and Older Adults
251
4.5.4 Low Socio-Economic Populations and the Homeless
252
4.5.5 People with Pre-Existing Health Conditions
252
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 229 
4.5.6 Occupational Groups
253
4.6 Projected Mental Health Risks and Economic Costs
254
4.6.1 Projected Mental Health Risks from Climate Change
254
4.6.2 Projected Economic Costs of Health Impacts
254
4.7 Adaptation to Reduce Risks
255
4.7.1 Roles and Responsibilities for Adaptation to Reduce Risks
255
4.7.2 Policies and Programs that Reduce Risks 
255
4.7.2.1 Monitoring and Surveillance of Mental Health Impacts 
256
Box 4.3 eNuk environment and health monitoring program
257
4.7.2.2 Supporting Youth 
258
Box 4.4 Ka Pimthatek Pakthehnamoowin, a journey of hope in Island Lake, Manitoba
259
4.7.2.3 Interactions with the Natural Environment
259
4.7.3 Co-Benefits of Addressing Climate Change that Improve Mental Health Outcomes
260
4.7.4 Barriers and Opportunities for Adaptation Actions 
260
4.7.4.1 Social Capital
263
4.7.4.2 Sense of Community 
263
4.7.4.3 Communication and Outreach
264
4.7.4.4 Intersectoral and Transdisciplinary Collaboration
266
4.7.4.5 Government Interventions and Access to Resources 
266
4.7.4.6 Mental Health Literacy and Mental Health Care Training
266
4.7.4.7 Culturally Relevant Resources and Responses
267
4.7.4.8 Community Preparedness Utilizing Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessments
268
4.8	Knowledge Gaps 
273
4.9 Conclusion
274
4.10 References
275
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 230 
Summary
Climate change increases risks to the mental health and well-being of many people in Canada. Specific 
populations that can be disproportionally and inequitably affected include those experiencing health 
inequities based on race, culture, gender, age, socio-economic status, ability, and geographic location. These 
factors are encompassed within the social, biological, environmental, and cultural determinants of health 
that are amplified by climate change. Mental health can be impacted by hazards that occur over the shorter 
and longer term, such as floods, extreme heat events, wildfires, and hurricanes as well as drought, sea-level 
rise, and melting permafrost. Knowledge and awareness of climate change threats can also affect mental 
health and well-being, resulting in emotional and behavioural responses, such as worry, grief, anxiety, anger, 
hopelessness, and fear. 
Mental health impacts of climate change may include exacerbation of existing mental illness such as 
psychosis; new-onset mental illness such as post-traumatic stress disorder; mental health stressors such 
as grief, worry, anxiety, and vicarious trauma; and a lost sense of place, which refers to the perceived or 
actual detachment from community, environment, or homeland. Impacts can also include disruptions to 
psychosocial well-being and resilience, disruptions to a sense of meaning in a person’s life, and lack of 
community cohesion, all of which can result in distress, higher rates of hospital admissions, increased suicide 
ideation or suicide, and increased negative behaviours such as substance misuse, violence, and aggression. 
Adaptation efforts that can reduce the mental health impacts of climate change include expanded 
communication and outreach activities and community preparedness, greater access to health care for those 
requiring assistance, and improved mental health literacy and training.
Key Messages
•	
The current burden of mental ill health in Canada is likely to rise as a result of climate change. 
Given the very large number of Canadians who experience mental health problems, the potential 
increase of mental ill health outcomes from future climate change is large.
•	
Climate change hazards that can affect the mental health of people in Canada include acute 
hazards such as floods, extreme heat events, wildfires, and hurricanes, as well as slow-onset 
hazards such as drought, sea-level rise, and melting permafrost. Secondary impacts of climate 
hazards (such as economic insecurity, displacement, food and water insecurity) can lead to 
ongoing stress, anxiety, and depression. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 231 
•	
Mental health impacts of climate change may include exacerbation of existing mental illness 
such as psychosis; new-onset mental illness such as post-traumatic stress disorder; mental 
health stressors such as grief, worry, anxiety, and vicarious trauma; and a lost sense of place, 
which refers to the perceived or actual detachment from community, environment, or homeland. 
Impacts can also include disruptions to psychosocial well-being and resilience, disruptions to a 
sense of meaning in a person’s life, and lack of community cohesion, all of which can result in 
distress, higher rates of hospital admissions, increased suicide ideation or suicide, and increased 
negative behaviours such as substance misuse, violence, and aggression.
•	
Climate change and related environmental change can cause complex emotional and behavioural 
reactions in individuals, that are not necessarily pathological. These environmental distress 
reactions, called psychoterratic syndromes, include ecoanxiety, solastalgia, and ecoparalysis. 
•	
Climate change disproportionately affects the mental health of specific populations, including 
Indigenous Peoples; women; children; youth; older adults; people living in low socio-economic 
conditions (including the homeless); people living with pre-existing physical and mental health 
conditions; and certain occupational groups, such as land-based workers and first responders. 
For example, Indigenous Peoples are at greater risk of being displaced by climate-related 
hazards and this can result in a loss of community connections and loss of livelihoods that affect 
individual and collective well-being. 
•	
Given the current high costs of mental illness to society, and the breadth of mental health impacts 
that are related to climate change, future costs borne by Canadians and health systems are 
expected to be large as the climate continues to warm. 
•	
Access to mental health practitioners, mental health and health care facilities, social services, and 
culturally relevant mental health care information can prevent adverse mental health outcomes, 
improve outcomes, and enhance well-being in a changing climate. Rural, remote, and urban 
settings that currently face challenges providing mental health care will face increased demands 
for services from climate change impacts. 
•	
Greater communication and outreach about the mental health impacts of climate change, 
enhanced community preparedness for possible impacts, broad access to culturally relevant 
health care to assist people in need, intersectoral and transdisciplinary collaboration on 
adaptation initiatives, and improved mental health literacy and training support efforts to prepare 
for climate change impacts on Canadians. 
•	
Well-designed actions to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and adapt to climate change — for 
example, active transportation, environmental stewardship, green infrastructure, and enhanced 
social networks and community supports — can also benefit mental health.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 232 
Factors that influence the psychosocial health impacts of climate change. Source: Hayes et al., 2019.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 233 
Overview of Climate Change Impacts on Mental Health 
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Mental health
•	
Increased frequency and 
severity of precipitation 
(such as hurricanes, flooding, 
ice storms)
•	
Droughts
•	
Wildfires
•	
Extreme temperatures
•	
Decreased food and water 
security
•	
Melting permafrost
•	
Sea-level rise
•	
Gradual warming
•	
Post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD)
•	
Anxiety
•	
Worry and fear
•	
Depression
•	
Stress
•	
Vicarious trauma
•	
Recovery fatigue
•	
Suicide ideation
•	
Weakened social ties
•	
Addictions (such as drug and 
alcohol usage)
•	
Aggression including domestic 
violence
•	
Ecoanxiety/climate anxiety
•	
Ecogrief/climate grief
•	
Solastalgia
•	
Post-traumatic growth
•	
Impacts on health and social 
services
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 234 
4.1 Introduction 
Climate change poses significant risks to the mental health of Canadians. The past decade has seen rapid 
growth in research, discussion, and media reporting on climate change and its associated mental health 
implications. In a 2019 national survey of 2,000 residents of Canada (aged 18 and older), 49% of respondents 
indicated they were increasingly worried about the effects of climate change, and 25% indicated that they 
often think about climate change and are “really anxious about it” (Abacus Data, 2019). There is growing 
concern among public health officials in Canada about these impacts and how to support psychosocial1 
adaptation and resilience (BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy, n.d.; Toronto Public 
Health, 2015; Yaffe, 2016; Howard et al., 2017). Supporting psychosocial adaptation means developing or 
enhancing existing coping behaviours, practices, tools, or interventions to protect mental health and social 
well-being in a changing climate (Séguin, 2008; Brown & Westaway, 2011). This chapter provides information 
on the mental health impacts of climate change in Canada to support public health officials, practitioners, 
and decision makers in their efforts to prepare Canadians and their health systems. 
The mental health impacts from climate change are associated with both acute and slow-onset hazards. 
Acute hazards — such as floods, extreme heat events, wildfires, and hurricanes — can result in mental 
health impacts, such as mood and behavioural disorders (Berry et al., 2010a; Clayton et al., 2014; Dodgen et 
al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017). Acute hazards may also result in secondary impacts on mental health from 
physical harm and displacement, which can result in loss of livelihood, trauma, a lost sense of place, fear of 
impending impacts, and ongoing mood and behavioural disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD), depression, and anxiety (Berry et al., 2011; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; 
Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Clayton et al., 2014; Dodgen et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017; Cunsolo & Ellis, 
2018; Clayton, 2020; Clayton & Karazsia, 2020). Acute hazards can also result in affirmative outcomes, such 
as a sense of community cohesion, altruism, and a sense of meaning in a person’s life as communities come 
together to support one another in the aftermath of acute events (Weissbecker, 2011; Hayes & Poland, 2018; 
Hayes et al., 2020). Slow-onset hazards, such as drought, sea-level rise, and melting permafrost, can affect 
an individual’s sense of place, ecosystem health, culture and identity, and can lead to emotional responses 
of anxiety, grief, anger, helplessness, and depression (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Clayton et al., 2017; Adlard 
et al., 2018; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Middleton et al., 2020b). Both acute and slow-onset hazards can have 
secondary impacts on mental health (e.g., income insecurity, food and water insecurity). Knowledge and 
awareness of climate change threats, often identified as “vicarious,” “mediated,” or “anticipatory” experiences, 
can also affect mental health and well-being, resulting in emotional and behavioural responses, such as 
worry, grief, anxiety, anger, hopelessness, and fear (Clayton et al., 2017; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Clayton, 2020; 
Clayton & Karazsia, 2020; Pihkala, 2020). 
Addressing the impacts of climate change on the mental health of people living in Canada requires both 
greater understanding of risks and of adaptation efforts, as risks are increasing with climate warming. 
Temperatures in Canada have increased at a rate that is twice the global average, with Northern communities 
1	
Mental health is one aspect of the broader definition of psychosocial health. As defined in Section 4.2 Key Terms, 
psychosocial health is the interplay between social well-being, which arises from relationships with others and one’s 
context and culture, and psychological well-being, including thoughts, feelings, and behaviours (Berry et al., 2014).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 235 
warming even faster, particularly throughout Inuit Nunangat2 (Inuit homelands) (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Future occurrences of many of the acute and slow-onset climate-related hazards that affect mental health 
are projected to increase (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards, and Chapter 5: Air Quality). In addition, mental 
illness is already a leading cause of disability in the country, even before considering the projected increase 
in climate change hazards (CAMH, 2012). According to the Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC), 
approximately 7.5 million Canadians experience mental health problems each year (MHCC, 2017). Mental 
illness can affect anyone of any age, background, education level, income, or culture (MHCC, 2017). By the 
time they reach the age of 40, approximately 50% of people living in Canada will have, or have had, some 
form of mental illness (MHCC, 2017). Also, while the burden of mental health problems is high, many people 
in Canada lack access to mental health services, which affects opportunities for adaptation to reduce 
risks (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2015; Moroz et al., 2020). For example, in 
Northern, rural, and remote places in Canada, many communities do not have access to regular mental 
health care providers or related resources (including a family physician), and transportation within and to 
remote communities can be impeded by changing weather patterns and disruptions to land, water, ice, and 
air travel routes (CMHA, 2009; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 
2013b; Standing Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs, 2017; MHCC, 2020). Barriers to accessing 
mental health care throughout Canada are numerous, and can include, for example, financial and/or physical 
constraints; mental health stigma; a lack of mental health literacy; and limited culturally relevant mental 
health resources (Rodriguez & Kohn, 2008; Osofsky et al., 2010; MHCC, 2016; Hayes et al., 2019). 
The total burden of mental illness related to climate change in Canada is currently unknown; however, a 
number of empirical studies have documented the effects of a warming climate on mental health, largely in 
Northern and Indigenous3 communities (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; Donaldson 
et al., 2013; Durkalec et al., 2015; Dodd et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2020; Middleton et. al., 2020a). Compared 
with the number of studies on climate change impacts on physical health, far fewer have examined mental 
health. Reasons for this difference include challenges related to: 
•	
attributing environmental hazards to climate change and then attributing mental health outcomes 
to these hazards;
•	
isolating the mental health outcomes related to climate change from other compounding 
life stressors; 
•	
measuring some types of mental health impacts and compounding stressors (e.g., the difficulty 
of measuring compounding stressors of those experiencing colonialism, intergenerational trauma, 
and connections to the land, such as many Indigenous Peoples);
•	
studying and reporting on mental health indicators when mental health can be understood 
differently among diverse populations; and, 
2	
Inuit Nunangat includes Inuvialuit (part of the Northwest Territories and Yukon), Nunavut, Nunavik (Northern Quebec), 
and Nunatsiavut (Labrador).
3	
The term Indigenous is used in this chapter to refer collectively to the original inhabitants of Canada and their 
descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as defined under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 
1982. Wherever possible, clear distinctions are made between these three distinct, constitutionally recognized 
groups. Indigenous Peoples outside of Canada are also referenced in some instances particularly with respect to 
international climate policy, processes, and rights and are identified as such.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 236 
•	
under- or over-reporting of mental health outcomes related to climate change; under-reporting 
may occur because of the stigma surrounding mental illness, and over-reporting may occur 
because research is conducted too soon after a climate hazard, and, thus, normal reactions to 
abnormal events may be inappropriately pathologized (Hayes et al., 2018a). 
4.2 Key Terms
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines mental health as: “A state of well-being in which every individual 
realizes his or her own potential, can cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and 
is able to make a contribution to her or his community” (WHO, 2018, n.p.). Mental health can be demonstrated by 
the range of thoughts, feelings, and behaviours that people experience in their lifetimes. This conceptualization 
of mental health goes beyond diagnostic categories to encompass broader definitions of mental health across 
cultures and contexts. Mental health, like physical health, exists on a spectrum and includes states of mental 
wellness, mental challenges, and mental illness, each of which can influence functioning across life domains 
(MHCC, 2018). Throughout this chapter, the term mental health refers to specific mental health–related outcomes, 
such as PTSD, anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic growth (PTG).
Mental wellness refers to affirmative mental health outcomes, such as psychosocial resilience, which is the ability 
to adapt, thrive, develop, and transform despite experiencing stressors (Kumar, 2016).
Mental challenges include problems related to thoughts, feelings, or behaviours, such as overwhelming emotions, 
including fear, panic, and worry (American Psychiatric Association, n.d.).
Mental illness includes moderate to severe diagnosable mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder, 
psychosis, and PTSD (Coppock & Dunn, 2009; American Psychiatric Association, 2013). 
Emotional distress refers to experiencing symptoms of poor mental health outcomes (e.g., anxiety, depression, 
loss of motivation). The term mental ill health encompasses the definitions of mental challenges, formally 
diagnosable mental illnesses, and emotional distress.
Mental health is one aspect of the broader definition of psychosocial health. Psychosocial health is defined as 
the interplay between social well-being, which arises from relationships with others and one’s context and culture, 
and psychological well-being, including thoughts, feelings, and behaviours (Berry et al., 2014). Psychosocial health 
depends on social factors in a person’s life domain (home, work, school, and community) that are related to mental 
health and that allow people to live in optimal social conditions. Psychosocial impacts refer to outcomes that affect 
social relationships and context; for example, a lost sense of place related to experiencing climate change hazards. 
A holistic understanding of mental health also includes an understanding of important social, cultural, and 
environmental determinants, which may include spiritual well-being, connectedness to nature and one’s 
environment, and sense of place (MHCC, 2016; Hayes et al., 2018a). There are many approaches to understanding, 
supporting, and treating mental health from multiple cultural perspectives, which are valued and shared by 
people in Canada. For example, First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities often have their own definitions of 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 237 
mental wellness, which include connections to land; an interplay among physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual 
wellness; and the importance of community and culture (Kirmayer et al., 2003; Health Canada, 2015; ITK, 2016; 
Sawatzky et al., 2019). 
Specific qualities of environment-related trauma can foster complex emotional and behavioural reactions. For example, 
Glenn Albrecht noted the increase in environmental distress following climate-related hazards, such as drought and 
wildfires in Northern Australia, Hurricane Katrina, and the changing ice conditions in Northern Canada (Albrecht, 2011; 
Albrecht, 2012; Albrecht, 2017). He and his colleagues coined these environmental distress reactions “psychoterratic 
syndromes” and they include ecoanxiety, ecoparalysis, and solastalgia (Albrecht, 2011). These terms describe complex 
emotional and behavioural reactions of experiencing climate change that are not necessarily pathological. These 
reactions might actually be quite justified in response to climate change impacts and may serve as normal expressions 
of grief and/or loss in response to environmental degradation from climate change (Albrecht, 2011; Albrecht, 2019). 
Table 4.1 provides definitions for some common environment-related distress.
Table 4.1 Definitions of environment-related distress
TERM
DEFINITION
Ecoanxiety
Ecoanxiety (or climate anxiety) refers to the anxiety people experience that is 
triggered by awareness of ecological threats facing the planet due to climate 
change (Albrecht, 2011; Albrecht, 2012).
Ecoparalysis
Ecoparalysis refers to the complex feelings of not being able to do anything 
grand enough to mitigate or stop climate change (Koger et al., 2011).
Solastalgia
Solastalgia refers to the distress of bearing witness to ecological changes 
in one’s home environment due to climate change; conceptualized as feeling 
homesick when a person is still in their home environment (Albrecht, 2011; 
Albrecht, 2012).
Ecological grief
Ecological grief (or ecogrief) refers to distress related to ecological loss or 
anticipated losses related to climate change. These losses may relate to 
land, species, culture, or lost sense of place and/or of cultural identity and 
ways of knowing. Ecogrief can include loss and trauma related to specific 
hazards such as climate-related flooding or wildfires, or slow-onset climate 
change impacts such as rising global temperatures, drought, melting 
permafrost, and sea-level rise (Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 238 
4.3 Methods and Approach
As the literature in Canada on climate change and mental health is limited, this chapter also draws on the global 
literature and applies lessons learned to a Canadian context,where appropriate, to substantiate existing studies 
and fill knowledge gaps. A scoping review was conducted of English- and French-language peer reviewed and 
grey literature on climate change and mental health. Peer reviewed literature was identified by searching the 
PubMed, Scopus, PsycINFO (Proquest), Cochrane Review, and Google Scholar databases, using the search 
terms “climate change” or “changing climate” and “mental health” or “psychosocial” or “well-being/well-being,” as 
well as synonyms and related words, such as “mental ill health,” and “mental wellness.” In an effort to capture 
literature that addressed psychosocial adaptation, the terms “resilience,” “response,” and “adaptation” were used 
in combination with the primary search terms. Grey literature sources included government reports, workshop 
reports, unpublished project reports, conference presentations, and communication with practitioners, and 
knowledge leaders. 
The initial scoping review took place in July 2017, and English-language literature on climate change and mental 
health from the year 2000 onward was captured. An updated review took place in May 2019 and, at that time, 
French-language literature from 2000 to 2019 was included. After removing duplicates and irrelevant articles, a 
total of 207 articles were reviewed in depth for relevance and incorporated into this literature review.
Studies of climate change and psychosocial health tend to apply either survey or interview methods to learn 
about the lived experiences of psychosocial distress associated with a changing climate (e.g., Cunsolo Willox et 
al., 2012; Alderman et al., 2013; Ampuero et al., 2015; Durkalec et al., 2015; Eisenman et al., 2015; Harper et al., 
2015; Albrecht, 2017; Dodd et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2020; Middleton et al., 2020a). Most surveys and interviews 
are self-reported accounts from people who have experienced extreme temperatures or extreme weather events. 
Many of the findings presented in this chapter are from self-reported surveys and interviews, which mostly used a 
variety of validated survey tools and scales to assess how extreme temperatures or extreme events affect people’s 
psychosocial health. 
4.4 Mental Health Impacts of Climate Change
4.4.1 Causal Pathways
The casual pathways linking climate change hazards to mental health are multifaceted. Figure 4.1 describes 
how climate change negatively affects mental, physical, and community health. In the centre of this figure are 
the geophysical impacts of climate change, which amplify pre-existing social, individual, and physical health 
inequities. The interactions among climate hazards and pre-existing health inequities can lead to a host of 
mental, physical, and community health outcomes.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 239 
Figure 4.1 Linkages among climate change and physical, mental, and community health. Source: Clayton et al., 2017.
Exposure to climate hazards may trigger direct mental health impacts, such as depression, grief, or PTSD 
(Clayton et al., 2014; Dodge et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017; Hayes & Poland, 2018; Middleton et al., 2020b). 
Psychological reactions may also occur as a result of experiencing physical health impacts, such as heat 
stress, vector-borne disease, or injury (Berry et al., 2010a; Clayton et al., 2017) or impacts on community well-
being, such as economic disruptions, displacement, and a loss of social cohesion (Berry et al., 2010a; Agnew, 
2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Sahni et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017; Miles-
Novelo & Anderson, 2019). Disruption of social cohesion and resource scarcity can significantly affect health 
and related services for those who already have mental health problems and/or substance use disorder 
(Dodgen et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017). After experiencing climate stressors, some people may experience 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 240 
a combination of both affirmative mental health outcomes and mental problems or illness (Weissbecker, 
2011; Hayes & Poland, 2018; Hayes et al., 2020). Affirmative outcomes can include a sense of optimism for 
the future, compassion, and altruism for others who have been affected by climate hazards, and a sense of 
meaning or purpose in one’s life. Post-traumatic growth (PTG) can result from an increase in social cohesion 
after a climate disaster (Edwards & Wiseman, 2011; Ramsay & Manderson, 2011).
4.4.2 Timing of Impacts
In the literature, three timeframes related to the onset of psychosocial responses from acute hazards have 
been identified. They include immediate effects (hours, days, weeks), mid-range effects (six months to a 
year), and long-term effects (2.5 years and beyond) (Tunstall et al., 2006; Fritze et al., 2008; Anderson et al., 
2017; Clayton et al., 2017). Immediate effects of acute, extreme weather events can include acute trauma, 
a normal response to a disaster (e.g., “normal reactions to abnormal situations”) in which the traumatic 
reaction tends to subside once security and safety are established (Fritze et al., 2008). However, this is not 
always the case, as higher rates of more severe mental health concerns, such as suicide, have been reported 
in relation to acute climate change hazards such as extreme heat events (Carleton, 2017; Burke et al., 2018). 
Some mental health impacts can also extend over the medium- and long-term; those most commonly 
identified in the literature include anxiety, depression, PTSD, and drug and alcohol misuse, which can occur 
any time during ongoing climatic stressors or well after a climate-related extreme event has ended. They 
may also be related to the awareness of the threats posed by a changing climate (Fritze et al., 2008; Dodgen 
et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017). Notably, there are no key timeframes specified in the literature related to 
slow-onset hazards. People exposed to these hazards may experience an ongoing lost sense of place and/or 
distress from displacement, economic insecurity, food insecurity, and water insecurity. 
4.4.3 Mental Health Impacts of Acute Hazards
The majority of studies in the climate change and mental health literature examine the mental health 
outcomes of acute hazards, such as flooding, extreme heat events, wildfires, and hurricanes. Exposure to 
acute disasters can trigger a host of mental health outcomes, including PTSD, major depressive disorder, 
anxiety, complicated grief, survivor guilt, recovery fatigue, and suicidal ideation or attempts (Berry et al., 
2010a; Berry et al., 2011; Doherty & Clayton, 2011; Reser & Swim, 2011; Weissbecker, 2011; Cunsolo Willox 
et al., 2012; Stanke et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Bourque & Cunsolo Willox et al., 2014; O’Brien 
et al., 2014; Harper et al., 2015; Durkalec et al., 2016; Gifford & Gifford, 2016; Clayton et al., 2017; Mantoura 
et al., 2017; Dodd et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2018a; Clayton, 2020; Clayton & Karazsia, 2020; Middleton et al., 
2020a; Middleton et al., 2020b). In many cases, people exposed to acute disasters experience relatively little 
distress or only brief experiences with mental illness or mental health challenges, and instead demonstrate 
significant resilience (Bonanno, 2004). There is also evidence that suggests that people who are not exposed 
to acute hazards can experience mental health outcomes, such as vicarious trauma, secondary stress, and/or 
compassion fatigue for those whose lives have been disrupted by extreme events (Lambert & Lawson, 2013; 
Naturale, 2015). These forms of indirect distress are often due to close connection with people exposed to 
extreme events, media coverage of survivor experiences, or caring for survivors in a professional capacity 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 241 
(Naturale, 2015). The following sections provide information on specific hazards and mental health outcomes, 
with a focus on literature that is specific to Canada and/or relevant to the Canadian context.
4.4.3.1 Flooding 
Flooding has become the most frequent type of disaster globally, and risks of flooding are projected to 
increase as a result of the impacts of climate change in Canada (Alderman et al., 2012; Stanke et al., 2012; 
IPCC, 2014; Fernandez et al., 2015; UNISDR, 2015; Zhang et al., 2019). Evidence suggests that flooding can 
significantly affect mental health, and its effects can include increased levels of PTSD, general distress, 
depression, and anxiety among flood survivors (Alderman et al., 2012; Berry et al., 2014; Fernandez et al., 
2015; Sahni et al., 2016; Waite et al., 2017). People exposed to flooding events may also experience an 
enhanced sense of community, compassion, and altruism, as community members come together to support 
one another in the wake of a disaster (Weissbecker, 2011; Hetherington et al., 2018; Hayes et al., 2020). 
These affirmative mental health outcomes may co-occur with poor mental health outcomes, such as anxiety 
or general distress (Weissbecker, 2011; Hayes et al., 2020). People do not need to be directly exposed to 
a flood to experience poor mental health outcomes. For example, a study based in England by Waite et al. 
(2017) surveyed 2126 people to understand the effects of flooding on mental health. Respondents included 
individuals whose homes had been flooded and those who were disrupted by the flood (e.g., could not travel 
to work), but whose homes were not directly flooded (Waite et al., 2017). Psychological morbidity was highest 
among respondents directly affected by flooding (622), with PTSD being the most commonly reported impact 
(36.2%), followed by anxiety (28.3%), and depression (20.1%) (Waite et al., 2017). Interestingly, those who 
were disrupted by the flood, but who had not directly experienced flooding (1099), also experienced PTSD 
(15.2%), anxiety (10.7%), and depression (9.6%) related to the flood event (Waite et al., 2017). 
Flooding can exacerbate pre-existing mental health conditions and contribute to new ones (Stanke et al., 
2012). The impacts of floods can include increased substance misuse, increased family violence after the 
flood exposure, and effects on sleep, which can lead to poor mental health outcomes (Burton et al., 2016; 
Sahni et al., 2016). Broader psychosocial health outcomes associated with flooding are often related to job 
insecurity and economic insecurity from flood damage to homes and businesses that strain individuals’ and 
families’ sense of place and livelihoods. 
There is also evidence to suggest long-term mental health and psychosocial effects of experiencing flooding, 
including anxiety when it rains many years after experiencing a flooding event; reduced sense of security, 
including fears and anxiety about experiencing another extreme event; stress of living in floodplains; financial 
stress and family breakdown related to housing insecurity and/or economic insecurity from rebuilding; and 
lost sense of place due to displacement from flooding (Burton et al., 2016; Decent & Feltmate, 2018; Hayes et 
al., 2020). 
4.4.3.2 Extreme Heat Events
There is a growing body of literature documenting the mental health impacts from exposure to extreme 
heat events. These impacts include increased mood and behavioural distress; exacerbated mental illness; 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 242 
and increased risk of aggression, violence, and suicide (Anderson & Jané-Llopis, 2011; Agnew, 2012; Vida 
et al., 2012; Bélanger et al., 2014; Dixon et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Ding et al., 2016; Dodgen et al., 2016; 
Obradovich et al., 2018; Thompson et al., 2018; Kaiser et al., 2019; Miles-Novelo & Anderson, 2019). People 
who tend to be at greater risk of poor mental health outcomes from exposure to extreme heat include the 
elderly, people with chronic physiological conditions, and people with pre-existing mental health conditions, 
including those taking psychotropic medications that affect thermoregulation (Price et al., 2013; Bélanger 
et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Trang et al., 2016; Anderson et al., 2017). Some mental illnesses may be 
associated with inefficient physiological reactions to extreme heat, which make it harder for the body to cool 
down (Trang et al., 2016). Also, some medications may predispose people to heat illnesses (Health Canada, 
2011), as they can inhibit important physiological reactions and/or cause cognitive impairment that may 
affect judgment and limit the uptake of protective measures. In addition, people with mental illness may 
face greater challenges in adapting because of cognitive impairment (e.g., not seeking shade) and/or socio-
economic barriers, which disproportionately affect people with mental illness (Cusack et al., 2011; Page et 
al., 2012; Price et al., 2013; Bélanger et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014; Dodgen et al., 2016; Trang et al., 2016; 
Anderson et al. 2017). 
Higher temperatures may also be linked with violence (including suicide) and aggression (Stephen et al., 
1999; Anderson & Jané-Llopis, 2011; Agnew, 2012; Dixon et al., 2014; Dodgen et al., 2016; Thompson et al., 
2018; Kim et al., 2019; Miles-Novelo & Anderson, 2019). A 2019 study analyzed the association between the 
daily mean temperature and incidence of suicide for 341 locations in 12 countries and found that the pooled 
excess relative risk (1.46, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.25 to 1.70) for suicide for 26 Canadian locations 
(1986 to 1999) was highest at a daily mean temperature of 24.2°C (Kim et al., 2019). It is important to 
note that this temperature is at the 99th percentile; however, as climate change progresses, reaching this 
threshold more often is likely. This may result in an increased number of suicides, depending on the levels of 
acclimatization and adaptation. Some Canadian locations have higher increases in the relative risk than the 
pooled value at different temperatures, including Oshawa, with a relative risk of 3.80 (95% CI 1.06 to 13.59) at 
24.9°C; Ottawa, with a relative risk of 2.44 (95% CI 1.18 to 5.02) at 25.9°C; and Toronto, with a relative risk of 
1.75 (95% CI 1.18 to 2.59) at 26.5°C (Kim et al., 2019). 
Extreme heat also poses strain on systems that support mental health and well-being. Increased ambulance 
calls, emergency department visits, calls to telehealth and other helplines, and/or increases in people seeking 
outpatient care for mental health–related reasons during periods of extreme heat have been observed (Basu 
et al., 2018). In addition, drug storage in extreme temperatures may affect the efficacy of medications (De 
Winter et al., 2013; Armenian et al., 2017).
4.4.3.3 Wildfires
The research on the mental health impacts of wildfires has grown in recent years, likely due to the increase 
in wildfire disasters (particularly in communities in Western Canada). Similar to the research on flooding, 
the main mental health impacts of wildfires include increased risk of PTSD, anxiety (including generalized 
anxiety disorder), worry, and depression (Hutton, 2005; Eisenman et al., 2015; Yusa et al., 2015; Klinkenberg, 
2017; Agyapong et al., 2018; Dodd et al., 2018). Wildfires can also lead to population displacement, damage 
to infrastructure, loss of property, threats to food security, and respiratory conditions, which can result in 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 243 
exacerbated or the onset of psychological distress (including anxiety, stress, and PTSD) (Hutton, 2005; Yusa 
et al., 2015; Dodd et al., 2018). Recent findings from a study on the 2016 wildfire in Fort McMurray, Alberta, 
revealed significant increases in PTSD. Findings revealed 60% of respondents self-reported symptoms of 
PTSD, while 29% were formally diagnosed with PTSD (Klinkenberg, 2017). Another 26% of respondents 
highlighted experiences of depression and 36% noted experiences of insomnia (Klinkenberg, 2017). 
Researchers comparing youth exposed to the Fort McMurray wildfires to controls in Red Deer, Alberta, found 
that depression scores, suicidal thinking, and increased tobacco use were significantly higher in the youth 
from Fort McMurray (Brown et al., 2019). 
A study published in 2018 of the health impacts of wildfires in the Northwest Territories between June and 
August of 2014 revealed that displacement and evacuation related to the wildfires resulted in increased 
stress, fear, and long-term mental and emotional trauma (Dodd et al., 2018). Indigenous Peoples’ mental 
health and well-being was at particular risk because the fires disrupted land-based activities and cultural 
practices that are essential to the livelihoods in many of these communities (Dodd et al., 2018).
4.4.3.4 Hurricanes
There is limited literature documenting the mental health outcomes related to hurricanes in Canada, as 
hurricane exposure is relatively low compared to that in the U.S., for example. The primary mental health 
impacts from hurricanes that have been documented in studies outside of Canada include increased risk of 
PTSD and anxiety and mood disorders (Galea et al., 2007; Kessler et al., 2008; Whaley, 2009; Zwiebach et al., 
2010; Ferré et al., 2019; Orengo-Aguayo et al., 2019). The literature also highlights long-term effects, including 
affirmative outcomes such as a sense of resilience. Negative outcomes include, for example, lingering 
depression and PTSD (Rhodes & Chan, 2010; Pitts, 2015; Ferré et al., 2019). 
Much of the literature documenting the mental health impacts of hurricanes is focused on the experiences of 
Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Maria survivors. Hurricane Katrina was a Category 5 hurricane that struck 
the Gulf Coast of the U.S. in 2005, devastating the city of New Orleans (Whaley, 2009). It has been estimated 
that 20% to 35% of survivors experienced some form of mental health impact following Hurricane Katrina 
(Whaley, 2009). Nearly half (47.7%) of marginalized community members of New Orleans (mainly low-income, 
African-American women) showed probable signs of PTSD (Rhodes & Chan, 2010). This rate is significantly 
higher than the representative sample obtained by Kessler et al. (2008), which showed the prevalence of 
PTSD among the population at large who were affected by the hurricane to be between 14% and 20% (Kessler 
et al., 2008). Moreover, a 31.2% prevalence of anxiety and mood disorders among Hurricane Katrina survivors 
was observed (Kessler et al., 2008). 
Similar to the findings on the mental health impacts of Hurricane Katrina, researchers exploring the impacts 
of Hurricane Maria, which struck Puerto Rico in 2017, found clinically significant increases in depression, 
anxiety, and PTSD among two-thirds of the 74 households surveyed six months after the event (Ferré et al., 
2019). When looking at the mental health impacts of Hurricane Maria survivors who relocated to Florida, 
researchers found that adaptation and adjustment to a new environment added psychological burdens 
(Scaramutti et al., 2019). Therefore, adaptation efforts that lead to displacement do not always correlate with 
affirmative mental health outcomes (see section 4.4.5.1 Migration and Displacement). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 244 
In Canada, Hurricane Igor, which struck the Eastern coast of Newfoundland in 2010, was one of the most 
devastating hurricanes in Canadian history, reaching a Category 4 status (Gosse, 2010; Insurance Board of 
Canada, 2010; Pitts, 2015). While there are no known empirical investigations of the mental health impacts 
of this hurricane, there were reports documenting the psychosocial toll of loss and destruction (Gosse, 2010; 
Insurance Board of Canada, 2010). There was also one media report, five years after the hurricane, that 
documented psychosocial outcomes among community members in Clarenville and the Bonavista Peninsula 
in Newfoundland. These outcomes included an increased sense of community and resilience in the wake of 
the hurricane and in the months and years that followed the rebuilding efforts (Pitts, 2015). 
4.4.4 Mental Health Impacts of Slow-Onset Hazards
Climate change impacts on mental health may also occur as result of slow-onset hazards, such as drought, 
melting sea ice, and sea-level rise.
4.4.4.1 Drought
Climate change is expected to continue to increase the risk of drought in Canada (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Drought can affect livelihoods, socio-economic status, drinking water resources, food availability, and 
respiratory function (Vins et al., 2015; Watts et. al., 2017). As a consequence of these impacts, drought 
can also affect mental health (Yusa et al., 2015; Bard, 2017). The literature documenting the mental health 
impacts of drought highlights the secondary impacts from drought-related income, water, and food insecurity. 
These mental health impacts include increased risk of suicide, lost sense of place, and general despair 
(Nicholls et al., 2006; Polin et al., 2011; Rigby et al., 2011; Hanigan et al., 2012; Bryant & Granham, 2015). 
Those at greatest risk of experiencing poor mental health outcomes from drought include land-based workers 
(in the current research literature, land-based workers tended to be male and farmers), rural dwellers, and 
Indigenous Peoples (Rigby et al., 2011; O’Brien et al., 2014; Bryant & Granham, 2015; Powers et al., 2015; 
Flecther & Knuttila, 2016; Ellis & Albrecht, 2017). People involved in the agricultural industry are among the 
most commonly affected by the mental health impacts of drought because their economic livelihoods depend 
on environmental conditions (Vins et al., 2015; Ellis & Albrecht, 2017). For example, Ellis and Albrecht (2017) 
found that climate change contributed to increased worry and place-based distress, and also increased the 
perceived risk of depression and suicide among farmers in Australia. These outcomes emerged as a result of 
a lost sense of identity, deep emotional links to family farms, feelings of failure due to the inability to protect 
the land, and an understanding of ecological destruction occurring in their community (Ellis & Albrecht, 2017). 
Emotional responses to drought can be complex, involving both negative and positive effects. For example, 
in a study of drought impacts among First Peoples of Australia in New South Wales, Rigby et al. (2011) 
found impacts on culture and place, in particular, the inability to conduct cultural practices and displacement 
from traditional lands, which led to feelings of despair (Rigby et al., 2011). Noting the complexity of psychosocial 
responses to drought, authors also found that “the drought prompted increased love of and concern for land and a 
renewed enthusiasm for expressing connectedness to land through all forms of art” (Rigby et al., 2011, p. 249). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 245 
Droughts place significant psychosocial burdens on people because they tend to last longer than other extreme 
weather events, they tend to be more geographically expansive, and, thus, they have wide-ranging economic 
impacts. Furthermore, ecological recovery tends to be slow (Yusa et al., 2015; Fletcher & Knuttila, 2016). 
4.4.4.2 Melting Sea Ice and Sea-Level Rise
The mental health impacts of melting sea ice and sea-level rise are a growing field of study, and much 
of the Canadian literature is focused on sea-ice decline in Northern communities. This is the region of 
Canada where the most rapid warming is being experienced, particularly in remote Inuit and First Nations 
communities (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). The mental health impacts from melting sea ice and sea-level rise 
include psychosocial distress related to food insecurity, a lost sense of place and identity, increased stress 
and anxiety from unsafe travel conditions, and increased substance use (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo 
Willox et al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Asugeni et al., 2015; Durkalec et al., 2015; Harper et al., 
2015). For example, it has been documented that warming temperatures and melting sea ice caused a 
variety of strong emotional reactions, including fear, anxiety, sadness, anger, frustration, stress, and distress 
among Nunatsiavut Inuit (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 
2013b; Durkalec et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015). Changing weather patterns and sea ice thickness and extent 
affected community members’ abilities to travel and to participate in traditional food-gathering methods, 
thus affecting food security. These impacts affected the sense of place and identity, as cultural practices 
were disrupted by the lack of access to stable and safe ice (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et 
al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Harper et al., 2015). Mental health problems, suicidal ideation, family 
stress, and increased drug and alcohol use were often associated with this disrupted sense of place and 
identity (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012). 
4.4.5 Overarching Issues Related to Mental Health and a 
Changing Climate 
4.4.5.1 Migration and Displacement
People exposed to climate hazards may be subject to job losses (particularly land-based workers), food and 
water insecurity, and forced migration, all of which can impact psychosocial health (Fritze et al., 2008; Agnew, 
2012; Vins et al., 2015). Global displacement due to climate change is projected to vary from 25 million to 
1 billion by 2050; however, 200 million is the most frequently cited estimate (IEHS, 2015). In addition to the 
effects of being displaced, migrants often face psychosocial impacts related to racism and discrimination 
experienced by many people in their new host countries or when people are displaced within a country 
(Gleick, 2014). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 246 
Box 4.1 Mental health and cultural safety in Indigenous communities 
affected by evacuations caused by extreme weather events
Understanding the history of relocation of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis populations in Canada is integral 
for informing effective and culturally safe evacuations during climate change impacts. Relocations have 
historically been implemented to establish the reserve system in Canada. Historical displacement among 
First Nations communities, for example, has meant moving communities to reserve lands through forcible 
means, often to unknown territory and land (Bussidor & Bilgen-Reinart, 1997; Christmas, 2013). Indigenous 
Peoples today inhabit less than 1% of their traditional lands and territories in Canada (Usher, 2003). Climate 
change and the increased impacts on Indigenous Peoples, paired with this history of relocation, have 
significant impacts on community members, which may exacerbate pre-existing trauma as a result of 
colonial legacy. 
In 2018, the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program at Indigenous Services Canada launched a 
three-year project entitled Addressing Mental Health Impacts in Indigenous Communities Due to Evacuations 
Caused by Extreme Weather Events. Participants included people from First Nations communities across 
Canada. This research was piloted in collaboration with First Nations community members and other key 
stakeholders to identify tangible solutions to inform policy and programs during evacuations, responses and 
recovery efforts, and to ensure that Indigenous voices are included in emergency planning and management.
Various conversations with participants suggested that climate change intensifies existing inequities 
experienced by communities by affecting subsistence lifestyles and connections to land and territory. First 
Nations communities were disproportionately evacuated due to climate change events, at 28.7 times the 
rates of their off-reserve Canadian counterparts, between 2009 and 2016 (Durocher, 2018). During times of 
evacuations, mental health and cultural safety are often not adequately considered in emergency response. 
Mental health challenges of experiencing an evacuation are often compounded and exacerbated through: 
•	
the breakdown of communications systems between multiple jurisdictions; 
•	
the intergenerational trauma of residential school systems; 
•	
limited cultural wellness supports; and 
•	
the often limited cultural spaces to provide country food and other spaces of healing. 
Recommendations to reduce the mental health challenges of these events included integrating First Nations 
communities and knowledge systems into all stages of evacuation planning and process, and promoting 
and strengthening resilience before, during, and after evacuations. Importantly, concepts of resilience differ 
among clans, families, Nations, and communities. However, more broadly, resilience work for many Indigenous 
communities means understanding what capacity looks like from a space of cultural and traditional knowledge — 
including incorporating the role of oral history, maintaining or re-establishing access to subsistence practices, and 
involving social and familial structures in emergency management and preparedness. 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 247 
Acute and slow-onset hazards due to climate change interact with existing socio-economic and political 
conditions to drive increases in voluntary and forced migration (Schwerdtle et al., 2017). In response to 
hazards related to climate change, not all populations migrate voluntarily, and some populations are not 
able to do so at all (Black et al., 2011). Some populations experiencing climate-related impacts may choose 
not to migrate, but rather to adopt other adaptation strategies (Black et al., 2011). Others may choose 
temporary migration with planned return or circular mobility between home and new host areas. “Trapped 
populations” represent those who are unable or less able to migrate because of social, political, or economic 
conditions, despite high vulnerability to climate change hazards (Bogic et al., 2015). These populations often 
live in low-resource settings (within or outside of Canada) and already experience various health inequities. 
Populations exposed to climate hazards who are unable to relocate remain at heightened or increased risk 
of mental health impacts of climate change (Foresight: Migration and Global Environmental Change, 2011). 
Climate-related migration can involve adverse health impacts but may also include positive impacts on health 
and well-being. For example, a review by Schwerdtle et al. (2017) on climate change and migration, which 
included case studies from various countries, described how voluntary, planned relocation can be an effective 
adaptation if it is based on the consent of migrating communities, if it improves the standards of living, and if 
used as a last resort.
In Canada, displacement related to climate change is an important issue, particularly for Indigenous 
communities. For example, the 2011 Manitoba flood displaced residents of Lake St. Martin First Nation in 
Manitoba for over six years (Macyshon, 2017). Approximately 7% of the evacuees never returned home, and 
some of these cases were due to suicide and homelessness (Macyshon, 2017). Substance misuse may also 
be related to displacement. The health director of the Montreal Lake Cree Nation in Saskatchewan suggested 
that increased use of crystal methamphetamine by 600 community members is related to a 2015 wildfire 
evacuation that displaced the entire community of 1200 people (Zakreski, 2019). The psychosocial effects 
of displacement related to climate change can therefore include increased rates of suicide, homelessness, 
and substance misuse among Indigenous communities that are impacted by evacuations caused by extreme 
weather events in Canada (Box 4.1). However, more research is needed to better understand these impacts. 
4.4.5.2 Impacts on Health Systems and Facilities
Climate change also has implications for mental health services, treatment, and facilities. For example, 
mental health care facilities may be inaccessible due to infrastructure damage to buildings or roads following 
acute climate hazard events (Hasket et al., 2008; Osofsky et al., 2010; Clayton et al., 2017). Further, mental 
health professionals may be unable to reach health care facilities to provide services because of damage to 
their own property, personal injuries, or damage to infrastructure between their dwellings and health facilities. 
For the same reasons, people may be unable to access prescription medication to treat pre-existing mental 
health disorders (Balbus et al., 2013). 
Many communities in Canada may not have access to mental health care facilities or practitioners on site 
even before a climate-related hazard, particularly in rural and remote areas (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; 
Petrasek MacDonald et al., 2015; Moroz et al., 2020). In such cases, mental health care is often introduced in 
a community after the event for a short period of time and long-term mental health care needs are often not 
met (Hayes et al., 2020). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 248 
Box 4.2 Strengthening mental health care in High River, Alberta
The town of High River, Alberta, has experienced three major flooding events since 2005, most notably 
the 2013 flash flood that was declared a state of emergency, with four reported deaths and 13,000 people 
displaced from their homes (Canadian Disaster Database, 2016). Soon after the 2013 flood, the provincial 
government responded to the current and future mental health needs of Albertans by investing $50 million in 
mental health care and creating the first Chief Mental Health Officer in the province (Government of Alberta, 
2013). This investment resulted in: 
•	
the deployment of 15 mental health experts to High River;
•	
28 additional mental health experts from British Columbia brought in to support evacuees;
•	
clinical staff visits to hotels where evacuees were housed;
•	
the hiring of six additional child and youth mental health specialists;
•	
training for first responders and flood victims in suicide prevention and psychological First Aid;
•	
85,000 mental health promotion resources related to mental health care delivered digitally; and, 
•	
mental health care translation services for the mental health promotion resources and services 
(Government of Alberta, 2013).
Further, staff from the Calgary Counselling Centre were brought into the community to provide free mental 
health care for residents affected by the flood. According to the Calgary Counselling Centre website, over 
2750 people received counselling related to their experiences with the flooding event and 93% reported 
improved well-being after treatment (Foothills Community Counselling, 2020). 
Due to funding shortages, however, the Calgary Counselling Centre in High River closed in 2016. Clients were 
notified that they could travel to the Calgary offices an hour away to seek support (Foothills Community 
Counselling, 2020). However, this was not feasible for people of low socio-economic status or with mobility 
issues, who were unable to travel to Calgary. Further, many of the mental health care responders who were 
sent into High River following the flood began to leave in 2016, despite persistent mental health care needs in 
the community (Hayes et al., 2020). 
Noting the long-term effects of the flood and the overarching mental health care needs of the community, the 
municipality of High River and a private donor stepped in to establish the Foothills Community Counselling 
Service (Foothills Community Counselling, 2020; Hayes et al., 2020). This service is offered in the community 
with costs on a sliding-scale, so that High River residents, irrespective of income, can receive long-term care. 
The municipality has also created the Safe Spot Initiative to build citizen capacity to support the mental 
health of High River residents (McCracken, 2017). This initiative trains businesses and agencies in 
psychological First Aid. After receiving training, businesses and agencies post a large orange dot in their 
window to let community members know that their establishment is a “safe spot” to talk about their mental 
health with a trained staff member. The aim of this program is to increase access to community-based 
mental health care (Hayes et al., 2018b). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 249 
Clayton et al. (2017) noted that, where cities have set plans in place to enhance or build resilient 
infrastructure to support climate change and health needs, they often overlook mental health infrastructure 
(including mental health care facilities and wellness services). Enhancing access to and expanding mental 
health services can support psychosocial resilience to climate change (Box 4.2). 
4.4.5.3 Loss and Damage
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) highlights the community-wide 
negative impacts of loss and damage related to climate change (Tschakert et al., 2017; UNFCCC, 2020). 
Loss and damage refer to physical losses and damage to environmental resources, biodiversity, properties, 
businesses, and infrastructure from slow-onset and acute climate hazards. There is a growing body of 
literature that highlights how climate-related loss and damage affects psychosocial well-being (Barnett et 
al., 2016; Tschakert et al., 2017; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Tschakert et al., 2019). As noted earlier, a lost sense 
of place, particularly among Indigenous Peoples in Canada and globally, is tied to a loss of culture, identity, 
and connectedness to the land and land-based activities; thus, the psychosocial effects of loss are myriad 
and complex (Rigby et al., 2011; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Tam et al., 2013; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Middleton 
et al., 2020a; Middleton et al., 2020b). For example, Tam et al. (2013) assessed how climate change affected 
well-being in a First Nation community in the Western region of James Bay, and found that both slow-onset 
hazards (e.g., increased temperatures, changes in the timing of seasons, etc.) and acute hazards (e.g., 
flooding events) led to the loss of traditional harvesting practices, damaged the winter road, and disrupted 
the behaviour of animals. Similarly, in Nunatsiavut, Labrador, it was found that disruptions from increasing 
temperatures, melting sea ice, and shifting plant and wildlife patterns, as well as subsequent impacts on 
food and cultural security, resulted in decreased sense of place, diminished cultural continuity, and concerns 
about loss of place-based connections moving forward (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et 
al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Middleton et al., 2020a). These experiences of loss, damage, and 
disruption subsequently led to socio-economic challenges and food insecurity that affected the communities’ 
psychosocial well-being (Tam et al., 2013). 
In a systematic analysis, entitled One thousand ways to experience loss, Tschakert et al. (2019) documented 
the many ways people and communities experience climate-related loss and damage through a comparative 
review of over 100 case studies. An array of negative emotional outcomes, including sadness, worry, 
trauma, depression, and suicidal ideation, a lost sense of place, a lost sense of safety, feeling homesick 
in one’s home environment (solastalgia), grief, and loss of identity were identified (Tschakert et al., 2019). 
Further, a systematic literature review of climate-sensitive mental health outcomes for Indigenous Peoples 
globally found that changing place attachments and food systems can lead to diverse, interconnected, and 
overlapping emotional and psychological outcomes (Middleton et al., 2020b). The authors of this study 
highlight that there is no one single or simple relationship between climate stressors and intangible loss and 
damage and that climate-related harm is “mediated by personal circumstance, culture, and socio-economic 
context” (Tschakert et al., 2019, p. 69). An overview of how health inequities — based on biological, cultural, 
social, and environmental determinants of health — influence climate-related exposures, risks, and impacts is 
provided in the following section. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 250 
4.5 Populations at Higher Risk
While all people are at risk of experiencing the health impacts of climate change, some populations and 
communities are disproportionately affected. This section highlights populations throughout Canada who 
are at higher risk of the mental health impacts of a changing climate, including Indigenous Peoples; children, 
youth, and older adults; low socio-economic groups and the homeless; people with pre-existing health 
conditions; and certain occupational groups. This section emphasizes the need for appropriate attention, 
promotion, prevention, and care for specific subsets of the population.
In many cases, individuals who experience existing health inequities are at increased risk of mental health 
outcomes related to climate change. Health inequities refer to avoidable differences in health status and 
occur as a result of unfair or unjust systems, policies, and factors that influence health status (Government 
of Canada, 2018; see also Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). In order to address these systemic 
health inequities, it is important to better understand who is most at risk and the systemic factors that 
increase risk. 
Individuals may fit into several population groups of higher concern and experience multiple health inequities, 
which can compound risks of the mental health impacts of climate change. The way multiple risk factors 
and health inequities can compound risk is not well understood. For example, there are many populations 
who may be at increased risk of the mental health impacts of climate change and who also experience 
discrimination. This can include racialized groups, those discriminated against because of sexual orientation, 
and those discriminated against as a result of mental health conditions. There is limited information about 
how discrimination can exacerbate the mental health impacts of climate change in specific populations. 
Importantly, many populations who are at increased risk of mental health outcomes related to climate change 
have and continue to demonstrate adaptive and/or resilient behaviours, despite the challenges and inequities 
they face. While there is a nascent base of literature that explores the strengths and adaptation actions 
among populations considered at higher risk to mental health outcomes related to climate change (Ford et al., 
2016; Hayes et al., 2019), such information can elucidate important learnings about those experiencing the most 
severe climate change impacts to better understand adaptation and resilience (Hayes, 2019).
4.5.1 Indigenous Peoples
There is a large body of literature documenting climate change impacts on the mental health of Indigenous 
Peoples in Canada and globally, with a specific focus on Indigenous Peoples in remote Australia (Shipley & 
Berry, 2010; Bardsley & Wiseman, 2012; Green & Minchin, 2014; O’Brien et al., 2014; Bowles, 2015) and Inuit 
Nunangat in Canada (Cameron, 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Ford, 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; 
Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Durkalec et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2015; Ford et al., 2016). Indigenous Peoples in 
these distinct geographic locations are on the front lines of a changing climate and are bearing witness to the 
loss or degradation of land, which can take a toll on individual and collective well-being (Cunsolo Willox et al., 
2012; Tam et al., 2013; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2014; Middleton et al., 2020b). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 251 
Compounding the impacts of a rapidly changing climate are the ongoing legacies and traumas stemming 
from colonization, land dispossession, residential schools, forced relocation, racism, social exclusion, and 
the continued marginalization of First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples in Canada (Kirmayer et al., 2009; 
Cameron, 2012; Ford, 2012). There is also a lack of culturally relevant health services for many First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples in Canada, leading to systematic and cultural barriers to service access and uptake 
(see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). It is also well understood that 
Indigenous Peoples have a greater burden of chronic physical illness as a result of experiencing systemic 
health inequities that can exacerbate climate-related mental ill health outcomes (Earle, 2013; ITK, 2016). 
4.5.2 Sex and Gender
Evidence suggests that women4 tend to be more prone to anxiety, worry, and PTSD related to a changing 
climate (Tunstall et al., 2006; Lowe et al., 2013; Dodgen et al., 2016; Clayton et al., 2017). The literature 
also suggests that women tend to be at greater risk from climate changes as a result of gender-based 
marginalization (Fletcher & Knuttila, 2016; Williams et al., 2018). In particular, women tend to be in caregiving 
roles, which are typically undervalued and underpaid, and, in these roles, women are at greater risk of 
experiencing compassion fatigue, particularly during periods of exposure (or vicarious exposure) to climate 
hazards (Hayes, 2019). Pacheco (2020) also highlights that pregnant people are at greater risk of heat-induced 
illnesses and nutritional deficiencies, which are exacerbated by climate-related heat events and food insecurity.
Studies indicate that men also experience mental health impacts of climate change. For example, Cunsolo 
Willox et al.’s (2012) work in Northern Inuit communities in Nunatsiavut found that middle-aged men often 
suffered the most from changing environmental conditions because they were unable to provide food for 
family and community, with resulting negative effects on sense of place and identity (Durkalec et al., 2015). 
Further, as discussed previously, there is an increased risk of suicide among male farmers during times of 
drought (Hanigan et al., 2012). It is important to consider the role of gender-based socialization related to 
seeking mental health care (Tunstall et al., 2006). The literature suggests that the issue may be less about 
who is affected and more about who is socialized to engage in help-seeking behaviours and who has access 
to mental health services (Tunstall et al., 2006; Alston & Kent, 2008; Berry et al., 2011; Polain et al., 2011; 
Granham, 2015).
4.5.3 Children, Youth, and Older Adults
Children, youth, and older adults tend to be at greater risk from the psychosocial impacts of a changing 
climate because they are more dependent on others to maintain their health and well-being (Lowe et al., 
2013; Clayton et al., 2014). Limited evidence suggests that pregnant people exposed to climate change 
stressors may have children with increased risks of intrauterine growth retardation, low birth weight, and 
prematurity (Pacheco, 2020). Among other types of long-term adverse effects, climate change may lead to 
4	
In Western science, sex is typically considered binary (male and female), which overlooks intersex individuals. Gender 
refers to the socially constructed roles assigned to men and women. In Western science, gender is commonly 
conflated with sex, and presented as binary (man and woman), overlooking non-binary individuals.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 252 
psychosocial impacts, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism spectrum disorder, and other 
neurodevelopmental disorders; cognitive deficits; mood disorders; and schizophrenia (Pacheco, 2020). 
Experiences of anxiety and feelings of impending doom related to climate change can also affect children 
(Tucci et al., 2007; Fritze et al., 2008; Ojala, 2012). A survey of Australian children by Tucci et al. (2007) noted 
that one in four children were so concerned about the global threat of climate change that they believed the 
world would end before they reached adulthood. Children may also be at increased risk of long-term trauma 
and anxiety from extreme weather events (Simpson et al., 2011: Brown et al., 2019; Roberts et al., 2019). The 
concerns of children and youth over climate change may be more prevalent because they think more about 
their future, they have less agency and control in their lives and behaviours, and they have more time to focus 
on the issue (Ojala, 2012; Clayton, 2020).
4.5.4 Low Socio-Economic Populations and the Homeless
People living with low socio-economic status are at higher risk of the health impacts of climate change (see 
Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity), including effects on mental health. For example, homeless 
people tend to live in urban and suburban areas where there is greater exposure to extreme temperatures, 
which can disproportionately affect people with pre-existing mental health conditions who have difficulty 
with thermoregulation (Dodgen et al., 2016). People who are homeless are at greater risk of vector-borne 
diseases because they spend large portions of time outdoors in precarious weather and in areas where host 
vectors may be more prevalent (Dodgen et al., 2016). Vector-borne diseases, such as West Nile virus and 
Lyme disease, may compound mental health issues for people with pre-existing mental health illness by 
contributing to cognitive, neurological, and mental health problems (Dodgen et al., 2016). While the current 
base of research on the mental health implications of climate change among the homeless and those living 
with low socio-economic status in Canada is limited, socio-economic status is recognized as a predictor of 
poor mental health outcomes (Hudson, 2005).
4.5.5 People with Pre-Existing Health Conditions
People with pre-existing health conditions, including mental health issues, are at greater risk for the mental 
health impacts of a changing climate (Cusack et al., 2011; Dodgen et al., 2016). For example, in the U.S., 
veterans with mental illness were 6.8 times more likely to suffer from exacerbated mental illness after 
Hurricane Katrina compared to veterans with no pre-existing mental health conditions (Dodgen et al., 2016). 
Further, people with severe mental illness are extremely vulnerable during climate hazards, and their needs 
can often be overlooked in emergencies (Jones et al., 2009). Individuals with pre-existing mental health 
issues are at increased risk for other morbidities and mortality. Mental health care and social resources to 
support well-being (such as support groups) are required during and after climate hazard exposures among 
this target population. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 253 
4.5.6 Occupational Groups
People whose occupations are primarily outdoors, or whose economic livelihoods depend on the health of 
the land and environment, are at greater risk for psychosocial impacts of climate change (Fritze et al., 2008; 
Costello et al., 2009; Berry et al., 2010a; Clayton et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014). Outdoor labourers who tend to be 
most at risk include fishers, herders, hunters, and trappers, and people in the tourism industry (Fritze et al., 
2008; Costello et al., 2009; Berry et al., 2010a; Clayton et al., 2014; IPCC, 2014). 
As climate change affects traditional, resource-based industries and workers who rely on these industries 
for their livelihoods, these workers may experience emotional distress related to job insecurity. There is 
anecdotal evidence to suggest that people working in resource-based industries in Alberta, for example, are 
presenting with severe emotional distress as they contemplate the collapse of the traditional sectors in which 
they have worked (Mouallen, 2015). Limited evidence also suggests that ecoanxiety can affect people working in 
the fields of climate science, environmental science, and public health (Clayton, 2018; Pihkala, 2020). 
Another occupational group that tends to disproportionately experience the psychosocial impacts of a 
changing climate are first responders who support health response efforts after extreme events (e.g., 
hurricanes, floods, wildfires) (Carleton et al., 2017). Dodgen et al. (2016) noted that PTSD rates among first 
responders range from 13% to 18% four years after responding to an extreme weather event. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 254 
4.6 Projected Mental Health Risks and 
Economic Costs
4.6.1 Projected Mental Health Risks from Climate Change
There are no known studies in Canada that project the mental health impacts of climate change. However, 
one study projected the mental health outcomes of climate change under future climate scenarios, focusing 
on suicide rates related to warming tempearatures in the U.S. and Mexico. Burke et al. (2018) estimated that 
increased warming by 2050 (under the RCP8.5 scenario) could result in a combined 9000 to 40,000 additional 
suicides in the U.S and Mexico. For a 1°C increase in monthly average temperatures, mortality by suicide 
increased by 21% in Mexico and 0.7% in the U.S. (Burke et al., 2018). 
In the absence of greater adaptation efforts, the current burden of mental ill health in Canada is likely to rise 
because many climate-related hazards associated with mental health outcomes are expected to increase in 
severity and frequency (Bush & Lemmen, 2019; Hayes et al., 2019). As previously noted, the Mental Health 
Commission of Canada reports that 7.5 million people in Canada experience mental health problems every 
year (MHCC, 2017). Given the very large number of Canadians who experience mental health problems, the 
potential increase of illness from future climate change is large. 
4.6.2 Projected Economic Costs of Health Impacts
There are no known studies documenting the projected economic costs of the mental health impacts related 
to climate change in Canada. It is estimated that 500,000 people in Canada miss work every week due to 
mental health issues, which costs the Canadian economy approximately $51 billion annually. Psychiatric 
conditions are the second most expensive health care expenditure in Canada, following closely behind 
expenditures for cardiovascular disease (CAMH, 2012; PHAC, 2014). Given the high costs of psychiatric 
conditions to the health system and society, and given the breadth of mental health impacts that can be 
related to climate change, future costs borne by Canadians are expected to be large as the climate continues 
to warm. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 255 
4.7 Adaptation to Reduce Risks
Adaptation measures can be effective in reducing the mental health impacts of climate change (Dodgen et al., 
2016). This section provides an overview of the roles and responsibilities of officials, within and outside the 
health sector, for enhancing mental health in a changing climate. It discusses current policies and programs 
to reduce mental health risks, including new and innovative approaches for the monitoring and surveillance 
of the mental health impacts of climate change, efforts to support youth, and interventions that encourage 
interactions with nature. Barriers and opportunities for adaptation action are also presented, as well as the 
co-benefits of addressing climate change that can benefit mental health.
4.7.1 Roles and Responsibilities for Adaptation to Reduce Risks
Adapting to reduce the mental health impacts of climate change requires intersectoral and transdisciplinary 
actions rooted in integrated and coordinated support and care (Stanke et al., 2012; Hayes et al., 2019). The 
disciplines that should be involved include a range of health professionals, such as:
•	
physicians, nurses, mental health specialists (e.g., psychiatrists, psychologists, psychotherapists); 
•	
allied health professionals (e.g., public health workers, pharmacists, social workers, community 
mental health workers); and
•	
emergency preparedness professionals (e.g., first responders).
The most effective support for mental health may be through mental health care professionals and formal 
services such as therapies, counselling, and/or psychotropic medications (Hayes et al., 2018a). For many, 
mental illness or emotional distress is still highly stigmatized, and people may prefer to support their well-
being through informal family or community supports and networks entirely unrelated to formal mental 
health care (Rodriguez & Kohn, 2008). As a consequence, people may rely on services and supports offered 
informally, such as exercise, arts-based activities, or groups that provide an enhanced sense of community 
(Hayes et al., 2018a). There are also a variety of cultural approaches to mental health care that people may 
rely on — for example, land-based healing practised by many Indigenous Peoples, which brings people out on 
the land to create, craft, cook, share stories, and connect with the land and with culture (Radu, 2018). 
4.7.2 Policies and Programs that Reduce Risks 
There are a range of interventions to address the psychosocial impacts of climate change, including policy-
level responses, programs, and practices, community-based approaches, and other strategies for providing 
mental health services and supports (Table 4.2). Psychosocial health refers more broadly to the social and 
psychological components that shape well-being, and mental health is one aspect of the broader definition 
of psychosocial health. The following sections highlight the broader range of adaptation interventions 
supporting psychosocial health (Clayton et al., 2017; Hayes & Poland, 2018; Hayes et al., 2018a).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 256 
Table 4.2 Examples of policy and program responses as well as 
medical interventions and practices to address the psychosocial 
impacts of climate change
POLICY AND PROGRAM RESPONSES
•	
Improved access to, or funding for, mental health care
•	
Economic assistance to reduce economic strain, which is a key stressor for people 
experiencing climate hazards
•	
Climate change resilience plans that address psychosocial well-being
•	
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments that include examination 
of mental health vulnerabilities and adaptation options
MEDICAL INTERVENTIONS AND PRACTICES
•	
Specific therapies or medications provided by mental health care professionals
•	
Specific behavioural interventions such as cognitive behavioural therapies, mindfulness-based 
practices, or ecological grief programs
•	
Specialized training for community members in psychological First Aid or mental health First Aid 
•	
Mobile mental health interventions
•	
Walk-in mental health care interventions
•	
Resource guides for professionals and the public on addressing the mental health outcomes 
related to climate change
4.7.2.1 Monitoring and Surveillance of Mental Health Impacts 
The Toolkit for Post-Disaster Surveillance of Impacts on Mental Health developed by the National Institute of 
Public Health of Quebec provides guidance to public health officials on monitoring the mental health impacts 
of major disasters during the recovery phase, which can last months to years after an extreme event (Canuel 
et al., 2019). This toolkit includes specific data collection instruments to evaluate the mental health impacts 
of exposures to climate-related hazards. In addition, novel approaches have been, and are being, developed in 
Indigenous communities to gain a better understanding of the psychosocial impacts of climate change (Box 4.3). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 257 
Box 4.3 eNuk environment and health monitoring program
It’s... making sure that we have, we still have things in the future that we have now and we can 
still use them the same way. Understanding the fact that things are gonna change, ice is gonna 
change, weather’s gonna warm up, but make sure that we are [protecting our environment], 
what we can protect now we should continue to protect.
Resident of Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Labrador 
Climatic and environmental changes present major challenges for human health in Inuit Nunangat (Inuit 
homelands) and Northern Canada (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in 
Canada). In particular, because of their close connection to and reliance on the land for sustenance, culture, 
livelihoods, and well-being, Inuit throughout the North have identified negative impacts on physical and 
mental health in their communities. While research has uncovered many connections among environment 
and health outcomes, detecting these outcomes and responding to them is a serious challenge. Community-
led, comprehensive, and sustainable surveillance and monitoring systems to assist with climate-health 
adaptation that can yield timely and usable data, and provide decision-making strategies for communities and 
governments, are needed. 
The Rigolet Inuit Community Government, the Nunatsiavut Department of Health and Social Development, 
and a team of Inuit and non-Inuit researchers have been working with the community of Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, 
Labrador, Canada to develop and implement the eNuk program, an Inuit-designed and -developed 
participatory environment and health surveillance system (The eNuk Program, 2018). Premised on Inuit 
values, knowledge systems, sciences, and priorities, the eNuk app is designed to track, analyze, and respond 
to the health impacts of climate change, including impacts on mental health (Sawatsky et al., 2018; Sawatsky 
et al., 2020). 
Inuit can use this app to take pictures and videos, insert text, and document the safety of ice routes and 
culturally important places for hunting, fishing, and berry picking. App users can also insert health-related 
information, including mental health indicators related to shifting environmental patterns; impacts on sense 
of place, cultural continuity, food security, and challenges to identity; emotional responses, such as ecological 
grief and anxiety; and acute and chronic mental health outcomes. Information from the app will provide 
information about climate change impacts on mental and physical health, and allow health professionals 
and decision makers to respond to local needs. The eNuk app is in a preliminary pilot phase (Sawatsky et al., 
2018; The eNuk Program, 2018; Sawatsky et al., 2020). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 258 
4.7.2.2 Supporting Youth 
Youth can be particularly vulnerable to experiences of anxiety, grief, and stress related to climate change, 
including ecoanxiety and ecogrief. Ray (2020) refers to youth born between the 1990s and the 2000s as “the 
climate generation,” because of their exposure to the climate crisis over their lives. The Field Guide to Climate 
Anxiety: How to Keep Your Cool on a Warming Planet (Ray, 2020) is aimed at youth and provides a number of 
resources for dealing with climate change, including:
•	
tools to address burnout related to climate activism and the climate crisis;
•	
techniques to make sense of the climate crisis and to find purpose and meaning in addressing it; 
•	
strategies to enhance collective and individual resilience; 
•	
tools to address potentially negative impacts of climate change media coverage; and
•	
tips on how to infuse climate justice work with joy, humour, and optimism. 
The field guide places individual and collective well-being, along with social and environmental justice, at 
the centre of these actions. Supporting the well-being of children and youth in their efforts to cope with the 
impacts of climate change has also been the focus of some Indigenous communities and organizations. Box 
4.4 highlights how two organizations from three Island Lake First Nations exposed to a wildfire came together 
to support the well-being of children. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 259 
Box 4.4 Ka Pimthatek Pakthehnamoowin, a journey of hope in Island 
Lake, Manitoba
In August 2017, approximately 3700 people from three Island Lake First Nations were forced from their 
homes by a 77,000 hectare wildfire. The entire community of Wasagamack First Nation, as well as residents 
of St. Theresa Point and Garden Hill First Nations, were evacuated by boat and plane to Brandon and 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, to stay in hotels. While in evacuation centres in the south, children were subject to 
discrimination, predatory drug dealers, and separation from parents.
Following this experience, Four Arrows Regional Health Authority, a regional organization focused on 
improving health outcomes for the Island Lake membership, collaborated with Save the Children, a child-
rights organization, to support child-focused mental health in response to the fires, and to prepare for future 
climate extremes and disasters. Through this partnership, the two organizations:
•	
trained over 100 frontline workers on addressing the unique needs of children in emergencies, 
helping children in crisis, and implementing psychological First Aid; 
•	
trained over 100 frontline workers on the importance of self-care through “care for caregivers” 
workshops; and 
•	
distributed emergency backpacks full of supplies to 2000 children to keep them safe during emergencies. 
Through this process, it was observed that children were struggling with the wide-reaching implications 
of climate change and the emotional impacts of the 2017 evacuation. Children were exhibiting increased 
externalizing behaviours and were also living in challenging contexts of the opioid crisis, theft, domestic 
violence, and a lack of safe housing. 
To support the emotional resilience of children in response to these challenges, the two organizations worked to 
create an evidence-based psycho-educational program that builds resilience and coping skills in safe small-group 
settings. The program sought to enhance the resilience of children, adolescents, and their caregivers in St. Theresa 
Point First Nation in response to, and in preparation for, climate extremes and disasters.
4.7.2.3 Interactions with the Natural Environment
Much of the current literature exploring new and innovative approaches to addressing the psychosocial 
impacts of climate change highlights the importance of interactions with the natural environment. 
Interactions that include practices that preserve the natural environment provide people with a sense of 
stewardship and personal investment that may help overcome feelings of hopelessness, anxiety, and 
ecoparalysis. One environmental clinic treated “impatients,” people who were emotionally and physically tired 
of waiting for legislative interventions on climate change, with “prescriptions” for environmental action (Koger 
et al., 2011). The clinic provided students with problem-focused coping strategies that increase well-being 
through environmental activism (Koger et al., 2011). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 260 
Spending time in nature has also been linked with enhanced physical and psychosocial health (Ulrich, 1979). 
A common practice in Japan to reduce stress and anxiety is shinrin-yoku (“forest bathing”) — a way of 
connecting deeply with nature. In a study by Lee et al. (2011), authors found that forest bathing resulted in 
decreased cortisol levels and pulse rates and significantly increased positive feelings. 
Indigenous communities have traditionally found psychosocial enhancement through land-based healing 
practices (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2012; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013a; Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013b; Petrasek 
MacDonald et al., 2015; Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018; Middleton et al., 2020a). Land-based healing provides space 
and opportunity for community members to come together, to learn and impart knowledge about land-based 
culture and knowledge, and to enhance a sense of community, all of which increase psychosocial well-being 
(Kirmayer & Valaskakis, 2009; Radu et al., 2014).
Other proposed approaches to build the human–nature relationship that supports psychosocial well-being 
include ecopsychology, the branch of environmentalism that integrates psychology to support psychosocial 
well-being and planetary health, and deep ecology practices, which provide people with opportunities to 
integrate meditative practices in nature to calm the mind and body while building a relationship with nature 
(Bragg & Reser, 2012). Many new therapies still need to be evaluated for their effectiveness in reducing the 
psychosocial impacts of climate change. 
4.7.3 Co-Benefits of Addressing Climate Change that Improve Mental 
Health Outcomes
Greenhouse gas mitigation and adaptation actions to address climate change can produce significant health 
co-benefits (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience), including benefits to mental health 
(City of Toronto, 2019). For example, increasing opportunities in a community for active transportation 
(e.g., walking, jogging, and biking) have been shown to reduce depression and improve moods (Koger et al., 
2011; Whitfield et al., 2017). In addition, community-based environmental stewardship projects that support 
adaptation and/or efforts to mitigate greenhouse gases can enhance a sense of social cohesion and thus 
support psychosocial well-being (Koger et al., 2011). Increasing green infrastructure is also an important 
strategy to mitigate greenhouse gases and adapt to climate change that has been demonstrated to reduce 
urban heat islands, improve physical health, and support mental well-being (Zupancic et al., 2013; Huang et 
al., 2017; Health Canada, 2020).
4.7.4 Barriers and Opportunities for Adaptation Actions 
Psychosocial adaptation to the effects of climate change is influenced by a number of factors that may be 
protective of psychosocial health when they are in place and may hinder psychosocial health when they are 
absent. These include (Hayes et al., 2019): 
•	
social capital; 
•	
sense of community;
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 261 
•	
communication and outreach;
•	
intersectoral and transdisciplinary collaboration;
•	
community preparedness;
•	
government interventions;
•	
access to resources (financial and physical);
•	
mental health literacy;
•	
culturally relevant resources and responses;
•	
health care training; and
•	
vulnerability and adaptation assessments. 
Figure 4.2 presents factors that influence the psychosocial health impacts of climate change, illustrating 
how these impacts are mediated by the social and ecological determinants of health, response interventions, 
and the factors previously identified that influence psychosocial adaptation. While specific Indigenous 
determinants of health such as food insecurity, colonialism, racism and social exclusion, self-determination, 
and environmental stewardship are not included in this figure, it is recognized that they are integral to 
understanding the factors that influence the psychosocial health of Indigenous Peoples experiencing the 
effects of climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 262 
Figure 4.2 Factors that influence the psychosocial health impacts of climate change. Source: Hayes et al., 2019.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 263 
4.7.4.1 Social Capital
Social capital refers to the “networks and resources available to people throughout their connections to 
others” (Aldrich, 2012, p. 172). Two important dimensions of social capital include the structural dimension, in 
which people engage and interact in activities, and the cognitive dimension, which encompasses perceptions 
about trust, social cohesion, and reciprocity (e.g., a sense of community) (Berry et al., 2010b; Aldrich, 2012). 
Essentially, social capital is both the networks and relationships people form to support one another, as well 
as perceptions about these networks and relationships. Social capital is of paramount importance in post-
disaster recovery, even when compared with economic or other types of assistance (Aldrich, 2012). 
Social capital may serve as a protective factor for farmers affected by wildfires and drought. The “Hay West” 
movement, for example, demonstrated how social capital is not bound by a single geographic location but 
can benefit farm workers across the country. In 2002, drought-affected Prairie farmers received 64,000 
hay bales from farmers in Eastern Canada, who understood the plight of those affected by the drought 
and sought to support one another (Yusa et al., 2015). Social capital was also identified as an important 
protective factor in decreasing the risk of suicide among adult female farmers during periods of prolonged or 
worsening drought in Australia (Hanigan et al., 2012). 
4.7.4.2 Sense of Community 
A sense of community refers to feelings of belonging and is often referred to as the opposite of feeling 
isolated (Bajayo, 2012). A sense of community is particularly important when addressing the mental health 
impacts of climate change, because it can provide space to explore and discuss challenging emotions such 
as ecological grief and ecoparalysis. Resources that enhance a sense of community have been developed 
to support people experiencing emotions such as ecoanxiety. For example, the “Ecoanxious” website was 
created to make people feel less alone in their fears about the climate crisis (Malena-Chan & Gatley, 2020). 
This forum offers people the opportunity to share their stories of ecoanxiety, learn from others’ experiences, 
and practise guided meditation (Malena-Chan & Gatley, 2020). The website “Is This How You Feel?” provides 
an online platform for people to explore how climate change makes them feel (“Is This How You Feel?”, 2020). 
Additionally, the Good Grief Network, which is a 10-step program to support individuals and communities 
as they explore and address ecogrief, connects people to build “personal resilience while strengthening 
community ties” (Schmidt & Lewis-Reau, 2020). The network provides specific tools that can help address 
the negative impacts of ecogrief, including denial, hopelessness, helplessness, activism fatigue, and burnout 
(Schmidt & Lewis-Reau, 2020) “Climate and Mind” is a U.S.-based online repository of research and resources 
for addressing climate-related distress, including a listing of mental health professionals who can support 
people (Bryant, 2020). This site offers guidance on how to host climate cafés or climate circles, which are 
informal community gatherings that offer people the opportunity to share and explore feelings of ecoanxiety, 
ecological grief, and climate-related distress while building a community of support (Bryant, 2020). All of these 
resources emphasize the importance of fostering a sense of community to support psychosocial resilience.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 264 
4.7.4.3 Communication and Outreach
It is important that messages about the mental health impacts of climate change include actions to support 
psychosocial well-being (Clayton & Manning, 2018; King et al., 2018). Messages about impending climate 
risks alone may invoke more fear and anxiety in people, in particular among those with pre-existing mental 
health issues, and may contribute to mental health problems (Dodgen et al., 2016). Messages that trigger 
fear may also increase avoidance behaviours; that is, people may feel so overwhelmed that they disengage 
and avoid messages about climate change as a way to cope (Stern, 2012). Pairing messages about risks 
from climate hazards with messages about what, where, and how people can support their well-being may 
help people to feel more empowered and in control of their wellness (Maibach et al., 2011). Trusted sources 
for this information include health professionals, meteorologists, climatologists, and governments (Zhao 
et al., 2014). A good example of a communication product is presented in Figure 4.3. This image highlights 
that ecological grief and anxiety associated with climate change are increasing and identifies health sector 
responses that can reduce emotional suffering and build resilience.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 265 
Figure 4.3 Ecological grief and anxiety: the start of a healthy response to climate change? Source: Cunsolo et al., 
2020; Image credit: Alex Sawatzky.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 266 
4.7.4.4 Intersectoral and Transdisciplinary Collaboration
Intersectoral and transdisciplinary collaboration is key to supporting adaptation to the psychosocial impacts 
of a changing climate (Morrisey & Reser, 2007; Stanke, 2012; Hayes et al., 2019). Mental health care 
professionals, along with other health and allied health professionals, provide mental health care on the front 
lines during extreme weather events and disasters. In addition, community groups, faith-based and spiritual 
institutions, and non-governmental organizations provide a sense of community and support for people 
experiencing psychosocial outcomes. Emergency preparedness professionals also support adaptation, 
particularly during these events. The mental health and wellness of these professionals can be seriously 
affected, as they tend to be more exposed to hazardous events (Carleton et al., 2017). Enhanced collaboration 
across disciplines and sectors can increase the effectiveness of adaptations to reduce the psychosocial 
impacts of climate change (Hayes et al., 2020).
4.7.4.5 Government Interventions and Access to Resources 
Access to mental health care and social services that support psychosocial health can reduce negative 
mental health outcomes (MHCC, 2016; Thompson et al., 2018). These resources may include mental health 
care from medical professionals, or informal support from community-based groups; access to these 
resources, however, may be affected or disrupted by climate hazards (Hayes et al., 2019). 
Government interventions that enhance access (both financial and physical) to psychosocial resources are 
foundational for enhancing mental health care (Polain et al., 2011; MHCC, 2016; Hayes et al., 2019). Canada’s 
universal, single-payer health system may not cover many mental health care services, and mental health 
services vary by province, territory, and region (Goldner et al., 2016). Additionally, although many First Nations 
and Inuit receive a range of mental health services and supports free of charge as part of the Non-Insured 
Health Benefits Program, many do not have access to them (Government of Canada, 2020). 
Provinces and territories provide outpatient physician services (e.g., primary care and psychiatry) and 
in-patient mental health care at hospitals. Allied professionals (e.g., nurses, social workers, counsellors, 
psychotherapists) are often provided at no charge during in-patient care; however, these services may include 
a fee when they are delivered as outpatient services. Many people in Canada, therefore, may need to pay 
for mental health services directly or through private insurance in order to access such services (Goldner et al., 
2016). Some people may not be able to access mental health care due to financial constraints or simply because 
there are no mental health care facilities to access (Moroz et al., 2020). The unequal access of some populations 
in Canada to mental health care services increases their vulnerability to climate change impacts. Enhanced and 
equitable access to mental health care could improve mental health outcomes in a changing climate. 
4.7.4.6 Mental Health Literacy and Mental Health Care Training
There is significant stigma surrounding mental ill health and mental health service use in Canada (Tam, 
2019). This barrier can reduce the number of people who seek help for their mental health needs related to 
the effects of climate change. Developing mental health literacy among the general public can help to reduce 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 267 
this stigma and encourage people who are struggling with the mental health impacts of climate change to 
seek care (Hayes et al., 2019). Mental health literacy refers to the knowledge of mental health outcomes, 
factors that influence mental health outcomes, and mental health care management and options (Davis, 
2013). psychological First Aid and mental health First Aid can enhance mental health literacy, by providing 
guidance and training on how to support people experiencing mental distress. 
Efforts to reduce the mental health impacts of climate change include training public health and emergency 
management officials. Training should focus on the activities required following a disaster, advocated by 
Neria and Shultz (2012):
•	
promoting a sense of safety;
•	
calming anxiety and decreasing physiological arousal;
•	
increasing self-efficacy and collective efficacy;
•	
encouraging social support and bonding with others; and
•	
instilling hope to promote a sense of a positive future. 
The application of these approaches may enhance mental health literacy and reduce long-term psychosocial 
impacts from climate change, especially among populations who experience disproportionate health burdens 
(Neira & Schultz, 2012). 
4.7.4.7 Culturally Relevant Resources and Responses
Adaptation efforts that support psychosocial health need to use culturally relevant and locally appropriate 
resources. For example, in Canada, increased availability of mental health care is needed in rural farming 
communities to help reduce impacts from drought. Such care should also be provided by individuals with 
knowledge of, and experience in, agriculture and should be designed with attention to gendered dimensions 
that create different experiences for farm men and women (Fletcher & Knuttila, 2016). 
Reducing the mental health impacts of climate change in First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities also 
requires culturally relevant resources (MHCC, 2016). For example, responding to the mental health and 
cultural safety needs of Indigenous Peoples following community evacuations from floods and fires requires 
integrating the First Nations Mental Wellness Continuum5 among first responders providing assistance to 
displaced First Nations populations. It also requires cultural competency training for emergency response 
personnel, law enforcement, and disaster management specialists at provincial and federal levels (Health 
Canada, 2015). There is also a need to enhance awareness and support of land-based healing practices 
relevant to Indigenous communities (Polain et al., 2011; Harper et al., 2015). Noting this, the Yukon’s Climate 
Change Secretariat report on adaptation actions identified strengthening mental health resources and 
building or enhancing programs that support Indigenous Peoples’ reconnection to the land as a top priority 
(Government of Yukon, 2017).
5	
The First Nations Mental Wellness continuum is a culturally relevant framework that supports service coordination 
and delivery of mental wellness services that are relevant to First Nations Peoples in Canada (Health Canada, 2015).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 268 
4.7.4.8 Community Preparedness Utilizing Vulnerability and 
Adaptation Assessments
Community preparedness to support psychosocial health in the aftermath of climate-related hazards, and 
to prevent the occurance of impacts in the first place, is highly dependent upon a thorough understanding 
of the risks and vulnerabilities related to community-level climate hazards and an assessment of adaptation 
opportunities (Morrissey & Reser, 2007; Hayes et al., 2019). For this reason, many communities throughout 
Canada have conducted climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments (V&As) (see 
Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). These assessments, often conducted by local, 
provincial, and territorial health authorities, or Indigenous communities, increase understanding of current 
and projected impacts of climate change on health, populations most at risk, and adaptation options.
V&As are useful tools to obtain information needed to address the mental health impacts of climate change; 
however, few V&As incorporate mental health indicators. Hayes and Poland (2018) provide a set of indicators 
and measurement tools that can be used to analyze climate change impacts on mental health (Table 4.3).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 269 
Table 4.3 Monitoring and measuring climate change impacts on 
mental health
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
POPULATIONS AT 
INCREASED RISK
POTENTIAL MENTAL 
HEALTH OUTCOMES
INDICATORS AND 
MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Extreme Heat
•	 People with pre-
existing mental health 
conditions
•	 People taking 
psychotropic 
medications 
that affect 
thermoregulation
•	 Older adults 
(who have poor 
thermoregulation)
•	 People with 
substance use 
disorders
•	 People living in urban 
heat islands
•	 Urban poor without 
access to air 
conditioning
•	 People who are 
homeless
•	 Workers exposed 
to heat and people 
active outdoors
•	 Exacerbated mood 
or behavioural 
disorders
•	 Violence
•	 Aggression
•	 Suicide
•	 Monitor emergency 
department visits after 
extreme heat events for 
an increase in patients 
reporting mood or 
behavioural disorders
•	 Monitor mortality statistics 
following extreme heat 
events — look for co-
morbidities related to 
mental health and incidents 
of suicide
•	 Interviews or questionnaires 
with people who 
experienced extreme heat 
events to ask about their 
mental health in relation to 
heat events 
•	 Review police records 
following extreme heat 
events to monitor elevated 
incidents of violence or 
aggression
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 270 
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
POPULATIONS AT 
INCREASED RISK
POTENTIAL MENTAL 
HEALTH OUTCOMES
INDICATORS AND 
MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Extreme 
Weather Event
(flood, 
hurricane, 
drought, 
mudslides, 
etc.)
•	 Gender (women)
•	 Sex (female, 
particularly pregnant 
women)
•	 Age (children, infants, 
older adults)
•	 Race and ethnicity 
(non-White)
•	 Immigrants 
•	 People with pre-
existing health 
conditions
•	 People with low socio-
economic status
•	 People who are under- 
and non-insured 
(health care and home 
insurance)
•	 People who are 
homeless
•	 Outdoor labourers
•	 First responders
•	 First Nations, Inuit, 
Métis
•	 Post-traumatic 
stress disorder 
(PTSD)
•	 Depression 
(including major 
depressive 
disorders)
•	 Anxiety
•	 Suicidal ideation
•	 Aggression
•	 Substance abuse 
and addiction
•	 Violence
•	 Survivor guilt
•	 Vicarious trauma
•	 Altruism
•	 Compassion
•	 Post-traumatic 
growth
Surveys
•	 Self-report surveys of 
general health. Consider 
using:
	»
General Health 
Questionnaire (GHQ) 
•	 Self-report surveys of 
mental illness and mental 
problems. Consider using 
any, or a combination of:
	»
Disaster-PAST 
	»
Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder Scale (GAD-7) 
	»
Post-Traumatic Stress 
Disorder Checklist (PCL) 
	»
Center for Epidemiologic 
Studies Depression Scale 
(CES-D) 
	»
Kessler Psychological 
Distress Scale (K6; K10) 
	»
Brief Trauma 
Questionnaire
•	 Self-report surveys of 
affirmative mental health. 
Consider using: 
	»
Stress-Related Growth 
Scale (SRGS) 
	»
Post-Traumatic Growth 
Index (PTGI) 
	»
Benefit Finding Scale 
(BFS)
Review patient records
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 271 
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
POPULATIONS AT 
INCREASED RISK
POTENTIAL MENTAL 
HEALTH OUTCOMES
INDICATORS AND 
MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Extreme 
Weather Event
(flood, 
hurricane, 
drought, 
mudslides, 
etc.)
(continued)
Monitor emergency department 
visits after extreme weather 
events for an increase in 
patients reporting mental health 
problems or illness
Review new prescription use for 
mental health and behavioural 
disorders after an extreme 
weather event
Interviews
•	 Interviews with primary 
care physicians and mental 
health care providers about 
any surges in patients 
reporting mental health 
issues following extreme 
weather events
•	 Interviews with people who 
experienced an extreme 
weather event about their 
perceptions regarding their 
mental health related to the 
event
Vector-Borne 
Disease (VBD) 
(e.g., Lyme 
disease, West 
Nile virus)
•	 People who are 
homeless
•	 People with pre-
existing mental health 
conditions
•	 Outdoor workers
•	 Recreationalists 
(hunters, fishers, 
outdoor enthusiasts)
•	 VBD disease, 
particularly Lyme 
disease or West 
Nile virus, that can 
compound mental 
health problems 
(e.g., cognitive 
or neurological 
impairment, 
behavioural 
disorders)
•	 Interviews or questionnaires 
with patients who have been 
diagnosed with VBDs to ask 
about perceptions of their 
mental health
•	 Interviews with primary 
care physicians and mental 
health care providers 
about any mental health 
co-morbidities for patients 
diagnosed with VBDs
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 272 
CLIMATE 
HAZARD
POPULATIONS AT 
INCREASED RISK
POTENTIAL MENTAL 
HEALTH OUTCOMES
INDICATORS AND 
MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Sea-Level Rise 
or Melting 
Permafrost
•	 People who work or 
live near the ocean 
(sea-level rise) or in 
the Arctic
•	 Outdoor labourers
•	 First Nations, Inuit, 
Métis
•	 Anxiety, worry, or 
fear of displacement
•	 Anxiety, worry, or 
fear of job loss
•	 Loss of place (grief, 
solace
•	 Interviews or questionnaires 
with residents who 
have experienced or are 
experiencing sea-level rise 
or prolonged drought in 
their communities. Interview 
questions may focus on the 
mental health implications 
of: displacement, job loss 
associated with sea-level 
rise, infrastructure damage, 
agricultural or resource 
loss and resource scarcity, 
as well as food and water 
safety and security
Climate Change 
Overall (i.e., 
awareness 
of climate 
change threats 
to human 
and planetary 
health and 
survival)
•	 People at greater risk 
from and exposure to 
climate change
•	 Researchers 
investigating climate 
change
•	 Environmental and 
climate change 
activists
•	 Environmental studies 
students
•	 Outdoor 
recreationalists
•	 First Nations, Inuit, 
Métis
•	 Anxiety
•	 Worry
•	 Stress
•	 Fear
•	 Interviews or questionnaires 
with people who experience 
concern, anxiety, worry, 
related to awareness of 
climate change threats 
•	 Generalized Anxiety Disorder 
Scale (GAD-7)
Source: Adapted from Hayes & Poland, 2018
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 273 
4.8	Knowledge Gaps 
A number of knowledge gaps currently challenge efforts by public health authorities to develop effective 
adaptation measures to reduce the mental health impacts of climate change. There are limited population-
level studies on climate change impacts on mental health within Canada and globally. Greater information 
from such studies on the key factors that increase risks of impacts on Canadians would help inform future 
adaptation efforts. Specific knowledge gaps include: 
•	
the mental health impacts of climate change on specific population groups experiencing health 
inequities, including people of colour and racialized groups, those discriminated against because 
of sexual orientation or identity, and those discriminated against based on their mental or 
physical health;
•	
the mental health complications of vector-borne diseases in Canada;
•	
affirmative mental health outcomes, such as psychosocial resilience, altruism, and compassion after 
experiencing climate hazards, which can enhance our understanding of psychosocial adaptation; 
•	
the mental health impacts of cold temperature climate hazards, such as impacts from a polar vortex;
•	
projections of the impacts of climate change on mental health under different climate scenarios; 
•	
an evaluation of the economic costs of the mental health impacts of climate;
•	
the effectiveness of psychosocial adaptation opportunities to a changing climate; 
•	
the availability and effectiveness of psychosocial interventions from a health equity perspective; and
•	
how awareness and communication activities about the climate change problem affect social-
emotional responses, such as anxiety, fear, grief, and worry.
Increased surveillance and monitoring of the impacts of climate change on the burden of mental illness in 
Canada are also needed. This includes monitoring and surveillance of the mental health implications of acute 
and slow-onset hazards related to climate change at the local, regional, and national levels.
The literature on adaptation also highlights the importance of traditional ecological knowledge, which is 
foundational in adaptive management strategies and in supporting Indigenous Peoples’ abilities to cope 
within a changing climate (Tam et al., 2013; Williams et al., 2018). Greater research is needed that highlights 
the importance of Indigenous wisdom in adapting to the psychosocial impacts of climate change.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 274 
4.9 Conclusion
Climate change affects the mental health and well-being of many people in Canada. In particular, climate 
change disproportionately and inequitably affects the mental health and well-being of specific populations, 
including those experiencing health inequities based on race, culture, gender, age, socio-economic status, 
ability, and geographic location. Importantly, there are a number of existing programs, interventions, and 
policies that can support people in Canada as they adapt to a changing climate as well as factors that can 
influence and enhance psychosocial adaptation. While further work is needed to build on existing research, 
programs, interventions, and policies to address knowledge and practice gaps related to mental health 
in a changing climate in Canada, there are existing tools and programs that can enhance and support 
psychosocial adaptation.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 275 
4.10 References
AbacusData. (2019). Public opinion research: Climate 
emergency polling (Summer 2019). National Survey of 2,000 
Canadians. Retrieved from <https://abacusdata.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/08/Climate-Emergency-Polling-July-2019-
RELEASE.pdf>
Adlard, B., Donaldson, S. G., Odland, J. O., Weihe, P., Berner, 
J., Carlsen, A., … Mulvad, G. (2018). Future directions for 
monitoring and human health research for the Arctic Monitoring 
and Assessment Programme. Global Health Action, 11(1), 1–4. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2018.1480084>
Agnew, R. (2012). Dire forecast: A theoretical model of the 
impact of climate change on crime. Theoretical Criminology, 
16(1), 21–42. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1362480611416843>
Agyapong, V. I., Hrabok, M., Juhas, M., Omeje, J., Denga, E., 
Nwaka, B.,... & Chue, P. (2018). Prevalence rates and predictors 
of generalized anxiety disorder symptoms in residents of Fort 
McMurray six months after a wildfire. Frontiers in psychiatry, 9, 
345. <htps://doi. org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00345> 
Albrecht, G. (2011). Chronic environmental change: Emerging 
“psychoterratic”syndromes. In I. Weissbecker (Ed.), Climate 
Change and Human Well-being. New York, NY: Springer.
Albrecht, G. (2012). Psychoterratic conditions in a scientific 
and technological world. In P. Kahn, & P. Hasbach (Eds.), 
Ecopsychology: Science, Totems, and the Technological Species 
(pp. 241-264). MIT Press.
Albrecht, G. (2017). Climate change and human responses 
(G. Monks, Ed.). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. 
Retrieved from <https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%
2F978-94-024-1106-5> 
Albrecht, G. A. (2019). Earth Emotions: New Words for a New 
World. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Alderman, K., Turner, L. R., & Tong, S. (2012). Floods and human 
health: A systematic review. Environment International, 47, 
37–47. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.06.003>
Alderman, K., Turner, L. R., & Tong, S. (2013). Assessment of the 
health impacts of the 2011 summer floods in Brisbane. Disaster 
Medicine and Public Health Preparedness, 7(4), 380–386. 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2013.42>
Aldrich, D. (2012). Building resilience: Social capital in post-
disaster recovery. University of Chicago Press.
Alston, M., & Kent, J. (2008). The Big Dry: The link between 
rural masculinities and poor health outcomes for farming 
men. Journal of Sociology, 44(2), 133-147. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/1440783308089166>
American Psychiatric Association. (n.d.). What is mental illness? 
Retrieved from <https://www.psychiatry.org/patients-families/
what-is-mental-illness>
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostics and 
statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-V) (5th ed). 
Ampuero, D., Goldswosthy, S., Delgado, L. E., & Miranda J, 
C. (2015). Using mental well-being impact assessment to 
understand factors influencing well-being after a disaster. 
Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal, 33(3), 184–194. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14615517.2015.1023564>
Anderson, H., Brown, C., Cameron, L. L., Christenson, M., 
Conlon, K. C., Dorevitch, S., Dumas, J., Eidson, M., Ferguson, 
A., …Walker, R. (2017). Climate and health intervention 
assessment: Evidence on public health interventions to 
prevent the negative health effects of climate change. 
Climate and Health Techninal Report Series. Centers for 
Disease Control Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/docs/
ClimateAndHealthInterventionAssessment_508.pdf>
Anderson, P., & Jané-Llopis, E. (2011). Mental health and global 
well-being. Health Promotion International, 26(1 Suppl), 147–155. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/heapro/dar060>
Armenian, P., Campagne, D., Stroh, G., Ives Tallman, C., 
Zeng, W., Lin, T., & Gerona, R. R. (2017). Hot and Cold Drugs: 
National Park Service Medication Stability at the Extremes of 
Temperature. Prehospital Emergency Care : Official Journal of 
the National Association of EMS Physicians and the National 
Association of State EMS Directors, 21(3), 378–385. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/10903127.2016.1258098>
Asugeni, J., MacLaren, D., Massey, P. D., & Speare, R. (2015). 
Mental health issues from rising sea level in a remote 
coastal region of the Solomon Islands: current and future. 
Australasian Psychiatry, 23(6 Suppl), 22–25. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/1039856215609767>
Bajayo, R. (2012). Building community resilience to 
climate change through public health planning. Health 
Promotion Journal of Australia, 23(1), 30–36. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/00222930400014148>
Balbus, J. M., Boxall, A. B. A., Fenske, R. A., McKone, T. E., & 
Zeise, L. (2013). Implications of global climate change for 
the assessment and management of human health risks of 
chemicals in the natural environment. Environmental Toxicology 
and Chemistry, 32(1), 62–78. <https://doi.org/10.1002/etc.2046>
Bard, D. (2017). Les changements climatiques et leurs 
consequences sur la sante. International Journal of Medicine and 
Surgery, 4, 7–11. doi:10.15342/ijms.v4.133
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 276 
Bardsley, D. K., & Wiseman, N. D. (2012). Climate change 
vulnerability and social development for remote indigenous 
communities of South Australia. Global Environmental 
Change, 22(3), 713–723. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2012.04.003>
Barnett, J., Tschakert, P., Head, L., & Adger, W. N. (2016). 
A science of loss. Nature Climate Change. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate3140>
Basu, R., Gavin, L., Pearson, D., Ebisu, K., & Malig, B. (2018). 
Examining the association between apparent temperature and 
mental health-related emergency room visits in California. 
American Journal of Epidemiology, 187(4), 726–735. <https://
doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwx295> 
BC Ministry of Environment and Climate Change Strategy. 
(n.d). Addressing climate and health risks in BC. Retrieved 
from <https://www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/environment/
climate-change/adaptation/health/final_climate_and_health_
backgrounder_public_health.pdf>
Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Valois, P., & Abdous, B. (2014). 
Perceived adverse health effects of heat and their determinants 
in deprived neighbourhoods: A cross-sectional survey of 
nine cities in Canada. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 11(11), 11028-11053. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph111111028>
Berry, H. L., Bowen, K., & Kjellstrom, T. (2010a). Climate change 
and mental health: A causal pathways framework. International 
Journal of Public Health, 55(2), 123–132. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00038-009-0112-0>
Berry, H. L., Hogan, A., Owen, J., Rickwood, D., & Fragar, L. 
(2011). Climate change and farmers’ mental health: Risks and 
responses. Asia-Pacific Journal of Public Health, 23(2 Suppl), 
119S–32. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1010539510392556>
Berry, H. L., & Welsh, J. A. (2010b). Social capital and health in 
Australia: An overview from the household, income and labour 
dynamics in Australia survey. Social Science and Medicine, 
70(4). <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2009.10.012>
Berry, P., Clarke, K.-L., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014). 
Human Health. In F. J. Warren, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation (pp. 19–22). Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada. 
Black, R., Bennett, S. R. G., Thomas, S. M., & Beddington, J. R. 
(2011). Migration as adaptation. Nature. 478, 447-449. <https://
doi.org/10.1038/478477a>
Bogic, M., Njoku, A., & Priebe, S. (2015). Long-term mental 
health of war-refugees: a systematic literature review. BMC 
International Health and Human Rights, 15, 29. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12914-015-0064-9>
Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, Trauma, and human resilience: 
Have we underestimated the human capacity to thrive after 
extremely aversive events? American Psychologist, 59(1), 20. 
<https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.59.1.20>
Bourque, F., & Cunsolo Willox, A. (2014). Climate change: The 
next challenge for public mental health? International Review of 
Psychiatry, 26(4), 415–422. <https://doi.org/10.3109/09540261
.2014.925851>
Bowles, D. C. (2015). Climate change and health adaptation: 
Consequences for indigenous physical and mental health. 
Annals of Global Health, 81(3), 427–431. <https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.aogh.2015.06.004> 
Bragg, E., & Reser, J. (2012). Ecopsychology in the Antipodes: 
Perspectives from Australia and New Zealand. Ecopsychology, 
4(4), 253–265. <https://doi.org/10.1089/eco.2012.0085>
Brown, M. R., Agyapong, V., Greenshaw, A. J., Cribben, I., Brett-
MacLean, P., Drolet, J., & Kitching, D. (2019). After the Fort 
McMurray wildfire there are significant increases in mental 
health symptoms in grade 7–12 students compared to controls. 
BMC Psychiatry, 19(1), 18. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-018-
2007-1> 
Brown, K., & Westaway, E. (2011). Agency, capacity, and 
resilience to environmental change: Lessons from human 
development, well-being, and disasters. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources, 36, 321–342. <https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-environ-052610-092905>
Bryant, A. (2020). Climate & mind. Retrieved from <https://www.
climateandmind.org/about>
Bryant, L., & Garnham, B. (2015). The fallen hero: Masculinity, 
shame and farmer suicide in Australia. Gender, Place and 
Culture, 22(1), 67-82. <https://doi.org/10.1080/096636
9X.2013.855628>
Burke, M., González, F., Baylis, P., Heft-Neal, S., Baysan, C., Basu, 
S., & Hsiang, S. (2018). Higher temperatures increase suicide 
rates in the United States and Mexico. Nature Climate Change, 
8(8), 723–729. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0222-x>
Burton, H., Rabito, F., Danielson, L., & Takaro, T. K. (2016). Health 
effects of flooding in Canada: A 2015 review and description of 
gaps in research. Canadian Water Resources Journal, 41(1-2), 
238-249. <https://doi.org/10.1080/07011784.2015.1128854>
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s changing climate 
report. Ottawa, ON: Environment and Climate Change Canada. 
Retrieved from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019> 
Bussidor, I., & Bilgen-Reinart, Ü. (1997). Night spirits: The story of 
relocation of the Dene. University of Manitoba Press.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 277 
Cameron, E. S. (2012). Securing indigenous politics: A 
critique of the vulnerability and adaptation approach to the 
human dimensions of climate change in the Canadian arctic. 
Global Environmental Change, 22(1), 103-114. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.11.004>
Canadian Disaster Database. (2016). The Canadian Disaster 
Database. Retrieved from <https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/
rsrcs/cndn-dsstr-dtbs/index-en.aspx>
Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA). (2009). Rural 
and northern community issues in mental health. Retrieved 
from <https://ontario.cmha.ca/documents/rural-and-northern-
community-issues-in-mental-health/>
Canuel, M., Gosselin, P., Duhoux, A., Brunet, A., & Lesage, A. 
(2019). Boîte à outils pour la surveillance post-sinistre des 
impacts sur la santé mentale. Retrieved from <https://www.
inspq.qc.ca/publications/2523>
Carleton, R. N., Afifi, T. O., Turner, S., Taillieu, T., Duranceau, 
S., LeBouthillier, D. M., Sareen, J., Ricciardelli, R., MacPhee, R. 
S., Groll, D., Hozempa, K., Brunet, A., Weekes, J. R., Griffiths, 
C. T., Abrams, K. J., Jones, N. A., Beshai, S., Cramm, H. A., 
Dobson, K. S., Hatcher, S., … Asmundson, G. J. G. (2017). Mental 
disorder symptoms among public safety personnel in Canada. 
Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 63(1), 54-64. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/0706743717723825>
Carleton, T. A. (2017). Crop-damaging temperatures increase 
suicide rates in India. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 114(33), 8746-8751. <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1701354114>
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH). (2012). Mental 
illness and addictions: Facts and statistics. Retrieved from 
<https://www.camh.ca/en/driving-change/the-crisis-is-real/
mental-health-statistics>
Christmas, R. (2013). Multi-track diplomacy and Canada’s 
Indigenous Peoples. Peace Research, 44/45(2), 5–30. Retrieved 
from <http://www.jstor.org/stable/24429459>
City of Toronto. (2019). Benefits of actions to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions in Toronto: Health and health equity. Retrieved 
from <https://www.toronto.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/8f33-
Benefits-of-Actions-to-Reduce-Greenhouse-Gas-Emissions-in-
Toronto-Health-and-Health-Equity.pdf> 
Clayton, S. (2018). Mental health risk and resilience among 
climate scientists. Nature Climate Change, 8, 260–261. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.102263>
Clayton, S. (2020). Climate anxiety: Psychological responses 
to climate change. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 74, 102263. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.102263>
Clayton, S., & Karazsia, B. T. (2020). Development and 
validation of a measure of climate change anxiety. Journal 
of Environmental Psychology, 69, 101434. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvp.2020.101434>
Clayton, S., & Manning, C. M. (Eds.). (2018). Psychology and 
climate change: Human perceptions, impacts, and responses. 
Academic Press. <https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-813130-
5.00012-6>
Clayton, S., Manning, C. M., & Hodge C. (2014). Beyond storms 
& droughts: The psychological impacts of climate change. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, and 
ecoAmerica. Retrieved from <https://ecoamerica.org/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/eA_Beyond_Storms_and_Droughts_
Psych_Impacts_of_Climate_Change.pdf> 
Clayton, S., Manning, C. M., Krygsman, K., & Speiser, M. (2017). 
Mental health and our changing climate: Impacts, implications, 
and guidance. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association, and ecoAmerica. Retrieved from <https://www.apa.
org/news/press/releases/2017/03/mental-health-climate.pdf> 
Coppock, V., & Dunn, B. (2009). Understanding social work 
practice in mental health. SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Costello, A., Abbas, M., Allen, A., Ball, S., Bell, S., Bellamy, R., … 
Patterson, C. (2009). Managing the health effects of climate 
change. Lancet and University College London Institute for 
Global Health Commission. The Lancet, 373(9676), 1693–1733. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)60935-1>
Cunsolo, A., & Ellis, N. R. (2018). Ecological grief as a mental health 
response to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate Change, 8, 
275-281. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0092-2>
Cunsolo, A., Harper, S. L., Minor, K., Hayes, K., Williams, K. G., 
& Howard, C. (2020). Ecological grief and anxiety: the start of 
a healthy response to climate change? The Lancet Planetary 
Health, 4(7), e261-e263. <https://www.thelancet.com/pdfs/
journals/lanplh/PIIS2542-5196(20)30144-3.pdf>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Landman, K., Houle, 
K., & Ford, J. D. (2013a). The land enriches the soul: On climatic 
and environmental change, affect, and emotional health and 
well-being in Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Emotion, Space and 
Society. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.emospa.2011.08.005>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S. L., Ford, J. D., Edge, V. L., Landman, 
K., Houle, K., … Wolfrey, C. (2013b). Climate change and mental 
health: An exploratory case study from Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, 
Canada. Climatic Change. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-013-
0875-4>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Harper, S. L., Ford, J. D., Landman, K., Houle, 
K., & Edge, V. L. (2012). “From this place and of this place:” 
Climate change, sense of place, and health in Nunatsiavut, 
Canada. Social Science and Medicine. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2012.03.043>
Cunsolo Willox, A., Stephenson, E., Allen, J., Bourque, F., Drossos, 
A., Elgarøy, S., … Wexler, L. (2014). Examining relationships 
between climate change and mental health in the Circumpolar 
North. Regional Environmental Change. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10113-014-0630-z>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 278 
Cusack, L., de Crespigny, C., & Athanasos, P. (2011). Heatwaves 
and their impact on people with alcohol, drug and mental 
health conditions: a discussion paper on clinical practice 
considerations. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 67(4), 915–922.
Davis, S. (2013). Community Mental Health in Canada, revised 
and expanded edition: Theory, policy, and practice. UBC Press.
Decent, D., & Feltmate, B. (2018). After the flood: The impact 
of climate change on mental health and time lost from work. 
Intact Centre on Climate Adpatation, and University of Waterloo. 
Retrieved from <https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2018/06/After-The-Flood.pdf> 
De Winter, S., Vanbrabant, P., Vi, N. T., Deng, X., Spriet, I., Van 
Schepdael, A., & Gillet, J. B. (2013). Impact of temperature 
exposure on stability of drugs in a real-world out-of-hospital 
setting. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 62(4), 380–387.e1. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annemergmed.2013.04.018> 
Ding, N., Berry, H. L., & Bennett, C. M. (2016). The Importance 
of Humidity in the Relationship between Heat and Population 
Mental Health: Evidence from Australia. PloS One, 11(10), 
e0164190. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0164190> 
Dixon, P. G., Sinyor, M., Schaffer, A., Levitt, A., Haney, C. R., Ellis, 
K. N., & Sheridan, S. C. (2014). Association of weekly suicide 
rates with temperature anomalies in two different climate 
types. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 11(11), 11627-11644. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph111111627>
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., & 
Orbinski, J. (2018). Lived experience of a record wildfire season 
in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health, 109(3), 327-337. Retrieved from <https://link.springer.
com/article/10.17269/s41997-018-0070-5>
Dodgen, D., D., Donato, N., Kelly, A., La Greca, J., Morganstein, 
J., Reser, J., … Ursano, R. (2016). Mental health and well-being. 
In A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. L. Gamble, C. B. Beard, J. E. Bell, 
D. Dodgen, R. J. Eisen, N. Fann, M. D. Hawkins, S. C. Herring, L. 
Jantarasami, D. M. Mills, S. Saha, M. C. Sarofim, J. Trtanj, & L. 
Ziska (Eds.), The impacts of climate change on human health 
in the United States: A scientific assessment. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Global Change Research Program. Retrieved from <https://
health2016.globalchange.gov/mental-health-and-well-being>
Doherty, T. J., & Clayton, S. (2011). The psychological impacts 
of global climate change. American Psychologist, 66(265–276), 
10–1037. Retrieved from <https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/
releases/amp-66-4-265.pdf>
Donaldson, S. G., Curren, M. S., Adlard, B., Provost, J., Leech, T., 
Tikhonov, C., … Shearer, R. (2013). Future human health research 
directions for the Canadian Northern Contaminants Program. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 72(1), 1–2. <https://
doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v72i0.23049>
Durkalec, A., Furgal, C., Skinner, M. W., & Sheldon, T. (2015). 
Climate change influences on environment as a determinant of 
Indigenous health: Relationships to place, sea ice, and health in 
anInuit community. Social Science & Medicine, 136-137, 17-26. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.04.026>
Durocher, L. (2018). The Long Road Home: Position Paper.
Earle, L. (2013). Understanding chronic disease and the 
role for traditional approaches in aboriginal communities. 
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. Retrieved 
from <https://www.ccnsa-nccah.ca/docs/emerging/FS-
UnderstandingChronicDisease-Earle-EN.pdf>
Edwards, T., & Wiseman, J. (2011). Climate change, resilience 
and transformation: challenges and opportunities for local 
communities. In I. Weissbecker (Ed.), Climate Change and 
Human Well-being. New York, NY: Springer.
Eisenman, D., McCaffrey, S., Donatello, I., & Marshal, G. (2015). 
An ecosystems and vulnerable populations perspective 
on solastalgia and psychological distress after a wildfire. 
EcoHealth, 12(4), 602–610. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-
015-1052-1> 
Ellis, N. R., & Albrecht, G. A. (2017). Climate change threats 
to family farmers’ sense of place and mental well-being: A 
case study from the Western Australian Wheatbelt. Social 
Science and Medicine, 175, 161-168. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2017.01.009>
Fernandez, A., Black, J., Jones, M., Wilson, L., Salvador-Carulla, 
L., Astell-Burt, T., & Black, D. (2015). Flooding and mental health: 
A systematic mapping review. PLoS ONE, 10(4), 1–21. <https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0119929>
Ferré, I. M., Negrón, S., Shultz, J. M., Schwartz, S. J., Kossin, J. P., 
& Pantin, H. (2019). Hurricane Maria’s impact on Punta Santiago, 
Puerto Rico: community needs and mental health assessment 
six months postimpact. Disaster Medicine and Public Health 
Preparedness, 13(1), 18–23. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
dmp.2018.103> 
Fletcher, A., & Knuttila, E. (2016). Gendering Change Canadian 
Farm Women Respond to Drought. In H. Diaz, M. Hurlbert, & 
J. Warren (Eds.), Vulnerability and Adaptation to Drought: The 
Canadian Prairies and South America. University of Calgary Press.
Foothills Community Counselling. (2020). Retrieved from 
<https://highriver.ca/foothills-community-counselling/>
Ford, J. D. (2012). Indigenous health and climate change. 
American Journal of Public Health, 102(7), 1260–1266. <https://
doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2012.300752> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 279 
Ford, J. D., Stephenson, E., Cunsolo Willox, A., Edge, V., 
Farahbakhsh, K., Furgal, C., Harper, S., Chatwood, S., Mauro, I., 
Pearce, T., Austin, S., Bunce, A., Bussalleu, A., Diaz, J., Finner, K., 
Gordon, A., Huet, C., Kitching, K., Lardeau, M. P., McDowell, G., 
… Sherman, M. (2016). Community-based adaptation research 
in the Canadian Arctic. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews. Climate 
Change, 7(2), 175–191. <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.376>
Foresight: Migration and Global Environmental Change. (2011). 
Final Project Report
The Government Office for Science, London. Retrieved from 
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/287717/11-1116-
migration-and-global-environmental-change.pdf> 
Fritze, J. C., Blashki, G. A., Burke, S., & Wiseman, J. (2008). Hope, 
despair and transformation: Climate change and the promotion 
of mental health and well-being. International Journal of Mental 
Health Systems, 2, 1–10. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1752-4458-
2-13>
Galea, S., Brewin, C. R., Gruber, M., Jones, R. T., King, D. W., King, 
L. A., & Kessler, R. C. (2007). Exposure to hurricane-related 
stressors and mental illness after Hurricane Katrina. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 64(12), 1427–1434.
Gleick, P. H. (2014). Water, Drought, Climate Change, and 
Conflict in Syria. Weather, Climate, & Society, 6(3), 331–340. 
<https://doi.org/10.1175/WCAS-D-13-00059.1>
Goldner, E. M., Bilsker, D., & Jenkins, E. (2016). A concise 
introduction to mental health in Canada. Canadian Scholars’ Press.
Gosse, K. (2010). Newfoundland begins cleanup of hurricane 
Igor’s path of destruction. Globe and Mail. Retrieved from 
<https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/
newfoundland-begins-cleanup-of-hurricane-igors-path-of-
destruction/article1213793/> 
Government of Alberta. (2013). Alberta helps families cope 
with emotional impact of floods. Retreived from <https://www.
alberta.ca/release.cfm?xID=3523164740483-D80A-5566-
F819A0C841FEDDEA> 
Government of Canada. (2018). Social determinants of health 
and health inequities. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/
en/public-health/services/health-promotion/population-health/
what-determines-health.html> 
Government of Canada. (2020). Non-insured health benefits for 
First Nations and Inuit. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.
gc.ca/eng/1572537161086/1572537234517> 
Government of Yukon. (2017). Yukon ‘state of play’: Analysis of 
climate change impacts and adaptation. Retreived from <https://
yukon.ca/en/yukon-state-play-analysis-climate-change-impacts-
and-adaptation> 
Green, D., & Minchin, L. (2014). Living on climate-changed 
country: Indigenous health, well-being and climate change in 
remote Australian communities. EcoHealth, 11(2), 263–272. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-013-0892-9> 
Hanigan, I. C., Butler, C. D., Kokic, P. N., & Hutchinson, M. F. 
(2012). Suicide and drought in New South Wales, Australia, 
1970-2007. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America, 109(35), 13950-13955. <https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1112965109>
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Ford, J., Willox, A. C., Wood, M., 
McEwen, S. A., … Namanya, D. B. (2015). Climate-sensitive 
health priorities in Nunatsiavut, Canada. BMC Public Health, 15, 
605. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-1874-3>
Hasket, M. E., Smith Scott, S., Nears, K., Grimmet, M. (2008). 
Lessons from Katrina: Disaster mental health service in the gulf 
coast region. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 
39(1), 93–99. <https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.39.1.93>
Hayes, K. (2019). Mental Health in a changing climate: The 
Effects on youth, women and newcomers. Greenbelt Foundation. 
Retrieved from <https://www.greenbelt.ca/mentalhealth>
Hayes, K., Berry, P., & Ebi, K. (2019). Factors Influencing the 
Mental Health Consequences of Climate Change in Canada. 
International Journal of Environmental Health Research, 16(9), 
1583. <https://doi.org///doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16091583>
Hayes, K., Blashki, G., Wiseman, J., Burke, S., & Reifels, L. 
(2018a). Climate change and mental health: Risks, impacts and 
priority actions. International Journal of Mental Health Systems, 
12(1), 1–12. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13033-018-0210-6>
Hayes, K., & Poland, B. (2018). Addressing mental health in 
a changing climate: Incorporating mental health indicators 
into climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation 
assessments. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(9), 1806. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15091806> 
Hayes, K., Poland, B., Cole, D. C., & Agic, B. (2020). Psychosocial 
adaptation to climate change in High River, Alberta: implications for 
policy and practice. Canadian Journal of Public Health, 111(6), 880-
889. <https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-020-00380-9> 
Hayes, K, Poland, B., Hathaway, M. (2018b). 5 Ways communities 
are coping with climate anxiety. YES Magazine. Retrieved from 
<https://www.yesmagazine.org/environment/2018/08/22/5-
ways-communities-are-coping-with-climate anxiety/> 
Health Canada. (2011). Extreme Heat Events Guidelines: 
Technical Guide for Health Care Workers. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/
hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/climat/workers-guide-
travailleurs/extreme-heat-chaleur-accablante-eng.pdf> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 280 
Health Canada. (2015). First Nations mental wellness continuum 
framework. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://thunderbirdpf.
org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/24-14-1273-FN-Mental-
Wellness-Framework-EN05_low.pdf> 
Health Canada. (2020). Reducing urban heat islands to protect 
health in Canada: An introduction for public health professionals. 
Ottawa, ON. Retreived from <https://www.canada.ca/content/
dam/hc-sc/documents/services/health/publications/healthy-
living/reducing-urban-heat-islands-protect-health-canada/
Reducing-Urban-Heat-EN.pdf> 
Hetherington, E., McDonald, S., Wu, M., & Tough, S. (2018). 
Risk and protective factors for mental health and community 
cohesion after the 2013 Calgary flood. Disaster Medicine 
and Public Health Preparedness, 12(4), 470-477. <https://doi.
org/10.1017/dmp.2017.91>
Howard, C., Rose, C., Hancock, T. (2016). Lancet countdown 2017 
report: Briefing for canadian policymakers. Lancet Countdown: 
Tracking Progress on Health and Climate Change and Canadian 
Public Health Association. Retrieved from <https://www.cpha.
ca/sites/default/files/uploads/advocacy/2017_lancet_canada_
brief.pdf> 
Huang, C., Yang, J., Lu, H., Huang, H., & Yu, L. (2017). Green 
spaces as an indicator of urban health: Evaluating its changes 
in 28 mega-cities. Remote Sensing, 9(12), 1266. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/rs9121266>
Hudson, C. G. (2005). Socioeconomic status and mental 
illness: Tests of the social causation and selection hypotheses. 
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 75(1), 3-18. <https://doi.
org/10.1037/0002-9432.75.1.3>
Hutton, D. (2005). Psychosocial aspects of climate change 
in Canada: A review of current literature and research 
recommendations. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada.
Is This How You Feel? (2020). Retrieved from <https://www.
isthishowyoufeel.com/>
Institute for Environment and Human Security (IEHS). (2015). 5 
Facts on Climate Migrants. United Nations University. Retrieved 
from <https://ehs.unu.edu/news/news/5-facts-on-climate-
migrants.html>
Insurance Board of Canada. (2010). Hurrican Igor causes over 
$65 million in insured damage. CISION. Retreived from <https://
www.newswire.ca/news-releases/hurricane-igor-causes-over-65-
million-in-insured-damage-546085852.html> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. 
Contribution of working group II to the fifth assessment report 
of the intergovernmental panel on climate change (C. B. Field, V. 
R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, 
M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. 
Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White, 
Eds.). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. 
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2016). National Inuit Suicide 
Prevention Strategy. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/ITK-National-Inuit-Suicide-Prevention-
Strategy-2016.pdf>
Jones, L., Asare, J. B., El Masri, M., Mohanraj, A., Sherief, H., & 
van Ommeren, M. (2009). Severe mental disorders in complex 
emergencies. The Lancet, 374(9690), P654-661. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61253-8> 
Kaiser, D., Lamothe, F., Roy, M., & Racinn- Hamel, S. É. (2019). 
Vague de chaleur été 2018 à Montréal : enquête épidémiologique. 
Direction régionale de santé publique du CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-
de-l’Île-de-Montréal. Montréal, QC: Gouvernement du Québec. 
Retrieved from <https://numerique.banq.qc.ca/patrimoine/
details/52327/3737294&docref=irDjexzzxNV8AspydEw39w> 
Kessler, R. C., Galea, S., Gruber, M. J., Sampson, N. A., Ursano, R. 
J., & Wessely, S. (2008). Trends in mental illness and suicidality 
after Hurricane Katrina. Molecular Psychiatry, 13, 374–384. 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.mp.4002119>
Kim, Y., Kim, H., Gasparrini, A., Armstrong, B., Honda, Y., Chung, 
Y., … Hashizume, M. (2019). Suicide and ambient temperature: 
A multi-country multi-city study. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 127(11). <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP4898>
King, N., Bishop-Williams, K.., Beauchamp, S., Ford, J. D., 
Berrang-Ford, L., Cunsolo, A., & Harper, S. L. (2018). How do 
Canadian media report climate change impacts on health? A 
newspaper review. Climatic Change, 152, 581-596. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-018-2311-2>
Kirmayer, L. J., Simpson, C., & Cargo, M. (2003). Healing 
traditions: Culture, community and mental health promotion with 
Canadian Aboriginal peoples. Australasian Psychiatry, 11(1), 
S15–S23. <https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1038-5282.2003.02010.x|>
Kirmayer, L. J., Tait, C. L., & Simpson, C. (2009). The Mental 
Health of Aboriginal Peoples in Canada: Transformations of 
Identity and Community. Healing Traditions: The Mental Health 
of Aboriginal Peoples in Canada, 45(7), 607-616. <https://doi.
org/10.2307/2077147>
Kirmayer, L. J., & Valaskakis, G. (Eds.). (2009). Healing 
Traditions: The Mental Health of Indigenous Peoples in Canada. 
Vancouver, BC: UBC Press.
Klinkenberg, M. (2017). Fort McMurray fire evacuees suffering 
from PTSD symptoms: study. The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from 
<https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/alberta/many-fort-
mcmurray-fire-evacuees-suffering-from-ptsd-symptoms-study/
article33764936/> 
Koger, S. M., Leslie, K. E., & Hayes, E. D. (2011). Climate 
Change: Psychological Solutions and Strategies for Change. 
Ecopsychology, 3(4), 227–235. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
eco.2011.0041> 
Kumar, U. (Ed.). (2016). The Routledge international handbook of 
psychosocial resilience. Routledge.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 281 
Lambert, S. F., & Lawson, G. (2013). Resilience of professional 
counselors following Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Journal of 
Counseling & Development, 91(3), 261–268. <https://doi.org/10.
1002/j.1556-6676.2013.00094.x|>
Lee, J., Park, B. J., Tsunetsugu, Y., Ohira, T., Kagawa, T., & 
Miyazaki, Y. (2011). Effect of forest bathing on physiological 
and psychological responses in young Japanese male subjects. 
Public Health, 125(2), 93–100. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
puhe.2010.09.005>
Lowe, D., Ebi, K. L., Forsberg, B. (2013). Factors increasing 
vulnerability to health effects before, during, and after 
floods. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 10(12), 7015–7067. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph10127015> 
Macyshon, J. (2017). Ravaged by floods in 2011, Manitoba First 
Nation finally welcomes families home. CTV News. Retrieved from 
<https://www.ctvnews.ca/canada/ravaged-by-floods-in-2011-
manitoba-first-nation-finally-welcomes-families-home-1.3661089>
Maibach, E., Nisbet, M., & Weathers, M. (2011). Conveying 
the human implications of climate change: A climate change 
communication primer for public health professionals. 
Fairfax, VA: George Mason University Center for Climate 
Change Communication. Retreived from <https://
www.climatechangecommunication.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/04/Climate-Communication-Primer-for-Public-
Health-Professionals-1.pdf> 
Malena-Chan, R., & Gatley, K. (2020). Ecoanxious Stories. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ecoanxious.ca/>
Mann, S. C., & Boger, W. P. (1978). Psychotropic drugs, summer 
heat and humidity, and hyperpyrexia: A danger restated. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 135(9), 1097-1100. <https://doi.
org/10.1176/ajp.135.9.1097>
Mantouraa, P., Robergeb, M.-C., Fournierc, L., & Mantoura, 
P. (2017). A framework for supporting action in population 
mental health. Santé Mentale Au Québec, XLII(1), 105–123. 
Retrieved from <http://www.ncchpp.ca/docs/2017_SMP_PMH_
ArticleSMQ_En.pdf> 
McCracken, D. (2017). Building citizen capacity. High River 
Online. Retrieced from <https://www.highriveronline.com/local/
building-citizen-capacity>
Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC). (2016). 
Advancing the mental health strategy for Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://www.mentalhealthcommission.ca/sites/default/
files/2016-08/advancing_the_mental_health_strategy_for_
canada_a_framework_for_action.pdf> 
Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC). (2017). 
Strengthening the case for investing in canada’s mental health 
system: Economic considerations. Retrieved from <https://www.
mentalhealthcommission.ca/sites/default/files/2017-03/case_
for_investment_eng.pdf>
Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC). (2018). The 
working mind: The mental health continuum. Retrieved from 
<https://theworkingmind.ca/continuum-self-check>
Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC). (2020). 
Rural and Remote Mental Health in Canada Evidence Brief on 
Best and Promising Practices. Retrieved from <https://www.
mentalhealthcommission.ca/sites/default/files/2020-05/Rural_
remote_mental_health_evidence_brief_eng.pdf>
Middleton, J., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Shiwak, I., Wood, M., 
Pollock, N.,... & Harper, S. L. (2020a). “We’re people of the snow:” 
Weather, climate change, and Inuit mental wellness. Social 
Science & Medicine, 262, 113137. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
socscimed.2020.113137>
Middleton, J., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Wright, C. J., & 
Harper, S. L. (2020b). Indigenous mental health in a changing 
climate: a systematic scoping review of the global literature. 
Environmental Research Letters, 15(5), 053001. Retrieved from 
<https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/ab68a9> 
Miles-Novelo, A., & Anderson, C. A. (2019). Climate change 
and psychology: Effects of rapid global warming on violence 
and aggression. Current Climate Change Reports, 5(1), 36-46. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-019-00121-2>
Moroz, N., Moroz, I., & D’Angelo, M. S. (2020, November). 
Mental health services in Canada: barriers and cost-effective 
solutions to increase access. In Healthcare Management Forum 
(Vol. 33, No. 6, pp. 282-287). Sage CA: Los Angeles, CA: SAGE 
Publications.
Morrissey, S. A., & Reser, J. P. (2007). Natural disasters, climate 
change and mental health considerations for rural Australia. 
Australian Journal of Rural Health, 15(2), 120-125. <https://doi.or
g/10.1111/j.1440-1584.2007.00865.x>
Mouallen, O. (2015). The boom, the bust, the darkness: Suicide 
rate soars in wake of Canada’s oil crisis. The Guardian. Retrieved 
from <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/
canada-oil-production-crisis-suicide-alberta> 
Naturale, A. (2015). How do we understand disaster-related 
vicarious trauma, secondary traumatic stress, and compassion 
fatigue? In G. Quitangon, & M. R. Evces (Eds.), Vicarious Trauma 
and Disaster Mental Health (pp. 93–110). Routledge.
Neria, Y., & Shultz, J. M. (2012). Mental health effects of 
Hurricane Sandy: Characteristics, potential aftermath, 
and response. JAMA, 308(24), 2571–2572. doi:10.1001/
jama.2012.110700 
Nicholls, N., Butler, C. D., & Hanigan, I. (2006). Inter-annual 
rainfall variations and suicide in New South Wales, Australia, 
1964-2001. International Journal of Biometeorology, 50(3), 139-
143. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-005-0002-y>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 282 
Obradovich, N., Migliorini, R., Paulus, M. P., & Rahwan, I. 
(2018). Empirical evidence of mental health risks posed by 
climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 115(43), 10953-10958. <https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1801528115>
O’Brien, L. V., Berry, H. L., Coleman, C., & Hanigan, I. C. (2014). 
Drought as a mental health exposure. Environmental Research, 
131, 181–187. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2014.03.014>
Ojala, M. (2012). How do children cope with global climate 
change? Coping strategies, engagement, and well-being. Journal 
of Environmental Psychology, 32(3), 225-233. Retrieved from 
<https://www.colorado.edu/cumuseum/sites/default/files/
attached-files/ojala7.pdf> 
Orengo-Aguayo, R., Stewart, R. W., de Arellano, M. A., Suárez-
Kindy, J. L., & Young, J. (2019). Disaster Exposure and Mental 
Health Among Puerto Rican Youths After Hurricane Maria. 
JAMA Network Open, 2(4), e192619. <https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2019.2619> 
Osofsky, J. D., Osofsky, H. J., Kronenberg, M., & Hansel, T. 
(2010). The aftermath of hurricane Katrina: Mental health 
considerations and lessons learned. In R. P. Kilmer, V. Gil-Rivas, 
R. G. Tedeschi, & L. G. Calhoun (Eds.), Helping families and 
communities recover from disaster. Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Pacheco, S. E. (2020). Catastrophic effects of climate change 
on children’s health start before birth. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation, 130(2), 562-564. <https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1172/JCI135005> 
Page, L. A., Hajat, S., Kovats, R. S., & Howard, L. M. (2012). 
Temperature-related deaths in people with psychosis, dementia 
and substance misuse. The British Journal of Psychiatry : 
The Journal of Mental Science, 200(6), 485–490. <https://doi.
org/10.1192/bjp.bp.111.100404> 
Petrasek MacDonald, J., Cunsolo Willox, A., Ford, J. D., Shiwak, 
I., Wood, M., Wolfrey, C., … the Rigolet Inuit Community 
Government. (2015). Protective factors for mental health and 
well-being in a changing climate: Perspectives from Inuit youth 
in Nunatsiavut, Labrador. Social Science and Medicine, 141, 133-
141. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2015.07.017> 
Pihkala, P. (2020). The Cost of Bearing Witness to the 
Environmental Crisis: Vicarious Traumatization and Dealing with 
Secondary Traumatic Stress among Environmental Researchers. 
Social Epistemology, 34(1), 86-100. <https://doi.org/10.1080/02
691728.2019.1681560> 
Pitts, L. (2015). Hurricane Igor: What it was like on the ground 
during, and after, the storm. CBC News. Retrieved from <https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/newfoundland-labrador/hurricane-
igor-what-it-was-like-on-the-ground-during-and-after-the-
storm-1.3234201> 
Polain, J. D., Berry, H. L., & Hoskin, J. O. (2011). Rapid change, 
climate adversity and the next “big dry”: Older farmers’ mental 
health. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 19(5), 239-243. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1584.2011.01219.x> 
Powers, J. R., Dobson, A. J., Berry, H. L., Graves, A. M., Hanigan, 
I. C., & Loxton, D. (2015). Lack of association between drought 
and mental health in a cohort of 45-61 year old rural Australian 
women. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 
39(6), 518–523. <https://doi.org/10.1111/1753-6405.12369> 
Price, K., Perron, S., & King, N. (2013). Implementation of 
the montreal heat response plan during the 2010 heat wave. 
Canadian Journal of Public Health, 104(2), e96-e100. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF03405667>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2014). Economic 
Burden of illness in Canada, 2005–2008. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/migration/phac-aspc/
publicat/ebic-femc/2005-2008/assets/pdf/ebic-femc-2005-
2008-eng.pdf> 
Radu, I. (2018). Land for Healing: Developing a First 
Nations Land-based Service Delivery Model. Bothwell, ON: 
Thunderbird Partnership Foundation. Retrieved from <https://
thunderbirdpf.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Thunderbirdpf-
LandforHealing-Document-SQ.pdf> 
Radu, I., House, L., & Pashagumskum, E. (2014). Land, life, 
and knowledge in Chisasibi: Intergenerational healing in the 
bush. Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society, 3(3), 
86–105. Retrieved from <https://www.chisasibiwellness.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Radu-et-al_Chisasibi-land-based-
healing_2014-1.pdf> 
Ramsay, T., & Manderson, L. (2011). Resilience, spirituality and 
posttraumatic growth: reshaping the effects of climate change. 
In I. Weissbecker (Ed.), Climate Change and Human Well-being. 
New York, NY: Springer.
Ray, S. J. (2020). A Field Guide to Climate Anxiety: How to Keep 
Your Cool on a Warming Planet. Oakland, CA: University of 
California Press.
Reser, J. P., & Swim, J. K. (2011). Adapting to and coping 
with the threat and impacts of climate change. American 
Psychologist, 66(4), 277. <http://doi.org/10.1037/a0023412>
Rhodes, J., & Chan, C. (2010). The Impact of Hurricane Katrina 
on the Mental and Physical Health of Low-Income Parents in 
New Orleans. The American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 80(2), 
237–247. <http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1939-0025.2010.01027.x>
Rigby, C. W., Rosen, A., Berry, H. L., & Hart, C. R. (2011). If the 
land’s sick, we’re sick: The impact of prolonged drought on the 
socal and emotional well-being of Aboriginal communities in 
rural New South Wales. Australian Journal of Rural Health, 19(5). 
<http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1584.2011.01223.x> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 283 
Roberts, S., Arseneault, L., Barratt, B., Beevers, S., Danese, A., 
Odgers, C. L., … Fisher, H. L. (2019). Exploration of NO 2 and 
PM 2.5 air pollution and mental health problems using high-
resolution data in London-based children from a UK longitudinal 
cohort study. Psychiatry Research, 272, 8-17. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.050>
Rodriguez, J. J., Kohn, R. (2008). Use of mental health services 
among disaster survivors. Current Opinion in Psychiatry, 21, 
370–378. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-7-173>
Ruskin, J., Rasul, R., Schneider, S., Bevilacqua, K., Taioli, E., & 
Schwartz, R. M. (2018). Lack of access to medical care during 
Hurricane Sandy and mental health symptoms. Preventive 
Medicine Reports, 10, 363–369. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pmedr.2018.04.014>
Sahni, V., Scott, A. N., Beliveau, M., Varughese, M., Dover, D. 
C., & Talbot, J. (2016). Public health surveillance response 
following the southern Alberta floods, 2013. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health, 107(2), e142–e148. <https://doi.org/10.17269/
cjph.107.5188>
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Gillis, G., Cook, O., Shiwak, I., Flowers, 
C., … Harper, S. L. (2018). Profiling the eNuk program: An Inuit-
led strategy for monitoring and responding to the impacts 
of environmental change on health and well-being in Rigolet, 
Nunatsiavut. Northern Public Affairs. Retrieved from <www.
northernpublicaffairs.ca/index/volume-5-issue-2-innovations-in-
community-health-and-wellness/profiling-the-enuk-program/>
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Harper, S., Shiwak, I., Wood, M., & 
IMHACC Team. (2019). “We have our own way”: Exploring 
pathways for well-being among Inuit in Nunatsiavut, Labrador, 
Canada. In C. Flemming, & M. Manning (Eds.), Handbook of 
Indigenous Well-being. Routledge.
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Gillis, D., Wood, M., 
Flowers, C.,... & Harper, S. L. (2020). “The best scientists are the 
people that’s out there”: Inuit-led integrated environment and 
health monitoring to respond to climate change in the Circumpolar 
North. Climatic Change, 1-22. Retrieved from <https://link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s10584-019-02647-8>
Scaramutti, C., Salas-Wright, C. P., Vos, S. R., & Schwartz, S. 
J. (2019). The Mental Health Impact of Hurricane Maria on 
Puerto Ricans in Puerto Rico and Florida. Disaster Medicine and 
Public Health Preparedness, 13(1). <https://doi.org/10.1017/
dmp.2018.151>
Schmidt, L., & Lewis-Reau, A. (2020). Good Grief Network. 
Retreived from <https://www.goodgriefnetwork.org/> 
Schwerdtle, P., Bowen, K., & McMichael, C. (2017). The health 
impacts of climate-related migration. BMC Medicine, 16(1). 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-017-0981-7>
Séguin, J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.
gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf> 
Shipley, M., & Berry, H. L. (2010). Longing to belong: Personal 
Social capital and psychological distress in an australian coastal 
region. SSRN, (39). <https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1703238>
Simpson, D. M., Weissbecker, I., & Sephton, S. E. (2011). Extreme 
weather-related events: Implications for mental health and 
well-being. In I. Weissbecker (Ed.), Climate Change and Human 
Well-being. New York, NY: Springer.
Standing Committee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs. (2017). 
Breaking point: The suicide crisis in Indigenous communities. 
Ottawa, ON: House of Commons.
Stanke, C., Murray, V., Amlôt, R., Nurse, J., & Williams, R. (2012). 
The effects of flooding on mental health: Outcomes and 
recommendations from a review of the literature. PLoS Currents, 
4, 1–17. <https://doi.org/10.1371/4f9f1fa9c3cae>
Stephen, A., Marion, M., Oluwafemi, A., & Wiggins, S. (1999). 
The effect of season and weather on suicide rates in the elderly 
in British Columbia. Canadian Journal of Public Health / Revue 
Canadienne de Sante’e Publique, 90(6), 418–422. Retrieved from 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/41994174>
Stern, P.C. (2012). Psychology: Fear and hope in climate 
messages. Nature Climate Change, 2, 572-573. Retrieved from 
<https://climateaccess.org/system/files/Stern_Fear%20and%20
hope.pdf> 
Tam, B. Y., Gough, W. A., Edwards, V., & Tsuji, L. J. S. (2013). 
The impact of climate change on the well-being and lifestyle 
of a First Nation community in the western James Bay 
region. Canadian Geographer, 57(4). <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1541-0064.2013.12033.x>
Tam, T. (2019). Addressing Stigma: Towards a More Inclusive 
Health System. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/corporate/
publications/chief-public-health-officer-reports-state-public-
health-canada/addressing-stigma-toward-more-inclusive-health-
system.html> 
The eNuk Program. (2018). Retrieved from <https://enuk.ca/>
Thompson, R., Hornigold, R., Page, L., & Waite, T. (2018). 
Associations between high ambient temperatures and heat 
waves with mental health outcomes: a systematic review. 
Public Health, 161, 171–191. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
puhe.2018.06.008>
Toronto Public Health. (2015). A climate of concern: Climate 
change and health strategy for Toronto. Retreived from 
<https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2015/hl/bgrd/
backgroundfile-81509.pdf> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 284 
Trang, P. M., Rocklöv, J., Giang, K. B., Kullgren, G., & Nilsson, 
M. (2016). Heatwaves and hospital admissions for mental 
disorders in Northern Vietnam e0155609. PLoS ONE, 11(5), 
1–20. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0155609>
Tschakert, P., Ellis, N. R., Anderson, C., Kelly, A., & Obeng, J. 
(2019). One thousand ways to experience loss: A systematic 
analysis of climate-related intangible harm from around the 
world. Global Environmental Change, 55, 58-72. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.11.006>
Tschakert, Petra, Barnett, J., Ellis, N., Lawrence, C., Tuana, 
N., New, M., … Pannell, D. (2017). Climate change and loss, 
as if people mattered: values, places, and experiences. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 8(5), e476. <https://
doi.org/10.1002/wcc.476>
Tucci, J., Micthell, J., Goddard, C. (2007). Children’s fears, hopes 
and heroes: Modern childhood in Australia. Australian Childhood 
Foundation.
Tunstall, S., Tapsell, S., Green, C., Floyd, P., & George, C. (2006). 
The health effects of flooding: Social research results from 
England and Wales. Journal of Water and Health, 4(3), 365–380. 
<https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2006.031>
Ulrich, R.. (1979). Visual landscapes and psychological 
well-being. Landscape Research, 4(1), 17–23. 
doi:10.1080/01426397908705892 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). (2020). Report of the executive committee of the 
Warsaw international mechanism for loss and damage associated 
with Climate Change Impacts. Retrieved from <https://unfccc.int/
documents/266453> 
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction 
(UNISDR). (2015). The human cost of weather related disasters 
1995-2015. Retrieved from <https://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.
int/files/resources/COP21_WeatherDisastersReport_2015_
FINAL.pdf> 
Usher, P. J. (2003). Environment, race and nation reconsidered: 
Reflections on aboriginal land claims in Canada. Canadian 
Geographer, 47(4), 365–382. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.0008-3658.2003.00029.x>
Vestal, C. (2017). ‘Katrina brain’: The invisible long-term toll of 
megastorms. POLITICO. Retrieved from <https://www.politico.
com/agenda/story/2017/10/12/psychological-toll-natural-
disasters-000547/> 
Vida, S., Durocher, M., Ouarda, T. B., & Gosselin, P. (2012). 
Relationship between ambient temperature and humidity 
and visits to mental health emergency departments in 
Québec. Psychiatric services (Washington, D.C.), 63(11), 1150–
1153. <https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201100485>
Vins, H., Bell, J., Saha, S., & Hess, J. J. (2015). The mental health 
outcomes of drought: A systematic review and causal process 
diagram. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 12(10), 13251–13275. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph121013251>
Waite, T. D., Chaintarli, K., Beck, C. R., Bone, A., Amlôt, R., Kovats, 
S., & Oliver, I. (2017). The English national cohort study of 
flooding and health: cross-sectional analysis of mental health 
outcomes at year one. BMC Public Health, 17(1), 129. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph121013251>
Wang, X., Lavigne, E., Ouellette-Kuntz, H., & Chen, B. E. (2014). 
Acute impacts of extreme temperature exposure on emergency 
room admissions related to mental and behavior disorders in 
Toronto, Canada. Journal of Affective Disorders, 155, 154-161. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2013.10.042>
Watts, N., Amann, M., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Belesova, K., Bouley, 
T., Boykoff, M., … Costello, A. (2017). The Lancet Countdown on 
health and climate change: from 25 years of inaction to a global 
transformation for public health. The Lancet, 391(10120), 581-
630. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)32464-9>
Weissbecker, I. (Ed.). (2011). Climate change and human well-
being. New York, NY: Springer.
Whaley, A. (2009). Trauma among survivors of hurricane 
Katrina: Considerations and recommendations for mental health 
care. Journal of Loss and Trauma, 14, 459–476. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/15325020902925480>
Whitfield, G. P., Meehan, L. A., Maizlish, N., & Wendel, A. M. 
(2017). The integrated transport and health impact modeling 
tool in Nashville, Tennessee, USA: Implementation steps and 
lessons learned. Journal of Transport and Health, 5, 171-181. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2016.06.009>
Williams, L., Fletcher, A., Hanson, C., Neapole, J., & Pollack, 
M. (2018). Women and Climate Change Impacts and Action in 
Canada: Feminist, Indigenous, and Intersectional Perspectives. 
Canadian Research Institue for the Advancement of Women 
and the Alliance for Intergenerational Resilience. Retrieved from 
<https://www.criaw-icref.ca/images/userfiles/files/Women and 
Climate Change_FINAL.pdf>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). Mental health: 
Strengthening our response. Retrieved from <https://www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-
our-response> 
Yusa, A., Berry, P., Cheng, J. J., Ogden, N., Bonsal, B., Stewart, R., 
& Waldick, R. (2015). Climate change, drought and human health 
in Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 12(7), 8359-8412. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph120708359> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 285 
Zakreski, D. (2019). Crystal meth crisis on Saskatchewan First 
Nation traced to 2015 wildfire evacuation. CBC News. Retreived 
from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/saskatoon/montreal-
lake-meth-crisis-wildfire-evacuation-1.5134061> 
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., 
Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., & Kharin, V.V. (2019). Changes 
in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada. In E. Bush, 
& D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report (pp 
112-193). Ottawa, ON: Environment and Climate Change Canada.
Zhao, X., Maibach, E., Gandy, J., Witte, J., Cullen, H., Klinger, 
B. A., & Pyle, A. (2014). Climate change education through TV 
weathercasts: Results of a field experiment. Bulletin of the 
American Meteorological Society, 95(1), 117–130. <https://doi.
org/10.1175/BAMS-D-12-00144.1>
Zupancic, T., Kingsley, M., Jason, T., &, & Macfarlane, R. (2013). 
Green city: Why nature matters to health - an evidence review. 
Toronto, ON: Toronto Public Health. Retreived from <https://
niagaraknowledgeexchange.com/resources-publications/green-
city-why-nature-matters-to-health-an-evidence-review/> 
Zwiebach, L., Rhodes, J., & Roemer, L. (2010). Resource loss, 
resource gain, and mental health among survivors of Hurricane 
Katrina. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 23(6), 751-758. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/jts.20579>
CHAPTER 5
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Air Quality 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 287 
Lead Authors
Marika Egyed, Health Canada
Phil Blagden, Health Canada
Contributing Authors
David Plummer, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Paul Makar, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Carlyn Matz, Health Canada
Mike Flannigan, University of Alberta
Morgan MacNeill, Health Canada
Eric Lavigne, Health Canada
Benny Ling, Health Canada
Diana Valencia Lopez, Health Canada
Betty Edwards, Health Canada
Radenko Pavlovic, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Jacinthe Racine, Environment and Climate Change Canada
Pierre Raymond, Health Canada
Robyn Rittmaster, Health Canada
Aaron Wilson, Health Canada
Guoliang Xi, Health Canada
Suggested Citation
Egyed, M., Blagden, P., Plummer, D., Makar, P., Matz, C., Flannigan, M., 
MacNeill, M., Lavigne, E., Ling, B., Lopez, D. V., Edwards, B., Pavlovic, 
R., Racine, J., Raymond, P., Rittmaster, R., Wilson, A., & Xi, G. (2022). 
Air Quality. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a 
Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: 
Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 288 
Table of Contents
Summary
290
Key Messages
290
5.1 Introduction
294
5.2 Methods and Approach
294
5.3 Health Effects of Outdoor Air Pollution
295
5.3.1 Particulate Matter
295
5.3.2 Ozone
296
5.3.3 Populations at Higher Risk
297
5.4 Interactions Between Climate Change and Outdoor Air Pollution
298
5.4.1 Particulate Matter Effects on Climate
299
5.4.2 Methane and Ozone Effects on Climate 
300
5.4.3 Effects of Climate Change on Air Quality
300
5.4.4 Air Quality Projections Under a Changing Climate
301
5.4.5 Air Quality Policies and Climate Change Mitigation
303
5.4.6 Key Uncertainties
303
5.5 Air Pollution Health Impacts Due to Climate Change and the Health Co-Benefits of Greenhouse 
Gas Mitigation
304
5.5.1 Air Pollution Health Impacts Due to Climate Change
305
5.5.2 Air Pollution Health Co-Benefits of Mitigation of Greenhouse Gas Emissions
307
Box 5.1 The elimination of coal-fired power in Canada: A case study of air pollution health 
co-benefits
311
5.5.3 Canadian Research Highlight: Quantifying Canadian Air Pollution Health Impacts of a Warming 
Climate and the Potential Health Co-Benefits of a Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Pathway 
312
5.5.4 Conclusion
317
5.5.5 Key Uncertainties
318
5.6 Climate Change and Air Pollution from Wildfires
318
5.6.1 Wildfires in Canada in a Changing Climate
318
5.6.2 Health Effects of Air Pollution from Wildfires
320
5.6.3 The Health Burden of Wildfire Smoke in Recent Years
321
5.6.4 Quantifying Recent Canadian Air Pollution Health Impacts from Wildfire Smoke
322
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 289 
5.6.5 Air Pollution Health Impacts of Wildfire Smoke Under Climate Change
330
5.6.6 Populations at Higher Risk
331
5.6.7 Conclusion
331
5.6.8 Key Uncertainties
332
5.7 Adaptation and Risk Mitigation for Health Effects of Outdoor Air Pollution
332
5.7.1 Outdoor Air Pollution
332
5.7.2 Wildfire Smoke
335
5.8 Impacts of Climate Change on Indoor Air Quality and Health
337
5.8.1 Building Airtightness
337
5.8.2 Impact of Changing Ambient Conditions on the Indoor Environment 
337
5.8.3 Extreme Weather Events and Wildfires
338
5.8.4 Populations at Higher Risk
339
5.8.5 Adaptation 
340
5.8.6 Key Uncertainties 
341
5.9 Impacts of Climate Change on Aeroallergens
341
5.9.1 Impact of Climate Change on Pollen Concentrations, Distribution, and Seasonal Length 
in Canada
341
5.9.2 Health Effects of Changes in Aeroallergens Under Climate Change Scenarios
342
5.9.3 Adaptation 
343
5.9.4 Key Uncertainties
343
5.10 Conclusion
344
5.10.1 Climate Change and Air Quality Health Impacts in Canada
344
5.10.2 Populations at Higher Risk
346
5.10.3 Adaptation
346
5.10.4 Knowledge Gaps
347
5.11 References
349
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 290 
Summary
Climate change and air quality are intimately linked: changes in climate are affecting air quality in Canada, 
and several air pollutants contribute to climate change. Exposure to key air pollutants, including fine 
particulate matter and ozone, increases the risk of adverse health outcomes, ranging from respiratory 
symptoms to development of disease and premature death. A warming climate is expected to worsen air 
pollution levels in Canada. As the frequency and severity of wildfires are expected to increase due to climate 
change, emissions from wildfires represent one of the most significant climate-related risks to air quality 
in Canada. Climate change can also affect indoor air quality when elevated levels of outdoor air pollutants 
infiltrate buildings or when mould accumulates following extreme weather events, such as floods. Changes in 
the climate are affecting airborne allergens such as pollen by expanding the geographic distribution of plant 
species, extending pollen seasons, and increasing pollen counts. 
Some groups are at increased risk of health impacts related to air pollution, including children, seniors, 
Indigenous Peoples, those with pre-existing conditions such as asthma or cardiac disease, and populations 
living in high air pollution areas. Mitigation efforts to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases can have 
substantial population health co-benefits related to improved air quality. These co-benefits can help offset 
the costs of climate mitigation, providing support for accelerated implementation of mitigation policies. 
Adaptation efforts that would prevent or alleviate the climate-related health impacts of air pollution include 
limiting exposure to air pollutants, including through the use of emergency shelters during wildfires; providing 
daily forecasts of air quality, wildfire smoke, and aeroallergens, such as the Air Quality Health Index; 
implementing flood prevention and ensuring that buildings have adequate ventilation and air filtration.
Key Messages
•	
Climate change and air quality are linked: overall, a warmer climate is expected to worsen 
air pollution in Canada, and some air pollutants contribute to climate change. If air pollution 
emissions remain unchanged, a warming climate will likely increase ozone levels in heavily 
populated and industrialized areas, including Southern Ontario and Southwestern Quebec. 
Projected effects on fine particulate matter are more modest and uncertain.
•	
The health impacts of air pollution in Canada, including premature death and disease, are 
expected to worsen in the future due to the influence of climate change. Unless these impacts 
are offset by reducing air pollution, hundreds of deaths annually are expected to result by mid-
century. Today, air pollution is a leading environmental cause of death and illness in Canada, 
resulting in an estimated 15,300 deaths a year, with an economic value of $114 billion annually. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 291 
•	
Canada needs to prepare for a future with more wildfires. Increasing wildfire emissions are one 
of the most significant climate-related risks to air quality in Canada. Wildfire smoke, which can 
spread over vast areas of the country, contributed to an estimated 620 to 2700 deaths annually in 
Canada from 2013 to 2018. The public health burden of wildfire smoke is expected to increase in 
the future due to climate change.
•	
Climate change will increase the length of airborne allergen seasons, pollen counts, and the 
geographical distribution of allergens. Respiratory allergies and asthma are expected to affect 
more people more often in the future, increasing costs to the health system.
•	
Climate change can affect indoor air quality through increased infiltration of outdoor pollutants 
and allergens, and as a result of weather events such as floods that cause mould growth in 
buildings. At the same time, energy retrofits of buildings without adequate ventilation can reduce 
indoor air quality. Key adaptation strategies for indoor air include ventilation, filtration, and 
controlling pollutant sources.
•	
Daily forecasts of air quality, wildfire smoke, and airborne allergens presented in accessible 
formats, such as the Air Quality Health Index, are important tools to protect community health 
and a key adaptation strategy to inform populations at higher risk of health impacts resulting 
from a changing climate. 
•	
Mitigation measures targeting climate pollutants, including methane and black carbon (soot), 
can have important immediate and long-term co-benefits for the health of local populations by 
reducing air pollution. The air quality benefits of these mitigation measures can help to offset the 
costs of climate action. Climate mitigation measures that improve air quality will also help avoid 
thousands of deaths annually in Canada by the middle of the century.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 292 
Health risks of climate change impacts on air pollution.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 293 
Overview of Climate-Related Health Impacts Associated with Air Quality
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Air quality
•	
Higher levels of airborne 
particulate matter related to 
smoke from wildfires
•	
Increased ground-level ozone 
(and potentially particulate 
matter) due to warming
•	
Higher levels of airborne 
particulate matter related to 
droughts
•	
Increased mould and 
chemical contaminants in 
indoor environments due to 
flooding, effects on ambient 
air quality and increased 
releases from indoor sources 
of air pollution
•	
Extended season and 
geographical distribution 
of pollen, and increased 
production of pollen by 
plants and trees
•	
Warming and changes 
to precipitation affecting 
growth and ranges of air/
aerosol or droplet-borne 
pathogens
•	
Air quality–related respiratory 
and cardiovascular disease and 
premature deaths
•	
Exacerbation of chronic 
respiratory diseases, such as 
asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
•	
Lung cancer
•	
Development and exacerbation 
of allergies
•	
Eye, nose, and throat irritation, 
and shortness of breath
•	
Exacerbation of mental health 
impacts
•	
Impacts on health 
infrastructures and services
•	
Impacts on health and social 
services 
•	
Risks from infectious diseases 
acquired by inhalation from 
environmental sources (e.g., 
cryptococcosis)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 294 
5.1 Introduction
Climate change and air quality are intimately linked in multiple ways that can have repercussions for human 
health. Changes in climate, such as increasing temperatures, can influence the levels of air pollutants 
that affect Canadians. Conversely, some air pollutants contribute to climate change and warming of the 
atmosphere. In addition, a changing climate is expected to create conditions that affect the frequency and 
severity of wildfires, an important source of air pollution, and the levels of aeroallergens such as pollen, which 
affect allergic diseases. A changing climate can also affect indoor air quality: elevated levels of outdoor air 
pollution (e.g., smog, wildfire smoke, and aeroallergens) can infiltrate into buildings; actions that increase 
energy efficiency of buildings without adequate ventilation can result in accumulation of indoor-generated air 
pollution; and extreme weather events such as flooding can lead to the presence of mould indoors.
Climate pollutants and air pollutants are often emitted from the same sources, such as those relating to the 
combustion of fossil fuels. As a result, greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation strategies targeting reductions 
in climate pollutants can have important local health co-benefits due to accompanying reductions in air 
pollutant emissions. 
This chapter first summarizes the effects of air pollution on health and describes how climate change and 
air quality are interrelated. It then describes the expected effects of a warming climate on air pollution 
health impacts in Canada, as outdoor air pollutant concentrations, aeroallergens, and indoor air quality are 
influenced by the changing climate. Consideration is given to populations at greater risk from air pollution, 
such as children, seniors, those with underlying health conditions, and Indigenous Peoples. Future wildfire 
activity under climate change, as well as the potential health co-benefits associated with mitigating GHG 
emissions, are highlighted. To help decision makers plan for climate change impacts on the health of 
Canadians, potential adaptation strategies are discussed.
5.2 Methods and Approach
The information presented in this chapter focuses on impacts in Canada, with provincial or regional 
information provided, where available. Results from studies done in the United States are also reviewed, as 
often only limited information specific to Canada is available, and the two countries are generally similar in 
multiple ways (e.g., economic development, population demographics, and air pollution emission controls). 
Overall, an emphasis has been placed on studies published from 2005 to 2019. Most of the literature 
reviewed was drawn from peer-reviewed English language journals and identified through searches of citation 
databases (i.e., PubMed, Medline, Scopus, and Google Scholar) and supplemented with manual scanning of 
reference lists in key papers. Both primary studies and review articles were consulted. In addition, relevant 
documents retrieved from the grey literature, including reports and web content from governments, agencies, 
and organizations, were reviewed. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 295 
This chapter also includes two new analyses conducted for this report. The first is an investigation of 
Canadian air pollution health impacts associated with climate change and the potential air pollution health 
co-benefits of GHG mitigation. The second focuses on the health impacts from wildfire smoke during recent 
years to better understand the implications of a changing climate on this air pollution source.
5.3 Health Effects of Outdoor Air Pollution
Air pollution is a leading environmental cause of death, both globally and in Canada (IHME, 2019), and the 11th 
largest cause of death overall in Canada (Alam et al., 2019). It is estimated that current levels of three major air 
pollutants — fine particulate matter (PM2.5),1 ozone, and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) — together cause about 15,300 
premature deaths in Canada annually, with an economic value of $114 billion (Health Canada, 2021). In addition, 
these air pollutants are estimated to result in many non-fatal health outcomes, including thousands of hospital 
visits and millions of days with asthma symptoms annually in Canada; thus, they represent an important 
population health issue. The scientific evidence indicates that there is no exposure threshold below which there 
is no risk for many of these health effects. Any incremental increase in air pollutant concentration, including a 
small increase, is associated with an increased risk of adverse health outcomes in the population. Hence, even in 
Canada, where air pollution levels are relatively low compared to many other countries, air pollution results in a 
considerable burden of disease.
The health effects of air pollution have been extensively studied and are well documented in the peer-reviewed 
scientific literature, which has been reviewed in depth by Health Canada (Health Canada, 2013; Health Canada, 
2016), the US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) (US EPA, 2019; US EPA, 2020b), and by international 
organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO, 2020). It is recognized that exposure to key air 
pollutants, including PM2.5 and ozone, results in increased risk of a wide variety of adverse health outcomes in 
the population, ranging from respiratory symptoms to development of disease and premature death. This section 
provides an overview of the health effects of ozone and PM2.5 to help understand current and possible future risks 
to the health of Canadians from climate change.
5.3.1 Particulate Matter
Particulate matter (PM) is a complex mixture of very small solid particles and liquid droplets made up of 
many different chemicals, including elemental carbon, organic compounds, metals, sulphates, and nitrates. 
These particles are small enough to remain suspended in the atmosphere for an appreciable period of time. 
PM is emitted directly from sources (primary PM, e.g., black carbon or soot) or formed in the atmosphere 
from precursor compounds that undergo chemical reactions (secondary PM). Both primary PM and 
1	
PM2.5 is used to denote particles with a mass median diameter of 2.5 microns or less. PM2.5 can penetrate deep in 
the human lung (Health Canada, 2013). Particulate matter is also frequently referred to as “aerosols” or “aerosol 
particles,” particularly when discussing climate effects.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 296 
secondary PM precursors have a large variety of natural and anthropogenic sources, such as wildfires, motor 
vehicle exhaust, and coal combustion. The health effects of PM are directly associated with the size of the 
particles, as smaller particles penetrate deeper into the lungs. PM2.5 is of significant concern for human 
health, has been extensively researched and reviewed, and is causally associated with the greatest range of 
health effects of any of the major (or “criteria”) air pollutants.
Risk assessments published by Health Canada (2013) and the US EPA (2019) have evaluated the weight 
of evidence of health effects from short-term and long-term exposure to PM2.5, and their conclusions are 
summarized here. Evidence indicates that short-term exposure (hours to days) to ambient PM2.5 increases 
the risk of premature death, including all-cause, cardiovascular, and respiratory mortality. In addition, short-
term exposure increases the risk of adverse cardiovascular and respiratory effects, including aggravation 
of pre-existing cardiovascular and respiratory diseases (e.g., asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease [COPD]), changes in cardiac and lung function, increased respiratory symptoms, and deterioration 
in indicators of cardiovascular health. Short-term exposure also results in increased medical interventions. 
For example, population-based studies show that increases in short-term PM2.5 exposure are associated with 
increases in emergency room visits and hospital admissions relating to respiratory and cardiovascular conditions.
Overall, the evidence indicates that long-term exposure (months to years) to ambient PM2.5 increases the 
risk of non-accidental and cardiovascular mortality, and it may also be associated with respiratory mortality. 
As well, long-term PM2.5 exposure increases the risk of adverse respiratory effects, including increased 
respiratory symptoms and effects on lung development in children, as well as cardiovascular effects, such 
as health parameters relating to atherosclerosis progression. Chronic exposure to PM2.5 increases the risk of 
lung cancer, and the International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified outdoor PM as carcinogenic 
in humans (IARC, 2016).
In addition to the extensive evidence examining respiratory and cardiovascular outcomes of PM2.5, there is 
emerging evidence that long-term exposure to PM2.5 may be associated with adverse effects on the nervous 
system, including dementia (Fu et al., 2019). Exposure to PM2.5 has also been increasingly associated with 
other health effects, including metabolic diseases such as diabetes (Chen et al., 2013a) and pregnancy 
outcomes such as low birth weight (Stieb et al., 2016; Lavigne et al., 2019). 
5.3.2 Ozone
Ozone is a gas that is not directly emitted by air pollution sources. Rather, it forms in the atmosphere from 
reactions between precursor compounds and sunlight. The weight of evidence of health effects of short-
term and long-term exposure to ozone have been evaluated by Health Canada (2013) and the US EPA 
(2020a), the conclusions of which are summarized here. Short-term exposure to ozone increases the risk 
of non-accidental and cardiopulmonary mortality. The evidence from short-term ozone-exposure studies in 
humans also demonstrates reduced lung function, increased respiratory symptoms (e.g., cough, shortness 
of breath), and airway hyper-responsiveness. Epidemiological studies provide evidence of exacerbation of 
asthma and COPD, respiratory infections, and increases in hospitalizations and emergency room visits for 
respiratory conditions such as asthma. There is also evidence that short-term ozone exposure is associated 
with metabolic effects and may also be associated with adverse effects on the cardiovascular system. Long-
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 297 
term exposure to ozone has been associated with reduced lung function growth in children (Gauderman et 
al., 2000), onset of asthma in subgroups that spend more time outdoors (e.g., children, outdoor workers), 
and increased respiratory symptoms in children with asthma. There is some evidence that long-term ozone 
exposure may contribute to premature mortality, in particular from respiratory causes (Turner et al., 2016).
5.3.3 Populations at Higher Risk
Evidence indicates that various subpopulations are at increased risk of health effects from poor air quality 
(Health Canada, 2013; US EPA, 2019; US EPA, 2020a). Increased risk of PM-related health effects has been 
identified for older adults and young children, as well as for individuals with pre-existing cardiovascular or 
pulmonary diseases, or genetic factors that make them more sensitive to the effects of PM. Similarly, some 
individuals have increased sensitivity to ozone exposure due to underlying health conditions, age, how they 
spend their time, or genetics. Specifically, ozone exposure increases health risks among children, older 
adults, subgroups that spend increased time outdoors, individuals with asthma or COPD, and individuals with 
polymorphisms in genes associated with oxidative stress responses and inflammation. Overall, it has been 
estimated that about one-third of the Canadian population has at least one risk factor that increases their 
susceptibility to air pollution (Stieb et al., 2019). 
Populations living in areas with higher levels of air pollution are also at increased risk for adverse health 
effects. Studies of populations in large urban centres in Canada suggest that material and social deprivation 
are associated with increased exposure to air pollution (Pinault et al., 2016a; Pinault et al., 2017). In addition, 
children living in low-income areas, racialized populations, and immigrants are exposed to higher levels of air 
pollution than children in high-income areas, White populations, and non-immigrants, respectively (Pinault et 
al., 2016b; Pinault et al., 2017). 
Indigenous Peoples2 in Canada may also be more sensitive to adverse health effects from poor outdoor air 
quality. Overall, the burden of chronic respiratory disease, including asthma and COPD, has been reported 
to be disproportionally higher in First Nations people (Carriere et al., 2017) and in Métis people (Gershon et 
al., 2014). In addition, higher rates of lower respiratory tract infections have been reported in First Nations 
and Inuit children (Kovesi, 2012; McCuskee et al., 2014). This can increase health risks from air pollution. 
In addition, the risk of exposure to poor air quality may be elevated for Indigenous Peoples due to multiple 
factors, including overcrowded housing, inadequate ventilation, exposure to smoke from wood heating, and 
the geographic proximity of many Indigenous communities to forests and, therefore, increased risks from 
wildfire smoke (Reading & Halseth, 2013; NCCAH, 2017). The existing health and social inequities experienced 
by Indigenous populations can increase health risks related to poor outdoor and indoor air quality. Many of 
these inequities are underpinned by systemic racism and colonization (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and 
Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada and Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity).
2	
The term Indigenous is used in this chapter to collectively refer to the original inhabitants of Canada and their 
descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples as defined under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. 
Wherever possible, clear distinctions are made between these three distinct, constitutionally recognized groups.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 298 
5.4 Interactions Between Climate Change and 
Outdoor Air Pollution
Many of the human activities that emit carbon dioxide (CO2), the main driver of climate change, also emit 
compounds that contribute to outdoor air pollution. For example, in addition to climate pollutants such as CO2 
and methane, fossil fuel combustion also emits air pollutants, including PM2.5, nitrogen oxides (NOx, including 
NO2), sulphur dioxide (SO2), carbon monoxide (CO), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Reactions among 
these pollutants may form additional PM2.5 and ground-level ozone. Some of these air pollutants can modify 
the radiative balance of the Earth, affecting climate, and are commonly referred to as short-lived climate 
forcers (SLCFs), as these compounds have a much shorter residence time in the atmosphere than CO2. This 
section reviews the linkages among different SLCFs, climate change, and air quality, with a focus on PM, 
methane, and ozone. An overview of these linkages is presented in Figure 5.1.
The impacts of an SLCF on climate are quantified using estimates of their “radiative forcing,” defined as “the 
net change in the energy balance of the Earth system due to some imposed perturbation” (Myhre et al., 2013, 
p. 664). An SLCF that produces a positive radiative forcing will result in some increase in the near-surface 
temperature, while ones producing a negative radiative forcing will have a net cooling effect. However, the 
efficacy of SLCFs in producing near-surface temperature changes for a given radiative forcing varies. Many 
forcing agents produce rapid adjustments in various components of the climate system — the effects of 
aerosols on clouds, for example — and the estimates of radiative forcing discussed here typically include 
these rapid adjustments, except where stated.
Figure 5.1 Linkages between air quality and climate change. The box colour for the SLCFs indicates either a new 
positive radiative forcing (red; warming) or a net negative radiative forcing (grey; cooling). Source: Adapted from 
Ravishankara et al., 2012.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 299 
5.4.1 Particulate Matter Effects on Climate
PM can affect climate through direct interactions with radiation, predominantly through scattering or 
absorption of incoming solar radiation (sunlight). Sulphate, nitrate, ammonium, and secondary organic 
aerosol particulates predominantly scatter incoming solar radiation, some of which is reflected back into 
space; therefore, these PM species have a net cooling effect on climate (Boucher et al., 2013). Conversely, PM 
species that absorb incoming solar radiation, such as black carbon and certain types of organic particulates 
referred to as brown carbon, have a net warming effect (Bond et al., 2013). The presence of clouds influences 
these effects (Chand et al., 2009), and, under clear skies, so does the nature of the Earth’s underlying surface. 
PM over highly reflective surfaces such as snow has a stronger net warming effect than over less reflective 
surfaces because of the relatively larger fraction of incoming solar radiation that would have been reflected 
back to space without the presence of PM (Haywood & Shine, 1995). In addition, the mix of compounds within 
individual aerosol particles can also affect the direct radiative effects of PM. For example, absorption of solar 
radiation by black carbon is enhanced when PM is coated by more weakly absorbing compounds, such as 
sulphates (Jacobson, 2001; Liu et al., 2017).
PM can also affect climate through its effects on clouds, due to its role as the “seeds” upon which water may 
condense in either liquid or solid form — acting as cloud condensation nuclei and ice nuclei, respectively. 
Aside from the mass of particles in the atmosphere, there is also strong evidence that the number of particles 
influences cloud formation, with increased atmospheric particle number concentrations (total number of 
particles per unit volume of air) resulting in liquid water clouds with a larger number concentration of smaller 
cloud droplets, making the clouds more reflective and producing a cooling effect on climate (Boucher et al., 
2013). However, PM–cloud interactions are subject to a large number of feedback processes that can locally 
modify the magnitude and direction of the radiative effects of these interactions, notably through changing 
precipitation production, which may alter the lifetime or spatial extent of the cloud, and changes involving 
ice particles in clouds (Fan et al., 2016). For these reasons, the effects of PM on clouds and climate are still 
uncertain (Seinfeld et al., 2016).
The Fifth Assessment Report3 of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessed the 
global net radiative forcing from anthropogenic PM, including through both direct radiative effects and 
aerosol–cloud interactions, at −0.90 (5% to 95% confidence interval [CI] −1.9 to −0.1) W/m2 (i.e., a net cooling 
effect). This likely offsets a significant fraction of the estimated +2.83 (5% to 95% CI +2.54 to +3.12) W/m2 
radiative forcing due to the change in concentration of the well-mixed GHGs4 (CO2, methane, nitrous oxide, 
and halocarbons) between 1750 and 2011. However, the net forcing from PM combines significant positive 
forcing (warming) from black carbon emitted from fossil fuel and biofuel use, and negative forcing (cooling) 
from sulphates, nitrates, and primary and secondary organic aerosols. The net forcing from PM mentioned 
above does not include additional positive forcing from black carbon deposited on snow, estimated at +0.04 
W/m2, which has a two to four times larger impact on surface temperatures than CO2 per unit radiative 
forcing (Myhre et al., 2013; Skiles et al., 2018). 
3	
The uncertainties in the estimates of radiative forcing quoted here are the 5% to 95% confidence interval as given by 
the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.
4	
Well-mixed GHGs are those with long residency time in the atmosphere, which results in their having a relatively 
homogeneous concentration throughout the troposphere.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 300 
Due to the short atmospheric lifetime (approximately 1 week) and highly variable spatial distribution of PM, 
impacts on radiation can be much larger on regional scales than the global average estimates given above. 
The chemical composition of PM influences the pathway and fate of incoming solar radiation as it travels 
through the atmosphere. Both PM that strongly scatters and PM that strongly absorbs incoming radiation 
reduce the amount of solar radiation reaching the Earth’s surface. However, only the latter will warm the 
atmospheric layer where it occurs. These effects could have significant impacts on surface temperatures 
and rainfall by reducing the amount of energy absorbed at the surface and, in the case of absorbing PM, 
heating the atmosphere aloft (Ramanathan et al., 2005; Liu et al., 2012). Modelling studies have shown that, 
due to the response of the global wind and weather patterns, the effects of SLCFs on climate are not limited 
to the regions where the emissions occur and may be even larger in regions well removed from the emission 
sources (Shindell et al., 2015; Kasoar et al., 2016). 
5.4.2 Methane and Ozone Effects on Climate 
Methane, with an atmospheric lifetime of approximately 9.1 years (Prather et al., 2012), is relatively well 
mixed throughout the atmosphere and is emitted from a large variety of sources (e.g., natural wetlands, 
geological seeps, rice cultivation, ruminants, and fossil fuel extraction and use) with an approximately equal 
contribution from natural and anthropogenic sources at the global scale (Saunois et al., 2016). Methane acts 
directly as a GHG, with an estimated radiative forcing of +0.48 (5% to 95% CI +0.43 to +0.53) W/m2 due to the 
approximately 150% increase in concentrations over the period 1750 to 2011 (Myhre et al., 2013). Methane is 
also chemically reactive in the atmosphere, participating in the photochemical production of ozone. Ozone, 
in addition to being an air pollutant, acts as a GHG (Forster & Shine, 1997), and methane, therefore, makes 
additional contributions to climate forcing through changes in ozone.
Ozone is formed photochemically in the lower atmosphere from precursor compounds, including methane, 
other VOCs, and NOx. Ozone is a highly reactive gas, and few reliable measurements are available from before 
the 1950s (Cooper et al., 2014). As a result, estimates of the change in ground-level ozone and the effects 
of tropospheric ozone on climate are based on numerical models and are more uncertain than for the long-
lived GHG gases (e.g., CO2). These estimates show that the increase in ozone from pre-industrial levels due 
to precursor emissions (methane, CO, non-methane VOCs, and NOx) has resulted in an estimated radiative 
forcing of +0.50 (5% to 95% CI +0.30 to 0.70) W/m2, of which +0.24 (5% to 95% CI +0.11 to +0.37) W/m2 is 
attributed to ozone from methane (Myhre et al., 2013).
5.4.3 Effects of Climate Change on Air Quality
Changes in climate can have significant effects on air quality. Studies show a strong correlation between 
temperature and ground-level ozone (Camalier et al., 2007). This relationship results from various factors: 
direct temperature effects on chemical reactions that produce ozone; increases in biogenic emissions of 
ozone precursors (e.g., VOC emissions from vegetation) with temperature; and the correlation of higher 
temperatures with meteorological conditions that are conducive to the production of ozone (Steiner et al., 
2006; Schnell & Prather, 2017). While tropospheric ozone in industrial regions in some seasons is expected to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 301 
increase with increasing temperatures, climate change alone is expected to result in a decrease in the global 
background concentration5 of ozone, as increases in water vapour reduce levels of ozone through increased 
photochemical destruction in remote locations (Wu et al., 2008a; Stevenson et al., 2013).
The direct impacts of increased temperature on PM vary by season. Warmer temperatures in winter will 
result in a larger fraction of certain PM components remaining in the gas phase, resulting in lower PM 
concentrations. However, warmer temperatures in summer will favour the increased production of sulphates 
and higher PM concentrations (Dawson et al., 2007). Observations across the United States suggest 
additional contributions to PM concentrations result from other temperature-related factors (Tai et al., 2010). 
In particular, increased emissions of VOCs from biogenic sources, such as trees, with increasing temperature have 
been shown to have a strong impact on the formation of organic components of PM (Day & Pandis, 2011).
Climate change includes many complex changes beyond increasing temperature. By more rapidly warming 
the Arctic, climate change may lead to a greater persistence of hot and dry conditions associated with 
slow-moving high-pressure systems (Coumou et al., 2018). Summertime episodes of poor air quality over 
Southeastern Canada and the Northeastern United States are frequently associated with these large, slow-
moving high-pressure systems and are brought to an end by the passage of a mid-latitude cyclone and 
associated cold front. Less frequent summertime mid-latitude cyclones have been observed in the recent 
past, negatively affecting air quality (Leibensperger et al., 2008), and less frequent mid-latitude cyclone 
passage has been projected under future climate scenarios in several studies (Mickley et al., 2004; Wu et al., 
2008b). However, the magnitude of these specific effects on future changes in air pollution is uncertain. Tai 
et al. (2012) found that the changes in the frequency of mid-latitude cyclone passage had only a small impact 
on PM, while Horton et al. (2014), from an analysis of 15 different climate models, found relatively small 
increases in stagnation events, which may lead to higher pollutant concentrations for 2080 to 2099 along the 
west coast of North America, Northeastern United States, and Southeastern Canada.
5.4.4 Air Quality Projections Under a Changing Climate
A large number of studies have used regional-scale air quality models, combined with future climate 
projections, to estimate future changes in tropospheric ozone and PM across North America. It should be 
noted that projections of future air quality depend on model projections of changes in the physical climate, 
and these changes are more uncertain at regional (sub-continental and smaller) scales for a variety of 
reasons (Deser et al., 2012; Mearns et al., 2013; Giorgi & Gutowski, 2015). Future air quality will also be 
affected by changes in air pollutant and precursor emissions. Many studies estimate the effects of climate 
change alone by making future projections using constant, present-day emissions of air pollutants. The 
impact of climate change alone on air quality, discussed in this section, is frequently referred to as “the 
climate penalty” (Wu et al., 2008b). 
While differences in modelling assumptions and scenarios make detailed comparisons difficult, some 
general conclusions can be drawn. Available studies generally find that, relative to current conditions, 
5	
The “background concentration” of ozone refers to the concentration of ozone found in remote regions, far from 
significant anthropogenic emission sources. The background concentration varies with latitude, altitude, and season 
and is, nonetheless, significantly influenced by anthropogenic sources.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 302 
climate change will cause small increases across large parts of North America of 2 to 3 parts per billion by 
volume in the daytime average ozone concentration during the summer (June to August) by the middle of 
the century (Hogrefe et al., 2004; Nolte et al., 2008; Lam et al., 2011; Kelly et al., 2012). Isolated increases of 
about 5 parts per billion by volume were also found across different modelling studies. The largest increases 
were projected over industrialized regions, such as the Northeastern United States and adjacent regions of 
Southeastern Canada. These studies have also found some evidence for a larger impact of climate change 
on days with the highest ozone concentrations (Hogrefe et al., 2004; Nolte et al., 2008) and indications that 
climate change may lengthen the ozone season (Nolte et al., 2008; Trail et al., 2014). 
Estimates of the impact of climate change alone on PM are more uncertain, as there are fewer studies, 
and the physical and chemical processes affecting PM are more complex and more sensitive to changes 
in physical climate variables that climate models represent poorly, such as the frequency of precipitation. 
Tagaris et al. (2007) found decreases of 10% to 20% (1 to 2 μg/m3) in PM2.5 over central and southeastern 
parts of the United States by about 2050, due to higher precipitation, although only three summers were 
simulated. Conversely, Kelly et al. (2012) simulated 10 summers leading to 2050 and found the effects of 
climate change alone resulted in increases in summer PM2.5 of 0.5 to 1.0 μg/m3 over much of the Eastern 
United States, extending into Southwestern Ontario. Increases of 0.3 to 0.5 μg/m3 were projected over the 
broader region of Southern Ontario and Southern Quebec. The increases in PM2.5 resulted from the net effect 
of increases in sulphates and secondary organic aerosols and decreases in nitrates. These changes can be 
contrasted with those found by Trail et al. (2014), who projected decreases in summer PM2.5 of 1 to 2 μg/
m3 for periods around 2050 across most of the Central United States to the Great Lakes, due to increased 
dispersion of pollutants in the atmosphere because of projected changes in wind speed and precipitation. 
These results demonstrate the level of uncertainty in our current understanding of certain aspects of changes 
in physical climate and associated air quality projections, as represented by existing models. For changes in 
annual average PM2.5, the available studies suggest very small changes in regional average values (Tagaris et 
al., 2007; Lam et al., 2011; Trail et al., 2014).
Two important caveats to the preceding discussion are worth noting. First, ozone and PM precursor 
emissions have been reduced significantly over the recent past in the United States and Canada because 
of emissions controls put in place to reduce the environmental and human health impacts of air pollution 
(Amann et al., 2013; Stieb et al., 2015; Fann et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). Air pollutant 
emissions are projected to decrease further over the coming decades as a result of air quality regulations, 
and available projections show significant net improvements in air quality can be realized in the future, 
accounting for the combined effects of anticipated reductions in air pollutant emissions and the negative 
impact of climate change (Tagaris et al., 2007; Nolte et al., 2008; Lam et al., 2011; Kelly et al., 2012; Pfister et 
al., 2014; Trail et al., 2014; Yahya et al., 2017). However, additional reductions in air pollution emissions would 
be required to counteract the effect of the climate penalty. Second, future ozone concentrations in North 
America will be affected by changes in the global concentration of methane (Yahya et al., 2017). Increases in 
the concentrations of methane result in a higher global background concentration of ozone (Stevenson et al., 
2013), which affects ozone concentrations in North America, as regional-scale episodes of high ozone build 
on top of the global background.
Another impact of climate change on air quality is the expected increase in the length and severity of the 
wildfire season (Flannigan et al., 2013). Estimates of the effects of climate change on wildfire emissions of 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 303 
black and organic carbon aerosols suggest increases of 80% to 150% by 2050 (compared to 1997 to 2001) 
over the Western United States (Yue et al., 2013), with an increase in summer average PM2.5 concentrations 
of 20% to 60% (Val Martin et al., 2015). These projections were based on increases in the average annual area 
burned each year of between 25% and nearly 170%, which are comparable to estimates of the increase in area 
burned by mid-century for Canada (Boulanger et al., 2014). Note that the Val Martin et al. (2015) study did not 
include any increase in wildfires in the Eastern United States because any climate change effect was found 
to be negligible, while projections of wildfires in Canada show increases from coast to coast (Boulanger et al., 
2014; Wang et al., 2017). For more information on the impact of climate change on wildfires in Canada and 
the associated health impacts, see section 5.6 Climate Change and Air Pollution from Wildfires.
5.4.5 Air Quality Policies and Climate Change Mitigation
Because of the relatively short time that air pollutants remain in the atmosphere, reductions in their 
emissions quickly affect their atmospheric concentrations and the associated radiative forcing of these 
compounds. Actions to reduce certain air pollutants that are SLCFs, such as black carbon, are therefore 
recognized as a way to reduce climate warming over the near term (CCAC, 2020). This would allow more time 
for international CO2 mitigation efforts to have an impact before critical temperature thresholds are crossed, 
while also simultaneously reducing the health and environmental burden of air pollution (IPCC, 2018). 
Shindell et al. (2012) projected a reduction in global mean warming of 0.5°C by 2050, relative to pre-industrial 
levels, resulting from a suite of controls on methane and black carbon emissions, and estimated additional, 
significant benefits for human health and agricultural yields. A smaller cooling benefit of 0.22°C by 2050 from 
a range of emission controls designed to maximize the climate benefit — largely targeting methane and black 
carbon — was found by Stohl et al. (2015). The authors also estimated that a warming of nearly 0.7°C would 
result from the complete removal of land-based anthropogenic SO2 sources, illustrating the significant cooling 
effect of sulphate PM from SO2 precursor emissions. 
These results demonstrate the need to evaluate climate change and air quality policies in an integrated 
manner. Targeting SLCFs that have a net warming effect on climate, namely methane and black carbon, 
would have simultaneous benefits for climate and air quality. Conversely, certain actions designed to improve 
air quality may have unintended negative consequences for climate change (Stohl et al., 2015; Partanen 
et al., 2018). However, the strategic application of air pollution emission controls can have significant co-
benefits for climate change, and well-designed GHG mitigation strategies, such as those targeting reductions 
in the use of fossil fuels, can have clear co-benefits for air quality and, hence, population health (Vandyck et 
al., 2018). Co-benefits for health associated with GHG reductions are reviewed in section 5.5 Air Pollution 
Health Impacts Due to Climate Change and the Health Co-Benefits of Greenhouse Gas Mitigation and also 
highlighted in Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience of this report.
5.4.6 Key Uncertainties
One of the most significant risks to air quality throughout Canada associated with climate change is the 
projected increase in emissions from wildfires. An improved understanding of the effects of climate change 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 304 
on wildfires requires further development of the capacity to simulate interactions between climate and 
fire risk, taking into account anthropogenic influences such as fire management through suppression, for 
example, in terrestrial carbon cycle models. A second significant uncertainty in projections of climate change 
effects on air quality is the impact of future changes in biogenic emissions. As discussed above, increasing 
biogenic emissions due to warmer temperatures is an important mechanism by which climate change 
negatively affects air quality. However, the likely effects of higher CO2 and water stress, as well as changes in 
the distribution of vegetation types on biogenic emissions, are not well understood (Fiore et al., 2015). Last, 
many of the studies estimating the impact of climate change on air quality have been based on only a few 
years of simulation because of the computational cost of the models. The short time periods make it difficult 
to remove the influence of random year-to-year variability from the effects of climate change (Barnes et al., 
2016) or to robustly analyze climate change impacts on more extreme, but less frequent, climate events.
5.5 Air Pollution Health Impacts Due to 
Climate Change and the Health Co-Benefits of 
Greenhouse Gas Mitigation
Exposure to air pollutants can cause a range of adverse health effects, and even small increases in 
exposure are associated with an increase in risk (see section 5.3 Health Effects of Outdoor Air Pollution). 
It is anticipated that climate change will worsen air quality both globally and in Canada, due to the climate 
penalty (see section 5.4 Interactions Between Climate Change and Outdoor Air Pollution). Studies have tried 
to estimate the effect of the climate penalty on two key air pollutants that have major health impacts, ozone 
and PM2.5, under possible future climates (Ebi & McGregor, 2008; Gao et al., 2013; Turnock et al., 2019). 
Conversely, many strategies that target long-lived GHG and SLCF emission reductions, such as reducing the 
use of fossil fuels, can be expected to reduce air pollutant emissions and improve air quality. The associated 
population health benefits are referred to as “air pollution health co-benefits” because they are not the primary 
motive behind development of those policies. Consequently, efforts undertaken to mitigate climate change in 
Canada may also have important air pollution health co-benefits. Many initiatives to reduce climate change 
are underway at global (e.g., the Paris Agreement [UNFCCC, 2015]), national (e.g., A Healthy Environment and 
a Healthy Economy [ECCC, 2020]), provincial (e.g., Plan d’action 2013-2020 sur les changements climatiques 
[Ministère de l'Environnement et Lutte contre les changements climatiques, 2012]), and municipal (e.g., 
Climate 2050 Strategic Framework [Metro Vancouver, 2018]) levels.
Scientists can quantify the number of population health impacts, such as premature deaths or asthma 
episodes, attributable to a given increase or decrease in air pollution. Economists estimate the social welfare 
value of these health impacts, including such things as medical costs, reduced workplace productivity, 
and the effects of increased mortality risk. These methods allow for estimation of the health impacts and 
associated monetary value of both the costs of air pollution increases under a warming climate and of the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 305 
air pollution health co-benefits of mitigating climate pollutants. It is important to note that modelled air 
pollution health impacts or benefits of individual scenarios are likely underestimated, as not all adverse health 
outcomes that have been associated with air pollution exposure can be quantified and valued in this manner.
This section of the chapter provides a review of published studies that have assessed the air pollution 
health impacts of the climate penalty and the potential air pollution health co-benefits of climate mitigation, 
including the associated economic valuation of those outcomes. It also presents information on the health 
impacts of the climate penalty and potential health co-benefits of GHG mitigation in Canada, including those 
associated with eliminating coal-fired electricity generation in Canada.
5.5.1 Air Pollution Health Impacts Due to Climate Change
Studies have investigated how a changing climate could influence future population health impacts of air 
pollution. Researchers have assessed these health impacts both regionally and globally, under various 
climate projection scenarios, including the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs)6 and the Special 
Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES)7 published by the IPCC, and for multiple future time periods. Most 
studies have examined the influence of climate change on ozone, and some have also addressed PM2.5. Both 
premature mortality and morbidity outcomes have been considered. In the studies reviewed here, the authors 
estimated the incremental air pollution health impacts in the future due to climate change alone (i.e., the 
impact of a warming climate on air pollution concentrations), keeping other factors constant. 
More recent studies have used the RCPs described in the Fifth Assessment Report of the IPCC (2014) and 
other publications (van Vuuren et al., 2011; van Vuuren & Carter, 2014) to model future climate change 
projections. The RCPs, identified as RCP2.6, RCP4.5, RCP6.0, and RCP8.5 (referring to different levels of 
radiative forcing in watts per square metre), represent global climate policy scenarios ranging from more 
stringent (RCP2.6) to less stringent (RCP8.5) in terms of GHG reductions and concentration trajectories. 
The RCPs also include projected policies to control air pollution. The more stringent RCP scenarios are also 
associated with lower air pollutant emissions globally and in Canada, given that many changes in sector 
activities to reduce GHG emissions (e.g., transition to cleaner energy sources) would also reduce air pollution 
emissions. The four RCP scenarios project average global temperature increases for 2081 to 2100 (relative to 
1986 to 2005) of 1.0°C, 1.8°C, 2.2°C, and 3.7°C, respectively. The RCPs are more in-depth explorations of the 
impacts of potential mitigation strategies on GHG emissions and are an extension and further development 
of the GHG emissions-based SRES projections used in previous IPCC assessment reports (IPCC, 2014).
There are no recent published analyses from Canada using the RCP scenarios, but findings have been 
published for the United States and for global analyses. In a national analysis, Fann et al. (2015) estimated 
6	
The Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) are four different plausible consequences of future climate 
policy scenarios (RCP2.6, RCP4.5, RCP6.0, RCP8.5) with emission and concentration trajectories of GHGs and other 
air pollutants and land-use pathways (IPCC, 2014).
7	
The SRESs describe emission projection scenarios organized into four storylines — A1 (subgroup A1B), A2, B1, and 
B2 — describing plausible futures according to assumptions for various driving forces, such as social and economic 
development, technology innovation, and environmental changes (Nakicenovic et.al, 2000).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 306 
that summer average eight-hour daily maximum ozone concentrations would increase by about 1 to 5 ppb 
for parts of the United States in the near future (2030) due to climate change, under RCP6.0 and RCP8.5 
scenarios. This analysis compared air quality impacts under the 2030 climate, as projected by the RCPs, 
with air quality impacts under climatic conditions in 2000. The ozone-related health outcomes in 2030 are 
presented in Table 5.1. The ranges in the projections reflect estimates of the health effects of ozone from 
multiple epidemiological studies. Overall, health impacts and the associated societal costs under RCP8.5 are 
projected to be an order of magnitude higher than under RCP6.0.
Table 5.1 Projected increases in annual ozone-related health impacts 
(counts) in 2030 in the United States under two climate scenarios
CLIMATE 
PROJECTION
PREMATURE 
DEATHS
HOSPITAL 
ADMISSIONS
EMERGENCY 
ROOM VISITS
ACUTE 
RESPIRATORY 
SYMPTOMS
MISSED DAYS 
OF SCHOOL
TOTAL 
ECONOMIC 
VALUATION (IN 
2010 USD)
RCP6.0
37–170
360
89
210,000
67,000
0.32–1.4 
billion
RCP8.5
420–1900
3900
1200
1,900,000
650,000
3.6–15 
billion
Source: Fann et al., 2015
Much lower US health impacts for the year 2050 (less than 100 ozone-related premature deaths) were 
reported in a separate analysis of the climate penalty under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 (Stowell et al., 2017).
Climate change impacts on both ozone and PM2.5 health effects under the RCP8.5 scenario have also been 
assessed globally, with estimates of 43,600 and 215,000 excess deaths annually by 2100 due to ozone and 
PM2.5 increases, respectively, including almost 10,000 deaths in North America. Global impacts in the near 
term (2030) were estimated to be almost 60,000 excess deaths annually for the two pollutants combined 
(Silva et al., 2017). Multiple models show an increase in PM2.5 health risks due to the climate penalty in nine of 
the 10 regions of the world, including North America (Park et al., 2020). 
Several investigators have applied the older SRES A1B scenario, which is roughly comparable to RCP6.0 
and estimates a global temperature increase of 1.59°C in 2050, to project the air pollution health impacts of 
climate change. These studies estimate hundreds of ozone-related and several thousand PM2.5-related deaths 
annually in 2050 in the United States due to the warming climate, along with thousands of hospital visits, 
bronchitis incidents, and asthma attacks (Selin et al., 2009; Tagaris et al., 2009). Higher estimates of ozone 
and PM2.5-related deaths attributable to climate change were reported for the year 2090, with 13,000 deaths 
in North America and more than 100,000 deaths globally (Fang et al., 2013). A study of 50 US cities under the 
SRES A2 scenario in the 2050s, which predicts a rise in average summer temperature for the Eastern United 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 307 
States of 1.6°C to 3.2°C, projected an increase in mortality (0.11% to 0.27%) and hospital admissions for 
asthma (2.1%) and COPD (0.2% to 1.6%) due to ozone increases under the future climate (Bell et al., 2007).
A Canadian analysis estimated the air pollution health impacts for a hypothetical increase of 4°C in ambient 
temperatures for 2002, with anthropogenic air pollution emissions held at 2002 levels (Séguin, 2008). 
Nationally, increases in summer ozone concentrations due to the higher temperature were associated with 
156 excess premature deaths and a total economic value of $750 million due to mortality and morbidity 
outcomes. This increased to 658 premature deaths ($3.2 billion) when increases in biogenic emissions, 
expected under a warmer climate, were also included. However, the same study projected, with considerable 
uncertainty, a net reduction in PM2.5 concentrations under the warmer climate, so that the net effect of the 
two pollutants under a 4°C increase was estimated to be an excess of approximately 300 premature deaths 
and a social cost of $1.4 billion. 
Overall, these studies show that climate change is expected to worsen air quality and cause considerable 
deaths and illnesses related to air pollution, with hundreds to thousands of excess annual deaths in North 
America over this century and 100,000 annual excess deaths estimated globally by 2100. Studies that 
examined both ozone and PM2.5 generally estimated that effects of climate change on PM2.5-related health 
outcomes are about an order of magnitude higher than those associated with ozone.
5.5.2 Air Pollution Health Co-Benefits of Mitigation of Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions
Mitigation measures to reduce GHGs and SLCFs help stabilize the climate by reducing pollutants that play a 
role in increasing global temperature and accelerating climate change. However, climate change mitigation 
strategies can also have a range of indirect health co-benefits (Markandya et al., 2018). Key among these are 
health co-benefits from reductions in air pollution because of the following: climate mitigation will limit the 
climate penalty; some climate pollutants (e.g., black carbon, ozone) contribute to air pollution either directly 
or as precursors; and changes in industrial and transportation activities to reduce long-lived GHG and/or 
SLCF emissions can also reduce co-emitted conventional air pollutants (Smith et al., 2014). For example, the 
widespread use of electric vehicles powered by low-carbon energy can be a strategy for GHG mitigation that 
could also result in improved air quality. Consequently, climate change mitigation measures represent an 
opportunity to integrate objectives to stabilize the climate with those to reduce air pollution health impacts, 
which may offset the costs of implementing the measures (Thompson et al., 2016).
Studies examining air pollution health co-benefits associated with GHG mitigation strategies typically 
compare a policy scenario that includes strong GHG mitigation and accompanying reductions in air pollutant 
emissions with a scenario with limited GHG mitigation and associated higher air pollutant emissions. 
Economic valuation of air pollution health co-benefits allows co-benefits to be incorporated into a broader 
climate change framework, and the cost-effectiveness and potential optimization of various GHG mitigation 
measures, which can impose an economic burden on society, can be examined. Studies report monetized 
health co-benefits as total dollar value or as the marginal benefit per tonne of CO2 equivalent that is reduced. 
Both PM2.5- and ozone-related health co-benefits have been evaluated in the studies reviewed below, unless 
otherwise stated.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 308 
In a global analysis of GHG mitigation measures associated with RCP4.5, it was estimated that Canadian 
air pollution health co-benefits would range from about 4500 to 6500 avoided premature deaths annually 
between 2030 and 2100, relative to the reference scenario associated with the RCP projections (West et al., 
2013) (Table 5.2). US co-benefits were estimated to be about an order of magnitude higher (West et al., 2013; 
Zhang et al., 2017). Globally, changes in emissions were estimated to avoid 0.5 million, 1.3 million, and 2.2 
million deaths from combined exposure to ozone and PM2.5 in 2030, 2050, and 2100, respectively. The global 
average monetized marginal health co-benefits were estimated to be $50 to $380 per tonne of CO2 (tCO2) (in 
2005 USD), which exceed the marginal GHG abatement costs in 2030 and 2050 in this analysis, and partially 
offset the costs in 2100 (West et al., 2013). For the United States, the marginal value of avoided ozone- and 
PM2.5-related deaths was estimated to be $45 to $137/tCO2 (in 2005 USD) (Zhang et al., 2017).
Table 5.2 Air pollution health co-benefits associated with the 
projected scenario of RCP4.5 (annual avoided premature deaths)
STUDY
2030
2050
2100
OZONE
PM2.5 
OZONE 
PM2.5 
OZONE 
PM2.5 
Canada
(West et al., 
2013)
368
4270
792
5750
1180
2880
United States
(West et al., 
2013)
2440
19,300
7550
29,500
24,800
35,400
United States
(Zhang et al., 
2017)
8000
16,000
Global
(West et al., 
2013)
0.5 million
1.3 million
2.2 million
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 309 
Other studies have evaluated the avoided air pollution deaths associated with climate mitigation pathways based 
on specific targets for increases in global mean surface temperature in the future compared to a reference 
scenario. The United States air pollution heath co-benefits of reducing the climate penalty were estimated for two 
climate mitigation scenarios, reflecting a 2.5°C and 2.0°C increase in global mean surface temperature (Saari et al., 
2019). The two mitigation scenarios reduced the combined ozone and PM2.5 health impacts by thousands and tens 
of thousands of deaths in 2050 and 2100, respectively, with 40% greater PM2.5 benefits by 2100, under the more 
stringent policy compared to the less stringent policy. In 2100, air pollution (ozone and PM2.5) risks associated with 
climate change were attenuated by 70% to 88% in the policy scenarios. Similarly, United States health co-benefits 
of limiting global warming in 2100 to a 1.5°C rise was estimated to result in 11,000 and 52,000 avoided premature 
deaths across the United States in 2050 and 2100, respectively, compared to a reference scenario with a 6°C 
increase in global mean surface temperature. These health co-benefits were valued at 150 billion USD and 1.3 
trillion USD (in 2005 USD), respectively, which were equivalent to a rate of $25 (95% CI $9–$42) per tonne of CO2 
equivalent (tCO2e) and $122 (95% CI $45–$207)/tCO2e, respectively (Garcia-Menendez et al., 2015).
In a global analysis, Vandyck et al. (2018) examined the air quality implications in 2100 of two GHG mitigation 
scenarios, the first based on GHG emission reductions implied by the Nationally Determined Contributions,8 
leading to a 2.5°C to 3.2°C rise in global mean temperature by 2100, and the second a 2°C rise by 2100. 
Globally, avoided deaths due to air pollution in 2050 were estimated at 0.3 to 0.5 million for the Nationally 
Determined Contributions scenario and 0.7 to 1.5 million for the 2°C scenario, including about 20,000 to 
25,000 avoided deaths in the United States. The timing of taking action can affect the magnitude of the 
accrued health co-benefits. For example, it was estimated that about 150 million deaths due to air pollution 
globally could be avoided over this century if carbon emission reductions to limit warming to 2⁰C are 
implemented sooner rather than later in the 21st century (Shindell et al., 2018).
Another global study specifically examined the potential air pollution health co-benefits of meeting the Paris 
Agreement temperature change targets of 1.5°C and 2°C, and compared them to the associated mitigation 
costs of the climate policy scenarios (Markandya et al., 2018). Globally, the economic value of the health co-
benefits were estimated to outweigh the mitigation costs for all scenarios examined, with the ratio of health 
co-benefits to climate change mitigation costs ranging from 1.4 to 2.45. The greatest potential health co-
benefits were observed for China and India, but significant co-benefits were also estimated for the European 
Union and the United States. Overall, climate change mitigation measures to meet the targets established 
in the Paris Agreement can be cost-effective under the modelled scenarios and, depending on geographical 
regions, when air quality associated health co-benefits are considered.
Other studies have estimated thousands of avoided deaths due to ozone for North America and hundreds of 
thousands globally under various climate change mitigation scenarios, including those targeting methane 
(West et al., 2007; West et al., 2012). The latter were valued at $13 to $17/tCO2e (2005 USD) in 2030, which 
outweighed the costs of measures to reduce methane emissions (West et al., 2012).
Some studies have examined the co-benefits of climate change mitigation strategies targeting specific SLCFs 
or emission sectors. The annual health co-benefits of full electrification of the vehicle fleet in the Greater 
Toronto and Hamilton Area (Canada) were estimated at 260 and 330 avoided deaths, based on electricity 
8	
Nationally Determined Contributions are country-specific emission reduction pledges to meet the Paris Agreement 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC, 2015).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 310 
derived from natural gas or from renewables, respectively (Gai et al., 2020). The North American health co-
benefits of ambitious clean energy and clean transportation scenarios in the United States were estimated 
at 175,000 and 120,000 avoided deaths due to air pollution, for the 2015 to 2030 period, respectively, 
with additional annual benefits thereafter (Shindell et al., 2016). The majority of benefits were from PM2.5 
reductions, with a smaller fraction from ozone reductions, and 3% to 4% of all benefits (thousands of avoided 
deaths for 2015 to 2030 period) were estimated for Canada. Near-term US benefits of the policies were 
valued at 250 billion USD (95% CI 140 billion to 1.05 trillion USD) annually. 
A global analysis of strategies to reduce methane and black carbon reported that implementation of the 
measures would avoid 0.7 to 4.7 million deaths per year globally, with the largest impact attributable to black 
carbon reductions, and a marginal benefit of 700 to 5000 USD per tonne of methane reduction (Shindell et al., 
2012). Carbon policies for the United States addressing clean electricity production, on-road transportation, 
and an economy-wide cap-and-trade system were estimated to have air pollution health co-benefits 
associated with PM2.5 and ozone reductions that would offset approximately 26% to 1050% of GHG mitigation 
costs (Thompson et al., 2014). The marginal health co-benefits of PM2.5 reductions under the cap-and-trade 
scenario were estimated at $6/tCO2, which exceeded the implementation costs, and at $8/tCO2 (in 2005 USD) 
under the clean energy scenario, which partially offset the implementation costs (Saari et al., 2015). Marginal 
health co-benefits of $148/tCO2 (in 2006 USD) compared to GHG mitigation costs of $126/tCO2 under a clean 
energy scenario, and marginal health co-benefits of $80/tCO2 compared to costs of $15/tCO2 under the cap-
and-trade scenario were reported for a subnational carbon policy in the Northeastern United States. It was 
noted that costs varied widely due to regional differences in energy consumption (Thompson et al., 2016).
It is important to consider all aspects of emission changes when evaluating the health co-benefits of climate 
change mitigation strategies. The US air pollution health co-benefits associated with electric vehicle (EV) 
adoption were found to vary, depending on the source mix of electricity generation (Peters et al., 2020). It was 
estimated that 25% of EV use powered by the current US electricity grid mix would result in 437 (95% CI 295 
to 578) avoided premature deaths due to PM2.5 and 98 (95% CI 33 to 162) due to ozone reductions annually, 
with a total value of about 16.8 billion USD. The health co-benefits were estimated to be about twice as high 
for the same EV adoption rate if the fraction of emission-free energy sources in the grid mix was doubled, 
although the associated reduction in CO2 emissions would only increase by about 10%. 
Overall, studies of the potential air pollution health co-benefits associated with climate mitigation scenarios 
targeting maximum increases in global mean temperature of about 1.5°C to 3°C consistently indicate that 
substantial health benefits would be realized. Annually, the burden of disease would be reduced by up to tens 
of thousands of premature deaths related to PM2.5 and ozone in the United States in 2050 and 2100, and by 
up to 1 million to 2 million premature deaths globally. When directly compared in a study, more stringent 
mitigation policies confer greater co-benefits, and there is evidence that larger co-benefits will be realized 
if policies are implemented sooner rather than later. Air pollution health co-benefits represent a significant 
public health gain for individual countries and globally, and the socio-economic value can contribute to or 
even offset the costs of mitigation. Moreover, the joint consideration of climate change and air pollution 
mitigation options provides a framework to optimize the overall public health benefits and to identify 
potential unintended consequences, such as inadvertent risks to health. This was made evident following the 
promotion of diesel-fuelled vehicles in some countries because of their lower GHG emissions, which resulted 
in elevated emissions of air pollutants (Cames & Helmers, 2013; Haines, 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 311 
Box 5.1 The elimination of coal-fired power in Canada: A case study of 
air pollution health co-benefits
In 2012, the Government of Canada published the Reduction of Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Coal-fired 
Generation of Electricity Regulations (Government of Canada, 2012). These regulations set a CO2 emission 
performance standard for new coal-fired electricity generation units and for those reaching the end of their 
useful lifespan of 50 years. The objective was to ensure a permanent transition to power generation options 
that emitted low amounts or no CO2, such as renewable energy or high-efficiency natural gas, and to ensure that 
no new high-emitting units would be built in Canada. In 2010, Alberta, Ontario, Saskatchewan, Nova Scotia, New 
Brunswick, and Manitoba had coal-fired power generation capacity, in decreasing order of magnitude.
It was estimated that during the 2015 to 2035 period the Regulations would result in avoiding 6820 
megawatts of coal-fired electricity production, with 74% in Alberta, 14% in Nova Scotia, and 11% in 
Saskatchewan. This would result in emissions reductions of 219 Mt CO2 equivalent, which was valued at $5.6 
billion (in 2010 CAD), based on the social cost of carbon9 (Government of Canada, 2012).
In addition to emitting GHGs, coal-fired power generation is a source of air pollutant emissions. The air 
quality and health co-benefits of the reductions in air pollution emissions associated with the Regulations 
were estimated by the Government of Canada. The following cumulative reductions in air pollutant emissions 
were estimated for 2015 to 2035: 1156 kt SOx, 546 kt NOx, 9 kt PM2.5, and 48 kt CO. Air quality modelling was 
undertaken to see how these changes in emissions would affect air pollutant concentrations.
For the 2015 to 2035 period, it was estimated that the incremental improvements in air quality associated 
with the Regulations would result in avoiding 900 premature deaths, 800 hospital visits, 120,000 asthma 
episodes, and 2.7 million episode-days when individuals experience breathing difficulty or must reduce 
activity. Of these cumulative impacts, 590, 140, 80, and 57 avoided deaths were estimated for Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario, respectively. The national health co-benefits were estimated to have a 
value in 2015 of $4.2 billion (in 2010$), of which about 70% were attributable to reductions in ambient PM2.5 
and about 26% to reductions in ambient ozone. The air pollution health co-benefits of $4.2 billion contributed 
a significant portion of the estimated value of the overall benefits of the Regulations ($23.3 billion), which 
was found to outweigh the estimated associated costs of $16.1 billion (Government of Canada, 2012). The 
Regulations were later amended to accelerate the phase-out of conventional coal-fired power in Canada by 
2030. It was estimated that the associated improvements in air quality from 2019 to 2055 would result in an 
additional 260 avoided premature deaths and 40,000 avoided asthma episodes, with a total socio-economic 
value of $1.2 billion (Government of Canada, 2018). 
This case study illustrates that the air pollution health co-benefits of GHG mitigation strategies can represent a 
substantial value to Canadians, although reducing air pollution may not be the primary goal of the regulation or 
policy in question. In addition, while some of the climate change benefits of GHG reductions may be fully realized 
only over the medium to long term (Zickfeld & Herrington, 2015), air pollution health co-benefits start immediately 
following the reduction of emissions, accrue over time, and occur in the area where mitigation is implemented. 
9	
The social cost of carbon is a monetary measure of the global damage expected from climate change from one 
additional tonne of CO2 emissions in a given year.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 312 
5.5.3 Canadian Research Highlight: Quantifying Canadian Air 
Pollution Health Impacts of a Warming Climate and the Potential 
Health Co-Benefits of a Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Pathway 
Health Canada undertook an analysis of the potential air pollution health impacts in Canada due to the 
climate penalty and the potential health co-benefits of a specific GHG mitigation pathway for the purposes 
of this assessment report. In a previous study, scientists at Environment and Climate Change Canada 
modelled mid-century air quality in North America to examine the influence of both a warming climate 
and GHG emission controls (Kelly et al., 2012). Air quality estimates were made using a unified regional 
air-quality modelling system (AURAMS), specifically, a comprehensive Canadian system. Specifically, air 
pollution concentrations were modelled for the June to August period under the current climate (based on 
meteorological data from 1997 to 2006) and under a future climate in 2041 to 2050 (based on meteorological 
conditions in SRES A2). Air pollutant emissions, which were derived from the 2002 Canadian emissions 
inventory, were held constant between the two scenarios in order to examine the impact of changing 
climatic conditions alone. Biogenic emissions and the effect of temperature on those emissions were 
included, but wildfire emission changes associated with climate change were not addressed. In addition, 
the study estimated air pollutant concentrations under the same 2041 to 2050 future climate, with a 2050 
emissions inventory informed by RCP6.0 (a moderate GHG mitigation scenario), which was used to scale 
North American air pollutant emissions from 2002 to 2050 levels (Kelly et al., 2012). RCP6.0 was chosen in 
part due to the high level of detail available in its accompanying emissions activity changes, allowing a more 
precise calculation of the air pollutant reductions associated with the GHG-emitting activity reductions. This 
scaling reflects both air pollutant emission reductions associated with GHG mitigation as well as assumed 
air pollution controls. Air pollutant concentrations for each scenario were estimated on a national grid at 45 
km resolution, and effects on both ozone and PM2.5 were considered. As noted in section 5.4 Interactions 
Between Climate Change and Outdoor Air Pollution, effects of a changing climate on PM2.5 are more complex 
and less well studied than effects on ozone. Therefore, projections of changes in PM2.5 are more uncertain.
For the current analysis, the air quality output from the three scenarios modelled by Kelly et al. (2012) was 
used as input for Health Canada’s Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool (AQBAT 3.0). AQBAT is a national 
model used to estimate the human health (mortality and morbidity outcomes) and welfare benefits or 
damages associated with incremental changes in ambient concentrations of air pollutants, including PM2.5 
and ozone, in Canada (Health Canada, 2019). AQBAT includes concentration-response functions (CRFs), 
which characterize the increase in per capita risk of a given adverse health outcome per unit increase in 
ambient air pollutant concentration, based on published scientific studies. AQBAT estimates health impacts 
by combining the following parameters: the baseline risk of the adverse outcome in the population, population 
counts, CRFs, and the change in air pollutant concentrations between the scenarios. In addition, AQBAT 
provides economic valuation estimates for the health outcomes; these consider the potential social welfare 
consequences of the health outcomes, including medical costs, reduced workplace productivity, pain and 
suffering, and the effects of increased mortality risk.
The air pollutant concentration estimates from these three scenarios were used to answer the following questions.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 313 
What would the incremental air pollution health impacts in Canada be in 2050 due to:
•	
a changing climate, if air pollution precursor emissions remain unchanged (i.e., the climate penalty)?
•	
reductions in air pollution precursor emissions associated with the RCP6.0 projection, under 
future climate conditions?
•	
a changing climate and reductions in air pollution emissions associated with the RCP6.0 
projection, compared to recent climatic conditions and emissions?
The Canadian population health impacts calculated for 2050 (June to August) and the associated economic 
valuation estimates are presented in Tables 5.3 and 5.4. 
Table 5.3 National, provincial, and territorial ozone and PM2.5 
premature deaths and valuation for June to Augusta
REGION
CHANGE IN NUMBER OF PREMATURE DEATHS (ECONOMIC VALUATION)
IMPACT OF CHANGING 
CLIMATE IN 2050b
IMPACT OF REDUCED AIR 
POLLUTANT EMISSIONS AS 
PER RCP6.0 IN 2050c
IMPACT OF CHANGING 
CLIMATE AND REDUCED 
AIR POLLUTANT 
EMISSIONS AS PER 
RCP6.0 IN 2050d
Canada
850 ($2,700,000,000)
−5,200 (−$16,000,000,000)
−4,400 (−$14,000,000,000)
British 
Columbia
−56 (−$170,000,000)
−81 (−$250,000,000)
−140 (−$420,000,000)
Alberta
−9 (−$27,000,000)
−220 (−$680,000,000)
−230 (−$710,000,000)
Saskatchewan
9 ($29,000,000)
−58 (−$180,000,000)
−49 (−$150,000,000)
Manitoba
15 ($48,000,000)
−62 (−$190,000,000)
−47 (−$150,000,000)
Ontario
620 ($1,900,000,000)
−2,900 (−$9,100,000,000)
−2,300 (−$7,300,000,000)
Quebec
270 ($830,000,000)
−1,500 (−$4,700,000,000)
−1,200 (−$3,900,000,000)
New Brunswick
18 ($56,000,000)
−120 (−$380,000,000)
−110 (−$330,000,000)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 314 
REGION
CHANGE IN NUMBER OF PREMATURE DEATHS (ECONOMIC VALUATION)
IMPACT OF CHANGING 
CLIMATE IN 2050b
IMPACT OF REDUCED AIR 
POLLUTANT EMISSIONS AS 
PER RCP6.0 IN 2050c
IMPACT OF CHANGING 
CLIMATE AND REDUCED 
AIR POLLUTANT 
EMISSIONS AS PER 
RCP6.0 IN 2050d
Nova Scotia
−5 (−$16,000,000)
−160 (−$500,000,000)
−170 (−$520,000,000)
Prince Edward 
Island
4 ($12,000,000)
−30 (−$94,000,000)
−26 (−$82,000,000)
Newfoundland 
and Labrador
−9 (−$28,000,000)
−50 (−$150,000,000)
−59 (−$180,000,000)
Yukon
<1
<1
<1
Northwest 
Territories
<1
<1
<1
Nunavut
<1
<1
<1
a. Counts and valuations represent mean estimates of premature mortality. Counts and valuation 
estimates are rounded to the nearest integer and given to a maximum of two significant figures. Valuations 
are in 2018 Canadian dollars and discounted from 2050 to 2019 using a 3% discount rate. Totals may not 
add up due to rounding.
b. Impact of a changing climate: (2045 climate @ 2002 emissions) – (2002 climate @ 2002 emissions)
c. Impact of reducing air pollutant emissions as per RCP6.0: (2045 climate @ 2002 emissions) – (2045 
climate @ 2045 RCP6.0 emissions)
d. Impact of changing climate and reducing air pollutant emissions as per RCP6.0: (2045 climate @ 2045 
RCP6.0 emissions) – (2002 climate @ 2002 emissions)
This analysis estimates that the impact of a warming climate in 2050 would result in 850 excess deaths 
across the country in the summer months, with clear regional differences. Most of the deaths would occur in 
Ontario (620) and Quebec (270), and some regions would experience small reductions in air pollution and the 
associated health impacts (e.g., British Columbia). This is consistent with the air quality changes projected 
by Kelly et al. (2012), which estimate for North America that the largest increases in ozone and PM2.5 would 
occur in industrialized regions such as the Northeastern United States and adjacent regions of Southeastern 
Canada. Reductions in air pollutant emissions associated with projections under the RCP6.0 scenario would 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 315 
have national population health benefits of about 5200 avoided premature deaths annually in 2050, with 
benefits in all provinces but particularly in Ontario (2900 avoided premature deaths) and Quebec (1500 
avoided premature deaths). These reflect the air pollution health co-benefits of the GHG mitigation strategies 
in RCP6.0, along with the assumptions in RCP6.0 of more stringent air pollution controls globally over time. 
The final scenario examined considered the effect of both a warming climate and air pollutant emission 
reductions. The results show that the benefits of air pollution mitigation are attenuated by the negative 
effects of a warmer climate. As indicated above, modelled projections of changes in PM2.5 concentrations are 
considered to be more uncertain than those for ozone, which is also true for the health impacts derived from 
those projections.
Table 5.4 Canadian morbidity and mortality impacts (counts) and 
economic valuation due to ozone and PM2.5 for June to Augusta
HEALTH END 
POINT
POLLUTANT
IMPACT OF 
CHANGING 
CLIMATE IN 2050b
IMPACT OF 
REDUCED AIR 
POLLUTANT 
EMISSIONS TO 
RCP6.0 IN 2050c
IMPACT OF 
CHANGING CLIMATE 
AND REDUCED 
AIR POLLUTANT 
EMISSIONS TO 
RCP6.0 IN 2050d
Mortality
Mortality
Ozone
610
−3500
−3000
Mortality
PM2.5
250
−1700
−1400
Mortality
Ozone + PM2.5
850
−5200
−4400
Morbidity
Acute respiratory 
symptom days
Ozone, PM2.5
1,900,000
−12,000,000
−9,600,000
Adult chronic 
bronchitis cases
PM2.5
160
−1100
−900
Asthma symptom 
days
Ozone, PM2.5
160,000
−920,000
−770,000
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 316 
HEALTH END 
POINT
POLLUTANT
IMPACT OF 
CHANGING 
CLIMATE IN 2050b
IMPACT OF 
REDUCED AIR 
POLLUTANT 
EMISSIONS TO 
RCP6.0 IN 2050c
IMPACT OF 
CHANGING CLIMATE 
AND REDUCED 
AIR POLLUTANT 
EMISSIONS TO 
RCP6.0 IN 2050d
Child acute 
bronchitis episodes
PM2.5
670
−4400
−3700
Respiratory and 
cardiac emergency 
room visits
Ozone, PM2.5
970
−6000
−5000
Respiratory and 
cardiac hospital 
admissions
Ozone, PM2.5
210
−1300
−1100
Restricted activity 
days
PM2.5
210,000
−1,500,000
−1,200,000
Minor restricted 
activity days
Ozone
340,000
−2,000,000
−1,600,000
Valuation (mean [2.5th percentile, 97.5th percentile])
All premature 
deaths
Ozone, PM2.5
$2.7 billion [$0.92 
billion, $5.1 billion]
−$16 billion [−$5.7 
billion, −$31 billion]
−$14 billion [−$4.8 
billion, −$26 billion]
All end points
Ozone, PM2.5
$2.7 billion [$0.97 
billion, $5.2 billion]
−$17 billion [−$6.0 
billion, −$32 billion]
−$14 billion [−$5.0 
billion, −$27 billion]
a. Counts represent mean estimates of health outcomes. Counts and valuation estimates are rounded to the 
nearest integer and given to a maximum of two significant figures. Valuations are in 2018 Canadian dollars and 
discounted from 2050 to 2019 using a 3% discount rate. Totals may not add up due to rounding.
b. Impact of a changing climate: (2045 climate @ 2002 emissions) – (2002 climate @ 2002 emissions)
c. Impact of reducing air pollutant emissions to RCP6.0: (2045 climate @ 2002 emissions) – (2045 climate 
@ 2045 RCP6.0 emissions)
d. Impact of changing climate and reducing air pollutant emissions to RCP6.0: (2045 climate @ 2045 
RCP6.0 emissions) – (2002 climate @ 2002 emissions)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 317 
Exposure to ozone and PM2.5 also increases the risk of multiple non-fatal outcomes, such as asthma 
symptoms and cardiorespiratory hospital admissions. These represent important aspects of population 
health. In this analysis, the effect of the climate penalty on worsening air quality is estimated to result in 
1.9 million acute respiratory symptom days and tens of thousands of asthma symptom days and restricted 
activity days, contributing to a substantial public health burden. This burden is in contrast to the larger annual 
health co-benefits that would result from air pollution reductions associated with the RCP6.0 scenario, 
including thousands of avoided cardiorespiratory hospital visits, as well as respiratory illnesses. About 70% 
of the mortality impacts are attributable to estimated changes in ambient ozone concentrations, with the 
remainder attributable to PM2.5. 
The economic value of the damage to health due to air pollution in Canada associated with a warming 
climate, based on analysis of the summer period in 2050, is estimated to be $2.7 billion, with a range of 
$0.97 billion to $5.2 billion, representing the 2.5th to the 97.5th percentile. This primarily reflects the value 
associated with increased risk of premature death. Importantly, this analysis also shows the potentially large 
socio-economic co-benefits that could be realized from air quality improvements delineated in the RCP6.0 
projection, which were estimated to be $17 billion, with a range of $6.0 billion to $32 billion, representing the 
2.5th to 97.5th percentile, in 2050.
5.5.4 Conclusion
Overall, the scientific evidence shows that climate change will affect atmospheric processes and, 
consequently, air quality. Multiple studies estimate that hundreds to thousands of ozone-related deaths may 
result annually in the United States during this century as a result of a warming climate. Fewer studies have 
examined PM2.5 health impacts, but those that have suggest that PM2.5 health impacts will be about one order 
of magnitude larger than those from ozone (Tagaris et al., 2009; Fang et al., 2013; Silva et al., 2017). Only one 
study was identified that included an analysis of health impacts in Canada. This focused only on ozone health 
impacts and estimated that the climate penalty under SRES A1B would result in 45 excess annual deaths 
in Canada in 2050 (Selin et al., 2009). In a new analysis for Canada conducted for this national assessment 
report, the net summer season health impacts in 2050 due to the climate penalty are estimated to be 850 
excess deaths due to air pollution (total value of impacts $2.7 billion), with approximately 70% of those due 
to ozone and the remainder to PM2.5, and with the vast majority of health impacts occurring in Ontario and 
Quebec. Note that this analysis did not include the air quality and health impacts resulting from wildfire 
smoke, which is discussed later in this chapter.
Strategies to mitigate GHG emissions can result in significant air pollution health co-benefits, the societal 
value of which can, in turn, offset the costs of GHG mitigation measures. Again, studies in the scientific 
literature generally estimate the PM2.5 co-benefits to be about an order of magnitude larger than those from 
ozone reductions. The new Canadian analysis, presented above, estimates net benefits of following the 
RCP6.0 pathway to be about 5200 avoided deaths for the summer season for a single year in 2050, mainly in 
Ontario and Quebec, with a total value of benefits of $17 billion. Air pollution co-benefits are anticipated for 
each year following GHG emission reductions, and the cumulative benefits over decades would be expected 
to be much larger.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 318 
Air pollution health co-benefits of climate change mitigation represent important potential near-term gains 
and are realized locally, where mitigation measures are implemented. The incorporation of health co-benefits 
into a climate change framework can provide justification for more stringent or accelerated climate change 
mitigation measures or incentives to implement actions on climate change (Shindell et al., 2018). Appropriate 
analyses could allow for the strategic selection of climate mitigation pathways in Canada that also optimally 
target reductions in population health impacts due to air pollution, given the health and economic burden these 
represent to society. It would also allow for identification of potential unintended adverse health consequences.
5.5.5 Key Uncertainties
The modelling of air quality in future scenarios under the effects of climate change represents a challenge, 
due to inherent uncertainties with respect to global atmospheric dynamics and chemistry, downscaling 
from global to regional scales, chemical–climate interactions, emissions projections, and meteorological 
conditions (Tagaris et al., 2009; Fang et al., 2013; Silva et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017). Most studies relevant 
to Canada have focused only on ozone, while fewer analyses have captured PM2.5 impacts. Modelled 
population health impacts are likely underestimated, as not all health outcomes that have been associated 
with air pollution exposure (e.g., neurological outcomes) can currently be quantified. Variability in the CRFs 
and monetization of health outcomes used in different studies may influence results (West et al., 2013; 
Thompson et al., 2014; Silva et al., 2017). Furthermore, the studies undertaken to date have largely used 
different approaches, assumptions, and modelling methodologies to investigate different questions, limiting 
the ability to synthesize the information.
5.6 Climate Change and Air Pollution 
from Wildfires
5.6.1 Wildfires in Canada in a Changing Climate
On average, 7000 wildfires burn about 2.5 million hectares — about half the size of Nova Scotia — every 
year in Canada. The area burned by wildfire in Canada has doubled since the early 1970s, and this has been 
attributed to human-caused climate change (Gillett et al., 2004). For example, human influences on the 
climate were found to be an important contributor to the severity of the 2017 wildfire season in Canada 
(Kirchmeier-Young et al., 2019). The increase in area burned results in higher air pollution emissions from 
wildfires, as well as greater associated health risks to humans (Reisen et al., 2015; Matz et al., 2020). The 
four factors that influence wildfire emissions include area burned, fuel consumed, combustion completeness 
(efficiency), and emission factor, which is the amount of pollutant released, measured in grams per kilogram. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 319 
The Canadian climate is warming, and this is having profound and immediate impacts on fire activity in 
Canada. The reasons for increasing wildfire activity due to rising temperatures are threefold. First, warmer 
temperatures extend the fire season, and a longer fire season has already been observed in parts of Canada. 
For example, interior British Columbia, Alberta, and Northern Ontario have longer fire seasons today than in 
1959 to 2000 (Albert-Green et al., 2013; Hanes et al., 2019). Second, warmer conditions result in increased 
lightning, and, all things being equal, more lightning will result in more fire (Romps et al., 2014). Third, warmer 
temperatures lead to drier fuels, unless there is a significant increase in precipitation (Flannigan et al., 2016). 
Almost all future climate change scenarios for Canada do not have sufficient increases in precipitation to 
compensate for the drying effect from warmer temperatures. Drier fuels make it is easier for fire to start, 
spread, and burn more intensely, which, in turn, makes the fires more difficult to control or to extinguish and 
results in greater air pollution emissions.
Wildfire activity varies temporally and spatially. For the period 1959 to 2015, the number of large fires and 
area burned by wildfire increased in Western Canada (Hanes et al., 2019). This trend is expected to continue, 
with the largest increase in wildfires and smoke projected for Western Canada through to 2050. Increasing 
fire activity is anticipated across all of Canada in the last half of this century (Flannigan et al., 2005; Flannigan 
et al., 2009).
Scientists are investigating whether recent increases in wildfires in Canada are a direct result of climate 
change. The observed increases in large wildfires are consistent with what is anticipated with climate change 
(Flannigan et al., 2009; Hanes et al., 2019). Recent research suggests that extreme fire risk in Western 
Canada during the last decade increased by 1.5 to 6 times due to human-caused climate change (Kirchmeier-
Young et al., 2017). Tan et al. (2019) suggested that extreme spring fire weather in Western Canada in 2016 
was very likely an outcome of human-caused climate warming, which increased the occurrence of a weather 
pattern associated with warmer and drier conditions. Kirchmeier-Young et al. (2019) suggested that human-
caused climate change increases the area burned by a factor of seven to 11 times during extreme fire 
seasons, such as the 2017 fire season in British Columbia. 
Amiro et al. (2009) suggested a doubling of wildfire emissions in Canada by the end of this century using 
the Canadian Global Circulation Model. The increases were largely due to increases in area burned rather 
than increases in the fuel burned per unit of area (known as depth of burn). Recent research, using three 
global circulation models (HadGEM2, CanESM2, and CSIRO-MK3.6.0) and three RCP scenarios (2.6, 4.5, and 
8.5), however, suggested that the proportion of days in the fire seasons with the potential for significant fuel 
consumption (depth of burn) by wildfire will increase across Canada’s forests, more than doubling for British 
Columbia and the rest of the boreal forest by 2100 (Wotton et al., 2017). The doubling of fuel consumption 
due to depth of burn only may occur as early as the 2030s in British Columbia. Wotton et al. (2017) suggested 
that the proportion of days with high-intensity wildfires that are difficult to impossible to extinguish will 
increase by two to three times for British Columbia and the boreal forest by 2100. 
Smoke from wildfires can travel long distances and significantly affect communities that can be 1000 km 
or more from the fire. As a result, large population centres are not immune to the adverse health impacts from 
wildfire smoke, although they may be in an area with low wildfire risk (Matz et al., 2020). In addition, Indigenous 
communities, which may be in close proximity to forests, may be more affected by wildfires and the need for and 
effects of evacuation (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 320 
Given projected increases in wildfire activity, the potential for interactions between society and fire in Canada 
(such as more evacuations of communities) will increase. Overall, Canadians need to be prepared for a future 
with more wildfires and increased levels of wildfire air pollution due to the changing climate.
5.6.2 Health Effects of Air Pollution from Wildfires
Wildfire emissions contain many different air pollutants, including PM, CO, NOX, methane, polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons, and VOCs, and contribute to the formation of ozone and secondary PM (Naeher et al., 2007). 
The health effects of some of these air pollutants are discussed in section 5.3 Health Effects of Outdoor Air 
Pollution. For each wildfire, the exact composition of the smoke is highly variable and determined by many 
factors, including type of vegetation burning (e.g., wet or green vegetation versus dead or dry vegetation), 
type of combustion (e.g., flaming versus smoldering conditions), and weather conditions (Adetona et al., 
2016; Black et al., 2017). 
The health effects of wildfire smoke are an active area of research and have been well reviewed, as they are 
an important global issue (Benmarhnia et al., 2013; Youssouf et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2015; Adetona et al., 2016; 
Reid et al., 2016; Black et al., 2017; Cascio, 2018). These reviews considered studies conducted around the 
world, including in North America, South America, Europe, Australia, and Asia. The methods used to assess 
exposure to wildfire smoke varied across the individual studies and included use of land-based PM monitors, 
satellite imagery, air quality modelling, comparison of fire versus non-fire periods, and self-reports. Based 
on these reviews, epidemiological studies have identified that exposure to wildfire smoke is associated with 
an increase in all-cause mortality; however, more studies are required to identify which specific causes of 
mortality are most affected. In addition, the literature indicates a strong association between exposure to 
wildfire smoke and respiratory morbidity, specifically exacerbations of asthma and COPD, and increased 
respiratory infections. Numerous studies have reported significant increases in health care utilization, 
including hospital admissions, emergency room visits, physician visits, and/or medication use, for these 
respiratory conditions associated with an increase in wildfire smoke. For cardiovascular morbidity, including 
health outcomes such as myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure, and heart rhythm disturbances, the 
association with wildfire smoke remains inconclusive, due to a small number of studies indicating an effect 
and many studies reporting null findings. Many studies reported no association with cardiovascular diseases 
as a group, and the results are inconsistent among the studies evaluating specific outcomes. A small number 
of studies have evaluated other health effects, including birth outcomes, mental health, and diabetes, although 
further research is required to assess the impact of wildfire smoke on these and other health effects.
Studies conducted in Canada on the health effects of wildfire smoke exposure support the conclusions of the 
reviews discussed above. Specifically, these studies have identified increased asthma-related physician visits 
(Henderson et al., 2011; McLean et al., 2015; Dodd et al., 2018a), asthma medication dispensed (Henderson 
et al., 2011; Elliot et al., 2013; McLean et al., 2015), and respiratory-related physician visits and hospital 
admissions (Henderson et al., 2011; Dodd et al., 2018a) associated with exposure to wildfire smoke. However, 
no associations were observed for cardiovascular-related physician visits or hospital admissions (Henderson 
et al., 2011; Dodd et al., 2018a). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 321 
How wildfire smoke causes health effects is not fully understood, although the evidence suggests the 
mechanisms may be similar to those identified for ambient PM. Studies in humans and animals exposed to 
wildfire or wood smoke have suggested that the health effects result from increased oxidative stress and 
inflammatory responses, as well as possible interaction of particulates with the autonomic nervous system 
and a possible reduction in immune responses (Adetona et al., 2016; Reid et al., 2016; Black et al., 2017; 
Cascio, 2018). 
5.6.3 The Health Burden of Wildfire Smoke in Recent Years
Health impact analyses have estimated the health burden of wildfires attributable to the increase in air 
pollutant concentrations from wildfire smoke. On a global scale for 1997 to 2006, the average annual 
mortality attributable to PM2.5 from landscape fire smoke was estimated at 339,000 deaths (interquartile 
range 260,000 to 600,000) (Johnston et al., 2012). For this study, landscape fires included forest, grass, and 
peat fires, and were associated with an estimated annual wildfire-PM2.5 exposure concentration of 0 to 
45 µg/m3 and a population-weighted average concentration of 2.1 µg/m3. The greatest impacts were noted 
for sub-Saharan Africa (157,000 premature deaths) and Southeast Asia (110,000 premature deaths). The 
importance of climatic variability on wildfire activities was also evident from the sensitivity analysis of strong 
La Niña and El Niño years. During the El Niño period, associated with dry conditions and greater fire activity, 
the estimated annual global mortality attributable to PM2.5 from landscape fire smoke was estimated at 
532,000, compared to an estimate of 262,000 for the La Niña period. 
In a national assessment for the continental United States, wildfire episodes in 2008 to 2012 were associated 
with an annual population-weighted mean wildfire-PM2.5 exposure of 0.6 to 1.1 µg/m3, depending on the 
wildfire activity of a given year (Fann et al., 2018). These annual wildfire-PM2.5 exposures were associated with 
an estimated 1500 to 2500 premature deaths from short-term exposure; 8700 to 32,000 premature deaths 
from long-term exposure; 3900 to 8500 respiratory hospital admissions; and 1700 to 2800 cardiovascular 
hospital admissions. The economic valuation over the five-year period was 63 billion USD (in 2010 USD) for 
the short-term premature deaths and combined hospital admissions. The long-term premature deaths had 
a valuation of 450 billion USD (in 2010 USD) across the five-year period. There was considerable regional 
variation in wildfire smoke exposure and attributable health impacts, with greater wildfire activity occurring in 
the western and southeastern states.
There is only limited information quantifying the health and associated monetary impacts from wildfire-
related air pollution in Canada in the published literature. A 2001 fire in Chisholm, Alberta, was used as a 
case study to estimate the acute health impacts associated with short-term increases in PM2.5 (Rittmaster et 
al., 2006; Rittmaster et al., 2008). This seven-day fire burned approximately 116,000 ha and had significant 
impacts on the air quality of Edmonton (160 km south of Chisholm), Red Deer (125 km south of Edmonton), and 
the surrounding area. Health damage associated with PM2.5 concentrations above the Canada Wide Standard of 
30 µg/m3, which was applicable at the time, were estimated to be $2 million to $3 million (in 1996 CAD).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 322 
5.6.4 Quantifying Recent Canadian Air Pollution Health Impacts from 
Wildfire Smoke
As discussed in section 5.6.1 Wildfires in Canada in a Changing Climate, wildfire activity in Canada is 
expected to increase under a warming climate. Currently, there is too much uncertainty to predict with 
sufficient accuracy where in Canada wildfires will occur by mid-century and hence to estimate the population 
health impacts of wildfires under potential future climates. However, it is informative to assess the current 
air pollution health impacts from wildfires to better understand the magnitude of this population health 
issue. Health Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada undertook an analysis of the Canadian 
air quality and human health impacts of air pollution from wildfires in recent years, the results of which are 
presented in this section (Matz et al., 2020). 
Although intermittent in nature, wildfire smoke is recognized as a major contributor to air quality issues in 
North America. To provide forecast guidance for air quality alerts that could reduce air pollution exposure 
and protect human health during a wildfire smoke event, Environment and Climate Change Canada developed 
FireWork, a comprehensive operational air quality forecast system based on near-real-time biomass-burning 
emissions data. This system delivers operational forecasts of modelled air pollutant concentrations from 
biomass burning, in particular PM2.5, on a daily basis over North America (Pavlovic et al., 2016).
A multi-year retrospective analysis of FireWork wildfire-PM2.5 forecasts was conducted to estimate Canadian 
population exposure to PM2.5 from wildfires (Munoz-Alpizar et al., 2017). Emissions from wildfires across 
North America were included in the modelling, which was limited to a five-month period from May to 
September, for calendar years 2013 to 2018. Due to substantial changes to the modelling grid used for 2016, 
there is a high level of uncertainty in the model output. As such, the results for that year were excluded from 
further analysis. 
Comparisons of average monthly forecasted surface PM2.5 concentrations due to wildfires for the 2013 to 
2018 period showed large year-to-year variations in both the timing and the spatial locations of impacts 
(see Figure 5.2). Additionally, wildfires can sometimes affect the same location many times during a single 
season. The frequent presence of wildfire-PM2.5, especially in Western North America, has implications for 
regional achievement of PM2.5 air quality standards. The percent of Canadian landmass with wildfire-PM2.5 and 
the percent of the Canadian population affected by wildfire-PM2.5 above specified concentrations are provided 
in Figure 5.3. For 2013 to 2017, more than 60% of the landmass of Canada had average (May to September) 
wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations of 0.2 µg/m3 or more, affecting more than 90% of the population and 
demonstrating the widespread nature of wildfire smoke. Additionally, for 2013 to 2018, approximately 25% 
to 40% of the land mass of Canada had average wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations of 1 µg/m3 or more, affecting 
approximately 20% to 30% of the population. At the higher-threshold concentration levels, the percentages 
of landmass and population affected were further reduced. Since the population of Canada is not evenly 
distributed over the large landmass, the proximity of fire activity to population centres is a key determinant 
of the population affected by higher wildfire-PM2.5 levels. For example, in 2017, the wildfire activity and 
smoke plume affected large population centres in British Columbia, and the proportion of the population 
affected was greater than the proportion of the landmass. Data for the provinces and territories with wildfire-
PM2.5 concentrations of 1 µg/m3 or more, affecting more than 5% of the landmass and more than 5% of the 
population, for 2013 to 2018, are presented in Figure 5.4. In multiple years between 2013 and 2018, about 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 323 
60% to 100% of the landmass and over 80% of the population in the four Western provinces and the Northwest 
Territories experienced average (May to September) wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations of at least 1 µg/m3. 
Figure 5.2 Wildfire PM2.5 concentrations (May to September) for 2013 to 2018 in Canada. The colours on the 
maps show a range from grey to deep red indicating a range of wildfire-PM2.5 from 0.0 to 15.0 µg/m3. Source: 
Matz et al., 2020.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 324 
Figure 5.3 Percent of Canadian landmass and of Canadian population with average (May to September) wildfire-
PM2.5 concentrations above given thresholds. Panel A shows the percent of Canadian landmass with average May 
to September wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations above given thresholds, and panel B shows the percent of population with 
May to September wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations above given thresholds. Source: Matz et al., 2020.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 325 
Figure 5.4 Percent of landmass and percent of population by province and territory with average (May to 
September) wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations ≥1 µg/m3 for 2013 to 2018. Panel A shows the percent of landmass 
with average wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations of 1 µg/m3 or more for 2013 to 2018 (May to September). Panel B 
shows the percent of the population exposed to average wildfire-PM2.5 concentrations of 1 µg/m3 or more for 
2013 to 2018 (May to September). Only provinces and territories affected at more than 5% (of landmass or 
population) are included in the panels. Source: Matz et al., 2020.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 326 
The Canadian population health impacts attributable to wildfire PM2.5 for 2013 to 2015 and 2017 to 2018 were 
estimated using Health Canada’s AQBAT 3.0. The mortality and morbidity results, including the economic 
valuation, are presented in Table 5.5 and Table 5.6. Nationally, 54 to 240 premature deaths due to short-term 
exposure and 570 to 2500 premature deaths due to long-term exposure per year were attributable to wildfire-
PM2.5, as well as many non-fatal cardiorespiratory health outcomes. The most frequent morbidities were days 
with acute respiratory symptoms and days with restricted activity. The substantial year-to-year variation in 
wildfire activity is reflected in the health impact analysis, with the greatest impacts estimated for 2017 and 
much smaller estimates for 2013. This variability is also driven by whether the air pollution plume from the 
fires disperses over highly populated areas. Over the five calendar years assessed, the economic value of the 
population health impacts was estimated at $410 million to $1.8 billion per year for acute health impacts and 
$4.3 to $19 billion per year for chronic health impacts. 
Table 5.5 Acute health impacts and economic valuationa from wildfire 
PM2.5, for 2013 to 2015 and 2017 to 2018
2013
2014
2015
2017
2018
Acute mortality
54
70
97
240
131
Acute mortality 
valuationb
$410 million
[$120 
million–$830 
million]
$520 million
[$160 
million–$1.1 
billion]
$730 million
[$220 
million–$1.5 
billion]
$1.8 billion
[$530 
million–$3.7 
billion]
$980 million
[$280 
million–$2.0 
billion]
Acute respiratory 
symptom days
1,400,000
1,900,000
2,500,000
6,100,000
3,400,000
Asthma symptom daysc
100,000
140,000
190,000
420,000
240,000
Child acute bronchitis 
episodes
2,600
3,400
4,600
10,000
6,000
Respiratory emergency 
room visits
170
230
310
710
420
Respiratory hospital 
admissions
34
45
61
140
83
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 327 
2013
2014
2015
2017
2018
Cardiac emergency 
room visits
60
75
110
250
140
Cardiac hospital 
admissions
46
57
80
190
110
Restricted activity days
750,000
1,000,000
1,400,000
3,200,000
1,800,000
Acute morbidity 
valuationb
$73 million
[$13 
million–$177 
million]
$97 million
[$17 
million–$240 
million]
$131 million
[$24 
million–$320 
million]
$310 million
[$58 
million–$750 
million]
$170 million
[$33 
million–$420 
million]
a. The dollar values in Table 5.5 are socio-economic values associated with small changes in the risk 
of various health outcomes. AQBAT provides economic valuation estimates of those health impacts, 
considering the potential social, economic, and public welfare consequences of the health outcomes, 
including medical costs, reduced workplace productivity, pain and suffering, and the impacts of increased 
mortality risk. 
b. Values represent mean valuation of multiple iterations; [2.5th–97.5th percentiles].
c. Asthma symptom days are only estimated for children (five to 19 years of age).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 328 
Table 5.6 Chronic health impacts and economic valuationa from 
wildfire PM2.5, for 2013 to 2015 and 2017 to 2018
2013
2014
2015
2017
2018
Chronic 
mortality
570
730
1000
2500
1400
Chronic 
mortality 
valuationb
$4.3 billion
[$1.5 
billion-$8.2 
billion
$5.5 billion
[$2.0 
billion–$11 
billion]
$7.6 billion
[$2.7 
billion–$15 
billion]
$19 billion
[$6.7 
billion–$35 
billion]
$10 billion
[$3.8 
billion–$20 
billion]
Adult chronic 
bronchitis cases
530
710
960
2300
1300
Chronic 
morbidity 
valuationb
$230 million
[$0–$620 
million]
$320 million
[$0–$830 
million]
$420 million
[$0–$1.1 
billion]
$1.0 billion
[$0–$2.6 
billion]
$560 million
[$0–$1.5 
billion]
a. The dollar values in Table 5.6 are socio-economic values associated with small changes in the risk 
of various health outcomes. AQBAT provides economic valuation estimates of those health impacts, 
considering the potential social, economic and public welfare consequences of the health outcomes, 
including medical costs, reduced workplace productivity, pain and suffering, and the impacts of increased 
mortality risk.
b. Values represent mean valuation of multiple iterations; [2.5th – 97.5th percentiles].
A breakdown of estimated national premature deaths, by province and territory, is provided in Table 5.7. 
In 2013, the greatest impacts were estimated for Ontario and Quebec, reflecting the wildfire activity in 
Northwestern Quebec that year. For the other years (2014 to 2018), the greatest impacts were estimated 
in the provinces of British Columbia and Alberta, reflecting the substantial wildfire activity in Western 
Canada and in the United States during these years. During this period, health impacts were also noted for 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec, indicating that the long-range transport of wildfire-PM2.5 can 
affect population health at great distances from the wildfire locations.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 329 
Table 5.7 Estimated premature deaths from acute and chronic 
exposure to wildfire PM2.5, by province and territory, for 2013 to 2015 
and 2017 to 2018
2013
2014
2015
2017
2018
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
Canada
54
570
70
730
97
1000
240
2500
131
1400
British 
Columbia
6
59
23
240
25
260
170
1700
69
720
Alberta
7
71
19
200
28
290
42
440
42
430
Saskatchewan
3
30
6
60
9
96
6
62
5
53
Manitoba
3
35
4
37
7
74
4
45
4
40
Ontario
19
200
11
110
17
180
10
110
6
66
Quebec
15
150
7
69
10
100
7
71
5
49
New Brunswick
1
9
0
4
1
6
0
5
0
4
Prince Edward 
Island
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
Nova Scotia
1
8
0
3
1
5
0
5
0
3
Newfoundland 
and Labrador
1
6
0
1
0
2
0
1
0
1
Yukon
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 330 
2013
2014
2015
2017
2018
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
ACUTE
CHRONIC
Northwest 
Territories
0
2
1
5
0
1
0
1
0
0
Nunavut
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5.6.5 Air Pollution Health Impacts of Wildfire Smoke Under 
Climate Change
In recent studies, projected wildfire activity under climate change scenarios has been used to estimate 
population exposures to wildfire smoke and health impacts in the future. Mills et al. (2018) projected wildfire 
smoke exposure across the continental United States under RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 for the years 2050 and 2090. 
In 2050, a projected 3 million more people would be exposed to wildfire smoke under RCP8.5 compared to 
RCP4.5 and the difference would increase to 10 million in 2090. Significant regional variation is noted across 
the country, with the greatest air quality impacts in the northeast and southwest. The study methods took 
a conservative approach and did not capture long-range transport of wildfire smoke. Ford et al. (2018) also 
considered the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios to model wildfire and biomass burning, and PM2.5 emissions 
for the continental United States. Annual average wildfire PM2.5 emissions were estimated to increase due 
to projected increases in emissions during the peak fire season and lengthening of the fire season, for 2050 
and 2100. The largest projected increases in emissions were noted for the Southeastern United States and 
along the Canadian border. Additionally, due to projected decreases in anthropogenic sources of PM2.5 under 
RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, the relative contributions of fire-PM2.5 were projected to increase from approximately 
25% in 2000 to approximately 50% in 2050 and 2100. From a modelled baseline of 17,000 premature deaths 
attributable to fire-PM2.5 in 2000, projections estimated increases in deaths to 42,000 (RCP4.5) or 32,000 
(RCP8.5) by 2050, and 32,000 (RCP4.5) or 44,000 (RCP8.5) by 2100. 
Liu et al. (2016) used projections of wildfire PM2.5, based on the SRES A1B climate scenario to estimate 
respiratory hospital admissions for seniors across the Western United States. Short-term increases in PM2.5 
from wildfires were associated with an increase of 178 respiratory hospital admissions for people 65 years or 
older for 2046 to 2051 compared to 2004 to 2009. The estimates were greatest for the population centres in 
Southern and Central California, Western Washington, Central Colorado, and Central Utah. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 331 
5.6.6 Populations at Higher Risk
For some of the air pollutants associated with wildfire smoke, such as PM, numerous epidemiological 
studies have identified populations that may be at increased risk (see section 5.3 Health Effects of Outdoor 
Air Pollution). In comparison, fewer studies have investigated possible populations or conditions that may 
increase the risk of adverse health effects from exposure to wildfire smoke. Limited evidence suggests 
that young children, seniors, people with pre-existing conditions such as asthma or COPD, and people with 
lower socio-economic status may be at increased risk (Liu et al., 2015; Reid et al., 2016). A recent review of 
North American studies reported evidence of a greater effect of wildfire smoke on women compared to men 
for health care utilization due to respiratory effects in healthy adults and in those with COPD (Kondo et al., 
2019). The review also reported a slightly lower relative risk for health care utilization for respiratory effects 
in youth compared to adults, but the data were insufficient to assess any effect modification due to income, 
education, access to care, or other personal characteristics. Further research is needed to better identify the 
subpopulations at greatest risk to the health effects of wildfire smoke.
Indigenous populations may be more sensitive to health effects from wildfire air pollution (see Chapter 2: 
Climate Change and Indigenous People’s Health in Canada). In Canada, First Nations and Métis people have 
a higher burden of chronic respiratory diseases such as asthma and COPD (Gershon et al., 2014; Carrière 
et al., 2017), making them more susceptible to the adverse effects of air pollution overall. A Canadian study 
suggested that adverse respiratory outcomes, including emergency room visits and clinic visits for cough, 
asthma, and pneumonia, increased during the prolonged 2014 wildfire season in the Northwest Territories 
compared to the previous two years, although this study was not specific to Indigenous Peoples (Dodd et al., 
2018a). In addition, Indigenous populations living in remote locations may be at increased risk of exposure to 
wildfire smoke due to proximity.
Given their occupation, wildland firefighters are exposed more frequently and to greater levels of wildfire 
smoke than the general public. Studies of firefighters have indicated acute health effects of wildfire smoke 
exposure, including reduced lung function, lung inflammation, pulmonary and systemic oxidative stress, and 
respiratory symptoms (Youssouf et al., 2014; Adetona et al., 2016; Black et al., 2017; Groot et al., 2019). However, 
the long-term effects of cumulative occupational exposure to wildfire smoke have not been identified. 
5.6.7 Conclusion
Scientific studies have identified numerous adverse health effects associated with wildfire smoke, including 
premature mortality and respiratory health effects. In addition, new research is evaluating possible 
associations with cardiovascular health effects, as well as with birth outcomes, mental health outcomes, 
and diabetes. Furthermore, significant population health impacts attributable to wildfire PM2.5 have been 
estimated for Canada, the United States, and globally. Specifically, for the Canadian population over the 
period from 2013 to 2018, 620 to 2700 deaths per year were attributed to PM2.5 from wildfires, along with 
many non-fatal adverse health outcomes. Climate change is anticipated to increase the number and severity 
of wildfires in Canada and globally, due to greater fire activity and lengthening of the fire season. The 
increased emissions from wildfires will result in a greater public health burden from air pollution and will 
require expanded adaptation efforts by public health agencies and other government organizations.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 332 
5.6.8 Key Uncertainties
Although increasing fire activity is expected in Canada over this century, it is difficult to estimate population 
health impacts under future climate change scenarios, as population exposure will depend on the location 
and size of individual fires, as well as meteorological conditions, all of which are hard to predict with the 
required spatial resolution. Air quality modelling includes inherent uncertainties, given the complexity of 
atmospheric processes. In addition, modelled population health impacts are likely underestimated, as not all 
health outcomes that have been associated with air pollution exposure can be quantified and included in the 
analysis. In addition, epidemiological studies of the health effects of wildfire air pollution specifically are still 
limited, and effects on health may differ from those caused by exposure to ambient air pollution. There is 
global recognition of the increasing importance of wildfire smoke as a source of air pollution exposure, and 
investigation of the health effects attributable to wildfire smoke is an active area of research. This may result 
in the development of source-specific CRFs for use in health impact assessments.
5.7 Adaptation and Risk Mitigation for Health 
Effects of Outdoor Air Pollution
In addition to strategies targeting reductions in air pollution emissions, there are multiple initiatives to help 
reduce exposure to and, hence, health risks from outdoor air pollution in Canada. These address outdoor air 
pollution in general, and, more recently, specific actions regarding wildfire smoke. There have been reductions 
in the number of smog-based advisories in recent years in Canada and the United States as a result of 
reductions in air pollution emissions, but the frequency of wildfire smoke episodes has increased. Given that 
climate change can contribute to the deterioration of air quality and increased wildfires, these measures take 
on added importance in the protection of public health.
5.7.1 Outdoor Air Pollution
Canada developed the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) to convey the health risks of air pollution to the 
public on a day-to-day basis and inform decisions to protect health. The AQHI forecast is designed to help 
Canadians know when to monitor their symptoms, limit their exposure to air pollution, and make other 
behavioural changes, such as adjusting their exercise activities. The index represents the combined impact 
of the air pollution mixture and conveys health risks in relative terms. Rather than anchoring the index to 
threshold values derived from air quality standards, the AQHI calculates risks from epidemiological analysis 
of the population health impacts associated with short-term (daily) exposure to air pollutants, with a value 
of 10 based upon the highest-risk day observed during the period 1998 to 2001. The formula incorporates 
concentrations of NO2, ozone, and PM2.5 according to their contribution to increasing the risk of mortality from 
non-accidental causes (Stieb et al., 2008). The AQHI is reported on a scale of 1 to 10+, and the higher the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 333 
number, the higher the health risk (see Figure 5.5). The AQHI is therefore an initiative to reduce the risk of air 
pollution that promotes adaptation through behavioural change; it has garnered international attention for its 
efficacy and clarity (Chen et al., 2013b; Oakes et al., 2014; Du et al., 2020).
Figure 5.5 Air Quality Health Index scale. Source: Government of Canada, 2019b.
The usefulness of the AQHI as a tool for adaptation depends on the ability to anticipate air quality conditions. 
Environment and Climate Change Canada forecasts the AQHI across the country (Government of Canada, 
2019a), accompanying weather forecasts in all regions except Quebec, which is the only province or territory 
that has not adopted the AQHI. As part of its Info-Smog program, Quebec has an air quality index that calculates a 
subindex for each pollutant relative to a provincial air quality standard (Government of Canada, 2019b).
Health messages and health protection advice communicated through the AQHI distinguish between the 
general population and the populations that may experience increased risk (Table 5.8). People with heart and 
lung conditions are described as most affected by air pollution, while other populations at higher risk include 
those with diabetes, young children, seniors, and people who are active outdoors. Advice to reduce exposure 
is primarily directed at avoiding elevated exposure to air pollution by changing schedules and relocating 
activities (e.g., indoors or outdoors and away from traffic), while, at the same time, encouraging appropriate 
exercise activities. Individuals are encouraged to check the AQHI forecast and become familiar with how their 
health may be affected at different AQHI values (e.g., recognizing when they experience symptoms). Those 
who may be at increased risk are encouraged to monitor their symptoms and limit outdoor activities at higher 
AQHI values. In addition to the information accompanying the AQHI forecasts, some provinces, municipalities, 
and media outlets post AQHI guides and information on webpages and provide adaptation advice to the 
public. The Air Health Check awareness campaign, which ran from 2015 to 2019, disseminated additional 
information on factors that increase vulnerability, symptoms, and protective actions (Scout Environmental, 2019).
Bilateral arrangements between federal and local authorities govern local air quality alerts, also called 
advisories, warnings, and special air quality statements. Air quality alerts may be based upon a forecast AQHI 
of seven or above (high risk), or when a specific pollutant exceeds a concentration chosen by the province. 
The health protection messages for advisories are generally consistent with the AQHI messaging for high 
or very high risk. However, they may be more detailed, including advice to avoid traffic, stay inside where 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 334 
there is central air conditioning, have an adequate supply of medication on hand, and reduce generation of 
air pollutants indoors, along with messages advising personal actions to reduce pollution, such as limiting 
vehicle use and outdoor combustion (OMECP, 2010). The Quebec Info-Smog program issues advisories 
when a pollutant reaches, or is forecast to reach, the “poor” category and makes use of similar risk reduction 
messages (Santé Montréal, 2017).
Table 5.8 AQHI health messages
HEALTH RISK
AIR QUALITY
 HEALTH INDEX
HEALTH MESSAGES
AT-RISK POPULATION*
GENERAL POPULATION
Low
1–3
Enjoy your usual outdoor 
activities.
Ideal air quality for outdoor 
activities.
Moderate
4–6
Consider reducing or 
rescheduling strenuous 
activities outdoors if you are 
experiencing symptoms.
No need to modify your 
usual outdoor activities 
unless you experience 
symptoms such as coughing 
and throat irritation.
High
7–10
Reduce or reschedule 
strenuous activities 
outdoors. Children and the 
elderly should also take it 
easy.
Consider reducing or 
rescheduling strenuous 
activities outdoors if you 
experience symptoms such 
as coughing and throat 
irritation.
Very high
Above 10
Avoid strenuous activities 
outdoors. Children and the 
elderly should also avoid 
outdoor physical exertion.
Reduce or reschedule 
strenuous activities outdoors, 
especially if you experience 
symptoms such as coughing 
and throat irritation.
* People with heart or breathing problems are at greater risk. Follow your doctor's usual advice about 
exercising and managing your condition.
Source: Government of Canada, 2015
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 335 
The AQHI does not measure the effects of odour, pollen, dust, heat, or humidity on human health. Additive 
health effects have been observed between heat and air pollution, leading to increases in mortality and 
hospital admissions for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases (European Academies’ Science Advisory 
Council, 2019). However, seasonal and regional variations in heat responses, as well as other factors, have 
thus far precluded consideration of a combined index for heat and air quality or the incorporation of a heat 
indicator into the AQHI. Only minimal messaging on the combined risk of air pollution and heat is included 
in AQHI factsheets. When air quality and heat warnings are issued simultaneously, messages acknowledge 
the combined risks of the two hazards; however, integrated adaptation messaging has not been established. 
Some local jurisdictions have been using ad hoc combinations of content from Health Canada’s work on 
extreme heat and air pollution (Anderson, 2016), and there is a need to develop joint messaging. 
There is no direct experimental evidence to demonstrate the effectiveness of air quality forecast programs 
such as the AQHI in reducing population health risks. However, many studies show that health risks increase 
with increasing exposure to air pollution and, therefore, actions that effectively reduce exposure will reduce 
risk (Abelsohn & Stieb, 2011). Several studies have investigated the effectiveness of air quality advisory 
programs in altering behaviour (Wen et al., 2009; Spurr et al., 2014; Radisic et al., 2016). They found that 
individuals who were more vulnerable to air pollution (e.g., asthma sufferers) and those with more knowledge 
of air pollution were more likely to respond to the information provided. However, few studies have been able 
to address the question of whether incidence of illness decreases. A study of the impact of phone messaging 
of alerts to sensitive patients, with follow-up interviews on actions and symptoms, did not detect an effect on 
health (Mehiriz & Gosselin, 2019). Another study investigated the impact of air quality advisories in Toronto 
and found that the announcement of alerts was associated with a reduction of emergency department visits 
for asthma by 25% but could not detect an effect for any other health outcome (Chen et al., 2018).
Enhancing urban green spaces can play a role as an adaptive measure to deal with climate change, while 
also providing potential health and social co-benefits. There has been considerable research indicating a 
positive association between exposure to green space and improved health outcomes, such as hypertension 
and cardiovascular end points (Twohig-Bennett & Jones, 2018). More recently, researchers are attempting 
to elucidate how green space and air pollution, two key elements of the urban environment, interact to affect 
health. There is emerging evidence that increased green space may attenuate the effect of air pollution 
(Crouse et al., 2019). For example, urban green space can provide an environment away from higher-pollution 
microenvironments (such as near roadways), where people can go, including to exercise. Green infrastructure, 
such as vegetation barriers along busy roadways, can reduce the transfer of air pollutants to nearby 
environments (Baldauf, 2016). Green space can also provide a cooling effect to help reduce the urban health 
island effect (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards) and function as a carbon sink. 
5.7.2 Wildfire Smoke
Wildfire smoke has become a frequent summertime feature of air quality conditions over large areas in 
Canada, particularly in Western Canada, with resulting attention to public health impacts and adaptation 
measures. Models suggest that wildfires will continue to increase in both severity and frequency due to 
climate change (see section 5.6 Climate Change and Air Pollution from Wildfires).  Adaptation measures in 
response to wildfire smoke are primarily related to warning individuals and providing them with the means to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 336 
reduce their exposure, particularly those who may be at increased risk of related health impacts. A qualitative 
study of the health impacts of the 2014 wildfires in the Northwest Territories observed a decrease in mental 
and emotional health among the majority of interviewees and recommended comprehensive planning and 
education to reduce risks in Indigenous and other communities (Dodd et al., 2018b).
Recent years have seen advances in air quality modelling to incorporate wildfire smoke into air quality 
forecasts. Environment and Climate Change Canada developed its FireWork model as part of its operational 
air quality forecast system and produces twice-daily forecasts of wildfire PM2.5 for the next 48 hours. The 
model output is incorporated into air quality forecasts. Maps and animations of predicted smoke paths are 
produced, and air quality alerts are issued when necessary (Government of Canada, 2019c). The relative 
cohesion of a smoke plume over large distances means that wildfire episodes present particular challenges 
to forecasting and to the adoption of appropriate adaptive measures. 
Currently, the AQHI formula is being evaluated for effectiveness in the context of wildfires. Concerns have 
arisen that, during smoke events, the AQHI readings do not correspond to the sensory experiences of the 
public in the area. An analysis was conducted with data from British Columbia, and an AQHI+ version of 
the index, using a formula based on one-hour PM2.5 only, was determined to have a better fit to asthma 
outcomes and respiratory physician visits, although not to mortality and cardiovascular outcomes. The new 
version is now used in British Columbia throughout the year, in conjunction with the AQHI (Yao et al., 2019). 
The Northwest Territories has developed a self-assessment guide for wildfire smoke and health, based on 
visibility (NT HSS, 2016a). 
Extreme ambient PM2.5 concentrations can occur, and adaptive measures that go beyond the risk reduction 
advice associated with the AQHI may be required. The British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BC CDC) 
carried out an analysis of public health responses to wildfire events and identified 13 priorities for action. 
While all are relevant to adaptation to smoke events, three are of particular interest: developing guidance 
for clean air shelters that can be used during smoke events; engaging public health practitioners in wildfire 
emergency response; and raising public awareness of protective actions (Maguet, 2018). Evidence reviews 
of air filtration in institutions were conducted (Keefe, 2014), the use of clean air shelters was explored 
(Barn, 2014), and advice on outdoor activities and the use of protective masks was developed (BC CDC, 
2014). A series of public information factsheets were developed in 2019 (BC CDC, 2019). The Manitoba 
Office of Disaster Management has developed guidelines for protecting community health and well-being 
from wildfires (Manitoba Health, 2019), as have the Northwest Territories (NT HSS, 2016b). The federal 
government, as well as several provinces and territories, have reports, web pages, and factsheets that 
advise the public on matters relating to health protection and risk reduction (OHLTC, n.d.; Saskatchewan 
Environment Public Health and Safety, n.d.; Nova Scotia Department of Health and Wellness, 2018; NT HSS, 
2018; Alberta Health Services, 2019; Government of Canada, 2019d; Ministère de l'Environnement et Lutte 
contre les changements climatique, 2019; Yukon Health and Social Services, 2019; Health Canada, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 337 
5.8 Impacts of Climate Change on Indoor Air 
Quality and Health
Canadians spend approximately 90% of their time indoors (Leech et al., 2002; Matz et al., 2014). Exposure 
to poor indoor air quality has been shown to cause or exacerbate a wide range of health effects, such 
as asthma, allergies, COPD, and other respiratory diseases, and certain commonly measured indoor air 
pollutants are recognized carcinogens (Zhang & Smith, 2003; Dales et al., 2008a; Hulin et al., 2012). Climate 
change, along with efforts to mitigate GHG emissions, can affect indoor air quality in a number of ways that 
have the potential to significantly affect human health in Canada. 
5.8.1 Building Airtightness
Building airtightness (also called envelope airtightness), defined as the resistance to inward or outward air 
leakage through unintentional leakage points or areas in the building envelope, is an important consideration 
for indoor air quality. Nearly two-thirds of energy use in residential and commercial buildings in Canada 
is for heating and cooling (NRCan, 2018). Since the early 1980s, the energy efficiency of Canadian homes 
has dramatically improved as a result of updated building codes as well as energy efficiency certification 
programs, including R-2000 and Energy Star (Hamlin & Gusdorf, 1997; Parekh et al., 2007). However, an 
increase in airtightness often comes at the expense of natural ventilation. Furthermore, the increased use 
of air conditioning (NRCan, 2016), which may continue to grow due to warm temperatures associated with 
climate change, can result in reduced natural ventilation, which can increase the accumulation of indoor-
generated air pollutants such as VOCs and PM2.5. Increased airtightness can also trap moisture inside homes, 
resulting in mould and the proliferation of dust mites (Bone et al., 2010). Heat-recovery ventilators offer an 
energy efficient means of providing adequate ventilation in homes (CMHC, 1998; Health Canada, 2018), 
and their use has been associated with improved health, for example, reductions in respiratory disorder 
symptoms, among occupants, according to Canadian and international studies (Leech et al., 2004; Kovesi 
et al., 2009; Maidment et al., 2014). As efforts continue in Canada to increase residential energy efficiency 
in order to support GHG mitigation, it is important to ensure that homes remain sufficiently ventilated to 
avoid poor indoor air quality and prevent adverse health outcomes associated with inadequate ventilation 
(Hernberg et al., 2014; Sharpe et al., 2015). Inadequate ventilation could also have implications for the 
transmission of infectious respiratory diseases, such as tuberculosis, which is a particular concern for First 
Nations (on- and off-reserve) and Inuit communities (Beggs et al., 2003). 
5.8.2 Impact of Changing Ambient Conditions on the 
Indoor Environment 
Changes to the outdoor environment due to climate change can alter air quality in the indoor environment. 
For example, higher outdoor ozone concentrations can result in higher concentrations of indoor pollutants, 
such as formaldehyde, acrolein, other aldehydes, acids, and ultrafine particles, as outdoor ozone has been 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 338 
shown to react with other compounds as it moves indoors (Nazaroff & Weschler, 2004; Weschler, 2006). 
Furthermore, ambient conditions, such as temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed, can also influence 
indoor air quality. For example, higher wintertime outdoor temperatures contribute to lower ventilation rates 
by reducing infiltration that results from rising warm air within a building, and strong wind gusts increase 
ventilation rates by creating a pressure differential between the inside and the outside of a building (Health 
Canada, 2018). Increased indoor temperatures resulting from higher outdoor temperatures have also 
been associated with higher air pollutant emissions rates from building materials and higher indoor VOC 
concentrations in homes (Wallace et al., 1996; Heroux et al., 2010; Xiong et al., 2013). Conversely, adaptive 
measures, such as increased home airtightness and increased use of air conditioning, could reduce the 
impact of poor ambient conditions on indoor air quality, although retaining pollutants from indoor sources 
may be an issue if ventilation is inadequate. Overall, these interactions are complex, variable, and influenced 
by building parameters and local factors. 
5.8.3 Extreme Weather Events and Wildfires
Climate change in Canada has increased the frequency of some extreme weather events (e.g., extreme heat 
events, heavy precipitation events) and is expected to continue to do so in the future (Bush & Lemmen, 2019) 
(see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). These events can have a variety of indoor air quality impacts that adversely 
affect human health. Power outages associated with extreme weather events, such as floods or severe wind 
or ice storms, may result in individuals using portable gas-powered generators, oil and gas space heaters, 
fireplaces, and/or candles indoors (Warren & Lemmen, 2014). These devices can lead to high levels of indoor 
air pollutants, such as CO, PM2.5, black carbon, ultrafine particles, NO2, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, 
which have been associated with a range of adverse health effects, including increased risk of death. For 
example, in 1998, 28 deaths reported during an ice storm that resulted in large power outages across 
much of Eastern Canada were largely attributed to CO poisoning (Hartling et al., 1998; Berry et al., 2008). 
Power outages can also lead to the failure of mechanical ventilation systems, resulting in under-ventilated 
homes and buildings and, consequently, the build-up of air pollutants generated indoors (IOM, 2011). As the 
climate continues to change, extreme weather events are expected to increase the risk of impacts to energy 
infrastructure across Canada (CEA, 2018), indicating a need for adaptive measures to mitigate the adverse 
health effects of deteriorating indoor air quality as a result of power outages.
Climate change is also projected to result in a higher frequency of heavy precipitation events, as well as 
increased storm surges and coastal flooding in Canada (Bush & Lemmen, 2019) (see Chapter 3: Natural 
Hazards and Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). Such events can result in flooding and water 
intruding into indoor space, creating conditions favourable to the growth of bacteria and fungi such as mould 
(Health Canada, 2007). For example, Hurricane Katrina in 2005 resulted in extensive proliferation of mould 
inside many homes in the affected regions of Louisiana (Solomon et al., 2005). Exposure to mould has been 
associated with eye, nose, and throat irritation; coughing and phlegm build-up; wheezing and shortness of 
breath; as well as increased prevalence of asthma symptoms (Health Canada, 2007). Furthermore, intrusion 
of water indoors can result in water damage to building materials and higher air pollutant emission rates from 
damp building materials (Korpi et al., 1998; Wolkoff, 1998; Huang et al., 2016). In 2013, a major flood in Alberta 
resulted in the evacuation of 100,000 residences and caused insured property damage that exceeded $1.74 billion 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 339 
(Insurance Bureau of Canada, 2013). Finally, renovations or repairs that follow interior water damage can result in 
higher VOC exposures due to emissions from new building materials (Weschler, 2009; ECA, 2013).
Wildfire events may also increase in severity and frequency under a changing climate, which could worsen 
both indoor and outdoor air pollution in affected areas (see section 5.6 Climate Change and Air Pollution 
from Wildfires). The impact of wildfire smoke on the indoor environment depends on a variety of housing 
characteristics; therefore, certain residences may be more affected than others. As wildfires become 
more prevalent, adaptive housing measures, such as air conditioners and stand-alone air cleaners, should 
be employed to protect occupants against the adverse health effects of wildfire smoke. For example, 
the infiltration of PM has been shown to be higher in parts of Canada with moderate climates where air 
conditioning use is less prevalent and houses are often less airtight (Clark et al., 2010). Moreover, infiltration 
of PM is lower in newer homes and residences with air cleaners (Barn et al., 2008; Hystad et al., 2009; Clark et 
al., 2010; MacNeill et al., 2012; Kearney et al., 2014; MacNeill et al., 2014; Wheeler et al., 2014).
In an emergency situation, people may need to congregate in a cleaner-air shelter. However, such shelters 
can pose unique indoor air quality challenges related to elevated CO2 levels, indoor temperatures, and relative 
humidity (Barn, 2014; Keefe, 2014; US EPA, 2016) due to high occupancy. Maintaining clean air in a shelter 
during periods of high ambient air pollution can require specific strategies such as filtration, air cleaning, 
and air conditioning (Health Canada, 2020). Public health risks from infectious diseases are also a concern 
when sheltering people during emergencies. Public health protection during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic 
has required approaches to cleaner-air shelters to be adjusted, including guidance regarding screening of 
symptomatic individuals, implementation of physical distancing, and provision of prevention supplies (US 
CDC, 2020).
5.8.4 Populations at Higher Risk
People with pre-existing health conditions are especially susceptible to the health impacts of poor indoor 
air quality (Dales et al., 2008a; To et al., 2009; Potera, 2011; Fann et al., 2016). Children have also been 
shown to be more susceptible to environmental pollutants (Faustman et al., 2000), and aging can lead to 
the deterioration of immune defences and lung function, as well as a predisposition to respiratory infections 
(Viegi et al., 2009). 
Other factors, such as an individual’s ability to adapt to or mitigate the adverse effects of climate change 
on their indoor environment can also influence their vulnerability to related health impacts. People who live 
in multi-family dwellings and/or rent their home may not be able to control temperature or humidity levels, 
which can influence indoor air quality by increasing pollutant emissions from building materials or enhancing 
the growth of mould, respectively. Renters may not be able to make modifications to their home to protect 
against water intrusion and infiltration of wildfire smoke (IOM, 2011; Romero-Lankao et al., 2014). In addition, 
those who lack financial resources or knowledge may not be able to take the necessary protective actions 
when faced with changes to their indoor air quality as a result of climate change (IOM, 2011). Poorly designed 
and poorly maintained dwellings can cause increased exposure to chemicals, moulds, and pathogens; poorly 
vented combustion apparatus contributes to acute and chronic disease; and exposure to environmental 
tobacco smoke is a significant health risk to adults and children (Sequel et al., 2017). Geographic location can 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 340 
also increase an individual’s vulnerability to health impacts, as certain areas will be more prone to extreme 
climate-related events such as flooding or wildfires (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples may experience disproportionate health impacts from poor indoor 
air quality, given the existing unequal burden of illness in some Indigenous communities. For example, 
First Nations and Inuit children have been shown to have increased rates of severe lower respiratory tract 
infections requiring hospitalization (Kovesi, 2012; McCuskee et al., 2014) and an increased prevalence 
of bronchiectasis was reported in Inuit children (Das & Kovesi, 2015). Smoking is more prevalent among 
Indigenous populations, with 27% of off-reserve First Nations, 26% of Métis, and 49% of Inuit people aged 12 
and older smoking daily, compared to 15% of non-Indigenous people (Statistics Canada, 2015). Importantly, 
while high-risk behaviours, such as smoking, have adverse health impacts, their prevalence is symptomatic of 
“deeper social and economic issues, as well as the legacy of colonialism” (ITK, 2014).
In Canada, tuberculosis rates are four times higher among Métis people, 57 times higher among First Nations 
people living on reserve, 24 times higher among First Nations people living off reserve, and 284 times higher 
among Inuit compared to Canadian-born non-Indigenous people (PHAC, 2018; Vachon et al., 2018). In 
addition, heart disease has been found to be 1.5 times higher among First Nations adults living on reserve 
compared with the general Canadian population (Indigenous Services Canada, 2018). These existing health 
inequities can compound the health risks related to climate change impacts on indoor air quality. 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples commonly experience higher rates of poverty, overcrowding in homes, 
and poor housing quality (Adelson, 2005; NCCAH, 2017; Statistics Canada, 2017), which can increase the 
risk of health impacts from poor indoor air quality. For example, 27% of First Nations people with registered 
or “Treaty Indian” status and 26% of Inuit lived in a dwelling in need of major repairs in 2016 (Statistics 
Canada, 2017), and more than half of adults in First Nations communities reported the presence of mould 
or mildew in their homes (Health Canada, 2014). Similarly, the 2011 census indicated that, among Inuit, 
one-third of all dwellings were in need of major repairs in comparison to 14% of Métis homes and 7% for the 
overall Canadian population (NCCAH, 2017). Climate change impacts on indoor air quality are expected to 
exacerbate health risks related to poor quality and overcrowded housing. 
5.8.5 Adaptation 
Adaptation strategies to address indoor air quality in Canada require a multi-faceted risk management 
approach that incorporates pollution source control, ventilation, and filtration (Poulin et al., 2016). Increasing 
the airtightness of building envelopes can contribute to a build-up of indoor air pollutants in the absence of 
adequate ventilation. This can be addressed through the installation and proper maintenance of mechanical 
ventilation systems (IOM, 2011; Poulin et al., 2016; Health Canada, 2018) as well as by reducing or eliminating 
indoor sources of air pollutants, for example, through the use of low-VOC products (Poulin et al., 2016). 
In addition, the influence of deteriorating ambient conditions can be reduced by ensuring a tightly sealed 
building envelope, using air conditioning and stand-alone air cleaning devices, as well as by installing 
high-efficiency filters on furnaces. Many of these measures may be inaccessible to some individuals and 
subpopulations across the country, including Indigenous communities, due to social inequities that result 
in inadequate housing, low socio-economic status, and insufficient resources to implement protective 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 341 
measures. Government actions to improve ambient air quality will also help to improve air quality in the 
indoor environment (Poulin et al., 2016). 
Flood-prevention measures can also mitigate or reduce home damage from flood and other water infiltration 
events (Warren & Lemmen, 2014). Furthermore, installation of CO alarms in every residence can help prevent 
deaths from CO poisoning during power outages. Finally, targeted actions such as increased poison control 
and other medical services, as well as support for building and infrastructure improvements, provided to rural, 
geographically affected, or low-income communities can help protect those who may be at increased risk. 
5.8.6 Key Uncertainties 
There are several key uncertainties regarding the magnitude of climate change impacts on indoor air quality 
in Canada. For example, climate change may affect patterns of activity, resulting in people spending more 
time indoors in some conditions and more time outdoors in others. The Canadian housing stock may change 
as environmental sustainability and climate resilience are increasingly considered. This might include more 
construction that meets standards such as net zero (buildings that generate as much on-site renewable 
energy as they consume [Singh et al., 2019]) or passive homes (ultralow-energy building design [Wright & 
Klingenberg, 2015]), or result in the development of novel building materials engineered to withstand water 
damage or increase fire resistance. It also remains unclear whether the new adaptive strategies available 
to homeowners will be adopted and implemented, what forces will drive them (e.g., costs, insurance 
requirements, etc.), and whether they will be sufficient to mitigate the indoor air quality issues associated 
with climate change. 
5.9 Impacts of Climate Change on Aeroallergens
5.9.1 Impact of Climate Change on Pollen Concentrations, Distribution, 
and Seasonal Length in Canada
The levels of aeroallergens, including tree pollen, grass pollen, ragweed pollen, and fungal spores are 
increasing in specific regions of the world and in Canada, and some of this increase has been linked to 
climate change (Ariano et al., 2010; Sierra-Heredia et al., 2018; Ziska et al., 2019). The timing and seasonal 
length of aeroallergens, as well as the production and allergenic content of pollen grains, will continue to be 
affected by climate change (see Figure 5.6) (Ariano et al., 2010; Ziska & Beggs, 2012; Bonofiglio et al., 2013). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 342 
Figure 5.6 Effects of climate change on aeroallergens in Canada.
Due to climate change and related increases in CO2 emissions, temperatures will increase and, as a result, 
aeroallergen seasons will start earlier and end later (Traidl-Hoffmann et al., 2003; D'Amato et al., 2014; 
Rice et al., 2014; D'Amato et al., 2016). In North America, the ragweed pollen season was found to have 
increased by 27 days between 1995 and 2009 due to warming temperatures (Takaro et al., 2013). In addition, 
increases in the atmospheric concentrations of CO2 can affect the reproductive processes of plants, which 
will increase the production of pollen (Taylor et al., 2007; Shea et al., 2008; Ariano et al., 2010; Ariano et 
al., 2015; Bjerg et al., 2016). Moreover, there is evidence that higher growing temperatures and increased 
CO2 emissions can increase the allergenicity (ability to induce an allergic response) of pollen, and climate 
change will enhance this effect (Beggs, 2004; Stach et al., 2007). Climate change will also affect regional 
changes in meteorological variables (e.g., humidity, precipitation, and temperature) linked to pollen dispersal 
and deposition (D'Amato et al., 2015). These regional climate changes will also affect plant distribution, as 
species that could not survive in previously hostile environments can potentially thrive because of changes in 
temperature and precipitation (Stach et al., 2007). Changes in the dispersal patterns of aeroallergens, longer 
pollen seasons, greater production of pollen grains, and increased allergenicity will lead to changes in human 
exposure and possibly in sensitization of individuals to allergens (Breton et al., 2006; Reid & Gamble, 2009; 
Bonofiglio et al., 2013). The magnitude of the impact on aeroallergens and related health effects depends, 
in part, on the effectiveness of adaptation actions. Adaptation strategies can help to reduce exposure to 
aeroallergens; for instance, research conducted in the province of Quebec showed that reducing pollen-
producing plants in an area could reduce exposure to aeroallergens (Demers & Gosselin, 2019).
5.9.2 Health Effects of Changes in Aeroallergens Under Climate 
Change Scenarios
Approximately 20% to 25% of the Canadian population is affected by allergic rhinitis, which is most commonly 
due to pollen allergy (Vaitla & Drewe, 2011; Keith et al., 2012). Asthma affects between 12% to 25% of 
Canadian children and is estimated to affect about 3 million Canadians overall (Asher et al., 2006; Gershon 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 343 
et al., 2010; Ismaila et al., 2013; Sierra-Heredia et al., 2018). About two-thirds of asthmatic individuals are 
allergic to aeroallergens, which act as triggers for asthma exacerbations (Lafeuille et al., 2013). A number 
of studies in Canada have evaluated the health effects of day-to-day fluctuations in aeroallergens. Ambient 
aeroallergens, including tree pollen, grass pollen, ragweed pollen, and fungal spores, have been associated 
with increased risk of asthma-related and allergic rhinitis-related emergency department visits and 
hospitalizations in cities across Canada (Dales et al., 2000; Cakmak et al., 2002; Dales et al., 2004; Dales 
et al., 2008b; Heguy et al., 2008), as well as an increased risk of myocardial infarction among the elderly 
(Weichenthal et al., 2016), and earlier delivery among term pregnancies (Lavigne et al., 2017). In addition, 
high aeroallergen counts during the gestational period have been associated with increased risk of atopic 
disease in the child later in life (Lowe et al., 2012). As climate change continues to intensify, it is anticipated 
that allergy sufferers will experience increased exposure to aeroallergens in Canada. The incidence and 
prevalence of respiratory allergies and asthma are therefore projected to increase, which will be associated 
with an increase in health care expenses to treat these conditions (Sierra-Heredia et al., 2018).
5.9.3 Adaptation 
For individuals suffering from seasonal aeroallergens, aeroallergen alert systems that provide knowledge 
of current or forecast pollen levels may aid in efforts to choose the right medications to treat symptoms 
(Lougheed et al., 2010; D'Amato et al., 2015). Health care providers can discuss optimal therapies for allergic 
rhinitis with their patients. For example, there is evidence that efficacies of prescribed and over-the-counter 
medications for allergic rhinitis are enhanced if they are taken consistently or before symptom onset (Kim et 
al., 2008; Keith et al., 2012). In addition, reminders and warnings that the aeroallergen season is approaching 
may allow Canadians to ensure that they have visited a health care provider, refilled prescriptions, and begun 
taking preventive medications according to their management plan (Johnston et al., 2018). 
An aeroallergen alert system is also a beneficial communication strategy to advise people at risk to control 
their exposure when aeroallergen levels are high (Sierra-Heredia et al., 2018). In Canada, daily aeroallergen 
forecasts are provided by Aerobiology Research Laboratories (ARL) through the Weather Network 
(Aerobiology Research Laboratories, 2019a; The Weather Network, 2019). A free application provided by 
ARL can also be downloaded on a smart phone in order to obtain forecasts of pollen and fungal spores 
(Aerobiology Research Laboratories, 2019b). Other potential risk-mitigation strategies at a population level 
include the greening of cities with trees and species that minimize allergenicity for people exposed (Fuertes 
et al., 2016; Carinanos et al., 2017; Fong et al., 2018). Strategies in the province of Quebec have shown that 
engaging various partners at the municipal level in synchronizing their ragweed-control actions can reduce 
exposure to ragweed pollen (Demers & Gosselin, 2019). This includes mowing regularly, applying low-impact 
herbicides, and planting a competitive plant cover to prevent the spread of ragweed.
5.9.4 Key Uncertainties
Although several studies have identified health effects associated with exposure to aeroallergens, key 
uncertainties remain. A better understanding of the spatial coverage of aeroallergens and interactions with 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 344 
air pollutants and urban green spaces is needed to provide information that at-risk populations can use to 
modify their exposures and to shape urban greening initiatives (D'Amato et al., 2015; Sierra-Heredia et al., 
2018). Additional information on the health benefits and effectiveness of adaptation strategies, such as 
the use of alert systems and aeroallergen control actions, is also needed. Further studies examining long-
term impacts of climate change on aeroallergens would help to explain regional differences and increase 
understanding of the key characteristics of climate change on pollen load and seasonal length (Ziska et al., 
2019). Projections of the impacts of climate change on future levels of aeroallergens are also required. 
5.10 Conclusion
5.10.1 Climate Change and Air Quality Health Impacts in Canada
Climate change and air quality are intimately linked; a warming climate can worsen air pollution (i.e., the 
climate penalty), and some air pollutants, including ozone and components of PM2.5, can affect the climate 
and enhance warming. GHGs and air pollutants are also derived from common sources linked to fossil fuel 
combustion; therefore, strategies to address one may have important co-benefits of reducing emissions of 
the other. 
Air pollution is the leading environmental cause of death in Canada, contributing to an estimated 15,300 
deaths annually, along with many non-fatal outcomes (Health Canada, 2021). Recent research indicates 
that the adverse effects of air pollution extend beyond cardiorespiratory impacts, linking exposure to varied 
outcomes such as diabetes, dementia, and reproductive health. Even small increases in exposure to air 
pollution are associated with an increased risk of adverse health impacts. The broad range of adverse health 
effects caused by air pollution, along with the ubiquitous and involuntary nature of air pollution exposure, 
highlight the importance of air quality management as a key public health issue.
Studies that have quantified the climate penalty in terms of air pollution health impacts under various climate 
projections have focused primarily on ozone, with some addressing PM2.5 as well. Analyses undertaken for 
this assessment estimate hundreds of excess annual deaths due to air pollution in 2050, associated with 
the impact of climate change on air pollution, primarily in Ontario and Quebec, with a net social value of 
$2.7 billion. Similarly, studies in the United States have reported hundreds to thousands of excess annual air 
pollution deaths later this century associated with a warming climate.
Importantly, many studies have reported the considerable potential air pollution health co-benefits of 
pursuing climate change mitigation strategies that target either long-lived climate pollutants (e.g., CO2) or 
short-lived climate forcers (e.g., black carbon or methane). Although climate benefits of near-term GHG 
emission reductions may only be realized in the mid- to long-term and generally occur globally, the public 
health benefits of the associated reductions in air pollutant emissions would be realized immediately and 
locally where the emission reductions are implemented. In addition, these benefits can have a large social 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 345 
value, which can offset a portion of the GHG mitigation costs. Incorporating air quality health co-benefits into 
climate change mitigation policy provides additional justification for pursuing more stringent or accelerated 
reduction measures to address climate change. Joint consideration of options to reduce both GHG and air 
pollution emissions would contribute to the strategic development of policies that optimize both and help 
to avoid unintended negative consequences, such as inadvertent increases in air pollution emissions from 
implementation of GHG mitigation strategies. 
Wildfires have become an important source of air pollution in Canada, and increasing wildfire emissions 
due to climate change represent one of the most significant risks to air quality. It is expected that wildfire 
frequency, severity, and distribution will change under a warming climate, resulting in higher emissions, 
and the evidence suggests that some of the current increased wildfire activity can already be attributed to 
climate change. Exposure to wildfire smoke affects respiratory health, while the evidence for cardiovascular 
outcomes remains inconclusive. A Canadian analysis estimates 620 to 2700 annual deaths attributable to 
wildfire emissions during the 2013 to 2018 period, with an annual net social value ranging from $4.7 billion 
to $21 billion, as well as many non-fatal cardiorespiratory effects. Overall, the greatest impacts were noted 
in British Columbia and Alberta, although during the 2013 fire season the greatest impacts were reported 
in Ontario and Quebec. Although the highest air pollution concentrations are expected to occur closer to 
the fires, smoke plumes can spread over vast areas of the country, affecting population centres far from 
the sources. For example, 20% to 30% of the Canadian population was exposed to average wildfire PM2.5 
concentrations of 1 μg/m3 or more during the May to September season in 2014, 2015, 2017, and 2018. The 
current air pollution health impacts of wildfire smoke are expected to increase under climate change, making 
this an important public health issue.
Canadians spend 90% of their time indoors, and climate change is expected to impact indoor air quality in 
a variety of ways. It is anticipated that climate change will include more frequent extreme weather events, 
which raise the risk of health effects from mould due to flooding, smoke from wildfires, and indoor air 
pollution from the inappropriate use of combustion sources, among other impacts. In addition, increased 
home airtightness associated with improved energy efficiency requires sufficient ventilation to ensure 
pollutants do not accumulate indoors. Conversely, under conditions of poor outdoor air pollution, impacts on 
indoor air quality can be mitigated through increased home airtightness and the use of air conditioning and 
filtration. Economic resources are typically needed to take protective measures, such as increasing home 
airtightness and ventilation. Thus, low-income households and socially disadvantaged communities may face 
challenges with implementing such measures. 
Ambient levels of aeroallergens, including pollen and fungal spores, have been associated with increased 
risk of asthma-related and allergic rhinitis-related hospital visits in Canada, as well as other adverse effects. 
Warming temperatures, changing weather conditions, and rising atmospheric CO2 levels result in increases 
in pollen counts, season length, and allergenicity, as well as changes to species distribution. Asthma affects 
about 3 million Canadians, including 12% to 25% of children, while approximately one-quarter of Canadians 
suffer from allergic rhinitis. Both of these conditions are commonly triggered by aeroallergens. The incidence 
and prevalence of asthma and allergic rhinitis are projected to increase with climate change.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 346 
5.10.2 Populations at Higher Risk
The scientific evidence indicates that multiple subpopulations are at increased risk from the adverse health 
effects of air pollution and aeroallergens and would therefore likely be more affected by worsening outdoor 
air pollution, wildfire smoke, indoor air pollution, and airborne allergen concentrations resulting from a 
changing climate.
Some groups are more susceptible to air pollutants due to age (children and seniors), pre-existing disease 
(e.g., asthma, COPD, or heart disease) or genetic predispositions. Growing evidence of air pollution effects on 
reproductive outcomes, diabetes, and progression of cardiac disease, among other health effects, suggests 
that a large proportion of the population may be at elevated risk. Other groups may be at higher risk due 
to elevated exposures because of where they live or how much time they spend outdoors, including for 
occupational purposes. A recent study estimates that one-third of the Canadian population has a least one 
risk factor making them at greater risk than the general population to the adverse effects of ozone and PM2.5, 
highlighting the need for risk communication and interventions to manage air quality to target both highly 
exposed and more susceptible populations (Stieb et al., 2019). 
Key populations at higher risk from the increasing pollen exposure and allergenicity expected under climate 
change include those with asthma and allergic rhinitis, and recent evidence suggests that other populations, 
including those with heart disease, may also be affected.
Importantly, in Canada, Indigenous populations bear a disproportionately higher burden of respiratory 
diseases, including asthma and COPD, than the general population, increasing their susceptibility to outdoor 
air pollution, wildfire smoke, indoor air pollution, and aeroallergens. Multiple, compounding health inequities 
(see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity) may further contribute to higher vulnerability. Indigenous 
Peoples living in remote communities may also be more likely to experience high levels of wildfire smoke. 
5.10.3 Adaptation
A key goal of air quality management in Canada is continuous improvement, through reductions in air 
pollutant emissions across multiple sectors (CCME, 2019). However, additional programs have been 
developed to address the health risks of air pollution by reducing exposure, and these programs will become 
increasingly important to counterbalance the expected negative impacts of climate change. 
The AQHI serves as a health-protection tool designed to help Canadians make decisions to protect their 
health by limiting short-term exposure to outdoor air pollution. The AQHI reports current and forecast 
conditions daily for communities across Canada and provides specific advice related to air quality levels 
associated with low, moderate, high, and very high health risks, including for susceptible individuals. In 
addition, local authorities use air quality alerts or advisories under high-risk conditions. The AQHI does not 
measure effects from heat, and there is currently only limited integration of heat and air quality messages for 
the public in Canada. The Government of Canada also provides forecasts of wildfire PM2.5 levels for the next 
48 hours, which include mapping of predicted smoke paths, and fire smoke air quality alerts are issued when 
necessary. The British Columbia Centre for Disease Control has implemented an alternative version of the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 347 
AQHI during the wildfire season to better reflect risks during wildfire smoke events, and multiple provinces 
and territories have information for protecting community health from wildfire smoke. 
Enhancing urban green space can have multiple co-benefits for health, including direct positive health 
impacts as well as a role in attenuating exposure to air pollution and contributing to the reduction of the 
urban heat island effect.
Adaptation strategies to address indoor air quality in Canada under a changing climate will require a multi-
faceted risk management approach that incorporates control of indoor sources of air pollutants, adequate 
ventilation under increasing home airtightness, and air filtration. Flood-prevention strategies would help to 
mitigate mould caused by water damage, and increased use of CO detection would help to prevent deaths 
from CO poisoning during power outages. In addition, targeting actions to rural, geographically affected, or 
low-income communities can help to protect populations at higher risk.
Daily aeroallergen forecasts, which can aid in reducing exposure to aeroallergens and optimization of 
pharmacotherapy for allergy sufferers, are currently provided in Canada by ARL through the Weather Network. 
Community-based adaptation strategies to reduce pollen levels could include urban greening with low-
allergenicity species. A project in Quebec has shown that municipal-level partnerships may be effective in 
coordinating multiple control strategies to address ragweed, a common allergen species.
5.10.4 Knowledge Gaps
Several important knowledge gaps remain in understanding of how the health of Canadians will be affected 
by air quality under a changing climate. Integrated modelling of climate change and air quality, including the 
effects of climate parameters on PM2.5 levels, is needed to improve understanding of both the population 
health impacts associated with the climate penalty and the potentially large air quality health co-benefits of 
GHG mitigation measures. The impact of changing climatic conditions on biogenic emissions needs to be 
better understood and incorporated into air quality models. In addition, an overall synthesis and comparison 
of the potential air quality co-benefits of multiple IPCC climate mitigation pathways remain difficult because 
studies to date have used different approaches, assumptions, and modelling methodologies. Aligning future 
study methodologies would provide improved information for pursuing climate change mitigation policies. 
Improved capacity to model wildfire smoke exposure and to understand interactions between climate 
and wildfire risk is required to inform projections of wildfire smoke health impacts under climate change. 
Improved understanding of the range of adverse health effects associated with air pollution exposure, 
including whether the health effects of wildfire smoke are different from those of ambient air pollution, would 
provide a more comprehensive assessment of the population health impacts and identify populations at 
higher risk.
Although it is well known that Canadians spend 90% of their time indoors, characterizing pollutant exposures 
indoors and the associated health risks is challenging. Changing climate conditions, as well as mitigation and 
adaptation measures, increase the complexity of this problem. There is a need for research that supports the 
assessment of the health implications of changing environmental conditions and which can guide healthy 
building design, energy saving, ventilation, and material selection.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 348 
Recent research suggests that the spectrum of health impacts associated with airborne allergen exposure 
may go beyond respiratory outcomes, which may help to identify new susceptible groups. A better 
understanding of aeroallergen distribution and interactions with air pollutants and green space would help to 
inform urban greening initiatives and adaptation measures to protect populations at higher risk. 
Finally, further research is required to inform the development of effective adaptation and risk mitigation 
strategies for wildfire smoke, indoor air quality, and aeroallergens under a changing climate to better protect 
the health of Canadians.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 349 
5.11 References
Abelsohn, A., & Stieb, D. M. (2011). Health effects of outdoor air 
pollution: approach to counseling patients using the Air Quality 
Health Index. Canadian family physician, 57(8), 881–e287.
Adelson, N. (2005). The embodiment of inequity: health 
disparities in aboriginal Canada. Canadian journal of public 
health, 96(2), S45–S61. <https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03403702>
Adetona, O., Reinhardt, T.E., Domitrovich, J., Broyles, G., Adetona, 
A. M., Kleinman, M.T., Ottmar, R. D., & Naeher, L. P. (2016). 
Review of the health effects of wildland fire smoke on wildland 
firefighters and the public. Inhalation Toxicology, 28(3), 95-139. 
doi:10.3109/08958378.2016.1145771
Aerobiology Research Laboratories. (2019a). Retrieved from 
<https://www.pollenexperts.ca/what-we-do/>
Aerobiology Research Laboratories. (2019b). Personalized pollen 
reports. Retrieved from <https://www.pollenexperts.ca/get-
involved/#gettheapps>
Alam, S., Lang, J. J., Drucker, A.M., Gotay, C., Kozloff, N., Mate, 
K., Patten, S.B., Orpana, H. M., Afshin, A., & Cahill, L. E. (2019). 
Assessment of the burden of diseases and injuries attributable 
to risk factors in Canada from 1990 to 2016: an analysis of the 
Global Burden of Disease Study. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal Open, 7(1), E140-E148. doi:10.9778/cmajo.20180137
Albert-Green, A., Dean, C. B., Martell, D. L., & Woolford, D. G. 
(2013). A methodology for investigating trends in changes in the 
timing of the fire season with applications to lightning-caused 
forest fires in Alberta and Ontario, Canada. Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research, 43(1), 39-45. doi:10.1139/cjfr-2011-0432
Alberta Health Services. (2019). Frequently Asked Questions: 
Wildfires / Air Quality due to Wildfire Smoke. Government of 
Alberta. Retrieved from <https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/
assets/wf/eph/wf-eph-wildfire-smoke-health.pdf> 
Amann, M., Klimont, Z., & Wagner F. (2013). Regional and global 
emissions of air pollutants: Recent trends and future scenarios. 
Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 38, 31-55. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-052912-173303
Amiro, B. D., Cantin, A., Flannigan, M. D., & de Groot, W. (2009). 
Future Emissions from Canadian Boreal Forest Fires. Canadian 
Journal of Forest Research, 39, 383-395. doi:10.1139/X08-154
Anderson, V. (2016). A Harmonized Heat Warning and 
Information System for Ontario (HWIS) Standard Operating 
Practice. Toronto, ON: Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-term 
Care. Retrieved from <http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/common/
ministry/publications/reports/heat_warning_information_
system/heat_warning_information_system.aspx>
Ariano, R., Berra, D., Chiodini, E., Ortolani, V., Cremonte, L. G., 
Mazzarello, M. G., Galdi E., Calosso C., & Ciprandi, G. (2015). 
Ragweed allergy: Pollen count and sensitization and allergy 
prevalence in two Italian allergy centers. Allergy & Rhinology 
(Providence, R.I.), 6(3), 177-183. doi:10.2500/ar.2015.6.0141
Ariano, R., Canonica, G. W., & Passalacqua, G. (2010). Possible 
role of climate changes in variations in pollen seasons and 
allergic sensitizations during 27 years. Annals of Allergy, Asthma 
& Immunology: Official Publication of the American College of 
Allergy, Asthma, & Immunology, 104(3), 215-222. doi:10.1016/j.
anai.2009.12.005
Asher, M. I., Montefort, S., Bjorksten, B., Lai, C. K., Strachan, D. P., 
Weiland, S. K., Williams, H., & ISAAC Phase Three Study Group. 
(2006). Worldwide time trends in the prevalence of symptoms 
of asthma, allergic rhinoconjunctivitis, and eczema in childhood: 
ISAAC phases one and three repeat multicountry cross-sectional 
surveys. Lancet (London, England), 368(9537), 733-743. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69283-0> 
Baldauf, R. (2016): Recommendations for Constructing 
Roadside Vegetation Barriers to Improve Near-Road Air Quality, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC, 
EPA/600/R-16/072. <https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_
report.cfm?Lab=NRMRL&dirEntryId=321772&simpleSearch=1
&searchAll=Recommendations+for+constructing+
roadside+vegetation+barriers+to+improve+near+
road+air+quality> [November 2020]
Barn, P. (2014). Evidence review: Home and community clean 
air shelters to protect public health during wildfire smoke 
events (C. Elliott, & K. Rideout, Eds). BC Centre for Disease 
Control. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.ca/resourcegallery/
Documents/Guidelines%20and%20Forms/Guidelines%20
and%20Manuals/Health-Environment/WFSG_EvidenceReview_
CleanAirShelters_FINAL_v3_edstrs.pdf>
Barn, P., Larson, T., Noullett, M., Kennedy, S., Copes R., & Brauer, 
M. (2008). Infiltration of forest fire and residential wood smoke: 
an evaluation of air cleaner effectiveness. Journal of Exposure 
Science and Environmental Epidemiology, 18(5), 503-511. 
doi:10.1038/sj.jes.7500640
Barnes, E. A., Fiore, A. M., & Horowitz, L. W. (2016). Detection of 
trends in surface ozone in the presence of climate variability. 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 121(10), 6112 – 
6129, doi:10.1002/2015jd024397
BC Centre for Disease Control (BC CDC). (2014). Wildfire Smoke 
Response Planning. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.ca/
health-professionals/professional-resources/wildfire-smoke-
response-planning>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 350 
BC Centre for Disease Control (BC CDC). (2019). The burning 
reality of wildfire smoke and its public health impacts. Retrieved 
from <http://www.bccdc.ca/about/news-stories/stories/the-
burning-reality-of-wildfire-smoke-and-its-public-health-impacts>
Beggs, C. B., Noakes, C. J., Sleigh, P. A., Fletcher, L. A., & Siddiqi, 
K. (2003). The transmission of tuberculosis in confined spaces: 
an analytical review of alternative epidemiological models. The 
International Journal of Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, 7(11), 
1015-26.
Beggs, P. J. (2004). Impacts of climate change on aeroallergens: 
Past and future. Clinical and Experimental Allergy. Journal of the 
British Society for Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 34(10), 1507-
1513. doi:10.1111/j.1365-2222.2004.02061.x
Bell M. L., Goldberg R., Hogrefe C., Kinney P. L., Knowlton K., 
Lynn B., Rosenthal J., Rosenzweig C., & Patz, J. A. (2007). 
Climate change, ambient ozone, and health in 50 US cities. 
Climatic Change, 82, 61–76. doi: 10.1007/s10584-006-9166-7
Benmarhnia, T., Mathlouthi, F., & Smargiassi, A. (2013). Health 
impacts of particles from forest fires. Institut National de Santé 
Publique du Québec. Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/
pdf/publications/1793_Health_Impacts_Forest_Fires.pdf> 
Berry, P., McBean, G., & Seguin, J. (2008). Vulnerabilities to 
natural hazards and extreme weather. In J. Seguin (Ed.), Human 
Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of 
Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity (pp. 43-112). Ottawa, 
ON: Health Canada. <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2008/hc-sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf>
Bjerg, A., Ekerljung, L., Eriksson, J., Näslund, J., Sjölander, S., 
Rönmark, E., Dahl, Å., Holmberg, K., Wennergren, G., Torén, K., 
Borres, M. P., Lötvall, J., & Lundbäck, B. (2016). Increase in 
pollen sensitization in Swedish adults and protective effect 
of keeping animals in childhood. Clinical and Experimental 
Allergy: Journal of the British Society for Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, 46(10), 1328–1336. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
cea.12757>
Black, C., Tesfaigzi, Y., Bassein, J. A., & Miller, L. A. (2017). 
Wildfire smoke exposure and human health: significant gaps 
in research for a growing public health issue. Environmental 
Toxicology and Pharmacology, 55, 186-195. doi:10.1016/j.
etap.2017.08.022
Bond, T. C., Doherty, S. J., Fahey, D. W., Forster, P. M., Berntsen, 
T., DeAngelo, B. J., Flanner, M. G., Ghan, S., Kärcher, B., Koch, D., 
Kinne, S., Kondo, Y., Quinn, P. K., Sarofim, M. C., Schultz, M. G., 
Schulz, M., Venkataraman, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, S., Bellouin, N.,…
Zender, C. S. (2013). Bounding the role of black carbon in the 
climate system: A scientific assessment. Journal of Geophysical 
Research: Atmospheres, 118, 5380–5552, doi:10.1002/
jgrd.50171.
Bone, A., Murray, V., Myers, I., Dengel, A., & Crump, D. (2010). 
Will drivers for home energy efficiency harm occupant 
health? Perspectives in Public Health, 130(5), 233-238. 
doi:10.1177/1757913910369092
Bonofiglio, T., Orlandi, F., Ruga, L., Romano, B., & Fornaciari, 
M. (2013). Climate change impact on the olive pollen season 
in Mediterranean areas of Italy: Air quality in late spring from 
an allergenic point of view. Environmental Monitoring and 
Assessment, 185(1), 877-890. doi:10.1007/s10661-012-2598-9
Boucher, O., Randall D., Artaxo P., Bretherton C., Feingold G., 
Forster P., Kerminen V.-M., Kondo Y., Liao H., Lohmann U., 
Rasch P., Satheesh S. K., Sherwood S., Stevens B., & Zhang X. 
Y. (2013). Clouds and Aerosols. In T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. 
Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. 
Bex, & P. M. Midgley (Eds.), Climate Change 2013: The Physical 
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (pp. 571-658). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, doi:10.1017/
CBO9781107415324.016
Boulanger, Y., Gauthier S., & Burton P. J. (2014). A refinement 
of models projecting future Canadian fire regimes using 
homogeneous fire regime zones. Canadian Journal of Forest 
Research, 44, 365 – 376, doi:/10.1139/cjfr-2013-0372.
Breton, M. C., Garneau, M., Fortier, I., Guay, F., & Louis, J. (2006). 
Relationship between climate, pollen concentrations of ambrosia 
and medical consultations for allergic rhinitis in Montreal, 
1994-2002. The Science of the Total Environment, 370(1), 39-50. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2006.05.022> 
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/>
Cakmak, S., Dales, R. E., Burnett, R. T., Judek, S., Coates, F., & 
Brook, J. R. (2002). Effect of airborne allergens on emergency 
visits by children for conjunctivitis and rhinitis. Lancet (London, 
England), 359(9310), 947-948. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(02)08045-5>
Camalier, L., Cox, W., & Dolwick P. (2007). The effects of 
meteorology on ozone in urban areas and their use in assessing 
ozone trends. Atmospheric Environment, 41(33), 7127–7137. 
doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2007.04.061.
Cames, M., & Helmers, E. (2013). Critical evaluation of the 
European diesel car boom – global comparison, environmental 
effects and various national strategies. Environmental Sciences 
Europe, 25, 15. doi:10.1186/2190-4715-25-15
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). 
(2014). Resources: AQMS. Retrieved from <https://www.ccme.
ca/en/resources/air/aqms.html>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 351 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment (CCME). 
(2019). Guidance Document on Air Zone Management. Retrieved 
from <https://www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/air/Guidance%20
Document%20on%20Air%20Zone%20Management.pdf>
Canadian Electricity Association (CEA). (2018). Climate 
Change adaptation. Retrieved from <https://electricity.ca/lead/
protecting-our-environment/climate-change-adaptation/>
Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC). (1998). 
Field Survey of Heat Recovery Ventilation Systems Final Report. 
Ottawa, ON: Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
Research Division. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/
collections/collection_2011/schl-cmhc/nh18-1/NH18-1-90-
1998-eng.pdf>
Cariñanos, P., Casares-Porcel, M., Díaz de la Guardia, C., Aira, 
M. J., Belmonte, J., Boi, M., Elvira-Rendueles, B., De Linares, C., 
Fernández-Rodriguez, S., Maya-Manzano, J. M., Pérez-Badía, 
R., Rodriguez-de la Cruz, D., Rodríguez-Rajo, F. J., Rojo-Úbeda, 
J., Romero-Zarco, C., Sánchez-Reyes, E., Sánchez-Sánchez, 
J., Tormo-Molina, R., & Vega Maray, A. M. (2017). Assessing 
allergenicity in urban parks: A nature-based solution to reduce 
the impact on public health. Environmental Research, 155, 
219–227. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2017.02.015>
Carrière, G. M., Garner, R., & Sanmartin, C. (2017). Housing 
conditions and respiratory hospitalizations among First Nations 
People in Canada. Health Reports (Catalogue no. 82-003-X). 
Ottawa, ON: Statistics Canada. Retrieved from <https://www150.
statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/82-003-x/2017004/article/14789-eng.pdf>
Cascio, W. E. (2018). Wildland fire smoke and human health. 
Science of the Total Environment, 624, 586-595. doi:10.1007/
s10393-004-0149-8
Chand, D., Wood, R., Anderson, T. L., Satheesh, S. K., & Charlson, 
R. J. (2009). Satellite-derived direct radiative effect of aerosols 
dependent on cloud cover. Nature Geoscience, 2, 181 -184. doi: 
10.1038/NGEO437
Chen, H., Burnett, R. T., Kwong, J. C., Villeneuve, P. J., Goldberg, 
M. S., Brook, R. D., van Donkelaar, A., Jerrett, M., Martin, R. V., 
Brook, J. R., & Copes, R. (2013a). Risk of incident diabetes in 
relation to long-term exposure to fine particulate matter in 
Ontario, Canada. Environmental Health Perspectives, 121(7), 804-
810. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1205958
Chen, H., Li, Q., Kaufman, J. S., Wang, J., Copes, R., Su, Y., & 
Benmarhnia, T. (2018). Effect of air quality alerts on human 
health: a regression discontinuity analysis in Toronto, Canada. 
The Lancet Planetary Health, 2(1), e19-e26. doi:10.1016/S2542-
5196(17)30185-7
Chen, R., Wang, X., Meng, X., Hua, J., Zhou, Z., Chen, B., & Kan, 
H. (2013b). Communicating air pollution-related health risks 
to the public: An application of the Air Quality Health Index in 
Shanghai, China. Environment international, 51, 168-173. doi.
org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.11.008
Clark, N. A., Allen, R. W., Hystad, P., Wallace, L., Dell, S.D., Foty, 
R., Dabek-Zlotorzynska, E., Evans, G., & Wheeler, A. J. (2010). 
Exploring variation and predictors of residential fine particulate 
matter infiltration. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 7(8), 3211-3224. doi: 10.3390/
ijerph7083211
Climate and Clean Air Coalition (CCAC). (2020). Why we need to 
act now. Retrieved from <ccacoalition.org/en/content/why-we-
need-act-now>
Cooper, O. R., Parrish D. D., Ziemke J., Balashov N. V., Cupeiro 
M., Galbally I. E., Gilge S., Horowitz L., Jensen N. R., Lamarque 
J.-F.,. Naik V, Oltmans S. J., Schwab J., Shindell D. T., Thompson 
A. M., Thouret V., Wang Y., & Zbinden R. M. (2014). Global 
distribution and trends of tropospheric ozone: An observation-
based review. Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene, 2, 000029. 
doi:/10.12952/journal.elementa.000029.
Coumou, D., Di Capua G., Vavrus S., Wang L., & Wang S. (2018). 
The influence of Arctic amplification on mid-latitude summer 
circulation. Nature Communications, 9(1), 2959. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-018-05256-8.
Crouse, D. L., Pinault, L., Balram, A., Brauer, M., Burnett, R. T., 
Martin, R. V., van Donkelaar, A., Villeneuve, P. J., & Weichenthal, 
S. (2019). Complex relationships between greenness, air 
pollution, and mortality in a population-based Canadian cohort. 
Environment International, 128, 292-300. doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2019.04.047
Dales, R., Liu, L., Wheeler, A. J., & Gilbert, N. L. (2008a). Quality of 
indoor residential air and health. Canadian Medical Association 
journal = Journal de l’Association Médicale Canadienne, 179(2), 
147–152. <https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.070359>
Dales, R. E., Cakmak, S., Burnett, R. T., Judek, S., Coates, F., 
& Brook, J. R. (2000). Influence of ambient fungal spores 
on emergency visits for asthma to a regional children’s 
hospital. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine, 162(6), 2087–2090. <https://doi.org/10.1164/
ajrccm.162.6.2001020>
Dales, R. E., Cakmak, S., Judek, S., & Coates, F. (2008b). 
Tree pollen and hospitalization for asthma in urban Canada. 
International Archives of Allergy and Immunology, 146(3), 241-
247. doi:10.1159/000116360 
Dales, R. E., Cakmak, S., Judek, S., Dann, T., Coates, F., Brook, J. 
R., & Burnett, R. T. (2004). Influence of outdoor aeroallergens 
on hospitalization for asthma in Canada. The Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology, 113(2), 303-306. doi:10.1016/j.
jaci.2003.11.016
D’Amato, G., Bergmann, K. C., Cecchi, L., Annesi-Maesano, I., 
Sanduzzi, A., Liccardi, G., Vitale, C., Stanziola, A., & D’Amato, 
M. (2014). Climate change and air pollution: Effects on pollen 
allergy and other allergic respiratory diseases. Allergo Journal 
International, 23(1), 17-23. doi:10.1007/s40629-014-0003-7
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 352 
D’Amato, G., Holgate, S. T., Pawankar, R., Ledford, D. K., Cecchi, 
L., Al-Ahmad, M., Al-Enezi, F., Al-Muhsen, S., Ansotegui, I., Baena-
Cagnani, C. E., Baker, D. J., Bayram, H., Bergmann, K. C., Boulet, 
L.-P., buters, J. T. M., D’amato, M., dorsano, S., Douwes, J., Finlay, 
S. E., Garrasi, D., …. Annesi-Maesano, I. (2015). Meteorological 
conditions, climate change, new emerging factors, and asthma 
and related allergic disorders. A statement of the world allergy 
organization. The World Allergy Organization Journal, 8(1), 25. 
doi:10.1186/s40413-015-0073-0
D’Amato, G., Vitale, C., Lanza, M., Molino, A., & D’Amato, 
M. (2016). Climate change, air pollution, and allergic 
respiratory diseases: An update. Current Opinion in Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology, 16(5), 434-440. doi:10.1097/
ACI.0000000000000301
Das, L., & Kovesi, T. A. (2015). Bronchiectasis in children 
from Qikiqtani (Baffin) Region, Nunavut, Canada. Annals of 
the American Thoracic Society, 12(1), 96–100. <https://doi.
org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201406-257OC>
Dawson, J. P., Adams P. J., & Pandis S. N. (2007). Sensitivity 
of PM2.5 to climate in the Eastern US: a modeling case 
study. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 7, 4295 – 4309. 
doi:10.5194/acp-7-4295-2007.
Day, M. C., & Pandis S. N. (2011). Predicted changes in 
summertime organic aerosol concentrations due to increased 
temperatures. Atmospheric Environment, 45(36), 6546 – 6556. 
doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.08.028
Demers, I., & Gosselin, P. (2019). At-a-glance -Pollens, climate 
and allergies: Quebec initiatives. Health promotion and chronic 
disease prevention in Canada, 39(4), 136-141. <https://doi.
org/10.24095/hpcdp.39.4.05>
Deser, C., Knutti, R., Solomon S., & Phillips A. S. (2012). 
Communication of the role of natural variability in future North 
American climate. Nature Climate Change, 2, 775 – 779. doi: 
10.1038/NCLIMATE1562.
Dodd, W., Howard, C., Rose, C., Scott, C., Scott, P., Cunsolo, A., 
& Orbinski, J. (2018a). The summer of smoke: Ecosocial and 
health impacts of a record wildfire season in the Northwest 
Territories, Canada. The Lancet Global health, 6(Suppl.2), S30. 
doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(18)30159-1
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., 
& Orbinski, J. (2018b). Lived experience of a record wildfire 
season in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal 
of Public Health, 109(3), 327-337. <https://doi.org/10.17269/
s41997-018-0070-5>
Du, X., Chen, R., Meng, X., Liu, C., Niu, Y., Wang, W., Li, S., Kan, 
H., & Zhou, M. (2020). The establishment of National Air Quality 
Health Index in China. Environment International, 138, 105594-
105600. doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2020.105594 
Ebi, K. L., & McGregor, G. (2008). Climate change, tropospheric 
ozone and particulate matter, and health impacts. Environment 
Health Perspectives, 116(11), 1449-1455. doi:10.1289/ehp.11463
Elliott, C. T., Henderson, S. B., & Wan, V. (2013). Time series 
analysis of fine particulate matter and asthma reliever 
dispensations in populations affected by forest fires. 
Environmental Health, 12, 11. doi:10.1186/1476-069X-12-11.
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2020). 
A Healthy Environment and Healthy Economy: Canada’s 
strengthened climate plan to create jobs and support people, 
communities and the planet. Gatineau, QC: Government of 
Canada. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/
eccc/documents/pdf/climate-change/climate-plan/healthy_
environment_healthy_economy_plan.pdf>
European Academies’ Science Advisory Council. (2019). The 
imperative of climate action to protect human health in Europe. 
German National Academy of Sciences. Retrieved from <https://
easac.eu/publications/details/the-imperative-of-climate-action-
to-protect-human-health-in-europe/>
European Collaborative Action (ECA). (2013). Harmonisation 
Framework for Health Based Evaluation of Indoor Emissions 
from Construction Products in the European Union Using the EU-
LCI Concept. Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European 
Union. Retrieved from <http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
repository/handle/JRC83683<
Fan, J., Wang Y., Rosenfeld D., & Liu, X. (2016). Review of 
aerosol-cloud interactions: mechanisms, significance and 
challenges. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 73(11), 4221 – 
4252. doi:10.1175/JAS-D-16-0037.1, 2016.
Fang, Y., Mauzerall, D. J., Liu, J., Fiore, A. M., & Horowitz, L. W. 
(2013). Impacts of 21st century climate change on global air 
pollution-related premature mortality. Climatic Change, 121, 
239–253. doi: 10.1007/s10584-013-0847-8
Fann, N., Alman, B., Broome, R. A., Morgan, G. G., Johnston, F. 
H., Pouliot, G., & Rappold, A. G. (2018). The health impacts and 
economic value of wildland fire episodes in the U.S.: 2018-
2012. Science of the Total Environment, 610-611, 802-809. 
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.08.024
Fann, N., Brennan, T., Dolwick, P., Gamble, J. L., Ilacqua, V., 
Kolb, L., Notle, C.G., Spero, T. L., & Ziska, L. (2016). Air Quality 
Impacts. In Crimmins, A., J. Balbus, J. L. Gamble, C. B. Beard, 
J. E. Bell, D. Dodgen, R. J. Eisen, N. Fann, M. D. Hawkins, S. 
C. Herring, L. Jantarasami, D.M. Mills, S. Saha, M. C. Sarofim, 
J. Trtanj, & L. Ziska (Eds.), The Impacts of Climate Change on 
Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment (pp. 
69-98). Washington, DC: US Global Change Research Program.
Fann, N., Kim, S.-Y., Olives, C., & Sheppard, L. (2017). Estimated 
changes in life expectancy and adult mortality resulting from 
declining PM2.5 exposures in the contiguous United States: 
1980–2010. Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(9), 097003. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP507>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 353 
Fann, N., Nolte, C.G., Dolwick, P., Spero, T.L., Brown, A. C., 
Phillips, S., & Anenberg, S. (2015). The geographic distribution 
and economic value of climate change-related ozone health 
impacts in the United States in 2030. Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association, 65(5), 570–580. doi:10.1080/1096224
7.2014.996270
Faustman, E. M., Silbernagel, S.M., Fenske, R. A., Burbacher, T. 
M., & Ponce, R. A. (2000). Mechanisms underlying Children’s 
susceptibility to environmental toxicants. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 108(Suppl.1), 13-21. doi:10.1289/ehp.00108s113
Fiore, A. M., Naik, V., & Leibensperger, E. M. (2015). Air 
quality and climate connections. Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association, 65(6), 645 – 685. doi:10.1080/109622
47.2015.1040526
Flannigan, M. D., Cantin, A. S., de Groot, W. J., Wotton, M., 
Newbery, A., & Gowman, L. M. (2013). Global wildland fire 
season severity in the 21st century. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 294, 54 – 61. doi:10.1016/j.foreco.2012.10.022
Flannigan, M. D., Krawchuk, M. A., de Groot, W. J., Wotton, B. M., 
& Gowman, L. M. (2009). Implications of changing climate for 
global wildland fire. International Journal of Wildland Fire, 18(5), 
483-507. doi: 10.1071/WF08187
Flannigan, M. D., Logan, K. A., Amiro, B. D., Skinner, W. R., & 
Stocks, B. J. (2005). Future area burned in Canada. Climatic 
Change, 72, 1-16. doi:10.1007/s10584-005-5935-y
Flannigan, M. D., Wotton, M., Marshall, G., de Groot, W. J., 
Johnston, J., Jurko, N., & Cantin, A. S. (2016). Fuel moisture 
sensitivity to temperature and precipitation: Climate change 
implications. Climatic Change, 134, 59-71. doi:10.1007/s10584-
015-1521-0.
Fong, K. C., Hart, J. E., & James, P. (2018). A review of 
epidemiologic studies on greenness and health: Updated 
literature through 2017. Current Environmental Health Reports, 
5(1), 77-87. doi:10.1007/s40572-018-0179-y
Ford, B., Val Martin, M., Zelasky, S. E., Fischer, E. V., 
Anenberg, S. C., Heald, C. L., & Pierce, J. R. (2018). Future fire 
implications of smoke concentrations, visibility, and health in 
the contiguous United States. GeoHealth, 2(8), 229-247. doi: 
10.1029/2018GH000144.
Forster, P., & Shine, K. P. (1997). Radiative forcing and 
temperature trends from stratospheric ozone changes. Journal 
of Geophysical Research Atmospheres, 102, 10841–10855. 
doi:10.1029/96JD03510
Fu, P., Guo, X., Cheung, F. M. H., & Yung, K. K. L. (2019). 
The association between PM2.5 exposure and neurological 
disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. The Science 
of the Total Environment, 655, 1240-1248. doi: 10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2018.11.218
Fuertes, E., Markevych, I., Bowatte, G., Gruzieva, O., Gehring, 
U., Becker, A., Berdel, D., von Berg, A., Bergstrom, A., Brauer, 
M., Brunekreef, B., Bruske, I., Carlesten, C., Chan-Yeung, M., 
Dharmage, S.C., Hoffmann, B., Klumper, C., Koppelman, G. H., 
Kozyrskyi, A.,...Heinrich, J. (2016). Residential greenness is 
differentially associated with childhood allergic rhinitis and 
aeroallergen sensitization in seven birth cohorts. Allergy, 71(10), 
1461-1471. doi:10.1111/all.12915
Gai, Y., Minet, L., Posen, I.D., Smargiassi, A., Tétrault, L.-F., 
& Hatzopoulou, M. (2020). Health and climate benefits of 
electric vehicle deployment in Greater Toronto and Hamilton 
Area. Environmental Pollution, 265, 114983. doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2020.114983
Gao, Y., Fu, J. S., Drake, J. B., Lamarque, J.-F., & Liu, Y. (2013). 
The impact of emission and climate change on ozone in the 
United States under representative concentration pathways 
(RCPs). Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 13(4), 9607-9621. 
doi:10.5194/acp-13-9607-2013
Garcia-Menendez, F., Saari, R. K., Monier, E., & Selin, N. E. (2015). 
U.S. Air quality and health benefits from avoided climate change 
under greenhouse gas mitigation. Environmental Science & 
Technology, 49(13), 7580-7588. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b01324
Gauderman, J. W., McConnell, R. O., Gilliland, F., London, S., 
Thomas, D., Avol, E., Vora, H., Berhane, K., Rappaport, E. B., 
Lurmann, F., Margolis, H. G. (2000). Association between 
air pollution and lung function growth in southern California 
children. American journal of respiratory and critical care 
medicine. 162(4), 1383-90. <https://doi.org/10.1164/
ajrccm.162.4.9909096>
Gershon, A. S., Guan, J., Wang, C., & To, T. (2010). Trends in 
asthma prevalence and incidence in Ontario, Canada, 1996-2005: 
A population study. American Journal of Epidemiology, 172(6), 
728-736. doi:10.1093/aje/kwq189
Gerson, A. S., Khan, S., Klein-Geltink, J., Wilton, D., To, T., 
Crighton, E. J., Pigeau, L., MacQuarrie, J., Allard, Y., Russell, 
S. J. & Henry, D. A. (2014). Asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) prevalence and health service use in 
Ontario Métis: A population-based cohort study. PLoS One, 9(4), 
e95899. doi: org/10.1371/journal.pone.0095899
Gillett, N. P., Weaver, A. J., Zwiers, F. W., & Flannigan, M. D. 
(2004). Detecting the effect of climate change on Canadian 
forest fires. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(18), L18211. 
doi:10.1029/2004GL020876
Giorgi, F., & Gutowski, W. J. (2015). Regional dynamical 
downscaling and the CORDEX initiative. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources, 40(1), 467–490. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-environ-102014-021217
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 354 
Government of Canada. (2012). Reduction of Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions from Coal-fired Generation of Electricity Regulations 
(SOR/2012-167). Canada Gazette Part II, 146(19). Retrieved from 
<http://www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2012/2012-09-12/html/sor-
dors167-eng.html> 
Government of Canada. (2015). Understanding Air Quality Health 
Index messages. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/air-quality-health-index/
understanding-messages.html>
Government of Canada. (2018). Regulations Amending the 
Reduction of Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Coal-fired 
Generation of Electricity Regulations (SOR/2018-263). Canada 
Gazette Part II, 152(25). Retrieved from <http://gazette.gc.ca/rp-
pr/p2/2018/2018-12-12/html/sor-dors263-eng.html> 
Government of Canada. (2019a). Air Quality Health Index. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/air-quality-health-index.html>
Government of Canada. (2019b). How Info-Smog works. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-
climate-change/services/info-smog/how-it-works.html>
Government of Canada. (2019c). Canada’s Wildfire Smoke 
Prediction System (FireWork) Daily smoke forecast maps from 
early April to late October. Retrieved from <https://weather.
gc.ca/firework/index_e.html>
Government of Canada. (2019d). Wildfire smoke and air quality. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-
change/services/air-quality-health-index/wildfire-smoke.html>
Groot, E., Caturay, A., Khan, Y., & Copes, R. (2019). A systematic 
review of the health impacts of occupational exposure to 
wildland fires. International Journal of Occupational Medicine 
and Environmental Health, 32(2), 121-40. <https://doi.
org/10.13075/ijomeh.1896.01326>
Haines, A. (2017). Health co-benefits of climate action. The 
Lancet Planetary Health, 1(1), e4-5. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2542-5196(17)30003-7>
Hamlin, T., & Gusdorf, J. (1997). Airtightness and energy 
efficiency of new conventional and R-2000 housing in Canada. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <http://
publications.gc.ca/site/eng/73407/publication.html>
Hanes, C., Wang, X., Jain, P., Parisien, M.-A., Little, J., & 
Flannigan, M. (2019). Fire-regime changes in Canada over the 
last half century. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 49, 
256–269. doi:10.1139/cjfr-2018-0293.
Hartling, L., Brison, R., & Pickett, W. (1998). Cluster of 
Unintentional Carbon Monoxide Poisonings Presenting to the 
Emergency Departments in Kingston, Ontario during ‘Ice Storm 
98’. Canadian Journal of Public Health, 89(6), 388-390. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF03404080>
Haywood, J. M., & Shine, K.P. (1995). The effect of 
anthropogenic sulfate and soot aerosol on the clear sky planetary 
radiation budget. Geophysical Research Letters, 22(5), 603 – 606. 
doi:10.1029/95GL00075
Health Canada. (2007). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: 
Moulds. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/canada/health-canada/
migration/healthy-canadians/publications/healthy-living-vie-
saine/mould-moisissure/alt/mould-moisissures-eng.pdf>
Health Canada. (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity 
(J. Seguin, Ed.). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-
sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf>
Health Canada. (2013). Canadian Smog Science Assessment 
- Volume 2: Health Effects. Ottawa, ON: Government of 
Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2014/sc-hc/En88-5-2-2013-eng.pdf>
Health Canada. (2014). A Statistical Profile on the Health of 
First Nations in Canada: Determinants of Health, 2006 to 2010. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1585414580249/1585414609942> 
Health Canada. (2016). Human Health Risk Assessment for 
Ambient Nitrogen Dioxide. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. 
Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/9.816718/
publication.html>
Health Canada. (2018). Ventilation and the Indoor Environment. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/documents/services/
publications/healthy-living/ventilation-indoor-environment/
ventilation-indoor-environment.pdf>
Health Canada. (2020). Guidance for Cleaner Air Spaces during 
Wildfire Smoke Events. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. 
Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/9.891164/
publication.html>
Health Canada. (2021). Health Impacts of Air Pollution in 
Canada: Estimates of morbidity and premature mortality 
outcomes, 2021 Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Heguy, L., Garneau, M., Goldberg, M. S., Raphoz, M., Guay, F., 
& Valois, M. F. (2008). Associations between grass and weed 
pollen and emergency department visits for asthma among 
children in Montreal. Environmental Research, 106(2), 203-211. 
doi:S0013-9351(07)00223-X
Henderson, S. B., Brauer, M., MacNab, Y. C., & Kennedy, S. M. 
(2011). Three measures of forest fire smoke exposure and 
their associations with respiratory and cardiovascular health 
outcomes in a population-based cohort. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 119(9), 1266-1271. doi:10.1289/ehp.1002288
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 355 
Hernberg, S., Sripaiboonkij, P., Quansah, R., Jaakkola, J.J., 
& Jaakkola, M. S. (2014). Indoor molds and lung function 
in healthy adults. Respiratory medicine, 108(5), 677-684. 
doi:10.1016/j.rmed.2014.03.004
Heroux, M.-E., Clark, N., Van Ryswyk, K., Mallick, R., Gilbert, N., 
Harrison, I., Rispler, K., Wang, D., Anastassopoulos, A., Guay, 
M., MacNeill, M., & Wheeler, A. (2010). Predictors of indoor 
air concentrations in smoking and non-Smoking residences. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 7(8), 3080-3099. doi:10.3390/ijerph7083080
Hogrefe, C., Lynn, B., Civerolo, K., Ku, J.-Y., Rosenthal, J., 
Rosenzweig, C., Goldberg, R., Gaffin, S., Knowlton, K. & Kinney, 
P. L. (2004). Simulating changes in regional air pollution over 
the eastern United States due to changes in global and regional 
climate and emissions. Journal of Geophysical Research: 
Atmospheres, 109(22), D22301, doi:10.1029/2004JD004690
Horton, D. E., Skinner, C. B., Singh, D. & Diffenbaugh, N. S. 
(2014). Occurrence and persistence of future atmospheric 
stagnation events. Nature Climate Change, 4, 698-703. 
doi:10.1038/NCLIMATE2272, 2014.
Huang, S., Xiong, J., Cai, C., Xu, W., & Zhang, Y. (2016). 
Influence of humidity on the initial emittable concentration 
of formaldehyde and hexaldehyde in building materials: 
experimental observation and correlation. Scientific Reports, 6, 
23388. doi: 10.1038/srep23388
Hulin, M., Simoni, M., Veigi, G., & Annesi-Maesano, I. (2012). 
Respiratory health and indoor air pollutants based on 
quantitative exposure assessments. The European Respiratory 
Journal, 40(4), 1033-1045. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00159011
Hystad, P. U., Setton, E. M., Allen, R. W., Keller, P. C., & Brauer, M. 
(2009). Modeling residential fine particulate matter infiltration 
for exposure assessment. Journal of Exposure Science & 
Environmental Epidemiology, 19(6), 570-579. doi:10.1038/
jes.2008.45
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2018). Preventing and 
Managing Chronic Disease in First Nations Communities: 
A guidance framework. Ottawa, ON: Indigenous Services 
Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/
collection_2018/aanc-inac/H34-313-1-2017-eng.pdf>
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). (2019). 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2017. Retrieved from <http://
www.healthdata.org/sites/default/files/files/policy_
report/2019/GBD_2017_Booklet.pdf>
Institute of Medicine (IOM). (2011). Climate Change, the 
Indoor Environment, and Health. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC). (2013). Canada inundated by 
severe weather in 2013: Insurance companies pay out record-
breaking $3.2 billion to policyholders. Retrieved from <http://
www.ibc.ca/yt/resources/media-centre/media-releases/canada-
inundated-by-severe-weather-in-2013-insurance-companies-pay-
out-record-breaking-$3-2-billion-to-policyholders> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Synthesis Report. In C.B. Field, V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K. J. 
Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. 
O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White (Eds.), Climate 
Change 2014 (pp.151). Contribution of Working Groups I, II and 
III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2018). 
Summary for Policymakers. In V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. 
Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P.R. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-
Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. Matthews, Y. 
Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, M. Tignor, & 
T. Waterfield (Eds.), Global Warming of 1.5°C. Cambridge, United 
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from <https://
www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/spm/>
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). (2016). 
Outdoor Air Pollution: IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of 
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Lyon, France. Retrieved from 
<https://monographs.iarc.fr/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/
mono109.pdf>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2014). Social Determinants of 
Inuit Health in Canada. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2016/07/ITK_Social_Determinants_Report.pdf> 
Ismaila, A. S., Sayani, A. P., Marin, M., & Su, Z. (2013). Clinical, 
economic, and humanistic burden of asthma in Canada: 
A systematic review. BMC Pulmonary Medicine, 13, 70. 
doi:10.1186/1471-2466-13-70
Jacobson, M. Z. (2001). Strong radiative heating due to the 
mixing state of black carbon in atmospheric aerosols. Nature, 
409(6821), 695 – 697. doi: 10.1038/35055518
Jiang, Z., McDonald, B. C., Worden, H., Worden, J. R., Miyazaki, 
K., Qug, Z., Henze, D. K., Jones, D. B. A., Arellano, A. F., Fischer, 
E. V., Zhu, L., & Boersma, K. F. (2018). Unexpected slowdown of 
US pollutant emission reduction in the past decade. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
115(20), 5099 – 5104. doi:10.1073/pnas.1801191115, 2018.
Johnston, F. H., Henderson, S. B., Chen, Y., Randerson, J.T., 
Marlier, M., DeFries, R. S., Kinney, P., Bowman, D. M. J. S., & 
Brauer, M. (2012). Estimated global mortality attributable to 
smoke from landscape fires. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
120(5), 695-701. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1104422>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 356 
Johnston, F. H., Wheeler, A. J., Williamson, G. J., Campbell, 
S. L., Jones, P. J., Koolhof, I. S., Lucani, C., Cooling, N.B., & 
Bowman, D.M.J.S. (2018). Using smartphone technology 
to reduce health impacts from atmospheric environmental 
hazards. Environmental Research Letters, 13(4), 044019. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aab1e6
Kasoar, M., Voulgarakis, A., Lamarque, J.-F., Shindell, D. T., 
Bellouin, N., Collins, W. J., Faluvegi, G., & Tsigaridis, K. (2016). 
Regional and global temperature response to anthropogenic 
SO2 emissions from China in three climate models. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 16(15), 9785 – 9804. doi:10.5194/acp-
16-9785-2016
Kearney, J., Wallace, L., MacNeill, M., Héroux, M.-E., Kindzierski, 
W., & Wheeler, A. (2014). Residential infiltration of fine and 
ultrafine particles in Edmonton. Atmospheric Environment, 94, 
793-805. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.05.020
Keefe, A. (2014). Evidence review: Filtration in institutional settings 
during wildfire smoke events (C. Elliott, & K. Rideout, Eds). BC 
Centre for Disease Control. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.
ca/resourcegallery/Documents/Guidelines%20and%20Forms/
Guidelines%20and%20Manuals/Health-Environment/WFSG_
EvidenceReview_FiltrationinInstitutions_FINAL_v3_edstrs.pdf>
Keith, P. K., Desrosiers, M., Laister, T., Schellenberg, R. R., & 
Waserman, S. (2012). The burden of allergic rhinitis (AR) in 
Canada: Perspectives of physicians and patients. Allergy, 
Asthma, and Clinical Immunology : Official Journal of the 
Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 8(1), 
7-1492-8-7. doi:10.1186/1710-1492-8-7
Kelly, J., Makar, P. A., & Plummer, D. A. (2012). Projections of 
mid-century summer air-quality for North America: effects 
of changes in climate and precursor emissions. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 12(12), 5367 – 5390. doi:10.5194/acp-
12-5367-2012
Kim, H., Bouchard, J., & Renzi, P. M. (2008). The 
link between allergic rhinitis and asthma: A role for 
antileukotrienes? Canadian Respiratory Journal, 15(2), 91-98. 
doi:10.1155/2008/416095
Kirchmeier-Young, M. C., Gillett, N. P., Zwiers, F. W., Cannon, A. J., 
& Anslow, F. S. (2019). Attribution of the influence of human-
induced climate change on an extreme fire season. Earth’s 
Future, 7, 2-10. <https://doi.org/10.1029/2018EF001050>
Kirchmeier-Young, M. C., Zwiers, F. W., Gillett, N. P., & Cannon, 
A. J. (2017). Attributing extreme fire risk in Western Canada to 
human emissions. Climatic Change, 144, 365-379. doi:10.1007/
s10584-017-2030-0
Kondo, M. C., De Roos, A. J., White, L. S., Heilman, W. E., Mockrin, 
M. H., Gross-Davis, C. A., & Burstyn, I. (2019). Meta-analysis 
of heterogeneity in the effects of wildfire smoke exposure on 
respiratory health in North America. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(6), 960. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16060960>
Korpi, A., Pasanen, A.-L. & Pasanen, P. (1998). Volatile 
Compounds Originating from Mixed Microbial cultures on 
building materials under various humidity conditions. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 64(8), 2914-2919. <https://doi.
org/10.1128/AEM.64.8.2914-2919.1998>
Kovesi, T., Zaloum, C., Stocco, C., Fugler, D., Dales, R.E., Ni, A., 
Barrowman, N., Gilbert, N. L., & Miler, J. D. (2009). Heat recovery 
ventilators prevent respiratory disorders in Inuit children. Indoor 
Air, 19(6), 489-499. doi:10.1111/j.1600-0668.2009.00615.x
Kovesi, T. (2012). Respiratory disease in Canadian First Nations 
and Inuit children. Paediatrics & Child Health, 17(7), 376-380. 
doi:10.1093/pch/17.7.376
Lafeuille, M. H., Gravel, J., Figliomeni, M., Zhang, J., & Lefebvre, 
P. (2013). Burden of illness of patients with allergic asthma 
versus non-allergic asthma. The Journal of Asthma : Official 
Journal of the Association for the Care of Asthma, 50(8), 900-
907. doi:10.3109/02770903.2013.810244
Lam, Y. F., Fu, J. S., Wu, S., & Mickley, L. J. (2011). Impacts of 
future climate change and effects of biogenic emissions on 
surface ozone and particulate matter concentrations in the 
United States. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 11(10), 4789 
– 4806. doi:10.5194/acp-11-4789-2011
Lavigne, E., Gasparrini, A., Stieb, D. M., Chen, H., Yasseen, A. 
S., 3rd, Crighton, E., To, T., Weichenthal, S., Villeneuve, P. J., 
Cakmak, S., Coates, F., & Walker, M. (2017). Maternal Exposure 
to Aeroallergens and the Risk of Early Delivery. Epidemiology 
(Cambridge, Mass.), 28(1), 107–115. <https://doi.org/10.1097/
EDE.0000000000000573>
Lavigne, É., Burnett, R. T., Stieb, D. M., Evans, G. J., Godri Pollitt, 
K. J., Chen, H., van Rijswijk, D., & Weichenthal, S. (2018). 
Fine Particulate Air Pollution and Adverse Birth Outcomes: 
Effect Modification by Regional Nonvolatile Oxidative 
Potential. Environmental Health Perspectives, 126(7), 077012. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP2535>
Leech, J. A., Nelson, W. C., Burnett, R. T., Aaron, S., & Raizenne, 
M. E. (2002). It’s about time: a comparison of Canadian and 
American time-activity patterns. Journal of Exposure Analysis 
and Environmental Epidemiology, 12(6), 427–432. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/sj.jea.7500244>
Leech, J. A., Raizenne, M., & Gusdorf, J. (2004). Health in 
occupants of energy efficient new homes. Indoor Air, 14(3), 
169–173. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0668.2004.00212.x>
Leibensperger, E. M., Mickley, L. J., & Jacob, D. J. (2008). 
Sensitivity of US air quality to mid-latitude cyclone frequency 
and implications of 1980–2006 climate change. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 8(23), 7075–7086. doi: 10.5194/acp-8-
7075-2008
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 357 
Liu, D., Whitehead, J., Alfarra, M. R., Reyes-Villegas, E., Spracklen, 
D. V., Reddington, C. L., Kong, S., Williams, P. I., Ting, Y.-C., 
Haslett, S., Taylor, J. W., Flynn, M. J., Morgan, W. T., McFiggans, 
G., Coe H., & Allan J. D. (2017). Black-carbon absorption 
enhancement in the atmosphere determined by particle mixing 
state. Nature Geoscience, 10, 184 – 191. doi:10.1038/NGEO2901
Liu, J. C., Mickely, L. J., Sulprizio, M. P., Yue, X., Peng, R. D., 
Dominici, F., & Bell, M. L. (2016). Future respiratory hospital 
admissions from wildfire smoke under climate change in the 
Western US. Environmental Research Letters, 11(12), 124018. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/11/12/124018.
Liu, J. C., Pereira, G., Uhl, S. A., Bravo, M. A., & Bell, M. L. (2015). 
A systematic review of the physical health impacts from 
non-occupational exposure to wildfire smoke. Environmental 
Research, 136, 120–132. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2014.10.015>
Liu, J. C., Zheng, Y., Li, Z., Flynn, C., & Cribb, M. (2012). Seasonal 
variations of aerosol optical properties, vertical distribution 
and associated radiative effects in the Yangtze Delta region of 
China. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 117(D16), 
D00K38. doi:10.1029/2011JD016490
Lougheed, M. D., Lemière, C., Dell, S. D., Ducharme, F. M., 
Fitzgerald, J. M., Leigh, R., Licskai, C., Rowe, B. H., Bowie, D., 
Becker, A., Boulet, L. P., & Canadian Thoracic Society Asthma 
Committee (2010). Canadian Thoracic Society Asthma 
Management Continuum--2010 Consensus Summary for children 
six years of age and over, and adults. Canadian Respiratory 
Journal, 17(1), 15–24. <https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/827281>
Lowe, A. J., Olsson, D., Braback, L., & Forsberg, B. (2012). 
Pollen exposure in pregnancy and infancy and risk of asthma 
hospitalisation - a register based cohort study. Allergy, 
Asthma, and Clinical Immunology : Official Journal of the 
Canadian Society of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 8(1), 17. 
doi:10.1186/1710-1492-8-17 
MacNeill, M., Kearney, J., Wallace, L., Gibson, M., Héroux, M. E., 
Kuchta, J., Guernsey, J. R., & Wheeler, A. J. (2014). Quantifying 
the contribution of ambient and indoor-generated fine particles 
to indoor air in residential environments. Indoor Air, 24(4), 
362–375. <https://doi.org/10.1111/ina.12084>
MacNeill, M., Wallace, L., Kearney, J., Allen, R. W., Van Ryswyk, 
K., Judek, S., Xu, X., & Wheeler, A. (2012). Factors influencing 
variability in the infiltration of PM2.5 mass and its components. 
Atmospheric Environment, 61, 518-532. doi: 10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2012.07.005
Maguet, S. (2018). Public Health Responses to Wildfire 
Smoke Events. BC Centre for Disease Control and National 
Collaborating Centre for Environmental Health. Retrieved from 
<https://ncceh.ca/sites/default/files/Responding%20to%20
Wildfire%20Smoke%20Events%20EN.pdf>
Maidment, C. D., Jones, C. R., Webb, T.L., Hathway, E. A., & 
Gilbertson, J. M. (2014). The impact of household energy 
efficiency measures on health: A meta-analysis. Energy Policy, 
65, 583-593. doi: 10.1016/j.enpol.2013.10.054
Manitoba Health. (2019). Health Effects of Smoke Exposure 
due to Wildland Fires. Government of Manitoba. Retrieved 
from <https://www.gov.mb.ca/health/publichealth/
environmentalhealth/smoke.html>
Markandya, A., Sampedro, J., Smith, S. J., Van Dingenen, R., 
Pizarro-Irizar, C., Arto, I., & González-Eguino, M. (2018). Health 
co-benefits from air pollution and mitigation costs of the Paris 
Agreement: a modelling study. The Lancet Planet Health, 2(3), 
e126-e133. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(18)30029-9
Matz, C. J., Stieb, D. M., Davis, K., Egyed, M., Rose, A., Chou, B., & 
Brion, O. (2014). Effects of age, season, gender and urban-rural 
status on time-activity: Canadian Human Activity Pattern Survey 
2 (CHAPS 2). International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 11(2), 2108–2124. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph110202108>
Matz, C. J., Egyed, M., Xi, G., Racine, J., Pavlovic, R., Rittmaster, 
R., Henderson, S. B., & Stieb, D. M. (2020). Health impact 
analysis of PM2.5 from wildfire smoke in Canada (2013-2015, 
2017-2018). The Science of the Total Environment, 725, 138506. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.138506>
McCuskee, S., Kirlew, M., Kelly, L., Fewer, S., & Kovesi, T. (2014). 
Bronchiolitis and pneumonia requiring hospitalization in young 
first nations children in Northern Ontario, Canada. The Pediatric 
Infectious Disease Journal, 33(10), 1023–1026. <https://doi.
org/10.1097/INF.0000000000000361>
McLean, K. E., Yao, J., & Henderson, S. B. (2015). An Evaluation 
of the British Columbia Asthma Monitoring System (BCAMS) 
and PM2.5 Exposure Metrics during the 2014 Forest Fire 
Season. International journal of environmental research and 
public health, 12(6), 6710–6724. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph120606710>
Mearns, L. O., Sain, S., Leung, L. R., Bukovsky, M. S., McGinnis, S., 
Biner, S., Caya, D., Arritt, R. W., Gutowski, W., Takle, E., Snyder, M., 
Jones, R. G., Nunes, A. M. B., Tucker, S., Herzmann, D., McDaniel, 
L., & Sloan, L. (2013). Climate change projections of the North 
American Regional Climate Change Assessment Program 
(NARCCAP). Climate Change, 120, 965 – 975. doi:10.1007/
s10584-013-0831-3.
Mehiriz, K., & Gosselin, P. (2019). Evaluation of the Impacts of a 
Phone Warning and Advising System for Individuals Vulnerable 
to Smog. Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial Study 
in Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 16(10), 1817. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph16101817>
MetroVancouver. (2018). Climate 2050 Strategic Framework. 
Retrieved from <http://www.metrovancouver.org/climate2050>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 358 
Mickley, L. J., Jacob, D. J., Field, B. D., & Rind, D. (2004). Effects 
of future climate change on regional air pollution episodes in 
the United States. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(24), L24103. 
doi:10.1029/2004GL021216
Mills, D., Jones, R., Wobus, C., Ekstrom, J., Jantarasami, L., St 
Juliana, A., & Crimmins, A. (2018). Projecting Age-Stratified 
Risk of Exposure to Inland Flooding and Wildfire Smoke in the 
United States under Two Climate Scenarios. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 126(4), 047007. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
EHP2594>
Ministère de l’Environnement et de la Lutte contre les 
changements climatiques. (2012). Pan d’action 2013-2020 
sur les changements climatiques. Gouvernement du Québec. 
Retrieved from <http://www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca/
changements/plan_action/pacc2020.pdf>
Ministère de l’Environnement et de la Lutte contre les 
changements climatiques. (2019). Feux de forêt. Gouvernement 
du Québec. Retrieved from <https://www.environnement.gouv.
qc.ca/air/feux-foret/index.htm>
Munioz-Alpizar, R., Pavlovic, R., Moran, M.D., Chen, J., Gravel, 
S., Henderson, S.B., Menard, S., Racine, J., Duhamel, A., Gilbert, 
S., Beaulieu, P.-A., Davignon, D., Cousineau, S., & Bouchet, V. 
(2017). Multi-year (2013-2016) PM2.5 wildfire pollution exposure 
over North America as determined from operation air quality 
forecasts. Atmosphere, 8(9), 179. doi: 10.3390/atmos8090179
Myhre, G., Shindell, D., Bréon, F.-M., Collins, W., Fuglestvedt, 
J., Huang, J., Koch, D., Lamarque, J.-F., Lee, D., Mendoza, D., 
Nakajima, T., Robock, A., Stephens, G., Takemura, T., & Zhang, 
H. (2013). Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. In T. F. 
Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, 
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex & P. M. Midgley, Eds., Climate Change 
2013: The Physical Science Basis (pp. 659-740). Contribution 
of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. 
doi:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.018
Naeher, L. P., Brauer, M., Lipsett, M., Zelikoff, J. T., Simpson, 
C. D., Koenig, J. Q., & Smith, K. R. (2007). Woodsmoke health 
effects: a review. Inhalation Toxicology, 19(1), 67–106. <https://
doi.org/10.1080/08958370600985875>
Nakicenovic, N., Alcamo, J., Davis, G., de Vries, B., Fenhann, 
J., Gaffin, S., Gregory, K., Grübler, A., Jung, T.Y., Kram, T., La 
Rovere, E.L., Michaelis, L., Mori, S., Morita, T., Pepper, W., Pitcher, 
H., Price, L., Riahi, K., Roehrl, A., Rogner, H.-H., Sankovski, A., 
Schlesinger, M., Shukla, P., Smith, S., Swart, R., van Rooijen, 
S., Victor, N., & Dadi, Z. (2000). Special report on emissions 
scenarios. In N. Nakicenovic, & R. Swart, Eds., Emissions 
Scenarios (pp. 599). Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: 
Cambridge University Press.
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health (NCCAH). 
(2017). Housing as a Social Determinant of First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis Health. Prince George, BC. Retrieved from <https://
www.ccnsa-nccah.ca/docs/determinants/FS-Housing-
SDOH2017-EN.pdf>
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (2016). Energy Efficiency 
Trends in Canada. Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada, Office 
of Energy Efficiency.
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (2018). Energy and 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GHGs). Retrieved from <https://
www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/facts/energy-ghgs/20063>
Nazaroff, W., & Weschler, C. (2004). Cleaning products and air 
fresheners: Exposure to primary and secondary air pollutants. 
Atmospheric Environment, 38(18), 2841-2865. doi:10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2004.02.040
Nolte, C. G., Gilliland, A. B., Hogrefe, C., & Mickley, L. J. (2008). 
Linking global to regional models to assess future climate 
impacts on surface ozone levels in the United States. Journal 
of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 113(D14), D14307. 
doi:10.1029/2007JD008497
Northwest Territories Health and Social Services (NT HSS). 
(2016a). Wildfire Smoke and Your Health Air quality Self-
assessment Method. Government of Northwest Territories. 
Retrieved from <https://www.hss.gov.nt.ca/sites/hss/files/
wildfire-smoke-health.pdf>
Northwest Territories Health and Social Services (NT HSS). 
(2016b). Smoke Exposure from Wildfire: Guidelines for Protecting 
Community Health and Wellbeing. Government of the Northwest 
Territories. Retrieved from <https://www.hss.gov.nt.ca/sites/
hss/files/smoke-exposure-wildfire-guidelines.pdf>
Northwest Territories Health and Social Services (NT HSS). 
(2018). Wildfire smoke information in the Northwest Territories. 
Government of the Northwest Territories. Retrieved from <https://
www.hss.gov.nt.ca/sites/hss/files/resources/smoke-warning-
aug2018.pdf>
Nova Scotia Department of Health and Wellness. (2018). 
Emergencies and Extreme Weather Events – Wildfires. Province 
of Nova Scotia. Retrieved from <https://novascotia.ca/dhw/
environmental/wildfires.asp>
Oakes, M., Baxter, L., & Long, T. C. (2014). Evaluating the 
application of multipollutant exposure metrics in air pollution 
health studies. Environment International, 69, 90–99. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.03.030>
Ontario Ministry of Environment Conservation and Parks 
(OMECP). (2010). AQHI categories and health messages. 
Government of Ontario. Retrieved from <http://www.
airqualityontario.com/aqhi/health_messages.php>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 359 
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long term Care (OHLTC). (n.d.). 
Emergency Management Forest Fire Smoke and Your Health. 
Government of Ontario. Retrieved from <http://www.health.gov.
on.ca/en/public/programs/emu/fire_mn.aspx>
Parekh, A., Roux, L., & Gallant, P. (2007, July). Thermal and 
air leakage characteristics of Canadian housing [Conference 
session]. The 11th Canadian Conference on Building Science 
and Technology, Banff, Alberta, Canada.
Park, S., Allen, R.J., & Lim, C. H. (2020). A likely increase in fine 
particulate matter and premature mortality under future climate 
change. Air Quality, Atmosphere & Health, 13(7), 143-151. doi.
org/10.1007/s11869-019-00785-7
Partanen, A.-I., Landry, J.-S., & Matthews, H. D. (2018). 
Climate and health implications of future aerosol emission 
scenarios. Environmental Research Letters, 13(2), 024028. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaa511
Pavlovic, R., Chen, J., Anderson, K., Moran, M. D., Beaulieu, P. A., 
Davignon, D., & Cousineau, S. (2016). The FireWork air quality 
forecast system with near-real-time biomass burning emissions: 
Recent developments and evaluation of performance for the 
2015 North American wildfire season. Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association, 66(9), 819-41. doi:10.1080/10962247
.2016.1158214
Peters, D. R., Schnell, J. L., Kinney, P. L., Naik, V., & Horton, D. 
E. (2020). Public health and climate benefits and trade-offs of 
U.S. vehicle electrification. GeoHealth, 4(10), e2020GH000275. 
<https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GH000275>
Pfister, G. G., Walters, S., Lamarque, J.-F., Fast, J., Barth, M. 
C., Wong, J., Done, J., Holland, G. & Bruyère, C. L. (2014). 
Projections of future summertime ozone over the U.S. Journal 
of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 119(9), 5559–5582. 
doi:10.1002/2013JD020932
Pinault, L., Crouse, D., Jerrett, M., Brauer, M., & Tjepkema, M. 
(2016a). Spatial associations between socioeconomic groups 
and NO2 air pollution exposure within three large Canadian 
cities. Environmental Research, 147, 373–382. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envres.2016.02.033>
Pinault, L., Crouse, D., Jerrett, M., Brauer, M., & Tjepkema, M. 
(2016b). Socioeconomic differences in nitrogen dioxide ambient 
air pollution exposure among children in the three largest 
Canadian cities. Health Reports, 27(7), 3–9.
Pinault, L., van Donkelaar, A., & Martin, R. V. (2017). Exposure 
to fine particulate matter air pollution in Canada. Health 
Reports, 28(3), 9–16.
Potera, C. (2011). Climate change impacts indoor 
environment. Environmental health perspectives, 119(9), a382. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.119-a382>
Poulin, P., Levasseur, M.-E., & Huppé, V. (2016). Mesures 
d’adaptation pour une saine qualité de l’air intérieur dans un 
contexte de changements climatiques : revue de la littérature. 
Institut National de Santé Publique du Québec. Retrieved from 
<https://www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/2194>
Prather, M. J., Holmes, C. D., & Hsu, J. (2012). Reactive 
greenhouse gas scenarios: Systematic exploration of 
uncertainties and the role of atmospheric chemistry. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 39(9), L09803. 
doi:10.1029/2012GL051440
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2018). Key Health 
Inequalities in Canada: A National Portrait. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/
documents/services/publications/science-research/key-health-
inequalities-canada-national-portrait-executive-summary/hir-full-
report-eng.pdf>
Radisic, S., Newbold, K. B., Eyles, J., & Williams, A. (2016). 
Factors influencing health behaviours in response to the air 
quality health index: A cross-sectional study in Hamilton, 
Canada. Environmental Health Review, 59(1), 17-29. doi: 
10.5864/d2016-002
Ramanathan, R., Chung, C., Kim, D., Bettge, T., Buja, L., Kiehl, 
J. T., Washington, W. M., Fu, Q., Sikka, D. R., & Wild, M. (2005). 
Atmospheric brown clouds: Impacts on South Asian climate 
and hydrological cycle. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 102(15), 5326 – 5333. 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0500656102
Ravishankara, A. R., Dawson, J. P., & Winner, D. A. (2012). New 
Directions: Adapting air quality management to climate change: 
A must for planning. Atmospheric Environment, 50, 387 – 389. 
doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2011.12.048
Reading, C., & Halseth, R. (2013). Pathways to improving well-
being for Indigenous peoples: how living conditions decide 
health. Prince George, BC: National Collaborating Centre for 
Aboriginal Health. Retrieved from <https://www.ccnsa-nccah.ca/
docs/determinants/RPT-PathwaysWellBeing-Reading-Halseth-
EN.pdf> 
Reid, C. E., Brauer, M., Johnston, F. H., Jerrett, M., Balmes, J. R., & 
Elliott, C. T. (2016). Critical Review of Health Impacts of Wildfire 
Smoke Exposure. Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(9), 
1334–1343. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1409277>
Reid, C. E., & Gamble, J. L. (2009). Aeroallergens, 
allergic disease, and climate change: impacts and 
adaptation. EcoHealth, 6(3), 458–470. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10393-009-0261-x>
Reisen, F., Duran, S. M., Flannigan, M. D., Elliott, C., & Rideout, 
K. (2015). Wildfire smoke and public health risk. International 
Journal of Wildland Fire, 24(8), 1029-1044. doi: 10.1071/
WF15034
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 360 
Rice, M. B., Thurston, G. D., Balmes, J. R., & Pinkerton, K. E. 
(2014). Climate change. A global threat to cardiopulmonary 
health. American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care 
Medicine, 189(5), 512–519. <https://doi.org/10.1164/
rccm.201310-1924PP>
Rittmaster, R., Adamowicz, W. L., Amiro, B., & Pelletier, R. T. 
(2006). Economic analysis of health effects from forest fires. 
Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 36(4), 868-877. doi: 
10.1139/x05-293
Rittmaster, R., Adamowicz, W. L., Amiro, B., & Pelletier, R. T. 
(2008). Erratum: Economic analysis of health effects from 
forest fires. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 38(4), 908. 
doi:10.1139/X08-905
Romero-Lankao, P., Smith, J. B., Davidson, D. J., Diffenbaugh, N. 
S., Kinney, P. L., Kirshen, P., Kovacs, P., & Villers Ruiz, L. (2014). 
North America. In V. R. Barros, C. B. Field, D. J. Dokken, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, K. J. Mach, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. 
O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L.White (Eds.), Climate 
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: 
Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment, Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: 
Cambridge University Press.
Romps, D. M., Seeley, J. T., Vollaro, D., & Molinari, J. (2014). 
Projected increase in lightning strikes in the United States due 
to global warming. Science, 346(6211), 851–854. doi: 10.1126/
science.1259100
Saari, R. K., Selin, N. E., Rausch, S., & Thompson, T. M. (2015). 
A self-consistent method to assess air quality co-benefits from 
U.S. climate policies. Journal of the Air and Waste Management 
Association (1995), 65(1), 74–89. <https://doi.org/10.1080/1096
2247.2014.959139>
Saari, R. K., Mei, Y., Monier, E., & Garcia-Menendez, F. (2019). 
Effect of health-related uncertainty and natural variability on 
health impacts and cobenefits of climate policy. Environmental 
science and technology, 53(3), 1098–1108. <https://doi.
org/10.1021/acs.est.8b05094>
Santé Montréal. (2017). Info-smog. City of Québec. Retrieved 
from <https://santemontreal.qc.ca/en/public/advice-and-
prevention/info-smog/>
Saskatchewan Environment Public Health and Safety. (n.d.). 
Wildfire Smoke and Air Quality. Government of Saskatchewan. 
Retrieved from <https://www.saskatchewan.ca/residents/
environment-public-health-and-safety/wildfire-in-saskatchewan/
fire-smoke-and-air-quality>
Saunois, M., Bousquet, P., Poulter, B., Peregon, A., Ciais, P., 
Canadell, J. G., Dlugokencky, E. J., Etiope, G., Bastviken, D., 
Houweling, S., Janssens-Maenhout, G., Tubiello, F. N., Castaldi, 
S., Jackson, R. B., Alexe, M., Arora, V. K., Beerling, D. J., 
Bergamaschi, P., Blake, D. R., Brailsford, G., …Zhu, Q. (2016). The 
global methane budget 2000 – 2012. Earth System Science Data 
Discussions, 8(2), 697–751. doi:10.5194/essd-8-697-2016
Schnell, J. L., & Prather, M. (2017). Co-occurrence of extremes 
in surface ozone, particulate matter, and temperature over 
eastern North America. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 114(11), 2854 – 2859. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1614453114, 2017.
Scout Environmental. (2019). Air Health Check. Retrieved from 
<https://scoutenvironmental.com/air-health-check/> 
Seguel, J. M., Merrill, R., Seguel, D., & Campagna, A. C. (2016). 
Indoor Air Quality. American journal of lifestyle medicine, 11(4), 
284–295. <https://doi.org/10.1177/1559827616653343>
Seinfeld, J. H., Bretherton, C., Carslaw, K. S., Coe, H., DeMott, 
P. J., Dunlea, E. J., Feingold, G., Ghan, S., Guenther, A. B., Kahn, 
R., Kraucunas, I., Kreidenweis, S. M., Molina, M. J., Nenes, A., 
Penner, J. E., Prather, K. A., Ramanathan, V., …Wood, R. (2016). 
Improving our fundamental understanding of the role of 
aerosol−cloud interactions in the climate system. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 113(21), 5781 – 5790. doi:10.1073/pnas.1514043113
Selin, N. E., Wu, S., Nam, K. M., Reilly, J. M., Paltsev, S., Prinn, R. 
G., & Webster, M. D. (2009). Global health and economic impacts 
of future ozone pollution. Environmental Research Letters, 4(4), 
044014. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/4/4/044014
Sharpe, R. A., Thornton, C. R., Nikolaou, V., & Osborne, N. 
J. (2015). Higher energy efficient homes are associated 
with increased risk of doctor diagnosed asthma in a UK 
subpopulation. Environment International, 75, 234–244. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2014.11.017>
Shea, K. M., Truckner, R. T., Weber, R. W., & Peden, D. B. (2008). 
Climate change and allergic disease. The Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology, 122(3), 443–455. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jaci.2008.06.032>
Shindell, D. T., Faluvegi, G., Rotstayn, L., & Milly, G. (2015). 
Spatial patterns of radiative forcing and surface temperature 
response. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 
120(11), 5385–5403. doi:10.1002/2014JD022752
Shindell, D. T., Faluvegi, G., Seltzer, K., & Shindell C. (2018). 
Quantified, localized health benefits of accelerated carbon 
dioxide emission reductions. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 291-
295. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0108-y
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 361 
Shindell, D. T., Kuylenstierna, J. C. I., Vignati, E., van Dingenen, 
R., Amann, M., Klimont, Z., Anenberg, S. C., Muller, N., Janssens-
Maenhout, G., Raes, F., Schwartz, J., Faluvegi, G., Pozzoli, L., 
Kupiainen, K., Höglund-Isaksson, L., Emberson, L., Streets, D., 
Ramanathan, V., ….Fowler, D. (2012). Simultaneously mitigating 
near-term climate change and improving human health and 
food security. Science, 335(6065), 183-189. doi:10.1126/
science.1210026
Shindell, D. T., Lee, Y., & Faluvegi, G. (2016). Climate and health 
impacts of US emissions reductions consistent with 2⁰C. Nature 
Climate Change, 6, 503-507. doi: 10.1038/nclimate2935
Sierra-Heredia, C., North, M., Brook, J., Daly, C., Ellis, A. K., 
Henderson, D., Henderson, S. B., Lavigne, É., & Takaro, T. K. 
(2018). Aeroallergens in Canada: Distribution, Public Health 
Impacts, and Opportunities for Prevention. International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(8), 1577. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15081577>
Silva, R. A., West, J. J., Lamarque, J. F., Shindell, D. T., Collins, 
W. J., Dalsoren, S., Faluvegi, G., Folberth, G., Horowitz, L. W., 
Nagashima, T., Naik, V., Rumbold, S. T., Sudo, K., Takemura, 
T., Bergmann, D., Cameron-Smith, P., Cionni, I., Doherty, R. M., 
Eyring, V., Josse, B., … Zeng, G. (2016). The effect of future 
ambient air pollution on human premature mortality to 2100 
using output from the ACCMIP model ensemble. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 16(15), 9847–9862. <https://doi.
org/10.5194/acp-16-9847-2016>
Silva, R. A., West, J. J., Lamarque, J. F., Shindell, D. T., Collins, 
W. J., Faluvegi, G., Folberth, G. A., Horowitz, L. W., Nagashima, 
T., Naik, V., Rumbold, S. T., Sudo, K., Takemura, T., Bergmann, 
D., Cameron-Smith, P., Doherty, R. M., Josse, B., MacKenzie, 
I. A., Stevenson, D. S., & Zeng, G. (2017). FUTURE GLOBAL 
MORTALITY FROM CHANGES IN AIR POLLUTION ATTRIBUTABLE 
TO CLIMATE CHANGE. Nature climate change, 7(9), 647–651. 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3354>
Singh, R., Walsh, P., & Mazza, C. (2019). Sustainable Housing: 
Understanding the Barriers to Adopting Net Zero Energy 
Homes in Ontario, Canada. Sustainability, 11(22), 6236-6257. 
doi:10.3390/su11226236
Skiles, S. M., Flanner, M., Cook, J. M., Dumont, M., & Painter, T. 
H. (2018). Radiative forcing by light-absorbing particles in snow: 
Nature Climate Change, 8(11), 964 – 971. doi:10.1038/s41558-
018-0296-5
Smith, K. R., Woodward, A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chadee, D. 
D., Honda, Y., Liu, Q., Olwoch, J. M., Revich, B., & Sauerborn, R. 
(2014). Human health: impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. 
In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, 
R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, 
P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part A: Global and sectoral 
aspects (pp. 709-754). Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
University Press.
Solomon, G. M., Hjelmroos-Koski, M., Rotkin-Ellman, M., 
& Hammond, S. K. (2006). Airborne mold and endotoxin 
concentrations in New Orleans, Louisiana, after flooding, 
October through November 2005. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114(9), 1381–1386. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.9198>
Spurr, K., Pendergast, N., & MacDonald, S. (2014). Assessing the 
use of the Air Quality Health Index by vulnerable populations in 
a ‘low-risk’ region: A pilot study. Canadian Journal of Respiratory 
Therapy : CJRT = Revue Canadienne de la Therapie Respiratoire : 
RCTR, 50(2), 45–49.
Stach, A., García-Mozo, H., Prieto-Baena, J. C., Czarnecka-
Operacz, M., Jenerowicz, D., Silny, W., & Galán, C. (2007). 
Prevalence of Artemisia species pollinosis in western 
Poland: impact of climate change on aerobiological trends, 
1995-2004. Journal of Investigational Allergology & Clinical 
Immunology, 17(1), 39–47
Statistics Canada. (2015). Aboriginal Peoples: Fact Sheet for 
Canada. Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/89-656-x/89-656-x2015001-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2017). The housing conditions of Aboriginal 
people in Canada Census of Population 2016. Ottawa ON: 
Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://www12.statcan.
gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/as-sa/98-200-x/2016021/98-
200-x2016021-eng.pdf>
Steiner, A. L., Tonse, S., Cohen, R. C., Goldstein, A. H., & Harley, R. 
A. (2006). Influence of future climate and emissions on regional 
air quality in California. Journal of Geophysical Research: 
Atmospheres, 111(D18), D18303. doi:10.1029/2005JD006935
Stevenson, D. S., Young, P. J., Naik, V., Lamarque, J.-F., Shindell, 
D. T., Voulgarakis, A., Skeie, R. B., Dalsoren, S. B., Myhre, G., 
Berntsen, T. K., Folberth, G. A., Rumbold, S. T., Collins, W. J., 
MacKenzie, I. A., Doherty, R. M., Zeng, G., van Noije, T. P. C., 
Strunk, A., Bergmann, D., Cameron-Smith, P., …Archibald, A. 
(2013). Tropospheric ozone changes, radiative forcing and 
attribution to emissions in the Atmospheric Chemistry and 
Climate Model Intercomparison Project (ACCMIP). Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 13(6), 3063-3085. doi:10.5194/acp-13-
3063-2013

HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 362 
Stieb, D. M., Burnett, R. T., Smith-Doiron, M., Brion, O., Shin, H. H., 
& Economou, V. (2008). A new multipollutant, no-threshold air 
quality health index based on short-term associations observed 
in daily time-series analyses. Journal of the Air & Waste 
Management Association (1995), 58(3), 435–450. <https://doi.
org/10.3155/1047-3289.58.3.435>
Stieb, D. M., Chen, L., Beckerman, B. S., Jerrett, M., Crouse, 
D. L., Omariba, D. W., Peters, P. A., van Donkelaar, A., Martin, 
R. V., Burnett, R. T., Gilbert, N. L., Tjepkema, M., Liu, S., & 
Dugandzic, R. M. (2016). Associations of Pregnancy Outcomes 
and PM2.5 in a National Canadian Study. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 124(2), 243–249. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1408995>
Stieb, D. M., Judek, S., van Donkelaar, A., Martin, R. V., Brand, 
K., Shin, H. H., Burnett, R. T., & Smith-Doiron, M. H. (2015). 
Estimated public health impacts of changes in concentrations 
of fine particle air pollution in Canada, 2000 to 2011. Canadian 
Journal of Public Health = Revue Canadienne de Sante 
Publique, 106(6), e362–e368. <https://doi.org/10.17269/
cjph.106.4983>
Stieb, D. M., Yao, J., Henderson, S. B., Pinault, L., Smith-Doiron, 
M. H., Robichaud, A., van Donkelaar, A., Martin, R. V., Ménard, 
R., & Brook, J. R. (2019). Variability in ambient ozone and fine 
particle concentrations and population susceptibility among 
Canadian health regions. Canadian Journal of Public Health = 
Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 110(2), 149–158. <https://
doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-0169-8>
Stohl, A., Aamaas, B., Amann, M., Baker, L.H., Bellouin, N., 
Berntsen, T.K., Boucher, O., Cherian, R., Collins, W., Daskalakis, 
N., Dusinska, M., Eckhardt, S., Fuglestvedt, J. S., Harju, M., 
Heyes, C., Hodnebrog, Ø., Hao, J., Im, U., Kanakidou, M., Klimont, 
Z., Kupiainen, K., …. Zhu, T. (2015). Evaluating the climate and air 
quality impacts of short-lived pollutants. Atmospheric Chemistry 
and Physics, 15(18), 10529 – 10566 doi:10.5194/acp-15-10529-
2015, 2015.
Stowell, J. D., Kim, Y.-M., Gao, Y., Fu, J. S., Chang, H. H., & 
Liu, Y. (2017). The impact of climate change and emissions 
control on future ozone levels: Implications for human health. 
Environmental International, 108, p. 41-50. doi:10.1016/j.
envint.2017.08.001
Tagaris, E., Liao, K.-J., DeLucia, A. J., Deck, L., Amar, P. & Russell, 
A. G. (2009). Potential impact of climate change on air pollution-
related human health effects. Environmental Science and 
Technology, 43(13), 4979–4988. doi: 10.1021/es803650w
Tagaris, E., Manomaiphiboon, K., Liao, K.-J., Leung, L. R., 
Woo, J.-H., He, S., Amar, P., & Russell, A. G. (2007). Impacts of 
global climate change and emissions on regional ozone and 
fine particulate matter concentrations over the United States. 
Journal Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 112(D14), D14312. 
doi:10.1029/2006JD008262.
Tai, A. P. K., Mickley, L. J., & Jacob, D. J. (2010). Correlations 
between fine particulate matter (PM2.5) and meteorological 
variables in the United States: Implications for the sensitivity of 
PM2.5 to climate change. Atmospheric Environment, 44(32), 3976-
3984. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2010.06.060
Tai, A. P. K., Mickley, L. J., & Jacob, D. J. (2012). Impact of 
2000–2050 climate change on fine particulate matter (PM2.5) air 
quality inferred from a multi-model analysis of meteorological 
modes. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 12(23), 11329-
11337. doi:10.5194/acp-12-11329-2012
Takaro, T. K., Knowlton, K., & Balmes, J. R. (2013). Climate 
change and respiratory health: current evidence and knowledge 
gaps. Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine, 7(4), 349–361. 
<https://doi.org/10.1586/17476348.2013.814367>
Tan, X., Chen, S., Gan, T. Y., Liu, B., & Chen, X. (2019). Dynamic 
and thermodynamic changes conducive to the increased 
occurrence of extreme fire weather over western Canada under 
possible anthropogenic climate change. Agricultural and Forest 
Meteorology, 265, 269-279. doi:10.1016/j.agrformet.2018.11.026
Taylor, P. E., Jacobson, K. W., House, J. M., & Glovsky, M. M. 
(2007). Links between pollen, atopy and the asthma epidemic. 
International Archives of Allergy and Immunology, 144(2), 
162–170. <https://doi.org/10.1159/000103230>
The Weather Network. (2019). Pollen report list. Retrieved from 
<https://www.theweathernetwork.com/forecasts/pollen/list>
Thompson, T. M., Rausch, S., Saari, R. K., & Selin, N. E. (2014). 
A systems approach to evaluating the air quality co-benefits 
of US carbon policies. Nature Climate Change, 4, 917-923. doi: 
10.1038/nclimate2342
Thompson, T. M., Rausch, S., Saari, R. K., & Selin, N. E. (2016). Air 
quality co-benefits of subnational carbon policies. Journal of the 
Air & Waste Management Association (1995), 66(10), 988–1002. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10962247.2016.1192071>
To, T., Dell, S., Tassoudji, M., & Wang, C. (2009). Health outcomes 
in low-income children with current asthma in Canada. Chronic 
Diseases in Canada, 29(2), 49–55.
Traidl-Hoffmann, C., Kasche, A., Menzel, A., Jakob, T., Thiel, 
M., Ring, J., & Behrendt, H. (2003). Impact of pollen on human 
health: more than allergen carriers? International Archives 
of Allergy and Immunology, 131(1), 1–13. <https://doi.
org/10.1159/000070428>
Trail, M., Tsimpidi, A. P., Liu, P., Tsigaridis, K., Rudokas, J., Miller, 
P., Nenes, A., Hu, Y., & Russell, A. G. (2014). Sensitivity of air 
quality to potential future climate change and emissions in the 
United States and major cities. Atmospheric Environment, 94, 
552 – 563, doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2014.05.079
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 363 
Turner, M. C., Jerrett, M., Pope, C. A., 3rd, Krewski, D., Gapstur, S. 
M., Diver, W. R., Beckerman, B. S., Marshall, J. D., Su, J., Crouse, 
D. L., & Burnett, R. T. (2016). Long-Term Ozone Exposure and 
Mortality in a Large Prospective Study. American Journal of 
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 193(10), 1134–1142. 
<https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201508-1633OC>
Turnock, S. T., Smith, S., & O’Connor, F. M. (2019). The 
impact of climate mitigation measures on near term climate 
forcers. Environmental Research Letters, 14(10), 104013. doi: 
10.1088/1748-9326/ab4222
Twohig-Bennett, C., & Jones, A. (2018). The health benefits 
of the great outdoors: A systematic review and meta-analysis 
of greenspace exposure and health outcomes. Environmental 
Research, 166, 628–637. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2018.06.030>
United National Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). (2015). The Paris Agreement. Retrieved from <https://
unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/the-paris-
agreement>
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (US 
CDC). (2020). COVID-19 considerations for cleaner air shelters 
and cleaner air spaces to protect the public from wildfire 
Smoke. Atlanta, GA. Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/
coronavirus/2019-ncov/php/cleaner-air-shelters.html>
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 
(2016). Wildfire Smoke: A guide for public health officials. 
Retrieved from <https://www.airnow.gov/publications/wildfire-
smoke-guide/wildfire-smoke-a-guide-for-public-health-officials/> 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 
(2019). Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate Matter. 
Washington, DC. Retrieved from <https://epa.gov/isa/integrated-
science-assessment-particulate-matter> 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 
(2020a). Integrated Science Assessment for Ozone and 
Related Photochemical Oxidants. Washington, DC. Retrieved 
from <https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/isa/recordisplay.
cfm?deid=348522> 
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 
(2020b). Integrated Science Assessments (ISAs). Retrieved from 
<www.epa.gov/isa>
Vachon, J., Gallant, V., & Siu, W. (2018). Tuberculosis in Canada, 
2016. Canada Communicable Disease Report = Releve des 
Maladies Transmissibles au Canada, 44(3-4), 75–81. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v44i34a01>
Vaitla, P. M., & Drewe, E. (2011). Identifying the culprit allergen in 
seasonal allergic rhinitis. The Practitioner, 255(1740), 27–2.
Val Martin, M., Heald, C. L., Lamarque, J.-F., Tilmes, S., Emmons, 
L. K., & Schichtel, B. A. (2015). How emissions, climate, and 
land use change will impact mid-century air quality over the 
United States: a focus on effects at national parks. Atmospheric 
Chemistry and Physics, 15(5), 2805–2823. doi:10.5194/acp-15-
2805-2015
Vandyck, T., Keramidas, K., Kitous, A., Spadaro, J. V., Van 
Dingenen, R., Holland, M., & Saveyn, B. (2018). Air quality co-
benefits for human health and agriculture counterbalance costs 
to meet Paris Agreement pledges. Nature Communications, 9(1), 
4939. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-06885-9>
Van Vuuren, D. P., & Carter, T. R. (2014). Climate and socio-
economic scenarios for climate change research and 
assessment: reconciling the new with the old. Climate change, 
122(3), 415-429. doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0974-2
Van Vuuren, D.P., Edmonds, J., Kainuma, M., Riahi, K., Thomson, 
A., Hibbard, K., Hurtt, G. C., Kram, T., Krey, V., Lamarque, J., 
Masui, T., Meinshausen, M., Nakicenovic, N., Smith, S. J., & Rose, 
S. K. (2011). The representative concentration pathways: an 
overview. Climatic Change, 109(1), 5-31. doi:10.1007/s10584-
011-0148-z
Viegi, G., Maio, S., Simoni, M., & Annesi-Maesano, I. (2009). The 
epidemiological link between ageing and respiratory diseases. In V. 
Bellia and R. Incalzi (Eds.), Respiratory Diseases in Elderly (p. 1–17). 
Wallace, L. (1996). Indoor particles: a review. Journal of the Air & 
Waste Management Association (1995), 46(2), 98–126. <https://
doi.org/10.1080/10473289.1996.10467451>
Wang, X., Parisien, M.-A., Taylor, S. W., Candau, J.-N., Stralberg, 
D., Marshall, G. A., Little, J. M., & Flannigan, M. D. (2017). 
Projected changes in daily fire spread across Canada over the 
next century. Environmental Research Letters, 12(2), 025005. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa5835
Warren, F. J., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2014). Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. 
Weichenthal, S., Lavigne, E., Villeneuve, P. J., & Reeves, F. (2016). 
Airborne Pollen Concentrations and Emergency Room Visits 
for Myocardial Infarction: A Multicity Case-Crossover Study 
in Ontario, Canada. American Journal of Epidemiology, 183(7), 
613–621. <https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwv252>
Wen, X. J., Balluz, L., & Mokdad, A. (2009). Association between 
media alerts of air quality index and change of outdoor activity 
among adult asthma in six states, BRFSS, 2005. Journal of 
Community Health, 34(1), 40–46. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10900-008-9126-4>
Weschler, C. J. (2006). Ozone’s impact on public health: 
contributions from indoor exposures to ozone and products 
of ozone-initiated chemistry. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114(10), 1489–1496. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.9256>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 364 
Weschler, C.J. (2009). Changes in indoor pollutants since the 
1950s. Atmospheric Environment, 43(1), 153–169. doi: 10.1016/j.
atmosenv.2008.09.044
West, J. J., Fiore, A. M., & Horowitz, L. W. (2012). Scenarios of 
methane emission reductions to 2030: abatement costs and 
co-benefits to ozone air quality and human mortality. Climatic 
Change, 114(3-4), 441–461. doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0426-4
West, J. J., Smith, S. J., Silva, R. A., Naik, V., Zhang, Y., Adelan, Z., 
Fry, M. M., Anenberg, S., Horowitz, L. W., & Lamarque, J. F. (2013). 
Co-benefits of mitigating global greenhouse gas emissions for 
future air quality and human health. Nature Climate Change, 3(10), 
885-889. doi: 10.1038/nclimate2009
West, J. J., Szopa, S., & Hauglustaine, D. A. (2007). Human 
mortality effects of future concentrations of tropospheric ozone. 
Comptes Rendus Geoscience, 339(11), 775-783. doi:10.1016/j.
crte.2007.08.005
Wheeler, A. J., Gibson, M. D., MacNeill, M., Ward, T. J., Wallace, 
L. A., Kuchta, J., Seaboyer, M., Dabek-Zlotorzynska, E., Guernsey, 
J. R., & Stieb, D. M. (2014). Impacts of air cleaners on indoor air 
quality in residences impacted by wood smoke. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 48(20), 12157–12163. <https://doi.
org/10.1021/es503144h>
Wolkoff, P. (1998). Impact of air velocity, temperature, humidity, 
and air on long-term VOC emissions from building products. 
Atmospheric Environment, 32(14–15), 2659-2668. doi: 10.1016/
S1352-2310(97)00402-0
World Health Organization (WHO). (2020). Ambient (outdoor) 
air pollution. Retrieved from <www.who.int/mediacentre/
factsheets/fs313/en/> 
Wotton, B. M., Flannigan, M. D., & Marshall, G. (2017). Potential 
climate change impacts on fire intensity and key wildfire 
suppression thresholds in Canada. Environmental Research 
Letters, 12(9), 095003. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa7e6e
Wright, G. S., & Klingenberg, K. (2015). Climate-specific passive 
building standards. Golden, CO: National Renewable Energy Lab 
(NREL). doi:10.2172/1215274
Wu, S., Mickley, L. J., Jacob, D. J., Rind, D., & Streets, D. G. 
(2008a). Effects of 2000 – 2050 changes in climate and 
emissions on global tropospheric ozone and the policy-relevant 
background surface ozone in the United States. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 113(D18), D18312. 
doi:10.1029/2007JD009639
Wu, S., Mickley, L. J., Leibensperger, E. M., Jacob, D. J., Rind, D., 
& Streets, D. G. (2008b). Effects of 2000-2050 change on ozone 
air quality in the United States. Journal of Geophysical Research: 
Atmospheres, 113(D6), D06302. doi:10.1029/2007JD008917
Xiong, J., Wei, W., Huang, S., & Zhang, Y. (2013). Association 
between the emission rate and temperature for chemical 
pollutants in building materials: general correlation and 
understanding. Environmental Science and Technology, 47(15), 
8540–8547. <https://doi.org/10.1021/es401173d>
Yahya, K., Campbell, P., & Zhang Y. (2017). Decadal application of 
WRF/chem for regional air quality and climate modeling over the 
U.S. under the representative concentration pathways scenarios. 
Part 2: Current vs. future simulations. Atmospheric Environment, 
152, 584 – 604. doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2016.12.028
Yao, J., Stieb, D. M., Taylor, E., & Henderson, S. B. (2020). 
Assessment of the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) and four 
alternate AQHI-Plus amendments for wildfire seasons in British 
Columbia. Canadian Journal of Public Health = Revue Canadienne 
de Sante Publique, 111(1), 96–106. <https://doi.org/10.17269/
s41997-019-00237-w>
Youssouf, H., Liousse, C., Roblou, L., Assamoi, E. M., Salonen, 
R. O., Maesano, C., Banerjee, S., & Annesi-Maesano, I. (2014). 
Non-accidental health impacts of wildfire smoke. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(11), 
11772–11804. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph111111772>
Yue, X., Mickley, L. J., Logan, J. A., & Kaplan, J. O. (2013). 
Ensemble projections of wildfire activity and carbonaceous 
aerosol concentrations over the western United States in the 
mid-21st century. Atmospheric Environment, 77, 767-780. 
doi:10.1016/j.atmosenv.2013.06.003
Yukon Health and Social Services. (2019). Wildfire Smoke. 
Government of Yukon. Retrieved from <http://www.hss.gov.
yk.ca/wildfiresmoke.php>
Zhang, J., & Smith, K. R. (2003). Indoor air pollution: a global 
health concern. British Medical Bulletin, 68, 209–225. <https://
doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldg029>
Zhang, Y., Smith, S. J., Bowden, J. H., Adelman, Z., & West, 
J. J. (2017). Co-benefits of global, domestic, and sectoral 
greenhouse gas mitigation for US air quality and human health 
in 2050. Environmental Research Letters, 12(11), 114033. 
<https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aa8f76>
Zhang, Y., West, J. J., Mathur, R., Xing, J., Hogrefe, C., Roselle, 
S. J., Bash, J. O., Pleim, J. E., Gan, C. M., & Wong, D. C. (2018). 
Long-term trends in the ambient PM2.5- and O3-related mortality 
burdens in the United States under emission reductions from 
1990 to 2010. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 18(20), 
15003–15016. <https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-18-15003-2018>
Zickfeld, K., & Herrington, T. (2015). The time lag between a 
carbon dioxide emission and maximum warming increases with 
the size of the emission. Environment Research Letters, 10(3), 
031001. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/10/3/031001
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 365 
Ziska, L. H., & Beggs, P. J. (2012). Anthropogenic climate change 
and allergen exposure: The role of plant biology. The Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 129(1), 27-32. doi:10.1016/j.
jaci.2011.10.032
Ziska, L. H., Makra, L., Harry, S. K., Bruffaerts, N., Hendrickx, 
M., Coates, F., Saarto, A., Thibaudon, M., Oliver, G., Damialis, A., 
Charalampopoulos, A., Vokou, D., Heidmarsson, S., Gudjohnsen, 
E., Vonini, M., Oh, J. W., Sullivan, K., Ford, L., Brooks, G. D., 
Myszkowska, D., …Crimmins, A. R. (2019). Temperature-
related changes in airborne allergenic pollen abundance and 
seasonality across the northern hemisphere: A retrospective 
data analysis. The Lancet Planetary Health, 3(3), e124-e131. 
doi:S2542-5196(19)30015-4
CHAPTER 6
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Infectious 
Diseases
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 367 
Lead Author
Nick H. Ogden, Public Health Agency of Canada
Contributing Authors
Catherine Bouchard, Public Health Agency of Canada
Gabrielle Brankston, University of Guelph
Elizabeth M. Brown, Public Health Ontario
Tricia Corrin, Public Health Agency of Canada
Antonia Dibernardo, Public Health Agency of Canada
Michael A. Drebot, Public Health Agency of Canada
David N. Fisman, University of Toronto
Eleni Galanis, BC Centre for Disease Control and University of 
British Columbia
Amy Greer, University of Guelph
Emily Jenkins, University of Saskatchewan
Julianne V. Kus, Public Health Ontario and University of Toronto
Patrick A. Leighton, Université de Montréal
L. Robbin Lindsay, Public Health Agency of Canada
Anne-Marie Lowe, Public Health Agency of Canada
Antoinette Ludwig, Public Health Agency of Canada
Shaun K. Morris, Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto
Victoria Ng, Public Health Agency of Canada 
Linda Vrbova, Public Health Agency of Canada
Lisa Waddell, Public Health Agency of Canada
Heidi Wood, Public Health Agency of Canada
Suggested Citation
Ogden, N. H., Bouchard, C., Brankston, G., Brown, E. M., Corrin, T., 
Dibernardo, A., Drebot, M. A., Fisman, D. N., Galanis, E., Greer, A., 
Jenkins, E., Kus, J. V., Leighton, P. A., Lindsay, L. R., Lowe, A.-M., 
Ludwig, A., Morris, S. K., Ng, V., Vrbova, L., Waddell, L., & Wood, H. 
(2022). Infectious Diseases. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), Health of 
Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 368 
Table of Contents
Summary
370
Key Messages
370
6.1 Introduction
376
6.1.1 Infectious Disease Emergence and Re-Emergence
377
6.1.2 Infectious Diseases in Previous Climate Change and Health Assessments
378
6.1.3 Managing Infectious Disease Risks
383
6.2 Methods and Approach
384
6.3 Climate-Sensitive Health Risks, Projected Impacts of Climate Change, and Evidence of Impacts 
to Date
385
6.3.1 Vector-Borne Diseases
385
6.3.1.1 Effects of Climate Change on the Ecology and Epidemiology of Vectors and 
Vector-Borne Disease Transmission
385
Box 6.1 How weather and climate change can affect arthropod vectors and vector-borne diseases
386
Box 6.2 Scenarios for introduction of exotic vector-borne diseases into Canada
389
6.3.1.2 Exotic Mosquito-Borne Diseases
390
6.3.1.3 Canada-Endemic Mosquito-Borne Diseases
397
6.3.1.4 Other Insect-Borne Zoonotic Diseases
401
6.3.1.5 Tick-Borne Zoonotic Diseases
402
Box 6.3 Diseases and pathogens transmitted by Ixodes scapularis ticks that are emerging 
with Lyme disease
405
6.3.2 Zoonoses Directly Transmitted from Animals to Humans
410
6.3.2.1 Viral Zoonoses
411
Box 6.4 Climate change and coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
412
6.3.2.2 Parasitic Zoonoses
414
6.3.2.3 Bacterial Zoonoses
415
6.3.3 Infectious Diseases Directly Transmitted from Human to Human
416
6.3.3.1 Respiratory Infections
417
6.3.3.2 Gastrointestinal Infections
419
6.3.4 Infectious Diseases Acquired by Inhalation from Environmental Sources
420
6.3.4.1 Legionellosis
420
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 369 
Box 6.5 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of infections from legionellosis 
422
6.3.4.2 Cryptococcus gattii Infection
422
Box 6.6 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of infections from 
Cryptococcus gattii
424
6.3.4.3 Blastomycosis
425
Box 6.7 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of infections from blastomycosis
426
6.3.4.4 Histoplasmosis
426
Box 6.8 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of infections from histoplasmosis
427
6.3.4.5 Coccidioidomycosis
427
Box 6.9 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of infections from 
coccidioidomycosis
428
6.4 Adaptation to Reduce Health Risks
428
6.4.1 Risk Assessment to Identify Current and Future Risks
430
6.4.1.1 Responsive Rapid Risk Assessments
430
6.4.1.2 Predicting Future Populations at Risk, and Establishing Early Warning Systems, 
Through Quantitative Model-Based Risk Assessments
430
6.4.2 Prioritization
431
6.4.3 Surveillance for Known Risks or Possible Future Risks
432
6.4.4 Interventions to Prevent and Control Disease Incidence
434
6.4.5 Adaptation Challenges for Communities and Members of Society at Increased Risk
435
6.4.6 Adaptation Gaps and Opportunities
436
6.4.6.1 Adaptation Gaps
436
6.4.6.2 Adaptation Opportunities 
437
6.5 Knowledge Gaps
440
6.6 Conclusion
441
6.7 References
443
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 370 
Summary
Climate change is affecting the risk from infectious diseases. There is evidence that the recent emergence of 
Lyme disease in Canada has been driven by climate warming, making more of Canada suitable for the ticks 
that carry the disease. Emergence of other insect-borne diseases, such as eastern equine encephalitis, could 
have been facilitated by a warming climate, and epidemics of West Nile virus infection have likely been driven 
by variability in weather and climate, which will increase with climate change. The risk from a very wide range 
of other infectious diseases is also known to be sensitive to weather and climate. Changes to geographic and 
seasonal patterns of these diseases in North America, and increased risk of importation of climate-sensitive 
diseases from further afield, are likely to pose increased risks to Canadians in coming decades. Adaptation 
measures include assessments of risk and vulnerability, integrated surveillance and early warning systems using 
emerging technologies, and a “One Health” approach that integrates human, animal, and environmental health.
Key Messages
•	
Under climate change, many diseases considered “climate-sensitive” are more likely to emerge or 
re-emerge globally and in Canada. These diseases include those transmitted by arthropod vectors 
(such as West Nile virus, Lyme disease), those directly transmitted from animals (zoonoses such 
as rabies, hantavirus pulmonary syndrome), those directly transmitted human-to-human (such 
as seasonal influenza, enterovirus infections), and those that can be acquired by inhalation from 
environmental sources (such as Cryptococcus infection, Legionnaires’ disease). 
•	
Infectious diseases new to Canada may spread northward from the United States, and from 
elsewhere in the world, carried by people and goods, or by wild animals. The indirect socio-
economic effects of climate change may affect the capacity of nations to prevent and control 
infectious diseases globally, increasing the likelihood that new diseases will come into Canada 
through human travel and migration.
•	
Climate change is expected to make the Canadian environment more suitable for arthropod 
vectors (such as mosquitoes and ticks) and transmission of new infectious diseases. For 
example, mosquito-borne diseases already in Canada such as West Nile virus, which usually 
cause a limited number of infections each year, may produce epidemics under a more variable 
climate with more frequent extreme weather events. 
•	
Potential effects of climate change on infectious diseases are identified by modelling studies, 
while disease surveillance has identified changes in occurrence of infectious diseases, and in 
some cases linked these changes to recent effects of climate change. These studies are largely 
restricted to diseases that humans acquire from arthropod vectors (insects and ticks) and directly 
from animals. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 371 
•	
Canada has high adaptive capacity to cope with infectious diseases given its robust national 
public health surveillance and response tied into national and international networks, a strong 
health system, and capacity for technological innovations. Canada is also a leader in “One Health” 
approaches that consider human, animal, and environmental factors together, using knowledge 
from many disciplines and sectors. Such approaches are essential to planning for emerging and 
re-emerging infectious diseases, including those related to climate change. 
•	
Canada is also increasing its capacity to respond to effects of climate change on infectious 
diseases. This capacity will be enhanced by big data and modern genomic technologies, Earth 
observation from satellites, web crawling, and “citizen science” approaches to surveillance for 
climate change impacts on infectious diseases. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 372 
Components of vulnerability to infectious diseases in the context of climate change. The three intersecting 
components of risk are hazard, contact rate (which, with hazard, determines exposure), and sensitivity. Adaptation 
(represented by the blue background disc) depends on our capacity to minimize, and respond to changes in, each of 
these three components of risk. Green arrows show direct and indirect effects of climate change.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 373 
Overview of the Impacts of Climate Change on Infectious Diseases

HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Infectious diseases 
transmitted by 
arthropod vectors
•	
Faster reproduction rates 
and greater survival, leading 
to increased abundance and 
geographic range of vectors 
found in Canada
•	
Effects of weather variability 
and extreme weather events 
on reproduction rates and 
survival of mosquitoes that 
lead to rapid changes in 
populations
•	
Faster reproduction rates 
and greater survival of exotic 
vectors once they are carried 
into Canada, making it more 
likely that exotic vectors 
and the diseases they carry 
(pathogens) can become 
established
•	
Faster development of 
pathogens in mosquito 
vectors
•	
	Increased incidence of Canada-
endemic vector-borne diseases 
(e.g., Lyme disease, West Nile 
virus infection, eastern equine 
encephalitis)
•	
Increased epidemics of 
Canada-endemic mosquito-
borne diseases (West Nile 
virus infection, eastern 
equine encephalitis, California 
serogroup viruses)
•	
Spread of US-endemic 
tick-borne (e.g., monocytic 
ehrlichiosis) and mosquito-
borne (e.g., La Crosse virus 
infection ) diseases into Canada
•	
Increasing risk of 
autochthonous transmission 
of tropical/subtropical Aedes 
mosquito-borne diseases 
(dengue, chikungunya, Zika)
•	
Impacts on health services
Infectious diseases 
directly transmitted 
by animals (zoonotic 
diseases)
•	
Changes to rates of 
reproduction and survival of 
wild animal reservoir hosts 
and other species resulting in 
changes in geographic ranges 
and levels of hazard for, and 
contact rates with, humans
•	
Effects of weather on 
reproduction rates and 
survival of species such as 
rodents that can lead to rapid 
changes in their abundance
•	
Changes (increases in some 
locations, decreases in others) 
in geographic and temporal 
patterns of risk of directly  
transmitted zoonotic diseases 
(such as rabies, brucellosis)
•	
Possible increasing frequency 
of outbreaks of some 
rodent-borne diseases (such 
as hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome)
•	
Impacts on health services
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 374 
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Infectious diseases 
acquired by inhalation 
from environmental 
sources
•	
Possible increased survival 
and reproduction of fungi in 
soils and other land-based 
environments
•	
Possible increase in 
multiplication of Legionella 
bacteria due to increased 
use of air conditioning 
•	
Increased incidence, and 
changing geographic ranges 
of air-borne and aerosolized 
fungal infections (such as 
cryptococcosis)
•	
Increased outbreaks of 
legionnellosis
•	
Impacts on health services
Emerging infectious 
diseases
•	
Climate-change induced 
changes to the ecology of 
zoonotic diseases globally 
increases the possibility 
of emergence, spillover 
into humans and spread to 
Canada
•	
Increased international 
travel, including human 
population migration, 
enhances global spread of 
zoonotic diseases that are 
also capable of human-to-
human transmission
•	
Increased likelihood and 
frequency of epidemics and 
pandemics (such as SARS and 
COVID-19) including water-
borne, food-borne, vector-
borne, and zoonotic infectious 
diseases
•	
Increased transmission of 
pathogens and infectious 
diseases, potentially leading 
to not only physical health 
impacts, but also impacts 
on mental, spiritual, and 
psychological health 
•	
Impacts on health services
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 375 
List of Acronyms 
CSGV 	 	
California serogroup viruses
CVV 	
	
Cache Valley virus
EEEV 	 	
eastern equine encephalitis virus 
EIP 	
	
extrinsic incubation period
GCM 	
	
global climate models
GHG 	
	
greenhouse gas
GOARN 	
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network
GPHIN 		
Global Public Health Intelligence Network
HFMD 	 	
hand-foot-and-mouth disease
IHR 	
	
International Health Regulations
JCV 	
	
Jamestown Canyon virus
JE 	
	
Japanese encephalitis
LACV 	 	
La Crosse encephalitis virus
MCDA 		
multi-criteria decision analysis
RCP 	
	
representative concentration pathways
RMSF 	 	
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
RRA	
	
rapid risk assessment
RVFV 	 	
Rift Valley fever virus
SINV 	 	
Sindbis virus
SLEV 	 	
St. Louis encephalitis virus
SSHV 	 	
Snowshoe Hare virus
USUV 	 	
Usutu virus
VEE 	
	
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
WGS 	
	
whole genome sequencing
WHO	
	
World Health Organization
WNV 	 	
West Nile virus
YF 	
	
yellow fever
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 376 
6.1 Introduction
Infectious diseases continue to emerge and re-emerge globally, illustrated by epidemics and pandemics 
of new and existing diseases, such as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 
coronavirus, Ebola in Africa, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection in the Middle East, and 
Zika, chikungunya, yellow fever, and dengue virus infections in the Americas. Many infectious diseases are 
climate-sensitive; as a result, transmission of these diseases may be affected directly or indirectly by climate 
change. In Canada, it is expected that current infectious disease risks will increase and new diseases will 
emerge as the climate warms, causing concern for human health. This chapter considers the impacts of 
climate change on risks from infectious diseases of importance for public health in Canada. It expands on 
previous national climate change and health assessments to identify the state of knowledge of current and 
projected risks from infectious diseases, assesses vulnerability, and identifies where public health efforts 
may be required to protect the Canadian population. Infectious diseases related to the impacts of climate 
change on pathogen transmission in water and food are discussed in Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and 
Security, and Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security, respectively. 
The demographic makeup of Canadians is changing, with an aging population (Statistics Canada, 2016), and 
more people affected by chronic illnesses, both of which can change the sensitivity of people to infectious 
disease hazards (Dye, 2014). In this chapter, risk is considered to have two main components: likelihood of 
exposure and sensitivity (i.e., severity of outcome), while the vulnerability of the population is considered to 
be the risk combined with the adaptive capacity (Figure 6.1). This is similar to other versions in the literature 
of the relationship between risk and vulnerability, where vulnerability is a component of risk that combines 
sensitivity, exposure, and adaptive capacity of the human population (IPCC, 2014). Exposure likelihood 
depends on the level of hazard, which is the number of infective organisms (i.e., infective humans, micro-
organisms, arthropod vectors, animal reservoir hosts) in an individual’s environment, and the rate of contact 
of uninfected humans with the hazard (Figure 6.1). In the context of infectious diseases, adaptive capacity 
is the capacity of public health systems to identify, prevent, and control disease, and of health systems to 
minimize the impact of disease through rapid and effective treatment. Climate change may affect each of the 
components of vulnerability through direct effects on the existence and level of hazard, indirect effects on 
rates of contact with the hazard, by increasing or decreasing population sensitivity, and by affecting adaptive 
capacity itself (Figure 6.1).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 377 
Figure 6.1 Components of vulnerability to infectious diseases in the context of climate change. The three 
intersecting components of risk are hazard, contact rate (which, with hazard, determines exposure), and 
sensitivity. Adaptation (represented by the blue background disc) depends on the capacity to minimize, and 
respond to changes in each of these three components of risk. Green arrows show direct and indirect effects of 
climate change.
6.1.1 Infectious Disease Emergence and Re-Emergence
Infectious diseases emerge through changes in their geographic ranges, “spillover,” and “adaptive emergence.” 
Spillover is when some environmental or socio-economic change allows an animal pathogen already 
transmissible to humans to come into contact with humans (e.g., Nipah virus). Adaptive emergence is 
due to genetic change in a micro-organism infecting animals, usually wildlife, that results in it becoming 
transmissible to humans from the animal (i.e., it becomes a zoonosis) and perhaps transmissible among 
humans (e.g., SARS-CoV) (Ogden et al., 2017). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 378 
There are multiple drivers of disease emergence, which include those associated with globalization and 
environment. These include climate change, social and demographic changes, and changes in public health 
systems and policies (Semenza et al., 2016). Endemic diseases can re-emerge (i.e., increase in incidence, 
or resurge as epidemics) through the same drivers. Climate change may directly affect infectious disease 
emergence and re-emergence through effects on the survival of pathogens, on survival and reproduction 
rates of arthropod vectors (e.g., mosquitoes, ticks, and fleas), and, in the case of zoonoses, on the abundance 
of animal reservoir hosts. These are factors that determine the potential for a pathogen to propagate among 
humans or, for zoonoses, animal hosts, which is described by the basic reproduction number R0. If R0 is one 
or higher (in which case one infection results in at least one more infection), the pathogen may persist and 
spread, but if R0 is less than one, it will die out (Anderson & May, 1991). The direct effects of climate change 
that cause disease emergence in a particular location are effectively those that change R0 from less than one 
to one or higher in that location. 
Climate change may have indirect impacts on disease emergence and re-emergence by affecting other 
environmental and social changes, and by reducing the ability of public health systems to respond (e.g., extreme 
weather events may disrupt public health capacity to control disease outbreaks). The effects of climate change 
on ecosystems, including on biodiversity, may alter the hazards posed by zoonoses through complex effects on 
wildlife communities (Altizer et al., 2013; Cable et al., 2017). Other changes that can affect disease emergence 
and re-emergence may be related to public health adaptation initiatives to reduce broader health risks of climate 
change. For example, efforts to reduce heat islands in urban areas through the greening of cities (Beaudoin 
& Gosselin, 2016) and actions to manage floods (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards) may increase zoonosis 
hazards from wildlife and vector-borne diseases (Medlock & Vaux, 2011; Millins et al., 2017). Increased use of air 
conditioning to combat urban heat could increase risks of legionellosis (Fitzhenry et al., 2017). 
Climate change may have negative impacts on economies, particularly those of low- and middle-income 
countries, which could directly, or indirectly through an increase in conflicts, reduce infectious disease control 
and contribute to increasing densities of infectious agents (Ogden, 2017). Economic impacts and dislocation 
may simultaneously drive increased economic or refugee migration, increasing importation of infectious 
diseases to Canada from abroad (Ogden, 2017). In addition, if health systems are not climate-resilient (e.g., 
resilient to outages of power and communication systems associated with extreme weather events) (see 
Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience), impacts may reduce the capacity to detect and 
respond to emerging or re-emerging infectious diseases (Mayhew & Hanefeld, 2014; Ebi et al., 2018; Global 
Commission on Adaptation, 2019). The range of projected climate change includes long-term changes in 
temperature and precipitation patterns, increased climate variability, and increased frequency of extreme 
weather events, which will vary among geographic regions in Canada (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). These changes 
will directly and indirectly affect different infectious disease risks idiosyncratically (Ogden & Lindsay, 2016). 
6.1.2 Infectious Diseases in Previous Climate Change and 
Health Assessments
Since 2008, there have been six national, regional, or international assessments on the effects of climate change 
on infectious disease risks and vulnerability (Table 6.1). There were two assessments in Canada — one that 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 379 
focused on health in 2008 (Charron et al., 2008) and one that included health in a broader Government of Canada 
report on climate change impacts and adaptation in 2014 (Berry et al., 2014a). International assessments relevant 
to Canada included chapters on health and on North America from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) (Romero-Lankao et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2014) and national assessments in the United States 
(Beard et al., 2016; Ebi et al., 2018). 
All assessments identified arthropod-borne diseases (i.e., those transmitted by arthropods such as mosquitoes, 
ticks, and fleas) as most climate-sensitive, with climate determining the occurrence and abundance via effects on 
vector survival and reproduction, and on pathogen development in some vectors. The assessments suggest that 
climate warming is likely to increase risks from these diseases, but most assessments indicated moderate 
confidence in identifying which vector-borne diseases will be affected and the magnitude of the effects. This is due 
to the complexity of vector-borne disease transmission cycles. Multiple non-climatic determinants, including 
environmental and land-use changes, particularly for vector-borne zoonoses such as West Nile virus (WNV) and 
Lyme disease, and control efforts, particularly for exotic mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria and dengue, are 
important for determining the occurrence and abundance of vectors and pathogens. Previous assessments 
highlighted the climatic sensitivity of endemic hazard sensitivity in Canada and the United States, including plague 
and hantavirus infections that have a rodent reservoir; Lyme disease and other tick-borne diseases, such as Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever (RMSF); and endemic mosquito-borne diseases caused by WNV, eastern equine 
encephalitis virus (EEEV), and California serogroup viruses. The assessments identified that changes to 
geographic ranges and length of transmission seasons are particularly likely under climate change (Charron et al., 
2008; Berry et al., 2014a; Smith et al., 2014; Beard et al., 2016; Ebi et al., 2018). Figure 6.2 illustrates the pathways 
through which climate change can affect infectious disease risks in Canada, according to previous assessments. 
Figure 6.2 Climate change effects on infectious disease risks in Canada. Source: Ogden & Gachon, 2019.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 380 
The 2008 Canadian assessment provided model-based projections of the northward spread of Lyme disease 
from the United States into Canada associated with climate change–driven range expansion of the tick 
vector Ixodes scapularis (Charron et al., 2008). Subsequently, the spread of the tick along climate-determined 
trajectories and the emergence of Lyme disease in Canada were documented (Berry et al., 2014a; Smith 
et al., 2014; Beard et al., 2016; Ebi et al., 2018) (Table 6.1). These assessments also identified risks of the 
introduction of exotic vector-borne diseases, such as malaria, dengue, and chikungunya, with climate change. 
Increasing temperatures were anticipated to increase the geographical extent of North America suitable for 
transmission of exotic vector-borne pathogens and the survival of populations of the exotic mosquito vectors 
(e.g., Aedes species) that transmit them. 
Table 6.1 Summary of assessment findings related to the effects of 
climate change on infectious diseases, excluding water- and food-
borne diseases
ASSESSMENT 
IDENTIFIED 
CLIMATE-
SENSITIVE 
INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES
ANTICIPATED 
IMPACT OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE
EVIDENCE 
FOR IMPACTS 
OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE ON 
DISEASE RISKS
ADAPTATION 
AND ADAPTIVE 
CAPACITY AT 
THE TIME OF THE 
ASSESSMENT
Chapter 5 - The 
Impacts of Climate 
Change on Water-, 
Food-, Vector-, 
and Rodent-
Borne Diseases 
in Human Health 
in a Changing 
Climate: A Canadian 
Assessment of 
Vulnerabilities and 
Adaptive Capacity 
(Charron et al., 
2008)
•	 Tick-borne 
disease
•	 Mosquito-borne 
disease
•	 Hantavirus
•	 Plague
•	 Northward 
geographic 
range spread 
of tick-borne 
and mosquito-
borne diseases 
into Canada 
from the United 
States
•	 Invasion 
of exotic 
mosquito-
borne diseases 
(dengue, 
malaria)
•	 Invasion of 
exotic directly 
transmitted 
infections (e.g., 
SARS)
None
Adaptive capacity 
in terms of risk 
assessment, 
surveillance, 
prevention, and 
control is robust 
in Canada, but 
gaps identified 
in knowledge of 
disease ecology, 
the effects 
of climate, 
expert capacity, 
surveillance, and 
warning systems
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 381 
ASSESSMENT 
IDENTIFIED 
CLIMATE-
SENSITIVE 
INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES
ANTICIPATED 
IMPACT OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE
EVIDENCE 
FOR IMPACTS 
OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE ON 
DISEASE RISKS
ADAPTATION 
AND ADAPTIVE 
CAPACITY AT 
THE TIME OF THE 
ASSESSMENT
Chapter 7 - Human 
Health in Canada 
in a Changing 
Climate: Sector 
Perspectives 
on Impacts and 
Adaptation (Berry 
et al., 2014a) 
As above
As above
Evidence for the 
emergence of 
Lyme disease 
via climate-
determined 
trajectories, as 
well as increasing 
incidence of 
human cases
As above
Chapter 11 - 
Human Health: 
Impacts, 
Adaptation, and 
Co-Benefits in 
Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) 
Assessment Report 
5 (AR5) (Smith et 
al., 2014) 
•	 Mosquito-borne 
diseases, such 
as malaria 
and dengue, 
in low- and 
middle-income 
countries
•	 Tick-borne 
diseases in 
Europe and 
North America 
•	 Plague in Asia 
and North 
America
•	 Hantavirus in 
North America
Possible increased 
incidence and 
range expansion 
of mosquito-borne 
and tick-borne 
diseases
None identified
Need to address 
risk and adaptive 
capacity in all 
countries by:
•	 Reducing 
poverty
•	 Improving 
nutrition, basic 
public health, 
and health 
services
•	 Vulnerability 
mapping
•	 Developing 
early warning 
systems linked 
to control 
programs
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 382 
ASSESSMENT 
IDENTIFIED 
CLIMATE-
SENSITIVE 
INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES
ANTICIPATED 
IMPACT OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE
EVIDENCE 
FOR IMPACTS 
OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE ON 
DISEASE RISKS
ADAPTATION 
AND ADAPTIVE 
CAPACITY AT 
THE TIME OF THE 
ASSESSMENT
Chapter 26 - North 
America in IPCC 
AR5 North America 
Chapter (Romero-
Lankao et al., 2014) 
•	 Mosquito-borne 
diseases such 
as West Nile 
virus
•	 Tick-borne 
diseases, 
particularly 
Lyme disease
•	 Possible 
increased 
incidence 
and range 
expansion 
of mosquito-
borne and tick-
borne diseases 
•	 Risk of invasion 
of exotic 
mosquito-
borne diseases
Evidence for the 
emergence of 
Lyme disease 
via climate-
determined 
trajectories in 
Canada
Need improved 
datasets and 
models to 
understand effects 
of environmental 
changes versus 
other determinants 
of vector-borne 
disease risk, and 
early warning 
systems
Chapter 5 - Vector-
Borne Diseases 
in The Impacts of 
Climate Change 
on Human Health 
in the United 
States: A Scientific 
Assessment (Beard 
et al., 2016) 
•	 Mosquito-borne 
disease such as 
West Nile virus 
and dengue
•	 Tick-borne 
diseases such 
as Lyme disease
•	 Plague
•	 Geographic 
range change, 
change in 
seasonality, 
and date of 
onset/duration 
of vector 
activity
None identified
Need improved 
models to 
understand and 
predict the effects 
of weather and 
climate changes 
versus other 
determinants 
of vector-borne 
disease risk, and 
field observations 
to support these
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 383 
ASSESSMENT 
IDENTIFIED 
CLIMATE-
SENSITIVE 
INFECTIOUS 
DISEASES
ANTICIPATED 
IMPACT OF 
CLIMATE CHANGE
EVIDENCE 
FOR IMPACTS 
OF CLIMATE 
CHANGE ON 
DISEASE RISKS
ADAPTATION 
AND ADAPTIVE 
CAPACITY AT 
THE TIME OF THE 
ASSESSMENT
Chapter 14 - 
Human Health in 
Impacts, Risks, 
and Adaptation 
in the United 
States: Fourth 
National Climate 
Assessment. (Ebi 
et al., 2018) 
•	 Mosquito-borne 
disease such as 
West Nile virus 
and dengue
•	 Tick-borne 
diseases such 
as Lyme disease
•	 Changes in 
geographic 
ranges, 
seasonal 
distribution, 
and abundance 
of disease 
vectors
•	 Increased risks 
from mosquito-
borne diseases 
abroad, which 
may spread 
into US territory
None identified
Need vulnerability 
and adaptation 
assessments 
and response 
plans, integrated 
surveillance for 
vector-borne 
diseases, and early 
warning systems 
such as disease 
forecasting
6.1.3 Managing Infectious Disease Risks
Adapting to climate-related infectious diseases first involves assessing risks to health and identifying 
populations at increased risk to the impacts. The capacity of public health systems to detect emerging and 
re-emerging infectious diseases by surveillance, and to prevent and control them by health promotion or more 
proactive measures such as vaccine development, as well as the capacity of health care systems to minimize 
consequences of infectious diseases, need to be assessed. Assessments provide information on vulnerability 
to infectious diseases and identify the most effective measures to reduce it (Berry, 2008). In general, previous 
assessments have suggested that, in North America, the ability of public health systems to assess risks from 
emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases, and to detect, prevent, and control them, is robust (see Table 
6.1). The risk to most Canadians is low because of the relatively high socio-economic status of much of the 
population, which provides an environment that limits many disease risks, and because of the strong public 
health and health care infrastructures and systems. In addition, progress has been made in filling gaps in 
knowledge, surveillance, capacity, and early warning systems identified in previous assessments (see section 
6.4 Adaptation to Reduce Health Risks). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 384 
6.2 Methods and Approach
This chapter includes analysis of the impacts of climate change on human risks from infectious diseases 
of importance for public health in Canada, with the exception of infectious diseases transmitted in drinking 
and recreational water and in food, which are addressed in separate chapters (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, 
Quantity, and Security, and Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). This chapter is a narrative review authored 
by subject matter experts. However, to support the author team, a rapid review was conducted to identify 
the majority of the national and international literature on weather, climate, and climate change impacts on 
infectious diseases. The review focused on the five areas explored in the chapter:
•	
vector-borne diseases:
•	
exotic mosquito-borne diseases, including those for which humans are the main reservoirs 
(e.g., malaria, dengue)
•	
mosquito-borne diseases endemic in Canada (e.g., WNV disease)
•	
non-mosquito, insect-borne diseases (e.g., plague) 
•	
tick-borne diseases (e.g., Lyme disease)
•	
directly transmitted zoonoses (e.g., rabies, hantavirus)
•	
infectious diseases directly transmitted human-to-human (e.g., influenza and enterovirus infections)
•	
infectious diseases transmitted by inhalation from environmental sources (e.g., 
cryptococcosis, legionellosis)
•	
Canadian capacity to adapt to changing risks from infectious diseases
The rapid review followed the general framework for scoping reviews first proposed by Arksey and O'Malley 
(2005) and further refined over the last 15 years (Levac et al., 2010; Peters et al., 2015; Tricco et al., 2016). 
It identified and characterized all of the available international research on climate change and infectious 
diseases using a systematic and reproducible methodology. A protocol was developed a priori and defines 
the scope of the rapid review, the comprehensive search strategy, and all tools used to screen citations 
and extract information from the literature (available upon request). The electronic search was conducted 
using Embase, PubMed, and Global Health in September 2018 to identify relevant literature in English and 
French on infectious diseases that also explored effects of weather, climate, and/or climate change. A grey 
literature search included targeted hand-searching of various government and scientific websites to identify 
reports that were not indexed in the electronic databases. Search results were de-duplicated in the reference 
management software Endnote (EndNote X7, Clarivate Analytics), and unique citations were uploaded into the 
web-based systematic review software Distiller SR (Distiller SR, Evidence Partners, Ottawa, Canada). Studies 
were screened for relevance by two reviewers, working independently, using a relevance screening tool 
developed a priori. All citations that were included after relevance screening were procured and confirmed to 
be relevant, and then the research was characterized using the developed data characterization tool. More 
recent publications were identified during the chapter review process.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 385 
Where sufficient information exists, in this chapter the confidence in direction and strength of the effects of 
climate change are identified. Identification of climate- or weather-sensitivity of diseases was considered to 
provide limited evidence for effects of climate change, evidence for climate- or weather-sensitivity combined 
with projections of effects of climate change provides medium evidence, while detected changes in infectious 
disease risks attributable to recent climate change was considered as providing robust evidence for effects of 
climate change.
6.3 Climate-Sensitive Health Risks, Projected 
Impacts of Climate Change, and Evidence of 
Impacts to Date
6.3.1 Vector-Borne Diseases
6.3.1.1 Effects of Climate Change on the Ecology and Epidemiology of Vectors and 
Vector-Borne Disease Transmission
The life cycles of many arthropod vectors, and the impacts of weather and climate on these life cycles, 
have been intensely studied in the laboratory, field, and modelling studies, and reviewed elsewhere (Ogden 
& Lindsay, 2016). How changes in weather and climate may affect arthropod vectors and the transmission 
of vector-borne diseases is summarized in Box 6.1. While the effects of weather and climate are generic 
for arthropod vectors, how specifically they affect life cycles and transmission cycles is highly idiosyncratic 
among the different vectors and pathogens (Figure 6.3). Climate change may affect the risk of vector-
borne diseases by altering human social-behavioural risk factors, such as perception of risk and adoption 
of preventive behaviours (Bouchard et al., 2018). Human population growth, movement, and social and 
economic factors (e.g., changing exposure to tick-borne encephalitis virus in eastern Europe due to changing 
population exposure following collapse of the Eastern Bloc) have also been associated with differential rates 
of human exposure to vectors and vector-borne diseases (Randolph, 2004). How climate change may affect 
risks indirectly through these factors requires further study.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 386 
Box 6.1 How weather and climate change can affect arthropod vectors 
and vector-borne diseases
Warming temperatures can have a number of effects on vectors and vector-borne diseases, including: 
•	
increasing survival of vectors; 
•	
accelerating development from one life stage to the next, resulting in shorter life cycles and 
greater vector abundance; 
•	
increasing periods of the year when vectors can be active and therefore the likelihood they feed 
successfully (Monaghan et al., 2015); 
•	
shortening the duration of the extrinsic incubation period (EIP) of mosquito-borne pathogens. The 
EIP is the time it takes for a pathogen ingested in a blood meal to get from the mosquito’s gut to 
its salivary glands, from which it can be delivered to another host.
An optimal temperature range exists for most vectors and vector-borne diseases. Extreme high and low 
temperatures can reduce vector activity and survival. For example, for mosquito-borne diseases, if the 
temperature is too cold, most mosquitoes die before the EIP is complete, while at very high temperatures 
most mosquitoes die, whether or not the EIP is complete. This results in a temperature range specific for 
mosquito species–pathogen combinations, outside of which efficient pathogen transmission by mosquitoes 
is impossible. Optimal rainfall ranges are also required for vectors and vector-borne diseases. Increased 
rainfall generally increases mosquito abundance by increasing the habitat for immature (larval and pupal) 
mosquitoes, which are aquatic. Only adult females take blood meals that transmit pathogens. However, heavy 
rainfall can reduce vector activity, for example, by drowning ticks and washing out immature mosquitoes from 
their habitat. In some cases, droughts can limit arthropod vectors. For example, droughts generally decrease 
mosquito populations by reducing the habitat for immature mosquitoes, and may reduce tick numbers if 
severe enough to dry out the woodland in which they live. However, droughts can increase mosquitoes in 
some urban habitats by turning drains into standing water, which is habitat for mosquito larvae and pupae.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 387 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 388 
Figure 6.3 The impacts of weather and climate on the life cycles of dipteran and ixodid tick vectors. The 
impacts of climate change are illustrated using the life cycle of the mosquito Culex pipiens and its role in 
the transmission of West Nile virus (WNV) in A. The life cycle of the tick Ixodes scapularis and its role in the 
transmission of the Lyme disease agent Borrelia burgdorferi is illustrated in B. In both, dark and pale blue arrows 
indicate development, and host finding/detachment from hosts, respectively, while red arrows indicate pathogen 
transmission cycles. Points at which weather and climate (and potentially climate change) may affect the 
vector’s life cycle (LC) and pathogen transmission cycle (TC) are indicated by the grey-filled boxes in which A = 
effects on activity, D = effects on inter-stadial development rates, EI = effects on the extrinsic incubation period, 
Re = effects on reproduction, T = effects of temperature, Ra = effects of rainfall, and RH = effects of humidity. In 
the centre of the B. burgdorferi transmission cycle (B) is an illustration of the seasonal activity of the tick vectors, 
which may be affected by climate and climate change through effects on both development and activity, as 
described in the text. Source: Ogden & Lindsay, 2016.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 389 
Box 6.2 Scenarios for introduction of exotic vector-borne diseases 
into Canada
Scenario 1 – Local spread of US-endemic pathogens into regions of Canada where the mosquito vectors 
are already present 
Based on current knowledge, this scenario relates particularly to St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV, a 
flavivirus) and La Crosse encephalitis virus (LACV, a bunyavirus), which cause uncommon but severe and 
sometimes fatal disease in humans, and are endemic to central and eastern US states bordering Canada 
(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018a; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018b). 
The main vectors for SLEV (Culex tarsalis and Cx. pipiens) and LACV (Aedes triseriatus), as well as their wild 
animal reservoirs (wild birds for SLEV and chipmunks and squirrels for LACV), are established in parts of 
Canada (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018a; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
2018b; Giordano et al., 2015). A short-lived epidemic of SLEV in Southern Ontario in 1975 suggests that 
endemicity may be possible if environmental conditions become suitable (Spence et al., 1977).
Scenario 2 – Spread of “exotic” diseases endemic to other countries to regions of Canada where mosquito 
vectors are already present
The possibility of autochthonous transmission of exotic diseases transmitted by Aedes species mosquitoes 
is a reality where the mosquitoes have become endemic, such as Southern Europe and the Southern United 
States (Rezza et al., 2007; Bouri et al., 2012; Delisle et al., 2015; Likos et al., 2016; Septfons et al., 2016; 
Venturi et al., 2017). West Nile virus emerged in the United States and Canada by this mechanism, most likely 
by importation of infected mosquitoes on an aircraft followed by endemic transmission due to the existence 
of competent mosquito vectors and avian reservoir hosts (Gubler, 2007; Artsob et al., 2009; Zheng et al., 
2014; Giordano et al., 2017). Other diseases that may emerge in Canada under this scenario include Japanese 
encephalitis (JE), malaria, Sindbis virus (SINV) infection, Usutu virus (USUV) infection, and Venezuelan equine 
encephalitis (VEE) infection (Table 6.2). All of these diseases are transmitted by mosquito vectors that have 
long been established in some parts of Canada (Berrang-Ford et al., 2009; Giordano et al., 2015; Giordano et 
al., 2018). The reservoir hosts for many of these diseases also already exist in Canada. For example, swine, 
wild birds, rodents, and horses are reservoirs of JE, SINV, USUV, and VEE virus, respectively. 
Scenario 3 – Spread of “exotic” diseases endemic to other countries to Canada where mosquito vectors 
are not currently present 
This scenario is the same as scenario 2, except that it applies to exotic mosquito-borne diseases for which 
both pathogen and vector would have to be imported and become endemic. Therefore, this is the least likely 
scenario for the emergence of a new mosquito-borne disease in Canada. For most of Canada, mosquito-
borne diseases in this group include chikungunya, dengue, yellow fever (YF), and Zika virus infection, as the 
Aedes species vectors Ae. albopictus and Ae. aegypti have been considered absent. However Ae. albopictus 
has recently emerged in one area of Southern Ontario (Windsor-Essex County Health Unit, 2019b), so for this 
region chikungunya, dengue, and Zika virus are pathogens that could emerge according to scenario 2. YF is 
transmitted by Ae. aegypti but not by Ae. albopictus (Cuoto-Lima et al., 2017), so YF remains a “scenario 3” 
pathogen. Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is endemic to East Africa; however, livestock and wildlife species, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 390 
such as white-tailed deer in North America, are thought to be capable of acting as reservoirs for the virus 
(Golnar et al., 2014; Wilson et al., 2018). The African floodwater-breeding Aedes species vectors of RVFV 
are absent from North America, but mosquito species endemic to the United States and Canada have been 
observed to transmit the virus under laboratory conditions (Gargan et al., 1988; Turell et al., 2010; Iranpour et 
al., 2011; Turell et al., 2013a; Turell et al., 2013b; Turell et al., 2014). If these mosquitoes can transmit the virus 
under field conditions, RVFV should be considered a pathogen that could emerge according to scenario 2.
6.3.1.2 Exotic Mosquito-Borne Diseases
There is a wide range of mosquito-borne diseases of public health significance globally. Some, such as 
malaria, dengue, yellow fever, and chikungunya, which are transmitted from human to human by mosquitoes, 
are among the world’s greatest public health threats, causing millions of cases and deaths annually (WHO, 
2019a). Other diseases, many of which are mosquito-borne zoonoses, such as those caused by Sindbis 
and Venezuelan equine encephalitis viruses, occur more sporadically (Table 6.2). Exotic mosquito-borne 
diseases are absent from Canada due to multiple factors, including climate. For most exotic mosquito-borne 
diseases, Canada’s climate is currently too cold for the vectors, and/or for development of the pathogens 
in the mosquito (Ng et al., 2019). Other barriers exist, including the lack of animal reservoir hosts for some 
diseases (such as primates for yellow fever virus) and standards of housing, including doors and windows, 
which prevent entry of vectors, and air conditioning systems, which inhibit human-to-human transmission 
by mosquitoes (Reiter, 2001). Physical barriers need to be surmounted for the pathogens and vectors to be 
transported to Canada from overseas. 
The expansion of the geographic range of exotic vector-borne diseases into Canada requires movement of 
exotic vectors and pathogens from the countries where they are endemic. Increasing global trade and travel 
are expected to facilitate the global movement of mosquito vectors (infected or not) and infected travellers, 
thereby increasing the possibility of importation of vectors and pathogens into regions where they have not 
previously occurred (Tatem et al., 2006; Tatem et al., 2012; Semenza et al., 2016). There are three scenarios 
whereby vector-borne diseases currently exotic to Canada may emerge here (Box 6.2). 
The public health impact of climate change on each emergence scenario will vary and could include increased 
likelihood of Canadians acquiring infection while travelling abroad, increased likelihood of short-lived 
autochthonous (i.e., local, within Canada) transmission where competent vectors are already established, and 
permanent endemicity of new diseases in Canada (Ng et al., 2019).
Mosquito vectors of exotic mosquito-borne diseases are sensitive to weather conditions, and climate 
change would be expected to affect them. Field and laboratory experiments demonstrate the temperature 
sensitivity of the Aedes and Anopheles species mosquitoes that are the main vectors of the most important 
exotic mosquito-borne diseases globally (Brady et al., 2013; Shapiro et al., 2017). In general, warmer 
temperatures, high humidity, and increased precipitation facilitate the life cycle of mosquitoes by supporting 
larval development and survival and by extending adult lifespan (Reeves et al., 1994; Jetten & Focks, 1997; 
Paaijmans et al., 2009; Yang et al., 2009). These climatic conditions will influence pathogen transmission by:
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 391 
•	
reducing egg development time in adult female mosquitoes, thus reducing time between blood 
feeds and increasing feeding frequency (Reeves et al., 1994; Jetten & Focks, 1997; Paaijmans et 
al., 2013);
•	
shortening the EIP, thereby allowing mosquitoes to become infectious faster (Davis, 1932; Reeves et 
al., 1994; Jetten & Focks, 1997; Paaijmans et al., 2009; Paaijmans et al., 2013; Xiao et al., 2014); and 
•	
increasing mosquito longevity, enabling infectious mosquitoes to bite more people (Yang et al., 2009).
However, many of these weather-dependent relationships are complex; relationships can be non-linear, can 
have opposite effects depending on circumstance, and can be influenced by non-climatic factors (Box 6.1).
The degree to which climate change will affect, or has already affected, the global distribution of many 
mosquitoes and mosquito-borne diseases is uncertain. This is because the relationship between climate 
and vector-borne diseases, particularly those transmitted human-to-human via mosquitoes, is complex, 
and the spatiotemporal distribution of vectors and the pathogens they carry depends on a range of factors 
that are not directly climatic. These factors include increased mobility and interconnectivity of people and 
goods (Junxiong & Yee-Sin, 2015; Semenza et al., 2016; Tabachnick, 2016; Lindsey et al., 2018; Romeo-Aznar 
et al., 2018), urbanization and other land-use changes (Junxiong & Yee-Sin, 2015; Jones & O'Neill, 2016; 
Semenza et al., 2016; Asad & Carpenter, 2018; Romeo-Aznar et al., 2018), socio-economic factors (KC & 
Lutz, 2017; Reina Ortiz et al., 2017; Lindsey et al., 2018; Moreno-Madriñán & Turell, 2018; Romeo-Aznar et al., 
2018), demographic changes, including those due to immigration and population growth (Asad & Carpenter, 
2018; Lindsey et al., 2018; Romeo-Aznar et al., 2018), population immunity (Anyamba et al., 2012; Larrieu 
et al., 2014; Semenza et al., 2016), genetic evolution and adaptation (Gubler, 2007; Tsetsarkin et al., 2007; 
Tabachnick, 2016), access to health care (Reiter, 2008; Ooi & Gubler, 2009; Semenza et al., 2016), and vector 
control and intervention programs (Githeko et al., 2000; Junxiong & Yee-Sin, 2015; Tasanee et al., 2015). Some 
of these factors are independent of climate change, but some may be influenced by climate change, and 
climate change may affect mosquito-borne diseases indirectly via these factors.
Despite the uncertainty, effects of climate change on the spread of mosquitoes and mosquito-borne diseases 
are likely (high confidence), with regional variation across the globe (Smith et al., 2014). By shortening 
the length of the life cycle, increasing mosquito survival, and enhancing pathogen transmission, climate 
change will drive the expansion of mosquito and mosquito-borne pathogen populations in some locations 
and increase the geographic scope, mostly poleward and toward higher altitudes, of their ecological niches 
in many cases (Campbell et al., 2015; Kraemer et al., 2015; Samy et al., 2016; Hertig, 2019; Kamal et al., 
2019; Kraemer et al., 2019). While mosquito populations may expand into new geographic areas, they may 
disappear from others (Machado-Machado, 2012; Escobar et al., 2016; Williams et al., 2016). 
A warming climate is expected to enhance populations of Canada-endemic mosquito species (Hongoh et 
al., 2012) and conditions for pathogen transmission, making Southern Canada, in particular, more suitable 
for the emergence of new mosquito-borne diseases by scenarios 1 and 2 (Box 6.2). Temperature conditions 
in parts of Southern Canada are also expected to become increasingly suitable for populations of the 
yellow fever mosquito Ae. aegypti and the Asian tiger mosquito Ae. albopictus that are vectors of dengue, 
chikungunya, Zika, and yellow fever. Climate change is also expected to increase temperature suitability for 
virus transmission (Ng et al., 2017), rendering mosquito-borne disease emergence by scenario 3 (Box 6.2) 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 392 
increasingly possible in Southern Canada. Southern Coastal British Columbia, Southern Ontario, Quebec, 
New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia are anticipated to become climatically suitable for Ae. albopictus (Ogden 
et al., 2014a), while Southern Coastal British Columbia may also become suitable for Ae. aegypti (Campbell 
et al., 2015; Kamal et al., 2019). In 2016, an adult Ae. aegypti was collected in Southern Ontario. A very small 
number of adults and larvae were found in the subsequent year under enhanced mosquito trapping and field 
surveillance in the area, suggesting this species has not become established in Canada (Windsor-Essex 
County Health Unit, 2019a). However, Ae. albopictus has been found sporadically in multiple, but restricted, 
locations in Southern Ontario since 2005. There is one small area of Canada where Ae. albopictus became 
established between 2017 and 2018, although, to date, there is no evidence that these mosquitoes carry 
pathogens that have caused illness in humans (Windsor-Essex County Health Unit, 2019b).
Particularly for scenarios 2 and 3, the likelihood that new vector-borne diseases emerge in Canada will 
depend on the number of pathogen and/or vector introduction events, as well as the degree to which climate 
change makes Canada a more suitable environment for them to become established. Some forms of global 
movement may be driven by climate change, for example, climate refugees (McMichael et al., 2012) and 
changes in travel patterns (World Tourism Organization & United Nations Environment Programme, 2008). Climate 
change may therefore have three impacts that increase the likelihood of emergence by scenarios 2 and 3:
•	
increased climatic suitability in Canada; 
•	
increased abundance of exotic pathogens and their vectors in countries outside Canada; and 
•	
increased introduction of pathogens and vectors. 
Even without the effects of climate change, global interconnectivity is increasing (Findlater & Bogoch, 2018), 
and Canadians are enthusiastic travellers (Statistics Canada, 2019), so local and global movement will 
continue to pose a growing risk for the introduction of exotic pathogens via imported vectors and infected 
humans into Canada. Pathways of introduction may be predictable, however. For Japanese encephalitis 
(JE), the most probable scenario for introduction into the United States would be by JE-infected female 
mosquitoes arriving on aircraft from eastern China (Oliveira et al., 2018). JE incursion would likely follow a 
similar pathway into Canada, with coastal British Columbia being the most likely entry location because of its 
many travel and trade connections with Asia. It also has a temperate climate and endemic mosquito vectors 
and reservoirs that might support local JEV transmission, should it arrive. 
In addition to a suitable climate, other factors such as poverty and a lack of access to infrastructure, health 
care, and disease control measures are also important for endemic transmission of exotic pathogens 
transmitted human-to-human by mosquitoes (Ebi et al., 2006a; Halstead, 2008). Social conditions for most 
of the Canadian population (particularly population density and housing) are expected to limit mosquito 
biting rates, and health services remove infected people from transmission, making it difficult for efficient, 
sustained transmission cycles of such exotic pathogens to become established (Berrang-Ford et al., 2009; 
Ng et al., 2019). It is more likely that the public health impact will be occasional autochthonous cases in 
Canadians who have not travelled. These people may have severe health consequences because, in the 
absence of a history of travel, diagnosis may be delayed (Berrang-Ford et al., 2009; Ng et al., 2019). Delayed 
diagnosis of “unexpected” cases of exotic mosquito-borne disease in Canadians could lead to some chains of 
transmission and limited outbreaks. Examples from outside Canada include the introduction of chikungunya 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 393 
virus into Mediterranean Europe in 2007 and dengue in France, Croatia, and Madeira between 2010 and 2013.
These events may have been driven by particularly warm weather conditions (Rezza et al., 2007; Tomasello & 
Schlagenhauf, 2013).
In contrast, if exotic mosquito-borne zoonoses invade, they may be more likely to become endemic if 
environmental conditions, including climate, are suitable, as pathogen transmission among wildlife and/or 
livestock reservoir hosts would be mainly unrestricted, as has been the case for WNV. The range expansion 
of Sindbis virus (SINV) and Usutu virus (USUV), out of Africa and into Europe, have strongly paralleled that of 
WNV in North America (Weissenböck et al., 2002; Ashraf et al., 2015). Given that the mosquito vectors and 
reservoirs for USUV and SINV are already present in Canada, and the climate in invaded parts of Europe is 
very similar to that of southern regions of Canada, the emergence of SINV or USUV in this country as disease-
causing endemic viruses is possible. Infections with SINV and USUV produce unpleasant but relatively mild 
infections in immunocompetent humans. 
Another exotic mosquito-borne zoonosis, Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV), can cause infections that are serious 
and can be fatal (WHO, 2019b), so the possibility of emergence of this virus in Canada is a more concerning 
threat. Canada-endemic mosquito species have been shown to be competent vectors for RVFV, while a 
wide range of wildlife and domesticated livestock are animal reservoirs (Box 6.2, Table 6.2). The most likely 
mechanism of introduction into North America is considered to be RVFV-infected humans arriving on aircraft 
from endemic areas where there is an outbreak (Golnar et al., 2014; Golnar et al., 2018). Should the traveller come 
into contact with endemic mosquito vectors, transmission to wildlife and/or livestock may result in endemicity.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 394 
Table 6.2 Key global mosquito-borne diseases and features of their transmission (vectors and hosts), geographic occurrence, 
and the presence of vectors and hosts in Canada and the United States
DISEASE
PATHOGEN(S)
GEOGRAPHIC 
DISTRIBUTION OF 
HUMAN CASES
ENDEMICITY 
IN THE US
PRIMARY VECTORS
VECTORS 
ESTABLISHED IN 
CANADA?
IF ABSENT FROM CANADA, 
ARE VECTORS ESTABLISHED 
IN THE UNITED STATES?
PRIMARY 
RESERVOIRS
PRIMARY 
RESERVOIR(S) 
IN CANADA?
EVIDENCE 
OF SENSITIVITY 
TO CLIMATE
INTRODUCTION 
SCENARIO
Chikungunya
Chikungunya 
virus
Africa, Southeast 
Asia, Philippines, 
Pacific Islands, 
Middle East, 
Caribbean, Americas
Not endemic but 
locally acquired 
cases reported in 
2014–2015 in Florida 
and Texas
Aedes aegypti and 
Ae. albopictus
Emerging 
population of Ae. 
albopictus in a very 
limited area of 
Southern Ontario
Aedes aegypti southern states 
to Southern New York state, 
Ae. albopictus in southern and 
northeast states, including 
those bordering Central and 
Eastern Canada
Humans, wild 
primates (in 
Africa)
Yes (humans), 
no wild primates
Yes
2
Dengue
Dengue virus 
serotypes 1 to 4
Asia, the Pacific, 
Americas, Africa, 
Caribbean
Endemic in Puerto 
Rico
Ae. aegypti and Ae. 
albopictus
Emerging 
population of Ae. 
albopictus in a very 
limited area of 
Southern Ontario
Aedes aegypti southern states 
to Southern New York state, 
Ae. albopictus in southern and 
northeast states, including 
those bordering Central and 
Eastern Canada
Humans, wild 
primates in 
Southeast Asia 
and Western 
Africa
Yes (humans), 
no wild primates
Yes
2
Japanese 
encephalitis
Japanese 
encephalitis virus
Asia, Pacific Islands, 
Torres Strait of 
Australia, Papua New 
Guinea
Not endemic
Culex spp. 
mosquitoes
Cx. tarsalis in 
Western and 
Central Canada
Domestic pigs 
and wild birds
Yes
Yes
2
La Crosse 
encephalitis
La Crosse virus
United States (upper 
mid-western and 
mid-Atlantic and 
southeast states)
Endemic to most of 
the eastern states, 
including states that 
border Canada
Aedes triseriatus
Aedes triseriatus in 
Eastern Canada
Small mammals 
(chipmunks and 
squirrels
Yes
Yes
1
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 395 
DISEASE
PATHOGEN(S)
GEOGRAPHIC 
DISTRIBUTION OF 
HUMAN CASES
ENDEMICITY 
IN THE US
PRIMARY VECTORS
VECTORS 
ESTABLISHED IN 
CANADA?
IF ABSENT FROM CANADA, 
ARE VECTORS ESTABLISHED 
IN THE UNITED STATES?
PRIMARY 
RESERVOIRS
PRIMARY 
RESERVOIR(S) 
IN CANADA?
EVIDENCE 
OF SENSITIVITY 
TO CLIMATE
INTRODUCTION 
SCENARIO
Malaria
Plasmodium spp.
Central America, 
South America, 
Africa, Southeast 
Asia, Middle East, 
Southwest Pacific
Not endemic
Anopheles spp. 
mosquitoes, 
particularly An. 
gambiae and An. 
arabiensis
Anopheles 
quadrimaculatus 
in Eastern Ontario 
and Quebec, 
Anopheles 
freeborni in British 
Columbia
Humans
Yes
Yes
2
Rift Valley 
fever
Rift Valley fever 
virus
Eastern and Southern 
Africa, Saudi Arabia, 
Indian Ocean
Not endemic
African floodwater 
Aedes spp. 
mosquitoes
Some Aedes 
species in Canada 
are capable of 
transmitting 
the virus in the 
laboratory
Unknown, 
possibly 
livestock, 
equines, and 
wild ungulates
Yes
Yes
3
Sindbis fever
Sindbis virus
Northern Europe, 
Australia, China, 
South Africa
Not endemic
Ornithophilic 
Culex, Culiseta, 
Ochlerotatus. 
and Aedes spp. 
mosquitoes
Culex pipiens and 
some Ochlerotatus 
and Aedes spp.
Birds
Yes
Yes
2
St. Louis 
encephalitis
St. Louis 
encephalitis virus
Central, Western, 
and Southern United 
States
Endemic in northern, 
eastern, and central 
states including 
states bordering 
Canada
Culex tarsalis, 
C. pipiens, C. 
quinquefasciatus, C. 
nigripalpus
Culex tarsalis 
in Western and 
Central Canada 
and Culex pipiens 
along the US-
Canada border
Birds
Yes
Yes
1
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 396 
DISEASE
PATHOGEN(S)
GEOGRAPHIC 
DISTRIBUTION OF 
HUMAN CASES
ENDEMICITY 
IN THE US
PRIMARY VECTORS
VECTORS 
ESTABLISHED IN 
CANADA?
IF ABSENT FROM CANADA, 
ARE VECTORS ESTABLISHED 
IN THE UNITED STATES?
PRIMARY 
RESERVOIRS
PRIMARY 
RESERVOIR(S) 
IN CANADA?
EVIDENCE 
OF SENSITIVITY 
TO CLIMATE
INTRODUCTION 
SCENARIO
Usutu virus
Usutu virus
Africa, Europe
Not endemic
Culex pipiens, Cx. 
neavei
Culex pipiens along 
the US-Canada 
border
Birds
Yes
Yes
2
Venezuelan 
equine 
encephalitis
Venezuelan 
encephalitis virus
South and Central 
Americas, Mexico 
and cases as far 
as Southern United 
States
Not endemic
Culex, Aedes, 
Mansonia, 
Psorophora, 
Deincerites, and 
Ochlerotatus spp. 
mosquitoes
Oc. sollicitans in 
Eastern Canada
Oc. taeniorhynchus along 
most of US coast and Culex 
melanoconion in Florida
Rodents, 
equines
Yes
Yes
2
Yellow fever
Yellow fever virus
Tropical and 
subtropical Africa, 
South America
Not endemic
Ae. aegypti 
Aedes aegypti southern states 
to Southern New York state
Humans, wild 
primates
Yes (humans), 
no wild primates
Yes
3
Zika
Zika virus
Africa, Southeast 
Asia, South America
Not endemic but 
locally acquired cases 
in Puerto Rico, Florida, 
and Texas from 
2015–2016
Ae. aegypti, Ae. 
albopictus
Emerging 
population of Ae. 
albopictus in a very 
limited area of 
Southern Ontario
Aedes aegypti southern states 
to southern New York state, 
Ae. albopictus in southern and 
northeastern states, including 
those bordering Central and 
Eastern Canada
Humans, wild 
primates 
Yes (humans), 
no wild primates
Yes
2
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 397 
6.3.1.3 Canada-Endemic Mosquito-Borne Diseases
All four of the most medically important arboviruses endemic to Canada — WNV, EEEV, snowshoe hare virus 
(SSHV), and Jamestown Canyon virus (JCV) — are transmitted through bites of infected female mosquitoes. 
Mosquitoes acquire infections from specific mammalian or avian reservoir hosts. The main mosquito vectors 
for WNV are Cx. pipiens and Cx. restuans in Eastern Canada and Cx. tarsalis in Western Canada (Kramer 
et al., 2008), while for EEEV, Culiseta melanura is the main vector (Armstrong & Andreadis, 2010). Non-
Culex mosquito species (e.g., Aedes, Culiseta, and Anopheles spp.) are the primary vectors of the California 
serogroup viruses (CSGV), such as SSHV and JCV (Drebot, 2015; Pastula et al., 2015; Webster et al., 2017). 
For WNV and EEEV, a wide range of bird species serve as reservoirs, including corvids and passerines 
(Kilpatrick et al., 2006; Kramer et al., 2008; Ludwig et al., 2010; Reisen, 2013). The main reservoir of JCV is 
the white-tailed deer (Andreadis et al., 2008), while squirrels, chipmunks, and hares are the reservoir hosts 
for SSHV (Drebot, 2015). A number of these viruses are also maintained by transovarial transmission, which 
allows for less dependence on mammalian reservoirs (Griot et al., 1993).
Additional viral and bacterial agents transmitted by insects are also endemic in Canada but are less active, or 
their occurrence is under-studied. Western equine encephalitis virus appears to have decreased in prevalence 
in Canada in recent decades, while Cache Valley virus (CVV) has been responsible for a number of livestock 
(i.e., sheep) outbreaks in Ontario, Quebec, and other provinces, but human infection is most likely under-
reported (Drebot, 2015). Arboviruses can also be transmitted occasionally by blood transfusion or tissue 
transplants (Fonseca et al., 2005; Pathogen Regulation Directorate, 2010). Apart from this possibility, humans 
are incidental/dead-end hosts for these mosquito-transmitted diseases; while they can be infected, they 
cannot subsequently transmit viruses to feeding mosquitoes with any efficiency because viremia is transient 
and viral loads are low (Kramer et al., 2008; Kulkarni et al., 2015). 
Approximately 20% of individuals who are exposed to mosquito-borne viruses, such as WNV, EEEV, JCV, or 
SSHV, will develop acute clinical illness, including fever, headache, skin rash, nausea, and muscle aches. Most 
affected people recover fully, but approximately 1% develop severe illness (e.g., meningitis, encephalitis, 
acute flaccid paralysis, and poliomyelitis), in which case neurologic and cognitive deficits may be prolonged 
or permanent. Approximately 10% of severe cases are fatal. Individuals over 70 years of age and those 
with underlying medical conditions, such as obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and heart disease, are at 
greater risk of severe illness. However, SSHV causes neurological illness in children as well. People who are 
immunocompromised are also at greater risk (Petersen et al., 2013a; Petersen et al., 2013b; Sejvar, 2014; 
Badawi et al., 2018). The severity of illness varies and depends upon the virus; for example, EEEV is one of the 
most severe mosquito-transmitted diseases in the United States, with approximately 33% mortality in those 
developing neurological illness and significant brain damage in most survivors who developed symptomatic 
disease (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018c). Western equine encephalitis virus and CVV 
give rise to a similar range of symptoms; while the majority of cases are asymptomatic, a varying percentage 
develop encephalitis, meningoencephalitis, encephalomyelitis, high fever, altered consciousness, neurologic 
dysfunction, aseptic meningitis, stiff neck, headache, myalgia, tremors, nausea, vomiting, and urinary tract 
infection. The mortality rate is between 5% to 20% for St. Louis encephalitis virus, but is believed to be much lower 
for western equine encephalitis virus and CVV infection (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018d). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 398 
The expected effects of climate change on Canada-endemic mosquito-borne diseases are northward 
range expansion associated with long-term warming and more epidemic behaviour associated with 
climate variability and extreme weather events, via effects on vector survival and reproductive rates 
(together affecting vector abundance), biting rates, the length of the activity season, and the duration of 
the EIP. Canada-endemic mosquito-borne diseases are zoonoses transmitted from wild animals (birds and 
mammals). The effects of climate change on the populations of these animals are expected to affect the 
pathogen transmission cycles. These effects may simply result in northward range expansion of hosts, but 
there may be more complex effects on reservoir host biodiversity. For example, changes in host abundance 
and geographic range may be limited by physical conditions (e.g., barriers to movement) and/or biological 
processes (e.g., reduced access to food at critical times in the life cycle, such as breeding and rearing 
periods). Resulting changes in species composition can have varying consequences, such as disruptions 
in predator–prey and host–parasite relationships. Therefore, although host biodiversity will likely change in 
response to new climate conditions, uncertainties remain regarding how such changes will affect exposure 
risk of Canadians to vector-borne diseases (Varrin et al., 2007). In all likelihood, the impact will be specific 
to the ecosystem or habitat, resulting in a patchwork of increasing and decreasing biodiversity of host 
communities, changing with time across the country. Climate change may have more rapid effects on host 
communities via extreme weather events, such as droughts and heat events, which can bring reservoir hosts 
searching for water sources to mosquito breeding grounds (Shaman et al., 2005; Wang et al., 2010; Harrigan 
et al., 2014).
Many modelling studies have examined the relationship between climatic variables (mainly temperature and 
precipitation) and WNV infection (infected humans, birds, or mosquitoes) in Canada (Wang et al., 2011; Chen 
et al., 2013; Tam et al., 2014; Paz, 2015; Yoo et al., 2016; DeFelice et al., 2018). However, the ecology of EEEV 
and CSGV remains under-studied, likely due to perceptions that these viruses are not as important for public 
health, as well as a lack of detailed surveillance data. However, land cover, including proximity and size of 
coniferous forested area and wetlands, has been found to influence EEEV and JCV occurrence (Vander Kelen 
et al., 2014; Rocheleau et al., 2018) and could also be affected by climate change.
The impact of climate change on WNV transmission in Canada has been investigated in two studies with 
similar conclusions. Chen et al. (2013) examined WNV transmission in the Prairies, where Cx. tarsalis is the 
main vector, and projected an extension of seasonal activity of WNV-infected Cx. tarsalis from three months 
(June to August) to five months (May to September) by the 2080s. The authors also projected a northward 
range expansion for Cx. tarsalis and WNV. Since this vector is also capable of transmitting CVV, the range and 
prevalence of this disease may also be influenced by this Cx. tarsalis expansion (Ayers et al., 2018). Hongoh 
et al. (2012) modelled the potential distribution of Cx. pipiens populations in Eastern Canada under current 
and future projected climate change and projected a similar northward range expansion for this eastern 
vector of WNV. 
A greater understanding of how climate change may alter communities of avian and mammalian reservoir 
host species would enable more robust evaluation of climate change effects, but few studies have conducted 
these evaluations, due to limited data and methodological constraints. Current evidence indicates that 
climatically suitable ranges (or climate envelopes) for many species will likely shift northwards in response 
to warming temperatures. For example, ecological niche models for 765 species suggest that climate change 
may increase biodiversity in Southern Quebec during this century, as species move northward (Berteaux et 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 399 
al., 2010; Chambers et al., 2013). Similarly, many bird species that currently breed in the northern portion of 
the Eastern United States are likely to move northward into Canada, increasing the richness of bird species 
in Eastern Canada (DesGranges & Morneau, 2010). Habitat loss and disturbance, induced by climate change 
or other factors, that may result in habitat fragmentation (Warren & Lemmen, 2014) can affect avian and 
mammalian reservoir host communities (Berteaux & Stenseth, 2006). To what extent these positive and 
negative effects on host populations will cause increased or decreased risks from mosquito-borne diseases 
is not yet clear and needs further study (Salkeld et al., 2013). 
Mosquito-borne infections have been identified in Canada for many decades; however, recently the number of 
cases of arbovirus infection appears to be increasing (Ludwig et al., 2019). Since 2002, the annual reported 
incidence of human cases of WNV, the only Canada-endemic mosquito-borne disease that is nationally 
reportable, has fluctuated significantly over time at a national level. Reported cases have ranged from five 
cases in 2010 to highs of 1481 in 2003 (during initial invasion across Canada) and 2215 cases in 2007, associated 
with an unprecedented abundance of Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes in the Prairie provinces (Figure 6.4). This may be 
consistent with the effects of weather and climate variability on WNV dynamics (Ludwig et al., 2019).
Figure 6.4 The number of reported human cases of WNV each year in Canada. Source: Government of Canada, 2019a.
Geographical variation over time has been dramatic as well. In 2003 and 2007, most human cases of WNV 
were reported in the Prairies (Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba), but in 2002, 2012, and 2018 most 
reported cases were detected in Ontario and Quebec. This variability is at least in part consistent with the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 400 
effects of local weather variability on the abundance of Cx. tarsalis, Cx. pipiens, and Cx. restuans mosquitoes 
during outbreak years, and an indication that greater weather variability under climate change may result in 
more epidemic behaviour of endemic mosquito-borne diseases (Ludwig et al., 2019). Human CSGV cases 
have been detected across Canada, and a single human EEEV case was reported in 2016 in Ontario (M. 
Drebot, personal communication, 2019). 
Increased awareness of CSGVs, enhanced field surveillance in reservoir hosts, and greater diagnostic 
capacity in humans and animals, may have contributed to their “emergence” as a public health concern 
during the mosquito season. Routine diagnostic testing for CSGVs was conducted during the late 1970s and 
1980s but discontinued until new testing methods were introduced in 2005, when human cases were once 
again documented in Canada. Over 200 probable and confirmed cases of CSGV infections and/or exposures 
have been identified by laboratory-based surveillance from 2005 to 2014, with illness from JCV being more 
frequently detected than illness caused by SSHV (Drebot, 2015; Lau et al., 2017; Webster et al., 2017; M. 
Drebot, personal communication, 2019). Although CSGV infections are not nationally notifiable, the numbers 
of CSGV infections have been summarized in the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) arbovirus annual 
reports (Government of Canada, 2019a) and have ranged from 34 to 122 cases per year. To date, there have 
been no direct associations observed between the effects of weather variability or recent climate change and 
the incidence of these mosquito-borne viruses in Canada, although such associations may exist.
In Canada, changes have been observed in the geographic distributions and densities of mosquito vectors. 
The mosquito fauna of Canada, which includes 74 mosquito species from 10 different genera, was described 
in the 1970s (Wood et al., 1979). Since then, six species (Ochlerotatus ventrovittis, Oc. japonicus, Culex 
salinarius, Culex erraticus, Anopheles perplexens, and An. crucians) have been reported as possibly newly 
established in Canada (Thielman & Hunter, 2007; Giordano et al., 2015; Iranpour et al., 2017). In addition, the 
geographic range of 10 species (Uranotaenia sapphirina, Culiseta melanura, Cs. minnesotae, Culex tarsalis, 
Ochlerotatus sticticus, Oc. spencerii, Oc. dorsalis, Oc. nigromaculis, Oc. campestris, and Oc. cataphylla) has 
expanded in Canada (Iranpour et al., 2009). Some of these range expansions, which may affect public health, could 
have been facilitated by changes in climate, but lack of systematic surveillance precludes any conclusion. 
There is strong observational evidence of range shifts for mammal and bird species in North America. Over 
the past 40 years, about 180 of 305 bird species wintering in North America expanded their range northward, 
at an average rate of 1.4 km per year. Similarly, the breeding ranges of birds in Southern North America 
have shifted by an average of 2.4 km per year (Federal, Provincial, & Territorial Governments of Canada, 
2010). Within the northeastern forests of North America, 27 of 38 species for which historical ranges are 
documented have expanded their ranges, predominantly northward (Rodenhouse et al., 2009). Published 
accounts of range shifts in Canada are available for a number of species (Hitch & Leberg, 2007; Blancher 
et al., 2008;), with detailed analyses for some species, including the hooded warbler (Setophaga citrina) 
(Melles et al., 2011), and the southern flying squirrel (Glaucomys volans) (Garroway et al., 2010; Garroway 
et al., 2011). It is very possible that geographic range shifts of these species have been driven, in part, by 
recent climate warming. Such range changes could affect endemic mosquito-borne pathogen transmission 
by changing ranges of reservoir species, while species that are not reservoirs may act to “dilute” arbovirus 
transmission cycles (Levine et al., 2017). However, further study is required to understand precisely how, 
where, and when this may have an impact on risk to humans. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 401 
6.3.1.4 Other Insect-Borne Zoonotic Diseases
Other insect-borne zoonotic diseases may also be affected by climate change. Plague, caused by the 
bacterium Yersinia pestis, has been documented sporadically in Western Canada. Yersinia pestis is 
transmitted by the bite of an infected flea or by direct contact with infectious tissues or fluids while handling 
an animal or human that is sick with, or has died from, plague. Droplet-transmission via coughing or sneezing 
is also possible, due to infection of the lungs of an animal or human with pneumonic plague (Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, 2019a). People infected with plague usually develop flu-like symptoms. After 
this flu-like phase, they develop varying symptoms, depending on the form of plague — bubonic, septicemic 
(this form typically develops as a complication of bubonic plague), or pneumonic. Plague is an infection that 
requires urgent medical care, as mortality rates are high in the absence of treatment (Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, 2019a). The natural reservoirs of Y. pestis are wild rodents, particularly ground 
squirrels in North America and gerbils in Asia. 
There is a well recognized association of climatic patterns (generally warmer and wetter periods) with 
spillover of plague from gerbil–flea transmission cycles to humans in central Asia, due to effects on 
vegetation that promote gerbil and then flea populations (Kausrud et al., 2010; Samia et al., 2011). These 
spillover events in Asia are thought to have been the source of the great plague pandemics (the Justinian 
plague and the Black Death) that decimated human populations in Europe (Kausrud et al., 2010). The 
impact of climate was studied on plague outbreaks in pre-industrial Europe (1347 to 1760 CE). In contrast 
to spillover in the Asian steppes, the results suggested that plague in Europe was associated with drier and 
colder climates (Yue & Lee, 2018). This difference is likely due to the transmission in Europe being driven by 
a combination of direct human-to-human transmission (causing pneumonic type of plague in humans) and 
flea-borne transmission from peri-domestic rat reservoirs (producing the bubonic type of plague), both of 
which may be influenced by effects of climate on human population density and behaviour (Earn et al., 2020). 
A 56-year time series of human plague cases in the Western United States was used to explore the effects 
of climatic patterns on plague incidence. As in central Asia, warmer and wetter climate was associated with 
increased numbers of human cases (Ben Ari et al., 2008). In a consecutive study, the same group found 
that El Niño–Southern Oscillation and Pacific Decadal Oscillation, in combination, affect the dynamics of 
plague over the Western United States by enhancing dry-to-wet changes in the climate. The underlying 
mechanism could involve changes in precipitation and temperatures that affect both hosts and vectors as in 
Asia. Snow may play a key role, possibly via effects on summer soil moisture, which affects flea survival and 
development and growth of vegetation for rodents (Ben Ari et al., 2010). A study of the relationships between 
climatic variables and the frequency of human plague cases (from 1960 to 1997) in Northeastern Arizona and 
Northwestern New Mexico suggested that plague risk can be estimated by monitoring key climatic variables, 
most notably maximum daily summer temperature values and time-lagged (one- and two-year) amounts of 
late winter (February–March) precipitation (Enscore et al., 2002). 
Modelling studies have been conducted on the impact of climate change on plague distribution in North 
America. Using an ecological niche-modelling approach, models by Holt et al. (2009) suggest that, by 2050, 
climate conditions may reduce plague risk in the southern parts of California and increase risk along the 
northern coast and the Sierras. A study by Nakazawa et al. (2007) suggested that the disease shifts in 
accordance with patterns of climatic shift, but that overall geographic shifts will likely be subtle, with some 
northward movement of southern limits and possibly northward movement of northern limits as well. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 402 
Studies of flea species vectors of Y. pestis in Canadian prairie dog populations suggested that flea counts 
per individual varied inversely with the number of days in the prior growing season with more than 10 mm of 
precipitation; an index of the number of precipitation events that might have caused a substantial, prolonged 
increase in soil moisture and vegetative production (Eads & Hoogland, 2017). Beyond these studies there 
have been no attempts to assess how precisely climate change may impact plague dynamics and geographic 
range in Canada, and there are no field surveillance data available to explore any climatic impacts on the 
environmental hazard of plague in Canada. Plague is nationally notifiable, but only one human case has been 
recorded, which occurred in 1939 (Government of Canada, 2018a).
Chagas disease is caused by the protozoal parasite Trypanosoma cruzi and is an infection most commonly 
acquired through contact with the feces of an infected triatomine bug (or “kissing bug”), a blood-sucking 
insect that feeds on humans and animals. Chagas disease has an acute and a chronic phase and, if 
untreated, infection is lifelong. Infection may be mild or asymptomatic. There may be fever and/or swelling 
around the site of inoculation. Many people may remain asymptomatic for life, but 20% to 30% of infected 
people develop debilitating and sometimes life-threatening medical problems over the course of their 
lives (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018e). It is absent from Canada and, while most of the 
estimated 300,000 cases of Chagas disease in persons living in the United States were likely acquired in Latin 
American countries, transmission cycles of T. cruzi involving animal hosts and humans, and autochthonous 
vector-borne human infections, have been reported in Texas, California, Tennessee, Louisiana, and 
Mississippi in the United States (Steverding, 2014). 
Chagas disease is likely under-recognized and having an impact on the health care system and economy 
globally because of limited screening and treatment and a lack of awareness among health care 
professionals (Click Lambert et al., 2008; Bern & Montgomery, 2009). The possible impact of climate change 
on Chagas disease vectors in North America has been explored using ecological niche-modelling methods; 
while northward range expansions of some species were predicted, increasing risks for Canada were not 
found (Carmona-Castro et al., 2018). 
6.3.1.5 Tick-Borne Zoonotic Diseases
Ticks transmit a wide range of bacterial, viral, and protozoan pathogens globally (Sonenshine, 2018). While it 
is generally acknowledged that increases in temperature associated with climate change will likely contribute 
to a general increase in the number, type, activity level, and geographical distribution of ticks in North America 
(Eisen et al., 2016; Sonenshine, 2018), the magnitude of impact climate change will have on risks from tick-
borne diseases is uncertain and will likely vary regionally. In Canada, evidence suggests that the emergence 
of Lyme disease, associated with the northward range spread of the tick Ixodes scapularis, has been driven, at 
least in part, by recent climate warming (Ebi et al., 2017; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2019).
Tick-borne diseases of public health significance are zoonoses, and in North America the natural reservoir 
hosts are wild animals, particularly rodents. There are two types of ticks, hard-bodied (Ixodid) ticks and soft-
bodied (Argasid) ticks (Lindquist et al., 2016). In Northern North America, including Canada, the soft-bodied 
tick of most public health importance is Ornithodorus hermsi, which transmits the bacterium that causes 
relapsing fever, Borrelia hermsii. Other soft-bodied ticks and relapsing fever Borrelia species occur in the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 403 
United States; Borrelia turicatae and Borrelia parkeri are transmitted by Ornithodoros turicata and Ornithodoros 
parkeri, respectively, but are not currently endemic to Canada (Sage et al., 2017). Both O. hermsi and B. 
hermsii are naturally cave-dwelling species, and the natural hosts for blood meals by the ticks, and reservoir 
hosts for B. hermsii, are wild rodents. While Ornithodorus hermsi and B. hermsii most commonly occur in 
caves in the mountainous regions of the Western United States and have limited distribution in Southern 
British Columbia, they invade cabins in these regions, which is where most human infections are acquired 
(Dworkin et al., 2008). 
Tick-borne relapsing fever is a febrile, septicemic disease with a sudden onset followed by numerous relapses 
with afebrile intervals (Artsob, 2000; Murray, 2003). Persistence of the bacterium and relapses are associated 
with bacteria evading the immune response (Cutler, 2010). There is a very wide range of symptoms, including 
rashes, ocular lesions, jaundice, and vomiting (Ogden et al., 2014b). However, it is uncommon in humans in 
Canada, due to the low frequency with which people come into contact with infected ticks. 
An ecological niche-modelling approach identified elevation (higher elevations being more favourable) and 
specific ranges of temperature and precipitation as key determinants of the presence of O. hermsi ticks 
and B. hermsii (Sage et al., 2017). In this same study, wider northward and westward range expansion into 
mountainous regions of British Columbia were projected using three global climate models (GCM) (GCMs: 
ACCESS1-0, HadGEM2-ES, and CCSM4) and two estimates of greenhouse gas concentration trajectories 
denoted by representative concentration pathways (RCP) 4.5 and 8.5. Greater range expansion was projected 
in Canada with the higher greenhouse gas emission scenario, RCP8.5. For both RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, all 
models projected a range contraction in the United States.
Diseases transmitted by hard-bodied ticks pose the greatest tick-borne disease challenges for public 
health in North America, and, among these, the most important is Lyme disease, caused by the bacterium 
Borrelia burgdorferi. Lyme disease is a disease affecting multiple body systems that begins with mild non-
specific illness and, in most cases, a typical skin rash known as erythema migrans. If untreated, the disease 
progresses to disseminated Lyme disease with neurological or cardiac manifestations and, in late stages, 
arthritis (Wormser et al., 2006). This bacterium is transmitted by Ixodes scapularis (the black-legged tick) in 
Northeastern and Upper Midwest United States, and in Southern Central and Eastern Canada, and I. pacificus 
(the western black-legged tick) in the Pacific states of the United States and Southern British Columbia 
(Bouchard et al., 2015; Eisen et al., 2016). In Southern British Columbia, the geographic range of I. pacificus, 
and the risk of B. burgdorferi infection the tick poses, is thought to be quite wide (Mak et al., 2010). However, 
the risk of acquiring Lyme disease is much lower where I. pacificus is the vector, compared to most regions 
where I. scapularis is the vector, due to characteristics of the ecology of I. pacificus that result in generally 
low infection prevalence in this tick and less likelihood that it bites humans (Eisen et al., 2016). There have 
been no studies to date to assess possible impacts of climate change on future I. pacificus and B. burgdorferi 
distributions in British Columbia. Modelling of current I. pacificus and B. burgdorferi distributions in British 
Columbia has identified temperature — specifically, mean daily temperatures in January and July — as an 
important determinant of the ecological niche of these species, and climate change is expected to have an 
impact on northward and possibly altitudinal distributions (Mak et al., 2010).
For I. scapularis, a range of field and laboratory studies (Ogden, 2014) suggested that the main impact of 
temperature on this species is on development rates and activity; woodland habitats in Canada provide 
refuges for the ticks, in which they are protected from the direct effects of very low winter temperatures that 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 404 
would otherwise kill them. Model-based assessments of the risk of occurrence of I. scapularis used effects 
of temperature on development rates, and thus life cycle length, to identify lower temperature limits for 
persistence of self-sustaining tick populations (Ogden et al., 2005). These limits have now been extensively 
validated by field studies, which, in concert with analysis of passive tick surveillance data, have identified a 
spatiotemporal pattern of south-to-north range spread into Canada from the United States (and now within 
Canada) that is consistent with recent climate warming having been a key driver (Ogden et al., 2010; Leighton 
et al., 2012; Clow et al., 2017; Ebi et al., 2017). 
The rapidly increasing incidence of Lyme disease in Canada, identified by national surveillance (Gasmi et al., 
2017), is consistent with the observed range expansion of I. scapularis, as well as increasing infection 
prevalence in recently established tick populations (Ogden et al., 2013; Clow et al., 2017) (see Figure 6.5). Due 
to the high level of agreement among studies, and the evidence of climate change impacts, there is high 
confidence that the emergence of Lyme disease in Eastern and Central Canada has been associated with 
recent climate warming. The observed emergence of Lyme disease in Canada is consistent with effects of 
climate change acting on the tick vector itself. However, there is also evidence that a warming climate may be 
influencing the risk of Lyme disease via effects on other parts of the transmission cycle, particularly the 
abundance and geographic range of key rodent reservoir hosts (Simon et al., 2014). 
Figure 6.5 The evolution of Lyme disease risk in Canada and human cases. Bar chart shows the evolution of 
human Lyme disease cases. Note that Lyme disease became nationally notifiable in December 2009. Data from 
2009 and earlier are based on voluntary submission of information from provinces and territories in which Lyme 
disease was notifiable. Source: Gasmi et al., 2018.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 405 
Other Ixodes scapularis-transmitted pathogens, additional to B. burgdorferi, are now emerging in Canada from 
the United States as the ticks spread north (Table 6.3), but none of the diseases they cause are currently 
nationally notifiable. Details of these are presented in Box 6.3.
Box 6.3 Diseases and pathogens transmitted by Ixodes scapularis ticks 
that are emerging with Lyme disease
Anaplasmosis, caused by the bacterium Anaplasma phagocytophilum, has non-specific symptoms (e.g., fever, 
headache, and muscle aches) and a case-fatality rate less than 1% (Biggs et al., 2016). Human or animal 
cases have been identified in most provinces where the ticks occur (Edginton et al., 2018). 
Babesiosis, caused by the protozoan Babesia microti, causes a Lyme-like disease, with a case-fatality rate 
of 2%–5% (Biggs et al., 2016). The pathogen has been detected in I. scapularis ticks in Manitoba, Ontario, 
Quebec, and New Brunswick (O'Brien et al., 2016), although human cases have been identified only in 
Manitoba (Bullard et al., 2014).
Powassan virus, which was first detected in Powassan, Ontario, is transmitted by a number of different 
tick species. Presentation can vary greatly, from asymptomatic infections to fatal encephalitis cases, and 
the case-fatality rate is 10% (Artsob, 1988). Two lineages have been identified in vector ticks, with Lineage I 
identified in I. cookei, the nest-living groundhog tick, in Ontario, Quebec, and New Brunswick, while Lineage II, 
also known as deer tick virus, is transmitted by I. scapularis in Manitoba, Ontario, and Nova Scotia (Corrin et 
al., 2018). 
Borrelia miyamotoi was first identified in 2013 in Canada, and this pathogen has been found in I. scapularis 
and I. pacificus ticks (Dibernardo et al., 2014). Borrelia miyamotoi is more closely related to the Borrelia 
species that cause relapsing fever, which are transmitted by soft-bodied ticks. The disease has generally non-
specific symptoms of fever, fatigue, headache, myalgia, chills, nausea, and arthralgia, which may relapse, as 
do other relapsing fever infections.
A model-based assessment of the possible effects of climate change on the geographic range of the tick 
Dermacentor variabilis, a vector of RMSF and tularemia, which is already endemic to much of Southern 
Canada, suggested that the range of this tick will expand northward in Canada (Minigan et al., 2018).
Prolonged extreme values of temperature (i.e., high or low), low humidity, and intense rainfall could adversely 
affect tick survival by reducing their activity and increasing their mortality rate (Ogden & Lindsay, 2016). 
However, this is expected to have less of an effect on ticks than on mosquitoes, because of the tick’s ability 
to find refuge in their woodland habitats (Ogden & Lindsay, 2016). Model-based studies have suggested that, 
while the northern limit of the geographic range of I. scapularis and D. variabilis ticks will move northward 
with climate change, there will also be a northward contraction of the southern limit of the ticks’ range as 
the climate becomes too hot for them (Brownstein et al., 2005a; Minigan et al., 2018). If so, this may affect 
exposure to the ticks for those living in southern US states, but is unlikely to affect risk in Canada. Studies of 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 406 
I. scapularis suggest that ticks in the Southeastern United States may adapt to a hot climate (Ogden et al., 
2018), so this effect may be minimal. 
Non-climate factors also determine where tick populations and pathogen transmission cycles can become 
established. These include microhabitat features, such as soil characteristics, which are critical for tick 
survival and the successful establishment of new tick populations (Lindsay et al., 1998; Guerra et al., 2002). 
Modifications in habitat characteristics, in parallel with climate change, such as habitat fragmentation, loss 
of biodiversity, resource availability, and land use, affect the dynamics of ticks, their animal hosts, and the 
exposure of ticks to humans (Brownstein et al., 2005b; Simon et al., 2014). In some parts of Canada, the 
emergence of I. scapularis and B. burgdorferi is patchy and uneven, likely because of the suitability of different 
woodlands for tick survival and because of variations in tick host abundance (Gabriele-Rivet et al., 2015). 
Changes in non-climate factors can drive emergence of tick-borne diseases. For example, Lyme disease emerged 
in the United States in the 20th century, likely as a consequence of the reforestation of farmland and the increase 
in the deer populations, which allowed the expansion of the tick populations (Kilpatrick et al., 2017).
While Lyme disease and other tick-borne diseases transmitted by I. scapularis and I. pacificus ticks are 
the tick-borne diseases of greatest concern for public health in Canada at present, other Canada-endemic 
tick-borne diseases (Table 6.3) are possibly being affected by a warming climate or may be affected in the 
future. Currently, there is no evidence of the impact of recent warming on these diseases; however, there is 
evidence from surveillance showing recent increases in the abundance and range of tick vectors of these 
other diseases. These include increased abundance of I. cookei (a vector of Lineage I Powassan virus), 
Dermacentor variabilis (a vector of RMSF, tularaemia, and Colorado tick fever), and Rhipicephalus sanguineus 
(a vector of RMSF) in Eastern Canada (Gasmi et al., 2018), and range expansion of D. variabilis in the Prairie 
provinces (Dergousoff et al., 2013) (Table 6.3). 
The northward range expansion of Lyme disease into Canada provides proof of concept of the following: 
•	
The geographic range of ticks and tick-borne diseases in North America may be limited by climate.
•	
A warming climate may permit northward range expansion of these species. 
•	
Migratory birds and, perhaps, other mammalian tick host species act as a route of introduction 
of ticks and tick-borne pathogens each year from the United States into parts of Canada that are 
becoming climatically suitable for their endemicity (Ogden et al., 2008; Nelder et al., 2019).
Therefore, other US-endemic ticks and tick-borne pathogens that are not currently endemic to Canada may 
spread north. Northward expansion of the range of Amblyomma americanum, a vector of tularemia, Heartland 
virus, and the bacterial pathogens Ehrlichia ewingii and E. chaffeensis, as well as the suspected cause of 
red meat allergies (Reynolds & Elston, 2017), has been detected in the United States (Stafford et al., 2018). 
Multiple model-based assessments suggest that areas of Southern Canada will become climatically suitable 
for this tick with a warming climate (Raghavan et al., 2019; Sagurova et al., 2019). This tick, and the infectious 
disease and other public health issues it brings, are likely to spread into Canada in the coming decades, likely 
introduced by migratory birds (Gasmi et al., 2018; Nelder et al., 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 407 
Table 6.3 Tick-borne pathogens affecting humans and their associated vector tick species that occur in Canada or may 
spread into Canada
PATHOGEN 
(DISEASE IN HUMANS)
YEAR OF 
IDENTIFICATION
PRINCIPAL 
TICK VECTOR(S)
PRINCIPAL 
RESERVOIR HOST 
SPECIES
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTIONa
NATIONALLY 
NOTIFIABLE
EVIDENCE OF ENDEMICITY IN CANADA
CANADA
US
TICKS
HUMANS
ANIMALS
Anaplasma phagocytophilum 
(human anaplasmosis)
1994
Ixodes scapularis, 
Ixodes pacificus
Rodents
BC, AB, SK, MB, ON, 
QC, NB, NL, NS, PEI
Upper MW and NE 
states
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Babesia microti (human 
babesiosis)
1970
Ixodes scapularis
Mice
MB, ON, QC, NB, NS
NE and upper MW 
states
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme 
disease)
1982
Ixodes scapularis, 
Ixodes pacificus
Rodents
BC, AB, SK, MB, ON, 
QC, NB, NS, NL, PEI
NE and upper MW 
states
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Borrelia hermsii (tick-borne 
relapsing fever)
1935
Ornithodoros hermsi
Rodents and 
rabbits
BC
Western states
No
–
Yes
–
Borrelia mayonii/ Borrelia 
mayonii-like? (no specific 
name*)
2014
Ixodes scapularis, 
Ixodes angustus
Rodents
ON, BC
Upper MW states: 
Minnesota and 
Wisconsin
No
Yes
–
Yes
Borrelia miyamotoi (no 
specific name)
2013
Ixodes scapularis, 
Ixodes pacificus
Mice
BC, AB, MB, ON, QC, 
NB, NS, NL, PEI
Upper MW, NE, and the 
mid-Atlantic states
No
Yes
No
–
Colorado tick fever virus 
(Colorado tick fever)
1946
Dermacentor 
andersoni
Golden mantled 
squirrels, deer 
mice, and rabbits
SK, AB
Western states: 
Colorado, Utah, 
Montana, Wyoming
No
No
Yes
–
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 408 
PATHOGEN 
(DISEASE IN HUMANS)
YEAR OF 
IDENTIFICATION
PRINCIPAL 
TICK VECTOR(S)
PRINCIPAL 
RESERVOIR HOST 
SPECIES
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTIONa
NATIONALLY 
NOTIFIABLE
EVIDENCE OF ENDEMICITY IN CANADA
CANADA
US
TICKS
HUMANS
ANIMALS
Ehrlichia chaffeensis (human 
monocytic ehrlichiosis)
1987
Amblyomma 
americanum
White-tailed deer
-
Southeastern and 
south-central states
No
No
No
–
Ehrlichia ewingii (generically 
named Ehrlichiosis)
1999
Amblyomma 
americanum
White-tailed deer
-
Southeastern and 
south-central states
No
–
–
–
Ehrlichia muris-like agent (no 
specific name)
2011
Ixodes scapularis, 
Ixodes muris
Mice
MB
Upper MW states
No
Yes
–
–
Francisella tularensisc 
(tularemia)
1924
Dermacentor 
variabilis, 
Dermacentor 
andersoni, 
Haemaphysalis 
leporispalustris, 
Amblyomma 
americanum
Rabbits, hares, 
and rodents
Canada-wide
All states
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Heartland virus (no specific 
name)
2012
Amblyomma 
americanum
White-tailed deer
–
MW and south states
No
No
–
–
Lineage I Powassan virus (no 
specific name)
1963
Ixodes cookei, 
Ixodes marxi, Ixodes 
spinipalpis
Small and 
medium-sized 
woodland 
mammals 
(woodchucks)
ON, QC, NB, PEI
NE states and Great 
Lakes region
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 409 
PATHOGEN 
(DISEASE IN HUMANS)
YEAR OF 
IDENTIFICATION
PRINCIPAL 
TICK VECTOR(S)
PRINCIPAL 
RESERVOIR HOST 
SPECIES
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTIONa
NATIONALLY 
NOTIFIABLE
EVIDENCE OF ENDEMICITY IN CANADA
CANADA
US
TICKS
HUMANS
ANIMALS
Lineage II Powassan virus 
(no specific name)
2001
Ixodes scapularis, 
Dermacentor 
andersoni
Mice
MB, ON, NS
NE and upper MW 
states
No
Yes
–
–
Rickettsia rickettsii (Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever)
1909
Dermacentor 
variabilis, 
Dermacentor 
andersoni, 
Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus
Variety of wild 
mammals, 
including rodents
BC, AB, SK, ON, NS
Eastern, central, 
western, and 
southwestern states
No
Yesb
Yes
Yes
Source: Bouchard et al., 2019
Note: * Where there is no specific disease name, diseases are named after the pathogen (e.g., Powassan virus disease)
(–) indicates no data available and/or no studies have been performed
a. Canada: Provinces where endemic transmission is known to occur are underlined. For provinces that are not underlined, pathogen transmission cycles are unknown, and infections were 
detected in adventitious ticks, and/or in humans or animals most likely infected by adventitious ticks. 
US: States where highest incidence rate of human cases were found.
b. Based on historical surveys in ticks in Canada, rather than recent surveys.
c. Francisella tularensis may be mechanically transmitted by a range of biting flies, but only ticks act as biological vectors.
Abbreviations: AB, Alberta; BC, British Columbia; MB, Manitoba; NB, New Brunswick; NL, Newfoundland and Labrador; NS, Nova Scotia; ON, Ontario; PEI, Prince Edward Island; QC, Quebec; SK, 
Saskatchewan; US, United States; NE, Northeast; MW, Midwest. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 410 
6.3.2 Zoonoses Directly Transmitted from Animals to Humans
In this section, zoonoses that can be transmitted directly from animals to humans are considered (Figure 
6.6). Zoonoses transmitted in food and water are considered in Chapters 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and 
Security, and Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security. The risk of infection by directly transmitted zoonoses 
may be influenced by direct effects of climate change and weather on the survival of the pathogens, indirect 
effects on their host species and communities, and/or effects on contact rates between the pathogens 
and humans. Together, these determine the frequency of “spillover” events, that is, when pathogens are 
successfully transmitted from animals to humans (Altizer et al., 2013; Brierley et al., 2016), as well as the 
possibility of adaptive emergence of zoonoses, which then result in epidemics or pandemics affecting 
human populations (Ogden et al., 2017). Climate change may, therefore, drive global emergence of zoonotic 
infectious diseases. Directly transmitted zoonoses, mostly from wildlife, are the zoonoses that emerge and 
re-emerge most frequently on a global scale (Jones et al., 2008). 
Climate change impacts on zoonoses in the North are expected to be greater than elsewhere in Canada, 
including effects on vector-, food-, and water-borne zoonoses, as well as directly transmitted zoonoses 
(Parkinson et al., 2014). Greater climatic impact, coupled with, in many cases, higher consumption of 
traditional and country foods,1 suggest that Northern communities, particularly Northern Indigenous 
communities, are at greater risk of health effects (Brook et al., 2009). A further concern is that, as permafrost 
melts with a warming climate, pathogens that have remained dormant but viable in animal carcasses or 
soil, may be released into the environment and cause disease outbreaks (Revich et al., 2012). For most of 
the directly transmitted zoonoses discussed in this section, there is evidence of sensitivity to climate and/
or weather, which raises the possibility of current and future impacts of climate change. In very few cases 
have there been attempts to assess such impacts. Also, for very few directly transmitted zoonoses is there 
evidence of changing patterns of disease or risk, but that may be due, in part, to the lack of systematic 
surveillance of these diseases in Canada.
1	
Traditional Inuit food, also known as country food, is an integral part of Inuit identity and culture, a significant source 
of nutrients, and contributes to individual and community health and well-being. It includes marine animals (e.g., 
walrus, seals, etc.), caribou, birds, fish, and foraged foods.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 411 
Figure 6.6 Zoonoses and emergence by genetic change and/or evolution.
6.3.2.1 Viral Zoonoses
Globally, one of the most highly pathogenic and high-impact groups of directly transmitted viral zoonoses are 
avian influenza A viruses. Global epidemics of highly pathogenic (for humans) avian influenza viruses have 
occurred in recent decades (Goneau et al., 2018), and outbreaks have occurred in domesticated poultry in 
Canada, sparking fears of human cases (Skowronski et al., 2007). Disease in humans varies from mild illness 
to severe illness, with high case-fatality rates (Neumann, 2015). The main reservoirs of avian influenza viruses 
are wild birds, particularly waterfowl (i.e., swans, geese, and ducks). Influenza viruses of swine are also of 
great public health concern, although these viruses are now maintained mostly by domesticated swine, and 
effects of climate change are relatively unlikely (Schultz-Cherry et al., 2011). Pandemic influenza viruses, 
such as the 1918 and 2009 H1N1 viruses, emerge following recombination (a molecular process) of avian, 
swine, and human influenza viruses (Neumann et al., 2009). Due to the high level of threat from zoonotic and 
pandemic influenza viruses, there is extensive surveillance for them in wild and domesticated animals and 
humans, both globally and in Canada (Government of Canada, 2017; Government of Canada, 2018b), and a 
program of preparedness for pandemics (Government of Canada, 2019b).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 412 
Box 6.4 Climate change and coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is a paradigm of a zoonotic infectious disease that spills over 
into humans and then becomes a pandemic, due to characteristics of the virus that permit efficient human-
to-human transmission, and due to globalization that allows rapid international spread (Ogden et al., 2017). 
The causal virus, SARS-CoV-2, is likely a coronavirus of bat origin (Lau et al., 2020) that may have spilled over 
into humans from an intermediary animal reservoir such as pangolins (Han, 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). Contact 
with infected animals or animal products at a “wet market” in the city of Wuhan, Hubei province, China, 
some time during late 2019 has been implicated as the original spillover event (Zhang et al., 2020), although 
uncertainty around the origins of the virus remains. After that time, the virus likely evolved more efficient 
human-to-human transmissibility (Andersen et al., 2020). Despite intensive control within China (Wang et al., 
2020), and travel restrictions to and from China, global spread occurred (Wu et al., 2020), and COVID-19 was 
declared a pandemic (WHO, 2020). 
Recent climate change may have affected transmission of SARS-CoV-2 via impacts on the ecology of natural 
transmission cycles (see section 6.1.1 Infectious Disease Emergence and Re-Emergence) that resulted in 
a particularly high prevalence of infection in the wildlife captured for food or medicinal products and that 
facilitated spillover in the Wuhan wet market. However, there is no evidence for this at the time of writing 
(O’Reilly et al., 2020). There is some limited evidence of reduced transmission of SARS-CoV-2 at high 
temperatures (Pequeno et al., 2020), and there is speculation that climate change may result in seasonally 
varying transmission of SARS-CoV-2 if, and when, it becomes endemic (Kanzawa et al., 2020; Kissler et al., 
2020). However, at this point in the pandemic, it appears that non-pharmaceutical health interventions are 
more important than physical environment in influencing viral transmission (Jüni et al., 2020).
Indirect effects of climate change on COVID-19 transmission via effects on contact rates between people and on air 
quality, as for other human-to-human transmitted respiratory viruses (see section 6.3.3.1 Respiratory Infections) could 
be expected. While the transmission of COVID-19 via the fecal–oral route is thought to be possible (Gupta et al., 2020) 
and viral RNA has been detected in wastewater from communities with ongoing COVID-19 transmission (Randazzo et 
al., 2020), there is no evidence to date that SARS-CoV-2 is a water-borne pathogen.
Despite limited evidence for direct or indirect impacts of climate change on COVID-19 transmission, further 
studies are needed. These studies should also take into account that impacts of COVID-19 are likely greatest 
among socio-economically disadvantaged individuals and communities via effects on transmission and 
disease severity (Ji et al., 2020; Nash & Geng, 2020). 
 
Emergence and re-emergence of avian influenza risks to humans could be driven by a number of climate 
change effects on the ecology of the viruses, including bird migration patterns and changes in land use 
and livestock production patterns (Morin et al., 2018). Transmission of avian influenza viruses among wild 
birds, which often involves fecal–oral transmission via water, may be inhibited by climate warming, as the 
survival of the viruses is greater in cool compared to warm water (Morin et al., 2018). Consistent with this, the 
prevalence of infected birds in a Canadian study was higher if sampling was preceded by cold weather (Papp 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 413 
et al., 2017), and phylogenetic data suggest that influenza A viruses actually emerged following the Little Ice 
Age (Gatherer, 2010). However, complexity associated with the global transmission of avian influenza viruses 
means that, while avian influenza viruses are inherently climate-sensitive, the effects of climate change could 
be positive, with reduced disease transmission because of effects on environmental survival of the viruses, or 
negative, with increasing transmission through indirect effects of other factors (Gilbert et al., 2008; Gatherer, 
2010; Morin et al., 2018).
Rabies is a zoonotic disease that represents a major worldwide health concern with more than 55,000 human 
deaths annually (Knobel et al., 2005). Rabies virus is capable of infecting cerebral and nervous tissues of 
all mammals, usually leading to behavioural changes followed by death (WHO, 2013). In Canada, rabies is 
associated with several wildlife species, including bats, skunks, raccoons, and foxes, that each maintain 
distinct viral variants circulating endemically within their populations (Rosatte, 1988; Tinline & Gregory, 2020). 
Human cases of rabies are rare in Canada, with only three domestically acquired cases since 2000 (Filejski, 
2016), but human exposures to rabid animals followed by administration of post-exposure prophylactic 
treatment occur annually across the country. 
While climate-driven ecological change is likely to affect the circulation of rabies in each of its respective host 
populations to some extent, such impacts are likely to be felt first and most significantly in the Arctic. Rabies 
occurs across the Arctic and is regarded as enzootic, or prevalent, in Northern Canada (north of 60 degrees 
north latitude) (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). The main reservoir 
host of Arctic rabies is the Arctic fox (Vulpes lagopus). 
Arctic rabies is caused by a unique strain of rabies virus, referred to as the Arctic rabies virus variant, which 
circulates within the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions, with sporadic incursions toward more southern regions, 
occasionally leading to establishment of enzootic rabies in these areas (Rosatte, 1988). In the Canadian 
Arctic, rabies cases in domestic animals and wildlife are reported every year, and Arctic residents receive 
more rabies post-exposure prophylactic treatments per capita than any other population in Canada (Rosatte, 
1988; Mitchell & Kandola, 2005; Aenishaenslin et al., 2014; CFIA, 2019).
Northern Canada is experiencing climate change at rates faster and greater than the global and Canadian 
averages (Larsen et al., 2014; Bush & Lemmen, 2019). While the long-term impacts of rapid climate warming 
on Arctic rabies have yet to be documented, rabies ecology and epidemiology are likely to be altered by 
ongoing climate-driven perturbations to Arctic ecosystems. These include fading population cycles of 
lemmings, a key source of food for Arctic foxes (Fuglei & Ims, 2008; Kausrud et al., 2008), reduced extent and 
duration of sea ice used by foxes for winter foraging and movement (Kim et al., 2016), and the northward 
range expansion of red foxes (Vulpes vulpes). Red foxes are both a resource competitor for Arctic foxes 
and competent reservoir host for the Arctic rabies variant (Rosatte, 1988; Hersteinsson & MacDonald, 1992; 
Gallant et al., 2012). A recent modelling study (Simon et al., 2019) suggested that rabies incidence may 
initially stabilize due to reduced variation in prey dynamics, with interactions between Arctic and red foxes 
intensifying outbreaks where these species overlap. However, in the long term, displacement of Arctic foxes 
by red foxes and restricted winter movements due to reduced sea ice extent may limit rabies transmission 
in warmer areas. Similarly, Huettmann et al. (2017) predicted a reduction of the current ecological niche of 
rabies virus in Alaska with climate warming.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 414 
Hantaviruses cause infections of wild rodent and insectivorous mammal populations and can cause 
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, a fever followed by acute pulmonary edema and shock. There is no specific 
treatment for hantavirus pulmonary syndrome; the case-fatality rate is 38% in Canada (Drebot et al., 2000), 
where, on average, four cases are reported a year (Government of Canada, 2015). Humans become infected 
by contact with infected rodents or their excretions, particularly aerosolized urine or feces (Weir, 2005). In a 
previous report (Charron et al., 2008), the climate sensitivity of hantavirus incidence, associated with effects 
on rodent populations, was identified. There have been no further studies of hantavirus in Canada, and 
potential impacts of climate change are unexplored.
6.3.2.2 Parasitic Zoonoses
In Canada, the zoonotic protozoans Cryptosporidium, Giardia, and Toxoplasma are the most important 
parasites for public health, according to expert opinion, and the first two are nationally notifiable (FAO & 
WHO, 2014). Transmission of Cryptosporidium and Giardia spp. can be directly from animals, for example, 
from neonatal farm animals or in petting zoo environments. It can also occur from human to human through 
close contact and outbreaks in communal, caregiving environments, and through food or water. The effects 
of climate change on infections by these parasites will most likely occur through food- or water-borne 
transmission (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security, and Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). 
Currently, the human burden of disease, including neural and ocular lesions associated with visceral larval 
migrans (i.e., the migration of larvae through the body) due to the zoonotic ascarids (i.e., roundworms) 
Baylisascaris procyonis and Toxocara canis is not known in Canada, and only isolated cases and serosurveys 
are reported (Embil et al., 1988; Sapp et al., 2016). The reservoir hosts for these ascarids are, respectively, 
raccoons and domestic dogs. In Southern Canada, dogs are also competent hosts for B. procyonis (Lee et al., 
2010). Toxocara canis was the most common parasite detected in the feces of dogs in shelters in a national 
study in Canada (Villeneuve et al., 2015). Direct transmission from dogs to humans is possible if eggs that 
have larvated in the environment stick to the fur of the animal, but in general T. canis is thought to be acquired 
mainly from eggs in the environment (Keegan & Holland, 2010). 
Eggs of both ascarid parasites undergo temperature-dependent development in the environment before 
becoming infective for humans. Therefore, the primary mechanisms by which these parasites may be 
affected by climate change are through local amplification due to more rapid development and increased 
survival of eggs shed in the feces of definitive hosts (i.e., those in which parasite reproduction occurs), and 
through northward range expansion due to changes in the distribution and abundance of the canine and 
raccoon hosts. Eggs of T. canis are freeze-susceptible (O'Lorcain, 1995) and undergo delayed development 
after chilling (Azam et al., 2012), but eggs of B. procyonis can survive freezing temperatures and freeze–
thaw cycles (Shafir et al., 2011). This suggests that a changing climate may have different effects on these 
parasites. For B. procyonis, northward expansion may follow that of the primary host, raccoons, which are 
currently limited to the southern parts of Canadian provinces (Naughton, 2012). For T. canis, northward 
range expansion and local amplification may follow increased survival and development rate of eggs in the 
environment. Increased circulation of both parasites in dogs, with their close relationship to people, may 
result in increased disease in Canadians. No studies to date have explicitly investigated effects of climate 
change on these parasites. However, eggs of T. canis were recently reported in dogs north of 60 degrees 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 415 
north latitude in Canada for the first time (Salb et al., 2008), which may suggest northward range expansion 
of this species (Jenkins et al., 2011).
Until recently, the zoonotic cestode Echinococcus multilocularis was thought to be transmitted between 
wild canids and rodents only in southern parts of the Prairie Provinces and the Arctic tundra, and only one 
autochthonous human case had been documented in Canada (James & Boyd, 1937; Deplazes et al., 2017). 
Eggs of Echinococcus are shed in the feces of wild or domestic canids; they are immediately infective 
and can adhere to the host’s fur. Infection can occur in humans via inadvertently consuming these eggs. 
Transmission can also occur via consumption of unwashed produce or drinking unfiltered surface water 
in heavily contaminated environments (Deplazes et al., 2017). In humans, the parasite establishes initially 
in the liver, and behaves like a parasitic tumour, eventually metastasizing throughout the abdomen unless 
aggressively surgically and medically managed. Recently, more cases of alveolar echinococcosis have 
been detected in both dogs and humans in Canada, and the parasite has expanded its range to include 
most of Western Canada (Deplazes et al., 2017) and the southern portion of Ontario (Kotwa et al., 2019). 
This emergence is likely linked to both the introduction of European strains of the parasite, which have now 
established successfully in wildlife, and increasing rates of contact between people and urban wildlife. 
Possible mechanisms for the effects of climate change on this parasite include effects on egg survival, as 
eggs are environmentally resistant but susceptible to high temperatures and desiccation, and by stabilizing 
and amplifying rodent intermediate host populations, which were thought to be a limiting factor keeping this 
parasite in check (Rausch, 1956; Jenkins et al., 2013). Climatic variables, both temperature and precipitation, 
have been correlated with the prevalence of infection in definitive and intermediate hosts (i.e., hosts in which 
parasite reproduction does not occur) (Takeuchi-Storm et al., 2015), which may be associated with direct 
effects on the survival of eggs in the environment, or impacts on reservoir hosts (Mas-Coma et al., 2008). 
The parasite is now provincially notifiable in Alberta and Ontario. Dogs can serve as both definitive and 
intermediate hosts for E. multilocularis, and therefore regular cestocidal treatment of dogs known to consume 
rodent intermediate hosts may help mitigate human risk (Jenkins, 2017).
6.3.2.3 Bacterial Zoonoses
Brucella species bacteria, which are endemic to Canada and cause disease in humans, are Brucella abortus 
and B. suis biotype 4. Brucella abortus is maintained by cattle, when the disease is not prevented by control 
programs, and by wild ungulates, including deer and bison (Nishi et al., 2002). Brucella suis biotype 4 is 
maintained by caribou (Forbes, 1991). Brucellosis in humans causes persistent and often recurrent fever with 
chronic fatigue and other symptoms such as arthritis (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019b). 
In animals, the main effect of infection is abortion. The main transmission route to the human population is 
mostly food-borne, but direct transmission from tissues of infected livestock to those working in livestock 
and food-processing industries is possible (Hunter et al., 2015), as is direct transmission from infected 
tissues of wildlife to hunters (Franco-Paredes et al., 2017). Apart from possible direct effects of climate 
change on the survival of Brucella spp. bacteria in the environment (Aune et al., 2012), and thus on animal-
to-animal transmission, climate change may affect transmission through effects on wild host population 
dynamics (Cross et al., 2007). While brucellosis may be a climate-sensitive disease, there have been no 
studies to explore possible effects of climate change.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 416 
Caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis, anthrax risk in the environment is amplified by infected wild 
and domesticated ungulates, which suffer hemorrhagic illness as a consequence of infection. The infected 
animal’s blood and carcass, if and when it dies, contaminates soils with bacteria that form resistant and 
persistent spores (Valseth et al., 2017). Humans can acquire infection by inhaling spores, ingesting spores 
contaminating food or water, or by contamination of skin cuts with spores. 
Manifestations in humans depend on the route of infection — cutaneous manifestations after the infection 
of cuts, gastrointestinal manifestations after ingestion, and respiratory manifestations after inhalation. There 
is high case fatality (approximately 25%) in untreated people (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
2017). High temperatures have been associated with outbreaks in wild and domesticated animals in northern 
countries, including Canada, and enhanced environmental suitability for anthrax transmission and B. anthracis 
survival in the North and in South-Central Canada is anticipated with a warming climate (Walsh et al., 2018). 
The persistent nature of B. anthracis spores in soils allows weather-driven outbreaks to occur, and these may 
become more common with climate change due to combined effects of warming and flooding (Maksimovic 
et al., 2017). Both anthrax and brucellosis are reportable diseases when they occur in livestock in Canada 
(Government of Canada, 2019c).
Q fever is caused by the bacterium Coxiella burnetii. This bacterium is transmitted to humans mainly by 
airborne pathways from infected ruminant farms, particularly sheep and goat farms. In humans, the infection 
causes fever as well as pneumonia, infections of the liver, and chronic infections of the heart, and has a 
high case-fatality rate without treatment (up to 25%) (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019c). In 
ruminants, there are few clinical manifestations beyond abortion if the animal is infected in late pregnancy. 
Infected animals excrete the bacteria in milk, urine, feces, and placenta and birthing fluids (Plummer et al., 
2018). The bacteria persist in the environment; while farm workers are those most at risk, large outbreaks 
have occurred in Europe associated with long-distance airborne transmission from affected farms 
(Schneeberger et al., 2014). Q fever is not nationally notifiable in Canada but is thought to be particularly 
prevalent in farms in Quebec (Dolcé et al., 2003), although the reason for this is unknown. Greater incidence 
has been associated with increased precipitation in the Caribbean, suggesting sensitivity to weather (Eldin 
et al., 2015; Sivabalan et al., 2017). The dispersal of the bacteria is increased with wind speed and low humidity, 
but reduced precipitation associated with climate change in some regions may reduce the concentration of this 
airborne pathogen (van Leuken et al., 2016). There are no studies exploring possible effects of climate change.
6.3.3 Infectious Diseases Directly Transmitted from Human to Human
This section focuses on the subset of infections that are transmitted directly from human to human. Direct 
transmission can be defined as an infectious agent being transferred between people by direct contact 
or droplet spread rather than via food, water, or arthropod vectors. Direct contact occurs through skin-to-
skin contact, whereas droplet spread refers to spray with relatively large, short-range aerosols produced by 
sneezing, coughing, or talking (Dicker et al., 2012). Directly transmitted infections cause a wide spectrum 
of illnesses, and many human population characteristics, such as changing demographics and human 
behaviour, patterns of connectivity, and compliance with public health recommendations (e.g., immunization 
against influenza), influence the burden of these diseases within the population (Heesterbeek et al., 2015). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 417 
The basic reproduction number (R0) (i.e., the number of secondary cases created by a primary disease case in 
a totally susceptible population and in the absence of intervention), is an important metric of communicability 
(Pandemic Influenza Outbreak Research Modelling Team, 2009). For directly transmitted pathogens, R0 is a 
function of duration of infectiousness, the effective contact rate of an infected individual, and the “infectivity” 
of an individual case (Pandemic Influenza Outbreak Research Modelling Team, 2009). If any of these factors 
are modified directly or indirectly by climate change, the result will be a change in disease epidemiology. 
Increases in R0 can increase the burden of endemic diseases and can make disease outbreak and emergence 
events more likely. In fact, the impacts of climate change on human habitation, agricultural productivity, 
conflict, livelihoods, and political stability will likely result in the displacement of populations and changes in 
mixing patterns that will have knock-on effects on communicable diseases; the link between human conflict, 
displacement of populations, and large-scale migrations and communicable diseases has been repeatedly 
demonstrated in recent and distant history (Rabaan, 2019). Such second- and third-order impacts of climate 
change on communicable diseases may dwarf the first-order changes in epidemiology due to impacts on 
hosts and pathogens. 
There have been many studies identifying impacts of weather and climate on infectious diseases transmitted 
directly from human to human, but there is a dearth of studies that have attempted to explicitly investigate 
the effects of climate change. Only effects for hand-foot-and-mouth disease (HFMD) have been studied to 
date, and there have been no efforts to attribute any changes in disease incidence to recent climate change.
A possible indicator of climate-related modification of the epidemiology of directly transmitted communicable 
diseases is their seasonality. The seasonality of such infections is well recognized and has worked its way 
into the vernacular (e.g., “flu season”). While mechanisms underlying the seasonality of communicable 
diseases remain poorly understood (Fisman, 2007; Greer et al., 2008; Fisman, 2012), a growing body of 
literature has sought to distinguish the contribution of environmental factors to disease transmission, from 
other seasonally varying factors, such as seasonal human behaviour (school attendance, holidays, indoor 
crowding, etc.) and neuroendocrine factors (melatonin, vitamin D, etc.) (Dowell, 2001). Many viral and bacterial 
pathogens, particularly those that cause respiratory and gastrointestinal infection, display marked seasonality in 
temperate climates such as Canada’s, which suggests that environmental factors are important determinants of 
disease risk and environmental change may result in important changes in disease epidemiology.
6.3.3.1 Respiratory Infections
Respiratory infections are the greatest contributor to the overall burden of disease in the world (Ferkol & 
Schraufnagel, 2014) and were the third leading cause of death in 2015 worldwide (Global Burden of Disease, 
2015; Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators, 2016). Added to this now is COVID-19, but, to date, 
there is no evidence of the influence of weather and climate on the emergence and spread of this disease. 
Communicable respiratory diseases include diseases caused by both viral and bacterial pathogens. For many 
viral respiratory diseases, such as influenza, a broad spectrum of illness is common; most people suffer mild 
to moderate illness that is self-limited. However, a proportion of the population will experience more severe 
illness, or secondary bacterial infection, requiring hospitalization. It is estimated that, in Canada, an average 
of 12,200 hospitalizations (Schanzer et al., 2006; Schanzer et al., 2008; Schanzer et al., 2013a; Schanzer et al., 
2013b) and approximately 3500 deaths are attributable to influenza annually (Schanzer et al., 2013b). Severe 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 418 
respiratory infections are most common at the extremes of age (Ampofo et al., 2006; Schanzer et al., 2006; 
Schanzer et al., 2008; Schanzer et al., 2013a; Schanzer et al., 2013b).
In temperate regions, viral respiratory infections, such as influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) can 
occur throughout the year, but seasonal epidemics peak in winter months (Thompson et al., 2006; Rohr et al., 
2011). The predictable seasonality of wintertime viral respiratory infections has led investigators to evaluate 
whether environmental conditions could influence the time of onset and/or severity of seasonal influenza 
epidemics. There is some evidence that decreased absolute humidity (Shaman et al., 2010), decreased 
temperature (Earn et al., 2012; Skog et al., 2014), or both (Chattopadhyay et al., 2018) may trigger the onset 
of influenza season in temperate countries. Lower temperatures and decreased absolute humidity may 
also increase the transmissibility of influenza and influenza-like illness during epidemics (Tang et al., 2010; 
Roussel et al., 2016; Caini et al., 2018). 
The severity of influenza seasons is diminished in the presence of strong El Niño–Southern Oscillation 
conditions (Viboud et al., 2004; Choi et al., 2006), providing further evidence of climate sensitivity. This 
thermal inversion in the Pacific Ocean is associated with unusually warm and rainy conditions, similar 
to those projected under climate change scenarios (Fisman et al., 2016). Given the apparent increase in 
influenza transmission in cold conditions, it might be expected that the effect of climate change would be 
to diminish the burden of illness associated with viral respiratory infections. However, climatic effects on 
influenza epidemiology may depend on time scale. An analysis of climate and past US influenza epidemic 
seasons from 1997 to 2013 found that mild winters were associated with early and severe epidemics in the 
subsequent year (Towers et al., 2013). Diminished influenza transmission in a given season may result in a 
larger population of susceptible individuals, and consequently a more explosive influenza epidemic, in the 
next season. Furthermore, it has been suggested that increased global temperatures may increase the rate 
of influenza diversification, which could diminish cross-protective immunity and give rise to more frequent 
influenza pandemics (Gatherer, 2010).
Several important bacterial respiratory human pathogens display stereotyped seasonality. Both Streptococcus 
pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis infections are more common in winter, which may be driven in part 
by increased risk due to prior influenza and/or respiratory syncytial virus infection (Tuite et al., 2010; Kuster 
et al., 2011). Direct environmental impacts on these infections are also possible. Invasive pneumococcal 
infections tend to be strongly seasonal in temperate climates, which leads to causal correlations with cold 
weather (Cilloniz et al., 2017). However, it has been suggested that diminished wintertime UV radiation, which 
is less likely to be influenced by climate change than temperature or precipitation patterns, may account for 
this wintertime seasonality (White et al., 2009). More recent modelling work suggests that pneumococcal 
seasonality may be complex and driven by interplays between population contact patterns, wintertime 
weather, and predisposing viral respiratory infections (Domenech de Cellès et al., 2019). Meningococcal 
infections have historically displayed highly seasonal occurrence in sub-Saharan Africa, with epidemic 
onset linked to the timing of the Harmattan winds (Sultan et al., 2005). In temperate regions, invasive 
meningococcal disease incidence often peaks in late winter or early spring (Rosenstein et al., 2001; Lindsay 
et al., 2002; Brachman & Abrutyn, 2009). However, links to environmental factors, while identified in individual 
regions, are inconsistent across regions (Collier, 1992; Lindsay et al., 2002; Sultan et al., 2005; Michele et al., 
2006; Kinlin et al., 2009). Increased frequency of extreme weather events, including heavy rainfall events, 
are projected under climate change, and increases in respiratory illness have been associated with exposure 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 419 
to floodwaters (De Man et al., 2016). However, these illnesses are likely due to environmentally derived 
pathogens (e.g., Legionella, as described below) and water-borne pathogens, which are addressed elsewhere 
in this report (see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). 
6.3.3.2 Gastrointestinal Infections
As with respiratory viral infections, gastrointestinal tract viral infections display highly seasonal occurrence. 
Enteroviral infections, including echovirus, coxsackie A and B viruses, and, before its control, poliovirus 
are associated with outbreaks in late summer and early autumn in temperate countries (Moore, 1982). 
Norovirus and rotavirus commonly occur in winter (Greer et al., 2009; Patel et al., 2013). Enteroviruses are 
usually transmitted via the fecal–oral route and can cause recognizable disease entities, including HFMD, 
neuroinvasive infections (e.g., acute flaccid paralysis), and non-specific syndromes, including viral meningitis, 
encephalitis, myocarditis, gastroenteritis, and conjunctivitis. Norovirus and rotavirus are associated with 
gastroenteritis, and norovirus in particular can cause large point-source outbreaks, including those in closed 
environments such as cruise ships and long-term care facilities (Rajagopalan & Yoshikawa, 2016; Mouchtouri 
et al., 2017).
Mechanisms underlying the seasonality of enteroviral infections are not fully understood. However, Dowell 
(2001) pointed out that the seasonality of polio becomes more evident with distance from the equator, and is 
absent peri-equatorially, implying that seasonal changes in weather are key drivers of enteroviral seasonality. 
It has been suggested that temperature modulates both viral reproduction and particle survival, and that 
humidity alters viral attachments to water droplets, facilitating transmission (Patz et al., 2005; Wong et al., 
2010). Consistent with these hypotheses, elevated temperatures have been associated with increased HFMD 
risk in several Asian countries (e.g., Hii et al., 2011; Onozuka & Hashizume, 2011), at lags of one to two weeks. 
While some studies suggest that the relationship between temperature and disease risk is linear (Hii et al., 
2011; Wang et al., 2016), or associated with high maximum daily temperatures (Sumi et al., 2017), others 
suggest more complex non-linear relationships between risk and temperature (Kim et al., 2016; Liao et al., 
2016; Zhao et al., 2018). 
Increased relative humidity and rainfall have also been associated with elevated HFMD risk in most studies 
(Hii et al., 2011; Onozuka & Hashizume, 2011; Zhao et al., 2017); humidity may modulate the effects of 
temperature (Kim et al., 2016; Sumi et al., 2017). It has been suggested that extreme precipitation events may 
enhance the risk of HFMD (Cheng et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2019). As noted above, the combination of increased 
temperature and heavy rains is associated with El Niño–Southern Oscillation, which are associated with 
near-term increases in HFMD in China (Lin et al., 2013). These observations have allowed parameterization 
of mathematical models that suggest a 5% increase in HFMD in China by 2090, which would represent a 
substantial increase in disease burden (Zhao et al., 2018). If such estimates are applicable to enteroviral 
infections generally, this could also present an increase in currently rare but severe manifestations of 
enteroviral disease, such as neuroinvasive infections and myocarditis. 
Increased temperatures and rainy, humid weather associated with climate change could therefore increase 
the incidence of endemic enteroviral disease worldwide as well as the frequency of outbreaks, and spur 
the emergence of enteroviral strains in new geographic regions by elevating R0 beyond the threshold for 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 420 
sustained person-to-person transmission. Indeed, with the recent emergence of acute flaccid paralysis due to 
non-polio enteroviruses in North America, including Canada, such a phenomenon may currently be occurring 
(Hassel et al., 2015; Holm-Hansen et al., 2016; Suresh et al., 2018). Candidate vaccines against enterovirus 
EV-71, which is an important agent of HFMD and strongly associated with neuroinvasive disease, are in 
development but are not yet available for use in North America (Zhu et al., 2014). 
In contrast to enteroviruses, both noroviruses and rotavirus strains are associated with wintertime 
gastroenteritis in North America (Greer et al., 2009; Patel et al., 2013). In Spain, unusually cold weather 
has been associated with increased risk of rotavirus-related hospitalization (Morral-Puigmal et al., 2018). 
While rotavirus is highly transmissible via person-to-person spread, environmental reservoirs (particularly 
water) may be important for spread, and lower water temperatures delay environmental decay of the virus 
(see Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security). Cold, dry conditions have also been associated with 
norovirus activity in England and Wales (Lopman et al., 2009). Consequently, climate warming in Canada 
could reduce the incidence of some of these viral pathogens. 
6.3.4 Infectious Diseases Acquired by Inhalation from 
Environmental Sources
Perhaps the best-known infectious diseases of humans that have environmental sources other than 
infected humans, animal reservoirs, or arthropod vectors, are legionellosis and cryptococcosis. These 
types of infections are caused by bacteria and fungi that persist in soils and water and that infect humans 
by inhalation after becoming aerosolized or airborne in dust. For all such infections, while there have been 
studies to identify influences of weather and climate on their occurrence, there has been little assessment 
of the possible impacts of climate change. Details of the pathogens, the diseases they cause, and their 
sensitivity to weather and climate are provided in the main text, while the possible effects of climate change 
are described in Box 6.5, Box 6.6, Box 6.7, Box 6.8, and Box 6.9.
6.3.4.1 Legionellosis
Infection with Legionella bacteria causes legionellosis, which presents as Legionnaires’ disease, Pontiac fever, 
or as an asymptomatic infection. Legionnaires’ disease manifests as pneumonia (Stout & Yu, 1997). Illness is 
often severe and can progress to respiratory and multi-organ failure, with a case-fatality rate of 11% to 25% 
(Marston et al., 1994; Stout & Yu, 1997). Pontiac fever is milder and characterized by fever, fatigue, myalgia, 
and headache, with or without cough (Tossa et al., 2006), and patients recover within two to five days without 
treatment. Individuals at increased risk of legionellosis include older adults, males, smokers, and those with 
underlying conditions, including immunosuppression, chronic lung disease, diabetes, and cancer (Marston et 
al., 1994; Stout & Yu, 1997).
Legionella bacteria occur naturally in freshwater and soil and multiply in environmental protozoa. They 
become a human health risk when they multiply in water between 25°C and 42°C, become aerosolized, and 
are inhaled into the lungs (Fields et al., 2002; WHO, 2007). Infection with Legionella pneumophila (which 
causes more than 70% of human infections) occurs through inhalation of aerosols from manufactured 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 421 
freshwater systems in homes or in the community (e.g., cooling towers, hot tubs, shower heads, fountains) 
(WHO, 2007). Transmission also occurs in care facilities due to a combination of inadequate design and/or 
maintenance of building infrastructure and risk factors present in the residents or patients (Silk et al., 2013). 
Infection with some species occurs through direct contact with, or via aerosolization of, contaminated soil or 
compost (WHO, 2007; Picard-Masson et al., 2016).
As an environmental bacterium, Legionella is sensitive to climatic factors. Legionellosis shows a marked 
seasonality, with higher incidence in the late summer and early fall (Simmering et al., 2017; Alarcon Falconi 
et al., 2018). It also shows regional differences, which may be associated with climatic factors (Beauté et 
al., 2016; Simmering et al., 2017). The most consistent and strongest climate association has been reported 
between legionellosis and precipitation. Several studies in North America, Asia, and Europe have found an 
increase in the risk of sporadic legionellosis following rainfall events (Fisman et al., 2005; Hicks et al., 2007; 
Garcia-Vidal et al., 2013). The increase occurs two to 11 days after rainfall (Fisman et al., 2005; Chen et al., 
2014b; Beauté et al., 2016;) and has been associated with a 2.5 to 2.6-fold increase in incidence per 5 mm to 
1 cm of rain (Hicks et al., 2007; Chen et al., 2014b) or 2.1 to 2.5-fold compared to periods with no rain (Fisman 
et al., 2005; Beauté et al., 2016). This may be because precipitation increases runoff and adds nutrients 
and protozoa to water sources, which can increase Legionella replication; it can also increase turbidity and 
organic matter, which decreases the effectiveness of water disinfection (Fisman et al., 2005). 
In temperate zones, warmer temperatures have also been found to increase the risk of legionellosis (Fisman 
et al., 2005; Hicks et al., 2007; Conza et al., 2013; Halsby et al., 2014; Beauté et al., 2016; Simmering et al., 
2017). An increase of 1°C has been associated with a 2.8% to 7% increase in risk (Fisman et al., 2005; Hicks 
et al., 2007; Conza et al., 2013), and the risk occurs after a lag of three to nine weeks (Halsby et al., 2014; 
Beauté et al., 2016). However, one study (Beauté et al., 2016) suggested that risk may decrease at higher 
temperature ranges (above 20°C). Finally, higher relative humidity and vapour pressure have been associated 
with legionellosis risk (Fisman et al., 2005; Conza et al., 2013; Gleason et al., 2016; Simmering et al., 2017). 
Higher humidity has been positively associated with legionellosis cases (Gleason et al., 2016). Simmering et 
al. (2017) found that temperature and humidity interact; the highest risk was between 16°C and 27°C and a 
relative humidity of more than 70%. In summary, the risk of legionellosis seems to increase following warmer, 
wetter weather (Chen et al., 2014a; Halsby et al., 2014), as warm, wet environments support Legionella growth 
and aerosolization. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 422 
Box 6.5 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of 
infections from legionellosis 
Expected effects of climate change:
No studies have directly assessed the impacts of climate change on legionellosis. However, given its known 
sensitivity to climate and weather, effects of climate change could be expected. An increased frequency 
of heavy precipitation events could increase the risk, while increases in temperature may increase outdoor 
activities by people and the use of aerosolizing water devices such as fountains and air conditioners, 
which are sources of Legionella infection (Sakamoto et al., 2009; Beauté et al., 2016). However, at a certain 
temperature threshold, it appears that risk may peak and begin to decrease (20°C) (Beauté et al., 2016). Extreme 
temperatures, combined with dry summers for some Canadian regions, may lead to a reduced risk of legionellosis. 
Evidence of effects of climate change:
Legionellosis incidence has increased in many countries in the last two decades (Neil & Berkelman, 2008; 
Beauté, 2017; European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, 2018). In Canada, the incidence increased 
more than six-fold, from 0.13 per 100,000 population in 2004 to 0.87 per 100,000 population in 2016 
(Government of Canada, 2019d). While it is possible that recent climate change may have been a driver, other 
plausible causes include the widespread use of more sensitive diagnostic tests, an aging infrastructure, and 
an aging population (Beauté, 2017; Alarcon Falconi et al., 2018; European Centre for Disease Prevention and 
Control, 2018).
6.3.4.2 Cryptococcus gattii Infection
Cryptococcus gattii is an environmental fungus that causes infection in humans and multiple animal 
species (Chen et al., 2014b). Cryptococcus gattii occurs in soil and tree debris, but it can also be found in 
air, freshwater and saltwater, and on vehicles and fomites — objects or materials such as clothes, utensils, 
and furniture that can carry infection (Kidd et al., 2007a). Its spores are aerosolized from soil or trees and 
transported to other sites or inhaled by humans and animals (Kidd et al., 2007b). In humans, spores are 
inhaled into the lungs, where they cause pneumonia or pulmonary nodules. They may be disseminated 
through the bloodstream, particularly to the central nervous system, where they cause meningitis or 
brain nodules (Chen et al., 2014b) (Figure 6.7). The case-fatality rate is high, at 23% (Phillips et al., 2015). 
Individuals at higher risk of infection include those over 50 years of age, smokers, and people with chronic 
lung disease or immunocompromizing conditions or treatments (MacDougall et al., 2011). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 423 
Figure 6.7 Biology of Cryptococcus gatti. Cryptococcus gattii lives as a yeast in the environment (1), usually in 
association with certain trees or soil around trees. Humans and animals can become infected with C. gattii after 
inhaling airborne, dehydrated yeast cells or spores (2), which travel through the respiratory tract and enter the 
lungs of the host (3). The small size of the yeast and/or spores allows them to become lodged deep in the lung 
tissue. The environment inside the host body signals C. gattii to transform into its yeast form, and the cells grow 
thick capsules to protect themselves (4). The yeasts then divide and multiply by budding. After infecting the 
lungs, C. gattii cells can travel through the bloodstream (5) — either on their own or within macrophage cells — to 
infect other areas of the body, typically the central nervous system (6). Source: US CDC, 2020.
Cryptococcus gattii is found worldwide. It first emerged in Canada on Vancouver Island in 1999, when it 
caused an outbreak among healthy animals and humans (Fyfe et al., 2008). Since then, incidence increased 
to reach a steady state of 0.2 to 0.5 cases per 100,000 population in British Columbia (BCCDC, 2019). Since 
2004, the fungus has been found in the environment and in humans and animals on the British Columbia 
mainland and neighbouring Washington and Oregon states (MacDougall et al., 2007). It is unclear whether 
the range of C. gattii increased or whether C. gattii was already present in these regions (Roe et al., 2018). 
Very few locally acquired Canadian cases have been reported outside British Columbia, except for two human 
cases in Quebec in 2008 and 2015 (St-Pierre et al., 2018) and one case in a deer in Nova Scotia in 2014 (Overy 
et al., 2016). 
As an environmental fungus, C. gattii is sensitive to climatic factors. Humidity, temperature, precipitation, 
evaporation, and solar radiation all affect the occurrence of C. gattii in the environment (Granados & 
Castañeda, 2006; Kidd et al., 2007b). An ecological niche model conducted in British Columbia described 
areas with environmental conditions supporting C. gattii establishment as those with low elevations, with a 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 424 
daily January average temperature of above 0°C, and within two coastal climatic zones of British Columbia, 
where winters are mild and wet and summers are warm and dry (Mak et al., 2010). Environmental sampling of 
C. gattii in British Columbia found that air sample concentrations were greatest during summer months with 
warm, dry conditions, and low relative humidity (Kidd et al., 2007b). 
The response to climatic and other environmental factors has been inconsistent globally and may depend, in 
part, on where C. gattii is sampled (i.e., air, soil, or trees), on strain type, and on other factors. Wind increases 
aerosolization from the soil and enables spread (Uejio et al., 2015). Heavy rainfall or humidity may pull spores 
out of the air (Kidd et al., 2007b), although in most regions, C. gattii is more likely to be isolated from trees 
during the rainy season, suggesting it is more abundant at this time (Uejio et al., 2015). In British Columbia, 
higher temperatures decreased isolation from trees and concentration in soil, but in other parts of the world, 
the highest isolation frequency was during very high temperatures (Uejio et al., 2015). Cryptococcus gattii 
spores can withstand high levels of solar radiation, so summer conditions with high temperatures and high 
isolation are unlikely to preclude C. gattii survival (Rosas & Casadevall, 2006). 
Box 6.6 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of 
infections from Cryptococcus gattii
Expected effects of climate change: 
Warming and increasing precipitation may increase the geographic range of C. gattii and the population 
exposed in Canada, given the association of this fungus with above-freezing temperatures and humid 
habitats. However, in areas where temperature becomes very high, the concentration of spores in the 
environment and risk to humans may decrease. Heavy precipitation events could decrease aerosolized 
spread and air concentrations, decreasing human risk. To date, no studies have directly assessed climate 
change impacts on C. gattii (Acheson et al., 2018).
Evidence of effects of climate change: 
Because it was first described in tropical regions, it was thought that C. gattii was found only in tropical or 
subtropical climates (Kwon-Chung & Bennett, 1984) and that its emergence in British Columbia may have 
been associated with climate change. It is now believed that C. gattii originated in South America (Souto et 
al., 2016) and became widely distributed to multiple tropical and temperate areas in the years before and 
after it first appeared on Vancouver Island (Acheson et al., 2019). It is also now believed that C. gattii was 
introduced simultaneously into multiple areas of the northwestern coast of North America 60 to 100 years 
ago via human agency (Roe et al., 2018). Why it emerged as a human and animal pathogen in North America 
in the late 1990s remains unclear, but both climate and land-use changes are possible causes (Acheson et al., 
2018). The more recent appearance of cases in Quebec and Nova Scotia could also have been facilitated by a 
changing climate, following introductions by human agency (Roe et al., 2018).
:
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 425 
6.3.4.3 Blastomycosis
Blastomyces dermatitidis is a dimorphic fungus found in moist soil and decaying vegetation. Transmission occurs 
from the environment to humans and other animals through aerosolization and inhalation (Castillo et al., 2016). 
Spores inhaled into the lungs cause pulmonary blastomycosis, characterized by cough, fever, and shortness 
of breath (McBride et al., 2017). The yeast form may be disseminated through the blood to other organs, and 
cutaneous infection can occur from direct inoculation (Castillo et al., 2016). The case-fatality rate is high, at 5% to 
20%, which may be associated with delayed diagnosis, particularly in less endemic areas (Crampton et al., 2002; 
Dalcin & Ahmed, 2015). The infection is treated with antifungals (Castillo et al., 2016). The incubation period is 
typically one to three months and cases mainly occur in immunocompromised individuals, smokers, and those 
with underlying diseases who are at higher risk of infection and mortality (Crampton et al., 2002; Dalcin & Ahmed, 
2015; Castillo et al., 2016; McBride et al., 2017). Individuals are at increased risk of exposure through outdoor 
occupations and activities such as hunting and camping (Crampton et al., 2002). Most cases are sporadic, but 
activities that disrupt soil (e.g., construction, deforestation, outdoor activities) and exposure to riverbanks have 
been associated with point-source outbreaks (Baumgardner & Burdick, 1991; Proctor et al., 2002; Azar et al., 2015). 
Blastomyces dermatitidis is endemic in certain parts of Canada, including Southern Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba, Ontario, and Southern Quebec (Crampton et al., 2002; Litvinov et al., 2013; Lohrenz et al., 2018). 
Blastomycosis is only reportable in Ontario and Manitoba and may be under-recognized in other parts of 
the country. It is hyperendemic in Northwest Ontario, characterized by persistent, high levels of disease 
occurrence. The Kenora, Ontario, area has the highest reported rates worldwide, with 35 hospitalizations 
per 100,000 population per year (Litvinjenko & Lunny, 2017; Brown et al., 2018). This endemic region is 
contiguous with endemic regions in US states that border the Mississippi and Ohio rivers, the Great Lakes, 
and St. Lawrence Seaway (McBride et al., 2017). 
Blastomyces species are environmental fungi and therefore depend on climatic conditions for growth and 
dispersal. Specific ecological factors are poorly understood, in part because the organism has rarely been 
recovered from the environment, but moist soil near waterways and lakes seem to be the preferred niche 
for Blastomyces species fungi (Castillo et al., 2016). Soil disruption facilitates aerosolization (Baumgardner, 
1997). It is hypothesized that proximity to waterways and drought followed by increased precipitation may 
help expose spores and facilitate their dispersal (McDonough et al., 1976; McTaggart et al., 2016). Although 
the peak onset for pulmonary infection is in the fall and winter, reflecting exposure during warmer weather 
(Morris et al., 2006; Light et al., 2008; Dalcin & Ahmed, 2015; Brown et al., 2018), few studies have specifically 
assessed the role of climatic factors and varying results have been reported. Baumgardner et al. (2011) 
found an association between total precipitation, temperature (low average temperatures during the season 
of infection, but high maximum temperatures the previous season), and canine cases. Seitz et al. (2015) 
found a higher risk of blastomycosis hospitalization with lower maximum temperature. Proctor et al. (2002) 
investigated an outbreak that followed a prolonged period of drought. Similarly, Pfister et al. (2011) found 
that moderate-to-severe drought, followed by above-normal precipitation and warming of yard waste, was 
associated with an outbreak in Wisconsin. Wind may be a factor, as some outbreaks have been associated 
with excavation dust (Baumgardner et al., 2011) or disruption of decomposing yard waste (Pfister et al., 
2011). A Wisconsin ecological niche model found proximity to waterways and a summer vegetation index to 
be most predictive of the location of human and animal blastomycosis cases; bioclimatic factors did not play 
a significant role (Reed et al., 2008).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 426 
Box 6.7 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of 
infections from blastomycosis
Expected effects of climate change: 
Wetter winters and drier summers could provide conditions more conducive to the growth and dispersal of 
Blastomyces in currently endemic areas or new regions of Canada (Greer et al., 2008). However, there have 
been no studies to date to directly assess the impacts of climate change on Blastomyces infection.
Evidence of effects of climate change: 
Blastomyces have been present in Canada for several decades and potentially longer (Kepron et al., 1972; 
Kane et al., 1983; St-Germain et al., 1993). In Northwestern Ontario, the incidence of blastomycosis increased 
between the late 1990s and the period from 2006 to 2015, from 17 cases to 35 cases per 100,000 (Litvinjenko 
& Lunny, 2017; Brown et al., 2018). The estimated incidence in Quebec also increased between 1988 
and 2010, from approximately 4.4 to 10.3 cases per 100,000 (Litvinov et al., 2013). In Saskatchewan and 
Manitoba, animal cases increased from 1999 to 2001, but incidence plateaued from 2004 to 2010 (Davies et 
al., 2013). Climate change may have been a cause, but factors such as increased awareness and diagnosis, 
increased human exposure to endemic areas, changes in fungal pathogenicity or niche and land-use changes 
may have been involved. Interestingly, blastomycosis increased in Central Canada, and C. gattii emerged in 
Western Canada around the same time — in the late 1990s.
6.3.4.4 Histoplasmosis
Histoplasmosis is caused by the dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum. Spores grow in moist soil rich in 
bat or bird guano along waterways and in caves. Disruption of soil due to excavation and construction leads 
to aerosol generation and the risk of inhalation of spores. Infection develops seven to 14 days after exposure. 
It is often asymptomatic or causes self-limited illness with fever, headache, weakness, chest pain, and cough. 
It can lead to extrapulmonary infection and also cause more severe pulmonary infection in individuals with 
underlying lung conditions or immunocompromised individuals (Kauffman, 2007). Histoplasma capsulatum is 
endemic along the St. Lawrence and Great Lakes River Drainage Basins in Quebec and Ontario, the Ohio and 
Mississippi River valleys in the United States, and along waterways in Asia and South America. In Canada, 
the highest rate of diagnosed illness is in Quebec. In one study, 58 cases were identified as having occurred 
in Canada over three years (1992 to 1994), of which 72% were from Quebec (Nicolle et al., 1998). Cases in 
Alberta were first identified in 2003, and since then a small number are reported every year (Anderson et al., 
2006; Alberta Health, 2018). The fungus is climatically sensitive, preferring moderate temperatures (18°C to 
28°C), constant humidity, and low light (Teixeira et al., 2016).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 427 
Box 6.8 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of 
infections from histoplasmosis
Expected effects of climate change: 
Warming temperatures may increase the risk of histoplasmosis and other fungal diseases (Garcia-Solache & 
Casadevall, 2010), although there have been no formal studies to assess the effects of climate change.
Evidence of effects of climate change: 
A change in geographic distribution of human outbreaks has been reported in the United States, with suitable 
environments expanding into the Missouri River basin, which may be due to recent climate change or 
changes to land use (Maiga et al., 2018). However, Ontario has not seen a change in incidence between 1990 
and 2015 (Brown et al., 2018).
6.3.4.5 Coccidioidomycosis
Coccidioidomycosis is caused by Coccidioides species fungi, which are found in arid soil, including C. immitis 
found in California and C. posadasii found elsewhere (Maves & Crum-Cianflone, 2012). Spores are released 
into the air when soil is disturbed and can be inhaled by humans, causing coccidioidomycosis, also known 
as valley fever. The disease has an incubation period of one to three weeks, and many individuals remain 
asymptomatic or have mild symptoms. Approximately 40% develop pulmonary infection with cough, chest 
pain, dyspnea, and fever. This is usually self-limited and resolves within a few weeks. Disseminated infection 
occurs in 5% of individuals and leads to diffuse and chronic pulmonary illness, meningitis, or infection in 
other organs (Maves & Crum-Cianflone, 2012). This severe form requires prolonged antifungal treatment. 
Pregnant women and people with impaired cellular immunity, due to HIV infection or organ transplantation, 
are at higher risk of severe illness. Reactivation of latent disease is also possible (Maves & Crum-Cianflone, 
2012). The geographic range of the fungus includes parts of South and Central America, Mexico, and the 
Southwestern United States (Maves & Crum-Cianflone, 2012). Certain areas of California and Arizona have the 
highest reported rates worldwide. Soil disruption, including construction, archaeological digs, earthquakes, 
and wind storms in endemic desert areas is the main source of exposure (Maves & Crum-Cianflone, 2012). 
Coccidioides spp. are affected by climatic factors (Nguyen et al., 2013), requiring moisture to grow in soil and 
then a dry period to mature into spores that can be aerosolized (the “grow and blow” hypothesis) (Comrie 
& Glueck, 2007). The seasonal spike in human cases in the United States occurs mainly in the fall, after a 
period of rainy months followed by warm dry months. There is also a cyclical pattern, with incidence peaks 
approximately every two to five years, believed to be associated with droughts followed by rainy weather 
(Park et al., 2005; Tamerius & Comrie, 2011; Gorris et al., 2018 ). Warmer temperatures are associated with 
higher incidence in humans (Gorris et al., 2018), and incidence increases following large windstorms (Tong et 
al., 2017). However, regions with high mean annual precipitation or very moist soil (such as coastal regions) 
have a low incidence (Gorris et al., 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 428 
Box 6.9 Effects of, and evidence for, climate change on the risk of 
infections from coccidioidomycosis
Expected effects of climate change: 
Warmer temperatures could expand the range of Coccidioides into Canada, particularly into drier areas of 
Southern British Columbia. Wet winters and dry summers could provide conditions more conducive to growth 
and dispersal of Coccidioides in Canada. However, an earlier onset of the rainy season or heavier annual 
precipitation could decrease the risk. To date, there is no evidence of local transmission in Canada, although 
South-Central Washington state shares some ecological and climate characteristics with the Southern 
Okanagan Valley in British Columbia, 400 km to the north (Environmental Protection Agency, 2018). No 
studies have yet directly assessed the possible impacts of climate change on Coccidioides infection. 
Evidence of effects of climate change: 
In endemic areas of the United States, the incidence has increased from the early 1990s to recent years 
(Kirkland & Fierer, 1996; Sunenshine et al., 2007; Vugia et al., 2009). This has been attributed to population 
growth and construction in endemic areas, increased numbers of immunosuppressed persons, and improved 
awareness and diagnostic methods. However, there is evidence for northward range expansion toward 
the Canadian border, which may be related to climatic events; specifically, extensive droughts may have 
contributed to range expansion. It may also have been caused by increased human exposure due to increased 
population density (Litvintseva et al., 2015). In 2010–2011, three residents of South-Central Washington 
state who did not travel to known endemic areas were diagnosed with coccidioidomycosis (Marsden-Haug 
et al., 2013). Since then, 13 more locally acquired cases have been reported (Washington State Department 
of Health, 2021). Soil samples collected in 2010 and again in 2014 from this area identified Coccidioides with 
an identical genotype to index case samples (Marsden-Haug et al., 2013; Litvintseva et al., 2015). This is the most 
northerly location where Coccidioides has been found, again supporting the idea of northward range expansion.
6.4 Adaptation to Reduce Health Risks
Canada already has a robust public health system, which is networked with international public health 
organizations. Together, these systems contribute to infectious disease preparedness, surveillance, and 
monitoring and outbreak response. As infectious disease risks continue to grow in a changing climate, these 
activities will be increasingly important for adaptation success. Two streams of public health activities in the 
context of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases are upstream preparedness and outbreak response. 
Within these streams, there are three key public health activities: risk assessment, to identify current and 
future risk; surveillance, for known risks or possible future emerging risks identified in risk assessments; and 
interventions, to prevent and control infectious diseases. These three activities are discussed individually, but, 
in practice, they should be highly connected; risk assessments guide rational implementation of surveillance 
activities, which, in turn, trigger interventions to protect the public when a hazard is detected (Figure 6.8). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 429 
Actions to protect health need to be robust and coordinated to address the increased risks from infectious 
diseases due to climate change. Furthermore, as many of the threats of emerging and re-emerging infectious 
diseases involve directly transmitted or vector-borne zoonoses, a One Health approach, which considers the 
interactions among human, animal, and environmental factors in disease transmission, emergence, and re-
emergence, is required to develop effective responses (Ogden et al., 2017; Ogden et al., 2019). 
In general, Canada and other high-income countries could be considered well-placed to respond to emerging 
and re-emerging infectious diseases through robust international institutions for surveillance and response, 
such as the WHO’s International Health Regulations (IHR) (WHO, 2019c), the Global Outbreak Alert and 
Response Network (WHO, 2019d), as well as the health care system and public health institutions in Canada. 
The public health system in Canada centres around the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network (Pan-Canadian 
Public Health Network, 2016), a federal, provincial, and territorial partnership, with federal coordination by 
PHAC. This system is supported by high-quality academic institutions and industries in Canada that can 
facilitate innovation and responses to threats from emerging infectious diseases. Canada is a leader in the 
One Health approach in federal, provincial, and academic institutions, and the One Health approach is applied 
systematically in addressing these disease threats (Government of Canada, 2013; INSPQ, 2018a; CPHAZ, 
2019; GREZOSP, 2019; Ogden et al., 2019). Despite this capacity, there are many unknowns ahead, and, as 
seen with COVID-19, even the best-prepared public health systems can be severely challenged by emerging 
infectious diseases. 
Figure 6.8 Two streams of public health actions to manage emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases. The blue 
boxes indicate outbreak response, and the orange boxes indicate upstream preparedness. Examples of activities that 
may be components of outbreak management are shown in the green boxes. Dashed lines indicate how outbreak 
response may be triggered by early detection of disease risk using an upstream preparedness approach.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 430 
Since the last national Canadian climate change and health assessment (Berry et al., 2014a), PHAC enhanced 
upstream preparedness for emerging and re-emerging vector-borne disease risks through an integrated 
program of adaptation, which comprises (Figure 6.8):
•	
prioritization of disease risks for study, now formalized in a multi-criteria decision analysis 
(MCDA) method (Ng et al., 2019); 
•	
modelling studies to identify climate-disease risk associations and to project where and when 
diseases may emerge with climate change (Ng et al., 2019); 
•	
implementation of surveillance programs to validate models and track emerging vector-borne 
diseases (Drebot, 2015; Ogden et al., 2014c); and 
•	
development of synthesized knowledge (Hierlihy et al., 2019), disease forecasting (Ripoche et al., 
2019), and risk communication tools (Figure 6.9) to support local efforts to adapt to increasing 
risks from vector-borne diseases.
6.4.1 Risk Assessment to Identify Current and Future Risks
6.4.1.1 Responsive Rapid Risk Assessments
Responsive rapid risk assessments (RRAs) are qualitative risk assessments developed in response to an 
immediate disease emergence event within Canada, or a perceived risk, such as an international disease 
event or threat, that requires rapid decision making. Responsive RRAs are developed using the scientific 
literature and knowledge of a disease at the moment in time that the disease emerges or re-emerges; they 
may be updated as knowledge increases in the light of the disease emergence event. They generally pre-
date, and aim to guide, implementation of surveillance and/or intervention activities. Examples include 
those conducted in response to the threat of Zika virus in Canada nationally (Government of Canada, 2016) 
and provincially (INSPQ, 2016), as well as those developed by the European Centre for Disease Prevention 
and Control (ECDC) in response to a number of disease emergence events (ECDC, 2019). The World Health 
Organization has developed a protocol for their preparation (WHO, 2019e), which forms the basis for RRAs 
used in Canada. The capacity to perform RRAs in the face of disease emergence events is essential for public 
health officials in Canada to respond to unforeseen events, including those driven by climate change.
6.4.1.2 Predicting Future Populations at Risk, and Establishing Early Warning 
Systems, Through Quantitative Model-Based Risk Assessments
Quantitative risk assessments aim to predict where and when infectious diseases may emerge or re-emerge 
with a precision useful to public health officials in their efforts to prepare and respond to disease emergence 
with needed policies or programs. Risk assessments can be obtained using mathematical models that 
recreate the essential components of vector life cycles or disease transmission cycles, if there are sufficient 
quantitative data to calibrate these types of models. If not, statistical or ecological niche models can be used, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 431 
providing there are surveillance data that include, at a minimum, information on presence, but preferably 
data on presence/absence and abundance, to calibrate them. In either case, the objective of the models is 
to assess where and when risk from climate-sensitive infectious diseases may change (i.e., they provide “early 
warning” of future disease risks). Predictive models are used for three main purposes (Ogden & Gachon, 2019): 
•	
short-range forecasting of disease risks based on weather; 
•	
long-range or seasonal forecasting based on climate; and 
•	
projections of long-term effects of climate change on disease risks.
Models are developed by first identifying key associations between the presence of vectors and/or pathogens 
and weather (for short-term forecasting) or climatic variables, while accounting for important climate-
independent determinants of their presence, which may include other environmental changes such as 
land-use change (Patz et al., 2003). Validation of deduced associations against real data is important to 
provide confidence in the use of model outputs. Once associations between climate and the occurrence of 
pathogens/vectors have been identified and quantified, the impacts of projected climate change, obtained 
from regional and global climate models, on pathogen/vector distributions and risk can be estimated.
Forecasting provides early warning of impending weather-driven disease outbreaks. This can include short-
range forecasting on a time scale of days to weeks and long-range forecasting on a time scale of several 
months that can be used to implement prevention and control activities (Morin et al., 2018). The model-based 
assessments of the effects of climate change provide assessments of where and when diseases may emerge 
or re-emerge in coming decades, which are used in a number of contexts (Ogden et al., 2014c): 
•	
high-level national policy decisions on whether and when public health preparedness for emerging 
risks may be needed (Centre for Food-borne, Environmental and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, 2017); 
•	
provincial, territorial, and municipal assessments of vulnerability to the health impacts of climate 
change and of needed adaptation measures (Berry et al., 2014b); and 
•	
design and implementation of surveillance (Ogden et al., 2014).
As discussed earlier in this chapter, a number of model-based risk assessments have been conducted for 
Canada, including those for Lyme disease (Ogden et al., 2006; Ogden et al., 2014), relapsing fever (Sage et al., 
2017), Dermacentor variabilis ticks (Minigan et al., 2018), exotic mosquito-borne diseases and their vectors 
(Ogden et al., 2014a; Ng et al., 2017), and WNV (Hongoh et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2013).
6.4.2 Prioritization
Since they were identified as an important methodological need by Charron et al. (2008) and by the WHO 
(WHO, 2019g), a number of MCDA methods have been explored to prioritize diseases for attention, based 
upon their public health importance, including their risk of emergence or re-emergence due to climate change 
(Ng & Sargeant, 2012; Cox et al., 2013). These types of methods have been adopted and occasionally adapted 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 432 
for disease prioritization at both federal (Otten et al., 2019) and provincial levels (INSPQ, 2018b), although not 
as yet by all jurisdictions in Canada.
6.4.3 Surveillance for Known Risks or Possible Future Risks
There are two types of surveillance to identify emerging infectious diseases to inform outbreak management. 
The first is vigilance for international disease emergence events, and the second is disease-specific 
surveillance, to be implemented once a disease is recognized as a significant public health risk for Canadians. 
The possible impact of climate change on increasing infectious disease emergence and re-emergence events 
globally, and on increasing dispersion of the disease agents through travel, trade, and migration, increases 
the need for effective vigilance for emerging infectious disease events in other countries. International efforts 
that support this type of surveillance include the IHR, under which all WHO member states are obliged to 
undertake surveillance for disease emergence events and to report any that are identified. In addition, as 
part of the global One Health initiative, the Food and Agriculture Organization, World Organization for Animal 
Health, and the WHO collaborate in the Global Early Warning System, which is a warning system for emerging 
disease threats at the human–animal–ecosystems interface. International “passive” surveillance programs 
include the GeoSentinel Surveillance Network, an international network of voluntarily participating medical 
clinics, and surveillance systems that scrutinize publicly available web content for signals of potential 
emerging threats. These include the Program for Monitoring Emerging Diseases (ProMed), HealthMap, and 
MediSys, as well as Canada’s own Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN), operated by PHAC 
(Ogden et al., 2017).
In Canada, a number of methods are available and used for the surveillance of endemic and emerging 
infectious diseases, to follow trends in incidence, identify the spatiotemporal distribution and spread of cases 
(including clusters) and risk, and identify risk factors in the affected population. The standard method for 
acquiring data on human disease cases nationally is through the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance 
System, coordinated by PHAC (Government of Canada, 2019e). Some diseases that are not nationally 
notifiable may be notifiable at provincial and territorial levels. These notifiable diseases are identified using 
clinical and laboratory case definition criteria, and emergence or re-emergence (nationally or internationally) 
is one criterion. Other criteria for adding diseases to the list include diseases under international surveillance, 
considerations of incidence in Canada, severity, communicability, potential for outbreaks, socio-economic 
burden, preventability, risk perception, and necessity for public health response (Public Health Agency of 
Canada, 2009). 
Other methods of capturing information on possible human disease cases during emergence events include 
syndromic surveillance; for example, the use of real-time data from pharmacies on sales of influenza 
remedies were used to track the evolution of pandemic H1N1 influenza in Canada in 2009 (Muchaal et al., 
2015). Another method is passive laboratory-based surveillance. In response to possible increasing risks from 
arboviruses in Canada, PHAC’s National Microbiology Laboratory instigated surveillance for human cases of 
non-WNV arboviruses by routinely taking sera submitted for WNV testing that were WNV-negative, and testing 
them for a panel of endemic and exotic arboviruses (Drebot, 2015). The Pan-Canadian Public Health Network 
has the capacity to instigate national human case surveillance for limited periods during disease emergence 
events. It recently used this capacity in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and to the the Zika outbreak in 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 433 
Central and South America in 2015–2016, which infected more than 500 Canadian travellers (Government of 
Canada, 2019f). 
There has been much effort in Canada to use surveillance in sentinel animals and vectors to detect risks 
from emerging vector-borne zoonoses, particularly WNV, Lyme disease, and other Ixodes species-transmitted 
pathogens, as a method of early warning of the spread of emerging diseases, and, for WNV, of impending 
outbreaks (Thomas-Bachli et al., 2015). For vector-borne diseases, vector surveillance includes active 
surveillance to capture vector mosquitoes, which are then tested for mosquito-borne pathogens, particularly 
WNV, which is carried out routinely in many jurisdictions in Canada (Government of Canada, 2019a). It also 
includes the collection of ticks by drag sampling, the capture of tick hosts, and the testing of ticks and hosts 
for tick-borne pathogens (Ogden et al., 2014). Passive surveillance for ticks, involving submission of ticks 
from the patients of medical and veterinary clinics, has been a key surveillance activity in Canada, providing a 
uniquely long dataset that has supported attribution of I. scapularis range expansion in Canada to impacts of 
climate change (Leighton et al., 2012). 
For both mosquitoes and ticks, the surveillance for vectors is capable of capturing multiple species of vectors 
and pathogens. Mosquito surveillance targeting WNV has identified incursions of exotic Aedes spp. vectors in 
Southern Ontario, which are vectors of dengue virus and Zika virus (Windsor-Essex County Health Unit, 2019a, 
Windsor-Essex County Health Unit, 2019b). Tick surveillance is undertaken predominantly by two methods: 
passive tick surveillance, involving submission of ticks that members of the public found on themselves or 
their pets via participating veterinary and medical practices; and active tick surveillance, through collecting 
host-seeking ticks by dragging a flannel across the ground (drag sampling), or through examining captured 
wild rodents (Ogden et al., 2014c). These forms of tick surveillance were originally designed to identify risk 
from Lyme disease, but can detect risk from other species of tick vectors of disease (Gabriele-Rivet et al., 
2015; Nelder et al., 2019). Ticks from both types of surveillance are routinely tested for a wide range of 
pathogens, in addition to the bacteria causing Lyme disease (Dibernardo et al., 2014). In Canada, most ticks 
collected through surveillance are currently identified to species in provincial laboratories, and then tested for 
pathogens at the National Microbiology Laboratory. However, this method will not be sustainable once ticks 
become more widespread, given the expected and observed (Gasmi et al., 2018) large increase in the number 
of tick submissions across Canada. New and less resource-intensive surveillance systems are needed to 
protect Canadians from the increasing risks of these diseases. 
A citizen science project called eTick was launched in 2014. It is a web-based platform that allows members 
of the public to submit images of ticks for species identification by an entomologist (eTick, 2019). It greatly 
expands the potential geographical coverage of tick monitoring, in addition to providing an opportunity to 
deliver timely public health information directly to the population exposed to ticks. It allows for the real-time 
monitoring and mapping of various tick species, including changes in distribution. The program is currently 
available in Quebec, Ontario, and New Brunswick. In Manitoba, an image-identification system called the Tick 
Checker, which is similar to eTick, was implemented in 2017 (Government of Manitoba, 2019a). This effort 
is part of Manitoba’s black-legged tick passive surveillance program, which identifies locations where new 
tick populations and Lyme disease risk may be emerging, before confirmation by active tick surveillance 
(Government of Manitoba, 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 434 
Livestock health organizations, such as the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, track some zoonoses in 
sentinel animals (for example, EEEV in horses) when they fall within the mandate of these organizations 
(Government of Canada, 2018c). Wildlife health organizations, such as the Canadian Wildlife Health 
Cooperative, assist in tracking some wildlife-borne zoonoses in sentinel animals (CWHC, 2019).
6.4.4 Interventions to Prevent and Control Disease Incidence
International responses to emerging infectious disease outbreaks are mandated under the IHR through 
the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN) (WHO, 2019d). This network brings together 
technical and operational resources from relevant institutions in WHO member states, including surveillance 
initiatives, networks of laboratories, United Nations organizations (e.g., UNICEF, UNHCR), the Red Cross, 
and international humanitarian non-governmental organizations, such as Médecins sans frontières. The 
network has the capacity to assemble and deploy technical teams to countries affected by outbreaks to 
assist with coordination, clinical disease management, epidemiological analysis, as well as logistics and 
communications that are needed to control outbreaks. PHAC is the lead for Canada’s extensive participation 
in GOARN. The agency was created in 2004, in part to ensure and enhance national coordination of responses 
to emerging infectious diseases through the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network and to participate in the 
IHR and GOARN. 
A key capacity for reducing risks to Canadians from outbreaks is the health care system and its ability to 
identify human disease cases and treat them. Diagnosis and treatment of cases reduces transmission and 
contributes to controlling outbreaks. However, this requires vigilance by front-line health care workers; in 
some outbreaks, health care facilities can become a focus for transmission, as occurred during the SARS 
outbreak in Canada (Varia et al., 2003). Increasing antimicrobial and antiviral drug resistance challenge the 
capacity of health care systems to treat emerging diseases (WHO, 2019f).
Canada’s technological capacity to prevent and control infectious diseases is well developed. The Federal/
Provincial/Territorial Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network, supported by PHAC’s National Microbiology 
Laboratory, which is one of only seven level-4 containment facilities in North America, has the capacity 
to develop, improve, and implement diagnostic tests for emerging infectious diseases such as Zika virus 
(Safronetz et al., 2017). The global network of public health organizations and pharmaceutical industries are 
capable of developing vaccines in response to outbreaks (Carlsen & Glenton, 2016; Henao-Restrepo et al., 
2017). The WHO has developed a list of priority pathogens for which vaccines are urgently needed; several 
of these diseases are zoonoses with the potential for person-to-person spread, and emergence risk may be 
enhanced by climate change. However, the time it takes to develop vaccines, and to assess them for safety 
and efficacy to ensure their public acceptability (Carlsen & Glenton, 2016), emphasizes the need for upstream 
preparedness rather than simply relying on vaccine development to manage outbreaks. While there is much 
capacity for vaccine discovery in Canada (Plummer & Jones, 2017), the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted 
the lack of Canadian capacity for vaccine manufacture. 
Other technological adaptations are important for current and future vector-borne disease control in Canada. 
For mosquito-borne diseases, such as WNV, mosquito control methods are effective mainstay methods; 
these include killing larvae in their aquatic habitat (larviciding) using non-chemical biological control agents 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 435 
such Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis, and killing adult mosquitoes (adulticiding) using chemical sprays 
such as deltamethrin (Reisen & Brault, 2007). For tick-borne diseases, such as Lyme disease, vector control 
methods, such as area-wide spraying with acaricides, remain unlicensed, and thus unavailable, or at an 
experimental stage of development in Canada (Ogden et al., 2015). Personal protection measures remain 
the most effective of control of vector-borne diseases, and these include insect repellents, which prevent 
tick bites, insecticide (permethrin)-treated clothing, and prompt removal of feeding ticks from the body to 
prevent transmission of B. burgdorferi (Ogden et al., 2015). For these measures to be effective, the public 
needs to understand the risks, perceive them to be worth acting on, know what protective actions to take, and 
be willing to take them. In turn, this requires effective communications from public health organizations at 
all levels, which is an increasingly difficult task because misinformation, particularly from the internet, is an 
increasing problem (Greenberg et al., 2017). As well as communicating information about personal disease 
protection in Canada, information for travellers will become increasingly important. This will help prevent 
them from introducing infections upon returning to Canada, particularly exotic vector-borne diseases, which 
may be increasingly likely to be autochthonously transmitted in this country under climate change (Berrang-
Ford et al., 2009).
6.4.5 Adaptation Challenges for Communities and Members of Society 
at Increased Risk
Vulnerability to infectious disease health risks related to climate change is complex and determined by 
a number of factors that interact to influence an individual’s exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity. 
While all Canadians are vulnerable to climate change, the experiences of impacts and risks are not uniform, 
and some individuals and communities will be disproportionately affected (see Chapter 9: Climate Change 
and Health Equity). Existing health inequities, and variations in the status of determinants of health, in 
combination with exposure (e.g., geographic location) and genetic and biological factors, can increase or 
decrease climate change vulnerability. There are existing knowledge gaps regarding the combination of 
variables that enhance vulnerability to infectious disease risks related to climate change. However, it is 
expected that individuals with determinants of ill health (e.g., low income, living in substandard housing, 
food-insecure) are more likely to experience disproportionate impacts and have limited ability to take 
protective measures. For example, in general, poorer health status is associated with lower socio-economic 
status, which, in turn, is associated with higher rates of unhealthy behaviours and dietary habits (Hajizadeh 
et al., 2016) that lead to higher rates of chronic diseases (Roberts et al., 2015) and can increase health risks 
associated with infectious diseases related to climate change.
In Canada, First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples experience lasting, systemic health inequities, which 
are associated with a legacy of colonization and intergenerational trauma (PHAC, 2019). They experience 
significantly higher rates of infectious diseases compared to non-Indigenous populations, which increases 
their risk of climate change-related infectious diseases (Adekoya et al., 2015). While greater sensitivity to 
infectious diseases, which may be due to genetic factors or high rates of chronic co-morbidities (Badawi et 
al., 2018), have been observed (e.g., genetic susceptibility to H1N1 influenza), existing health inequities, such 
as limited availability and accessibility of acceptable health care services, overcrowded housing, and lack 
of culturally relevant disease-prevention information (National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 436 
2016) can compound vulnerability (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). In addition, First 
Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples may be at increased risk of exposure due to a strong reliance on traditionally 
harvested foods and land-based activities, such as hunting. For example, outbreaks of trichinellosis have 
been associated with the consumption of marine mammals in Arctic regions (Yansouni et al., 2016), and a 
rise in the abundance of mosquitoes, ticks, and other biting insects that have the potential to transmit new 
vector-borne diseases is of increasing concern (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ 
Health in Canada). Geographic location may also increase exposure; for example, risk of exposure to Arctic 
fox rabies is higher for Arctic communities. 
Policies to address these underlying causes of vulnerability are generally not within the mandate of public 
health organizations (Adler & Newman, 2002); however, there is increasing recognition in the public health 
field that climate change will exacerbate health inequities (Friel, 2019). Efforts to strengthen determinants of 
health should be combined with climate change and health activities (e.g., adaptation measures) (see Chapter 
9: Climate Change and Health Equity). 
6.4.6 Adaptation Gaps and Opportunities
6.4.6.1 Adaptation Gaps
Prioritizing adaptation options to manage infectious disease risks from climate change in Canada should 
take into consideration multiple criteria, including the immediacy and level of the risks, the technical viability 
of the options, human and financial resources, compatibility with current policies, and other constraints (Ebi 
et al., 2006a; Ebi et al., 2006b). For many of the infectious disease risks associated with climate change 
discussed in this chapter, surveillance, monitoring, and disease control will only be successful with local 
action, so enabling local public health and health care systems to undertake these activities will be important 
in enhancing resilience to these threats. In a review of national-level adaptation planning for climate change 
impacts on infectious diseases in 14 Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development member 
nations, a number of limitations to current planning were observed. These included negligible consideration 
of the needs of population groups that experience disproportionate impacts, limited engagement at local 
government levels to assess health risks, and inadequate logistics and support related to funding, timelines 
for assessments, and development of adaptation plans (Panic & Ford, 2013). The report highlighted that 
these limitations need to be addressed in Canadian adaptation plans. Post-pandemic evaluation of Canadian 
public health responses to COVID-19 will likely be highly informative of the current adaptive capacity gaps.
In addition, adaptation to climate-related infectious diseases is constrained by existing research gaps. For 
many climate-related infectious diseases, there is a lack of knowledge of their ecology, little surveillance data 
for calibration of statistical/ecological niche models and for validation of predictive models, and a lack of 
long-term monitoring that is required to attribute changes in disease risk to climate change (Ebi et al., 2017). 
Effective control of tick-borne diseases in the environment is particularly difficult, and research is needed 
in this field. Knowledge and research gaps are being identified using scoping and systematic reviews about 
specific vector-borne disease risks prioritized by MCDA methods (Otten et al., 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 437 
A significant challenge in protecting the health of Canadians is that, globally, the capacity to control vectors 
is diminishing because of increasing resistance against insecticides. However, techniques such as the 
introduction of genetically modified mosquitoes that control populations by producing non-viable offspring, 
and mosquitoes carrying Wolbachia bacteria in their guts, rendering them incompetent as vectors, are a focus 
of research. These techniques may become available to public health officials in the near future. 
6.4.6.2 Adaptation Opportunities 
Existing information on the ecology and epidemiology of vector-borne diseases that threaten Canadians 
(Corrin et al., 2018), as well as prevention and control methods and their efficacy (Hierlihy et al., 2019), are 
being provided to public health officials at all levels of government to assist in developing response plans. 
The expected increased epidemic behaviour of mosquito-borne diseases such as WNV and EEEV means that 
weather-based forecasting of disease risk, as recommended by the IPCC, would be helpful for use in early 
warning systems. Much progress has been made to develop methods for weather-based forecasting for WNV, 
but implementation in Canadian public health programs will require further work (Ogden et al., 2019).
The increasing possibility of autochthonous transmission of exotic diseases poses a challenge for public 
health activities and the Canadian health care system. Since exotic diseases have been absent in Canada, 
health professionals have screened them out as possible diagnoses in patients without a history of travel to 
well-known endemic areas. An increase in modelling of disease risks will enhance preparedness for disease 
emergence events, and greater surveillance of new non-endemic infectious diseases among patients seeking 
care would be prudent. 
Similarly, enhanced surveillance is required for vector-borne diseases that are currently exotic to North 
America but could be carried into Canada by travellers, those that are absent from Canada but could expand 
northward into Canada from the United States, and those that are Canada-endemic and may re-emerge in the 
form of outbreaks. Education of health care providers about these possible new emerging diseases in Canada 
will be important for early diagnosis and treatment from the perspective of affected individuals, but also for 
early detection of outbreaks from a public health perspective. Citizen-based approaches to surveillance, such 
as the eTick program (eTick, 2019), are also an increasingly recognized opportunity. These approaches could 
also be enhanced by Indigenous knowledge and observation (Tomaselli et al., 2017; Henri et al., 2018).
There are opportunities to employ “big data” and technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI) that help 
analyze big data to address growing risks to health from infectious diseases. The first big data source that 
is being used in this regard is modern genomics. Whole genome sequencing (WGS) is now mainstreamed in 
Canadian enteric disease surveillance through PulseNet, as it is in the United States and Europe. PulseNet 
allows for more sensitive detection of disease clusters and outbreaks and greater capacity to reliably 
attribute sources of infection (Gilmour et al., 2013). The immense size of the data generated by WGS means 
that complex bioinformatics analysis methods have had to be developed for timely analysis of the data 
(IRIDA, 2019). Application of WGS to other applications in infectious disease diagnosis and surveillance, and 
further development of molecular epidemiology to make full use of the data, will continue and will support 
more robust efforts to tackle these risks. Metagenomic and meta-barcoding methods, which allow the 
identification of the range of species present in complex mixed-species samples, lend themselves to widened 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 438 
surveillance of mosquitoes and mosquito-borne diseases, including exotic mosquitoes and pathogens. 
Through these methods, the range of mosquito species and mosquito-borne pathogens, rather than simply 
WNV, is identified in mosquito-trap captures obtained during mosquito surveillance. These methods may also 
revolutionize the detection of pathogens in other environmental DNA samples from drinking and recreational 
water and from soil.
The second big data source is web media and social media, obtained by web crawling methods (Mukhi et al., 
2016). This source can provide early signals of disease emergence events to enhance management efforts 
by organizations such as GPHIN. The third big data source is Earth observation data obtained by satellites. 
Earth observation data provide proxies for environmental data such as weather, climate, habitats, and land 
use, which can be used in risk modelling to identify where there are risks of emergence and re-emergence 
of environmentally sensitive diseases (Ceccato et al., 2018). There are many examples of Earth observation 
data being used to identify disease risk (particularly Lyme disease) in Canada, in the form of static risk maps 
(Figure 6.9). Earth observation data are becoming increasingly “big” due to an increase in the numbers and types 
of satellites, with data at increasingly fine spatial resolution. In the near future, a higher frequency of images may 
allow for real-time identification of risks from vector-borne diseases such as WNV. At least theoretically, Earth 
observation data, synthesized by risk modelling to produce risk information could replace surveillance as a way to 
trigger public health responses well in advance of human cases of disease (Ogden et al., 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 439 
Figure 6.9 Risk maps for Lyme disease in Eastern Canada based on the risk of Ixodes scapularis populations, 
using Earth observation data on climatic and habitat suitability. These risk maps measure the environmental 
suitability for the tick vector of Lyme disease Ixodes scapularis in Eastern and Central Canada using Earth 
observation data proxies for temperature (annual cumulative degree-days above 0°C) and woodland habitat. The 
environmental suitability is zero where there is no woodland habitat (lighter grey areas) and where the climate is 
too cold (dark blue areas). In areas of woodland habitat, and where climate is warm enough, risk of occurrence 
of tick populations varies from low risk (pale blue areas) through moderate, moderate-high, and high-risk areas 
(represented by green, orange, and red areas, respectively). The scale of suitability for the tick according to 
temperature conditions (with values from 0 to 1500) is obtained from a mathematical model of I. scapularis 
populations. Earth observation data for this map were not available for parts of Nunavut and the Northwest 
Territories (shown by dark grey areas). Source: Kotchi et al., 2019.
There has been much work done to identify and quantify the effects of weather on mosquito vectors of 
WNV and on WNV risk in Canada (see section 6.3.1.3 Canada-Endemic Mosquito-Borne Diseases), which 
would serve as a basis for developing forecasting of WNV outbreaks. Combining weather data and Earth 
observation data on habitat in predictive models in geographic information systems would allow forecasting 
at high spatiotemporal resolution.
Many of the challenges posed by emerging vectors and diseases that threaten public health in the context of 
climate change are shared by other disciplines, such as agriculture (including both plant and animal health), 
environment and biodiversity management, and natural resources, where species invasions (infectious or 
otherwise) will likely be driven by climate change, among other factors. Collaboration on risk assessment, 
surveillance, and management activities through a robust One Health approach may convey significant 
advantages over the siloed management of sector-specific risks (Ogden et al., 2019). This will require more 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 440 
systematic collaboration between disciplines and government departments, who are all dealing with the 
emergence of threats to health (human, animal, and environment) associated with climate change.
6.5 Knowledge Gaps
Existing knowledge gaps related to the impact of climate change on infectious diseases in Canada hinder 
development of local and regional climate change and health vulnerability assessments and adaptation 
plans. They also thwart the ability of public health officials to detect infectious disease emergence and re-
emergence, and to prevent and control such emergence. The key gaps are described below.
Greater knowledge is needed of the ecology and epidemiology of infectious diseases and arthropod vectors 
to support development of risk assessments and early warning systems. In addition, systematic surveillance 
of human cases, arthropod vectors, infected sentinel animals, and environmental samples, as well as use 
of citizen science methods, at useful spatiotemporal scales is needed to identify emerging diseases and 
vectors. While this is happening already to some extent, surveillance methods, such as metagenomics, that 
detect multiple, possibly emerging pathogens and vectors, are needed to move from surveillance targeting 
a single disease to programs that address broad ranges of pathogens and vectors that threaten Canadians. 
Infectious disease diagnostic methods and algorithms need to be developed so that diseases currently 
considered exotic to Canada are detected more readily in Canadians who have not travelled to countries 
where these diseases are historically known to occur. Surveillance should be long-term to support attribution 
of the effects of climate change. 
There is a wide range of infectious diseases for which sensitivity to weather and climate is known, yet, for 
many of these, the possible impacts of climate change have not been assessed. In Canada, assessments that 
have been completed have focused on vector-borne diseases. The methods used for vector-borne diseases 
need to be applied to a wider range of infectious diseases, including human-to-human-transmitted diseases, 
and wind/airborne infectious diseases from environmental sources.
To attribute emergence and re-emergence of infectious diseases in Canada to climate change, information is 
required that supports analysis of statistical strength of association, consistency among studies, specificity 
of effects of climate, temporally appropriate timescales of climate change and disease emergence, biological 
gradient (greater effects of greater changes in climate), and plausibility (Hill, 1965).
There need to be greater linkages between the public health efforts to understand and respond to infectious 
and chronic diseases. It is increasingly recognized that infectious diseases can result in chronic illnesses 
(O'Connor et al., 2006), and that infectious diseases are more severe in those affected by chronic illnesses 
(Badawi et al., 2018). In addition, socio-economic status affects vulnerability to both infectious and chronic 
diseases as well as perceptions of risk, and knowledge of and willingness to use protective measures 
(Bouchard et al., 2018). The changing age demographic in Canada, as in other high-income countries, 
coupled with increasing incidence of chronic diseases in these populations (Dye, 2014), and the anticipated 
effects of climate change on both infectious and chronic diseases, mean that public health officials and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 441 
researchers need to understand, consider, and respond to the impacts of climate change on these diseases in 
a coordinated fashion. 
There are considerable gaps in Canada’s capacity to prevent and control vector-borne diseases. These 
gaps include a limited knowledge of a range of effective measures to control vectors in the environment 
and for people to protect themselves, as well as a lack of established protocols for vector-borne disease 
control programs for front-line public health responders. The need for innovation in prevention and control is 
highlighted by the increasing global challenges of antimicrobial resistance and resistance to insecticides.
Validation of early warning systems (Morin et al., 2018) is needed for those infectious diseases, such as 
mosquito-borne diseases, that may become more epidemic with climate change and that threaten Canada 
with rapid spread following introduction, as happened with WNV. In addition, Canadian communities at 
municipal and provincial or territorial levels require comprehensive assessments of vulnerability to the effects 
of climate change on all aspects of health, such as heat-related illnesses and deaths, chronic diseases, and 
risks from infectious diseases. These assessments are the first step to reducing future disease risks, as well 
as identifying knowledge and public health system gaps that need filling by investment and/or research (see 
Chapter 10: Health Sector Adaptation and Resilience).
Addressing existing knowledge gaps to support effective adaptation requires direct, well-planned, 
collaboration with public health and health end users (Nyström et al., 2018). Collaborations, such as that 
established between PHAC and Université de Montréal in their Groupe de recherche en épidémiologie des 
zoonoses et santé publique, would accelerate capacity to innovate and respond to emerging disease threats 
(GREZOSP, 2019). However, such collaborations require long-term investment; alignment of goals and 
objectives between partners; mutual skill, respect and trust; and geographical proximity to succeed (Rycroft-
Malone et al., 2015).
6.6 Conclusion
Since the first comprehensive Canadian assessment of climate change and health vulnerability and 
adaptation was published in 2008, there has been considerable effort to assess risks from emerging diseases 
(particularly vector-borne diseases), implement surveillance, and disseminate information on effective 
prevention and control to public health professionals and the public. Since that time, the tick vector of Lyme 
disease has spread into Canada, as projected, and carried with it the rapid emergence of Lyme and other 
tick-borne diseases. EEEV has also expanded its range into Canada, an outbreak of WNV occurred in Eastern 
Canada, and the mosquito species Ae. albopictus has become established in Southern Ontario. These events 
demonstrate increasing risks of northward spread of vectors and vector-borne diseases from the United 
States and of weather-driven epidemics of endemic mosquito-borne diseases, as identified in the 2008 
assessment. They also highlight the reality of vector-borne disease emergence and re-emergence driven by 
climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 442 
The emergence of, first, chikungunya virus infection and, then, Zika virus in the Americas has also increased 
concern among public health officials in and outside Canada of the risks associated with the spread of exotic 
diseases from far away and their introduction and endemic transmission. Whether these disease emergence 
events were driven by climate change, in whole or in part, has been the subject of debate (Paz & Semenza, 
2016). Either way, the identification in Southern Ontario of populations of Ae. albopictus, a vector of both 
these diseases, means that the possibility of autochthonous transmission of exotic diseases in Canada is 
now more than speculation. Evidence presented in this chapter suggests that the most important exotic 
vector-borne diseases that could emerge in Canada by long-distance dispersal include dengue and Rift Valley 
fever. In addition, although plague and directly transmitted zoonoses such as hantavirus were identified as 
climate-sensitive diseases in the 2008 assessment, there have been no major emergence or re-emergence 
events associated with these diseases since that time. However, there have also been no efforts to further 
explore possible future effects of climate change on these pathogens. 
Climate change and weather may increase risks from human-to-human-transmitted infectious diseases and 
airborne infectious diseases from environmental sources. Outbreaks or emergence events of these climate-
sensitive diseases, such as acute flaccid paralysis and blastomycosis, have occurred in Canada or North 
America generally (Trudel et al., 2014; Elrick et al., 2019). Therefore, more research on the possible effects of 
climate change on these diseases is warranted.
Similar to other high-income countries, the adaptive capacity in Canada to manage emerging and re-emerging 
infectious disease risks is considered strong. This is due to the combined contribution of international 
and national public health systems, as well as robust health care services and technological capacity. 
Nevertheless, knowledge gaps and gaps in public health activities remain. These include the need for further 
risk assessments of the effects of climate change on infectious diseases; more systematic vulnerability 
assessments by municipalities, provinces, and territories; enhancements to surveillance, including long-term 
surveillance programs to monitor effects of climate change; and greater capacity for prevention and control. 
These gaps can be filled only by increased research and investment in public health responses, more direct 
collaboration between public health end users and academic researchers, and application of multidisciplinary 
One Health approaches.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 443 
6.7 References
Acheson, E. S., Galanis, E., Bartlett, K., Klinkenberg, B. (2019). 
Climate classification system-based determination of temperate 
climate detection of Cryptococcus gattii sensu lato. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 25(9), 1723-1726.
Acheson, E. S., Galanis, E., Bartlett, K., Mak, S., & Klinkenberg, B. 
(2018). Searching for clues for eighteen years: Deciphering the 
ecological determinants of Cryptococcus gattii on Vancouver 
Island, British Columbia. Medical Mycology, 56(2), 129-144. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/mmy/myx037>
Adekoya N, Truman B, Landen M; Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention. (2015). Incidence of notifiable diseases among 
American Indians/Alaska Natives - United States, 2007-2011. 
MMWR Morb Mortal Weekly Report, 64(1), 16-9.
Adler NE, Newman K. (2002). Socioeconomic disparities in 
health: pathways and policies. Health Affairs (Project Hope), 
21(2), 60-76. <https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.21.2.60>
Aenishaenslin, C., Simon, A., Forde, T., Ravel, A., Proulx, J.-F., 
Fehlner-Gardiner, C., . . . Belanger, D. (2014). Characterizing 
rabies epidemiology in remote Inuit communities in Québec, 
Canada: A “One Health” approach. EcoHealth, 11(3), 343-355. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-014-0923-1>
Alarcon Falconi, T. M., Cruz, M. S., & Naumova, E. N. (2018). The 
shift in seasonality of legionellosis in the USA. Epidemiology 
& Infection, 146(14), 1824-1833. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268818002182>
Altizer, S., Ostfeld, R. S., Johnson, P. T. J., Kutz, S., & Harvell, C. D. 
(2013). Climate change and infectious diseases: From evidence 
to a predictive framework. Science, 341(6145), 514-519. <https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.1239401>
Ampofo, K., Gesteland, P. H., Bender, J., Mills, M., Daly, 
J., Samore, M., . . . Srivastava, R. (2006). Epidemiology, 
complications, and cost of hospitalization in children with 
laboratory-confirmed influenza infection. Pediatrics, 118(6), 
2409-2417. <https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2006-1475>
Andersen, K. G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W. I., Holmes, E. C., & 
Garry, R. F. (2020). The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2. Nature 
medicine, 26(4), 450–452. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-
0820-9>
Anderson, H., Honish, L., Taylor, G., Johnson, M., Tovstiuk, C., 
Fanning, A., Tyrrell, G., Rennie, R., Jaipaul, J., Sand, C., & Probert, 
S. (2006). Histoplasmosis cluster, golf course, Canada. Emerging 
infectious diseases, 12(1), 163–165. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid1201.051083>
Anderson, R. M., & May, R. M. (1991). Infectious diseases 
of humans: Dynamics and control. Oxford, England: Oxford 
University Press.
Andreadis, T. G., Anderson, J. F., Armstrong, P. M., & Main, A. J. 
(2008). Isolations of Jamestown Canyon virus (Bunyaviridae: 
Orthobunyavirus) from field-collected mosquitoes (Diptera: 
Culicidae) in Connecticut, USA: A ten-year analysis, 1997–2006. 
Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 8(2), 175-188. <https://doi.
org/10.1089/vbz.2007.0169>
Anyamba, A., Linthicum, K. J., Small, J. L., Collins, K. M., 
Tucker, C. J., Pak, E. W., . . . Russell, K. L. (2012). Climate 
teleconnections and recent patterns of human and animal 
disease outbreaks. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 6(1), 1-14. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0001465>
Arksey, H., & O’Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: Towards 
a methodological framework. International Journal of Social 
Research Methodology, 8(1), 19-32. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13
64557032000119616>
Armstrong, P. M., & Andreadis, T. G. (2010). Eastern equine 
encephalitis virus in mosquitoes and their role as bridge vectors. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 16(12), 1869-1874. <https://doi.
org/10.3201/eid1612.100640>
Artsob, H. (1988). Powassan encephalitis. In T. P. Monath (Ed.), 
The arboviruses: Epidemiology and ecology (Vol. 4, pp. 29-49). 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. 
Artsob, H. (2000). Arthropod-borne disease in Canada: A 
clinician’s perspective from the ‘Cold Zone’. Paediatrics & Child 
Health, 5(4), 206-212. <https://doi.org/10.1093/pch/5.4.206>
Artsob, H., Gubler, D. J., Enria, D. A., Morales, M. A., Pupo, M., 
Bunning, M. L., & Dudley, J. P. (2009). West Nile virus in the New 
World: Trends in the spread and proliferation of West Nile virus 
in the Western Hemisphere. Zoonoses and Public Health, 56(6-7), 
357-369. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1863-2378.2008.01207.x>
Asad, H., & Carpenter, D. O. (2018). Effects of climate change 
on the spread of Zika virus: A public health threat. Reviews on 
Environmental Health, 33(1), 31-42. <https://doi.org/10.1515/
reveh-2017-0042>
Ashraf, U., Ye, J., Ruan, X., Wan, S., Zhu, B., & Cao, S. (2015). 
Usutu virus: An emerging flavivirus in Europe. Viruses, 7(1), 219-
238. <https://doi.org/10.3390/v7010219>
Aune, K., Rhyan, J. C., Russell, R., Roffe, T. J., & Corso, B. (2012). 
Environmental persistence of Brucella abortus in the Greater 
Yellowstone Area. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 76(2), 
253-261. <https://doi.org/10.1002/jwmg.274>
Ayers, V. B., Huang, Y.-J. S., Lyons, A. C., Park, S. L., Higgs, S., 
Dunlop, J. I., . . . Vanlandingham, D. L. (2018). Culex tarsalis is 
a competent vector species for Cache Valley virus. Parasites & 
Vectors, 11, 1-6. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-018-3103-2>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 444 
Azam, D., Ukpai, O. M., Said, A., Abd-Allah, G. A., & Morgan, E. 
R. (2012). Temperature and the development and survival of 
infective Toxocara canis larvae. Parasitology Research, 110(2), 
649-656. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00436-011-2536-8>
Azar, M. M., Assi, R., Relich, R. F., Schmitt, B. H., Norris, S., Wheat, 
L. J., & Hage, C. A. (2015). Blastomycosis in Indiana. Chest, 
148(5), 1276-1284. <https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.15-0289>
Badawi, A., Velummailum, R., Ryoo, S. G., Senthinathan, A., 
Yaghoubi, S., Vasileva, D., . . . Arora, P. (2018). Prevalence of 
chronic comorbidities in dengue fever and West Nile virus: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 13(7), 1-27. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0200200>
Barclay, E. (2008). Is climate change affecting dengue in 
the Americas? The Lancet, 371(9617), 973-974. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)60435-3>
Baumgardner, D. J. (1997). Fungal infection after excavation or 
natural disaster. Wilderness & Environmental Medicine, 8(3), 177. 
Retrieved from <https://www.wemjournal.org/article/S1080-
6032(97)70965-7/>
Baumgardner, D. J., & Burdick, J. S. (1991). An outbreak of 
human and canine blastomycosis. Reviews of Infectious 
Diseases, 13(5), 898-905. <https://doi.org/10.1093/
clinids/13.5.898>
Baumgardner, D. J., Paretsky, D. P., Baeseman, Z. J., & Schreiber, 
A. (2011). Effects of season and weather on blastomycosis in 
dogs: Northern Wisconsin, USA. Medical Mycology, 49(1), 49-55. 
<https://doi.org/10.3109/13693786.2010.488658>
Beard, C. B., Eisen, R. J., Barker, C. M., Garofalo, J. F., Hahn, M., 
Hayden, M., . . . Schramm, P. J. (2016). Vector-borne diseases. 
In A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. L. Gamble, C. B. Beard, J. E. Bell, 
D. Dodgen, R. J. Eisen, N. Fann, M. D. Hawkins, S. C. Herring, 
L. Jantarasami, D. M. Mills, S. Saha, M. C. Sarofim, J. Trtanj, 
& L. Ziska (Eds.), The impacts of climate change on human 
health in the United States: A scientific assessment (pp. 129-
156). Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program. 
<https://doi.org/10.7930/J0765C7V>
Beaudoin, M., & Gosselin, P. (2016). An effective public health 
program to reduce urban heat islands in Québec, Canada. Pan 
American Journal of Public Health, 40(3), 160-166. Retrieved 
from <http://iris.paho.org/xmlui/handle/123456789/31230>
Beauté, J. (2017). Legionnaires’ disease in Europe, 2011 to 2015. 
Eurosurveillance, 22(27), 1-8. <https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-
7917.ES.2017.22.27.30566>
Beauté, J., Sandin, S., Uldum, S. A., Rota, M. C., Brandsema, 
P., Giesecke, J., & Sparén, P. (2016). Short-term effects of 
atmospheric pressure, temperature, and rainfall on notification 
rate of community-acquired Legionnaires’ disease in four 
European countries. Epidemiology & Infection, 144(16), 3483-
3493. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268816001874>
Ben Ari, T., Gershunov, A., Gage, K. L., Snäll, T., Ettestad, P., 
Kausrud, K. L., & Stenseth, N. C. (2008). Human plague in the 
USA: The importance of regional and local climate. Biology 
Letters, 4(6), 737-740. <https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2008.0363>
Ben Ari, T., Gershunov, A., Tristan, R., Cazelles, B., Gage, K., & 
Stenseth, N. C. (2010). Interannual variability of human plague 
occurrence in the western United States explained by tropical 
and North Pacific Ocean climate variability. The American 
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 83(3), 624-632. 
<https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2010.09-0775>
Bern, C., & Montgomery, S. P. (2009). An estimate of the burden 
of Chagas disease in the United States. Clinical Infectious 
Diseases, 49(5), e52-e54. <https://doi.org/10.1086/605091>
Berrang-Ford, L., Maclean, J. D., Gyorkos, T. W., Ford, J. D., & 
Ogden, N. H. (2009). Climate change and malaria in Canada: A 
systems approach. Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Infectious 
Diseases, 2009, 1-13. <https://doi.org/10.1155/2009/385487>
Berry, P. (2008). Vulnerabilities, adaptation and adaptive 
capacity in Canada. In J. Séguin (Ed.), Human health in a 
changing climate: A Canadian assessment of vulnerabilities 
and adaptive capacity (pp. 367-448). Ottawa, ON: Government 
of Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/
pub?id=9.691579&sl=0>
Berry, P., Clarke, K.-L., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014a). Human 
health. In F. J. Warren & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada in a 
changing climate: Sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation 
(pp. 191-232). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.699408&sl=0>
Berry, P., Patterson, J., Buse, C. (2014b). Assessment of 
Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Climate Change in 
Middlesex-London. Retrieved from <https://www.healthunit.
com/climate-change>
Berteaux, D., de Blois, S., Angers, J.-F., Bonin, J., Casajus, N., 
Darveau, M., . . . Vescovi, L. (2010). The CC-Bio project: Studying 
the effects of climate change on Quebec biodiversity. Diversity, 
2(11), 1181-1204. <https://doi.org/10.3390/d2111181>
Berteaux, D., & Stenseth, N. C. (2006). Measuring, understanding 
and projecting the effects of large-scale climatic variability 
on mammals. Climate Research, 32(2), 95-97. Retrieved from 
<https://www.int-res.com/articles/cr_oa/c032p095.pdf>
Biggs, H. M., Behravesh, C. B., Bradley, K. K., Dahlgren, F. 
S., Drexler, N. A., Dumler, J. S., . . . Traeger, M. S. (2016). 
Diagnosis and management of tickborne rickettsial diseases: 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other spotted fever group 
Rickettsioses, Ehrlichioses, and Anaplasmosis - United States. 
MMWR Recommendations and Reports, 65(2), 1-44. <https://doi.
org/10.15585/mmwr.rr6502a1>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 445 
Blancher, P., Cadman, M. D., Pond, B. A., Couturier, A. R., Dunn, E. H., 
Francis, C. M., & Rempel, R. S. (2008). Changes in bird distributions 
between atlases. In M. D. Cadman, D. A. Sutherland, G. G. Beck, 
D. Lepage, & A. R. Couturier (Eds.), Atlas of the breeding birds of 
Ontario, 2001-2005 (pp. 32-48). Toronto, ON: Bird Studies Canada, 
Environment Canada, Ontario Field Ornithologists, Ontario Ministry 
of Natural Resources, & Ontario Nature. 
Bouchard, C., Aenishaenslin, C., Rees, E. E., Koffi, J. K., Pelcat, 
Y., Ripoche, M., . . . Leighton, P. A. (2018). Integrated social-
behavioral and ecological risk maps to prioritize local public 
health responses to Lyme disease. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 126(4). <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1943>
Bouchard, C., Dibernardo, A., Koffi, J., Wood, H., Leighton, P. A., 
& Lindsay, L. R. (2019). Increased risk of tick-borne diseases 
with climate and environmental changes. Canada Communicable 
Disease Report, 45(4), 83-89. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.
v45i04a02>
Bouchard, C., Leonard, E., Koffi, J. K., Pelcat, Y., Peregrine, A., 
Chilton, N., . . . Ogden, N. H. (2015). The increasing risk of Lyme 
disease in Canada. The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 56(7), 
693-699. Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC4466818/>
Bouri, N., Sell, T. K., Franco, C., Adalja, A. A., Henderson, D. 
A., & Hynes, N. A. (2012). Return of epidemic dengue in the 
United States: Implications for the public health practitioner. 
Public Health Reports, 127(3), 259-266. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/003335491212700305>
Brachman, P. S., & Abrutyn, E. (Eds.). (2009). Bacterial infections 
of humans: Epidemiology and control (4th ed.). New York, NY: 
Springer.
Brady, O. J., Johansson, M. A., Guerra, C. A., Bhatt, S., Golding, 
N., Pigott, D. M., . . . Hay, S. I. (2013). Modelling adult Aedes 
aegypti and Aedes albopictus survival at different temperatures 
in laboratory and field settings. Parasites & Vectors, 6, 1-12. 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-3305-6-35>
Brierley, L., Vonhof, M. J., Olival, K. J., Daszak, P., & Jones, K. 
E. (2016). Quantifying global drivers of zoonotic bat viruses: A 
process-based perspective. The American Naturalist, 187(2), 
E53-E64. <https://doi.org/10.1086/684391>
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control. (2019). Reportable 
Diseases Data Dashboard. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.
ca/health-professionals/data-reports/reportable-diseases-data-
dashboard>
Brook, R. K., Kutz, S. J., Veitch, A. M., Popko, R. A., Elkin, B. T., & 
Guthrie, G. (2009). Fostering community-based wildlife health 
monitoring and research in the Canadian North. EcoHealth, 6(2), 
266-278. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-009-0256-7>
Brown, E. M., McTaggart, L. R., Dunn, D., Pszczolko, E., Tsui, K. 
G., Morris, S. K., . . . Richardson, S. E. (2018). Epidemiology and 
geographic distribution of blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, and 
coccidioidomycosis, Ontario, Canada, 1990–2015. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 24(7), 1257-1266. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2407.172063>
Brownstein, J. S., Holford, T. R., & Fish, D. (2005a). Effect 
of climate change on Lyme disease risk in North America. 
EcoHealth, 2(1), 38-46. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-004-
0139-x>
Brownstein, J. S., Skelly, D. K., Holford, T. R., & Fish, D. (2005b). 
Forest fragmentation predicts local scale heterogeneity of 
Lyme disease risk. Oecologia, 146(3), 469-475. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00442-005-0251-9>
Bullard, J. M. P., Ahsanuddin, A. N., Perry, A. M., Lindsay, L. 
R., Iranpour, M., Dibernardo, A., & Van Caeseele, P. G. (2014). 
The first case of locally acquired tick-borne Babesia microti 
infection in Canada. Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases 
and Medical Microbiology, 25(6), e87-e89. <https://doi.
org/10.1155/2014/209521>
Bush, E. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/>
Cable, J., Barber, I., Boag, B., Ellison, A. R., Morgan, E. R., Murray, 
K., . . . Booth, M. (2017). Global change, parasite transmission 
and disease control: Lessons from ecology. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
372(1719), 1-17. <https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0088>
Caini, S., Spreeuwenberg, P., Donker, G., Korevaar, J., & Paget, 
J. (2018). Climatic factors and long-term trends of influenza-
like illness rates in the Netherlands, 1970–2016. Environmental 
Research, 167, 307-313. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2018.07.035>
Campbell, L. P., Luther, C., Moo-Llanes, D., Ramsey, J. M., 
Danis-Lozano, R., & Peterson, A. T. (2015). Climate change 
influences on global distributions of dengue and chikungunya 
virus vectors. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 370(1665), 1-9. <https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2014.0135>
Canadian Food Inspection Agency. (2019). Rabies in Canada. 
Retrieved from <http://www.inspection.gc.ca/animals/terrestrial-
animals/diseases/reportable/rabies/rabies-in-canada/eng/1356
156989919/1356157139999>
Canadian Wildlife Health Cooperative. (2019). Retrieved from 
<http://www.cwhc-rcsf.ca/disease_surveillance.php>
Carlsen, B., & Glenton, C. (2016). The swine flu vaccine, public 
attitudes, and researcher interpretations: A systematic review 
of qualitative research. BMC Health Services Research, 16, 1-15. 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-016-1466-7>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 446 
Carmona-Castro, O., Moo-Llanes, D. A., & Ramsey, J. M. 
(2018). Impact of climate change on vector transmission of 
Trypanosoma cruzi (Chagas, 1909) in North America. Medical 
and Veterinary Entomology, 32(1), 84-101. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/mve.12269>
Castillo, C. G., Kauffman, C. A., & Miceli, M. H. (2016). 
Blastomycosis. Infectious Disease Clinics of North America, 
30(1), 247-264. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2015.10.002>
Ceccato, P., Ramirez, B., Manyangadze, T., Gwakisa, P., & 
Thomson, M. C. (2018). Data and tools to integrate climate 
and environmental information into public health. Infectious 
Diseases of Poverty, 7, 1-11. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s40249-
018-0501-9>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2017). Anthrax. 
Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/anthrax/index.html>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018a). La Crosse 
encephalitis: Epidemiology & geographic distribution. Retrieved 
from <https://www.cdc.gov/lac/tech/epi.html>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018b). Saint Louis 
encephalitis: Statistics & maps. Retrieved from <https://www.
cdc.gov/sle/technical/epi.html>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018c). Technical 
fact sheet: Eastern equine encephalitis. Retrieved from <https://
www.cdc.gov/easternequineencephalitis/tech/factsheet.html>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018d). Technical 
fact sheet: St Louis encephalitis. Retrieved from <https://www.
cdc.gov/sle/technical/fact.html>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018e). Chagas 
provider fact sheet. Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/
parasites/chagas/resources/factsheet.pdf>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019a). Plague 
fact sheet. Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/plague/
resources/235098_Plaguefactsheet_508.pd>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019b). 
Brucellosist. Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/brucellosis/
index.html>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2019c). Q Fever. 
Retrieved from <https://www.cdc.gov/qfever/symptoms/
index.html>
Centre for Food-borne, Environmental and Zoonotic Infectious 
Diseases. (2017). Synopsis: Lyme Disease in Canada – A 
Federal Framework. Canada communicable disease report, 
43(10), 212-214. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v43i10a04>
Centre for Public Health and Zoonoses. (2019). One Health. 
Retrieved from <http://cphaz.ca/onehealth/>
Chambers, D., Périé, C., Casajus, N., & de Blois, S. (2013). 
Challenges in modelling the abundance of 105 tree species in 
eastern North America using climate, edaphic, and topographic 
variables. Forest Ecology and Management, 291, 20-29. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2012.10.046>
Charron, D., Fleury, M., Lindsay, L. R., Ogden, N., & Schuster, C. J. 
(2008). The impacts of climate change on water-, food-, vector-
,and rodent-borne diseases. In J. Séguin (Ed.), Human health in 
a changing climate: A Canadian assessment of vulnerabilities 
and adaptive capacity (pp. 171-210). Ottawa, ON: Government 
of Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/
pub?id=9.691579&sl=0>
Chattopadhyay, I., Kiciman, E., Elliott, J. W., Shaman, J. L., & 
Rzhetsky, A. (2018). Conjunction of factors triggering waves 
of seasonal influenza. eLife, 7, 1-44. <https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.30756>
Chen, C. C., Jenkins, E., Epp, T., Waldner, C., Curry, P. S., & Soos, 
C. (2013). Climate change and West Nile virus in a highly 
endemic region of North America. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 10(7), 3052-3071. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph10073052>
Chen, N.-T., Chen, M.-J., Guo, C.-Y., Chen, K.-T., & Su, H.-J. 
(2014a). Precipitation increases the occurrence of sporadic 
Legionnaires’ disease in Taiwan. PLOS ONE, 9(12), 1-11. <https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0114337>
Chen, S. C.-A., Meyer, W., & Sorrell, T. C. (2014b). Cryptococcus 
gattii infections. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 27(4), 980-1024. 
<https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00126-13>
Cheng, J., Wu, J., Xu, Z., Zhu, R., Wang, X., Li, K., . . . Su, H. 
(2014). Associations between extreme precipitation and 
childhood hand, foot and mouth disease in urban and rural areas 
in Hefei, China. Science of the Total Environment, 497-498, 484-
490. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.08.006>
Choi, K. M., Christakos, G., & Wilson, M. L. (2006). El Niño 
effects on influenza mortality risks in the state of California. 
Public Health, 120(6), 505-516. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
puhe.2006.01.011>
Chretien, J.-P., Anyamba, A., Bedno, S. A., Breiman, R. F., Sang, 
R., Sergon, K., . . . Linthicum, K. J. (2007). Drought-associated 
chikungunya emergence along coastal East Africa. The American 
<https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2007.76.405>
Cilloniz, C., Ewig, S., Gabarrus, A., Ferrer, M., Puig de la 
Bella Casa, J., Mensa, J., & Torres, A. (2017). Seasonality 
of pathogens causing community-acquired pneumonia. 
Respirology, 22(4), 778-785. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
resp.12978>
Click Lambert, R., Kolivras, K. N., Resler, L. M., Brewster, C. C., 
& Paulson, S. L. (2008). The potential for emergence of Chagas 
disease in the United States. Geospatial Health, 2(2), 227-239. 
<https://doi.org/10.4081/gh.2008.246>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 447 
Clow, K. M., Leighton, P. A., Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., Michel, 
P., Pearl, D. L., & Jardine, C. M. (2017). Northward range 
expansion of Ixodes scapularis evident over a short timescale 
in Ontario, Canada. PLOS ONE, 12(12), 1-15. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0189393>
Collier, C. G. (1992). Weather conditions prior to major 
outbreaks of meningococcol meningitis in the United Kingdom. 
International Journal of Biometeorology, 36(1), 18-29. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/BF01208730>
Comrie, A. C., & Glueck, M. F. (2007). Assessment of climate-
coccidioidomycosis model: Model sensitivity for assessing 
climatologic effects on the risk of acquiring coccidioidomycosis. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1111(1), 83-95. 
<https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1406.024>
Conza, L., Casati, S., Limoni, C., & Gaia, V. (2013). Meteorological 
factors and risk of community-acquired Legionnaires’ disease in 
Switzerland: An epidemiological study. BMJ Open, 3(3). <https://
doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002428>
Corrin, T., Greig, J., Harding, S., Young, I., Mascarenhas, M., & 
Waddell, L. A. (2018). Powassan virus, a scoping review of the 
global evidence. Zoonoses and Public Health, 65(6), 595-624. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/zph.12485>
Cox, R., Sanchez, J., & Revie, C. W. (2013). Multi-criteria decision 
analysis tools for prioritising emerging or re-emerging infectious 
diseases associated with climate change in Canada. PLOS ONE, 
8(8). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068338>
Crampton, T. L., Light, R. B., Berg, G. M., Meyers, M. P., Schroeder, 
G. C., Hershfield, E. S., & Embil, J. M. (2002). Epidemiology and 
clinical spectrum of blastomycosis diagnosed at Manitoba 
hospitals. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 34(10), 1310-1316. 
<https://doi.org/10.1086/340049>
Cross, P. C., Edwards, W. H., Scurlock, B. M., Maichak, E. J., & 
Rogerson, J. D. (2007). Effects of management and climate on 
elk brucellosis in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem. Ecological 
Applications, 17(4), 957-964. <https://doi.org/10.1890/06-1603>
Cutler, S. J. (2010). Relapsing fever — A forgotten disease 
revealed. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 108(4), 1115-1122. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2672.2009.04598.x>
Dalcin, D., & Ahmed, S. Z. (2015). Blastomycosis in northwestern 
Ontario, 2004 to 2014. Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases 
and Medical Microbiology, 26(5), 259-262. <https://doi.
org/10.1155/2015/468453>
Davies, J. L., Epp, T., & Burgess, H. J. (2013). Prevalence and 
geographic distribution of canine and feline blastomycosis in 
the Canadian prairies. The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 54(8), 
753-760. Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC3711163/>
Davis, N. C. (1932). The effect of various temperatures in 
modifying the extrinsic incubation period of the yellow fever 
virus in Aëdes aegypti. American Journal of Epidemiology, 16(1), 
163-176. <https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117853>
DeFelice, N. B., Schneider, Z. D., Little, E., Barker, C., Caillouet, K. 
A., Campbell, S. R., . . . Shaman, J. (2018). Use of temperature to 
improve West Nile virus forecasts. PLoS computational biology, 
14(3). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006047>
Delisle, E., Rousseau, C., Broche, B., Leparc-Goffart, I., 
L’Ambert, G., Cochet, A., . . . Golliot, F. (2015). Chikungunya 
outbreak in Montpellier, France, September to October 2014. 
Eurosurveillance, 20(17), 1-6. <https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-
7917.ES2015.20.17.21108>
De Man, H., Mughini Gras, L., Schimmer, B., Friesema, I. H. M., 
De Roda Husman, A. M., & Van Pelt, W. (2016). Gastrointestinal, 
influenza-like illness and dermatological complaints following 
exposure to floodwater: A cross-sectional survey in the 
Netherlands. Epidemiology & Infection, 144(7), 1445-1454. 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268815002654>
Deplazes, P., Rinaldi, L., Alvarez Rojas, C. A., Torgerson, P. 
R., Harandi, M. F., Romig, T., . . . Jenkins, E. J. (2017). Global 
distribution of alveolar and cystic echinococcosis. Advances 
in Parasitology, 95, 315-493. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
bs.apar.2016.11.001>
Dergousoff, S. J., Galloway, T. D., Lindsay, L. R., Curry, P. S., & 
Chilton, N. B. (2013). Range expansion of Dermacentor variabilis 
and Dermacentor andersoni (Acari: Ixodidae) near their northern 
distributional limits. Journal of Medical Entomology, 50(3), 510-
520. <https://doi.org/10.1603/me12193>
DesGranges, J.-L., & Morneau, F. (2010). Potential sensitivity of 
Québec’s breeding birds to climate change. Avian Conservation 
and Ecology, 5(2). <https://doi.org/10.5751/ace-00410-050205>
Dibernardo, A., Cote, T., Ogden, N. H., & Lindsay, L. R. (2014). 
The prevalence of Borrelia miyamotoi infection, and co-
infections with other Borrelia spp. in Ixodes scapularis ticks 
collected in Canada. Parasites & Vectors, 7, 1-8. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1756-3305-7-183>
Dicker, R. C., Coronado, F. t., Koo, D., & Gibson Parrish, 
R., II. (Eds.). (2012). Principles of epidemiology in public 
health practice: An introduction to applied epidemiology and 
biostatistics (3rd ed.). Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.
Dolcé, P., Bélanger, M.-J., Tumanowicz, K., Gauthier, C. P., 
Jutras, P., Massé, R., . . . Artsob, H. (2003). Coxiella burnetii 
seroprevalence of shepherds and their flocks in the lower 
Saint-Lawrence River region of Quebec, Canada. Canadian 
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 14(2), 97-102. <https://doi.
org/10.1155/2003/504796>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 448 
Domenech de Cellès, M., Arduin, H., Lévy-Bruhl, D., Georges, S., 
Souty, C., Guillemot, D., . . . Opatowski, L. (2019). Unraveling the 
seasonal epidemiology of pneumococcus. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
116(5), 1802-1807. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1812388116>
Dowell, S. F. (2001). Seasonal variation in host susceptibility 
and cycles of certain infectious diseases. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 7(3), 369-374. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid0703.010301>
Drebot, M. A. (2015). Emerging mosquito-borne bunyaviruses in 
Canada. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 41(6), 117-123. 
<https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v41i06a01>
Drebot, M. A., Artsob, H., & Werker, D. (2000). Hantavirus 
pulmonary syndrome in Canada, 1989-1999. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 26(8), 65-69. Retrieved from 
<http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=9.507730&sl=0>
Dworkin, M. S., Schwan, T. G., Anderson, D. E., & Borchardt, S. 
M. (2008). Tick-borne relapsing fever. Infectious Disease Clinics 
of North America, 22(3), 449-468. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
idc.2008.03.006>
Dye, C. (2014). After 2015: Infectious diseases in a new era 
of health and development. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369(1645), 1-9. <https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0426>
Eads, D. A., & Hoogland, J. L. (2017). Precipitation, climate 
change, and parasitism of prairie dogs by fleas that transmit 
plague. Journal of Parasitology, 103(4), 309-319. <https://doi.
org/10.1645/16-195>
Earn, D. J. D., He, D., Loeb, M. B., Fonseca, K., Lee, B. E., & 
Dushoff, J. (2012). Effects of school closure on incidence 
of pandemic influenza in Alberta, Canada. Annals of Internal 
Medicine, 156(3), 173-181. <https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-
156-3-201202070-00005>
Earn, D. J. D., Ma, J., Poinar, H., Dushoff, J., Bolker, B. M. (2020). 
Acceleration of plague outbreaks in the second pandemic 
Proceedings of the National Academies of Science of the U S A, 
117(44), 27703-27711.
Ebi, K.L., Balbus J.M., Luber G., Bole A., Crimmins A., Glass G., 
Saha S., Shimamoto M.M., Trtanj J., & White-Newsome J.L. 
(2018). Human Health. In Reidmiller, D.R., C.W. Avery, D.R. 
Easterling, K.E. Kunkel, K.L.M. Lewis, T.K. Maycock, and B.C. 
Stewart (Eds.), Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United 
States: Fourth National Climate Assessment, Volume II (pp. 572–
603). Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program. 
doi: 10.7930/NCA4.2018.CH14
Ebi, K. L., Kovats, R. S., & Menne, B. (2006a). An approach 
for assessing human health vulnerability and public health 
interventions to adapt to climate change. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 114(12), 1930-1934. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.8430>
Ebi, K. L., Lewis, N. D., & Corvalan, C. (2006b). Climate variability 
and change and their potential health effects in small island 
states: Information for adaptation planning in the health sector. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 114(12), 1957-1963. <https://
doi.org/10.1289/ehp.8429>
Ebi, K. L., Ogden, N. H., Semenza, J. C., & Woodward, A. (2017). 
Detecting and attributing health burdens to climate change. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(8), 1-8. <https://doi.
org/10.1289/EHP1509>
Edginton, S., Guan, T. H., Evans, G., & Srivastava, S. (2018). 
Human granulocytic anaplasmosis acquired from a blacklegged 
tick in Ontario. CMAJ, 190(12), E363-E366. <https://doi.
org/10.1503/CMAJ.171243>
Eisen, R. J., Eisen, L., Ogden, N. H., & Beard, C. B. (2016). 
Linkages of weather and climate with Ixodes scapularis and 
Ixodes pacificus (Acari: Ixodidae), enzootic transmission of 
Borrelia burgdorferi, and Lyme disease in North America. 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 53(2), 250-261. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/jme/tjv199>
Eldin, C., Mahamat, A., Djossou, F., & Raoult, D. (2015). Rainfall 
and sloth births in May, Q fever in July, Cayenne, French Guiana. 
The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 92(5), 
979-981. <https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.14-0751>
Elrick, M. J., Gordon-Lipkin, E., Crawford, T. O., Van Haren, 
K., Messacar, K., Thornton, N., . . . Duggal, P. (2019). Clinical 
subpopulations in a sample of North American children 
diagnosed with acute flaccid myelitis, 2012-2016. JAMA 
Pediatrics, 173(2), 134-139. <https://doi.org/10.1001/
jamapediatrics.2018.4890>
Embil, J. A., Tanner, C. E., Pereira, L. H., Staudt, M., Morrison, 
E. G., & Gualazzi, D. A. (1988). Seroepidemiologic survey of 
Toxocara canis infection in urban and rural children. Public 
Health, 102(2), 129-133. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0033-
3506(88)80039-8>
Enscore, R. E., Biggerstaff, B. J., Brown, T. L., Fulgham, R. 
E., Reynolds, P. J., Engelthaler, D. M., . . . Gage, K. L. (2002). 
Modeling relationships between climate and the frequency of 
human plague cases in the southwestern United States, 1960-
1997. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 
66(2), 186-196. <https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.2002.66.186>
Environmental Protection Agency. (2018). Level III and IV 
Ecoregions of the Continental United States. Retrieved from 
<https://www.epa.gov/eco-research/level-iii-and-iv-ecoregions-
continental-united-states>
Escobar, L. E., Romero-Alvarez, D., Leon, R., Lepe-Lopez, M. A., 
Craft, M. E., Borbor-Cordova, M. J., & Svenning, J.-C. (2016). 
Declining prevalence of disease vectors under climate change. 
Scientific Reports, 6, 1-8. <https://doi.org/10.1038/srep39150>
etick. (2019). Retrieved from <https://www.etick.ca/>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 449 
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. (2018). 
Legionnaires’ disease — Annual epidemiological report for 2016. 
Stockholm, Sweden: European Centre for Disease Prevention 
and Control. Retrieved from <https://ecdc.europa.eu/en/
publications-data/legionnaires-disease-annual-epidemiological-
report-2016>
European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. (2019). 
Risk assessments. Retrieved from <https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/
en/threats-and-outbreaks/reports-and-data/risk-assessments>
Federal, Provincial, & Territorial Governments of Canada. (2010). 
Canadian biodiversity: Ecosystem status and trends 2010. 
Ottawa, ON: Canadian Councils of Resource Ministers. Retrieved 
from <https://biodivcanada.chm-cbd.net/ecosystem-status-
trends-2010/canadian-biodiversity-ecosystem-status-and-
trends-2010-full-report>
Ferkol, T., & Schraufnagel, D. (2014). The global burden of 
respiratory disease. Annals of the American Thoracic Society, 11(3), 
404-406. <https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201311-405PS>
Fields, B. S., Benson, R. F., & Besser, R. E. (2002). Legionella 
and Legionnaires’ disease: 25 years of investigation. Clinical 
Microbiology Reviews, 15(3), 506-526. <https://doi.org/10.1128/
cmr.15.3.506-526.2002>
Filejski, C. (2016). The changing face of rabies in Canada. 
Canada Communicable Disease Report, 42(6), 118-120. <https://
doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v42i06a01>
Findlater, A., & Bogoch, I. I. (2018). Human mobility and the 
global spread of infectious diseases: A focus on air travel. 
Trends in Parasitology, 34(9), 772-783. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pt.2018.07.004>
Fisman, D. N. (2007). Seasonality of infectious diseases. Annual 
Review of Public Health, 28, 127-143. <https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.publhealth.28.021406.144128>
Fisman, D. N. (2012). Seasonality of viral infections: 
Mechanisms and unknowns. Clinical Microbiology and 
Infection, 18(10), 946-954. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1469-0691.2012.03968.x>
Fisman, D. N., Lim, S., Wellenius, G. A., Johnson, C., Britz, 
P., Gaskins, M., . . . Newbern, C. (2005). It’s not the heat, 
it’s the humidity: Wet weather increases legionellosis risk 
in the greater Philadelphia metropolitan area. The Journal 
of Infectious Diseases, 192(12), 2066-2073. <https://doi.
org/10.1086/498248>
Fisman, D. N., Tuite, A. R., & Brown, K. A. (2016). Impact of El 
Niño Southern Oscillation on infectious disease hospitalization 
risk in the United States. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 113(51), 14589-14594. 
<https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1604980113>
Fitzhenry, R., Weiss, D., Cimini, D., Balter, S., Boyd, C., Alleyne, 
L., . . . Varma, J. K. (2017). Legionnaires’ disease outbreaks 
and cooling towers, New York City, New York, USA. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 23(11), 1769-1776. <https://doi.
org/10.3201/eid2311.161584>
Fonseca, K., Prince, G. D., Bratvold, J., Fox, J. D., Pybus, M., 
Preksaitis, J. K., & Tilley, P. (2005). West Nile virus infection and 
conjunctival exposure. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 11(10), 
1648-1649. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1110.040212>
Food and Agriculture Organization, & World Health Organization. 
(2014). Multicriteria-based ranking for risk management of food-
borne parasites: Report of a joint FAO/WHO expert meeting, 3-7 
September 2012, FAO headquarters, Rome, Italy (Microbiological 
risk assessment series 23). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health 
Organization. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/foodsafety/
publications/mra_23/en/>
Forbes, L. B. (1991). Isolates of Brucella suis biovar 4 from 
animals and humans in Canada, 1982-1990. The Canadian 
Veterinary Journal, 32(11), 686-688. Retrieved from <https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1481085/>
Franco-Paredes, C., Chastain, D., Taylor, P., Stocking, S., & Sellers, 
B. (2017). Boar hunting and brucellosis caused by Brucella suis. 
Travel Med Infect Dis, 16, 18-22. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
tmaid.2017.03.006>
Friel, S. (2019). Climate change and the people’s health 
(N. Krieger, Ed.). Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/
oso/9780190492731.001.0001
Fuglei, E., & Ims, R. A. (2008). Global warming and effects on 
the Arctic fox. Science Progress, 91(2), 175-191. <https://doi.
org/10.3184/003685008X327468>
Fyfe, M., MacDougall, L., Romney, M., Starr, M., Pearce, M., 
Mak, S., . . . Kibsey, P. (2008). Cryptococcus gattii infections 
on Vancouver Island, British Columbia, Canada: Emergence 
of a tropical fungus in a temperate environment. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 34(6), 1-12. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/reports-
publications/canada-communicable-disease-report-ccdr/
monthly-issue/2008-34/34-06.html>
Gabriele-Rivet, V., Arsenault, J., Badcock, J., Cheng, A., Edsall, J., 
Goltz, J., . . . Ogden, N. H. (2015). Different ecological niches for 
ticks of public health significance in Canada. PLOS ONE, 10(7), 
1-19. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0131282>
Gallant, D., Slough, B. G., Reid, D. G., & Berteaux, D. (2012). Arctic 
fox versus red fox in the warming Arctic: Four decades of den 
surveys in north Yukon. Polar Biology, 35(9), 1421-1431. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00300-012-1181-8>
Garcia-Solache, M. A., & Casadevall, A. (2010). Global warming 
will bring new fungal diseases for mammals. mBio, 1(1), 1-3. 
<https://doi.org/10.1128/mBio.00061-10>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 450 
Garcia-Vidal, C., Labori, M., Viasus, D., Simonetti, A., Garcia-
Somoza, D., Dorca, J., . . . Carratalà, J. (2013). Rainfall is a risk 
factor for sporadic cases of Legionella pneumophila pneumonia. 
PLOS ONE, 8(4), 1-5. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0061036>
Gargan, T. P., II., Clark, G. G., Dohm, D. J., Turell, M. J., & Bailey, C. 
L. (1988). Vector potential of selected North American mosquito 
species for Rift Valley fever virus. The American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 38(2), 440-446. <https://doi.
org/10.4269/ajtmh.1988.38.440>
Garroway, C. J., Bowman, J., Cascaden, T. J., Holloway, G. L., 
Mahan, C. G., Malcolm, J. R., . . . Wilson, P. J. (2010). Climate 
change induced hybridization in flying squirrels. Global 
Change Biology, 16(1), 113-121. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2486.2009.01948.x>
Garroway, C. J., Bowman, J., Holloway, G. L., Malcolm, J. R., 
& Wilson, P. J. (2011). The genetic signature of rapid range 
expansion by flying squirrels in response to contemporary 
climate warming. Global Change Biology, 17(5), 1760-1769. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02384.x>
Gasmi, S., Bouchard, C., Ogden, N. H., Adam-Poupart, A., Pelcat, 
Y., Rees, E. E., . . . Thivierge, K. (2018). Evidence for increasing 
densities and geographic ranges of tick species of public health 
significance other than Ixodes scapularis in Québec, Canada. 
PLOS ONE, 13(8), 1-15. <https://doi.org/10.1371/JOURNAL.
PONE.0201924>
Gasmi, S., Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., Burns, S., Fleming, S., 
Badcock, J., . . . Koffi, J. K. (2017). Surveillance for Lyme disease 
in Canada: 2009-2015. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 
43(10), 194-199. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v43i10a01>
Gatherer, D. (2010). The Little Ice Age and the emergence of 
influenza A. Medical Hypotheses, 75(4), 359-362. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mehy.2010.03.032>
Gilbert, M., Slingenbergh, J., & Xiao, X. (2008). Climate change 
and avian influenza. OIE Scientific and Technical Review, 27(2), 
459-466. <https://doi.org/10.20506/rst.27.2.1821>
Gilmour, M. W., Graham, M., Reimer, A., & Van Domselaar, 
G. (2013). Public health genomics and the new molecular 
epidemiology of bacterial pathogens. Public Health Genomics, 
16(1-2), 25-30. <https://doi.org/10.1159/000342709>
Giordano, B. V., Gasparotto, A., & Hunter, F. F. (2015). A checklist 
of the 67 mosquito species of Ontario, Canada. Journal of the 
American Mosquito Control Association, 31(1), 101-103. <https://
doi.org/10.2987/14-6456r.1>
Giordano, B. V., Kaur, S., & Hunter, F. F. (2017). West Nile virus 
in Ontario, Canada: A twelve-year analysis of human case 
prevalence, mosquito surveillance, and climate data. PLOS ONE, 
12(8), 1-15. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0183568>
Giordano, B. V., Turner, K. W., & Hunter, F. F. (2018). Geospatial 
analysis and seasonal distribution of West Nile virus vectors 
(Diptera: Culicidae) in Southern Ontario, Canada. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(4), 1-18. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15040614>
Githeko, A. K., Lindsay, S. W., Confalonieri, U. E., & Patz, J. A. 
(2000). Climate change and vector-borne diseases: A regional 
analysis. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 78(9), 1136-
1147. Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC2560843/>
Gleason, J. A., Kratz, N. R., Greeley, R. D., & Fagliano, J. A. 
(2016). Under the weather: Legionellosis and meteorological 
factors. EcoHealth, 13(2), 293-302. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10393-016-1115-y>
Global Burden of Disease 2015 Mortality and Causes of 
Death Collaborators. (2016). Global, regional, and national life 
expectancy, all-cause mortality, and cause-specific mortality for 
249 causes of death, 1980–2015: A systematic analysis for the 
Global Burden of Disease Study 2015. The Lancet, 388(10053), 
1459-1544. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31012-1>
Global Commission on Adaptation. (2019). Adapt now: a global call 
for leadership on climate resilience. Retrieved from <https://cdn.
gca.org/assets/2019-09/GlobalCommission_Report_FINAL.pdf>
Golnar, A. J., Kading, R. C., & Hamer, G. L. (2018). Quantifying the 
potential pathways and locations of Rift Valley fever virus entry 
into the United States. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases, 
65(1), 85-95. <https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.12608>
Golnar, A. J., Turell, M. J., LaBeaud, A. D., Kading, R. C., & 
Hamer, G. L. (2014). Predicting the mosquito species and 
vertebrate species involved in the theoretical transmission 
of Rift Valley fever virus in the United States. PLOS Neglected 
Tropical Diseases, 8(9), 1-11. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pntd.0003163>
Goneau, L. W., Mehta, K., Wong, J., L’Huillier, A. G., & Gubbay, 
J. B. (2018). Zoonotic influenza and human health — Part 1: 
Virology and epidemiology of zoonotic influenzas. Current 
Infectious Disease Reports, 20(10), 1-12. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11908-018-0642-9>
Gorris, M. E., Cat, L. A., Zender, C. S., Treseder, K. K., & 
Randerson, J. T. (2018). Coccidioidomycosis dynamics in 
relation to climate in the southwestern United States. GeoHealth, 
2(1), 6-24. <https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GH000095>
Government of Canada. (2013). Environmental Public Health 
and Climate Change. Retrieved from https://www.canada.ca/en/
public-health/services/health-promotion/environmental-public-
health-climate-change.html>
Government of Canada. (2015). Surveillance of hantavirus 
related diseases. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
public-health/services/diseases/hantaviruses/surveillance-
hantavirus-related-diseases.html>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 451 
Government of Canada. (2016). Rapid Risk Assessment: 
the risk of Zika virus to Canadians (first update). Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/
publications/diseases-conditions/rapid-risk-assessment-risk-
zika-virus-canadians-first-update.html>
Government of Canada. (2017). Avian Influenza Surveillance. 
Retrieved from <http://www.inspection.gc.ca/animals/terrestrial-
animals/diseases/surveillance/avian-influenza-surveillance/eng
/1329693810008/1329694298513>
Government of Canada. (2018a). Surveillance of plague. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/
services/diseases/plague/surveillance-plague.html>
Government of Canada. (2018b). How Canada prepares 
for Pandemic Flu. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/
en/health-canada/services/health-concerns/emergencies-
disasters/emergency-preparedness/pandemic-influenza-
preparedness.html>
Government of Canada. (2018c). Terrestrial animals - 
Immediately Notifiable Diseases. Retrieved from <http://
www.inspection.gc.ca/animals/terrestrial-animals/diseases/
immediately-notifiable/eng/1305670991321/1305671848331>
Government of Canada. (2019a). Surveillance of West Nile virus. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/
diseases/west-nile-virus/surveillance-west-nile-virus.html>
Government of Canada. (2019b). Flu (influenza): FluWatch 
surveillance. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-
health/services/diseases/flu-influenza/influenza-surveillance.html>
Government of Canada. (2019c). Reportable diseases: 
Terrestrial animals. Retrieved from <http://www.inspection.
gc.ca/animals/terrestrial-animals/diseases/reportable/eng/130
3768471142/1303768544412>
Government of Canada. (2019d). Reported cases from 1924 to 
2017 in Canada - Notifiable diseases on-line. Retrieved from 
<https://diseases.canada.ca/notifiable/charts?c=pl>
Government of Canada. (2019e). Notifiable diseases on-line. 
Retrieved from <https://diseases.canada.ca/notifiable/>
Government of Canada. (2019f). Zika virus - surveillance in Canada. 
Retrieved from <https://www.cmaj.ca/content/189/9/E334>
Government of Manitoba. (2018). Blacklegged tick risk areas 
in Manitoba. Retrieved from <https://www.gov.mb.ca/health/
publichealth/cdc/tickborne/surveillance.html> 
Government of Manitoba. (2019a). Manitoba tick checker. 
Retrieved from <https://forms.gov.mb.ca/tickSubmission/>
Government of Manitoba. (2019b). Manitoba Health, Seniors 
and Active Living West Nile Virus Program 2019: Planning 
Documents for Municipalities III. Adult Mosquito Control 
Package. Retrieved from <https://www.gov.mb.ca/health/wnv/
docs/amcontrolontrolpackage.pdf>
Granados, D. P., & Castañeda, E. (2006). Influence of climatic 
conditions on the isolation of members of the Cryptococcus 
neoformans species complex from trees in Colombia from 1992-
2004. FEMS Yeast Research, 6(4), 636-644. <https://doi.org/10.1
111/j.1567-1364.2006.00090.x>
Greenberg, J., Dubé, E., & Driedger, M. (2017). Vaccine hesitancy: 
In search of the risk communication comfort zone. PLOS 
Currents: Outbreaks, 1. Retrieved from <http://currents.plos.org/
outbreaks/index.html%3Fp=70808.html>
Greer, A., Ng, V., & Fisman, D. (2008). Climate change and 
infectious diseases in North America: The road ahead. CMAJ, 
178(6), 715-722. <https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.081325>
Greer, A. L., Drews, S. J., & Fisman, D. N. (2009). Why “winter” 
vomiting disease? Seasonality, hydrology, and norovirus 
epidemiology in Toronto, Canada. EcoHealth, 6(2), 192-199. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-009-0247-8>
Griot, C., Gonzalez-Scarano, F., & Nathanson, N. (1993). 
Molecular determinants of the virulence and infectivity 
of California serogroup bunyaviruses. Annual Review of 
Microbiology, 47, 117-138. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
mi.47.100193.001001>
Groupe de recherche en épidémiologie des zoonoses et santé 
publique. (2019). Retrieved from <https://grezosp.com/>
Gubler, D. J. (2007). The continuing spread of West Nile virus 
in the Western Hemisphere. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 45(8), 
1039-1046. <https://doi.org/10.1086/521911>
Guerra, M., Walker, E. D., Jones, C., Paskewitz, S., Cortinas, 
M. R., Stancil, A., . . . Kitron, U. (2002). Predicting the risk of 
Lyme disease: Habitat suitability for Ixodes scapularis in the 
North Central United States. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
8(3), 289-297. Retrieved from <https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/
article/8/3/01-0166_article>
Gupta, S., Parker, J., Smits, S., Underwood, J., & Dolwani, S. 
(2020). Persistent viral shedding of SARS-CoV-2 in faeces - a 
rapid review. Colorectal disease: the official journal of the 
Association of Coloproctology of Great Britain and Ireland, 22(6), 
611–620. <https://doi.org/10.1111/codi.15138>
Hajizadeh M, Mitnitski A, Rockwood K. 2016. Socioeconomic 
gradient in health in Canada: Is the gap widening or 
narrowing? Health Policy, 120(9), 1040-50. doi: 10.1016/j.
healthpol.2016.07.019.
Halsby, K. D., Joseph, C. A., Lee, J. V., & Wilkinson, P. (2014). 
The relationship between meteorological variables and sporadic 
cases of Legionnaires’ disease in residents of England and 
Wales. Epidemiology & Infection, 142(11), 2352-2359. <https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0950268813003294>
Halstead, S. B. (2008). Dengue virus-mosquito interactions. 
Annual Review of Entomology, 53, 273-291. <https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093326>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 452 
Han G. Z. (2020). Pangolins Harbor SARS-CoV-2-Related 
Coronaviruses. Trends in microbiology, 28(7), 515–517. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2020.04.001>
Harrigan, R. J., Thomassen, H. A., Buermann, W., & Smith, T. 
B. (2014). A continental risk assessment of West Nile virus 
under climate change. Global Change Biology, 20(8), 2417-2425. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12534>
Hassel, C., Mirand, A., Lukashev, A., Terletskaia-Ladwig, E., 
Farkas, A., Schuffenecker, I., . . . Bailly, J.-L. (2015). Transmission 
patterns of human enterovirus 71 to, from and among European 
countries, 2003 to 2013. Eurosurveillance, 20(34), 1-11. <https://
doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2015.20.34.30005>
Heesterbeek, H., Anderson, R. M., Andreasen, V., Bansal, S., De 
Angelis, D., Dye, C., . . . Isaac Newton Institute IDD Collaboration. 
(2015). Modeling infectious disease dynamics in the complex 
landscape of global health. Science, 347(6227), 1-10. <https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa4339>
Henao-Restrepo, A. M., Camacho, A., Longini, I. M., Watson, 
C. H., Edmunds, W. J., Egger, M., . . . Kieny, M.-P. (2017). 
Efficacy and effectiveness of an rVSV-vectored vaccine in 
preventing Ebola virus disease: Final results from the Guinea 
ring vaccination, open-label, cluster-randomised trial (Ebola 
Ça Suffit!). The Lancet, 389(10068), 505-518. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)32621-6>
Henri, D.A., Jean-Gagnon, F., & Grant Gilchrist, H. (2018). 
Using Inuit traditional ecological knowledge for detecting and 
monitoring avian cholera among Common Eiders in the eastern 
Canadian Arctic. Ecology and Society, 23(1), 22.
Hersteinsson, P., & MacDonald, D. W. (1992). Interspecific 
competition and the geographical distribution of red and arctic 
foxes Vulpes vulpes and Alopex lagopus. Oikos, 64(3), 505-515. 
<https://doi.org/10.2307/3545168>
Hertig, E. (2019). Distribution of Anopheles vectors and potential 
malaria transmission stability in Europe and the Mediterranean 
area under future climate change. Parasites & Vectors, 12, 1-9. 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-018-3278-6>
Hicks, L. A., Rose, C. E., Fields, B. S., Drees, M. L., Engel, J. P., 
Jenkins, P. R., . . . Whitney, C. G. (2007). Increased rainfall is 
associated with increased risk for legionellosis. Epidemiology 
& Infection, 135(5), 811-817. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268806007552>
Hierlihy, C., Waddell, L., Young, I., Greig, J., Corrin, T., & 
Mascarenhas, M. (2019). A systematic review of individual and 
community mitigation measures for prevention and control 
of chikungunya virus. PLOS ONE, 14(2), 1-27. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0212054>
Hii, Y. L., Rocklöv, J., & Ng, N. (2011). Short term effects of 
weather on hand, foot and mouth disease. PLOS ONE, 6(2), 1-6. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0016796>
Hill A.B. (1965). The environment and disease: association or 
causation? Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine, 58(5), 
295–300.
Hitch, A. T., & Leberg, P. L. (2007). Breeding distributions of 
North American bird species moving north as a result of climate 
change. Conservation Biology, 21(2), 534-539. <https://doi.org/1
0.1111/j.1523-1739.2006.00609.x>
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Jacob, D., Taylor, M., Bindi, M., Brown, S., 
Camilloni, I., . . . Zhou, G. (2019). Impacts of 1.5°C of global 
warming on natural and human systems. In V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, 
W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. 
Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, 
M. Tignor, & T. Waterfield (Eds.), Global warming of 1.5°C: An 
IPCC special report. In Press. Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.
ch/sr15/chapter/chapter-3/>
Holm-Hansen, C. C., Midgley, S. E., & Fischer, T. K. (2016). Global 
emergence of enterovirus D68: a systematic review. The Lancet 
Infectious Diseases, 16(5), e64-e75. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1473-3099(15)00543-5>
Holt, A. C., Salkeld, D. J., Fritz, C. L., Tucker, J. R., & Gong, P. 
(2009). Spatial analysis of plague in California: Niche modeling 
predictions of the current distribution and potential response to 
climate change. International Journal of Health Geographics, 8, 
1-14. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-072x-8-38>
Hongoh, V., Berrang-Ford, L., Scott, M. E., & Lindsay, L. R. (2012). 
Expanding geographical distribution of the mosquito, Culex 
pipiens, in Canada under climate change. Applied Geography, 33, 
53-62. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2011.05.015>
Huettmann, F., Magnuson, E. E., & Hueffer, K. (2017). Ecological 
niche modeling of rabies in the changing Arctic of Alaska. Acta 
Veterinaria Scandinavica, 59, 1-11. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13028-017-0285-0>
Hunter, M., Donnelly, C., Smart, D., Smyth, B., Menzies, F., & 
Hedderwick, S. (2015). Brucellosis in people with occupational 
cattle exposure in Northern Ireland: Clinical features of 53 
cases. Journal of Infection, 70(1), 101-103. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jinf.2014.08.004>
Institut national de santé publique du Québec. (2016). Risk 
assessment: Emergence and Vector-Borne Transmission of Zika 
Virus in Quebec. Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/
default/files/publications/2270_risk_emergence_transmission_
zika_quebec.pdf>
Institut national de santé publique du Québec. (2018a). 
Observatoire multipartite québécois sur les zoonoses et 
l’adaptation aux changements climatiques. Retrieved from 
<https://www.inspq.qc.ca/zoonoses/observatoire>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 453 
Institut national de santé publique du Québec. (2018b). 
Priorisation des zoonoses au Québec dans un contexte 
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques à l’aide d’un outil 
d’aide à la décision multicritère. Retrieved from <https://www.
inspq.qc.ca/publications/2432>
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Summary for policymakers. In Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. 
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, 
K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. 
Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (Eds.), 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part 
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, 
USA: Cambridge University Press.
Iranpour, M., Hebert, P., Dibernardo, A., & Lindsay, R. (2017). 
Ochlerotatus ventrovittis Dyar (Diptera: Culicidae): A new record 
for the mosquito fauna of Canada. Paper presented at the 
Joint Meeting of the Entomological Societies of Canada and 
Manitoba: October 22-25, 2017, Winnipeg, MB. Retrieved from 
<https://home.cc.umanitoba.ca/~fieldspg/pdf/Proceedings/
ESMproceedings_V73.pdf>
Iranpour, M., Lindsay, L. R., & Dibernardo, A. (2009). Culiseta 
melanura (Diptera: Culicidae), a new record for the Manitoba 
mosquito fauna. Proceedings of the Entomological Society 
of Manitoba, 65, 21-25. Retrieved from <https://home.
cc.umanitoba.ca/~fieldspg/pdf/Proceedings/ESMproceedings_
V65.pdf>
Iranpour, M., Turell, M. J., & Lindsay, L. R. (2011). Potential for 
Canadian mosquitoes to transmit Rift Valley fever virus. Journal 
of the American Mosquito Control Association, 27(4), 363-369. 
<https://doi.org/10.2987/11-6169.1>
Integrated Rapid Infectious Disease Analysis (IRIDA). (2019). 
Platform overview. Retrieved from <https://www.irida.ca/
platform-overview/>
James, E., & Boyd, W. (1937). Echinococcus alveolaris (with the 
report of a case). CMAJ, 36(4), 354-356. Retrieved from <https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1562016/>
Jenkins, E. (2017). Echinococcus spp. tapeworms in dogs & 
cats. Clinician’s Brief, 15(7), 14-18. Retrieved from <https://
www.cliniciansbrief.com/article/echinococcus-spp-
tapeworms-dogs-cats>
Jenkins, E. J., Castrodale, L. J., de Rosemond, S. J. C., Dixon, 
B. R., Elmore, S. A., Gesy, K. M., . . . Thompson, R. C. A. (2013). 
Tradition and transition: Parasitic zoonoses of people and 
animals in Alaska, northern Canada, and Greenland. Advances 
in Parasitology, 82, 33-204. <https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
407706-5.00002-2>
Jenkins, E. J., Schurer, J. M., & Gesy, K. M. (2011). Old problems 
on a new playing field: Helminth zoonoses transmitted 
among dogs, wildlife, and people in a changing northern 
climate. Veterinary Parasitology, 182(1), 54-69. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.vetpar.2011.07.015>
Jetten, T. H., & Focks, D. A. (1997). Potential changes in the 
distribution of dengue transmission under climate warming. The 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 57(3), 285-
297. <https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.1997.57.285>
Ji, W., Huh, K., Kang, M., Hong, J., Bae, G. H., Lee, R., Na, Y., 
Choi, H., Gong, S. Y., Choi, Y. H., Ko, K. P., Im, J. S., & Jung, J. 
(2020). Effect of Underlying Comorbidities on the Infection and 
Severity of COVID-19 in Korea: a Nationwide Case-Control Study. 
Journal of Korean medical science, 35(25), e237. <https://doi.
org/10.3346/jkms.2020.35.e237>
Jones, B., & O’Neill, B. C. (2016). Spatially explicit global 
population scenarios consistent with the Shared Socioeconomic 
Pathways. Environmental Research Letters, 11(8), 1-10. <https://
doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/084003>
Jones, K. E., Patel, N. G., Levy, M. A., Storeygard, A., Balk, D., 
Gittleman, J. L., & Daszak, P. (2008). Global trends in emerging 
infectious diseases. Nature, 451(7181), 990-993. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature06536>
Jüni, P., Rothenbühler, M., Bobos, P., Thorpe, K. E., da Costa, 
B. R., Fisman, D. N., Slutsky, A. S., & Gesink, D. (2020). Impact 
of climate and public health interventions on the COVID-19 
pandemic: a prospective cohort study. CMAJ : Canadian 
Medical Association journal = journal de l’Association medicale 
canadienne, 192(21), E566–E573. <https://doi.org/10.1503/
cmaj.200920>
Junxiong, P., & Yee-Sin, L. (2015). Clustering, climate and dengue 
transmission. Expert Review of Anti-infective Therapy, 13(6), 731-
740. <https://doi.org/10.1586/14787210.2015.1028364>
Kamal, M., Kenawy, M. A., Rady, M. H., Khaled, A. S., & Samy, 
A. M. (2019). Mapping the global potential distributions of 
two arboviral vectors Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus under 
changing climate. PLOS ONE, 13(12), 1-21. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0210122>
Kane, J., Righter, J., Krajden, S., & Lester, R. S. (1983). 
Blastomycosis: A new endemic focus in Canada. CMAJ, 129(7), 
728-731. Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
articles/PMC1875443/>
Kanzawa, M., Spindler, H., Anglemyer, A., & Rutherford, G. W. 
(2020). Will Coronavirus Disease 2019 Become Seasonal? The 
Journal of infectious diseases, 222(5), 719–721. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa345>
Kauffman, C. A. (2007). Histoplasmosis: A clinical and 
laboratory update. Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 20(1), 115-132. 
<https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00027-06>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 454 
Kausrud, K. L., Begon, M., Ari, T. B., Viljugrein. H., Esper, J., 
Büntgen, U., Leirs, H., Junge, C., Yang, B., Yang, M., Xu, L., 
Stenseth, N. C. (2010) Modeling the epidemiological history 
of plague in Central Asia: palaeoclimatic forcing on a disease 
system over the past millennium. BMC Biology, 8, 112. doi: 
10.1186/1741-7007-8-112.
Kausrud, K. L., Mysterud, A., Steen, H., Vik, J. O., Østbye, E., 
Cazelles, B., . . . Stenseth, N. C. (2008). Linking climate change 
to lemming cycles. Nature, 456(7218), 93-97. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nature07442>
KC, S., & Lutz, W. (2017). The human core of the shared 
socioeconomic pathways: Population scenarios by age, 
sex and level of education for all countries to 2100. Global 
Environmental Change, 42, 181-192. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2014.06.004>
Keegan, J. D., & Holland, C. V. (2010). Contamination of the 
hair of owned dogs with the eggs of Toxocara spp. Veterinary 
Parasitology, 173(1-2), 161-164. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
vetpar.2010.06.010>
Kepron, M. W., Schoemperlen, C. B., Hershfield, E. S., Zylak, C. 
J., & Cherniack, R. M. (1972). North American blastomycosis in 
Central Canada: A review of 36 cases. CMAJ, 106(3), 243-246. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1940364/>
Kidd, S. E., Hagen, F., Tscharke, R. L., Huynh, M., Bartlett, K. H., 
Fyfe, M., Macdougall, L., Boekhout, T., Kwon-Chung, K. J., & 
Meyer, W. (2004). A rare genotype of Cryptococcus gattii caused 
the cryptococcosis outbreak on Vancouver Island (British 
Columbia, Canada). Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 101(49), 17258–17263. 
<https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0402981101>
Kidd, S. E., Bach, P. J., Hingston, A. O., Mak, S., Chow, Y., 
MacDougall, L., . . . Bartlett, K. H. (2007a). Cryptococcus gattii 
dispersal mechanisms, British Columbia, Canada. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 13(1), 51-57. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid1301.060823>
Kidd, S. E., Chow, Y., Mak, S., Bach, P. J., Chen, H., Hingston, A. 
O., . . . Bartlett, K. H. (2007b). Characterization of environmental 
sources of the human and animal pathogen Cryptococcus gattii 
in British Columbia, Canada, and the Pacific Northwest of the 
United States. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 73(5), 
1433-1443. <https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01330-06>
Kilpatrick, A. M., Dobson, A. D. M., Levi, T., Salkeld, D. J., Swei, 
A., Ginsberg, H. S., . . . Diuk-Wasser, M. A. (2017). Lyme disease 
ecology in a changing world: Consensus, uncertainty and critical 
gaps for improving control. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 372(1722). <https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0117>
Kilpatrick, A. M., Kramer, L. D., Jones, M. J., Marra, P. P., & 
Daszak, P. (2006). West Nile virus epidemics in North America 
are driven by shifts in mosquito feeding behavior. PLOS 
Biology, 4(4), 0606-0610. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pbio.0040082>
Kim, B. I., Ki, H., Park, S., Cho, E., & Chun, B. C. (2016). Effect 
of climatic factors on hand, foot, and mouth disease in 
South Korea, 2010-2013. PLOS ONE, 11(6), 1-9. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0157500>
Kinlin, L. M., Spain, C. V., Ng, V., Johnson, C. C., White, A. N. J., 
& Fisman, D. N. (2009). Environmental exposures and invasive 
meningococcal disease: An evaluation of effects on varying 
time scales. American Journal of Epidemiology, 169(5), 588-595. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/aje/kwn383>
Kirkland, T. N., & Fierer, J. (1996). Coccidioidomycosis: A 
reemerging infectious disease. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
3(2), 192-199. Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC2626789/>
Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y. H., & Lipsitch, 
M. (2020). Projecting the transmission dynamics of SARS-
CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science (New York, 
N.Y.), 368(6493), 860–868. <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
abb5793>
Knobel, D. L., Cleaveland, S., Coleman, P. G., Fèvre, E. M., Meltzer, 
M. I., Miranda, M. E. G., . . . Meslin, F.-X. (2005). Re-evaluating the 
burden of rabies in Africa and Asia. Bulletin of the World Health 
Organization, 83(5), 360-368. Retrieved from <https://www.who.
int/bulletin/volumes/83/5/360.pdf>
Kotchi S.-O., Bouchard, C., Brazeau, S., Ogden, N.H. (2021) 
Earth Observation-informed risk maps of the Lyme disease 
vector Ixodes scapularis in Central and Eastern Canada. Remote 
Sensing, 13(3), 524.
Kotwa, J. D., Isaksson, M., Jardine, C. M., Campbell, G. D., 
Berke, O., Pearl, D. L., . . . Peregrine, A. S. (2019). Echinococcus 
multilocularis infection, Southern Ontario, Canada. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 25(2), 265-272. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2502.180299>
Kraemer, M. U. G., Reiner, R. C., Jr., Brady, O. J., Messina, J. 
P., Gilbert, M., Pigott, D. M., . . . Golding, N. (2019). Past and 
future spread of the arbovirus vectors Aedes aegypti and Aedes 
albopictus. Nature Microbiology, 4, 854-863. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41564-019-0376-y>
Kraemer, M. U. G., Sinka, M. E., Duda, K. A., Mylne, A., Shearer, F. 
M., Brady, O. J., . . . Hay, S. I. (2015). The global compendium of 
Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus occurrence. Scientific Data, 2, 
1-8. <https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2015.35>
Kramer, L. D., Styer, L. M., & Ebel, G. D. (2008). A global 
perspective on the epidemiology of West Nile virus. Annual 
Review of Entomology, 53, 61-81. <https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.ento.53.103106.093258>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 455 
Kulkarni, M. A., Berrang-Ford, L., Buck, P. A., Drebot, M. A., 
Lindsay, L. R., & Ogden, N. H. (2015). Major emerging vector-
borne zoonotic diseases of public health importance in 
Canada. Emerging Microbes & Infections, 4(1), 1-7. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/emi.2015.33>
Kuster, S. P., Tuite, A. R., Kwong, J. C., McGeer, A., The 
Toronto Invasive Bacterial Diseases Network, & Fisman, D. N. 
(2011). Evaluation of coseasonality of influenza and invasive 
pneumococcal disease: Results from prospective surveillance. 
PLOS Medicine, 8(6), 1-9. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001042>
Kwon-Chung, K. J., & Bennett, J. E. (1984). High prevalence of 
Cryptococcus neoformans var. gattii in tropical and subtropical 
regions. Zentralblatt für Bakteriologie, Mikrobiologie, und Hygiene 
Serie A - Medical microbiology, infectious diseases, virology, 
parasitology, 257(2), 213-218. 
Lafferty, K. D. (2009). The ecology of climate change and 
infectious diseases. Ecology, 90(4), 888-900. <https://doi.
org/10.1890/08-0079.1>
Larrieu, S., Cassadou, S., Rosine, J., Chappert, J. L., Blateau, A., 
Ledrans, M., & Quénel, P. (2014). Lessons raised by the major 
2010 dengue epidemics in the French West Indies. Acta Tropica, 
131, 37-40. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actatropica.2013.11.023>
Larsen, J. N., Anisimov, O. A., Constable, A., Hollowed, A. 
B., Maynard, N., Prestrud, P., . . . Stone, J. M. R. (2014). 
Polar regions. In V. R. Barros, C. B. Field, D. J. Dokken, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, K. J. Mach, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. 
O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White (Eds.), Climate 
change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part B: 
Regional aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the 
Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (pp. 1567-1612). Cambridge, United Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.
ch/report/ar5/wg2/>
Lau, L., Wudel, B., Kadkhoda, K., & Keynan, Y. (2017). Snowshoe 
hare virus causing meningoencephalitis in a young adult from 
northern Manitoba, Canada. Open Forum Infectious Diseases, 
4(3), 1-3. <https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofx150>
Lau, S., Luk, H., Wong, A., Li, K., Zhu, L., He, Z., Fung, J., Chan, 
T., Fung, K., & Woo, P. (2020). Possible Bat Origin of Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerging infectious 
diseases, 26(7), 1542–1547. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2607.200092>
Lee, A. C. Y., Schantz, P. M., Kazacos, K. R., Montgomery, S. P., 
& Bowman, D. D. (2010). Epidemiologic and zoonotic aspects 
of ascarid infections in dogs and cats. Trends in Parasitology, 
26(4), 155-161. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2010.01.002>
Leighton, P. A., Koffi, J. K., Pelcat, Y., Lindsay, L. R., & Ogden, N. 
H. (2012). Predicting the speed of tick invasion: An empirical 
model of range expansion for the Lyme disease vector Ixodes 
scapularis in Canada. Journal of Applied Ecology, 49(2), 457-464. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2012.02112.x>
Levac, D., Colquhoun, H., & O’Brien, K. K. (2010). Scoping 
studies: Advancing the methodology. Implementation Science, 5, 
69. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-5-69>
Levine RS, Hedeen DL, Hedeen MW, Hamer GL, Mead DG, Kitron 
UD. (2017). Avian species diversity and transmission of West 
Nile virus in Atlanta, Georgia. Parasites & Vectors, 10(1), 62. doi: 
10.1186/s13071-017-1999-6.
Liao, J., Yu, S., Yang, F., Yang, M., Hu, Y., & Zhang, J. (2016). 
Short-term effects of climatic variables on hand, foot, and 
mouth disease in mainland China, 2008-2013: A multilevel 
spatial Poisson regression model accounting for overdispersion. 
PLOS ONE, 11(1), 1-14. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0147054>
Light, R. B., Kralt, D., Embil, J. M., Trepman, E., Wiebe, L., 
Limerick, B., . . . Macdonald, K. (2008). Seasonal variations 
in the clinical presentation of pulmonary and extrapulmonary 
blastomycosis. Medical Mycology, 46(8), 835-841. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/13693780802132763>
Likos, A., Griffin, I., Bingham, A. M., Stanek, D., Fischer, M., White, 
S., . . . Philip, C. (2016). Local mosquito-borne transmission of 
Zika virus—Miami-Dade and Broward counties, Florida, June–
August 2016. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 65(38), 
1032-1038. <https://doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6538e1>
Lin, H., Zou, H., Wang, Q., Liu, C., Lang, L., Hou, X., & Li, Z. (2013). 
Short-term effect of El Niño-Southern Oscillation on pediatric 
hand, foot and mouth disease in Shenzhen, China. PLOS ONE, 
8(7), 1-7. <http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0065585>
Lindquist, E. E., Galloway, T. D., Artsob, H., Lindsay, L. R., Drebot, 
M., Wood, H., & Robbins, R. G. (2016). A handbook to the ticks 
of Canada (Ixodida: Ixodidae, Argasidae): Biological Survey of 
Canada Monograph Series No. 7: Biological Survey of Canada. 
Retrieved from <https://biologicalsurvey.ca/public/Bsc/
Controller/Page/AGR-001-Ticks-Monograph.pdf>
Lindsay, A. P., Hope, V., Marshall, R. J., & Salinger, J. (2002). 
Meningococcal disease and meteorological conditions in 
Auckland, New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand Journal of 
Public Health, 26(3), 212-218. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
842X.2002.tb00676.x>
Lindsay, L. R., Barker, I. K., Surgeoner, G. A., Mcewen, S. 
A., Gillespie, T. J., & Addison, E. M. (1998). Survival and 
development of the different life stages of Ixodes scapularis 
(Acari: Ixodidae) held within four habitats on Long Point, Ontario, 
Canada. Journal of Medical Entomology, 35(3), 189-199. <https://
doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/35.3.189>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 456 
Lindsey, N. P., Staples, J. E., & Fischer, M. (2018). Chikungunya 
virus disease among travelers—United States, 2014-2016. The 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 98(1), 192-
197. <https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.17-0668>
Litvinjenko, S., & Lunny, D. (2017). Blastomycosis 
hospitalizations in northwestern Ontario: 2006-2015. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 43(10), 200-205. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v43i10a02>
Litvinov, I. V., St-Germain, G., Pelletier, R., Paradis, M., & 
Sheppard, D. C. (2013). Endemic human blastomycosis in 
Quebec, Canada, 1988–2011. Epidemiology & Infection, 141(6), 
1143-1147. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268812001860>
Litvintseva, A. P., Marsden-Haug, N., Hurst, S., Hill, H., Gade, 
L., Driebe, E. M., . . . Chiller, T. (2015). Valley fever: Finding 
new places for an old disease: Coccidioides immitis found 
in Washington State soil associated with recent human 
infection. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 60(1), e1-e3. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/cid/ciu681>
Lohrenz, S., Minion, J., Pandey, M., & Karunakaran, K. (2018). 
Blastomycosis in southern Saskatchewan 2000–2015: Unique 
presentations and disease characteristics. Medical Mycology, 
56(7), 787-795. <https://doi.org/10.1093/mmy/myx131>
Lopman, B., Armstrong, B., Atchison, C., & Gray, J. J. (2009). 
Host, weather and virological factors drive norovirus 
epidemiology: Time-series analysis of laboratory surveillance 
data in England and Wales. PLOS ONE, 4(8), 1-10. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0006671>
Ludwig, A., Bigras-Poulin, M., Michel, P., & Bélanger, D. 
(2010). Risk factors associated with West Nile virus 
mortality in American Crow populations in southern Quebec. 
Journal of Wildlife Diseases, 46(1), 195-208. <https://doi.
org/10.7589/0090-3558-46.1.195>
Ludwig, A., Zheng, H., Vrbova, L., Drebot, M. A., Iranpour, M., 
& Lindsay, L. R. (2019). Increased risk of endemic mosquito-
borne diseases in Canada due to climate change. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 45(4), 90-97. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i04a03>
MacDougall, L., Fyfe, M., Romney, M., Starr, M., & Galanis, E. 
(2011). Risk factors for Cryptococcus gattii infection, British 
Columbia, Canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 17(2), 193-
199. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1702.101020>
MacDougall, L., Kidd, S. E., Galanis, E., Mak, S., Leslie, M. J., 
Cieslak, P. R., . . . Bartlett, K. H. (2007). Spread of Cryptococcus 
gattii in British Columbia, Canada, and detection in the Pacific 
Northwest, USA. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 13(1), 42-50. 
<https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1301.060827>
Machado-Machado, E. A. (2012). Empirical mapping of 
suitability to dengue fever in Mexico using species distribution 
modeling. Applied Geography, 33, 82-93. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2011.06.011>
Maiga, A. W., Deppen, S., Scaffidi, B. K., Baddley, J., Aldrich, M. 
C., Dittus, R. S., & Grogan, E. L. (2018). Mapping Histoplasma 
capsulatum exposure, United States. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, 24(10), 1835-1839. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2410.180032>
Mak, S., Morshed, M., & Henry, B. (2010). Ecological niche 
modeling of Lyme disease in British Columbia, Canada. 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 47(1), 99-105. <https://doi.
org/10.1603/033.047.0114>
Maksimovic, Z., Cornwell, M. S., Semren, O., & Rifatbegovic, M. 
(2017). The apparent role of climate change in a recent anthrax 
outbreak in cattle. OIE Scientific and Technical Review, 36(3), 
959-963. <https://doi.org/10.20506/rst.36.3.2727>
Marsden-Haug, N., Goldoft, M., Ralston, C., Limaye, A. P., Chua, 
J., Hill, H., . . . Chiller, T. (2013). Coccidioidomycosis acquired in 
Washington state. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 56(6), 847-850. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/cis1028>
Marston, B. J., Lipman, H. B., & Breiman, R. F. (1994). 
Surveillance for Legionnaires’ disease: Risk factors for morbidity 
and mortality. Archives of Internal Medicine, 154(21), 2417-2422. 
<https://doi.org/10.1001/archinte.1994.00420210049006>
Mas-Coma, S., Valero, M. A., & Bargues, M. D. (2008). Effects 
of climate change on animal and zoonotic helminthiasis. OIE 
Scientific and Technical Review, 27(2), 443-457. <https://doi.
org/10.20506/rst.27.2.1822>
Maves, R. C., & Crum-Cianflone, N. F. (2012). 
Coccidioidomycosis: A review. Infectious Diseases in 
Clinical Practice, 20(1), 18-24. <https://doi.org/10.1097/
IPC.0b013e31823c4b85>
Mayhew, S., & Hanefeld, J. (2014). Planning adaptive health 
systems: The climate challenge. The Lancet Global health, 2(11), 
e625-e626. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(14)70313-4>
McBride, J. A., Gauthier, G. M., & Klein, B. S. (2017). Clinical 
manifestations and treatment of blastomycosis. Clinics in 
Chest Medicine, 38(3), 435-449. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ccm.2017.04.006>
McDonough, E. S., Wisniewski, T. R., Penn, L. A., Chan, D. M., 
& McNamara, W. J. (1976). Preliminary studies on conidial 
liberation of Blastomyces dermatitidis and Histoplasma 
capsulatum. Sabouraudia, 14(2), 199-204. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/00362177685190271>
McMichael, C., Barnett, J., & McMichael, A. J. (2012). An ill 
wind? Climate change, migration, and health. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 120(5), 646-654. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1104375>
McTaggart, L. R., Brown, E. M., & Richardson, S. E. (2016). 
Phylogeographic analysis of Blastomyces dermatitidis and 
Blastomyces gilchristii reveals an association with North 
American freshwater drainage basins. PLOS ONE, 11(7), 1-22. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0159396>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 457 
Medlock, J. M., & Vaux, A. G. C. (2011). Assessing the possible 
implications of wetland expansion and management on 
mosquitoes in Britain. European Mosquito Bulletin, 29, 38-
65. Retrieved from <http://e-m-b.org/sites/e-m-b.org/files/
EMB%2829%2938-65.pdf>
Melles, S. J., Fortin, M. J., Lindsay, K., & Badzinski, D. (2011). 
Expanding northward: Influence of climate change, forest 
connectivity, and population processes on a threatened species’ 
range shift. Global Change Biology, 17(1), 17-31. <https://doi.org
/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2010.02214.x>
Michele, M., Alberto, M., Liana, S., & Francesco, D. (2006). 
Do environmental factors influence the occurrence of acute 
meningitis in industrialized countries? An epidemic of varying 
aetiology in Northern Italy. European Journal of Epidemiology, 
21(6), 465-468. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10654-006-9013-1>
Millins, C., Gilbert, L., Medlock, J., Hansford, K., Thompson, D. 
B. A., & Biek, R. (2017). Effects of conservation management of 
landscapes and vertebrate communities on Lyme borreliosis risk 
in the United Kingdom. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 372(1722), 1-12. <https://doi.
org/10.1098/rstb.2016.0123>
Minigan, J. N., Hager, H. A., Peregrine, A. S., & Newman, J. A. 
(2018). Current and potential future distribution of the American 
dog tick (Dermacentor variabilis, Say) in North America. 
Ticks and Tick-borne Diseases, 9(2), 354-362. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ttbdis.2017.11.012>
Mitchell, R., & Kandola, K. (2005). Rabies in the Northwest 
Territories Part 2: Rabies surveillance in the Northwest 
Territories. EpiNorth, 17, 4-6. 
Monaghan, A. J., Moore, S. M., Sampson, K. M., Beard, C. B., & 
Eisen, R. J. (2015). Climate change influences on the annual 
onset of Lyme disease in the United States. Ticks and Tick-
borne Diseases, 6(5), 615-622. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ttbdis.2015.05.005>
Moore, M. (1982). Enteroviral disease in the United States, 
1970–1979. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 146(1), 103-108. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/146.1.103>
Moreno-Madriñán, M. J., & Turell, M. (2018). History of 
mosquitoborne diseases in the United States and implications 
for new pathogens. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 24(5), 821-
826. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2405.171609>
Morin, C. W., Semenza, J. C., Trtanj, J. M., Glass, G. E., Boyer, C., 
& Ebi, K. L. (2018). Unexplored opportunities: Use of climate- and 
weather-driven early warning systems to reduce the burden of 
infectious diseases. Current Environmental Health Reports, 5(4), 
430-438. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-018-0221-0>
Morral-Puigmal, C., Martínez-Solanas, È., Villanueva, C. M., & 
Basagaña, X. (2018). Weather and gastrointestinal disease in 
Spain: A retrospective time series regression study. Environment 
International, 121(1), 649-657. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2018.10.003>
Morris, S. K., Brophy, J., Richardson, S. E., Summerbell, R., Parkin, 
P. C., Jamieson, F., . . . Ford-Jones, E. L. (2006). Blastomycosis 
in Ontario, 1994-2003. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 12(2), 274-
279. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1202.050849>
Mouchtouri, V. A., Verykouki, E., Zamfir, D., Hadjipetris, C., 
Lewis, H. C., Hadjichristodoulou, C., & The EU SHIPSAN ACT 
Partnership. (2017). Gastroenteritis outbreaks on cruise ships: 
Contributing factors and thresholds for early outbreak detection. 
Eurosurveillance, 22(45), 1-8. <https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-
7917.ES.2017.22.45.16-00576>
Muchaal, P. K., Parker, S., Meganath, K., Landry, L., & Aramini, 
J. (2015). Evaluation of a national pharmacy-based syndromic 
surveillance system. Canada Communicable Disease Report, 
41(9), 203-208. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v41i09a01>
Mukhi, S. N., Andres, E., Demianyk, B., Gammon, B., & Kloeze, H. 
(2016). KIWI: A technology for public health event monitoring 
and early warning detection. Online Journal of Public Health 
Informatics, 8(3), 1-16. <https://doi.org/10.5210/ojphi.
v8i3.6937>
Murray, D. L. (2003). Relapsing fever. In C. D. Rudolph, A. 
M. Rudolph, M. K. Hostetter, G. Lister, & N. J. Siegel (Eds.), 
Rudolph’s pediatrics (21st ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Nakazawa, Y., Williams, R., Peterson, A. T., Mead, P., Staples, 
E., & Gage, K. L. (2007). Climate change effects on plague 
and tularemia in the United States. Vector-Borne and 
Zoonotic Diseases, 7(4), 529-540. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
vbz.2007.0125>
Nash, D., & Geng, E. (2020). Goal-Aligned, Epidemic 
Intelligence for the Public Health Response to the COVID-19 
Pandemic. American journal of public health, 110(8), 1154–1156. 
<https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2020.305794>
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. (2016). 
Determinants of the prevalence and severity of influenza 
infection in Indigenous populations in Canada. Prince George, 
BC: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health.
Naughton, D. (2012). The natural history of Canadian mammals. 
Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press.
Neil, K., & Berkelman, R. (2008). Increasing incidence of 
Legionellosis in the United States, 1990–2005: Changing 
epidemiologic trends. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 47(5), 591-
599. <https://doi.org/10.1086/590557>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 458 
Nelder, M. P., Russell, C. B., Clow, K. M., Johnson, S., Weese, 
J. S., Cronin, K., . . . Patel, S. N. (2019). Occurrence and 
distribution of Ambylomma americanum as determined by 
passive surveillance in Ontario, Canada (1999–2016). Ticks and 
Tick-borne Diseases, 10(1), 146-155. <https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
TTBDIS.2018.10.001>
Neumann, G. (2015). H5N1 influenza virulence, pathogenicity 
and transmissibility: What do we know? Future Virology, 10(8), 
971-980. <https://doi.org/10.2217/fvl.15.62>
Neumann, G., Noda, T., & Kawaoka, Y. (2009). Emergence and 
pandemic potential of swine-origin H1N1 influenza virus. Nature, 
459(7249), 931-939. <https://doi.org/10.1038/nature08157>
Ng, V., Fazil, A., Gachon, P., Deuymes, G., Radojević, M., 
Mascarenhas, M., . . . Ogden, N. H. (2017). Assessment of the 
probability of autochthonous transmission of chikungunya 
virus in Canada under recent and projected climate change. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(6), 1-12. <https://doi.
org/10.1289/ehp669>
Ng, V., Rees, E. E., Lindsay, R. L., Drebot, M. A., Brownstone, 
T., Sadeghieh, T., & Khan, S. U. (2019). Could exotic mosquito-
borne diseases emerge in Canada with climate change? Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 45(4), 98-107. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i04a04>
Ng, V., & Sargeant, J. M. (2012). A stakeholder-informed 
approach to the identification of criteria for the prioritization 
of zoonoses in Canada. PLOS ONE, 7(1), 1-12. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0029752>
Nguyen, C., Barker, B. M., Hoover, S., Nix, D. E., Ampel, N. M., 
Frelinger, J. A., . . . Galgiani, J. N. (2013). Recent advances 
in our understanding of the environmental, epidemiological, 
immunological, and clinical dimensions of coccidioidomycosis. 
Clinical Microbiology Reviews, 26(3), 505-525. <https://doi.
org/10.1128/CMR.00005-13>
Nicolle, L., Rotstein, C., Bourgault, A., St-Germain, G., Garber, 
G., & Canadian Infectious Diseases Society Invasive Fungal 
Registry (1998). Invasive fungal infections in Canada from 
1992 to 1994. The Canadian journal of infectious diseases = 
Journal canadien des maladies infectieuses, 9(6), 347–352. 
doi:10.1155/1998/473219
Nishi, J. S., Stephen, C., & Elkin, B. T. (2002). Implications 
of agricultural and wildlife policy on management and 
eradication of bovine tuberculosis and brucellosis in free-
ranging wood bison of northern Canada. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences, 969(1), 236-244. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04385.x>
Nyström, M.E., Karltun, J., Keller, C., Andersson Gäre B. (2018). 
Collaborative and partnership research for improvement of 
health and social services: researcher’s experiences from 
20 projects. Health Research Policy and Systems, 16, 46 
doi:10.1186/s12961-018-0322-0
O’Brien, S. F., Delage, G., Scalia, V., Lindsay, R., Bernier, F., Dubuc, 
S., . . . Fearon, M. A. (2016). Seroprevalence of Babesia microti 
infection in Canadian blood donors. Transfusion, 56(1), 237-243. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/trf.13339>
O’Connor, S. M., Taylor, C. E., & Hughes, J. M. (2006). Emerging 
infectious determinants of chronic diseases. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 12(7), 1051-1057. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid1207.060037>
O’Lorcain, P. (1995). The effects of freezing on the viability 
of Toxocara canis and T. cati embryonated eggs. Journal of 
Helminthology, 69(2), 169-171. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0022149X00014073>
Ogden, N. H. (2014). Lyme disease and climate change. In C. 
D. Butler (Ed.), Climate change and global health (pp. 145-157). 
Wallingford, United Kingdom: CABI. 
Ogden, N. H. (2017). Climate change and vector-borne diseases 
of public health significance. FEMS Microbiology Letters, 
364(19), 1-8. <https://doi.org/10.1093/femsle/fnx186>
Ogden, N. H., AbdelMalik, P., & Pulliam, J. R. C. (2017). 
Emerging infectious diseases: Prediction and detection. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 43(10), 206-211. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v43i10a03>
Ogden, N. H., Bigras-Poulin, M., O’Callaghan, C. J., Barker, 
I. K., Lindsay, L. R., Maarouf, A., . . . Charron, D. (2005). A 
dynamic population model to investigate effects of climate on 
geographic range and seasonality of the tick Ixodes scapularis. 
International Journal for Parasitology, 35(4), 375-389. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpara.2004.12.013>
Ogden, N. H., Bouchard, C., Kurtenbach, K., Margos, G., Lindsay, 
L. R., Trudel, L., . . . Milord, F. (2010). Active and passive 
surveillance and phylogenetic analysis of Borrelia burgdorferi 
elucidate the process of Lyme disease risk emergence in 
Canada. Environmental Health Perspectives, 118(7), 909-914. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0901766>
Ogden, N. H., & Gachon, P. (2019). Climate change and infectious 
diseases: What can we expect?. Canada communicable disease 
report = Releve des maladies transmissibles au Canada, 45(4), 
76–80. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i04a01> 
Ogden, N. H., Koffi, J. K., Pelcat, Y., & Lindsay, L. R. (2014c). 
Environmental risk from Lyme disease in central and eastern 
Canada: A summary of recent surveillance information. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 40(5), 74-82. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v40i05a01>
Ogden, N.H., Maarouf, A., Barker, I.K., Bigras-Poulin, M., Lindsay, 
L.R., Morshed, M.G., O’Callaghan, C.J., Ramay, F., Waltner-Toews, 
D. & Charron, D.F. (2006). Climate change and the potential for 
range expansion of the Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis in 
Canada. International Journal for Parasitology, 36, 63-70.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 459 
Ogden, N. H., & Lindsay, L. R. (2016). Effects of climate and 
climate change on vectors and vector-borne diseases: Ticks are 
different. Trends in Parasitology, 32(8), 646-656. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pt.2016.04.015>
Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., Hanincová, K., Barker, I. K., Bigras-
Poulin, M., Charron, D. F., . . . Thompson, R. A. (2008). Role of 
migratory birds in introduction and range expansion of Ixodes 
scapularis ticks and of Borrelia burgdorferi and Anaplasma 
phagocytophilum in Canada. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 74(6), 1780-1790. <https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.01982-07>
Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., & Leighton, P. A. (2013). Predicting 
the rate of invasion of the agent of Lyme disease, Borrelia 
burgdorferi. Journal of Applied Ecology, 50(2), 510-518. <https://
doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.12050>
Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., Ludwig, A., Morse, A. P., Zheng, 
H., & Zhu, H. (2019). Weather-based forecasting of mosquito-
borne disease outbreaks in Canada. Canada Communicable 
Disease Report, 45(5), 127-132. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.
v45i05a03>
Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., & Schofield, S. W. (2015). Methods 
to prevent tick bites and Lyme disease. Clinics in Laboratory 
Medicine, 35(4), 883-899. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cll.2015.07.003>
Ogden, N. H., Margos, G., Artsob, H., & Tsao, J. I. (2014b). Non-
rickettsial tick-borne bacteria and the diseases they cause. In D. 
E. Sonenshine & R. M. Roe (Eds.), Biology of ticks (2nd ed., Vol. 
2, pp. 278-312). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Ogden, N. H., Pang, G., Ginsberg, H. S., Hickling, G. J., Burke, 
R. L., Beati, L., & Tsao, J. I. (2018). Evidence for geographic 
variation in life-cycle processes affecting phenology of the 
Lyme disease vector Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) in the 
United States. Journal of Medical Entomology, 55(6), 1386-1401. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/jme/tjy104>
Ogden, N. H., Radojević, M., Caminade, C., & Gachon, P. (2014a). 
Recent and projected future climatic suitability of North America 
for the Asian tiger mosquito Aedes albopictus. Parasites & 
Vectors, 7, 1-14. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-014-0532-4>
Ogden, N. H., Wilson, J. R. U., Richardson, D. M., Hui, C., Davies, 
S. J., Kumschick, S., . . . Pulliam, J. R. C. (2019). Emerging 
infectious diseases and biological invasions: A call for a One 
Health collaboration in science and management. Royal Society 
Open Science, 6(3), 1-15. <https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.181577>
Oliveira, A. R. S., Piaggio, J., Cohnstaedt, L. W., McVey, D. S., & 
Cernicchiaro, N. (2018). A quantitative risk assessment (QRA) 
of the risk of introduction of the Japanese encephalitis virus 
(JEV) in the United States via infected mosquitoes transported 
in aircraft and cargo ships. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 160, 
1-9. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prevetmed.2018.09.020>
Onozuka, D., & Hashizume, M. (2011). The influence of 
\temperature and humidity on the incidence of hand, foot, and 
mouth disease in Japan. Science of the Total Environment, 410-
411, 119-125. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.09.055>
Ooi, E.-E., & Gubler, D. J. (2009). Global spread of epidemic 
dengue: the influence of environmental change. Future Virology, 
4(6), 571-580. 10.2217/fvl.09.55
O’Reilly, K. M., Auzenbergs, M., Jafari, Y., Liu, Y., Flasche, S., & 
Lowe, R. (2020). Effective transmission across the globe: the 
role of climate in COVID-19 mitigation strategies. The Lancet. 
Planetary health, 4(5), e172. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-
5196(20)30106-6>
Otten A., Fazil, A., Chemeris, A., Breadner, P., & Ng, V. (2019). 
Prioritization of vector-borne diseases in Canada under current 
climate and projected climate change. Microbial Risk Analysis. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mran.2019.100089>
Overy, D. P., McBurney, S., Muckle, A., Lund, L., Lewis, P. J., & 
Strang, R. (2016). Cryptococcus gattii VGIIb-like variant in white-
tailed deer, Nova Scotia, Canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
22(6), 1131-1133. doi:10.3201/eid2206.160081
Paaijmans, K. P., Cator, L. J., & Thomas, M. B. (2013). 
Temperature-dependent pre-bloodmeal period and temperature-
driven asynchrony between parasite development and mosquito 
biting rate reduce malaria transmission intensity. PLOS ONE, 
8(1), 1-7. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055777
Paaijmans, K. P., Read, A. F., & Thomas, M. B. (2009). 
Understanding the link between malaria risk and climate. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America, 106(33), 13844-13849. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.0903423106
Pan-Canadian Public Health Network. (2016) Retrieved from 
<http://www.phn-rsp.ca/index-eng.php>
Pandemic Influenza Outbreak Research Modelling Team. (2009). 
Modelling an influenza pandemic: a guide for the perplexed. 
CMAJ, 181(3-4), 171-173. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.090885
Panic, M., & Ford, J. D. (2013). A review of national-level 
adaptation planning with regards to the risks posed by climate 
change on infectious diseases in 14 OECD nations. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 10(12), 
7083-7109. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph10127083>
Papp, Z., Clark, R. G., Parmley, E. J., Leighton, F. A., Waldner, C., 
& Soos, C. (2017). The ecology of avian influenza viruses in wild 
dabbling ducks (Anas spp.) in Canada. PLOS ONE, 12(5), 1-18. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176297>
Park, Benjamin J., Sigel, K., Vaz, V., Komatsu, K., McRill, 
C., Phelan, M., . . . Hajjeh, Rana A. (2005). An epidemic of 
coccidioidomycosis in Arizona associated with climatic 
changes, 1998-2001. The Journal of Infectious Diseases, 
191(11), 1981-1987. <https://doi.org/10.1086/430092>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 460 
Parkinson, A. J., Evengard, B., Semenza, J. C., Ogden, N., 
Børresen, M. L., Berner, J., . . . Albihn, A. (2014). Climate change 
and infectious diseases in the Arctic: Establishment of a 
circumpolar working group. International Journal of Circumpolar 
Health, 73(1), 1-7. <https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v73.25163>
Pastula, D. M., Hoang Johnson, D. K., White, J. L., Dupuis, A. P., 
Fischer, M., & Staples, J. E. (2015). Jamestown Canyon virus 
disease in the United States—2000-2013. The American Journal 
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 93(2), 384-389. <https://doi.
org/10.4269/ajtmh.15-0196>
Patel, M. M., Pitzer, V. E., Alonso, W. J., Vera, D., Lopman, B., Tate, 
J., . . . Parashar, U. D. (2013). Global seasonality of rotavirus 
disease. The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, 32(4), 
e134-e147. <https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0b013e31827d3b68>
Pathogen Regulation Directorate. (2010). Pathogen safety data 
sheets: Infectious substances—West Nile virus (WNV). Public Health 
Agency of Canada Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
public-health/services/laboratory-biosafety-biosecurity/pathogen-
safety-data-sheets-risk-assessment/west-nile-virus.html>
Patz, J. A., Githeko, A. K., McCarty, J. P., Hussein, S., Confalonieri, 
U., & de Wet, N. (2003). Climate change and infectious diseases. In 
A. J. McMichael, D. H. Campbell-Lendrum, C. F. Corvalán, K. L. Ebi, 
A. Githeko, J. D. Scheraga, & A. Woodward (Eds.), Climate change 
and human health: Risks and responses (pp. 103-132). Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization. 
Patz, J.A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Holloway, T. & Foley, J.A. 
(2005). Impact of regional climate change on human health. 
Nature, 438, 310-7. doi: 10.1038/nature04188.
Paz, S. (2015). Climate change impacts on West Nile virus 
transmission in a global context. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 370(1665), 1-11. 
<https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0561>
Paz, S., & Semenza, J. C. (2016). El Niño and climate 
change—Contributing factors in the dispersal of Zika virus 
in the Americas? The Lancet, 387(10020), 745. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00256-7>
Pequeno, P., Mendel, B., Rosa, C., Bosholn, M., Souza, J. 
L., Baccaro, F., Barbosa, R., & Magnusson, W. (2020). Air 
transportation, population density and temperature predict 
the spread of COVID-19 in Brazil. PeerJ, 8, e9322. <https://doi.
org/10.7717/peerj.9322>
Peters, M., Godfrey, C., McInerney, P., Soares, C. B., Khalil, H., & 
Parker, D. (2015). The Joanna Briggs Institute reviewers’ manual 
2015: Methodology for JBI scoping reviews. Adelaide, Australia: 
The Joanna Briggs Institute.
Petersen, L. R., Brault, A. C., & Nasci, R. S. (2013a). West Nile 
virus: Review of the literature. JAMA, 310(3), 308-315. <https://
doi.org/10.1001/jama.2013.8042>
Petersen, L. R., Carson, P. J., Biggerstaff, B. J., Custer, B., 
Borchardt, S. M., & Busch, M. P. (2013b). Estimated cumulative 
incidence of West Nile virus infection in US adults, 1999–2010. 
Epidemiology & Infection, 141(3), 591-595. <https://doi.
org/10.1017/s0950268812001070>
Pfister, J. R., Archer, J. R., Hersil, S., Boers, T., Reed, K. D., 
Meece, J. K., . . . Davis, J. P. (2011). Non-rural point source 
blastomycosis outbreak near a yard waste collection site. 
Clinical Medicine & Research, 9(2), 57-65. <https://doi.
org/10.3121/cmr.2010.958>
Phillips, P., Galanis, E., MacDougall, L., Chong, M. Y., Balshaw, 
R., Cook, V. J., . . . Thompson, D. (2015). Longitudinal clinical 
findings and outcome among patients with Cryptococcus gattii 
infection in British Columbia. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 60(9), 
1368-1376. <https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/civ041>
Picard-Masson, M., Lajoie, É., Lord, J., Lalancette, C., Marchand, 
G., Levac, É., . . . Lajoie, L. (2016). Two related occupational 
cases of Legionella longbeachae infection, Quebec, Canada. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases, 22(7), 1289-1291. <https://doi.
org/10.3201/eid2207.160184>
Plummer, F. A., Jones, S. M. (2017), The story of Canada’s 
Ebola vaccine. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 189 (43), 
E1326-E1327
Plummer, P. J., McClure, J. T., Menzies, P., Morley, P. S., Van den 
Brom, R., & Van Metre, D. C. (2018). Management of Coxiella 
burnetii infection in livestock populations and the associated 
zoonotic risk: A consensus statement. Journal of Veterinary 
Internal Medicine, 32(5), 1481-1494. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
jvim.15229>
Proctor, M. E., Klein, B. S., Jones, J. M., & Davis, J. P. (2002). 
Cluster of pulmonary blastomycosis in a rural community: 
Evidence for multiple high-risk environmental foci following a 
sustained period of diminished precipitation. Mycopathologia, 
153(3), 113-120. <https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1014515230994>
Public Health Agency of Canada. (2009). Case definitions for 
communicable diseases under national surveillance. Cananda 
Communicable Disease Report, 35(Suppl.2).
Rabaan, A. A. (2019). Cholera: An overview with reference to the 
Yemen epidemic. Frontiers of Medicine, 13(2), 213-228. <https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11684-018-0631-2>
Raghavan, R. K., Peterson, A. T., Cobos, M. E., Ganta, R., & Foley, 
D. (2019). Current and future distribution of the lone star tick, 
Amblyomma americanum (L.) (Acari: Ixodidae) in North America. 
PLOS ONE, 14(1), 1-13. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0209082>
Rajagopalan, S., & Yoshikawa, T. T. (2016). Norovirus infections 
in long-term care facilities. Journal of the American Geriatrics 
Society, 64(5), 1097-1103. <https://doi.org/10.1111/jgs.14085>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 461 
Randazzo, W., Truchado, P., Cuevas-Ferrando, E., Simón, 
P., Allende, A., & Sánchez, G. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 RNA in 
wastewater anticipated COVID-19 occurrence in a low 
prevalence area. Water research, 181, 115942. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2020.115942>
Randolph, S. E. (2004). Faune, climat et politique: Causes 
possibles aux récents accroissements des zoonoses à tiques 
[Fauna, climate and politics: Possible causes for the recent 
increases in tick-borne zoonoses]. Archives de Pédiatrie, 11(10), 
1282-1285. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcped.2003.12.019>
Rausch, R. (1956). Studies on the helminth fauna of Alaska: 
XXX. The occurrence of Echinococcus multilocularis Leuckart, 
1863, on the mainland of Alaska. The American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 5(6), 1086-1092. <https://doi.
org/10.4269/ajtmh.1956.5.1086>
Reed, K. D., Meece, J. K., Archer, J. R., & Peterson, A. T. 
(2008). Ecologic niche modeling of Blastomyces dermatitidis 
in Wisconsin. PLOS ONE, 3(4), 1-7. <https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0002034>
Reeves, W. C., Hardy, J. L., Reisen, W. K., & Milby, M. M. 
(1994). Potential effect of global warming on mosquito-borne 
arboviruses. Journal of Medical Entomology, 31(3), 323-332. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/31.3.323>
Reina Ortiz, M., Le, N. K., Sharma, V., Hoare, I., Quizhpe, E., Teran, 
E., . . . Izurieta, R. (2017). Post-earthquake Zika virus surge: 
Disaster and public health threat amid climatic conduciveness. 
Scientific Reports, 7, 1-10. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-
15706-w>
Reisen, W., & Brault, A. C. (2007). West Nile virus in North 
America: Perspectives on epidemiology and intervention. Pest 
Management Science, 63(7), 641-646. <https://doi.org/10.1002/
ps.1325>
Reisen, W. K. (2013). Ecology of West Nile virus in North 
America. Viruses, 5(9), 2079-2105. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
v5092079>
Reiter, P. (2001). Climate change and mosquito-borne disease. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(suppl 1), 141–161.
Reiter, P. (2008). Climate change and mosquito-borne disease: 
Knowing the horse before hitching the cart. OIE Scientific and 
Technical Review, 27(2), 383-398. <https://doi.org/10.20506/
rst.27.2.1804>
Revich, B., Tokarevich, N., & Parkinson, A. J. (2012). Climate 
change and zoonotic infections in the Russian Arctic. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 71(1), 1-8. <https://
doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v71i0.18792>
Reynolds, H. H., & Elston, D. M. (2017). What’s eating you? 
Lone star tick (Amblyomma americanum). Cutis, 99(2), 111-
114. Retrieved from <https://www.mdedge.com/dermatology/
article/130759/infectious-diseases/whats-eating-you-lone-star-
tick-amblyomma-americanum>
Rezza, G., Nicoletti, L., Angelini, R., Romi, R., Finarelli, A. C., 
Panning, M., . . . Cassone, A. (2007). Infection with chikungunya 
virus in Italy: An outbreak in a temperate region. The Lancet, 
370(9602), 1840-1846. <https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-
6736(07)61779-6>
Ripoche, M., Campagna, C., Ludwig, A., Ogden, N. H., & Leighton, 
P. A. (2019). Short-term forecasting of daily abundance of West 
Nile virus vectors Culex pipiens-restuans (Diptera: Culicidae) and 
Aedes vexans based on weather conditions in southern Québec 
(Canada). Journal of Medical Entomology, 56(3), 859-872. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/jme/tjz002>
Roberts, K. C., Rao, D. P., Bennett, T. L., Loukine, L., Jayaraman, 
G. C. (2015). Prevalence and patterns of chronic disease 
multimorbidity and associated determinants in Canada. Health 
Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention Canada, 35(6), 87-
94. doi: 10.24095/hpcdp.35.6.01. PMID: 26302227; PMCID: 
PMC4910465
Rocheleau, J. P., Michel, P., Lindsay, L. R., Drebot, M., Dibernardo, 
A., Ogden, N. H., . . . Arsenault, J. (2018). Risk factors associated 
with seropositivity to California serogroup viruses in humans 
and pet dogs, Quebec, Canada. Epidemiology & Infection, 146(9), 
1167-1176. <https://doi.org/10.1017/s0950268818001000>
Rodenhouse, N. L., Christenson, L. M., Parry, D., & Green, L. E. 
(2009). Climate change effects on native fauna of northeastern 
forests. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 39(2), 249-263. 
<https://doi.org/10.1139/X08-160>
Roe, C. C., Bowers, J., Oltean, H., DeBess, E., Dufresne, P. 
J., McBurney, S., . . . Engelthaler, D. M. (2018). Dating the 
Cryptococcus gattii dispersal to the North American Pacific 
Northwest. mSphere, 3(1), 1-13. <https://doi.org/10.1128/
mSphere.00499-17>
Rohr, J. R., Dobson, A. P., Johnson, P. T. J., Kilpatrick, A. M., Paull, 
S. H., Raffel, T. R., . . . Thomas, M. B. (2011). Frontiers in climate 
change-disease research. Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 26(6), 
270-277. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2011.03.002>
Romeo-Aznar, V., Paul, R., Telle, O., & Pascual, M. (2018). 
Mosquito-borne transmission in urban landscapes: The missing 
link between vector abundance and human density. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 285(1884), 1-9. 
<https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2018.0826>
Romero-Lankao, P., Smith, J. B., Davidson, D. J., Diffenbaugh, 
N. S., Kinney, P. L., Kirshen, P., . . . Villers Ruiz, L. (2014). 
North America. In V. R. Barros, C. B. Field, D. J. Dokken, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, K. J. Mach, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. 
O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White (Eds.), Climate 
change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part B: 
Regional aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (pp. 1439-1498). Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press. Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.ch/report/
ar5/wg2/>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 462 
Rosas, Á. L., & Casadevall, A. (2006). Melanization affects 
susceptibility of Cryptococcus neoformans to heat and cold. 
FEMS Microbiology Letters, 153(2), 265-272. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.1997.tb12584.x>
Rosatte, R. C. (1988). Rabies in Canada: History, epidemiology 
and control. The Canadian Veterinary Journal, 29(4), 362-365. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
PMC1680921/>
Rosenstein, N. E., Perkins, B. A., Stephens, D. S., Popovic, T., 
& Hughes, J. M. (2001). Meningococcal disease. The New 
England Journal of Medicine, 344(18), 1378-1388. <https://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJM200105033441807>
Roussel, M., Pontier, D., Cohen, J.-M., Lina, B., & Fouchet, D. 
(2016). Quantifying the role of weather on seasonal influenza. 
BMC Public Health, 16, 1-14. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-
016-3114-x>
Rycroft-Malone, J., Burton, C., Wilkinson, J., Harvey, 
G., McCormack, B., Baker, R., Dopson, S., Graham, I.D., 
Staniszewska, S., Thompson, C., Ariss, S., Melville-Richards, 
L., Williams, L. (2015). Collective action for implementation: a 
realist evaluation of organisational collaboration in healthcare. 
Implementation Science, 11(17). doi:10.1186/s13012-016-0380-z
Safronetz, D., Sloan, A., Stein, D. R., Mendoza, E., Barairo, 
N., Ranadheera, C., . . . Drebot, M. (2017). Evaluation of 5 
commercially available Zika virus immunoassays. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 23(9), 1577-1580. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2309.162043>
Sage, K. M., Johnson, T. L., Teglas, M. B., Nieto, N. C., & Schwan, 
T. G. (2017). Ecological niche modeling and distribution of 
Ornithodoros hermsi associated with tick-borne relapsing fever 
in western North America. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 
11(10), 1-18. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0006047
Sagurova I, Ludwig A, Ogden NH, Pelcat Y, Dueymes G, Gachon 
P. (2019). Predicted northward expansion of the geographic 
range of the tick vector Amblyomma americanum in North 
America under future climate conditions. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 127(10), 107014. doi: 10.1289/EHP5668
Sakamoto, R., Ohno, A., Nakahara, T., Satomura, K., Iwanaga, S., 
Kouyama, Y., . . . Yamaguchi, K. (2009). Legionella pneumophila 
in rainwater on roads. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 15(8), 1295-
1297. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1508.090317>
Salb, A. L., Barkema, H. W., Elkin, B. T., Thompson, R. C. A., 
Whiteside, D. P., Black, S. R., . . . Kutz, S. J. (2008). Dogs as 
sources and sentinels of parasites in humans and wildlife, 
northern Canada. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 14(1), 60-63. 
<https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1401.071113>
Salkeld DJ, Padgett KA, Jones JH. (2013). A meta-analysis 
suggesting that the relationship between biodiversity and risk 
of zoonotic pathogen transmission is idiosyncratic. Ecology 
Letters, 16(5), 679-686
Samia, N. I., Kausrud, K. L., Heesterbeek, H., Ageyev, V., Begon, 
M., Chan, K. S., Stenseth, N. C. (2011) Dynamics of the plague-
wildlife-human system in Central Asia are controlled by two 
epidemiological thresholds. Proceedings of the National 
Academies of Science of the U S A, 108(35), 14527-14532.
Samy, A. M., Elaagip, A. H., Kenawy, M. A., Ayres, C. F., Peterson, 
A. T., & Soliman, D. E. (2016). Climate change influences 
on the global potential distribution of the mosquito Culex 
quinquefasciatus, vector of West Nile virus and lymphatic 
filariasis. PLOS ONE, 11(10), 1-13. <https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0163863>
Sapp, S. G. H., Rascoe, L. N., Wilkins, P. P., Handali, S., Gray, E. B., 
Eberhard, M. L., . . . Yabsley, M. J. (2016). Baylisascaris procyonis 
roundworm seroprevalence among wildlife rehabilitators, United 
States and Canada, 2012–2015. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 
22(12), 2128-2131. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2212.160467>
Schanzer, D. L., Langley, J. M., & Tam, T. W. S. (2006). 
Hospitalization attributable to influenza and other viral 
respiratory illnesses in Canadian children. The Pediatric 
Infectious Disease Journal, 25(9), 795-800. <https://doi.
org/10.1097/01.inf.0000232632.86800.8c>
Schanzer, D. L., Langley, J. M., & Tam, T. W. S. (2008). Role of 
influenza and other respiratory viruses in admissions of adults 
to Canadian hospitals. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses, 
2(1), 1-8. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-2659.2008.00035.x>
Schanzer, D. L., McGeer, A., & Morris, K. (2013a). Statistical 
estimates of respiratory admissions attributable to seasonal and 
pandemic influenza for Canada. Influenza and Other Respiratory 
Viruses, 7(5), 799-808. <https://doi.org/10.1111/irv.12011>
Schanzer, D. L., Sevenhuysen, C., Winchester, B., & Mersereau, 
T. (2013b). Estimating influenza deaths in Canada, 1992-2009. 
PLOS ONE, 8(11), 1-11. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0080481>
Schneeberger, P. M., Wintenberger, C., van der Hoek, W., & Stahl, 
J. P. (2014). Q fever in the Netherlands 2007-2010: What we 
learned from the largest outbreak ever. Médecine et Maladies 
Infectieuses, 44(8), 339-353. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
medmal.2014.02.006>
Schultz-Cherry, S., Olsen, C. W., & Easterday, B. C. (2011). 
History of swine influenza. Current Topics in Microbiology and 
Immunology, 370, 21-28. <https://doi.org/10.1007/82_2011_197>
Seitz, A. E., Adjemian, J., Steiner, C. A., & Prevots, D. R. (2015). 
Spatial epidemiology of blastomycosis hospitalizations: 
Detecting clusters and identifying environmental risk factors. 
Medical Mycology, 53(5), 447-454. <https://doi.org/10.1093/
mmy/myv014>
Sejvar, J. J. (2014). Clinical manifestations and outcomes of 
West Nile virus infection. Viruses, 6(2), 606-623. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/v6020606>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 463 
Semenza, J. C., Lindgren, E., Balkanyi, L., Espinosa, L., Almqvist, 
M. S., Penttinen, P., & Rocklöv, J. (2016). Determinants and 
drivers of infectious disease threat events in Europe. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 22(4), 581-589. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2204>
Septfons, A., Leparc-Goffart, I., Couturier, E., Franke, F., Deniau, 
J., Balestier, A., . . . De Valk, H. (2016). Travel-associated and 
autochthonous Zika virus infection in mainland France, 1 
January to 15 July 2016. Eurosurveillance, 21(32), 1-7. <https://
doi.org/10.2807/1560-7917.Es.2016.21.32.30315>
Shafir, S. C., Sorvillo, F. J., Sorvillo, T., & Eberhard, M. L. (2011). 
Viability of Baylisascaris procyonis eggs. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, 17(7), 1293-1295. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid1707.101774>
Shaman, J., Day, J. F., & Stieglitz, M. (2005). Drought-induced 
amplification and epidemic transmission of West Nile virus in 
southern Florida. Journal of Medical Entomology, 42(2), 134-141. 
<https://doi.org/10.1093/jmedent/42.2.134>
Shaman, J., Pitzer, V. E., Viboud, C., Grenfell, B. T., & Lipsitch, M. 
(2010). Absolute humidity and the seasonal onset of influenza in 
the continental United States. PLOS Biology, 8(2), 1-13. <https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.1000316>
Shapiro, L. L. M., Whitehead, S. A., & Thomas, M. B. (2017). 
Quantifying the effects of temperature on mosquito and parasite 
traits that determine the transmission potential of human 
malaria. PLOS Biology, 15(10), 1-21. <https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.2003489>
Silk, B. J., Foltz, J. L., Ngamsnga, K., Brown, E., Muñoz, M. G., 
Hampton, L. M., . . . Hicks, L. A. (2013). Legionnaires’ disease 
case-finding algorithm, attack rates, and risk factors during a 
residential outbreak among older adults: An environmental and 
cohort study. BMC Infectious Diseases, 13, 1-8. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2334-13-291>
Simmering, J. E., Polgreen, L. A., Hornick, D. B., Sewell, D. K., & 
Polgreen, P. M. (2017). Weather-dependent risk for Legionnaires’ 
disease, United States. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 23(11), 
1843-1851. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2311.170137>
Simon, A., Tardy, O., Hurford, A., Lecomte, N., Bélanger, D., & 
Leighton, P. (2019). Dynamics and persistence of rabies in the 
Arctic. Polar Research, 38, 1-14. 
Simon, J. A., Marrotte, R. R., Desrosiers, N., Fiset, J., Gaitan, J., 
Gonzalez, A., . . . Millien, V. (2014). Climate change and habitat 
fragmentation drive the occurrence of Borrelia burgdorferi, 
the agent of Lyme disease, at the northeastern limit of its 
distribution. Evolutionary Applications, 7(7), 750-764. <https://
doi.org/10.1111/eva.12165>
Sivabalan, P., Saboo, A., Yew, J., & Norton, R. (2017). Q fever in 
an endemic region of North Queensland, Australia: A 10 year 
review. One Health, 3, 51-55. <https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
ONEHLT.2017.03.002>
Skog, L., Linde, A., Palmgren, H., Hauska, H., & Elgh, F. (2014). 
Spatiotemporal characteristics of pandemic influenza. BMC 
Infectious Diseases, 14, 1-14. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2334-14-378>
Skowronski, D. M., Li, Y., Tweed, S. A., Tam, T. W. S., Petric, M., 
David, S. T., . . . Brunham, R. C. (2007). Protective measures 
and human antibody response during an avian influenza H7N3 
outbreak in poultry in British Columbia, Canada. CMAJ, 176(1), 
47-53. <https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.060204>
Smith, K. R., Woodward, A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chadee, D. 
D., Honda, Y., Liu, Q., . . . Sauerborn, R. (2014). Human health: 
Impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, 
D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. 
Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. 
S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. 
White (Eds.), Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and 
vulnerability. Part A: Global and sectoral aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 709-754). 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. Retrieved from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/>
Sonenshine, D. E. (2018). Range expansion of tick disease 
vectors in North America: Implications for spread of tick-
borne disease. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(3), 1-9. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15030478>
Souto, A. C. P., Bonfietti, L. X., Ferreira-Paim, K., Trilles, L., 
Martins, M., Ribeiro-Alves, M., . . . Meyer, W. (2016). Population 
genetic analysis reveals a high genetic diversity in the Brazilian 
Cryptococcus gattii VGII population and shifts the global origin 
from the Amazon rainforest to the semi-arid desert in the 
northeast of Brazil. PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 10(8), 
1-19. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0004885>
Spence, L., Artsob, H., Grant, L., & Th’Ng, C. (1977). St. Louis 
encephalitis in southern Ontario: Laboratory studies for 
arboviruses. CMAJ, 116(1), 35-37. Retrieved from <https://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1879132/>
St-Germain, G., Murray, G., & Duperval, R. (1993). Blastomycosis 
in Quebec (1981-90): Report of 23 cases and review of published 
cases from Quebec. Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases, 
4(2), 89-94. <https://doi.org/10.1155/1993/249823>
St-Pierre, J., Dufresne, P. J., Carignan, A., Lévesque, É., Bernard, 
F., Longtin, J., & LeBlanc, L. (2018). Case series: Report of 
the first two human indigenous cases of Cryptococcus gattii 
infection in eastern Canada. Mycopathologia, 183(2), 399-406. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11046-017-0215-8>
Stafford, K. C., III., Molaei, G., Little, E. A. H., Paddock, C. 
D., Karpathy, S. E., & Labonte, A. M. (2018). Distribution 
and establishment of the lone star tick in Connecticut and 
implications for range expansion and public health. Journal 
of Medical Entomology, 55(6), 1561-1568. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/jme/tjy115>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 464 
Statistics Canada. (2016). A portrait of the population aged 85 
and older in 2016 in Canada. Retrieved from <https://www12.
statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/as-sa/98-200-
x/2016004/98-200-x2016004-eng.cfm>
Statistics Canada. (2019). Table 24-10-0041-01 International 
travellers entering or returning to Canada, by type of transport. 
Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/
tv.action?pid=2410004101>
Steverding, D. (2014). The history of Chagas disease. Parasites & 
Vectors, 7, 1-8. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1756-3305-7-317>
Stout, J. E., & Yu, V. L. (1997). Legionellosis. The New England 
Journal of Medicine, 337(10), 682-687. <https://doi.org/10.1056/
NEJM199709043371006>
Sultan, B., Labadi, K., Guégan, J.-F., & Janicot, S. (2005). Climate 
drives the meningitis epidemics onset in West Africa. PLOS 
Medicine, 2(1), 0043-0049. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pmed.0020006>
Sumi, A., Toyoda, S., Kanou, K., Fujimoto, T., Mise, K., Kohei, Y., 
. . . Kobayashi, N. (2017). Association between meteorological 
factors and reported cases of hand, foot, and mouth disease 
from 2000 to 2015 in Japan. Epidemiology & Infection, 145(14), 
2896-2911. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268817001820>
Sunenshine, R. H., Anderson, S., Erhart, L., Vossbrink, A., Kelly, 
P. C., Engelthaler, D., & Komatsu, K. (2007). Public health 
surveillance for coccidioidomycosis in Arizona. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 1111(1), 96-102. <https://doi.
org/10.1196/annals.1406.045>
Suresh, S., Forgie, S., & Robinson, J. (2018). Non-polio 
Enterovirus detection with acute flaccid paralysis: A systematic 
review. Journal of Medical Virology, 90(1), 3-7. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/jmv.24933>
Tabachnick, W. J. (2016). Climate change and the arboviruses: 
Lessons from the evolution of the dengue and yellow fever 
viruses. Annual Review of Virology, 3, 125-145. <https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-virology-110615-035630>
Takeuchi-Storm, N., Woolsey, I. D., Jensen, P. M., Fredensborg, 
B. L., Pipper, C. B., & Kapel, C. M. O. (2015). Predictors of 
Echinococcus multilocularis prevalence in definitive and 
intermediate hosts: A meta-analysis approach. Journal of 
Parasitology, 101(3), 297-303. <https://doi.org/10.1645/14-
645.1>
Tam, B. Y., Martin, I., & Tsuji, L. J. S. (2014). Geospatial analysis 
between the environment and past incidences of West Nile virus 
in bird specimens in Ontario, Canada. GeoJournal, 79(6), 805-
817. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-014-9526-1>
Tamerius, J. D., & Comrie, A. C. (2011). Coccidioidomycosis 
incidence in Arizona predicted by seasonal precipitation. PLOS 
ONE, 6(6), 1-7. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0021009>
Tang, J. W., Lai, F. Y. L., Nymadawa, P., Deng, Y. M., Ratnamohan, 
M., Petric, M., . . . Wong, F. Y. W. (2010). Comparison of the 
incidence of influenza in relation to climate factors during 
2000–2007 in five countries. Journal of Medical Virology, 82(11), 
1958-1965. <https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.21892>
Tasanee, A., Chayanit, L., & Agsornpien, N. (2015). Does the 
correlation between rainfall vs dengue hemorrhagic fever 
incidence always exist? Case study in Phuket, Thailand. 
Journal of Environmental Research and Development, 9(3), 
509-513. Retrieved from <http://jerad.org/archiveabstract.
php?vol=9&issue=3>
Tatem, A. J., Hay, S. I., & Rogers, D. J. (2006). Global traffic and 
disease vector dispersal. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 103(16), 6242-6247. 
<https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0508391103>
Tatem, A. J., Huang, Z., Das, A., Qi, Q., Roth, J., & Qiu, Y. 
(2012). Air travel and vector-borne disease movement. 
Parasitology, 139(14), 1816-1830. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0031182012000352>
Teixeira, M. de M., Patan, J. S., Taylor, M. L., Gómez, B. L., 
Theodoro, R. C., de Hoog, S., Engelthaler, D. M., Zancopé-
Oliveira, R. M., Felipe, M. S., Barker, B. M. (2016). Worldwide 
phylogenetic distributions and population dynamics of the genus 
Histoplasma. PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 10, e0004732. 
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004732.
Thielman, A. C., & Hunter, F. F. (2007). Photographic key to 
the adult female mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) of Canada. 
Canadian Journal of Arthropod Identification, 04. <https://doi.
org/10.3752/cjai.2007.04>
Thomas-Bachli, A. L., Pearl, D. L., Berke, O., Parmley, E. J., & 
Barker, I. K. (2015). A comparison of West Nile virus surveillance 
using survival analyses of dead corvid and mosquito pool data 
in Ontario, 2002–2008. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 122(3), 
363-370. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prevetmed.2015.10.007>
Thompson, W. W., Comanor, L., & Shay, D. K. (2006). 
Epidemiology of seasonal influenza: Use of surveillance data 
and statistical models to estimate the burden of disease. The 
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 194(Suppl. 2), S82-S91. <https://
doi.org/10.1086/507558>
Tinline, R., & Gregory, D. (i2020). Taking the bite out of rabies: 
The evolution of rabies management in Canada. Toronto, ON: 
University of Toronto Press.
Tomaselli, M., Kutz, S., Gerlach, C., & Checkley, S. (2017). Local 
knowledge to enhance wildlife population health surveillance: 
Conserving muskoxen and caribou in the Canadian Arctic. 
Biological Conservation, 217, 337-48.
Tomasello, D., & Schlagenhauf, P. (2013). Chikungunya and 
dengue autochthonous cases in Europe, 2007-2012. Travel 
Medicine and Infectious Disease, 11(5), 274-284. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tmaid.2013.07.006>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 465 
Tong, D. Q., Wang, J. X. L., Gill, T. E., Lei, H., & Wang, B. (2017). 
Intensified dust storm activity and valley fever infection in the 
southwestern United States. Geophysical Research Letters, 
44(9), 4304-4312. <https://doi.org/10.1002/2017GL073524>
Tossa, P., Deloge-Abarkan, M., Zmirou-Navier, D., Hartemann, P., 
& Mathieu, L. (2006). Pontiac fever: An operational definition 
for epidemiological studies. BMC Public Health, 6, 112. 
10.1186/1471-2458-6-112
Towers, S., Chowell, G., Hameed, R., Jastrebski, M., Khan, 
M., Meeks, J., . . . Harris, G. (2013). Climate change and 
influenza: The likelihood of early and severe influenza 
seasons following warmer than average winters. PLOS 
Currents: Influenza, 1. <https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.
flu.3679b56a3a5313dc7c043fb944c6f138>
Tricco, A. C., Lillie, E., Zarin, W., O’Brien, K., Colquhoun, H., 
Kastner, M., . . . Straus, S. E. (2016). A scoping review on 
the conduct and reporting of scoping reviews. BMC Medical 
Research Methodology, 16, 1-10. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12874-016-0116-4>
Trudel, L., Veillette, M., Bonifait, L., & Duchaine, C. (2014). 
Management of the 2012 Legionella crisis in Quebec City: 
Need for a better communication between resources and 
knowledge transfer. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5, 1-4. <https://doi.
org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00182>
Tsetsarkin, K. A., Vanlandingham, D. L., McGee, C. E., & Higgs, 
S. (2007). A single mutation in chikungunya virus affects vector 
specificity and epidemic potential. PLOS Pathogens, 3(12), 1895-
1906. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.0030201>
Tuite, A. R., Kinlin, L. M., Kuster, S. P., Jamieson, F., Kwong, J. C., 
McGeer, A., & Fisman, D. N. (2010). Respiratory virus infection 
and risk of invasive meningococcal disease in central Ontario, 
Canada. PLOS ONE, 5(11), 1-7. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0015493>
Turell, M. J., Britch, S. C., Aldridge, R. L., Kline, D. L., Boohene, 
C., & Linthicum, K. J. (2013). Potential for mosquitoes (Diptera: 
Culicidae) from Florida to transmit Rift Valley fever virus. 
Journal of Medical Entomology, 50(5), 1111-1117. <https://doi.
org/10.1603/ME13049>
Turell, M. J., Byrd, B. D., & Harrison, B. A. (2013). Potential for 
populations of Aedes j. japonicus to transmit Rift Valley fever 
virus in the USA. Journal of the American Mosquito Control 
Association, 29(2), 133-137. <https://doi.org/10.2987/12-
6316r.1>
Turell, M. J., Dohm, D. J., & Fonseca, D. M. (2014). Comparison 
of the potential for different genetic forms in the Culex pipiens 
complex in North America to transmit Rift Valley fever virus. 
Journal of the American Mosquito Control Association, 30(4), 
253-259. <https://doi.org/10.2987/14-6441R.1>
Turell, M. J., Wilson, W. C., & Bennett, K. E. (2010). Potential for 
North American mosquitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) to transmit Rift 
Valley fever virus. Journal of Medical Entomology, 47(5), 884-
889. <https://doi.org/10.1603/ME10007>
Uejio, C. K., Mak, S., Manangan, A., Luber, G., & Bartlett, K. H. 
(2015). Climatic influences on Cryptococcus gattii populations, 
Vancouver Island, Canada, 2002-2004. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, 21(11), 1989-1996. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2111.141161>
Valseth, K., Nesbø, C. L., Easterday, W. R., Turner, W. C., Olsen, 
J. S., Stenseth, N. C., & Haverkamp, T. H. A. (2017). Temporal 
dynamics in microbial soil communities at anthrax carcass 
sites. BMC Microbiology, 17, 1-15. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12866-017-1111-6>
van Leuken, J. P. G., Swart, A. N., Droogers, P., van Pul, A., 
Heederik, D., & Havelaar, A. H. (2016). Climate change effects 
on airborne pathogenic bioaerosol concentrations: A scenario 
analysis. Aerobiologia, 32(4), 607-617. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10453-016-9435-5>
Vander Kelen, P., Downs, J. A., Unnasch, T., & Stark, L. (2014). A 
risk index model for predicting eastern equine encephalitis virus 
transmission to horses in Florida. Applied Geography, 48, 79-86. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.01.012>
Varia, M., Wilson, S., Sarwal, S., McGeer, A., Gournis, E., Galanis, 
E., & Henry, B. (2003). Investigation of a nosocomial outbreak of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in Toronto, Canada. 
CMAJ, 169(4), 285-292. Retrieved from <http://www.cmaj.ca/
content/169/4/285.long>
Varrin, R., Bowman, J., & Gray, P. A. (2007). The known and 
potential impacts of climate change on biodiversity in Ontario’s 
terrestrial ecosystems: Case studies and recommendations for 
adaptation. (Climate Change Research Report CCRR-09). Sault Ste. 
Marie, ON: Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources Retrieved from 
<http://www.climateontario.ca/MNR_Publications/276927.pdf>
Venturi, G., Di Luca, M., Fortuna, C., Remoli, M. E., Riccardo, F., 
Severini, F., . . . Rizzo, C. (2017). Detection of a chikungunya 
outbreak in Central Italy, August to September 2017. 
Eurosurveillance, 22(39), 1-4. <https://doi.org/10.2807/1560-
7917.ES.2017.22.39.17-00646>
Viboud, C., Pakdaman, K., Boëlle, P.-Y., Wilson, M. L., Myers, M. 
F., Valleron, A.-J., & Flahault, A. (2004). Association of influenza 
epidemics with global climate variability. European Journal of 
Epidemiology, 19(11), 1055-1059. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10654-004-2450-9>
Villeneuve, A., Polley, L., Jenkins, E., Schurer, J., Gilleard, J., Kutz, 
S., . . . Gagné, F. (2015). Parasite prevalence in fecal samples 
from shelter dogs and cats across the Canadian provinces. 
Parasites & Vectors, 8, 1-10. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-
015-0870-x>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 466 
Vugia, D. J., Wheeler, C., Cummings, K. C., & Karon, A. (2009). 
Increase in coccidioidomycosis—California, 2000-2007. MMWR 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 58(5), 105-109. Retrieved 
from <https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
mm5805a1.htm>
Walsh, M. G., de Smalen, A. W., & Mor, S. M. (2018). Climatic 
influence on anthrax suitability in warming northern latitudes. 
Scientific Reports, 8, 1-9. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-
27604-w>
Wang, C., Liu, L., Hao, X., Guo, H., Wang, Q., Huang, J., He, N., Yu, 
H., Lin, X., Pan, A., Wei, S., Wu, T. (2020). Evolving Epidemiology 
and Impact of Non-pharmaceutical Interventions on the 
Outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Wuhan, China. JAMA. 
doi:10.1101/2020.03.03.20030593
Wang, G., Minnis, R. B., Belant, J. L., & Wax, C. L. (2010). Dry 
weather induces outbreaks of human West Nile virus infections. 
BMC Infectious Diseases, 10, 1-7. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2334-10-38>
Wang, J., Ogden, N. H., & Zhu, H. (2011). The impact of weather 
conditions on Culex pipiens and Culex restuans (Diptera: 
Culicidae) abundance: A case study in Peel Region. Journal of 
Medical Entomology, 48(2), 468-475. <https://doi.org/10.1603/
ME10117>
Wang, P., Goggins, W. B., & Chan, E. Y. Y. (2016). Hand, foot 
and mouth disease in Hong Kong: A time-series analysis on its 
relationship with weather. PLOS ONE, 11(8), 1-12. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0161006>
Warren, F. J., & Lemmen, D. S. (2014). Canada in a changing 
climate: Sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation. Ottawa, 
ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://www.nrcan.
gc.ca/environment/resources/publications/impacts-adaptation/
reports/assessments/2014/16309>
Washington State Department of Health. 
(2021). Coccidioidomycosis (Valley Fever). 
Retrieved from <https://www.doh.wa.gov/
ForPublicHealthandHealthcareProviders/NotifiableConditions/
Coccidioidomycosis#:~:text=Sources%3A%20Coccidioides%20
sp.,There%20are%20no%20specific%20precautions>
Webster, D., Dimitrova, K., Holloway, K., Makowski, K., Safronetz, 
D., & Drebot, M. A. (2017). California serogroup virus infection 
associated with encephalitis and cognitive decline, Canada, 
2015. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 23(8), 1423-1424. <https://
doi.org/10.3201/eid2308.170239>
Weir, E. (2005). Hantavirus: ‘Tis the season. CMAJ, 173(2), 147. 
<https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.050690>
Weissenböck, H., Kolodziejek, J., Url, A., Lussy, H., Rebel-Bauder, 
B., & Nowotny, N. (2002). Emergence of Usutu virus, an African 
mosquito-borne Flavivirus of the Japanese encephalitis virus 
group, central Europe. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 8(7), 652-
656. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid0807.020094>
White, A. N. J., Ng, V., Spain, C. V., Johnson, C. C., Kinlin, L. 
M., & Fisman, D. N. (2009). Let the sun shine in: Effects of 
ultraviolet radiation on invasive pneumococcal disease risk in 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. BMC Infectious Diseases, 9. <https://
doi.org/10.1186/1471-2334-9-196>
Williams, C. R., Mincham, G., Faddy, H., Viennet, E., Ritchie, S. 
A., & Harley, D. (2016). Projections of increased and decreased 
dengue incidence under climate change. Epidemiology & 
Infection, 144(14), 3091-3100. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
s095026881600162x>
Wilson, W. C., Kim, I. J., Trujillo, J. D., Sunwoo, S. Y., Noronha, 
L. E., Urbaniak, K., . . . Richt, J. A. (2018). Susceptibility of 
white-tailed deer to Rift Valley fever virus. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, 24(9), 1717-1719. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid2409.180265>
Windsor-Essex County Health Unit. (2019a). Aedes aegypti 
mosquito. Retrieved from <https://www.wechu.org/z-health-
topics/aedes-aegypti-mosquito>
Windsor-Essex County Health Unit. (2019b). Aedes albopictus 
mosquito. Retrieved from <https://www.wechu.org/z-health-
topics/aedes-albopictus-mosquito>
Wong, S.S.Y., Yip, C.C.Y., Lau, S.K.P. & Yuen, K.Y. (2010). Human 
enterovirus 71 and hand, foot and mouth disease. Epidemiology 
& Infection, 13, 1071-89. doi: 10.1017/S0950268809991555.
Wood, D. M., Dang, P. T., & Ellis, R. A. (1979). Part 6 The 
mosquitoes of Canada—Diptera: Culicidae. In The insects 
and arachnids of Canada. Ottawa, ON: Government of 
Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/
pub?id=9.811351&sl=0>
World Health Organization. (2007). Legionella and the prevention 
of legionellosis. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/emerging/
legionella.pdf>
World Health Organization. (2013). WHO expert consultation 
on rabies: Second report (WHO Technical Report Series 982). 
Geneva, Switzerland: WHO Press. Retrieved from <https://apps.
who.int/iris/handle/10665/85346>
World Health Organization Global Malaria Programme. (2018). 
Global report on insecticide resistance in malaria vectors: 
2010-2016. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. 
Retrieved from <https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand
le/10665/272533/9789241514057-eng.pdf?ua=1>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019a). Mosquito-borne 
diseases. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/neglected_
diseases/vector_ecology/mosquito-borne-diseases/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019b). Rift Valley Fever. 
Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/rift-valley-fever>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 467 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019c). Strengthening health 
security by implementing the International Health Regulations 
(2005). Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/ihr/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019d). Strengthening 
Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network (GOARN). 
Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/ihr/alert_and_response/
outbreak-network/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019e). Rapid risk 
assessment of acute public health events. Retrieved from 
<https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/HSE_GAR_
ARO_2012_1/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019f). Antimicrobial 
resistance. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/antimicrobial-
resistance/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019g). Prioritizing diseases 
for research and development in emergency contexts. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/activities/prioritizing-diseases-for-
research-and-development-in-emergency-context>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2020). WHO Timeline – 
COVID-19. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/news-room/
detail/08-04-2020-who-timeline---covid-19>
World Tourism Organization, & United Nations Environment 
Programme. (Eds.). (2008). Climate change and tourism—
Responding to global challenges. Madrid, Spain: World Tourism 
Organization.
Wormser, G. P., Dattwyler, R. J., Shapiro, E. D., Halperin, J. J., 
Steere, A. C., Klempner, M. S., . . . Nadelman, R. B. (2006). 
The clinical assessment, treatment, and prevention of Lyme 
disease, human granulocytic anaplasmosis, and babesiosis: 
Clinical practice guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America. Clinical Infectious Diseases, 43(9), 1089-1134. <https://
doi.org/10.1086/508667>
Wu, J. T., Leung, K., & Leung, G. M. (2020). Nowcasting and 
forecasting the potential domestic and international spread 
of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: A 
modelling study. The Lancet, 395(10225), 689-697. doi:10.1016/
s0140-6736(20)30260-9
Xiao, F.-Z., Zhang, Y., Deng, Y.-Q., He, S., Xie, H.-G., Zhou, X.-N., 
& Yan, Y.-S. (2014). The effect of temperature on the extrinsic 
incubation period and infection rate of dengue virus serotype 
2 infection in Aedes albopictus. Archives of Virology, 159(11), 
3053-3057. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00705-014-2051-1>
Yang, H. M., Macoris, M. L. G., Galvani, K. C., Andrighetti, M. 
T. M., & Wanderley, D. M. V. (2009). Assessing the effects of 
temperature on the population of Aedes aegypti, the vector of 
dengue. Epidemiology & Infection, 137(8), 1188-1202. <https://
doi.org/10.1017/s0950268809002040>
Yansouni, C.P., Pernica, J.M., & Goldfarb, D. (2016). Enteric 
parasites in Arctic communities: Tip of the iceberg? Trends in 
Parasitology, 32(11), 834-38.
Yoo, E. H., Chen, D., Diao, C., & Russell, C. (2016). The effects of 
weather and environmental factors on West Nile virus mosquito 
abundance in Greater Toronto Area. Earth Interactions, 20(3), 
1-22. <https://doi.org/10.1175/ei-d-15-0003.1>
Yu, G., Li, Y., Cai, J., Yu, D., Tang, J., Zhai, W., . . . Qin, J. (2019). 
Short-term effects of meteorological factors and air pollution on 
childhood hand-foot-mouth disease in Guilin, China. Science of 
the Total Environment, 646, 460-470. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2018.07.329>
Yue, R. P. H., & Lee, H. F. (2018). Pre-industrial plague 
transmission is mediated by the synergistic effect of 
temperature and aridity index. BMC Infectious Diseases, 18(1), 
134. doi: 10.1186/s12879-018-3045-5
Zhang, T., Wu, Q., & Zhang, Z. (2020). Probable Pangolin Origin 
of SARS-CoV-2 Associated with the COVID-19 Outbreak. 
Current biology : CB, 30(8), 1578. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cub.2020.03.063>
Zhao, D., Wang, L., Cheng, J., Xu, J., Xu, Z., Xie, M., . . . Su, H. 
(2017). Impact of weather factors on hand, foot and mouth 
disease, and its role in short-term incidence trend forecast 
in Huainan City, Anhui province. International Journal of 
Biometeorology, 61(3), 453-461. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-016-1225-9>
Zhao, Q., Li, S., Cao, W., Liu, D.-L., Qian, Q., Ren, H., . . . Guo, 
Y. (2018). Modeling the present and future incidence of 
pediatric hand, foot, and mouth disease associated with 
ambient temperature in mainland China. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 126(4), 1-11. <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP3062>
Zheng, H., Drebot, M. A., & Coulthart, M. B. (2014). West Nile 
virus in Canada: Ever-changing, but here to stay. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report, 40(10), 173-177. <https://doi.
org/10.14745/ccdr.v40i10a01>
Zhu, F., Xu, W., Xia, J., Liang, Z., Liu, Y., Zhang, X., . . . Wang, N. 
(2014). Efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity of an enterovirus 
71 vaccine in China. The New England Journal of Medicine, 
370(9), 818-828. <https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1304923>
CHAPTER 7
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Water Quality, 
Quantity, and 
Security
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 469 
Lead Authors
Tim Takaro, Simon Fraser University
Paddy Enright, Health Canada and University of Waterloo
Contributing Authors
Shannon Waters, Vancouver Coastal Health 
Lindsay Galway, Lakehead University
Jordan Brubacher, Simon Fraser University
Eleni Galanis, British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
Lorraine McIntyre, British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
Christina Cook, University of British Columbia
Gemma Dunn, Uisce (Ishka) Consulting International
Manon D. Fleury, Public Health Agency of Canada
Ben Smith, Public Health Agency of Canada
Tom Kosatsky, British Columbia Centre for Disease Control
Suggested Citation
Takaro, T., Enright, P., Waters, S., Galway, L., Brubacher, J., Galanis, E., 
McIntyre, L., Cook, C., Dunn, G., Fleury, M. D., Smith, B., & Kosatsky, T. 
(2022). Water Quality, Quantity, and Security. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter 
(Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 470 
Table of Contents
Summary
472
Key Messages
472
7.1 Introduction
476
7.2 Methods and Approach
477
7.3 Climate Change, Water, and Health
478
7.3.1 Indigenous Peoples — Water is Life
480
7.3.2 Water Quality
481
7.3.2.1 Drinking Water Systems and Health
481
7.3.2.1.1 Mechanisms Through Which Climate Change Impacts Water Quality
482
Box 7.1 Water, watersheds, and health
485
7.3.2.2 Saltwater Intrusion
487
7.3.2.3 Pathogens in Sewage Found in Ocean Water
487
7.3.2.4 Phytoplankton and Algal Blooms
488
7.3.3 Water Quantity
490
7.3.3.1 Drought
492
7.3.3.2 Streamflow and Snowmelt
493
7.3.3.3 Extreme Precipitation
493
7.3.3.4 Flooding
494
7.3.3.5 Projected Sea-Level Rise
497
7.3.3.6 Projected Precipitation
497
7.3.3.7 Projected Extreme Precipitation
499
7.3.3.8 Projected Freshwater Availability and Scarcity
500
7.3.4 Water Security and Society
501
7.3.4.1 Water and the Food System
502
7.3.4.1.1 Fishing and Seafood
503
7.3.4.2 Impacts on Infrastructure
505
7.3.4.2.1 Water Systems in Indigenous Communities
507
7.3.4.3 Cryosphere
507
7.4 Projected Health Security Risks and Impacts
509
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 471 
7.5 Adaptation to Reduce Risks
511
7.5.1 Climate-Resilient Water Systems
512
Box 7.2 Indigenous water co-governance as a way to address climate change 
514
7.5.2 Adaptation Options to Protect Water Quality, Quantity, and Security
514
7.6 Knowledge Gaps 
519
7.7 Conclusion
521
7.8 References 
522
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 472 
Summary
Climate change is expected to result in fluctuations in water quantity, degraded water quality, increased 
flood and drought risks, as well as a greater burden of climate-related water-borne disease. The impacts of 
sea-level rise and loss of ice in Canada are likely to be significant. Not all Canadians will experience these 
impacts equally. First Nations, Métis, and Inuit communities, many of which already face water insecurity, are 
expected to be disproportionately affected, as are rural and remote communities that have only basic water 
and sewage infrastructure. 
The health impacts associated with climate change effects on water quality and quantity are not inevitable. 
Through effective mitigation and adaptation, they can be reduced. Canadians can better adapt to these 
anticipated impacts and protect health by assessing local climate risks and vulnerabilities, developing 
adaptation plans, improving surveillance systems, building climate-resilient water systems, and promoting 
intersectoral collaboration to protect water resources and address climate-related risks.
Key Messages
•	
Changes in precipitation and temperature due to climate change will result in impacts on water 
quality and quantity and disrupt both natural water systems (rivers, lakes, oceans) and human 
drinking water and wastewater systems, thereby increasing risks to the health of Canadians. The 
extent and intensity of these changes will vary by region and season.
•	
Water-related health risks associated with climate change include threats to drinking water 
and irrigation supplies; increases in water-borne diseases (e.g., cryptosporidiosis, giardiasis, 
campylobacteriosis); physical injuries and mental health impacts from extreme weather events 
such as floods and droughts; and threats to health and well-being due to the socio-economic and 
environmental consequences of water insecurity. 
•	
Climate change-related water and food shortages, coupled with increasing population growth 
in climate vulnerable regions of the world with fewer resources, could affect Canada through 
regional and international migration. 
•	
Adaptation to the anticipated impacts of climate change on water resources and human health 
can help protect Canadians from future risks. Adaptation will require broad multi-sectoral action 
and coordination among, for example, public health practitioners and service providers, and water 
and wastewater managers.
•	
Indigenous Peoples are among those most affected by the degradation of water resources, 
but they also possess countless generations of accumulated knowledge, which can be applied 
to protect health. Partnerships among Indigenous communities, health authorities, and water 
managers are needed to identify the population-specific health impacts of climate change 
impacts on water resources and to implement effective adaptation options informed by traditional 
knowledges and cultural needs.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 473 
•	
More information is required on the current burden of disease in Canada related to climate change 
impacts on water resources and related hazards, and on the projected health risks from further 
warming. Research is also needed on the most effective ways to adapt to increasing stresses on 
drinking water systems and on needed public health interventions, including the communication of 
risks to the public. Better models for regional drought and flood prediction are needed.
•	
Health authorities can increase understanding of climate change impacts on water resources and 
health, as well as potential adaptation options, by conducting local and regional vulnerability and 
adaptation assessments related to climate change and health. By doing so, health authorities can 
improve their preparedness, maximize the health benefits of cross-sector collaboration, and build 
climate resilience within their communities. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 474 
Examples of the direct and indirect ways climate change can alter water quality and quantity and affect health.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 475 
Overview of the Health Impacts of Water Quality, Quantity, and 
Security in the Context of Climate Change
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Water quality, quantity, 
and security
•	
Increased precipitation 
and flooding causing 
dangerous evacuations, 
drinking water 
shortages, disruptions 
•	
Increased drought 
leading to regional water 
shortages, diminished 
food security, dust 
storms and habitat loss 
•	
Increased permafrost 
melt affecting water 
accessibility
•	
Increased salt-water 
infiltration affecting 
water accessibility
•	
Increased frequency of 
harmful algal blooms
•	
Higher water 
temperatures increasing 
the prevelance of water-
borne pathogens
•	
Water shortages causing 
or contributing to 
international conflict and 
forced migration
•	
Wildfire degrading 
watersheds
•	
Water-borne and food-borne 
infections, illnesses and deaths
•	
Water-borne infections and illnesses: 
•	
Acute gastrointestinal illness
•	
Infant mortality 
•	
Birth defects 
•	
Exacerbation of chronic 
diseases
•	
Skin diseases
•	
Food-borne illnesses: 
•	
Food poisoning
•	
Paralytic seafood poisoning
•	
Kidney failure
•	
Stress and other mental health 
impacts
•	
Respiratory illness
•	
Liver failure
•	
Injuries, illness, and deaths from 
flooding and extreme precipitation 
events
•	
Destruction or damage of health 
infrastructure
•	
Health and social services 
disruptions
•	
Disruptions to water systems and 
water management resulting in 
impacts such as degraded source 
water quality 
•	
Failure of drinking water systems 
during extreme weather events
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 476 
7.1 Introduction
Climate change will reduce the quantity and quality of water in all Canadian regions on a seasonal basis 
(Andrey et al., 2014). The health of Canadians can be affected by climate change effects on water in a 
number of ways: by an increasing frequency and severity of extreme weather events, such as floods and 
droughts, as well as the degradation of drinking and recreational water quality due to longer-term warming. 
These effects may arise because of shifts in ecological boundaries and changes to the cryosphere, and 
to the freshwater–saltwater interface. Health may also suffer from climate change impacts on water that 
affect food safety and security, for example, through the contamination of fish and shellfish (see Chapter 8: 
Food Safety and Security). Both extreme events and longer-term warming can increase pressures on water 
systems, which are integral to efforts to keep people healthy and safe. 
Health outcomes can include both physical and mental health impacts, for example, in the aftermath of a 
flood or during a drought. Such events can increase health impacts associated with chemical and biological 
contamination of water supplies such as water-borne illnesses. Illness caused by contamination may be 
acute, infectious, and restricted to the gastrointestinal tract, or chronic and associated with multiple systemic 
effects. Changes in water quality and quantity affect different exposure pathways that can interact with 
multiple social and behavioural factors, leading to negative health outcomes (Trtanj et al., 2016). For example, 
climate change effects on water can cause the loss of cultural and societal stabilizing factors that affect 
various determinants of health (e.g., loss of employment in industries that rely on a predictable water supply), 
which also have longer-term effects on mental health (see Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being). 
This chapter outlines the current and possible future health impacts of climate change in Canada related to 
effects on freshwater, marine, and coastal systems, with a specific focus on the importance of drinking water, 
wastewater, and stormwater infrastructure in reducing risks. It includes discussion of how climate change 
affects the sources of contaminants and exposure pathways, including projections of increased health risks, 
where data are available. Current evidence of climate impacts on fish and shellfish illnesses that affect 
Canadians is reviewed, and broader climate change implications for water security are explored. The chapter 
identifies adaptation options that public health authorities can take to protect health, in collaboration with 
decision makers outside of the health sector. It also identfies important knowledge gaps that would benefit 
from future research to support actions that help prepare for climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 477 
7.2 Methods and Approach
This chapter used a narrative scoping approach to identify information related to the current and projected 
water-related health impacts of climate change and possible adaptations in Canada. Systematic searches 
of the Agricola, Medline, and Embase databases were conducted for publications up to January 2019. 
Systematic searches targeted seven subject areas to support the broader narrative review, including:
•	
climate change and drinking water; 
•	
climate change, water, and adaptation; 
•	
climate change, water, and algal blooms;
•	
climate change and water in Canada; 
•	
climate change, water, and extreme weather; 
•	
climate change, water, and the food system; and
•	
climate change, water, and traditional indigenous uses. 
A number of search terms were employed for each subject. Some common search terms included variations 
of climate change; drinking water; water supply; human(s); health; public health; environmental exposure; 
diseases; mental health; mortality; morbidity; flood; safety; adaptation; infection; bacteria; pathogen; 
infectious; parasitic; water-borne; and others. 
Additional peer-reviewed and grey literature was identified from the authors’ knowledge, reviewers’ 
comments, and targeted searches. Author knowledge and targeted searches were used to incorporate 
relevant literature published after the completion of systematic searches. Estimates of future trends in 
streamflow, surface water levels, soil moisture, and groundwater draw on Canada’s Changing Climate Report 
(Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Some degree of caution is warranted when interpreting studies on climate change and water-borne 
disease. For example, publication bias may affect the evidence base (Levy et al., 2016). Additionally, due to 
constraints associated with using secondary data sources, studies are often limited in what covariates can 
be included, which may introduce uncertainty in the estimates. Moreover, pathogens can be transmitted by 
multiple agents and via multiple pathways (Semenza et al., 2012), and some health outcomes, such as acute 
gastrointestinal illness (AGI), are known to be under-reported (Thomas et al., 2013). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 478 
7.3 Climate Change, Water, and Health
Water quality and quantity are intricately linked and vary depending on geophysical, biological, and social 
contexts. Water quantity refers to the abundance of water available in an ecosystem or community. Water 
quality refers to the suitability of available water for a given task (e.g., drinking). Water security is a measure 
of access to water of a sufficient quantity and quality to protect and promote health and well-being. 
Hydrogeological factors, including soil, slope, and aquifer composition, as well as climatological factors, such 
as temperature and precipitation, all influence water quality and quantity via complex and interconnected 
pathways. Source water quality and quantity are the predominant factors that affect drinking water and drive 
water treatment requirements (Boholm & Prutzer, 2017). The most significant determinant of water quality is 
human activity (Trtanj et al., 2016). In most cases of water supply contamination, human activity is the source 
of contamination, either directly, via human waste entering the water supply, or indirectly, through land-use 
change, industry, or agriculture (Trtanj et al., 2016). 
Climate change-related stressors, such as extreme rain events or rapid spring snowmelts, are increasing the 
risks of water-borne disease. Generally, floods and high river flows dilute dissolved substances and transport 
pathogens, while droughts and low river flows concentrate them (Delpla et al., 2009) with health implications 
for populations using the water source. Healthy natural ecosystems are often able to filter biological and 
chemical contaminants (e.g., through wetlands), highlighting the value of source water protection to drinking 
water systems (DWSs) and health protection. 
Climate change can affect water resources through multiple pathways, but water resources are principally 
impacted by climate-driven changes to precipitation and temperature. In addition to an appropriate volume of 
water, which may be affected by flood or droughts, many human health impacts are mediated by biological 
or chemical agents in water that humans use, or come in contact with, through drinking water, bathing, 
recreation, or ceremonial use. The primary implications for human health are illustrated in Figure 7.1. From a 
Canadian perspective, the negative health effects associated with climate change impacts on water include 
physical impacts (e.g., physical trauma) from floods, mental health impacts (e.g., due to exposure to extreme 
weather events such as floods or droughts), and water-borne infectious diseases and other illnesses caused 
by gradual warming and by chemical and biological contamination. Indirect impacts (e.g., to personal hygiene 
or food security) are largely driven by limited access to water of a sufficient quantity or quality. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 479 
Figure 7.1 Examples of the direct and indirect ways climate change can alter water quality and quantity and 
affect health.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 480 
7.3.1 Indigenous Peoples — Water is Life
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples are diverse, with equally diverse beliefs, views, and experiences; however, 
water is an area where views are widely shared (McGregor, 2012). Within many Indigenous teachings, water has 
a variety of meanings, but underpinning all these is that “water is life” (AFN, 2013; Bharadwaj & Bradford, 2018). 
Water is part of creation stories that many Indigenous Peoples1 identify with, and because water is considered “life” 
itself, Indigenous Peoples often feel that they have a sacred connection to water and a responsibility to protect it, 
now and for future generations (McGregor, 2012; Sanderson et al., 2015). The Assembly of First Nations speaks of 
this responsibility as a never-ending circle from the “tiny droplets of water falling from the skies to the continuation 
of its journey to the lakes and rivers and the ground where it is stored” (AFN, 2013, p. 1). Inuit Elders speak of the 
healing quality of water gathered from the land when compared with municipally treated water, “I feel more alive 
when I’m drinking river water. More alive. Active.” (Watson, 2017, p. 123). 
To many Indigenous Peoples, water is sacred and has power, playing roles in their lives beyond hydration — for its 
aesthetics; as medicine; as a symbol of fertility, purity, strength, and softness; as a home for living beings (some of 
which are sources of traditional food); as a life-enriching cleansing agent; and an element of interconnectedness 
(McGregor, 2012; Sanderson et al., 2015; Bharadwaj & Bradford, 2018). Water is not viewed as a discrete aspect 
of the environment but as part of a holistic system. When considering the role of water, many Indigenous Peoples 
account for its value beyond that for humans, for example, the plants that water nourishes, the fish that live in 
water, the traditional medicines that grow in or around water, and the animals that drink water. Water is critical to 
life and to the physical, emotional, mental, and spiritual well-being of many Indigenous Peoples (McGregor, 2012). 
Climate-related changes in freshwater availability in the North has had impacts on subsistence food supplies and 
connection to the land (Goldhar et al., 2013a). 
To many Indigenous Peoples, water has a spirit and is to be respected as a living being. Water is considered by 
many as a relative, or a participant in a caring and compassionate relationship. Many Indigenous Peoples view 
various water bodies as having different personalities, and water is understood to have feelings and can be sad 
and/or angry if it is not respected or treated properly. As with all relationships, there are responsibilities on both 
sides, and water must be respected and allowed to perform its life-giving duties. Across Canada, there are local 
protocols and ceremonies for giving thanks and for maintaining and establishing a spiritual connection to water 
(McGregor, 2012). 
Indigenous Peoples, along with all plants and animals, have the right to clean and healthy water and have the 
responsibility to make informed decisions that affect the waters, planning at least seven generations ahead 
(McGregor, 2012; Sanderson et al., 2015; CWB, 2018). Indigenous Peoples have sovereign, inherent, and treaty 
rights over the land and waters in their traditional territories and continue to assert and exercise their rights and 
responsibilities through ceremony and management practices, as traditional stewards of watersheds (AFN, 
2013). The United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, adopted by Canada, affirms the work 
needed to achieve reconciliation, including in areas regarding water. Articles 25 and 32 of the declaration support 
1	
The term Indigenous is used in this chapter to refer collectively to the original inhabitants of Canada and their 
descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as defined under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 
1982. Wherever possible, clear distinctions are made between these three distinct, constitutionally recognized 
groups. Indigenous Peoples outside of Canada are also referenced in some instances – particularly with respect to 
international climate policy, processes, and rights – and are identified as such.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 481 
the right of Indigenous Peoples to their special relationship with water and to act on their responsibilities to 
future generations. The declaration calls for states to obtain free and informed consent before approving any 
project affecting lands or territories and other resources, particularly in connection with the development, use, or 
exploitation of mineral, water, or other resources (McGregor, 2012). This special relationship with water is important 
context for considering the impacts of climate change on Indigenous Peoples for the rest of this chapter.
7.3.2 Water Quality
7.3.2.1 Drinking Water Systems and Health
Drinking water systems are designed to provide safe drinking water, and, by extension, to protect and promote 
human health. Most of Canada’s population is serviced by large municipal DWSs, while approximately 
15% of the population is serviced by smaller non-municipal systems (Pons et al., 2015). Some Canadians, 
particularly those living in rural areas, access their drinking water through private water systems (i.e., privately 
owned systems that provide drinking water to individuals and households that own the systems) such as 
wells, springs, or surface water (Statistics Canada, 2011). In the Canadian context, there is no universally 
agreed-upon definition of a small DWS, and there are important differences with regard to the definition 
and regulation of small systems across provinces and territories (Charrois, 2010; Pons et al., 2015). For this 
report, large DWSs are defined as those serving populations of 5000 or more, and small systems are those 
serving populations of less than 5000 (Health Canada, 2005). Some DWS are supplied by surface water, 
some by groundwater, and others use a mix of surface and groundwater sources. Approximately 10% of 
the population relies on a groundwater source, and the majority of Canadians with private water supply use 
groundwater sources (Statistics Canada, 2011; Murphy et al., 2016a). 
The most studied health outcomes related to drinking water are AGI and other water-borne diseases. Small 
and private DWSs across Canada are more vulnerable to contamination and AGI outbreaks than larger 
municipally managed systems (Hrudey & Hrudey, 2004; Schuster et al., 2005; Uhlmann et al., 2009; Wilson 
et al., 2009; Charrois, 2010). Investigations of past water-borne disease outbreaks in Canadian DWSs have 
shown that a high proportion of outbreaks occurred in small DWSs (Moffatt & Struck, 2011), and are most 
often the result of multiple risk factors such as system failures, lack of treatment, limited monitoring, 
resource constraints, operator knowledge, or poor-quality source waters (Schuster et al., 2005; Wilson et 
al., 2009). Private DWSs are commonly untreated and vulnerable to contamination (Schuster et al., 2005), 
particularly surface water and groundwater under the direct influence of surface water sources (Murphy 
et al., 2016b). Nevertheless, water-borne disease has been associated with DWSs of all sizes and sources, 
including the largest recorded outbreak in the United States in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in 1993 with 403,000 
AGI cases (Corso et al., 2003). Although large municipal systems have multiple barriers in place to prevent 
contamination and reduce the risk of both sporadic and outbreak-related illness, a range of pressures, 
such as population growth, aging infrastructure, resource constraints, and climate change, are placing 
unprecedented pressures on these systems (Sharma et al., 2010). Due to these pressures, there is a growing 
risk that it may become more difficult for large municipal DWSs to reliably provide clean and dependable 
drinking water supplies to Canadians (Shuster-Wallace et al., 2019; Shuster-Wallace et al., 2020). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 482 
Although much of Canada benefits from reliable access to quality drinking water, many Indigenous 
communities face long-standing challenges to accessing safe drinking water, including long-term drinking 
water advisories and limited access to quality water or safe DWSs. In Canada’s North, Inuit and other 
northerners often rely on trucked water systems, where water is delivered to individual homes or distribution 
centres and stored in tanks until it is used (Daley et al., 2018). This system can adversely affect health due 
to inadequate supply (e.g., tanks do not hold enough water to meet household needs) and quality (e.g., 
water may be contaminated during storage) (Daley et al., 2014). Water management issues in Indigenous 
communities are discussed further in section 7.3.4.2 Impacts on Infrastructure.
Contamination of water destined for human consumption (e.g., drinking, cooking, and washing) or recreation 
(e.g., swimming in open waters) is typically categorized as biological, chemical, or radioactive. Biological 
contamination is microbial, from either bacteria, protozoa, viruses, or algae, and is usually managed by 
municipal systems that combine filtration and disinfection (Ashbolt, 2015). Chemical contamination threats 
are varied and include arsenic, lead, microplastics, and pharmaceuticals (i.e., synthetic hormones) (Kleywegt 
et al., 2011; Uslu et al., 2013). Many of these contaminants require sophisticated treatment (Kim et al., 
2018), which is a challenge for many of Canada’s DWSs. Radioactive contamination (e.g., isotopes of radium, 
uranium, and radon) must be removed by filtration. 
Many Canadian DWSs continue to face challenges with their drinking water. For example, between 2011 
and 2017, on average, 10% of Canadian households on a municipal DWS reported being subject to a boil 
water advisory at some point over the past year (Statistics Canada, 2021). A significant proportion (close 
to 50%) of boil water advisories are issued as a result of drinking water distribution system problems such 
as line breaks, pressure losses, or planned maintenance work. Most of these boil water advisories were 
precautionary, and were rescinded when repairs or maintenance was completed (Health Canada, 2015). 
Climate change can increase challenges to DWSs, through gradual warming, extreme weather events (e.g., floods, 
droughts, wildfires), and saltwater intrusion, all of which can increase contamination of waters and the need for 
treatment. The application of a risk-based approach to monitoring for potential contamination will be necessary as 
climate change exacerbates current risks to water quality and creates unfamiliar risks in the future. 
7.3.2.1.1 Mechanisms Through Which Climate Change Impacts Water Quality
There is a well-documented seasonality to many infectious diseases, including sporadic cases (Lake et al., 
2005; Britton et al., 2010; Lal et al., 2013) and outbreaks of water-borne AGI. Outbreaks are considered to 
occur if two or more epidemiologically linked people have a similar illness after exposure to the same water 
source (Curriero et al., 2001; Auld et al., 2004). The level of exposure required to experience health impacts 
differs according to the pathogen and, in many cases, the individual (e.g., less exposure may be required 
in children than in adults). An overview of climate-sensitive biological agents of water-related illnesses is 
provided in Table 7.1.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 483 
Table 7.1 Climate-sensitive biological agents of water-related illness 
PATHOGEN OR TOXIN 
PRODUCER
EXPOSURE PATHWAY 
SELECTED HEALTH 
OUTCOMES AND 
SYMPTOMS
MAJOR CLIMATE 
CORRELATION OR 
DRIVER (STRONGEST 
DRIVER(S) 
LISTED FIRST)
Algae: Toxigenic 
marine species of 
Alexandrium, Pseudo-
nitzschia, Dinophysis, 
Gambierdiscus; and 
Karenia brevis
Shellfish and fish 
consumption
Recreational waters 
(including aerosolized 
toxins) 
Drinking water
Gastrointestinal and 
neurological illness 
caused by shellfish 
poisoning (paralytic, 
amnesic, diarrhetic, 
neurotoxic) or fish 
poisoning (ciguatera) 
Asthma exacerbations, 
eye irritations caused by 
contact with aerosolized 
toxins (K. brevis) 
Increased water 
temperature, ocean 
surface currents, ocean 
acidification, hurricanes 
(Gambierdiscus spp. and 
K. brevis)
Cyanobacteria (multiple 
freshwater species 
producing toxins, 
including microcystin)
Drinking water 
Recreational waters 
Liver and kidney 
damage, gastroenteritis 
(diarrhea and vomiting), 
neurological disorders, 
and respiratory arrest
Increased water 
temperature, 
precipitation patterns 
Enteric bacteria and 
protozoan parasites, 
including Salmonella 
enterica, Campylobacter 
spp., toxigenic 
Escherichia coli, 
Cryptosporidium, Giardia
Drinking water 
Recreational waters 
Shellfish consumption
Enteric pathogens 
generally cause 
gastroenteritis; some 
cases may be severe 
and may be associated 
with long-term and 
recurring effects
Changes in air and water 
temperature, heavy 
precipitation (especially 
when preceded by a dry 
period), and flooding
Enteric viruses, 
including enteroviruses, 
rotaviruses, noroviruses, 
hepatitis A and E
Drinking water 
Recreational waters 
Shellfish consumption
Most cases result in 
gastrointestinal illness; 
severe outcomes may 
include paralysis and 
infection of the heart or 
other organs
Heavy precipitation, 
flooding, and changes 
in air and water 
temperature
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 484 
PATHOGEN OR TOXIN 
PRODUCER
EXPOSURE PATHWAY 
SELECTED HEALTH 
OUTCOMES AND 
SYMPTOMS
MAJOR CLIMATE 
CORRELATION OR 
DRIVER (STRONGEST 
DRIVER(S) 
LISTED FIRST)
Leptospira and 
Leptonema bacteria
Recreational waters
Indoor cooling systems 
that use water
Mild to severe influenza-
like illness (with or 
without fever) to severe 
cases of meningitis, 
kidney, and liver failure
Flooding, increased 
water temperature, 
heavy precipitation
Vibrio bacteria species
Recreational waters 
Shellfish consumption
Varies by species but 
includes gastroenteritis 
(V. parahaemolyticus, V. 
cholerae), septicemia 
(bloodstream 
infection) through 
ingestion or wounds 
(V. vulnificus), skin, eye, 
and ear infections (V. 
alginolyticus) 
Increased water 
temperature, sea-
level rise, precipitation 
patterns (as they affect 
coastal salinity)
Legionella bacteria 
species, non-tuberculous 
mycobacteria 
(suggestive evidence)
Indoor cooling systems 
that use water
Pneumonia
Air temperature, 
extreme weather events, 
proliferation of air 
conditioning use
Source: Trtanj et al., 2016

Distinct seasonality of water-borne diseases across different hydroclimatic systems has been observed, both 
in Canada and elsewhere (Bertuzzo et al., 2012; Galway et al., 2014). A number of epidemiological studies 
have observed a positive association of AGI with ambient air temperature, as well as with flooding and 
heavy rainfall events, explaining part of these seasonal patterns (Levy et al., 2016). For example, AGI rates 
in selected watersheds in British Columbia (bacterial and protozoan combined) peak in the early summer 
among snow-dominated watersheds and in the fall for rain-dominated ones, which roughly corresponds 
to when each of the two different hydroclimatic regimes experience most surface runoff and groundwater 
recharge (Galway et al., 2014). Extreme rain events increase this discharge, often measured as turbidity in 
source water, particularly after a dry period (Chhetri et al., 2017). By understanding hydroclimatic factors, 
including seasonal changes related to climate change and underlying seasonal AGI trends, DWS designers 
and operators can take measures to improve filtration and treatment efficiency and reduce contamination 
and risks of AGI during expected seasonal peaks in disease (Galway et al., 2014).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 485 
Box 7.1 Water, watersheds, and health
The watershed represents more than just a drainage basin; it describes a complex socio-ecological system, 
evolved over millennia, that is connected by water, which all life depends on (Parkes et al., 2010). Watersheds 
encompass the land contained within the drainage basin and are linked systems, with small streams forming 
their own watersheds nested within ever-larger catchment areas, up to the global scale (e.g., the Ottawa River 
is itself a large watershed, which is part of the even larger St. Lawrence River watershed). Watersheds can be 
described physically as a basin, in which gravity acts upon the water, that enables downstream exposures to 
upstream pathogen sources.
Increasingly, water management and other natural resources and ecosystem management initiatives are 
being undertaken at the watershed scale, such as by Ontario’s conservation authorities (Conservation Ontario, 
n.d.). Nationally, watershed-based approaches to ecosystem management have emerged as galvanizing 
forces for participatory or community-driven action (Bakker & Cook, 2011; Guehlstorf & Hallstrom, 2012; 
Morris & Brandes, 2013; Gérin-Lajoie et al., 2018). British Columbia alone has more than 230 community-
based groups working to protect water quality, many of which are volunteer-driven. 
This growing interest in water resources management and environmental protection at the watershed scale 
creates opportunity for citizen-led efforts to monitor, report on, and respond to health-relevant climate change 
impacts on water resources. For example, many Indigenous communities have been developing watershed 
strategies as a means of governance over their resources. Engagement of youth has been pursued by many 
to create the next generation of “watershed warriors” (AFN, 2013). Numerous First Nations communities in 
the Prairies have completed source water protection plans (Patrick, 2018) that will benefit human health. 
Indigenous Peoples are faced with long-standing issues and challenges in reacting or responding to the many 
competing pressures to protect their watersheds (AFN, 2013; Goldhar et al., 2013a). Organizations focused 
on governance and management at the watershed scale are critical components of protecting watersheds as 
social-ecological systems (Canadian Council of Ministers for the Environment, 2016; Picketts et al., 2017). 
The patterns, frequency, and intensity of precipitation may influence water-borne AGI through several 
mechanisms. Precipitation patterns can influence overland flow, runoff, and erosion, and lead to re-
suspension of particles and pathogens, increasing the potential for surface and groundwater contamination 
by pathogens and affecting the effectiveness of DWSs (Semenza et al., 2012). Some research indicates that 
heavy rain following a period of drought can lead to overland flow events with particularly high pathogen 
loads and increased risk of surface water contamination (Levy et al., 2016). Additionally, extreme rainfall 
events may increase microbial concentrations in drinking water supplies due, in part, to increased particulate 
matter following surface runoff and re-suspension of river bottom sediment by increasing turbidity (Mann 
et al., 2007; De Roos et al., 2017). Turbidity refers to the cloudiness of water or undissolved solids and is a 
proxy indicator of water quality. High turbidity has been shown to reduce the effectiveness of water treatment 
in DWSs and may also provide a medium for microbial growth in source waters (Mann et al., 2007). The 
influence of snow-related precipitation (e.g., rain-on-snow events, snowmelt, or spring thaws) could also 
affect the risk of AGI but remains largely unstudied (Jagai et al., 2012). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 486 
Nearly 70% of all water-borne disease outbreaks in the United States from 1948 to 1994 occurred after 
a heavy rain event (Curriero et al., 2001). Heavy rain has also been identified as a contributing factor in 
Canada’s Walkerton, Ontario, tragedy (Auld et al., 2004) and the largest outbreak of AGI in the United States 
in Milwaukee in 1993. In Milwaukee, a heavy precipitation event quickly saturated the soil, causing surface 
runoff and associated turbidity, resulting in a compromised water treatment process (Curriero et al., 2001). 
Unlike the Milwaukee event that was associated with a single large rain event, the Walkerton event followed 
multiple days of heavy rain that saturated the soil, leading to the contamination of a drinking water production 
well. The water supply was contaminated with multiple pathogens (Auld et al., 2004) reaching consumers 
after additional failures in the water treatment process (Hrudey et al., 2003). These examples highlight some 
of the similarities and differences among DWSs concerning how extreme precipitation can affect water 
quality under various hydrological conditions and possible implications of future climate change. 
In Canada, sporadic AGI cases are likely responsible for a greater burden of illness than AGI outbreaks, but 
are more challenging to study. Two relatively large 10-year studies in British Columbia recorded an average 
19 cases/100,000 and 26.9 cases/100,000, respectively. There were no outbreaks during the two study 
periods (Uhlmann et al., 2009; Chhetri et al., 2017). Identifying transmission pathways and under-reporting, 
including the possibility of unreported outbreaks, presents challenges (Hunter & Thompson, 2005). However, 
emerging evidence suggests that heavy precipitation events can be associated with increases in sporadic 
AGI in municipal DWSs (Chhetri et al., 2017). While the risk to specific indviduals is small, due to the large 
populations exposed, the number of cases or population attributable risk is significant. Considering that 
most AGI cases go unreported, AGI estimates are likely to be quite conservative. In a representative survey in 
British Columbia, it was estimated that only once in 48.5 cases of cryptosporidiosis and once in 40.7 cases of 
giardiasis are reported (MacDougall et al., 2008). 
Before a membrane-filtration drinking water treatment plant was installed for much of Metro Vancouver in 
2010, a significant increase in water-borne disease two to four weeks after heavy rain events (defined as 
above the 90th percentile) was observed (Chhetri et al., 2017). Using identical methods, another study by the 
International Joint Commission found similar associations in three municipal DWSs sourcing water from the 
Great Lakes region (Mezzacapo et al., 2018). In both studies, a dry period, defined as at least 30 days of the 
previous 60 without precipitation, was a significant mediating factor increasing risk. A preceding dry period of 
some length has also been observed in other studies (Levy et al., 2016). It is hypothesized that a dry period, 
or drought, allows for accumulation of pathogens in the environment and source waters, increasing the 
risk of drinking water contamination (Levy et al., 2016). While these studies cannot be extrapolated to other 
watersheds across Canada, they do highlight the vulnerability to sporadic illness due to heavy rain events in 
some municipal systems, independent of outbreaks due to DWS failures. For many regions in Canada, climate 
change is expected to increase extreme rain events (Chhetri et al., 2017; Bush & Lemmen, 2019). More 
studies are needed to examine the effects of extreme rain following dry periods on the various types of water 
treatment available and how each performs in the many types of watershed-level hydroclimatic systems 
across Canada. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 487 
7.3.2.2 Saltwater Intrusion
In coastal regions of Canada, the intrusion of saltwater from the ocean into coastal aquifers is a growing 
concern, as the saltwater can contaminate the groundwater, making it unusable for drinking or irrigation. 
Population increases, accompanied by increased groundwater demands, as well as rising sea levels and 
storm surges, are all driving factors of this phenomenon (Klassen & Allen, 2017). The complex interactions 
between fresh and saline coastal aquifers make it difficult to study these changes. As saltwater intrusions 
may last years and even decades, their impacts on water and food security, and implications for human 
health, can be long-lasting and severe (Luh et al., 2017). Contamination of groundwater by ocean water leads 
to increased demand on surface water sources and uncontaminated groundwater sources. Small islands 
with growing populations, such as British Columbia’s Gulf Islands, are particularly vulnerable. The increased 
density of coastal wells on some Gulf Islands has resulted in a depressed water table, resulting in saltwater 
intrusion and possible contamination of wells located nearest to the coast (Klassen & Allen, 2017). Saltwater 
intrusion events have also occurred in the Canadian Arctic and Atlantic Canada (Somers & Nishimura, 2012; 
Thienpont et al., 2012).
7.3.2.3 Pathogens in Sewage Found in Ocean Water
Pathogens found in sewage can end up in ocean water and bioaccumulate in shellfish, particularly filter-
feeding bivalves such as oysters, mussels, and clams (Le Guyader et al., 2000), which, when consumed raw or 
undercooked, can cause sporadic illness and disease outbreaks (Bellou et al., 2013). The pathogens of main 
concern include norovirus and hepatitis A, both viruses. Norovirus is a very common cause of gastroenteritis, 
causing symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and low-grade fever, lasting one to three days. It 
occurs primarily in the winter months and causes numerous community and facility disease outbreaks. It is 
usually self-limiting; a small proportion of patients require hospitalization for dehydration (Heymann, 2015). 
Hepatitis A causes liver infection and manifests as fever, nausea, abdominal pain, and jaundice. Most people 
recover without treatment, but adults can experience a more serious course with chronic liver disease, and 
1% to 2% of cases are fatal (Heymann, 2015). These pathogens can contaminate food through contact with 
an infected food handler or from direct contact with human sewage. 
Vibrio spp. are the most common form of bacteria to affect human health in Canada following the 
consumption of fish and shellfish (see section 7.3.4 Water Security and Society). However, bacteria other 
than Vibrio spp. are occasionally found in fish and shellfish and have caused outbreaks (Burkhardt & Calci, 
2000; Feldhusen, 2000: DePaola et al., 2010). Salmonella is the most common cause of such bacterial 
contamination in Canada, although, on occasion, Escherichia coli, Campylobacter, and Shigella have 
contaminated fish or shellfish. These bacteria are introduced into the marine environment from animal or 
human feces or during processing. Agricultural runoff is another possible source of marine contamination 
and disease outbreaks, although it is uncommon. Although V. cholerae are naturally occurring marine bacteria, 
illness risk is amplified in areas where sewage is not controlled. 
Direct contact with human sewage is commonly how shellfish become contaminated (Campos & Lees, 2014). 
Climatically driven increases in extreme precipitation events may result in an increased number of sewage 
water releases, particularly in combined stormwater and sewage water systems. Overflows occur when 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 488 
raw sewage enters the environment via accidental or planned discharges from municipal sewer systems, 
storm drains, or septic systems, or seepage from damaged sewage pipes (Cook et al., 2009; Miller et al., 
2018). Numerous shellfish-related disease outbreaks have been reported in association with overflow events 
(Maalouf et al., 2010). Some studies have linked heavy rainfall to overflows, oyster contamination, and 
norovirus outbreaks in Canada (Doyle et al., 2004; CBC, 2012). Extreme rainfall also reduces marine water 
salinity, which enhances norovirus survival (Wang & Deng, 2016).
7.3.2.4 Phytoplankton and Algal Blooms
Phytoplankton are microscopic organisms found in both fresh and marine waters and are sensitive to 
climate. Two common forms include algae and cyanobacteria (Zimmerman, 2015). Phytoplankton growth is 
determined by temperature, light, freshwater discharge, salinity, upwelling, and the availability of nutrients 
(Moore et al., 2008; Finnis et al., 2017; Vandersea et al., 2018). Climate change is providing favourable 
conditions for algae and cyanobacteria in ocean and freshwaters globally. Reports of blooms are becoming 
increasingly common in lakes across Canada (Pick, 2016). Some species of freshwater cyanobacteria 
produce toxins (cyanotoxins) that are harmful to human health when ingested, leading to liver, skin, and 
nervous system toxicity (Hilborn & Beasley, 2015). Cyanobacteria should not be confused with the toxic 
marine algae that contaminate shellfish and cause gastrointestinal neurological disease; however, together 
they are commonly known as “harmful algal blooms” (Carmichael & Boyer, 2016). 
Marine biotoxins are produced by phytoplankton found in ocean waters. They accumulate in shellfish or fish 
and can cause human illness when ingested raw or cooked. Three toxin groups of concern have been found 
off both the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of Canada and can accumulate in bivalve and invertebrate shellfish. 
Other marine biotoxins, such as ciguatoxin, occur in tropical waters and can be found in fish imported to 
Canada (Visciano et al., 2016).
Diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP), characterized by nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, can last one to three 
days and is caused by okadaic acid group and dinophysis toxins produced by several species of Dinophysis 
and Prorocentrum (Taylor et al., 2013a). Saxitoxin describes a group of more than 30 toxins and derivatives 
produced mainly by Alexandrium ssp., causing paralytic shellfish poisoning. This illness is characterized by 
diarrhea, numbness, tingling, paralysis of the mouth and extremities, headache, and difficulty walking and 
swallowing, and it can also be fatal (Alexander et al., 2009; Etheridge, 2010). Domoic acid (DA), produced 
by diatoms called Pseudo-nitzschia, causes amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP), characterized by diarrhea, 
headache, dizziness, confusion, permanent or short-term memory loss, and seizures. It can also be fatal (Perl 
et al., 1990; Grattan et al., 2018). 
The first reported ASP outbreak was associated with mussels from North American Atlantic waters in 1987 
(Perl et al., 1990). In 2011, an outbreak of DSP was associated with the consumption of mussels from British 
Columbia (Taylor et al., 2013a). Paralytic shellfish poisoning cases are routinely reported in British Columbia 
and the Atlantic provinces (Prakash et al., 1971; Finnis et al., 2017). On the Pacific Coast of the United States, 
DA has been found in traditional marine foods, such as razor clams (Grattan et al., 2018). The US Food and 
Drug Administration has established a regulatory safety level of 20 parts per million of DA for human shellfish 
consumption. However, a study with coastal Indigenous Peoples who consumed clams from Washington 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 489 
State showed deficits in memory and recall capacity with repeated DA exposures below this level (Grattan 
et al., 2018). Health Canada has also established regulatory safety levels for various contaminants, some of 
which are currently under review. Currently, Health Canada (2020) has established a limit of:
•	
20 mg/kg of DA for human shellfish consumption;
•	
0.2 mg/kg of DSP toxins in edible shellfish tissue for human consumption; and
•	
0.8 mg/kg of paralytic shellfish poisoning toxins in edible shellfish tissue for human consumption.
Temperature and nutrient loading are major determinants of harmful algal blooms and are influenced by 
temperature and extreme precipitation in both freshwater (IJC, 2017) and oceans, although few studies have 
directly assessed the link between climate change and marine biotoxins. Gobler et al. (2017) showed that, 
from 1982 to 2016, increasing ocean temperatures led to an increase in Alexandrium and Dinophysis bloom 
season duration and growth rates. Other researchers projected an increase in algal blooms in response to 
climate change–driven changes to marine ecosystems, particularly warming ocean temperatures in Canada 
(Glibert et al., 2014; Moore et al., 2015; DFO, 2020). 
An increasing number of marine harmful algal blooms and biotoxin outbreaks are being reported worldwide. 
This is likely due to a combination of climate change, increased nutrient load in coastal waters, heightened 
awareness, and improved diagnostic capacity (Botana, 2016; Gobler et al., 2017). Harmful algal blooms and 
disease outbreaks are being reported from new or expanding geographical areas. DSP outbreaks are being 
reported in new areas of North America and Europe, and cases have been reported in British Columbia, Nova 
Scotia, and Newfoundland (Todd, 1997; Deeds et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2013a; Gobler et al., 2017). Paralytic 
shellfish poisoning has appeared in new areas, such as Iceland (Gobler et al., 2017), and saxitoxin-producing 
planktons are expanding in other Arctic regions, such as Alaska (Anderson et al., 2019). Ciguatoxins are spreading 
northward and southward and have now been found in the Canary Islands, Crete, Madeira, and Southern Australia 
(Botana, 2016).
Harmful algal blooms and disease outbreaks usually occur during summer months, when the temperature 
is higher and more light is available (Moore et al., 2008). Climate change is increasing both ocean and 
freshwater temperatures, and this could increase the range, growing season, and growth rate of certain 
phytoplankton (Moore et al., 2008; Gobler et al., 2017). While some harmful algal blooms occur without 
anthropogenic inputs, others are caused by large external inputs of nitrogen and phosphorus (e.g., from 
chemical or manure-based agricultural fertilizers). These nutrients end up in the waterways adjacent to 
agricultural land, resulting in explosive growth, particularly following a dry spring coupled with an extended 
warm period (Pick, 2016). This has been observed, for example, in British Columbia freshwater, with the first 
heavy rains of the fall (Galanis et al., 2014). Cyanobacterial blooms most often occur in warm, nutrient-rich 
waters with low amounts of mixing among its layers (Hilborn & Beasley, 2015). In addition to more favourable 
conditions with warming waters, the increased surface runoff associated with extreme precipitation 
events can transport biological pathogens, as outlined above, and also transfer nutrients into source 
water, promoting algal growth (Delpla et al., 2009). Lake Erie, the shallowest of the Great Lakes, frequently 
experiences cyanobacteria blooms, while blooms in the other Great Lakes occur much less frequently 
(Carmichael & Boyer, 2016). Harmful algal blooms have increased across Canada over the past few decades 
(DFO, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 490 
The efficacy of water treatment for cyanotoxins ranges from 60% to 99.9% (Zamyadi et al., 2013). Efficacy 
of treatment varies because each species of cyanobacteria responds to treatment options differently. 
Monitoring and correctly identifying the species is an important component of treatment; however, this often 
requires time-consuming analysis by highly qualified personnel. Next-generation gene sequencing is currently 
being explored as an alternative approach to cyanobacteria identification and screening (Zamyadi et al., 
2019), which may reduce barriers to enhanced monitoring. In regions where lake and streamflow rates are 
projected to decrease in the summer months, the nutrients may become more concentrated. The increased 
water temperatures that result from this low flow will further promote growth.
Warming may also lead to growth of toxigenic plankton able to survive in low-nutrient conditions, leading to 
greater risk of ASP in warmer waters (McCabe et al., 2016). Areas of a watershed that have been recently burned 
by wildfire can cause an increased nutrient load into a water source through depositions of ash (Emelko et 
al., 2011; Emelko et al., 2016) and may increase the risk of such blooms, at least in freshwater (Martin, 2016). 
Whether wildfire-derived nutrient loads have an impact in coastal waters is unknown. However, given that nutrient 
availability is a key determinant of phytoplankton growth, this is a realistic scenario (Sundarambal et al., 2010; 
Morrison & Kolden, 2015). The number of wildfires in Canada is increasing, highlighting the importance of this 
nutrient source (Wang et al., 2015). The relationships between wildfires, nutrient loading, algal blooms, and human 
health warrants further study (Wang et al., 2015; Wotton et al., 2017; Hallema et al., 2018).
7.3.3 Water Quantity
While the demand for water in many Canadian communities is increasing due to growing populations, industry, 
and agricultural needs, climate change has reduced the availability of water in some locations, with the greatest 
vulnerability being in Southern Ontario, the Southern Prairies, and the Southern Interior of British Columbia (Andrey 
et al., 2014). Climate change will continue to cause fluctuations in water quantity across Canada; some locations 
may experience both reductions and increases, but at different times (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Indigenous 
communities, often located in low-lying and flood-prone areas, are particularly vulnerable to these fluctuations 
(ISC, 2020b; Thistlethwaite et al., 2020). In Canada, mean annual precipitation has increased, on average, with 
the greatest percentage increases occurring at more northern latitudes (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Normalized 
precipitation (precipitation expressed as a percentage) has, on average, increased by 20% across Canada from 
1948 to 2012 (Vincent et al., 2015). Despite absolute precipitation typically being lower in Canada’s North, from 
1948 to 2012, precipitation in that region increased by 30% (Vincent et al., 2015). However, due to a low density 
of meteorological stations and the associated paucity of data, there is low confidence in this estimate. Smaller 
increases in normalized precipitation have been observed in some regions of Southern Canada. Additionally, some 
seasonal differences have been observed. For instance, precipitation has increased in all four seasons in Northern 
Canada, while in Southern Canada, although it has increased in most seasons, these increases were rarely 
statistically significant (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Due to limited data availability, long-term precipitation trends (greater than 100 years) are available only for 
Southern Canada. Since 1900, a 5% increase in precipitation has been observed in Southern Canada, while the 
ratio of snowfall to total precipitation has decreased; this pattern is most pronounced in spring and autumn 
(Vincent et al., 2015). These shifts toward precipitation falling as rain instead of snow have led to earlier 
spring melts and increased streamflow in many areas (Vincent et al., 2015).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 491 
Table 7.2 Health impacts of drought
PRIMARY IMPACTS 
Impact
Cause
Water- and food-borne 
diseases
Reduced water availability concentrates pathogens, and associated 
warmer temperatures may contribute to pathogen prevalence
Greater erosion and compacting of soil so that rainfall events lead to 
increased runoff and associated point and/or non-point sources of pollution 
Water-related illness 
In coastal communities, groundwater sources may become infiltrated by 
saltwater in drought or water-scarce conditions, causing hypertension 
(Naser et al., 2019) and reducing available water for drinking and washing 
Increase in harmful algal blooms and illness related to harmful algal 
bloom toxins
Inadequate access to water supplies affect hygiene, increasing 
susceptibility to disease
Reduced access to potable water may lead to dehydration and failure 
of liver, kidney, and other organs after a matter of a few days, or 
approximately 10% body loss; in the presence of AGI with severe diarrhea, 
the margin of time to more severe illness or death without water can be 
only hours 
Infectious diseases
Increased abundance of disease-carrying vectors (e.g., mosquitos) due to 
changes in reservoir species behaviour, impacts on mosquito predators, 
and reduced flushing of mosquito larvae in urban and suburban 
environments (see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases)
Increased growth of harmful fungi which may be of increasing 
importance due to emerging anti-fungicidal resistance (see Chapter 6: 
Infectious Diseases) 
Respiratory impairments
Increased dust storms and an increased concentration of fine particulate 
matter in the air
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 492 
SECONDARY IMPACTS 
Impact
Cause
Malnutrition and food 
security
Reduced agricultural outputs and/or negative economic impacts, 
reducing the ability of Canadians, particularly those with low incomes, to 
purchase nutritious foods (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security)
Mental health
Impacts on Indigenous Peoples who depend upon sometimes transient 
water sources that sustain them physically, culturally, and spiritually, 
along with agricultural workers whose families and livelihoods may be 
threatened (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ 
Health in Canada and Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being)
Recreational exposure and 
injury
Increased recreational water use during warm and dry weather heightens 
exposure to increased concentration of pathogens in the available water, 
leading to more illness (e.g., leptospirosis, AGI) 
Low water levels may increase the likelihood of recreational injuries (e.g., 
spinal injuries resulting from diving or jumping into bodies of water)
Respiratory impairments
Increased concentration of particulate matter and allergens in the air; 
smoke from wildfires, in part driven by drought conditions, reduces air 
quality (see Chapter 5: Air Quality)
Source: Adapted from Yusa et al., 2015
7.3.3.1 Drought
Drought is “a prolonged period of abnormally dry weather that depletes water resources for human and 
environmental needs” (Yusa et al., 2015, p. 8360). Water scarcity associated with drought is linked to 
hydrometeorological conditions; other factors, such as human impacts on water resources and increased 
demand, can exacerbate the effects of drought (Yusa et al., 2015; Cook et al., 2017). The most immediate 
impact of drought is on availability of water for both humans and the environment, but quantity concerns 
will progress to quality concerns as drought persists. Lower river flows mean that point sources of pollution 
could have a higher impact on ecological systems, communities, and health. Drought periods followed by 
precipitation increase the risk of water-borne disease (Whitehead et al., 2009; Chhetri et al., 2017) (see 
Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). During drought, pathogens may accumulate in the environment (e.g., in riparian 
zones); when precipitation returns, heavy loads of contamination are flushed from the landscape into water 
sources (Whitehead et al., 2009). A Canadian study examining the risk of cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 493 
found risk increased after extreme rain events — events in which rainfalls exceeded the 90th percentile of 
weekly average precipitation — and that this risk further increased if 30 of the previous 60 days had had 
no precipitation (Chhetri et al., 2017). Additionally, increased temperatures associated with drought may 
increase the speed of many chemical processes, lower the amount of dissolved oxygen available for aquatic 
fauna, and affect growth of micro-organisms (Cook et al., 2017). All of these factors put increased treatment 
demand on municipal water supply systems and could have implications for human health. 
The possible health impacts of drought are presented in Table 7.2. The impacts of drought can be far-
reaching and include, for example, the mental health impacts of coping with drought while depending upon 
non-irrigated agriculture (Edwards et al., 2015).
Concerns about the effects of drought on water security are increasing around the world and across Canada. 
Extreme temperatures associated with climate change are expected to increase drought risk in Canada at the 
end of the century under a high emissions scenario, particularly in the southern Canadian Prairies and British 
Columbia interior (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Some Canadian cities have had to develop drought preparedness 
plans, including Tofino, British Columbia, a small coastal tourist town that sources water from a nearby lake 
(Lloyd, 2017). Tofino’s watershed experiences no snowpack, making it entirely dependent on rain that falls 
during the rainy season to last through the summer months (Lloyd, 2017). In the summer of 2006, Tofino was 
forced to implement severe water restrictions and rely on imported potable water and a backup unpotable 
source to allow local businesses to continue to operate (Lloyd, 2017). While smaller island watersheds are 
notably at a higher drought risk, aquifer-dependent communities can also be at risk. Such is the case with 
Merritt, British Columbia, a hot and arid inland community that is solely dependent on an aquifer that is slowly 
depleting (Lloyd, 2017). These realities are leading some regions to weigh the costs of using alternative water 
sources, such as desalinated sea water, recycled potable water, inter-basin water transfers, and decentralized 
water sources (Lam et al., 2017).
7.3.3.2 Streamflow and Snowmelt
Streamflow has been correlated with pathogenic contamination of source waters and with turbidity and may 
therefore influence drinking water contamination and AGI risk (Lake et al., 2005; Jagai et al., 2012). Both high 
and low flows have been identified as risk factors for degraded water quality (Jalliffier-Verne et al., 2015). As 
average temperatures rise as a result of climate change, spring snowmelts are projected to occur earlier in 
many locations throughout Canada, resulting in increased spring flows that may be followed by decreased 
flows throughout the summer (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Snowmelt can act on AGI transmission pathways in 
similar ways to rain events (Jagai et al., 2012), for example, by driving increased contamination of source water, 
contributing to flood risk, and potentially overwhelming water treatment measures (Chhetri et al., 2017). 
7.3.3.3 Extreme Precipitation
Changes in extreme precipitation (measured by a period of a day or less) due to warming have not yet been 
observed at Canadian weather stations at a national scale but have been observed on much larger scales 
globally, where more data are available (Westra et al., 2013). Extreme precipitation trends are difficult to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 494 
observe on a smaller scale because of natural variability. However, Environment and Climate Change Canada 
projects with high confidence that daily extreme precipitation will increase in Canada, with the return periods 
— the time between events — projected to decrease (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Globally, the median increase 
in extreme precipitation is approximately 7% per 1°C increase in global mean temperature (Westra et al., 2013). 
Extreme precipitation can affect human health by driving flood events, contributing to source water contamination 
through runoff, stressing the capacity of DWSs, and other impacts (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). 
7.3.3.4 Flooding
Flooding is the most frequent and costly natural hazard globally (CRED & UNISDR, 2015; Henstra & 
Thistlethwaite, 2017) and in Canada (Kovacs & Sandink, 2013). Climate change is anticipated to contribute 
to an increase in flood events worldwide (IPCC, 2014). In Canada more precipitation will fall as rain rather 
than snow in the coming decades (Bush & Lemmen, 2019), and regional climate models have projected an 
increase in rain-on-snow events across North America (Il Jeong & Sushama, 2018). It is unclear what the 
combined impacts of warm temperatures and reduced snowpack will have on snowmelt-related flooding 
events (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Streamflow-related flooding events are also complex, making it difficult to 
project changes in flood frequency and intensity (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Although climate change may not increase flooding in all areas of Canada, a general increase in flood risk is 
likely in urban areas, where land-use patterns may exacerbate flooding, and in coastal areas where flooding 
is driven by sea-level rise (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Many Canadian dams and dikes are vulnerable to failure, 
and these risks will rise as extreme rain events and flooding increase with climate change (McClearn, 2020). 
Record-keeping is often sparse and poorly regulated for the country’s 14,000 dams (McClearn, 2020). A report 
issued following the 2017 failure of the Gorie Dam on the North Maitland River in Southwestern Ontario due 
to heavy rains, noted that, in Ontario, many dams and weirs “are approaching or have exceeded their normal 
life expectancy” (Greck and Associates Limited, 2018, p. 5). 
In Canada, floods are often caused by heavy rain and/or the fast melting of snow and ice due to rapidly 
rising temperatures in the spring. During these conditions, overland flow of water can transport biological 
and chemical contaminants from surrounding areas into adjacent surface water bodies or unprotected 
wells. Abandoned wells can provide a conduit for contaminants to enter an aquifer used by other adjacent, 
properly sealed wells. Common contaminants are bacteria, viruses, and parasites, or chemical pollution 
from industrial, agricultural, or residential waste systems. Inundation and increased turbidity can overwhelm 
drinking water and wastewater treatment systems and are a significant health risk during these events 
(Hrudey et al., 2003). Globally, floods in coastal areas and riverine estuaries are increasing due to sea-
level rise and storm surge from extreme weather events (IPCC, 2014; Kinney et al., 2015). Health risks 
from flooding can include mortality directly associated with flooding, such as drowning (Lowe et al., 2013); 
hypothermia (Lowe et al., 2013); injuries, such as broken bones (Doocy et al., 2013); gastrointestinal illness 
(Vollaard et al., 2004); zoonotic diseases such as hookworm (Kovats & Akhtar, 2008); vector-borne illnesses 
(Ahern et al., 2005); respiratory issues from exposure to bio-contaminants following a flood (Hulin et al., 2012) 
(see Chapter 5: Air Quality); mental health impacts (Azuma et al., 2014); and pediatric conditions, such as 
childhood obesity (Dancause et al., 2013). Health risks from flooding are also discussed in Chapter 3: Natural 
Hazards, Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being, and Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases. Table 7.3 provides 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 495 
information on the primary and secondary health impacts of floods. Many impacts can be addressed or 
reduced with adequate warning and preparation, along with adherence to basic safety precautions related to 
the operation of motor vehicles, the use of combustible fuels in closed spaces, the use and management of 
electrical infrastructure and equipment, and the proper management and oversight of drinking water supply 
and treatment systems. 
Table 7.3 Health impacts of floods
PRIMARY IMPACTS 
Impact
Cause
Mortality
Drowning or acute trauma (e.g., from debris or building collapse) usually 
attributable to motor vehicle accidents or high-risk behaviours in flooded 
areas (e.g., swimming, wading through flood waters, etc.) 
Hypothermia
Exposure to floodwater causing a drop in core body temperature 
Cardiovascular stress
Exertion and stress related to the event, leading to high blood pressure, 
heart attacks, and strokes
Physical injuries 
Direct contact with floodwater, causing lacerations, skin irritations, 
bruises, and wound infections
Mental health
Adverse psychological responses to flood events, associated damage, 
and emergency situations, such as depression, anxiety, and post-
traumatic stress disorder; these impacts may be particularly severe for 
those who face evacuations due to flood events – these impacts may be 
both a primary and seconday effect of flooding
Infection
Aspiration of water into the lungs, causing pulmonary swelling, lung 
irritation, and fungal infection
Orthopedic injuries
Contact with water-borne debris, attempts to escape from collapsed 
structures, falls from ladders, and attempts to rescue people or 
possessions can cause sprains, strains, and other orthopedic injuries
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 496 
SECONDARY IMPACTS
Impact
Cause
Electrocution
Contact with downed power cables/lines, circuits, and electrical 
equipment in contact with standing water
Burns and explosion-related 
injuries
Disturbed propane and natural gas lines, tanks, power lines, and chemical 
storage tanks; toxic gas emissions; rescue boats coming into contact 
with power lines, leading to fire, chemical, or explosion-related burns
Vector-borne illness
The creation of pools of stagnant water may result in increased mosquito 
breeding and an associated increase in mosquito-borne illnesses
Impacts to the health system
Disruption or decreased availability of emergency and ongoing health 
services, because of damage to health infrastructure; decreased ability 
to provide/access care; displacement of patients and staff; impaired 
surveillance of illness, injury, or toxic exposure to health care staff; loss of 
medical records; and loss/impairment of medication and medical devices
Mental health 
Adverse psychological responses to flood events, associated damage, 
and emergency situations, such as depression, anxiety, and post-
traumatic stress disorder; these impacts may be particularly severe for 
those who face evacuations due to flood events – these impacts may be 
both a primary and seconday effect of flooding
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Health impacts associated with inappropriate use of unventilated cooking 
tanks (e.g., barbeques), pressure washers, and gas-powered generators
Burns/smoke inhalation
House fires started by candles used during power outages that can be 
associated with flood events
Dehydration and 
environmental exposure
Exposure of vulnerable populations to environmental stresses in days 
following the event, leading to heat exhaustion, heat stroke, heart attack, 
and stroke
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 497 
SECONDARY IMPACTS
Water- and food-borne 
diseases
Contaminated food and water from sewage overflows; flooding of 
agricultural areas; transport of sediment, fertilizers, and pesticides into 
waterways; damage and disruption of drinking water system operations; 
leakage of toxic materials from industrial sites into waterways
Health risks include gastrointestinal issues, infectious diseases such as 
Legionella pneumophila, norovirus, rotavirus, and hepatitis A and C
Respiratory issues
Respiratory contaminants from mould, bacterial, and other fungal growth 
on damp structures
Source: Adapted from Berry et al., 2014a
7.3.3.5 Projected Sea-Level Rise
Sea-level rise contributes to flooding and coastal erosion and is important to consider during infrastructure 
planning and maintenance, as well as for the protection of human and ecosystem health (see Chapter 3: Natural 
Hazards). Warm water expands; therefore, as oceans absorb heat from the atmosphere, sea-level will rise. Global 
sea levels may rise by up to 1 metre by 2100 (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). However, because landmasses are slowly 
moving vertically through uplift and subsidence, the relative sea-level rise experienced on land is variable. In 
Canada, sea-level change by 2100 will range from −0.9 metre to 1 metre (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Larger storm 
surges are projected for Canada’s Arctic and Atlantic coasts, which will cause additional coastal flooding in 
some regions. Storm surges and rising sea levels could place additional pressures on water and wastewater 
infrastructure located along the coast, in addition to contributing to saltwater intrusion of coastal aquifers, which is 
already occurring in some regions of Canada, such as the Gulf Islands in British Columbia (Klassen & Allen, 2017).
7.3.3.6 Projected Precipitation
Mean precipitation in Canada is projected to increase or decrease, depending on season and location (Figure 
7.2). By mid-century, depending on the emissions scenario used, Canada is projected to experience an 
increase of around 5.5% to 7% mean precipitation in all seasons nationally. Under a high emissions scenario 
(Representative Concentration Pathway [RCP]8.5), by the year 2100, this projected increase reaches 24%, with 
some Arctic regions increasing by more than 30%. Under a low emissions scenario (RCP2.6), a 7% increase is 
projected nationally (Zhang et al., 2019).
However, under a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5), precipitation is projected to decrease in some regions 
of Southern Canada during summer months, with much smaller summer decreases projected under a low 
emissions scenario (RCP2.6). Decreases of mean precipitation of around 30% are projected for Southwestern 
British Columbia during summer, under a high emissions scenario (Zhang et al., 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 498 
a)
b)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 499 
Figure 7.2 Projected precipitation changes for summer (A), winter (B), and annually (C) for two emissions 
scenarios (RCP2.6 and RCP8.5) by mid and late 21st century. Source: Zhang et al., 2019.
7.3.3.7 Projected Extreme Precipitation
Overall, Canada is expected to experience an increase in precipitation over the next 80 years, with greater 
intensity in the fall, winter, and spring. The frequency of extreme precipitation events is likely to increase 
across Canada, and their magnitude is projected to increase in proportion to the amount of warming. For 
example, under a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) and averaged across Canada, a rare once in 20-year one-
day precipitation event is projected to occur once in 10 years by 2031 to 2050, and once in five years by 2100 
(i.e., a four-fold increase in frequency) (Zhang et al., 2019). Under a low emissions scenario (RCP2.6), once in 
20-year one-day events are projected to become once in 15-year events by 2031 to 2050, with little additional 
increase in frequency beyond mid-century. Importantly, larger changes in the frequency of even rarer events 
is projected. For example, a once in 50-year one-day event is projected to become a once in 10-year event by 
2031 to 2050 and a once in five-year event by 2100 under a high emissions scenario (i.e., a five-fold increase 
in frequency) (Zhang et al., 2019).
c)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 500 
7.3.3.8 Projected Freshwater Availability and Scarcity
Canada's Changing Climate Report assessed available literature on observed and projected changes in 
Canada’s cryosphere (snow, ice, and permafrost) (Derksen et al., 2019), including resulting impacts on 
freshwater availability (Bonsal et al., 2019). Climate-driven changes to streamflow seasonality have already 
been observed in Canada: for example, earlier spring freshet due to earlier spring snowmelt, higher winter 
streamflows, and, for many regions, reduced summer flows (Bonsal et al., 2019). A lack of observations 
(especially in Northern Canada) limits the confidence in trend detection for many freshwater-related variables, 
but the available measurements indicate that annual streamflow magnitude, surface water, and shallow 
groundwater levels, droughts, and soil moisture have been highly variable over the past 30 to 100 years and 
have not exhibited increasing or decreasing trends connected to climate change (Bonsal et al., 2019). 
Warming temperatures are expected to decrease the proportion of total precipitation falling as snow, with 
a shift to increased rain, especially in spring and autumn (Zhang et al., 2019). This will have direct impacts 
on the flow regime for many streams across the country. For example, Canada’s largest Pacific watershed, 
the Fraser River Basin, is projected to shift from a watershed where peak streamflow is generated by spring 
snowmelt (nival regime) to a watershed where peak flow will instead be dominated by rainfall-generated 
flows (pluvial regime) (Curry et al., 2019). Understanding how such changes will influence fisheries and 
other human uses of the watershed, including those that impact health (e.g., drinking water infrastructure, 
freshwater quantity, and quality), requires further study. 
Ongoing changes to snow cover across Canada driven by a warming climate (Mudryk et al., 2018; Derksen 
et al., 2019) will contribute to changes in streamflow magnitude, seasonality, and corresponding freshwater 
availability. Observed declines in mountain glacier mass have, to date, had a limited impact on freshwater 
availability. However, climate models project that glacier mass could shrink by 85% across western Canada 
by 2100 under a medium emissions scenario (Derksen et al., 2019). In coming decades, glacier-fed rivers will 
experience periods of increased summer discharge due to greater meltwater contributions from enhanced 
glacier melt, but this is a short-term response to melting ice and is unsustainable once ice mass declines 
past a critical level. The rate and timing of this transition will have important consequences for stream and 
river water quality and temperature, and for the availability of water for human uses, such as hydroelectricity 
generation and agriculture (Derksen et al., 2019). Permafrost warming and thaw will result in changes to 
surface hydrology, which are not yet fully understood, including regionally variable wetting or drying of the 
landscape, changes to freshwater quantity and quality, and landscape changes due to subsidence and 
thermokarst events. As a result of increased temperature and evaporation, lower surface water levels of 
wetlands and lakes are projected in many regions toward the end of the century under a high emissions 
scenario. It is uncertain to what degree increases in precipitation will offset lower surface water levels 
(Bonsal et al., 2019). 
Annual streamflow is projected to decrease in some southern interior regions in Canada, while increasing in 
others (mostly northern regions). In some areas where increased evapotranspiration is expected to outweigh 
increases in precipitation, there is an increased risk of drought and decreased soil moisture (such as in the 
Southern Prairies and British Columbia Interior). This risk is greater under higher levels of climate warming 
(Bonsal et al., 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 501 
Due to the close link between surface temperature and groundwater recharge, projected changes to 
temperature and precipitation are expected to influence future groundwater levels. However, given the 
complexity of groundwater systems and a lack of information, the magnitude and even direction of change 
is not clear (Bonsal et al., 2019). For example, a major challenge when researching climate change impacts 
on groundwater is distinguishing effects of climate change from those due to land-use change, such as 
agriculture. Agricultural irrigation from groundwater sources has the potential to deplete aquifers, particularly 
in arid environments (Taylor et al., 2013b). More research is needed on groundwater trends and potential 
impacts due to climate change, particularly in areas that rely on groundwater for drinking water and irrigation. 
Soil moisture refers to the water stored in the unsaturated upper layer of soil, and it is an important 
component of the land energy and water balances that affect agricultural production. Soil moisture is 
involved in complex feedbacks with both temperature and precipitation. It has a direct impact on plants’ 
transpiration, which is the largest component of total land evapotranspiration (Seneviratne et al., 2010). 
Therefore, in certain regions where soil moisture becomes limited, evapotranspiration can decrease and may 
lead to reduced precipitation (Seneviratne et al., 2010). Reduced soil moisture can also increase near-surface 
air temperature by limiting the amount of energy used by latent heat flux, a process that has been identified 
as a contributing factor for extreme heat events (Seneviratne et al., 2010), which have substantial impacts on 
human health (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). 
Indigenous communities are among those disproportionately affected by decreased precipitation and related 
effects on water sources. For example, communities along the Yukon River reported changes to traditional 
drinking water resources, with impacts on their subsistence activities as well. In Pond Inlet, Nunavut, 
community members reported concerns about water quality due to observed changes in water taste and 
colour during the summer (ISC, 2019). 
In the Fraser River Basin in Northern British Columbia, the snow-dominated system is shifting to a rain-
dominated one (Kang et al., 2014; Picketts et al., 2017). In some parts of the basin, such as its tributary 
the Nechako River, there are projected changes to annual discharge, with earlier peak flows and lower low 
flows in late summer. Climate change projections indicate that the spring freshet will arrive earlier, and 
summer flows may decrease (Kang et al., 2014; Picketts et al., 2017). Decreases in snow accumulations 
will alter water quality, and decreases in flow can have major negative effects on migrating salmon, which 
have cultural significance for many First Nations Peoples. These changes will affect First Nations and their 
cultural relationship to water, food security, and the state of drinking water on many reserves, with concurrent 
implications for health. In many cases, these health impacts may be compounded by a variety of challenges 
unrelated to climate change (e.g., social issues rooted in colonization) (Berner et al., 2016).
7.3.4 Water Security and Society
Water security has direct implications for drinking water and water systems, food and food systems, cultural 
and spiritual practices, and recreation. Access to drinking water of a suitable quality and in sufficient supply 
to sustain health and well-being is a core component of water security. Similarly, water is fundamental 
to both food production (e.g., crop irrigation, maintaining healthy fish stocks, etc.) and food processing 
(e.g., manufacturing processed foods, cleaning vegetables before distribution for sale, cooking, etc.). Air 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 502 
temperature, water temperature, and precipitation are the most important climatic variables influencing the 
occurrence of food-borne disease (Smith & Fazil, 2019) (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). Of the 11 
key food-borne pathogens identified by Smith and Fazil (2019) to examine in the context of climate change in 
Canada, six are influenced, in part, by precipitation, drought, and/or water temperature. 
Parts of Canada already face periods of water insecurity, due to impacts on water quality and shortages in 
water supply. For example, in 2019, Iqaluit, Nunavut, faced an unprecedented shortage of source water after 
a summer of historically low precipitation (Bell, 2019). As the climate continues to warm, and in the absence 
of effective adaptation measures, concerns related to water security and human health may increase. Public 
health and water management practitioners, researchers, and decision makers all have a role to play in 
protecting and promoting health by working to attain and/or maintain water security.
7.3.4.1 Water and the Food System
Water, in a sufficient supply and of a sufficient quality, is critical to food production and is also used for 
cleaning, sanitation, and manufacturing activities in the food system (Kirby et al., 2003). Food processing 
operations require very large amounts of water (Compton et al., 2018). Variability in water supply could 
disrupt food-processing activities, with long-term disruptions affecting food security. Water may also serve 
as a vehicle for transmission of chemical and/or microbial contamination of foods during processing (Kirby 
et al., 2003). Key pathways by which climate change can affect food processing via water impacts include 
increasing frequency and length of drought periods, which may result in reduced access to water required for 
processing activities; flooding agricultural fields with contaminated water; and contaminating water used in 
food processing, such as through floodwater washing contaminants into water sources (Delpla et al., 2009; 
Schnitter & Berry, 2019). Impacts through any of these routes would necessitate alterations to current Hazard 
Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) steps used to prevent food-borne illness in Canada (CFIA, 2012). Food 
businesses in Canada are required to have a food safety plan, and the HACCP is a key tool for developing 
one. In the HACCP approach, water is used for food processing and cleaning, and removing chemical and 
microbial contaminants on meat, produce, or other raw ingredients. 
Water serves as a potential vehicle for the direct transmission of chemical and microbial contaminants 
to foods during processing. Chemical contaminants can include heavy metals, household and industrial 
pollutants, pesticides, and nitrates. Microbial contaminants can include pathogenic bacteria, such as 
verotoxigenic Escherichia coli, parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii, protozoa such as Cryptosporidium, and 
viruses such as norovirus. As noted in previous sections, extreme weather events associated with climate 
change can promote the movement of chemicals and pathogens from the surrounding environment into 
source water at higher levels than usual, potentially overwhelming existing treatment methods.
Both municipally treated and privately sourced water are used in food processing. Such water sources are 
generally treated for selected chemical and microbial hazards but are not risk-free (Kirby et al., 2003). Water 
that is untreated or ineffectively treated before use in food processing can transmit contaminants directly 
to foods. Food-borne disease outbreaks have been traced back to use of contaminated water during food 
processing (Kirby et al., 2003). Even water containing extremely low levels of a pathogen could result in 
hazardous exposures to humans via food. Given optimal conditions, transfer of just one pathogen cell to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 503 
food could result in an infectious dose reaching the consumer, as the pathogen can grow from the period 
of food processing through distribution, retail, and storage to consumption (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and 
Security). Using common food processing methods, it is very difficult to completely inactivate all possible 
pathogens. Some food products, such as leafy greens, are more likely to cause illness, because of the 
minimal processing involved and the increased likelihood that they will be eaten raw (Jung et al., 2014). Given 
that small and private DWSs are already associated with water-borne disease outbreaks to a greater extent 
than larger systems, food processors serviced by such systems are at greater risk (Moffatt & Struck, 2011). 
In addition to food contamination from use of water containing harmful pathogens, water shortages may also 
affect the processing of foods such as meat and produce, both of which have been linked to microbial food-
borne disease outbreaks in Canada (Ravel et al., 2009). Water shortages can affect human health through 
compromised ability to remove contaminants from food; for example, limitations to the use of water for 
cleaning and sanitizing could result in less efficient removal of contaminants. During periods of low water 
availability, if alternative interventions or procedures to process foods are unavailable, reduced access to 
safe, nutritious food could compromise food security and affect human health. 
The risk to food processing from water shortages has a seasonal component and is highest during the 
summer, when water demand for all purposes is greatest (Wiener et al., 2016). This time of year is also 
optimal for survival of many pathogens in the environment, as higher temperatures support and encourage 
growth (Smith & Fazil, 2019). While risks to food processing are highest in Southern Canada, depending on 
food exportation and supply chains, local or regional impacts on food processing from water shortages may 
be felt nationally. 
Nearly 30% of food consumed in Canada is imported from other countries, with the majority of imported food 
coming from the United States (Statistics Canada, 2009). Climate change impacts on water availability and 
quality can also affect processing of foods in other countries that export food to Canada. These impacts are 
specific to the region, commodity, and possible contaminants and could ultimately have an impact on public 
health in Canada. 
7.3.4.1.1 Fishing and Seafood
Climate change is expected to affect marine food sources, through temperature effects on marine 
ecosystems (e.g., changes in micro-biota and other species higher in the food web), ocean acidification, 
extreme precipitation events, and subsequent agricultural runoff linked to nutrient loading. The consumption 
of contaminated raw or undercooked fish and shellfish carries the risk of infection from viruses, bacteria, 
parasites, and toxins.
Vibrio species are naturally occurring bacteria found in ocean water worldwide, including Canada’s Pacific and 
Atlantic coastal waters. Common species on the Pacific and Atlantic coasts include V. parahaemolyticus (Vp), 
V. vulnificus, V. fluvialis, V. alginolyticus and non-toxigenic V. cholerae (Banerjee et al., 2018). Vp is the most 
common species linked to shellfish-related illness in Canada. If ingested, Vp can lead to diarrhea, vomiting, 
nausea, and fever lasting one to seven days, and, in rare cases, to death (BC CDC, 2020). The majority of 
Vp infections are caused by the consumption of raw oysters obtained from commercial fisheries or self-
harvested. Other routes of exposure include inadvertently or submerging wounds or ears in contaminated 
ocean water or swallowing it. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 504 
Vp and other Vibrio species in bivalve shellfish on the Pacific and Atlantic coasts of Canada increased 
between 2006 to 2009 and 2010 to 2013 (Banerjee et al., 2018). Every year, 30 to 70 human infections are 
reported in British Columbia, as are a small number from other parts of the country (BC CDC, 2020). For every 
case of Vp reported in Canada, 92 additional cases are believed to have occurred in the affected community 
(Thomas et al., 2013). V. fluvialis and V. alginolyticus each result in zero to four locally acquired cases per year 
in British Columbia (Khaira & Galanis, 2007; BC CDC, 2020) which typically present as acute gastrointestinal 
illness. V. vulnificus can cause severe infection, including primary septicemia and necrotizing soft-tissue 
infections. Locally acquired V. vulnificus infection is extremely rare in Canada; only five case reports have 
been published (Abbott, 1986; Kelly, 1991; Vinh et al., 2006; Bigham et al., 2008). 
Large Vp outbreaks in British Columbia have led to closures of shellfish harvest areas and bans on the sale 
of raw oysters in restaurants. These measures can threaten both the economic viability of the shellfish 
harvesting industry and the continued use of the food source (Fyfe et al., 1997; Taylor et al., 2018). Other 
Vibrio species are pathogenic to shellfish and fish and can also cause major economic impacts (Paillard et 
al., 2004).
Vibrio species are thermophilic, meaning they prefer higher temperatures; therefore, sea surface temperature 
(SST) is the most important environmental predictor of Vibrio concentrations. Higher temperatures lead 
to higher Vibrio concentrations in ocean water and oysters, and, by extension, increased rates of human 
illness (Cook et al., 2002; Parveen et al., 2008; Haley et al., 2014; Konrad et al., 2017). The SST threshold for 
Vp growth is approximately 15°C (Khaira & Galanis, 2007; Konrad et al., 2017), which means the majority of 
locally acquired Vibrio infections in Canada occur during the summer months. 
Although the biologic cycle of Vibrio species, with the exception of toxigenic cholera, is not well understood, 
it is known that Vibrio species attach to chitin-containing organisms, particularly zooplanktons, which are 
considered their natural reservoir (Vezulli et al., 2010). The seasonal variation in Vibrio concentrations 
depends on both SST and the composition of the plankton reservoir (Turner et al., 2009). Vibrio concentration 
is directly related to certain growth stages of zooplankton following phytoplankton blooms, which occur in 
warmer temperatures (Turner et al., 2009). 
The ongoing warming of ocean temperatures and associated extension of summer conditions, driven 
by climate change, increases the risk of Vibrio proliferation in ocean waters. This can result in increased 
accumulation in bivalve shellfish and, subsequent increased risk to humans. The rate of Vp illness has 
increased over many years, in association with slowly increasing SST; there have also been large outbreaks 
that occur over a few months following short-term anomalies in SST (Martinez-Urtaza et al., 2010). In the 
North Atlantic Ocean, both the warming of the Northern Hemisphere and the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation 
are associated with increasing Vibrio presence in the water over the last 50 years (Vezzulli et al., 2016). A 
more rapid increase in Vibrio incidence has been observed at higher latitudes (Logar-Henderson et al., 2019). 
This may be due to ballast water discharge during a period of warmer-than-usual weather (McLaughlin et 
al., 2005) or the introduction of new strains of Vp in warm water transported from other regions during large 
climatic events such as El Niño (Martinez-Urtaza et al., 2010). 
Non-toxigenic V. cholerae is emerging in Canada in bivalve shellfish. On the Atlantic coast, it was found in 
1% of samples taken between 2006 and 2013 and in 20% of samples taken between 2014 and 2016; on the 
Pacific coast, it increased from 1% in 2006 to 2009 to 5% in 2010 to 2013 (Banerjee et al., 2018). Human 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 505 
illness caused by locally acquired non-toxigenic V. cholerae is rare: in 2018, three confirmed cases were 
reported on Vancouver Island (CBC, 2019). Increasing incidence of Vibrio-related illness has also been noted 
in Europe and the United States (Newton et al., 2012; Baker-Austin et al., 2013). It is possible that, with 
increased warming, the incidence of Vibrio-related illness will continue to increase (see Chapter 8: Food 
Safety and Security). 
7.3.4.2 Impacts on Infrastructure
The reliable operation of water infrastructure is critical to health. Drinking water, wastewater, and stormwater 
systems are interdependent and can be affected by climate change impacts, with cascading effects from 
one to the other. For the purposes of this chapter, DWSs include drinking and wastewater treatment facilities 
and the infrastructure required to transport water from source, to treatment, to users, to waste treatment, 
and to discharge point. If DWSs are rendered inoperable or ineffective, water security, and by extension 
human health, can suffer. Contaminated drinking water or ineffective water systems increase the risk of 
communicable diseases (Alderman et al., 2012). For example, extreme rainfall events may affect the ability 
of water system operators to reduce turbidity, which has been associated with health impacts, such as non-
specific gastroenteritis (Aramini et al., 2000; Schwartz et al., 2000; Charron et al., 2004). DWSs are therefore a 
primary defence against water insecurity and associated health outcomes.
The Canadian Infrastructure Report Card 2019 found that, overall in Canada, approximately 70% of potable 
water infrastructure (i.e., local water and transmission pipes, water treatment facilities, water pumping 
stations, water reservoirs) is in very good (30%) or good (40%) condition, and 25% is in fair, poor, or very 
poor condition. In addition, approximately 55% to 65% of wastewater infrastructure is in very good or good 
condition. For approximately 15% of linear wastewater assets (i.e., sewer pipes and sanitary force mains) 
the condition is unknown, as they are underground. Regarding stormwater infrastructure, it is estimated that 
approximately 40% to 60% is in good or very good condition, but large data gaps exist because of limited data 
collection about condition (BluePlan Engineering, 2019). 
DWSs across Canada were not designed with the impacts of climate change in mind and are considered 
among the infrastructure most vulnerable to climate hazards such as extreme events (flooding, droughts, 
and storms), permafrost degradation in northern regions, and lower water levels in many parts of the country 
associated with higher temperatures and saltwater intrusion (Lemmen & Warren, 2004; Moffat & Struck, 
2011; Luh et al., 2017). A 2012 survey of 53 Canadian water utilities, conducted by the Canadian Water and 
Wastewater Association, found that only 30% of respondents were aware of the potential impacts of climate 
change, and over half (56%) did not have operational plans to address the impacts of climate change (Brettle 
et al., 2015). 
Drinking water infrastructure can be affected, or overwhelmed, by climate change hazards in many ways. 
For example, the quality of water entering a water treatment system can be affected by a flood (e.g., 
contaminants from rural or urban areas) or by a wildfire (e.g., organic carbon and nitrogen runoff); these 
events could directly affect the physical infrastructure itself. If water treatment and infrastructure upgrades 
are required (e.g., use of more chemicals like chlorine), costs will increase for municipalities (Andrey et al., 
2014). Case studies in Manitoba (Genivar, 2007) and Newfoundland (CCPE, 2008) identified potential risks to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 506 
water treatment system functions (pre-treatment, softening and clarification, disinfection, storage, chemical 
storage, and valves and pipes) from climate hazards such as flooding, high temperatures, intense rain, 
drought, ice storms, and intense wind. 
Many older cities still use a “combined sewer overflow” design that integrates stormwater and sanitary 
sewage systems. An increase in heavy precipitation events and/or rain-on-snow or frozen ground events 
will increase risks of stormwater impacts on sanitary systems, potentially overwhelming systems (Andrey 
et al., 2014) and heightening the risk of untreated sewage being discharged into adjacent streams and 
lakes (Madoux-Humery et al., 2016). This can cause contamination of the municipal DWS itself, if an intake 
is located nearby, and it can also lead to contamination of water bodies used for recreational activities. 
In Montréal, Quebec, a 10-year study found that 80% of all peak E. coli measurements at two municipal 
drinking water intakes along the St. Lawrence River were linked to combined sewer overflow events that were 
driven by either 10 mm of rain or snowmelt (Madoux-Humery et al., 2016). The investigators were able to 
demonstrate a human origin of the fecal contamination. Modern-day sewer designs segregate stormwater 
from the sanitary sewage in order to avoid this issue, but, even so, stormwater alone can be a source of 
pathogens due to pathogen reservoirs that exist in the built environment (Turgeon et al., 2011). 
Rising sea levels associated with climate change have also been observed to alter groundwater flows in 
coastal cities in the United States, resulting in an increased likelihood of sewer overflow events as rising 
groundwater enters aging sewer infrastructure or builds up in areas of high permeability (e.g., in fill materials 
used during construction) (Rossi & Toran, 2019). In addition to rain events, combined sewer overflows are 
also affected by land-use change and by changes to local hydrology due to urban growth (Jalliffier-Verne et 
al., 2015). Opportunities to reduce the likelihood of overflow events include city planning that decreases the 
area of impervious surfaces and overall demands on aging stormwater systems by reducing the amount of 
water they need to transport to river systems. This practice would help all cities, with or without combined 
sewer overflows, to reduce the transfer of biological and chemical contaminants from the city into adjacent 
waterways, as well as to increase groundwater recharge. 
Even after water has been treated to drinking water standards, it may still become contaminated after it 
leaves the treatment facility and travels through the system. In large systems, this risk is commonly reduced 
by post-treatment disinfection. Low water pressure events have been associated with elevated AGI in older 
DWSs that contain cracked and damaged water lines, which may travel adjacent to sewage lines (Gargano 
et al., 2015). In places where sewage lines run alongside water lines, if leaks form on both lines, the only 
barrier of protection is to maintain high pressure in the water line relative to that of the sewage line. Heavy 
precipitation associated with climate change may place added stress on aging infrastructure and make it 
more prone to failure, thereby increasing the likelihood of these low pressure events (Luh et al., 2017). DWSs 
generally alleviate some pressures associated with drought, decreased streamflow, and aquifer depletion 
by making better use of available water sources (e.g., water conservation). Broader source water protection 
initiatives for both surface and groundwater support such efforts. 
Small communities may be more vulnerable to impacts on water security from climate change because 
of deficits in water system infrastructure, as well as fewer technological, training, and financial resources 
(Moffat & Struck, 2011). Exacerbating the water security implications of climate change, 8.7% of DWSs, 
serving in total approximately 4 million Canadians, employed no treatment at all (as of 2006–2007), relying 
primarily on groundwater (Statistics Canada, 2013). This reliance on groundwater sources may put increased 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 507 
pressure on these systems during times of prolonged water scarcity and, particularly for systems that rely on 
single sources, increases the urgency for source water protection. Many of these DWSs serve small communities. 
7.3.4.2.1 Water Systems in Indigenous Communities
Access to safe drinking water is a challenge for many Indigenous communities in Canada. For example, as of 
February 15, 2020, 61 First Nations communities were under long-term (greater than one-year) drinking water 
advisories (ISC, 2020a). The Multi-Barrier Approach to Safe Drinking Water is designed for municipal water 
service systems with a central water treatment plant, piped distribution system, and coordinated monitoring 
oversight. In many Indigenous communities, particularly those that are small, remote, and isolated, the 
water distribution system is unlike traditional municipal water service systems, and often features a mix of 
private wells, trucked water, piped water, and few or no household water services (Daley et al., 2014; Patrick, 
2018). Many Indigenous communities face challenges, including poor source water quality, insufficient 
water treatment technology, inadequate water distribution systems, as well as local and regional water 
contamination caused by local industry. Institutional disadvantages, such as inadequate design standards 
for wastewater disposal, difficulty retaining qualified water treatment plant operators, insufficient funding 
for water system upgrades, and limits on the capacity of trucked systems to deliver water in the quantity 
residents require it, also contribute to these challenges (Daley et al., 2014; Patrick, 2018). For some people, 
a lack of trust in water systems, existence of chemical and biological hazards, cultural preference, taste, or 
other reasons, lead them to, at times, rely on water gathered from the land (Harper et al. 2011; Goldhar et al., 
2013b). This gathered and untreated water may be at increased risk of contamination, including as a result 
of risks from climate change. Any pathogen found in the water (e.g., vector-borne infectious agents, chemical 
contamination from nearby pollution sources, or pathogens associated with faulty treatment) may be directly 
consumed by water users (Martin et al., 2007; Harper et al., 2011), causing negative health outcomes. 
Climate change is exacerbating the current water challenges facing Indigenous communities (Ford et 
al., 2010; Andrey et al., 2014; Patrick, 2018; ISC, 2019). Changing temperatures can directly affect water 
and sewage treatment facilities, as well as food and drinking water security. Small, rural, and circumpolar 
communities are particularly vulnerable, having to navigate multiple interacting risks (Berner et al., 2016). 
Many Indigenous communities have recognized this risk; are concerned about climate change impacts on 
their water quality, quantity, and security (Picketts et al., 2017; ISC, 2019); and recognize the need for action. 
For example, the Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami’s National Inuit Climate Change Strategy (2019) identified the need to 
adapt to climate change–driven impacts on health, including those related to water, as a priority for climate 
action. Information on how Indigenous Peoples are adapting to climatic impacts on water quality, quantity, 
and security is provided in section 7.5  Adaptation to Reduce Risks as well as in Chapter 2: Climate Change 
and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada. 
7.3.4.3 Cryosphere
The cryosphere includes all places where water is frozen, including snow, ice, permafrost, and seasonally 
frozen ground. At lower latitudes and elevations in Canada, this state exists for part of the year, and at higher 
latitudes and elevations, it lasts year-round (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). The cryosphere, and Arctic regions in 
particular, are dramatically affected by changes in temperature and precipitation driven by climate change 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 508 
(Overland et al., 2018). The timing, duration, and intensity of melt periods, as well as the likelihood of 
precipitation being rain or snow, are all affected by temperature. Snow reflects a large amount of incoming 
solar radiation back into the atmosphere, and changes in snow depth have impacts on ground temperature 
and lake and sea ice thickness (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). In Canada, it appears that the length of the year with 
snow cover declined across the majority of the country, and seasonal snow accumulation has likely declined 
by 5% to 10% since 1981. Climate models project that snow cover duration will continue to decrease across 
Canada by mid-century, regardless of the emissions scenario (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). 
Changes in the cryosphere are likely to affect the health and well-being of Canadians, particularly those in 
Northern and Arctic regions, in several ways, including impacts on food security, damage to infrastructure, 
release of legacy pollutants, impacts on transportation networks, and others (Hovelsrud et al., 2011; AMAP, 
2015). Although the processes behind these impacts are complex, in Northern Canada, they can generally be 
linked to two primary issues: changes in ice conditions and changes to permafrost.
Changes in the quantity and quality of sea ice have wide-ranging impacts on Arctic food systems and 
navigation (Ford et al., 2009). Reduced sea ice quantity and quality impacts the variety of sea life and their 
migratory patterns, as well as the overall biodiversity of the region (AMAP, 2017). These changes may, in turn, 
affect access to traditional food sources for Northern communities (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). 
In addition to impacts on sea life, changes in the quantity and quality of sea ice also affect the ability of Inuit 
and other Northern hunters to harvest food, because of reduced ability to travel safely on the ice. Less access 
to the land also inhibits the ability to pass on traditional knowledge to future generations (ISC, 2019). 
The annual development of ice roads relies upon sea ice and ice on rivers and lakes. The use of these roads 
dramatically reduces shipping costs and transportation time, and they are central to sustaining Northern 
communities. Climate change is affecting the use of these roads, for example, in Ontario’s Far North (Hori et 
al., 2018), and continued warming will have wide-ranging ramifications for daily life in Northern communities, 
including by affecting health facility supply chains and access to market foods. 
Changes to the natural environment also have direct impacts on other types of built infrastructure across the 
Arctic. Much existing infrastructure has been built with the expectation of continual permafrost. Changes to 
permafrost threaten the structural integrity of buildings and roads, including health facilities, and water and 
wastewater treatment facilities. The degradation of permafrost has resulted in impacts on some DWSs by 
breaking both drinking water and sewage pipes, which could allow potential contaminants to enter drinking 
water (Lemmen & Warren, 2004). For example, the City of Iqaluit, Nunavut, has been affected by climate 
change-related permafrost thaw causing extensive damage to municipal water and wastewater pipes 
(George, 2019). In addition to risks to infrastructure, legacy contaminants currently stored in the permafrost 
may be released during permafrost melt (AMAP, 2015) (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). Warmer water in 
freshwater lakes, tundra ponds, and streams may also result in greater bacterial methylation of mercury and 
increased release of mercury from thawing permafrost (Berner et al., 2016), with potential implications for 
human health.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 509 
7.4 Projected Health Security Risks and Impacts
Projecting future impacts of water scarcity and flooding on global health security is challenging because 
of our limited ability to model events and responses that are subject to current and future adaptation and 
greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation policies, which can change. Although significant progress has been made 
toward understanding the health impacts of climate change and identifying ways to adapt to them, the 
complexity of the relationships among water, food, and other social and environmental determinants of health 
requires a broader understanding of compounding and cascading climatic impacts that can amplify harm 
(Pescaroli & Alexander, 2018). 
Local and regional conflicts in other parts of the world, driven by or exacerbated by water insecurity, may 
have implications for Canadians and Canadian interests. Water has been a source of conflict throughout 
history, and many scholars consider this risk to be increasing with population growth, rapid economic 
development, and climate-induced changes in the hydrologic cycle (Levy & Sidel, 2011; Gleick et al., 2020). 
The risk of forced migration as a result of climate change may also be increasing, particularly for less 
developed countries (Rigaud et al., 2018). Water-related impacts that contribute to migration pressure and 
population displacement include rising sea levels, desertification, floods, monsoons, hurricanes, and cyclones 
(Dickson et al., 2014; McLeman, 2019). 
Future scenarios that could spark international conflict affecting Canada include drought-driven reversal of 
peace-building efforts in Africa, international conflict over the Indus River, and further instability in the Middle 
East (McLeman, 2011; McLeman, 2019). Refugee surges and maintenance of refugee camps along borders 
can provide cover for insurgent groups, and reductions in water security can lead to internal conflicts, both 
of which destabilize governments and can lead to deployment of Canadian peacekeeping forces (Canadian 
Parliament Standing Committee on National Defence, 2019; Gleick et al., 2020). 
Domestically, increasing water temperatures, driven by climate change, may allow for the successful northern 
expansion of novel contaminants, such as Naegleria fowleri. This pathogen can cause primary amebic 
meningitis, a very rare but almost always fatal disease of the central nervous system (Health Canada, 2012). 
No cases of illness associated with N. fowleri have yet been reported in Canada. The most northerly known 
case to date was reported in Minnesota (Gompf & Garcia, 2019). 
Climate change is anticipated to increase the frequency and severity of wildfires, primarily due to changes in 
temperature and precipitation, causing decreases of precipitation in some areas and insufficient increases of 
precipitation in others to offset the effects of rising temperatures (Wotton et al., 2017). Hot, dry, and strong 
winds are conditions that produce high risk of extreme wildfire (Bush & Lemmen, 2019). Risk of extreme fire 
conditions, an increase in fire-spread days, and a lengthened fire season are projected for Canada as a whole, 
and the Western Prairies in particular (Wang et al., 2015). 
In addition to the more commonly discussed health impacts of wildfires (e.g., burns, respiratory effects, 
mental health impacts), watersheds may be severely affected through effects on water flows and water 
quality. Long-term (multi-year) effects of wildfires include increased stormwater runoff, increased nutrient 
(mainly nitrogen and phosphorus) and contaminant loads, increased organic carbon, elevated risks of 
algal and cyanobacterial blooms, elevated microbial activity, dissolved organic carbon transformation, and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 510 
presence of fire-fighting chemicals (Khan et al., 2015; Harper et al., 2018; Robinne et al., 2019) (see Chapter 3: 
Natural Hazards), with implications for human health. Water flows may be affected by changes to vegetation, 
as well as topographic changes caused by flash floods and landslides associated with wildfires. Changes 
in water flows may affect the reliability of inflow forecasting methods used by drinking water managers to 
project the quantity of available water for treatment.
Although municipal DWSs may remain capable of adequately treating source water in environments recently 
affected by wildfire, the added stress of increased wildfire activity may increase operating costs and strain 
treatment capacity (Robinne et al., 2019). For example, in the aftermath of the 2016 Fort McMurray wildfire, 
out of an abundance of caution, the water utility chose to issue a precautionary boil water advisory for three 
months and saw its annual costs for treatment chemicals increase by 50% (Curtis & Gillis, 2016; Thurton, 
2017; Robinne et al., 2019). Recent research has identified communities in Alberta whose source water may 
be at risk due to wildfires (see Figure 7.3) (Robinne et al., 2019), a situation that will likely worsen due to 
climate change. To prepare communities and drinking water providers for the impacts of climate change, 
increased research into the impacts of wildfires on water quality is needed.
Figure 7.3 Source Exposure Index (SEI) for Alberta and wildfire exposure index for forested watersheds. This 
figure shows Robinne et al.’s (2019) Source Exposure Index (SEI) for Alberta (a) and wildfire exposure index for 
forested watersheds (b). In both figures, a higher value indicates higher exposure. The SEI is a spatial index that 
assesses source exposure based on the availability and demand for water in a watershed, the watershed’s forest 
cover, and the danger of a fire occurring in that area.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 511 
7.5 Adaptation to Reduce Risks
To reduce the health impacts of climate change, reducing GHGs is the most important preventative measure. 
However, regardless of near-term GHG emissions reductions, climate change will continue to pose risks to 
water quality, quantity, and security in Canada for the foreseeable future. Therefore, there is a pressing need 
to identify further adaptive actions to reduce or eliminate the anticipated health impacts of climate change. 
Adapting to the health impacts of climate change involves actions taken by health officials, in collaboration 
with those in other fields, to understand, assess, prepare for, and help prevent the health impacts of 
climate change. Adaptive actions often emphasis supporting those most at-risk in society (see Chapter 10: 
Adaptation and Health System Resilience). It includes the design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation 
of specific measures, for example, health and health supporting infrastructures, to reduce health risks. The 
responsibility for adapting to climate change impacts on water and health is diffuse. Many important health-
related adaptation options (e.g., upgrading or replacing water and wastewater systems, flood and drought 
risk reduction, adaptive agricultural practices, and water storage) are under the purview of decision makers 
outside of the health sector (e.g., drinking water management, public works and infrastructure, emergency 
management, civil society) and at different levels of government (municipal, Indigenous, regional, provincial/
territorial, or federal). 
The federal government has varying levels of responsibility for water governance and management, related to 
fish habitat, navigation, transboundary waters, water monitoring, and water on federal lands (Zubrycki et al., 
2011). To support the reduction of health risks related to water, the federal role is often centred on research, 
coordination, facilitation of inter-jurisdictional collaboration, education, and outreach. In collaboration with 
key provincial/territorial, Indigenous, and academic stakeholders, the federal government develops water 
quality guidance for drinking water (Health Canada, 2019a) and recreational waters (Health Canada, 2012). 
In Indigenous communities, the federal government generally plays a larger role, due to its responsibility for 
federal lands (Zubrycki et al., 2011). 
Primary responsibility for water governance and management in Canada lies with provincial/territorial 
governments, with municipalities (ECCC, 2016; Health Canada, 2019b), or with municipal/provincial agencies 
and corporations, which often take the lead on drinking and wastewater treatment operations. This shared 
jurisdictional responsibility for water issues, and hence climate change adaptation, is also characterized by 
participation by a multitude of disciplines and sectors (e.g., DWSs, urban design, agriculture, health, energy), 
involving diverse risk management methods and terminologies. 
Although progress has been made toward improving the uptake of integrated, multisectoral approaches 
to water management, challenges remain (Shrubsole et al., 2017). Despite human health being a central 
consideration in almost all water management and governance frameworks, the role of health decision 
makers is often not explicitly articulated in water management planning and, in practice, is often focused on 
developing guidelines or standards, monitoring and surveillance, and health communications and response. 
Through collaboration with health sector officials, decision makers in other sectors have a significant 
opportunity to reduce health risks from climate change impacts on water through adaptation. Successful 
health adaptation will require significant intersectoral and intergovernmental coordination. Although not 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 512 
exhaustive, the following section identifies possible adaptive approaches that can reduce the human health 
consequences of climate change impacts on water quality, quantity, and security. 
7.5.1 Climate-Resilient Water Systems
Water systems and water management practices have traditionally been developed with the understanding 
that past experience was the best indicator of future conditions for the delivery of services. Climate change 
upends this notion; design parameters of systems built to withstand past climate conditions may not meet 
future needs (Milly et al., 2008). Past approaches to water management and governance have not adequately 
incorporated either novel or existing pressures likely to be introduced or exacerbated by climate change. A 
national survey conducted in 2017 of officials responsible for municipal asset management revealed that 
information and data about climate change impacts are either unavailable, or poorly integrated into local 
infrastructure (e.g., water infrastructure) decision making (PSD et al., 2019). Water management planning and 
water system design should incorporate climate change information (Milly et al., 2008), and water managers, 
health authorities, and allied professions and sectors should work collaboratively to advance progress toward 
climate-resilient water systems (Smith et al., 2019). 
Resilience is the ability of a system to cope with, respond to, and recover from a shock or stressor in order to 
continue providing key functions (e.g., a water system can withstand a climate-driven shock without failing 
to adequately treat water). Climate-resilient water management identifies and implements flexible actions 
that reduce risks to water quality, quantity, and security in a range of possible future climates to a variety of 
potential climate shocks and stressors (Smith et al., 2019). Efforts to build climate-resilient water systems 
have been ongoing since 2007 in Canada. Examples of initiatives to develop new information and tools to 
support climate-resilient water management to support health include the following:
•	
The Northwest Territories Water Stewardship Strategy: A Plan for Action 2016-2020 builds on the 
momentum of the Northwest Territories Water Stewardship: A Plan for Action 2011-2015 and aims to 
ensure the maintenance of the quantity and quality of water resources in the Northwest Territories, 
secure water supply, and ensure the resilience of freshwater ecosystems (GNWT, 2016). 
•	
The Saskatchewan Water Security Agency is undertaking the project Building Capacity for 
Community Hydrologic Drought Response, which will increase the ability of municipalities in 
Saskatchewan to reduce the impacts of drought exacerbated by climate change, including 
impacts on water supply and quality (NRCan, 2021).
•	
The Atlantic Canada Water and Wastewater Association is undertaking a project called 
Incorporating Climate Resilience for Municipal Infrastructure into the Updates of Existing Atlantic 
Canada Water and Wastewater Design Guidelines (NRCan, 2021).
•	
The Government of Manitoba, through the project Climate Resiliency: Capacity Building for 
Manitoba Decision Makers, is increasing the capacity and expertise of professionals (including 
engineers and planners), the business community in Northern Manitoba, and Indigenous 
organizations and communities, to reduce climate change impacts, including through adaptations 
related to land use, water management, and infrastructure (NRCan, 2021). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 513 
•	
The Federation of Canadian Municipalities has developed guides and disseminated information 
through webinars and networks to support municipalities in efforts to integrate climate change 
considerations into asset management programs, including those related to water. Key grant 
programs include the Municipal Asset Management Program, Municipalities for Climate 
Innovation Program, and Climate and Asset Management Network (PSD et al., 2019).
Many opportunities exist to further integrate climate resilience into water management activities (Smith et 
al., 2019). The World Health Organization has developed guidance for climate-resilient water safety planning 
to aid water system decision makers and health authorities in building climate change resilience in water 
systems and reducing health risks associated with climatic impacts on water resources. This process builds 
on and leverages the success of existing approaches to water resources management, such as integrated 
water risk management and climate change adaptation, to ensure that health and climate considerations are 
adequately captured in water management (WHO, 2017). 
Across Canada and internationally, health authorities are increasingly recognizing the need to assess their 
vulnerability and identify adaptations to reduce the health impacts of climate change, including those related 
to water issues (Berry et al., 2018) (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). Guidance 
documents and toolkits have been developed to facilitate the completion of vulnerability and adaptation 
assessments (V&As) related to climate change and health (WHO, 2013; Ebi et al., 2016). 
The opportunity exists to increase the understanding of climate change impacts on health through effects 
on water quality, quantity, and security by conducting V&As at local to regional levels in Canada. A number of 
previous assessments conducted by health authorities in Canada (Berry et al., 2014b; Grey Bruce Health Unit, 
2017; Levison et al., 2017) have included examination of water issues, and many of the 10 projects funded 
through Health Canada's HealthADAPT initiative also address these issues (Government of Canada, 2020). 
The participation of health sector officials in broader climate change impact and adaptation assessments, 
which are often led by the environment department or ministry of the government involved, is also important for 
increasing understanding of existing and projected impacts of climate change and options for reducing risks to 
Canadians and for facilitating needed intersectoral collaboration, to make progress in building resilience. 
Climate change adaptation actions to reduce risks from impacts related to water often require collaboration 
with decision makers in other health-relevant sectors. For example, a V&A conducted by the Middlesex-
London Public Health Unit in Ontario identified enhanced source water protection as a potential climate 
change adaptation (Berry et al., 2014b). By working with other sectors to integrate V&A findings into water 
management processes, the health sector can help to address key upstream determinants of health that help 
prevent dangerous exposures before illness and injury can affect populations.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 514 
Box 7.2 Indigenous water co-governance as a way to address 
climate change 
In the Cowichan Valley, British Columbia, the Cowichan Watershed Board (CWB) undertakes governance 
and management activities at the watershed scale. The CWB was created after a severe summer drought 
in 2007 amid stakeholder recognition that a more formal and proactive approach to water management 
was needed in the face of continued population growth, climate change, and the cumulative impacts of 
past uncoordinated decision making in the Cowichan-Koksilah watershed. The CWB draws its strength 
from its governance model, with officials from Cowichan Tribes and the Cowichan Valley Regional District 
participating as equal partners and co-chairs steering the Board. This partnership, to advance whole-of-
watershed health, supports the local recognition of Indigenous rights and is also a deep commitment to 
moving down the path of reconciliation (CWB, 2018). 
Effective water management in watersheds such as the Cowichan-Koksilah watershed has been hampered 
because the legislative authority and responsibility for water is complex and spread among federal, provincial, 
and local governments and agencies and because of unextinguished Indigenous rights. Leadership and 
coordinated decision making are central to the CWB’s purpose and structure. The CWB currently does not 
hold any statutory decision-making powers, although it is anticipated that the CWB may evolve to acquire 
some form of delegated authority to make local water management decisions. In the meantime, the CWB 
has endorsed “watershed targets,” including ensuring sustainable fish populations, ensuring clean water 
and adequate summer flow, protecting and preserving riparian and estuarine habitats, conserving water, 
and increasing local residents’ “watershed IQ.” To attain these targets, it is necessary to follow the ancient 
Cowichan Tribes principle, adopted by the CWB, of “Nutsumaat kws yaay’us tthqa” – coming together as a 
whole to work together to be stronger as partners for the watershed (CWB, 2018).
7.5.2 Adaptation Options to Protect Water Quality, Quantity, and Security
A number of adaptation measures, including new or enhanced policies and programs, are available to reduce 
health risks from climate change impacts on water quality, quantity, and security (Table 7.4). Many of these 
actions are most effective when they are tailored to the local or regional context, based on information about 
climate change impacts gathered through V&As. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 515 
Table 7.4 Example adaptations to reduce health risks from climate 
change impacts on water quality, quantity, and security
Municipal
•	 Improved or expanded activities related to the safety of municipal water supplies, 
including water testing (drinking and recreational), water treatment, water delivery, 
and stormwater management
	»
Integrate climate change considerations into drinking water quality standards 
and objectives
	»
Publish educational and advisory information on water quality
	»
Advise on issuing boil water advisories
•	 Community-based water monitoring programs
•	 Climate and demographic projections integrated into floodplain mapping and land-
use decision making
•	 Vulnerability assessment of water system infrastructure (e.g., vulnerability 
mapping)
•	 Redundancy in DWSs (e.g., more than one water source)
•	 Mental health support and mental illness prevention and awareness initiatives 
targeted for those whose livelihoods depend on water (e.g., agriculturally 
dependent communities)
•	 Water conservation, reuse, and capture-and-storage techniques to reduce climate 
change impacts
•	 Protocols and procedures for chemical and contaminant risk management during 
emergencies
•	 Expanding water reuse systems to offset reduced supply, increased demand, or both
Provincial/
territorial
•	 Enhanced or revised legislation governing municipal and public water supplies, 
including their construction and operation
	»
Enhance or revise policies, regulations, and protocols regarding water quality 
inspections
	»
Conduct inspections of municipal drinking water systems and laboratories that 
test drinking water
	»
Operate water quality testing laboratories
	»
Draft emergency response planning regarding water supplies
	»
Enhance or revise water quality standards and watershed management
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 516 
Provincial/
territorial
(continued)
	»
Approve designated areas for water treatment plants based on climate risk
	»
Enhance well-water safety
	»
Implement national guidelines for drinking water safety
•	 Mental health support and mental illness prevention and awareness initiatives 
targeted to those whose livelihoods depend on water (e.g., agriculturally dependent 
communities)
•	 Protocols and procedures for chemical and contaminant risk management during 
emergencies
•	 Monitoring of harmful algal bloom outbreaks
Federal
•	 Research on threats to drinking water in the context of climate change
•	 Development of a recommended set of national guidelines for drinking water 
safety that integrate information on climate change risks
•	 Nationally integrated approach to monitoring and surveillance for water-borne 
diseases
Cross-cutting
•	 Nature-based solutions (e.g., wetlands for agricultural wastewater treatment, 
buffer zone parks for flood control, etc.)
•	 Climate change and health considerations and climate projections integrated into 
water resource management activities
•	 Enhanced health risk communications practices to prepare for likely climate 
change impacts (e.g., advising consumers to avoid produce that may have been in 
contact with floodwater)
•	 Exploration of equitable economic transition support for communities whose 
livelihoods are affected by water scarcity
•	 Health education and outreach initiatives for users of gathered water
•	 Decommissioning or renovation of water infrastructure at risk
Source: Adapted from Séguin, 2008; Berry et al., 2014a
 
For many water-related climate change impacts (e.g., flooding, drought, runoff-driven contamination) and 
land-use changes, DWS designs informed by watershed scale management can reduce dangerous exposures 
and risks to health. Adaptation actions can achieve significant health co-benefits as resilience is built; for 
example, improving community access to water (e.g., beaches, rivers, lakes) can benefit fitness by increasing 
recreational space, improving residents’ sense of connection to the natural environment, and improving 
overall mental wellness (Gascon et al., 2017). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 517 
Nature-based solutions provide important opportunities for communities seeking to reduce land-use based 
exposures and vulnerabilities. Nature-based solutions are “actions that work with and enhance nature to 
support biodiversity and help address societal challenges” (Kapos et al., 2019, p. 16). Actions that adopt 
the design of natural systems or mimic them, as well as efforts to encourage a previously existing natural 
process (e.g., a wetland), all characterize a nature-based approach to climate adaptation. Nature-based 
solutions to reduce runoff and stormwater overflow, such as rain gardens (Autixier et al., 2014) and grassed 
swales (Bäckström, 2003), have been explored as a means of holding back water and allowing for the settling 
of particulates. These interventions remove contamination from water systems by increasing the hydraulic 
detention time (Li et al., 2016). Nature-based solutions can also help address both GHG mitigation (e.g., 
carbon sequestration by protecting existing or creating new green spaces) and adaptation objectives (e.g., 
improving water quality and reducing flood risk through the development of natural areas that can capture 
or control water, sometimes known as “blue spaces”). Many such actions offer greater cost savings than 
traditional grey infrastructure-based approaches, while providing additional co-benefits, including for health. 
For example, a park designed for flood defence, such as Toronto’s Corktown Common Park (Waterfront 
Toronto, 2020), may also create recreational spaces and allow for the development of active transport 
infrastructure (e.g., bicycle and walking paths). Green spaces may also have health benefits for those who 
suffer from some forms of mental illness and generally may help improve quality of life for those who live or 
work nearby (Raymond et al., 2017). 
Across Canada, various levels of government have experimented with financial incentives to drive land-use 
change. For example, following widespread flooding, New Brunswick’s provincial government launched a buy-
out program for homeowners most at risk of flooding (New Brunswick, 2019). Other regions have provided 
financial incentives to landowners who take action to protect water quality, such as to farmers who refrain 
from cultivating directly beside waterways (Clean Water Program, 2020).
Protecting health from water-related risks through an approach involving standards and guidelines, which 
is informed by familiar threats and past experience, may not increase resilience in the face of unknown or 
unexpected health risks, unless new knowledge of climate change risks is integrated into these activities. 
By working with stakeholders to apply a climate lens to guideline development, existing vulnerabilities may 
be reduced and resilience to future impacts increased. Risks from new pathogens and viruses to the health of 
Canadians from climate change impacts on water may require improved water quality monitoring and surveillance, 
as well as early warning capabilities to inform the actions of system operators. The water and public health 
sectors will need to approach this problem collaboratively and partner with all levels of government. 
Leveraging community interest in water quality protection to help inform monitoring efforts may help 
improve resilience. For example, Indigenous communities across Canada face multi-faceted water system 
vulnerabilities. Communities in the North face challenges, such as the loss of permafrost, the contamination 
of tundra pond water sources, and the vulnerability of village sewage lagoons to climate hazards (Berner et 
al., 2016; McKnight, 2017). Communities recognize that these climate impacts on already stressed DWSs may 
increase the risk of water-borne disease in the future. Recognizing the growing burden of gastrointestinal 
illness on their community, a group of Inuit youth in Mittimatalik (Pond Inlet), with the support of Elders and 
research bodies, are working to apply both Inuit and scientific knowledge to assess the impact of climate 
change on local water quality and human health (Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 2019). Such community-led water 
monitoring programs have the potential to help inform climate-resilient planning for water systems across 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 518 
Canada and, in some cases, may incentivize increased community stewardship of water resources. In 
addition, the Circuit Rider Training Program is a long-term capacity-building program that provides training 
and mentoring services to operators of First Nations DWSs and wastewater systems (ISC, 2015).
Currently, most municipal DWSs are centralized and often extract large volumes of water from a single source 
located a great distance from the population it serves. Reliance on a single source is risky, because a serious 
failure related to that source can have disastrous consequences (Boholm & Prutzer, 2017). In addition, 
centralized DWSs require large amounts of chemicals for treatment and energy to transport water, as well 
as a vast infrastructure (Speight, 2018), and can therefore have impacts on the environment. Shifting to 
less-centralized systems that incorporate multiple water sources (e.g., rainwater, greywater, multiple smaller 
groundwater supplies) and additional water protection areas can result in more resilient systems that could 
help mitigate the risks associated with climate change impacts on aging infrastructure (Boholm & Prutzer, 
2017). This would also alleviate pressures associated with drought, decreased streamflow, and aquifer depletion 
by making better use of available water sources. Promoting water-saving practices, such as the use of low-flow 
showers and toilets and the use of greywater and rainwater, can also help to reduce water consumption. 
In some cases, there will be limits to the effectiveness of large land-use changes, new protective 
infrastructure (either nature-based or traditional), and updates to DWSs or DWS operations, and the extent 
to which they can be adopted. In these cases, the development, promotion, and adoption of early warning 
systems with associated risk communications may play an important role in addressing and reducing 
health impacts from climate change (Wu et al., 2016). Early warning systems have been used with success 
to reduce the impacts of floods (Alfieri et al., 2012), infectious diseases (Ogden et al., 2019), extreme heat 
(see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience), and other health hazards by providing sufficient 
lead time for officials to respond to impending threats. Progress has been made toward integrating climate 
and weather data into warning systems for some climate-related impacts (e.g., Ogden et al., 2019), in order 
to better prepare both health officials and citizens. The opportunity exists to expand efforts to reduce risks 
of climate-related water-borne diseases, for example, by monitoring the human–wildlife interface, such as 
through the use of bio-sentinels that act as a proxy for human health impacts/risks (e.g., monitoring the 
health of a particular fish species) (Stephen & Duncan, 2017). This may prove particularly useful for impacts 
on water quality, such as harmful algal blooms. 
Early warning systems can benefit from tools that present the spatial distribution of climate-related hazard 
exposures, vulnerability factors, and impacts on health in a visual format. The Federal Flood Mapping 
Framework (NRCan, 2018) has resulted in renewed emphasis on flood inundation mapping across Canada. 
At the local and regional levels, various groups have made efforts to apply innovative approaches to 
better understand the variation in impacts of floods across geographic regions. For example, in Quebec, 
a partnership between Laval University, Ouranos, and the Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
has integrated vulnerability indicators into flood mapping, providing valuable information for health and 
emergency management authorities to plan emergency response measures (Ouranos, 2018). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 519 
7.6 Knowledge Gaps 
Climate change impacts on water quality, quantity, and security are complex, and many knowledge gaps exist. 
The ability to measure and monitor climate change impacts on water resources across Canada’s diverse 
ecosystems and socio-cultural environments, in addition to resulting health outcomes, are basic requirements 
to address key knowledge gaps (Table 7.5). This work is crucial to developing effective interventions that can 
build resilience and reduce climate change-related health impacts. 
Integrating Indigenous knowledge into efforts to prepare for and respond to climate-driven stressors on water 
quality, quantity, and security is a key component of research needed to protect health in a changing climate. 
Research from First Nations, Inuit, and Métis perspectives is lacking and requires attention. Research led by, 
or in partnership with, Métis communities is a notable gap to date. Climate change impacts and adaptation 
assessments, and adaptation policies and programs, are well-served when a broad evidence base, informed 
by different perspectives, communities, and knowledge systems, can be drawn from. Increasing climate 
research led by First Nations, Inuit, and Métis researchers will benefit all Canadians. 
Table 7.5 Key research needs related to the health effects of climate 
change impacts on water quality, quantity, and security
CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES AND IMPLICATIONS FOR HUMAN HEALTH
•	 Relationships between temperature and precipitation on the diverse Canadian flow regimes (e.g., 
switch in river basins from snow-dominated to rain-dominated regimes) 
•	 Impacts of changes in the cryosphere on water resources (e.g., effects of changes in albedo on 
permafrost and downstream water quality and quantity)
•	 Effects of changes in the cryosphere on releases of chemical contaminant burdens (e.g., persistent 
organic pollutants and heavy metals) and subsequent impacts on food and water supplies
•	 Impacts of wildfires on source water quality and availability, and how they vary across forest 
ecosystems
•	 Effects of ocean and freshwater acidification and nutrient runoff from land in the context of climate 
change (e.g., adaptation in the agricultural sector) on harmful algal blooms
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 520 
WATER RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND SOURCE WATER PROTECTION
•	 Effects of climate change and land-use change on groundwater recharge over short and long 
timescales
•	 Effective measures for protecting DWSs from increased flooding-related health concerns (e.g., 
increases in bacterial contamination)
•	 Impacts of projected drought extremes on water resources and the most effective adaptations to 
protect health (e.g., individual storage capacity; water sharing across multiple jurisdictions)
•	 Effective government, management, and partnership models, including those with First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis communities
DRINKING WATER AND DRINKING WATER SYSTEMS
•	 Factors that make water systems vulnerable to extreme rain events, and effective adaptation measures
•	 Health ramifications and possible DWS stresses from wildfire impacts on source water, particularly for 
untreated drinking water sources (e.g., “gathered water”)
•	 Cost-effective adaptations for DWSs to address emerging contaminants (e.g., harmful algal blooms), 
which are expected to increase under climate change 
PUBLIC HEALTH AND HEALTH CARE
•	 Health risks associated with water contaminated by residue from burned residential, industrial, and 
commercial materials as a result of wildfires 
•	 Health risks of harmful algal blooms, and how they might increase with climate change 
•	 Emerging new or previously rare water-borne pathogens (e.g., northward-moving Naegleria fowleri) and 
effective measures to protect health
•	 Impacts of changes in animal (e.g., waterfowl) and other vector populations on the distribution and 
transmission of water-borne diseases as the climate continues to change
•	 Health risks associated with water reuse and effective measures to protect health
•	 Effective technologies for producing potable water in future water-stress scenarios 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 521 
7.7 Conclusion
The quality, quantity, and security of Canada’s water resources are being affected by climate change, 
increasing risks to human health. Expected increases in both average temperatures and temperature 
extremes, along with heavy precipitation events, droughts, and wildfires in many regions of Canada, will 
place increased stress on water resources in freshwater, marine, and coastal systems, thereby creating 
greater risks to human health. A range of climate-sensitive pathogens or toxins currently affect the health 
of Canadians; these include algae, cyanobacteria, enteric viruses, and Leptospira, Leptonema, Vibrio, and 
Legionella bacteria. In addition, gradual warming and an increase in extreme events will continue to place 
stress on DWSs, potentially leading to the presence of biological or chemical agents in water, which could 
further lead to human exposure through drinking water, bathing, recreation, or ceremonial use. Climate change 
will pose even greater challenges for small and rural systems. The future health impacts due to climate change 
are uncertain because of a lack of projections for many of these health outcomes and because of the complex 
pathways through which people are affected, which involve social and behavioural factors. 
Similar to other health concerns associated with climate change, evidence suggests that specific populations 
are at higher risk of these effects, including children, seniors, and people with chronic diseases. The health 
and well-being of many Indigenous Peoples and communities is disproportionately affected by challenges to 
water resources, which can arise from a variety of factors, such as insufficient water treatment technology, 
distribution systems and upgrades, water contamination caused by local industry, and difficulty retaining 
qualified water treatment plant operators. Climate change impacts on source water will exacerbate the 
effects of these challenges if further adaptations are not implemented to safeguard water resources 
and protect health in these communities. First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities possess countless 
generations of accumulated knowledge which, through equitable partnerships, could be applied to protect health. 
Increased partnerships among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, health authorities, and water managers are 
needed to identify and address the health impacts specific to Indigenous populations of climate-driven changes to 
water resources and to implement effective options for community-level adaptation.
In the absence of enhanced efforts to adapt, the health of Canadians will increasingly be affected as the 
climate continues to change. By working to identify both vulnerabilities to public health and adaptation 
options, health authorities can reduce and adapt to these impacts and build the climate resilience of water 
systems. Although some adaptation options exist today, increased research is needed to understand the 
scope of both current and future impacts and the effectiveness of adaptation strategies and technologies. 
To evaluate the effectiveness of adaptation options, research is needed to identify the most effective means 
of monitoring water-related health hazards. Additionally, projections of possible future health impacts and 
proactive measures for communicating risks to the public, for example, through early warning systems, 
should be explored. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 522 
7.8 References 
Abbott, L. P. (1986). Vibrio vulnificus in New Brunswick. Canada 
Diseases Weekly Report, 12-14, 57-8. 
Ahern, M., Kovats, R. S., Wilkinson, P., Few, R., & Matthies, 
F. (2005). Global health impacts of floods: epidemiologic 
evidence. Epidemiologic reviews, 27, 36–46. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/epirev/mxi004> 
Alderman, K., Turner, L. R., & Tong, S. (2012). Floods and human 
health: a systematic review. Environment international, 47, 
37–47. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2012.06.003>
Alexander, J., Benford, D., Cockburn, A., Cravedi, J., Dogliotti, E., 
Di Domenico, A., … Verger, P. (2009). Scientific Opinion of the 
Panel on Contaminants in the Food Chain on a request from 
the European Commission on Marine Biotoxins in Shellfish 
– Saxitoxin Group. The EFSA Journal, 7(4), 1-76. <https://doi.
org/10.2903/j.efsa.2009.1019>
Alfieri, L., Salamon, P., Pappenberger, F., Wetterhall, F., & Thielen, 
J. (2012). Operational early warning systems for water-related 
hazards in Europe. Environmental Science & Policy, 21, 35-49.
Anderson, D. M., Richlen, M. L., & Lefebvre, K. A. (2019). Harmful 
algal blooms in the Arctic. In E. Osborne, J. Richter-Menge, & M. 
Jeffries (Eds.), Arctic Report Card: Update for 2018. Retrieved 
from <https://arctic.noaa.gov/Report-Card/Report-Card-2018/
ArtMID/7878/ArticleID/789/Harmful-Algal-Blooms-in-the-Arctic> 
Andrey, J., Kertland, P., & Warren, F. J. (2014). Water and 
Transportation Infrastructure. In F. J. Warren, & D. S. Lemmen 
(Eds.), Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on 
Impacts and Adaptation. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Aramini, J., McLean, M., Wilson, J., Holt, J., Copes, R., 
Allen, B., & Sears, W. (2000). Drinking water quality and 
health-care utilization for gastrointestinal illness in greater 
Vancouver. Canada Communicable Disease Report = Releve des 
Maladies Transmissibles au Canada, 26(24), 211–214.
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). (2015). 
AMAP Assessment 2015: Human Health in the Arctic. Oslo, Norway.
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). (2017). Snow, 
Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA) 2017. Oslo, Norway.
Ashbolt, N. J. (2015). Microbial Contamination of Drinking Water 
and Human Health from Community Water Systems. Current 
Environmental Health Reports, 2(1), 95–106. <DOI:10.1007/
s40572-014-0037-5>
Assembly of First Nations (AFN). (2013). Strategy to 
protect and advance Indigenous water rights. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www.afn.ca/uploads/files/water/
firstnationswaterstrategy.pdf>
Auld, H., MacIver, D., & Klaassen, J. (2004). Heavy rainfall and 
waterborne disease outbreaks: the Walkerton example. Journal 
of Toxicology and Environmental Health. Part A, 67(20-22), 
1879–1887. <https://doi.org/10.1080/15287390490493475> 
Autixier, L., Mailhot, A., Bolduc, S., Madoux-Humery, A. S., 
Galarneau, M., Prévost, M., & Dorner, S. (2014). Evaluating 
rain gardens as a method to reduce the impact of sewer 
overflows in sources of drinking water. The Science of the 
Total Environment, 499, 238–247. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2014.08.030>
Azuma, K., Ikeda, K., Kagi, N., Yanagi, U., Hasegawa, K., & 
Osawa, H. (2014). Effects of water-damaged homes after 
flooding: health status of the residents and the environmental 
risk factors. International Journal of Environmental Health 
Research, 24(2), 158–175. <https://doi.org/10.1080/09603123.2
013.800964> 
Bäckström M. (2003). Grassed swales for stormwater 
pollution control during rain and snowmelt. Water Science 
and Technology : a Journal of the International Association on 
Water Pollution Research, 48(9), 123–132.
Baker-Austin, C., Trinanes, J. A., Taylor, N. G. H., Hartnell, R., 
Siitonen, A., Martinez-Urtaza, J. (2013). Emerging Vibrio risk at 
high latitudes in response to ocean warming. Nature Climate 
Change, 3, 73-77. <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate1628> 
Bakker, K., & Cook, C. (2011). Water governance in 
Canada: Innovation and fragmentation. Water Resources 
Development, 27(02), 275-289.
Banerjee, S. K., Rutley, R., & Bussey, J. (2018). Diversity and 
Dynamics of the Canadian Coastal Vibrio Community: an 
Emerging Trend Detected in the Temperate Regions. Journal 
of Bacteriology, 200(15), e00787-17. <https://doi.org/10.1128/
JB.00787-17>
Bell, J. (2019). Iqaluit seeks new emergency fix for another 
looming water shortage. Nunatsiaq News. Retrieved from 
<https://nunatsiaq.com/stories/article/iqaluit-seeks-new-
emergency-fix-for-another-looming-water-shortage/>
Bellou, M., Kokkinos, P., & Vantarakis, A. (2013). Shellfish-borne 
viral outbreaks: a systematic review. Food and Environmental 
Virology, 5(1), 13–23. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12560-012-
9097-6> 
Berner, J., Brubaker, M., Revitch, B., Kreummel, E., Tcheripanoff, 
M., & Bell, J. (2016). Adaptation in Arctic circumpolar 
communities: food and water security in a changing 
climate. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75, 33820. 
<https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v75.33820> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 523 
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M .D. & Parker, S. (2014a). Human 
Health. In F. J. Warren, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation (pp. 191-232). Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources 
Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.gc.ca/
pub?id=9.699408&sl=0>
Berry, P., Enright, P. M., Shumake-Guillemot, J., Villalobos 
Prats, E., & Campbell-Lendrum, D. (2018). Assessing Health 
Vulnerabilities and Adaptation to Climate Change: A Review of 
International Progress. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(12), 2626. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph15122626>
Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Buse, C. (2014b). Assessment of 
vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change in 
Middlesex-London. London, ON: Middlesex-London Health Unit. 
Retrieved from <https://www.healthunit.com/climate-change>
Bertuzzo, E., Mari, L., Righetto, L., Gatto, M., Casagrandi, R., 
Rodriguez-Iturbe, I., & Rinaldo, A. (2012). Hydroclimatology of 
dual-peak annual cholera incidence: Insights from a spatially 
explicit model. Geophysical Research Letters, 39(5). doi: 
10.1029/2011GL050723.
Bharadwaj, L., & Bradford, L. (2018). Indigenous water poverty: 
Impacts beyond physical health. In H. Exner-Pirot, B. Norbye, & 
L. Butler (Eds.), Northern and Indigenous health and healthcare. 
Saskatoon, SK: University of Saskatchewan.
Bigham, M., Galanis, E., Gustafson, R., Hoang, L., Louie, K., 
Faremo, A., Mcintyre, L., Isaac-Renton, J., Daly, P., Gustafson, L., 
Wong, B., Chong, S., Stone, J., & Rodriguez-Maynez, L. (2008). 
Re-emergence of Pathogenic Vibrio Vulnificus on the Pacific 
Northwest Coast in 2007. Vancouver, BC: Association of Medical 
Microbiology and Infectious Disease Canada. Retrieved from 
<http://www.cacmid.ca/wp-content/uploads/2008finalprogram1.
pdf> 
BluePlan Engineering. (2019). Canadian Infrastructure Report 
Card 2019: Monitoring the State of Canada’s Core Public 
Infrastructure. Retrieved from <http://canadianinfrastructure.ca/
downloads/canadian-infrastructure-report-card-2019.pdf>
Boholm, Å., & Prutzer, M. (2017). Experts’ understandings of 
drinking water risk management in a climate change scenario. 
Climate Risk Management, 16, 133–144. doi:10.1016/j.
crm.2017.01.003 
Bonsal, B. R., Peters, D. L., Seglenieks, F., Rivera, A., & Berg, A. 
(2019). Changes in freshwater availability across Canada. In E. 
Bush & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report 
(p. 261–342). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Botana, L. M. (2016). Toxicological Perspective on Climate 
Change: Aquatic Toxins. Chemical Research in Toxicology, 29(4), 
619–625. <https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrestox.6b00020>
Brettle, M., Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Yasvinski, G. (2015). 
Determining Canadian water utility preparedness for the impacts 
of climate change. Change and Adaptation in Socio-Ecological 
Systems, 2(1). doi: 10.1515/cass-2015-0024. 
British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BC CDC). (2020). 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus. Retrieved from <http://www.bccdc.ca/
health-info/diseases-conditions/vibrio-parahaemolyticus>
Britton, E., Hales, S., Venugopal, K., & Baker, M. G. (2010). 
Positive association between ambient temperature 
and salmonellosis notifications in New Zealand, 1965–
2006. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public 
Health, 34(2), 126-129. doi:10.1111/j.1753-6405.2010.00495.x 
Burkhardt, W., 3rd, & Calci, K. R. (2000). Selective accumulation 
may account for shellfish-associated viral illness. Applied and 
environmental microbiology, 66(4), 1375–1378. <https://doi.
org/10.1128/AEM.66.4.1375-1378.2000>
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/
energy/Climate-change/pdf/CCCR_ExecSumm-EN-040419-
FINAL.pdf>
Campos, C. J., & Lees, D. N. (2014). Environmental transmission 
of human noroviruses in shellfish waters. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 80(12), 3552–3561. <https://doi.
org/10.1128/AEM.04188-13>
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC). (2012). Shellfish 
harvesting banned off most of N.S. CBC News. Retrieved from 
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/nova-scotia/shellfish-
harvesting-banned-off-most-of-n-s-1.1138561>
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC). (2019). Officials 
Offer Food Safety Advice as Herring egg Harvest Opens on 
Vancouver Island. CBC News. Retrieved from <https://www.
cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/herring-egg-harvest-
vancouver-island-food-safety-1.5039174>
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. (2016). 
Summary of Integreated Watershed Management Approaches 
Across Canada. Retrieved from <https://ccme.ca/en/res/
summaryofintegratedwatershedmanagementapproaches
acrosscanada.pdf>
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). (2012). Hazard 
Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP). Retrieved from <http://
www.inspection.gc.ca/about-the-cfia/newsroom/food-safety-
system/haccp/eng/1346306502207/1346306685922> 
Canadian Parliamentary Standing Committee on National 
Defence. (2019). Canada’s Role in International Peace Operations 
and Conflict resolutions: Report of the Standing Committee on 
National Defence. Retrieved from <https://www.ourcommons.
ca/Content/Committee/421/NDDN/Reports/RP10491893/
nddnrp16/nddnrp16-e.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 524 
Carmichael, W. W., & Boyer, G. L. (2016). Health impacts from 
cyanobacteria harmful algae blooms: Implications for the 
North American Great Lakes. Harmful Algae, 54, 194–212. 
doi:10.1016/j.hal.2016.02.00. 
Canadian Council of Professional Engineers (CCPE). (2008). 
Adapting to Climate Change: Canada’s First National Engineering 
Vulnerability Assessment of Public Infrastructure. Canadian 
Council of Professional Engineers. Retrieved from <https://pievc.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/adapting_to_climate_change_
report_final.pdf> 
Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters 
(CRED) & United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction 
(UNISDR). (2015). The Human Cost of Weather Related 
Disasters 1995–2015. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved 
from <https://www.preventionweb.net/files/46796_
cop21weatherdisastersreport2015.pdf>  
Charrois J. W. (2010). Private drinking water supplies: 
challenges for public health. Canadian Medical Association 
Journal = Journal de l’Association Medicale Canadienne, 182(10), 
1061–1064. <https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.090956> 
Charron, D., Thomas, M., Waltner-Toews, D., Aramini, 
J., Edge, T., Kent, R., Maarouf, A., & Wilson, J. (2004). 
Vulnerability of waterborne diseases to climate change in 
Canada: a review. Journal of Toxicology and Environmental 
Health. Part A, 67(20-22), 1667–1677. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/15287390490492313> 
Chhetri, B. K., Takaro, T. K., Balshaw, R., Otterstatter, M., Mak, 
S., Lem, M., Zubel, M., Lysyshyn, M., Clarkson, L., Edwards, J., 
Fleury, M. D., Henderson, S. B., & Galanis, E. (2017). Associations 
between extreme precipitation and acute gastro-intestinal illness 
due to cryptosporidiosis and giardiasis in an urban Canadian 
drinking water system (1997-2009). Journal of Water and 
Health, 15(6), 898–907. <https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2017.100> 
Clean Water Program. (2020). Clean Water Program. Retrieved 
from <https://www.cleanwaterprogram.ca/> 
Compton, M., Willis, S., Rezaie, B., & Humes, K. (2018). Food 
processing industry energy and water consumption in the 
Pacific Northwest. Innovative Food Science & Emerging 
Technologies, 47, 371-383.
Conservation Ontario. (n.d.). History of Conservation Authorities. 
Retrieved from <https://conservationontario.ca/conservation-
authorities/about-conservation-authorities/history-of-
conservation-authorities> 
Cook, A., Lowther, J., Price-Hayward, M., Lee, R. (2009). Spatial 
and temporal pattern of norovirus contamination in a Pacific 
oyster fishery (P. Lassus, Ed.). Seventh International Conference 
on Molluscan Shellfish Safety. Nantes, France.
Cook, C., Gavin, H., Berry, P., Guillod, B., Lange, B., Rey Vicario, 
D., & Whitehead, P. (2017). Drought planning in England: a primer. 
Environmental Change Institute.
Cook, D. W., Bowers, J. C., & DePaola, A. (2002). Density of 
total and pathogenic (tdh+) Vibrio parahaemolyticus in Atlantic 
and Gulf coast molluscan shellfish at harvest. Journal of Food 
Protection, 65(12), 1873–1880. <https://doi.org/10.4315/0362-
028x-65.12.1873>
Corso, P. S., Kramer, M. H., Blair, K. A., Addiss, D. G., Davis, J. P., 
& Haddix, A. C. (2003). Costs of Illness in the 1993 Waterborne 
Cryptosporidium Outbreak, Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, 9(4), 426-431. <https://doi.org/10.3201/
eid0904.020417>
Cowichan Watershed Board (CWB). (2018). Governance Manual 
– Version 3. Retrieved from <https://cowichanwatershedboard.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/CWB-Gov-Manual-Version3-
Sept-24-2018.pdf>
Curriero, F. C., Patz, J. A., Rose, J. B., & Lele, S. (2001). The 
association between extreme precipitation and waterborne 
disease outbreaks in the United States, 1948-1994. American 
Journal of Public Health, 91(8), 1194–1199. <https://doi.
org/10.2105/ajph.91.8.1194> 
Curry, C. L., Islam, S. U., Zwiers, F. W., & Déry, S. J. (2019). 
Atmospheric Rivers Increase Future Flood Risk in Western 
Canada’s Largest Pacific River. Geophysical Research Letters, 
46(3), 1651-1661. <https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL080720> 
Curtis, P., & Gillis, H. (Eds.). (2016). Annual Report Fort 
McMurray Waterworks System Approval. Edmonton, AB: Alberta 
Environment and Parks. 
Daley, K., Castleden, H., Jamieson, R., Furgal, C., & Ell, L. (2014). 
Municipal water quantities and health in Nunavut households: 
an exploratory case study in Coral Harbour, Nunavut, 
Canada. International journal of circumpolar health, 73(1), 23843.
Daley, K., Hansen, L. T., Jamieson, R. C., Hayward, J. L., 
Piorkowski, G. S., Krkosek, W.,... & Corriveau, E. (2018). Chemical 
and microbial characteristics of municipal drinking water supply 
systems in the Canadian Arctic. Environmental Science and 
Pollution Research, 25(33), 32926-32937.
Dancause, K. N., Veru, F., Andersen, R. E., Laplante, D. P., & 
King, S. (2013). Prenatal stress due to a natural disaster 
predicts insulin secretion in adolescence. Early Human 
Development, 89(9), 773–776. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
earlhumdev.2013.06.006> 
Deeds, J. R., Wiles, K., Heideman, G. B., 6th, White, K. D., & 
Abraham, A. (2010). First U.S. report of shellfish harvesting 
closures due to confirmed okadaic acid in Texas Gulf coast 
oysters. Toxicon : official Journal of the International Society 
on Toxinology, 55(6), 1138–1146. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
toxicon.2010.01.003>
Delpla, I., Jung, A.-V., Baures, E., Clement, M., & Thomas, O. 
(2009). Impacts of climate change on surface water quality in 
relation to drinking water production. Environment International, 
35(8), 1225–1233. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2009.07.001
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 525 
DePaola, A., Jones, J. L., Woods, J., Burkhardt, W., 3rd, Calci, K. 
R., Krantz, J. A., Bowers, J. C., Kasturi, K., Byars, R. H., Jacobs, E., 
Williams-Hill, D., & Nabe, K. (2010). Bacterial and viral pathogens 
in live oysters: 2007 United States market survey. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology, 76(9), 2754–2768. <https://doi.
org/10.1128/AEM.02590-09> 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO). (2020). Marine 
harmful algal blooms and phycotoxins of concern to Canada. 
Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 
3384. Retrieved from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/
Library/4088319x.pdf>
Derksen, C., Burgess, D., Duguay, C., Howell, S., Mudryk, L., 
Smith, S., Thackeray, C., & Kirchmeier-Young, M. (2019). Changes 
in snow, ice, and permafrost across Canada. In E. Bush & D. S. 
Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report (p.194–260). 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
De Roos, A. J., Gurian, P. L., Robinson, L. F., Rai, A., Zakeri, I., 
& Kondo, M. C. (2017). Review of Epidemiological Studies of 
Drinking-Water Turbidity in Relation to Acute Gastrointestinal 
Illness. Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(8), 086003. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP1090>
Dickson, S., Webber, S., & Takaro, T. K. (2014). Preparing BC for 
Climate Migration. Vancouver, BC: Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives. Retrieved from <https://www.policyalternatives.ca/
sites/default/files/uploads/publications/BC%20Office/2014/11/
ccpa-bc_ClimateMigration_web.pdf> 
Doocy, S., Daniels, A., Packer, C., Dick, A., & Kirsch, T. D. 
(2013). The human impact of earthquakes: a historical review 
of events 1980-2009 and systematic literature review. PLoS 
currents, 5, ecurrents.dis.67bd14fe457f1db0b5433a8ee20fb833. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/currents.
dis.67bd14fe457f1db0b5433a8ee20fb833> 
Doyle, A., Barataud, D., Gallay, A., Thiolet, J. M., Le Guyaguer, 
S., Kohli, E., & Vaillant, V. (2004). Norovirus food-borne 
outbreaks associated with the consumption of oysters from 
the Etang de Thau, France, December 2002. Euro Surveillance 
: Bulletin Europeen sur les Maladies Transmissibles = European 
Communicable Disease Bulletin, 9(3), 24–26. <https://doi.
org/10.2807/esm.09.03.00451-en> 
Ebi, K., Anderson, V., Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Yusa, A. (2016). 
Ontario Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation 
Assessment Guidelines: Technical Document. Toronto, ON: 
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care Public Health 
Policy and Programs Branch.
Edwards, B., Gray, M., & Hunter, B. (2015). The Impact of 
Drought on Mental Health in Rural and Regional Australia. Social 
Indicators Research, 121, 177–194. doi:10.1007/s11205-014-
0638-2
Emelko, M.B., Silins, U., Bladon, K.D., & Stone, M. (2011). 
Implications of land disturbance on drinking water treatability 
in a changing climate: Demonstrating the need for “source 
water supply and protection” strategies. Water Research, 45(2), 
461–472.
Emelko, M. B., Stone, M., Silins, U., Allin, D., Collins, A. L., 
Williams, C. H., Martens, A. M., & Bladon, K. D. (2016). 
Sediment-phosphorus dynamics can shift aquatic ecology and 
cause downstream legacy effects after wildfire in large river 
systems. Global Change Biology, 22(3), 1168–1184. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/gcb.13073> 
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2016). Water 
governance and legislation: shared responsibility. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/
services/water-overview/governance-legislation/shared-
responsibility.html>
Etheridge S. M. (2010). Paralytic shellfish poisoning: seafood 
safety and human health perspectives. Toxicon : Official Journal 
of the International Society on Toxinology, 56(2), 108–122. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.12.013> 
Feldhusen F. (2000). The role of seafood in bacterial food-borne 
diseases. Microbes and Infection, 2(13), 1651–1660. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/s1286-4579(00)01321-6>
Finnis, S., Krstic, N., McIntyre, L., Nelson, T. A., & Henderson, 
S. B. (2017). Spatiotemporal patterns of paralytic shellfish 
toxins and their relationships with environmental variables in 
British Columbia, Canada from 2002 to 2012. Environmental 
Research, 156, 190–200. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2017.03.012> 
Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., King, M., & Furgal, C. (2010). 
Vulnerability of Aboriginal health systems in Canada to climate 
change. Global Environmental Change, 20(4), 668-680.
Ford, J. D., Gough, W. A., Laidler, G. J., Macdonald, J., Irngaut, 
C., & Qrunnut, K. (2009). Sea ice, climate change, and 
community vulnerability in northern Foxe Basin, Canada. Climate 
research, 38(2), 137-154.
Fyfe, M., Yeung, S. T., Daly, P., Schallie, K., Kelly, M. T., & 
Buchanan, S. (1997). Outbreak of Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
related to raw oysters in British Columbia. Canada 
Communicable Disease Report = Releve des Maladies 
Transmissibles au Canada, 23(19), 145–148.
Galanis, E., Mak, S., Otterstatter, M., Taylor, M., Zubel, M., Takaro, 
T. K., Kuo, M., & Michel, P. (2014). The association between 
campylobacteriosis, agriculture and drinking water: a case-
case study in a region of British Columbia, Canada, 2005-
2009. Epidemiology and infection, 142(10), 2075–2084. <https://
doi.org/10.1017/S095026881400123X>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 526 
Galway, L. P., Allen, D. M., Parkes, M. W., & Takaro, T. K. 
(2014). Seasonal variation of acute gastro-intestinal illness by 
hydroclimatic regime and drinking water source: a retrospective 
population-based study. Journal of Water and Health, 12(1), 
122–135. <https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2013.105>
Gargano, J. W., Freeland, A. L., Morrison, M. A., Stevens, K., 
Zajac, L., Wolkon, A., Hightower, A., Miller, M. D., & Brunkard, 
J. M. (2015). Acute gastrointestinal illness following a 
prolonged community-wide water emergency. Epidemiology 
and Infection, 143(13), 2766–2776. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268814003501>
Gascon, M., Zijlema, W., Vert, C., White, M. P., & Nieuwenhuijsen, 
M. J. (2017). Outdoor blue spaces, human health and well-being: 
A systematic review of quantitative studies. International Journal 
of Hygiene and Environmental Health, 220(8), 1207–1221. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheh.2017.08.004>
Genivar. (2007). City of Portage La Prairie water resources 
infrastructure assessment phase II- pilot study. Retrieved from 
<https://pievc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2007/11/City-of-Portage-
la-Prairie_Final-Report.pdf>
George, J. (2019). City of Iqaluit says climate change is 
contributing to its water pipe woes. Nunatsiaq News. Retrieved 
from <https://nunatsiaq.com/stories/article/city-of-iqaluit-says-
climate-change-is-contributing-to-its-water-pipe-woes/>
Gérin-Lajoie, J., Herrmann, T. M., MacMillan, G. A., Hébert-
Houle, É., Monfette, M., Rowell, J. A., ...  Dedieu, J. P. 
(2018). IMALIRIJIIT: a community-based environmental 
monitoring program in the George River watershed, Nunavik, 
Canada. Écoscience, 25(4), 381-399.
Gleick, P., Iceland, C., & Trivedi, A. (2020). Ending Conflicts over 
Water. World Resources Institute. Retrieved from <https://files.
wri.org/d8/s3fs-public/ending-conflicts-over-water.pdf>
Glibert, P. M., Icarus Allen, J., Artioli, Y., Beusen, A., Bouwman, L., 
Harle, J., Holmes, R., & Holt, J. (2014). Vulnerability of coastal 
ecosystems to changes in harmful algal bloom distribution 
in response to climate change: projections based on model 
analysis. Global Change Biology, 20(12), 3845–3858. <https://
doi.org/10.1111/gcb.12662>
Gobler, C. J., Doherty, O. M., Hattenrath-Lehmann, T. K., Griffith, 
A. W., Kang, Y., & Litaker, R. W. (2017). Ocean warming since 
1982 has expanded the niche of toxic algal blooms in the North 
Atlantic and North Pacific oceans. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 114(19), 
4975–4980. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1619575114>
Goldhar, C., Bell, T., & Wolf, J. (2013a). Rethinking existing 
approaches to water security in remote communities: an 
analysis of two drinking water systems in Nunatsiavut, Labrador, 
Canada. Water Alternatives, 6(3), 462.
Goldhar C., Bell T., & Wolf J. (2013b). Vulnerability to Freshwater 
Changes in the Inuit Settlement Region of Nunatsiavut, Labrador: 
A Case Study from Rigolet. ARCTIC, 67(1), 1-133. <https://doi.
org/10.14430/arctic4365>
Gompf, S. G., & Garcia, C. (2019). Lethal encounters: The 
evolving spectrum of amoebic meningoencephalitis. IDCases, 15, 
e00524. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idcr.2019.e00524>
Government of Canada. (2020). HealthADAPT. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/programs/health-
adapt.html>
Government of Northwest Territories (GNWT). (2016). 
NWT Water Stewardship Strategy Action Plan 2016-2020. 
Retrieved from <https://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/en/services/water-
management-and-monitoring/water-stewardship-nwt>
Grattan, L. M., Boushey, C. J., Liang, Y., Lefebvre, K. A., 
Castellon, L. J., Roberts, K. A., Toben, A. C., & Morris, J. G. 
(2018). Repeated Dietary Exposure to Low Levels of Domoic 
Acid and Problems with Everyday Memory: Research to Public 
Health Outreach. Toxins, 10(3), 103. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
toxins10030103>
Greck and Associates Limited. (2018). MVCA Gorrie Dam 
Future Plans Study. Prepared for Maitland Valley Conservation 
Authority. Retrieved from <http://www.mvca.on.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/Gorrie-Dam-Future-Plans-Study-Nov.-2018.pdf>
Grey Bruce Health Unit. (2017). Climate Change and Public 
Health in Grey Bruce Health Unit: Current conditions and future 
projections. Owen Sound, ON: Grey Bruce Health Unit.  Retrieved 
from <https://www1.publichealthgreybruce.on.ca/Portals/0/
Topics/Healthy_Environments/Climate%20Change%20in%20
GBHU%20-%20Report%20%282017%29.pdf> 
Guehlstorf, N., & Hallstrom, L. K. (2012). Environmental Reviews 
and Case Studies: Participatory Watershed Management: A Case 
Study from Maritime Canada. Environmental Practice, 14(2), 
143-153.
Haley, B. J., Kokashvili, T., Tskshvediani, A., Janelidze, N., 
Mitaishvili, N., Grim, C. J., Constantin de Magny, G., Chen, 
A. J., Taviani, E., Eliashvili, T., Tediashvili, M., Whitehouse, C. 
A., Colwell, R. R., & Huq, A. (2014). Molecular diversity and 
predictability of Vibrio parahaemolyticus along the Georgian 
coastal zone of the Black Sea. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5, 45. 
<https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2014.00045>
Hallema, D. W., Robinne, F. N., & Bladon, K. D. (2018). Reframing 
the challenge of global wildfire threats to water supplies. Earth’s 
Future, 6(6), 772-776.
Harper, A. R., Doerr, S. H., Santin, C., Froyd, C. A., & Sinnadurai, P. 
(2018). Prescribed fire and its impacts on ecosystem services 
in the UK. The Science of the total Environment, 624, 691–703. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.12.161>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 527 
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Schuster-Wallace, C. J., Berke, 
O., & McEwen, S. A. (2011). Weather, water quality and 
infectious gastrointestinal illness in two Inuit communities 
in Nunatsiavut, Canada: potential implications for climate 
change. EcoHealth, 8(1), 93–108. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10393-011-0690-1>
Health Canada. (2005). Guidance for providing safe drinking 
water in areas of federal jurisdiction - Version 1. Retrieved from 
<http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/459848/publication.html>
Health Canada. (2012). Guidelines for Canadian Recreational Water 
Quality. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/
canada/health-canada/migration/healthy-canadians/publications/
healthy-living-vie-saine/water-recreational-recreative-eau/alt/pdf/
water-recreational-recreative-eau-eng.pdf>
Health Canada. (2015). Guidance for Issuing and Rescinding Boil 
Water Advisories in Canadian Drinking Water Supplies. Water and 
Air Quality Bureau, Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety 
Branch, Health Canada. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/
healthy-living/guidance-issuing-rescinding-boil-water-advisories-
canadian-drinking-water-supplies.html>
Health Canada. (2019a). Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water 
Quality - Summary Table. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.
ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-workplace-health/
reports-publications/water-quality/guidelines-canadian-drinking-
water-quality-summary-table.html>
Health Canada. (2019b). Drinking water quality in Canada. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/
services/environmental-workplace-health/water-quality/
drinking-water.html>
Health Canada. (2020). Health Canada’s Maximum Levels for 
Chemical Contaminants in Foods. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/food-nutrition/
food-safety/chemical-contaminants/maximum-levels-chemical-
contaminants-foods.html>
Henstra, D., & Thistlethwaite, J. (2017). Flood Risk Management: 
What Is the Role for the Government of Canada? Centre for 
International Governance Innovation. Retrieved from <https://
www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/documents/Policy%20
Brief%20No.103_0.pdf>
Heymann, D. (Ed.). (2015). Control of Communicable Diseases 
Manual (20th ed.). Washington, DC: APHA Press.
Hilborn, E. D., & Beasley, V. R. (2015). One health and 
cyanobacteria in freshwater systems: animal illnesses and 
deaths are sentinel events for human health risks. Toxins, 7(4), 
1374–1395. <https://doi.org/10.3390/toxins7041374>
Hori, Y., Cheng, V. Y., Gough, W. A., Jien, J. Y., & Tsuji, L. J. 
(2018). Implications of projected climate change on winter road 
systems in Ontario’s Far North, Canada. Climatic Change, 148(1-
2), 109-122.
Hovelsrud, G. K., Poppel, B., van Oort, B., & Reist, J. D. 
(2011). Arctic Societies, Cultures, and Peoples in a Changing 
Cryosphere. Ambio, 40(Suppl 1), 100–110. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s13280-011-0219-4>
Hrudey, S. E., & Hrudey, E. (2004). Safe Drinking Water: Lessons 
from Recent Outbreaks in Affluent Nations. London, United 
Kingdom: IWA Publishing.
Hrudey, S. E., Payment, P., Huck, P. M., Gillham, R. W., & Hrudey, E. J. 
(2003). A fatal waterborne disease epidemic in Walkerton, Ontario: 
comparison with other waterborne outbreaks in the developed 
world. Water science and technology : a journal of the International 
Association on Water Pollution Research, 47(3), 7–14.
Hulin, M., Simoni, M., Viegi, G., & Annesi-Maesano, I. 
(2012). Respiratory health and indoor air pollutants based 
on quantitative exposure assessments. The European 
Respiratory Journal, 40(4), 1033–1045. <https://doi.
org/10.1183/09031936.00159011>
Hunter, P. R., & Thompson, R. C. (2005). The zoonotic 
transmission of Giardia and Cryptosporidium. International 
Journal for Parasitology, 35(11-12), 1181–1190. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijpara.2005.07.009>
Il Jeong, D., & Sushama, L. (2018). Rain-on-snow events over 
North America based on two Canadian regional climate models. 
Climate Dynamics, 50(1-2), 303–316. doi:10.1007/s00382-017-
3609-x 
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2015). Circuit Rider Training 
Program. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/13134
24571273/1533818103401>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2019). Community Voices 
on Climate Change and Health Adaptation in Northern Canada. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <http://www.climatetelling.info/
uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/19-012-climate-change-c2-ang.pdf>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2020a). Ending long-term 
drinking water advisories. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.
gc.ca/eng/1506514143353/1533317130660>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2020b). Flooding in First 
Nations communities. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.
gc.ca/eng/1397740805675/1535120329798>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2019). National Inuit Climate 
Change Strategy. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/ITK_Climate-Change-Strategy_
English.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 528 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part 
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of working group 
II to the fifth assessment report of the intergovernmental panel 
on climate change (C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. 
Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. 
O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. 
MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White, Eds.). Cambridge, 
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
International Joint Commission (IJC). (2017). Human Health Effects 
of Cyanobacterial Toxins in the Great Lakes Region: A Science and 
Monitoring Assessment. Retrieved from <https://www.ijc.org/sites/
default/files/2019-04/HPABAlgalBloomFinal.pdf>
Jagai, J. S., Griffiths, J. K., Kirshen, P. K., Webb, P., & Naumova, 
E. N. (2012). Seasonal patterns of gastrointestinal illness 
and streamflow along the Ohio River. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 9(5), 1771–1790. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph9051771>
Jalliffier-Verne, I., Leconte, R., Huaringa-Alvarez, U., Madoux-
Humery, A. S., Galarneau, M., Servais, P., Prévost, M., & Dorner, 
S. (2015). Impacts of global change on the concentrations 
and dilution of combined sewer overflows in a drinking water 
source. The Science of the Total Environment, 508, 462–476. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.11.059>
Jung, Y., Jang, H., & Matthews, K. R. (2014). Effect of the food 
production chain from farm practices to vegetable processing 
on outbreak incidence. Microbial Biotechnology, 7(6), 517–527. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/1751-7915.12178>
Kang, D. H., Shi, X., Gao, H., Déry, S. J. (2014). On the changing 
contribution of snow to the hydrology of the Fraser River Basin, 
Canada. Journal of Hydrometeorology, 15(4), 1344-1365.
Kapos, V., Wicander, S., Salvaterra, T., Dawkins, K., & Hicks, 
C. (2019). The Role of the Natural Environment in Adaptation, 
Background Paper for the Global Commission on Adaptation. 
Washington, DC: Global Commission on Adaptation.
Kelly, M. T. (1991). Pathogenic Vibrionaceae in patients and the 
environment. Undersea Biomedical Research, 18(3), 193-6.
Khaira, G., & Galanis, E. (2007). Descriptive epidemiology of 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus and other Vibrio species infections in 
British Columbia: 2001-2006. Canada Communicable Disease 
Report = Releve des Maladies Transmissibles au Canada, 33(11), 
12–22.
Khan, S. J., Deere, D., Leusch, F. D., Humpage, A., Jenkins, 
M., & Cunliffe, D. (2015). Extreme weather events: Should 
drinking water quality management systems adapt to changing 
risk profiles?. Water research, 85, 124–136. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2015.08.018>
Kim, S., Chu, K. H., Al-Hamadani, Y. A. J., Park, C. M., Jang, 
M., Kim, D.-H., Yu, M., Heo, J., Yoon, Y. (2018). Removal of 
contaminants of emerging concern by membranes in water and 
wastewater: A review. Chemical Engineering Journal, 335(1), 
896–914. doi:10.1016/j.cej.2017.11.044
Kinney, P. L., Matte, T., Knowlton, K., Madrigano, J., Petkova, E., 
Weinberger, K., Quinn, A., Arend, M., & Pullen, J. (2015). New 
York City Panel on Climate Change 2015 Report. Chapter 5: 
Public health impacts and resiliency. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1336, 67–88. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
nyas.12588>
Kirby, R. M., Bartram, J., & Carr, R. (2003). Water in food 
production and processing: quantity and quality concerns. Food 
Control, 14(5), 283-299.
Klassen, J., & Allen, D. M. (2017). Assessing the risk of saltwater 
intrusion in coastal aquifers. Journal of Hydrology, 551, 730–
745. doi:10.1016/j.jhydrol.2017.02.044
Kleywegt, S., Pileggi, V., Yang, P., Hao, C., Zhao, X., Rocks, C., 
Thach, S., Cheung, P., & Whitehead, B. (2011). Pharmaceuticals, 
hormones and bisphenol A in untreated source and finished 
drinking water in Ontario, Canada--occurrence and treatment 
efficiency. The Science of the Total Environment, 409(8), 1481–
1488. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.01.010> 
Konrad, S., Paduraru, P., Romero-Barrios, P., Henderson, S. B., 
& Galanis, E. (2017). Remote sensing measurements of sea 
surface temperature as an indicator of Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
in oyster meat and human illnesses. Environmental Health, 16(1), 
92. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017-0301-x>
Kovacs, P., & Sandink, D. (2013). Best Practices for Reducing 
the Risk of Future Damage to Homes from Riverine and Urban 
Flooding: A Report on Recovery and Rebuilding in Southern 
Alberta. Toronto, ON: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. 
Retrieved from <http://www.iclr.org/images/Alberta_flood_
risk_2013_PDF.pdf>
Kovats, R. S., & Akhtar, R. (2008). Climate, climate change and 
human health in Asian cities. Environment and Urbanization, 
20(1), 165–175. doi:10.1177/0956247808089154 
Lake, I. R., Bentham, G., Kovats, R. S., & Nichols, G. L. (2005). 
Effects of weather and river flow on cryptosporidiosis. Journal 
of Water and Health, 3(4), 469–474. <https://doi.org/10.2166/
wh.2005.048>
Lal, A., Baker, M. G., Hales, S., & French, N. P. (2013). Potential 
effects of global environmental changes on cryptosporidiosis 
and giardiasis transmission. Trends in Parasitology, 29(2), 
83–90. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2012.10.005>
Lam, K. L., Stokes-Draut, J. R., Horvath, A., Lane, J. L., Kenway, 
S. J., & Lant, P. A. (2017). Life-cycle energy impacts for adapting 
an urban water supply system to droughts. Water Research, 127, 
139–149. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.watres.2017.10.016>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 529 
Le Guyader, F., Haugarreau, L., Miossec, L., Dubois, E., & 
Pommepuy, M. (2000). Three-year study to assess human 
enteric viruses in shellfish. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 66(8), 3241–3248. <https://doi.org/10.1128/
AEM.66.8.3241-3248.2000>
Lemmen, D., & Warren, F. (Eds.). (2004). Climate change impacts 
and adaptation: A Canadian perspective. Ottawa, ON: Natural 
Resources Canada.
Levinson, M., Whelan, M., & Butler, A. (2017). A Changing 
Climate: Assessing Health Impacts & Vulnerabilities Due to 
Climate Change within Simcoe Muskoka. Barrie, ON: Simcoe-
Muskoka District Health Unit. 
Levy, B. S., & Sidel, V. W. (2011). Water rights and water 
fights: preventing and resolving conflicts before they boil 
over. American Journal of Public Health, 101(5), 778–780. 
<https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2010.194670>
Levy, K., Woster, A. P., Goldstein, R. S., & Carlton, E. J. (2016). 
Untangling the Impacts of Climate Change on Waterborne 
Diseases: a Systematic Review of Relationships between 
Diarrheal Diseases and Temperature, Rainfall, Flooding, and 
Drought. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(10), 4905–
4922. <https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b06186>
Li, H., Li, K., & Zhang, X. (2016). Performance evaluation of 
Grassed swales for stormwater pollution control. Procedia 
Engineering, 154, 898–910. doi:10.1016/j.proeng.2016.07.481
Lloyd, E. (2017). Drought Disaster Planning and Adaptation in 
Rural British Columbia [Master’s Thesis, Royal Roads University]. 
Royal Roads University. Retrieved from <https://viurrspace.ca/
handle/10613/5021>
Logar-Henderson, C., Ling, R., Tuite, A. R., & Fisman, D. N. (2019). 
Effects of large-scale oceanic phenomena on non-cholera 
vibriosis incidence in the United States: implications for climate 
change. Epidemiology and Infection, 147, e243. <https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0950268819001316>
Lowe, D., Ebi, K. L., & Forsberg, B. (2013). Factors increasing 
vulnerability to health effects before, during and after 
floods. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 10(12), 7015–7067. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph10127015>
Luh, J., Royster, S., Sebastian, D., Ojomo, E., & Bartram, J. (2017). 
Expert assessment of the resilience of drinking water and 
sanitation systems to climate-related hazards. The Science of 
the Total Environment, 592, 334–344. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2017.03.084> 
Maalouf, H., Pommepuy, M., & Le Guyader, F. S. (2010). 
Environmental Conditions Leading to Shellfish Contamination 
and Related Outbreaks. Food and Environmental Virology, 2(3), 
136-45.
MacDougall, L., Majowicz, S., Doré, K., Flint, J., Thomas, 
K., Kovacs, S., & Sockett, P. (2008). Under-reporting of 
infectious gastrointestinal illness in British Columbia, 
Canada: who is counted in provincial communicable disease 
statistics? Epidemiology and Infection, 136(2), 248–256. 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268807008461>
Madoux-Humery, A. S., Dorner, S., Sauvé, S., Aboulfadl, K., 
Galarneau, M., Servais, P., & Prévost, M. (2016). The effects of 
combined sewer overflow events on riverine sources of drinking 
water. Water Research, 92, 218–227. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
watres.2015.12.033>
Mann, A. G., Tam, C. C., Higgins, C. D., & Rodrigues, L. C. 
(2007). The association between drinking water turbidity 
and gastrointestinal illness: a systematic review. BMC Public 
Health, 7, 256. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-7-256> 
Martin, D., Bélanger, D., Gosselin, P., Brazeau, J., Furgal, C., & 
Déry, S. (2007). Drinking water and potential threats to human 
health in Nunavik: adaptation strategies under climate change 
conditions. Arctic, 195-202.
Martin, D. A. (2016). At the nexus of fire, water and society. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 371, 1696. doi:10.1098/rstb.2015.0172
Martinez-Urtaza, J., Bowers. J. C., Trinanes, J., & DePaola, A. 
(2010). Climate anomalies and the increasing risk of Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus illnesses. Food Research 
International, 43(7), 1780-90. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2010.04.001> 
McCabe, R. M., Hickey, B. M., Kudela, R. M., Lefebvre, K. A., 
Adams, N. G., Bill, B. D., Gulland, F. M., Thomson, R. E., Cochlan, 
W. P., & Trainer, V. L. (2016). An unprecedented coastwide toxic 
algal bloom linked to anomalous ocean conditions. Geophysical 
Research Letters, 43(19), 10366–10376. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/2016GL070023>
McClearn, M. (2020). Climate change threatens Canada’s dams 
- but who’s keeping track? The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from 
<https://www.theglobeandmail.com/canada/article-climate-
change-will-push-canadas-dams-to-their-limits-but-due-to/> 
McGregor, D. (2012). Traditional knowledge: Considerations 
for protecting water in Ontario. International Indigenous Policy 
Journal, 3(3), 1-21. <https://doi.org/10.18584/iipj.2012.3.3.11> 
McKnight, E. (2017). Characterizing and monitoring the water 
properties and dynamics of Lhù’ààn Mǟn (Kluane Lake), 
Yukon, in the face of climate change. ARCTIC, 70(4), 435-40. 
doi:10.14430/arctic4692 
McLaughlin, J. B., DePaola, A., Bopp, C. A., Martinek, K. A., 
Napolilli, N. P., Allison, C. G., Murray, S. L., Thompson, E. 
C., Bird, M. M., & Middaugh, J. P. (2005). Outbreak of Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus gastroenteritis associated with Alaskan 
oysters. The New England Journal of Medicine, 353(14), 1463–
1470. <https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa051594> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 530 
McLeman, R. (2011). Climate change, migration and critical 
international security considerations: IOM Migration Research 
Series. Geneva, Switzerland: International Organization for 
Migration. Retrieved from <https://publications.iom.int/system/
files/pdf/mrs42.pdf>
McLeman, R. (2019). International migration and climate 
adaptation in an era of hardening borders. Nature Climate 
Change, 9(12), 911-918. doi:10.1038/s41558-019-0634-2
Mezzacapo, M., Takaro, T. K., Buckeridge, D., Foldy, S., & 
Boehme, J. (2018). Data Challenges for Environmental Factors 
and Gastrointestinal Illness in Great Lakes Cities. International 
Association for Great Lakes Research Annual Meeting 2018. 
Miller, A., Cumming, E., & McIntyre, L. (2018). Summary Working 
Group Report of the Environmental Transmission of Norovirus 
into Oysters. Vancouver, BC: Environmental Health Services and 
BC Centre for Disease Control.
Milly, P. C. D., Betancourt, J., Falkenmark, M., Hirsch, R. M., 
Kundzewicz, Z. W., Lettenmaier, D. P., & Stouffer, R. J. (2008). 
Stationarity is dead: Whither water management? Science, 
319(5863), 573-574. doi:10.1126/science.1151915.
Moffatt, H., & Struck, S. (2011). Water-borne disease outbreaks in 
Canadian Small Drinking Water Systems. National Collaborating 
Centres for Public Health. Retrieved from <https://www.ncceh.
ca/sites/default/files/SDWS_Water-borne_EN.pdf> 
Moore, S. K., Johnstone, J. A., Banas, N. S., & Salathé, E. P. 
(2015). Present-day and future climate pathways affecting 
Alexandrium blooms in Puget Sound, WA, USA. Harmful 
Algae, 48, 1–11. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2015.06.008> 
Moore, S. K., Trainer, V. L., Mantua, N. J., Parker, M. S., Laws, 
E. A., Backer, L. C., & Fleming, L. E. (2008). Impacts of climate 
variability and future climate change on harmful algal blooms 
and human health. Environmental Health, 7(Suppl. 2), S4.
Morris, T., & Brandes, O. M. (2013). The state of the water 
movement in British Columbia: a waterscape scan & needs 
assessment of BC watershed-based groups. POLIS Project on 
Ecological Governance, University of Victoria & Real Estate 
Foundation of British Columbia.
Morrison, K. D., & Kolden, C. A. (2015). Modeling the 
impacts of wildfire on runoff and pollutant transport from 
coastal watersheds to the nearshore environment. Journal 
of Environmental Management, 151, 113–123. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.12.025> 
Mudryk, L., Derksen, C., Howell, S., Laliberté, F., Thackeray, 
C., Sospe - dra-Alfonso, R., Vionnet, V., Kushner, P., & Brown, 
R. (2018). Canadian snow and sea ice: historical trends and 
projections. The Cryosphere, 12, 1157–1176. doi:10.5194/tc-12-
1157-2018
Murphy, H. M., Thomas, M. K., Medeiros, D. T., McFadyen, 
S., & Pintar, K. D. M. (2016a). Estimating the number of 
cases of acute gastrointestinal illness (AGI) associated with 
Canadian municipal drinking water systems. Epidemiology 
and Infection, 144(7), 1371–1385. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268815002083>
Murphy, H. M., Thomas, M. K., Schmidt, P. J., Medeiros, D. T., 
McFadyen, S., & Pintar, K. D. (2016b). Estimating the burden of 
acute gastrointestinal illness due to Giardia, Cryptosporidium, 
Campylobacter, E. coli O157 and norovirus associated with 
private wells and small water systems in Canada. Epidemiology 
and Infection, 144(7), 1355–1370. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268815002071> 
Naser, A. M., Rahman, M., Unicomb, L., Doza, S., Gazi, M. S., 
Alam, G. R., Karim, M. R., Uddin, M. N., Khan, G. K., Ahmed, K. 
M., Shamsudduha, M., Anand, S., Narayan, K., Chang, H. H., 
Luby, S. P., Gribble, M. O., & Clasen, T. F. (2019). Drinking Water 
Salinity, Urinary Macro-Mineral Excretions, and Blood Pressure 
in the Southwest Coastal Population of Bangladesh. Journal 
of the American Heart Association, 8(9), e012007. <https://doi.
org/10.1161/JAHA.119.012007> 
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (2018). Federal Flood 
Mapping Framework. Retrieved from <http://ftp.geogratis.gc.ca/
pub/nrcan_rncan/publications/ess_sst/308/308128/gip_112_
v2_0_en.pdf>
Natural Resources Canada (NRCan). (2021). Building Regional 
Adaptation Capacity and Expertise (BRACE) Program. Retrieved 
from <https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/climate-change/impacts-
adaptations/building-regional-adaptation-capacity-and-
expertise-brace-program/21324>
New Brunswick. (2019). Residents affected by flooding can apply 
for disaster relief and increased advance payments. Retrieved 
from <https://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/news/public_ 
alerts/public_alert.2019.05.0281.html>
Newton, A., Kendall, M., Vugia, D. J., Henao, O. L., & Mahon, 
B. E. (2012). Increasing rates of vibriosis in the United States, 
1996-2010: review of surveillance data from 2 systems. Clinical 
Infectious Diseases, 54 Suppl 5(0 5), S391–S395. <https://doi.
org/10.1093/cid/cis243> 
Ogden, N. H., Lindsay, L. R., Ludwig, A., Morse, A. P., Zheng, H., 
& Zhu, H. (2019). Weather-based forecasting of mosquito-borne 
disease outbreaks in Canada. Canada Communicable Disease 
Report = Releve des Maladies Transmissibles au Canada, 45(5), 
127–132. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.v45i05a03> 
Ouranos. (2018). Atlas web de la vulnérabilité de la population 
québécoise aux aléas climatiques. Retrieved from <https://atlas-
vulnerabilite.ulaval.ca/projet/>
Overland, J., Dunlea, E., Box, J. E., Corell, R., Forsius, M., 
Kattsov, V., Olsen, M. S., Pawlak, J., Reiersen, L. O., & Wang, M. 
(2018). The urgency of Arctic change. Polar Science, 21, 6-13. 
doi:10.1016/j.polar.2018.11.008
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 531 
Paillard, C., Le Roux, F., & Borrego, J. J. (2004). Bacterial disease 
in marine bivalves, a review of recent studies: trends and 
evolution. Aquatic Living Resources, 17(4), 477-98. <https://doi.
org/10.1051/alr:2004054> 
Parkes, M. W., Morrison, K. E., Bunch, M. J., Hallström, L. K., 
Neudoerffer, R. C., Venema, H. D., & Waltner-Toews, D. (2010). 
Towards integrated governance for water, health and social–
ecological systems: The watershed governance prism. Global 
Environmental Change, 20(4), 693-704.
Parveen, S., Hettiarachchi, K. A., Bowers, J. C., Jones, J. L., 
Tamplin, M. L., McKay, R., Beatty, W., Brohawn, K., Dasilva, L. 
V., & Depaola, A. (2008). Seasonal distribution of total and 
pathogenic Vibrio parahaemolyticus in Chesapeake Bay oysters 
and waters. International Journal of Food Microbiology, 128(2), 
354–361. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.09.019> 
Patrick, R. (2018). Adapting to Climate Change through Source 
Water Protection: Case Studies from Alberta and Saskatchewan, 
Canada. International Indigenous Policy Journal, 9(3). 
doi:10.18584/iipj.2018.9.3.1
Perl, T. M., Bédard, L., Kosatsky, T., Hockin, J. C., Todd, E. C., & 
Remis, R. S. (1990). An outbreak of toxic encephalopathy caused 
by eating mussels contaminated with domoic acid. The New 
England Journal of Medicine, 322(25), 1775–1780. <https://doi.
org/10.1056/NEJM199006213222504> 
Pescaroli, G., & Alexander, D. (2018). Understanding compound, 
inter­connected, interacting, and cascading risks: A holistic 
framework. Risk Analysis, 38(11), 2245-2257. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/risa13128>
Pick, F. R. (2016). Blooming algae: a Canadian perspective on 
the rise of toxic cyanobacteria; Canadian Journal of Fisheries 
and Aquatic Sciences, 73(7), 1149–1158. <https://doi.
org/10.1139/cjfas-2015-0470> 
Picketts, I. M., Parkes, M. W., & Déry, S. (2017). Climate change 
and resource development impacts in watersheds: insights from 
the Nechako River Basin, Canada. The Canadian Geographer, 
61(2), 196-211. <https://doi.org/10.1111/cag.12327>
Pons, W., Young, I., Truong, J., Jones-Bitton, A., McEwen, S., 
Pintar, K., & Papadopoulos, A. (2015). A Systematic Review of 
Waterborne Disease Outbreaks Associated with Small Non-
Community Drinking Water Systems in Canada and the United 
States. PloS one, 10(10), e0141646. <https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0141646> 
Prakash, A., Medcof, J. C., & Tennant, A. D. (1971). Paralytic 
shellfish poisoning in eastern Canada. Fisheries Research Board 
of Canada. Retrieved from <https://waves-vagues.dfo-mpo.
gc.ca/Library/1498.pdf>
Public Sector Digest Inc. (PSD), Canadian Water Network, 
Canadian Water and Wastewater Association, Federation 
of Canadian Municipalities. (2019). Cases Studies: Using 
Better Data to Identify Climate Change-Related Infrastructure 
Vulnerabilities in Canadian Communities. Retrieved from 
<https://cwn-rce.ca/wp-content/uploads/Case-Studies-Using-
Better-Data-to-Identify-Climate-Change-Related-Infrastructure-
Vulnerabilities-in-Canadian-Communities.pdf>
Ravel, A., Greig, J., Tinga, C., Todd, E., Campbell, G., Cassidy, 
M., Marshal, B., & Pollari, F. (2009). Exploring historical 
Canadian food-borne outbreak data sets for human illness 
attribution. Journal of Food Protection, 72(9), 1963-1976.
Raymond, C. M., Frantzeskaki, N., Kabisch, N., Berry, P., Breil, M., 
Nita, M. R., Geneletti, D., & Calfapietra, C. (2017). A framework 
for assessing and implementing the co-benefits of nature-based 
solutions in urban areas. Environmental Science & Policy, 77, 15-
24. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2017.07.008> 
Rigaud, K. K., de Sherbinin, A., Jones, B., Bergmann, J., Clement, 
V., Ober, K., Schewe, J., Adamo, S., McCusker, B., Heuser, S., & 
Midgley, A. (2018). Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate 
Migration. Washington, DC: World Bank. Retrieved from <https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/29461> 
Robinne, F.N., Bladon, K.D., Silins,U., Emelko, M.B., Flannigan, 
M.D., Parisien, M.A., Wang, X.,. Kienzle, S.W., & Dupont, D.P. 
(2019). A Regional-Scale Index for Assessing the Exposure 
of Drinking-Water Sources to Wildfires. Forests, 10(5), 384. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/f10050384> 
Rossi, R. J., & Toran, L. (2019). Exploring the potential for 
groundwater inundation in coastal US cities due to interactions 
between sewer infrastructure and global change. Environmental 
Earth Sciences, 78(8), 258. doi:10.1007/s12665-019-8261-9 
Sanderson, D., Picketts, I. M., Déry, S. J., Fell, B., Baker, S., 
Lee-Johnson, E., & Auger, M. (2015). Climate change and water 
at Stellat-en First Nation, British Columbia, Canada: Insights 
from western science and traditional knowledge. The Canadian 
Geographer, 59(2), 136-150.
Schnitter, R., & Berry, P. (2019). The Climate Change, Food 
Security and Human Health Nexus in Canada: A Framework to 
Protect Population Health. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 16(14), 2531. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph16142531> 
Schuster, C. J., Ellis, A. G., Robertson, W. J., Charron, D. F., 
Aramini, J. J., Marshall, B. J., & Medeiros, D. T. (2005). Infectious 
disease outbreaks related to drinking water in Canada, 1974-
2001. Canadian Journal of Public Health = Revue Canadienne 
de Sante Publique, 96(4), 254–258. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
BF03405157>  
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 532 
Schwartz, J., Levin, R., & Goldstein, R. (2000). Drinking 
water turbidity and gastrointestinal illness in the elderly 
of Philadelphia. Journal of Epidemiology and Community 
Health, 54(1), 45–51. <https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.54.1.45> 
Séguin, J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.
gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf>
Semenza, J. C., Herbst, S., Rechenburg, A., Suk, J. E., Höser, C., 
Schreiber, C., & Kistemann, T. (2012). Climate Change Impact 
Assessment of Food- and Waterborne Diseases. Critical Reviews 
in Environmental Science and Technology, 42(8), 857–890. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2010.534706> 
Seneviratne, S. I., Corti, T., Davin, E. L., Hirschi, M., Jaeger, E. 
B., Lehner, I., Orlowsky, B., & Teuling, A. J. (2010). Investigating 
soil moisture–climate interactions in a changing climate: A 
review. Earth-Science Reviews, 99(3-4), 125–161. doi:10.1016/j.
earscirev.2010.02.004
Shamkhali Chenar, S., & Deng, Z. (2017). Environmental 
indicators for human norovirus outbreaks. International Journal 
of Environmental Health Research, 27(1), 40–51. <https://doi.org
/10.1080/09603123.2016.1257705> 
Sharma, A., Burn, S., Gardner, T., & Gregory A. (2010). Role of 
decentralised systems in the transition of urban water systems; 
Water Science and Technology. Water Supply, 10(4), 577–583. 
doi:10.2166/ws.2010.187
Shrubsole, D., Walters, D., Veale, B., & Mitchell, B. (2017). 
Integrated Water Resources Management in Canada: the 
experience of watershed agencies. International Journal of Water 
Resources Development, 33(3), 349-359. <https://doi.org/10.108
0/07900627.2016.1244048> 
Shuster-Wallace, C., Sandford, R., & Merril, S. (2019). Water 
futures for the world we want: Opportunities for research, 
practice, and leadership in achieving SDG6. Saskatoon, SK: 
University of Saskatchewan. Retrieved from <https://gwf.usask.
ca/documents/water_futures_for_the_world_we_want.pdf>
Shuster-Wallace, C., Sandford, R., & Merril, S. (2020). Climate 
change, pollution and urbanization threaten water in Canada. 
The Conversation. Retrieved from <https://theconversation.com/
climate-change-pollution-and-urbanization-threaten-water-in-
canada-127876>
Smith, B. A., & Fazil, A. (2019). Climate change and infectious 
diseases: The challenges: How will climate change impact 
microbial food-borne disease in Canada? Canada Communicable 
Disease Report, 45(4), 108-113. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.
v45i04a05>
Smith, D. M., Matthews, J. H., Bharati, L., Borgomeo, E., 
McCartney, M., Mauroner, A., Nicol, A., Rodriguez, D., Sadoff, C., 
Suhardiman, D., Timboe, I., Amarnath, G., & Anisha, N. (2019). 
Adaptation’s thirst: Accelerating the convergence of water and 
climate action. Background Paper prepared for the 2019 report 
of the Global Commission on Adaptation. Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from <http://www.iwmi.cgiar.org/Publications/Other/
PDF/adaptations-thirst-gca-background-paper.pdf> 
Somers, G., & Nishimura, P. (Eds). (2012). Managing groundwater 
resources: Assessing the impact of climate change on salt-water 
intrusion of coastal aquifers in Atlantic Canada. Prince Edward 
Island Environment, Labour and Justice. Retrieved from <http://
www.gov.pe.ca/photos/original/cle_WA2.pdf>
Speight, V. (2018). Sustainable water systems of the future: how 
to ensure public health protection? Perspectives in Public Health, 
138(5), 248–249. doi:10.1177/1757913918790146 
Statistics Canada. (2009). Human Activity and the Environment: 
Annual Statistics. Retrieved from <https://www150.
statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/pub/16-201-x/16-201-x2009000-eng.
pdf?st=2TCSV5or> 
Statistics Canada. (2011). Households and the environment 
survey (HES). Retrieved from <https://www23.statcan.gc.ca/
imdb/p2SV.pl?Function=getSurvey&SDDS=3881> 
Statistics Canada. (2013). Survey of Drinking Water Plants 
2011. Minister of Industry. Retrieved from <https://www150.
statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/pub/16-403-x/16-403-x2013001-eng.
pdf?st=JPnR4dOl> 
Statistics Canada. (2021). Table 38-10-0277-01 Treatment of 
main source of water by households, Canada, provinces and 
census metropolitan areas (CMA). Retrieved from <https://
www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=3810027701> 
Steffen, W., Richardson, K., Rockström, J., Cornell, S. E., Fetzer, 
I., Bennett, E. M., Biggs, R., Carpenter, S. R., de Vries, W., de Wit, 
C. A., Folke, C., Gerten, D., Heinke, J., Mace, G. M., Persson, L. 
M., Ramanathan, V., Reyers, B., & Sörlin, S. (2015). Planetary 
boundaries: guiding human development on a changing 
planet. Science, 347(6223), 1259855. <https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1259855> 
Stephen, C., & Duncan, C. (2017). Can wildlife surveillance 
contribute to public health preparedness for climate change? A 
Canadian perspective. Climatic Change, 141(2), 259-271.
Sundarambal, P., Balasubramanian, R., Tkalich, P., & He, J. 
(2010). Impact of biomass burning on ocean water quality 
in Southeast Asia through atmospheric deposition: field 
observations. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 10(23), 
11323-11336. <https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-10-11323-2010>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 533 
Taylor, M., Cheng, J., Sharma, D., Bitzikos, O., Gustafson, R., 
Fyfe, M., Greve, R., Murti, M., Stone, J., Honish, L., Mah, V., Punja, 
N., Hexemer, A., McIntyre, L., Henry, B., Kendall, P., Atkinson, 
R., Buenaventura, E., Martinez-Perez, A., Galanis, E., … Team, 
T. (2018). Outbreak of Vibrio parahaemolyticus Associated 
with Consumption of Raw Oysters in Canada, 2015. Food-
borne Pathogens and Disease, 15(9), 554–559. <https://doi.
org/10.1089/fpd.2017.2415> 
Taylor, M., McIntyre, L., Ritson, M., Stone, J., Bronson, R., 
Bitzikos, O., Rourke, W., Galanis, E., & Outbreak Investigation 
Team. (2013a). Outbreak of Diarrhetic Shellfish Poisoning 
associated with mussels, British Columbia, Canada. Marine 
Drugs, 11(5), 1669–1676. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
md11051669> 
Taylor, R. G., Scanlon, B., Döll, P., Rodell, M., van Beek, R., Wada, 
Y., Longuevergne, L., Leblanc, M., Famiglietti, J. S., Edmunds, M., 
… Holger, T. (2013b). Ground water and climate change. Nature 
Climate Change, 3(4), 322–329. doi:10.1038/nclimate1744 
Thienpont, J. R., Johnson, D., Nesbitt, H., Kokelj, S. V., Pisaric, 
M .F., Smol, J. P. (2012). Arctic coastal freshwater ecosystem 
responses to a major saltwater intrusion: A landscape-scale 
palaeolimnological analysis. The Holocene, 22(12), 1451-1460. 
<https://doi.org/10.1177/0959683612455538> 
Thistlethwaite, J. Miano, A., Henstra, D., & Scott, D. (2020). 
Indigenous Reserve Lands in Canada Face High Flood Risk. 
Centre for International Governance and innovation. Retrieved 
from <https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/
documents/PB%20no.159.pdf>
Thomas, M. K., Murray, R., Flockhart, L., Pintar, K., Pollari, 
F., Fazil, A., Nesbitt, A., & Marshall, B. (2013). Estimates of 
the burden of food-borne illness in Canada for 30 specified 
pathogens and unspecified agents, circa 2006. Food-borne 
Pathogens and Disease, 10(7), 639–648. <https://doi.
org/10.1089/fpd.2012.1389>
Thurton, D. (2017). Fort McMurray seeing big spike in water-
treatment costs. CBC News Edmonton. Retrieved from <https://
www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/fort-mcmurray-wildfire-
water-treatmentcosts-contaminants-1.3973249>
Todd, E. C. (1997). Seafood-associated diseases and control 
in Canada. Revue scientifique et technique (International Office 
of Epizootics), 16(2), 661–672. <https://doi.org/10.20506/
rst.16.2.1058>
Trtanj, J., Jantarasami, L., Brunkard, J., Collier, T., Jacobs, 
J., Lipp, E., McLellan, S., Moore, S., Paerl, H., Ravenscroft, J., 
Sengco, M., & Thurston, J. (2016). Climate Impacts on Water-
Related Illness. In A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. L. Gamble, C. B. 
Beard, J. E. Bell, D. Dodgen, R. J. Eisen, N. Fann, M. D. Hawkins, 
S. C. Herring, L. Jantarasami, D. M. Mills, S. Saha, M. C. Sarofim, 
J. Trtanj, & L. Ziska (Eds.), The Impacts of Climate Change on 
Human Health in the United States: A Scientific Assessment 
(p. 157-187). Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research 
Program. <http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/J0R49NQX> 
Turgeon, P., Michel, P., Levallois, P., Archambault, M., & Ravel, 
A. (2011). Fecal Contamination of Recreational Freshwaters: 
the Effect of Time-Independent Agroenvironmental Factors. 
Water Quality, Exposure and Health, 3(2), 109–118. doi:10.1007/
s12403-011-0048-5
Turner, J. W., Good, B., Cole, D., & Lipp, E. K. (2009). Plankton 
composition and environmental factors contribute to Vibrio 
seasonality. The ISME Journal, 3(9), 1082–1092. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/ismej.2009.50> 
Uhlmann, S., Galanis, E., Takaro, T., Mak, S., Gustafson, L., 
Embree, G., Bellack, N., Corbett, K., & Isaac-Renton, J. (2009). 
Where’s the pump? Associating sporadic enteric disease with 
drinking water using a geographic information system, in British 
Columbia, Canada, 1996-2005. Journal of Water and Health, 7(4), 
692–698. <https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2009.108> 
Uslu, M. O., Jasim, S., Arvai, A., Bewtra, J., & Biswas, N. (2013). A 
survey of Occurrence and Risk Assessment of Pharmaceutical 
Substances in the Great Lakes Basin. Ozone: Science and 
Engineering, 35(4), 249-262. doi:10.1080/01919512.2013.793595 
Vandersea, M. W., Kibler, S. R., Tester, P. A., Holderied, K., 
Hondolero, D. E., Powell, K., Baird, S., Doroff, A., Dugan, D., 
& Litaker, R. W. (2018). Environmental factors influencing 
the distribution and abundance of Alexandrium catenella in 
Kachemak bay and lower cook inlet, Alaska. Harmful Algae, 77, 
81–92. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hal.2018.06.008> 
Vezzulli, L., Grande, C., Reid, P. C., Helaouet, P., Edwards, M., 
Hofle, M. G., Brettar, I., Colwell, R. R., Pruzzo, C. (2016). Climate 
influence on Vibrio and associated human diseases during the 
past half-century in the coastal North Atlantic. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Science of the United States of America, 
113(34), E5062-71. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1609157113> 
Vezzulli, L., Pruzzo, C., Huq, A., & Colwell, R. R. (2010). 
Environmental reservoirs of Vibrio cholerae and their role in 
cholera. Environmental Microbiology Reports, 2(1), 27–33. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-2229.2009.00128.x> 
Vincent, L. A., Zhang, X., Brown, R. D., Feng, Y., Mekis, E., 
Milewska, E. J., Wan, H., Wang, X. L. (2015). Observed Trends 
in Canada’s Climate and Influence of Low-Frequency Variability 
Modes. Journal of Climate, 28(11), 4545–4560. doi:10.1175/
JCLI-D-14-00697.1 
Vinh, D. C., Mubareka, S., Fatoye, B., Plourde, P., & Orr, P. (2006). 
Vibrio vulnificus Septicemia After Handling Tilapia Species Fish: 
A Canadian Case Report and Review. The Canadian Journal of 
Infectious Diseases & Medical Microbiology = Journal Canadien 
des Maladies Infectieuses et de la Microbiologie Medicale, 17(2), 
129–132. <https://doi.org/10.1155/2006/164681> 
Visciano, P., Schirone, M., Berti, M., Milandri, A., Tofalo, R., 
& Suzzi, G. (2016). Marine Biotoxins: Occurrence, Toxicity, 
Regulatory Limits and Reference Methods. Frontiers 
in Microbiology, 7, 1051. <https://doi.org/10.3389/
fmicb.2016.01051> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 534 
Vollaard, A. M., Ali, S., van Asten, H. A., Widjaja, S., Visser, L. G., 
Surjadi, C., & van Dissel, J. T. (2004). Risk factors for typhoid 
and paratyphoid fever in Jakarta, Indonesia. JAMA, 291(21), 
2607–2615. <https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.291.21.2607>
Wang, J., & Deng, Z. (2016). Modeling and Prediction of Oyster 
Norovirus Outbreaks along Gulf of Mexico Coast. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 124(5), 627–633. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1509764> 
Wang, X., Thompson, D. K., Marshall, G. A., Tymstra, C., Carr, R., 
& Flannigan, M. D. (2015). Increasing frequency of extreme fire 
weather in Canada with climate change. Climatic Change, 130(4), 
573–586. doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1375-5 
Waterfront Toronto. (2020). Corktown Common Park. Retrieved 
from <https://waterfrontoronto.ca/nbe/portal/waterfront/Home/
waterfronthome/projects/corktown+commo> 
Watson, V. (2017). Perception of water among the Inuit 
community in Iqaluit, Nanvut: An anti-colonialist feminist 
political ecology [Master’s Thesis, York University]. Toronto, 
ON: York University. Retrieved from <https://yorkspace.library.
yorku.ca/xmlui/bitstream/handle/10315/34466/Watson_
Victoria_C_2017_Masters.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y> 
Wiener, M. J., Jafvert, C. T., & Nies, L. F. (2016). The assessment 
of water use and reuse through reported data: A US case 
study. The Science of the Total Environment, 539, 70–77. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.08.114> 
Westra, S., Alexander, L. V., & Zwiers, F. W. (2013). Global 
Increasing Trends in Annual Maximum Daily Precipitation. 
Journal of Climate, 26(11), 3904–3918. <https://doi.
org/10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00502.1> 
Whitehead, P. G., Wilby, R. L., Battarbee, R. W., Kernan, M., & 
Wade, A. J. (2009). A review of the potential impacts of climate 
change on surface water quality. Hydrological Sciences Journal, 
54(1), 101–123. <https://doi.org/10.1623/hysj.54.1.101> 
Wilson, J., Aramini, J., Clarke, S., Novotny, M., Quist, M., & 
Keegan, V. (2009). Retrospective surveillance for drinking water-
related illnesses in Canada, 1993-2008. Novometrix Research 
Inc. Retrieved from <http://www.ncceh.ca/sites/default/files/
DW_Illnesses_Surveillance_Aug_2009.pdf> 
World Health Organization. (‎2013)‎. Protecting health from 
climate change: vulnerability and adaptation assessment. 
Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from <https://apps.who.int/iris/
handle/10665/104200>
World Health Organization. (2014). Constitution of the World 
Health Organization. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/
governance/eb/who_constitution_en.pdf>
World Health Organization. (2017). Climate-resilient water safety 
plans: managing health risks associated with climate variability 
and change. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from <https://apps.
who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/258722/9789241512794-
eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y> 
Wotton, M. B., Flannigan, M. D., & Marshall, G. A. (2017). 
Potential climate change impacts on fire intensity and key 
wildfire suppression thresholds in Canada. Environmental 
Research Letters, 12(9). doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa7e6e
Wu, X., Lu, Y., Zhou, S., Chen, L., & Xu, B. (2016). Impact of 
climate change on human infectious diseases: Empirical 
evidence and human adaptation. Environment International, 86, 
14-23. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.09.007> 
Yusa, A., Berry, P., J Cheng, J., Ogden, N., Bonsal, B., Stewart, 
R., & Waldick, R. (2015). Climate Change, Drought and Human 
Health in Canada. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 12(7), 8359–8412. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph120708359> 
Zamyadi, A., Dorner, S., Sauvé, S., Ellis, D., Bolduc, A., Bastien, 
C., & Prévost, M. (2013). Species-dependence of cyanobacteria 
removal efficiency by different drinking water treatment 
processes. Water Research, 47(8), 2689–2700. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2013.02.040>
Zamyadi, A., Romanis, C., Mills, T., Neilan, B., Choo, F., Coral, 
L. A., Gale, D., Newcombe, G., Crosbie, N., Stuetz, R., & 
Henderson, R. K. (2019). Diagnosing water treatment critical 
control points for cyanobacterial removal: Exploring benefits 
of combined microscopy, next-generation sequencing, and cell 
integrity methods. Water Research, 152, 96–105. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.watres.2019.01.002>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, H., 
Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G. & Kharin, V. V. (2019). Changes 
in Temperature and Precipitation Across Canada. In E. Bush 
& D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019> 
Zimmerman, L. (2015). Phytoplankton. In Biological Resources. 
Retrieved from <https://coast.noaa.gov/data/docs/nerrs/
Reserves_ACE_SiteProfile.pdf>
Zubrycki, K., Roy, D., Venema, H. D., & Brooks, D. B. (2011). Water 
Security in Canada: Responsibilities of the federal government. 
Winnipeg, MB: International Institute for Sustainable 
Development. Retrieved from <https://www.iisd.org/system/
files/publications/water_security_canada.pdf>
CHAPTER 8
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Food Safety 
and Security
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 536 
Lead Authors
Sherilee L. Harper, University of Alberta
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Contributing Authors
Aamir Fazil, Public Health Agency of Canada
Manon Fleury, Public Health Agency of Canada
James Ford, University of Leeds
Nia King, Queen’s University
Alexandra Lesnikowski, Concordia University
Deborah McGregor, York University
Jaclyn Paterson, Health Canada
Ben Smith, Public Health Agency of Canada
Hannah Tait Neufeld, University of Waterloo
Acknowledgements
Amreen Babujee, University of Alberta 
Katharine Neale, University of Alberta 
Alexandra Sawatzky, University of Alberta 
Shanaya Singh, Health Canada
Suggested Citation
Harper, S. L., Schnitter, R., Fazil, A., Fleury, M., Ford, J., King, N., 
Lesnikowski, A., McGregor, D., Paterson, J., Smith, B., & Neufeld, H. T. 
(2022). Food Security and Food Safety. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), 
Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for 
Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.  
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 537 
Table of Contents
Summary
539
Key Messages
539
8.1 Introduction
544
8.2 Conceptual Framework and Methods
545
8.2.1 Conceptualizing Climate Change, Food Systems, and Human Health
545
8.2.2 Identifying, Assessing, and Synthesizing Evidence
548
8.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Systems in Canada 
549
8.4 Climate Change, Food Security, and Health in Canada
553
8.4.1 Food Security in Canada
553
Box 8.1 Food colonization increases climate change vulnerability for Indigenous Peoples 
555
8.4.2 Food Security as a Public Health Issue
556
8.4.3 Climate Change Impacts on the Pillars of Food Security
558
8.4.3.1 Climate Change Impacts on Food Availability
558
8.4.3.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Accessibility
559
8.4.3.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Utilization
560
8.4.3.3.1 Climate Change Impacts on Nutrient Availability
560
8.4.3.3.2 Impacts of Climate-Related Biodiversity Loss on Nutrient Access
561
Box 8.2 Climate change impacts on marine environments among coastal First Nations 
communities in British Columbia
562
8.4.3.3.3 Impacts of Dietary Transitions and Substitutions on Nutrient Use
563
8.4.3.4 Climate Change Impacts on Food Stability
563
8.5 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety in Canada
564
8.5.1 Climate Change, Food Safety, and Food-Borne Pathogens
564
8.5.1.1 Food System Pathways Through Which Climate Change Affects Food Safety
567
Box 8.3 Climate change impacts throughout food systems can increase public health risks: 
Escherichia coli O157 in lettuce as an example of a climate-sensitive food-borne pathogen
568
8.5.1.1.1 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Food Production
571
Box 8.4 Projected impacts of climate change on V. parahaemolyticus in British Columbia oysters
573
8.5.1.1.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Food Processing 
and Distribution
574
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 538 
8.5.1.1.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Food Preparation 
and Consumption
575
8.5.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Chemical Contaminants
576
8.5.2.1 Climate Change Impacts on Contaminants Throughout Food Systems
577
8.5.2.1.1 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Chemical Contamination 
During Food Production
577
8.5.2.1.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Chemical Contamination 
During Food Preparation and Consumption
581
8.5.2.2 Climate Change Challenges Related to Chemical Hazards in Foods in the Arctic 
and Sub-Arctic
581
8.6 Adaptation to Reduce Health Risks
583
8.6.1 Climate-Centred Adaptation Options
583
8.6.1.1 Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessments
583
8.6.1.2 Adaptation Planning 
585
8.6.1.2.1 Adaptation Leadership in Northern Canada to Address Risks to 
Food Security and Safety
586
8.6.1.3 Surveillance 
588
Box 8.5 Adaptation actions to reduce emerging V. parahaemolyticus risks in oysters
589
8.6.1.4 Risk Communication and Education
590
8.6.2 Vulnerability-Centred Adaptations 
590
8.6.2.1 Tackling the Root Causes of Vulnerability
590
Box 8.6 Indigenous food sovereignty as a climate change solution
591
8.6.2.2 Strengthening Health Systems
592
8.6.3 Adaptation Progress and Future Challenges
593
8.7 Knowledge Gaps and Recommendations 
594
8.7.1 Food Security 
594
8.7.2 Food Safety 
595
8.8 Conclusions 
597
8.9 References
598
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 539 
Summary
Changes in climate are affecting food security and food safety in Canada. Climate change is increasing risks 
of food insecurity through disruptions to food systems, rises in food prices, and negative nutritional effects. 
Precipitation, temperature, and extreme weather events are projected to increase the introduction of pathogens 
(viruses, bacteria, and parasites) to food, causing food-borne illness. Chemical contaminants that have harmful 
health effects may also be introduced into Canada’s food systems more frequently through various climate-
sensitive environmental exposure pathways. The impacts of climate change on food security and food safety will 
not be equitably distributed, and Canada’s Northern region and Indigenous Peoples will likely experience the most 
severe effects. Adaptation measures include monitoring of health outcomes related to food safety; conducting 
vulnerability and adaptation assessments that address climate-related impacts to food security and food safety; 
utilizing both Western science and Indigenous knowledge; developing adaptation plans within all levels of 
government and in all regions, particularly in Northern Canada; conducting risk communication and education; and 
tackling root causes of vulnerability. 
Key Messages
•	
Warming temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, and more frequent and severe extreme 
weather events will increase risks to key components of food systems in Canada, such as the 
production, processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption of food. 
•	
Climate change impacts on food systems, rises in food prices, and negative nutritional effects 
have already negatively influenced food security and food safety, both of which have important 
implications for human health. Globally, climate change is projected to have negative effects 
on the nutritional content and overall yield of some agricultural commodities, particularly 
subsistence crops including grains and legumes. Changes in biodiversity from climate change 
may also result in nutritional challenges, for example, from declining availability of traditional food 
sources. As a result, climate change is projected to affect the health of Canadians by affecting 
the amount of nutrients they obtain from their food, as well as the stability of food availability, 
accessibility, and use. 
•	
Climate change is projected to exacerbate existing food safety challenges in Canada and create 
new ones. Precipitation, temperature, and extreme weather events affect the introduction of 
pathogens to foods and their ability to grow to levels that cause food-borne illness. Climate 
change may also affect human behaviours, such as food handling and consumption practices 
(such as barbeques, picnics). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 540 
•	
Climate change impacts on food security and food safety vary greatly across Canada, reflecting 
underlying societal, cultural, environmental, and economic factors and inequities. While it is 
difficult to estimate the precise magnitude of current and future climate change impacts on food 
insecurity, these impacts are expected to exacerbate health-related risks for Canadians. 
•	
Climate change may increase the exposure of Canadians to chemical contaminants, such 
as persistent organic pollutants and heavy metals that can have harmful health effects. 
These chemical contaminants can be introduced into Canada’s food systems through various 
environmental exposure pathways and then accumulate in plant and animal tissues that are 
consumed. Many of these chemicals can exacerbate existing health risks for Canadians and 
create new ones, which underlines the importance of Canada’s surveillance programs.
•	
Climate change is affecting Indigenous food systems and contributing to declining availability, 
accessibility, and quality of traditionally harvested foods, which play an important role in 
community and individual health and well-being. Climate change has already affected nutrition, 
mental health outcomes, and food sovereignty. Indigenous food security must be understood 
within the context of historical and ongoing colonialism. Indigenous self-determination and the 
gendered and intergenerational transmission of Indigenous knowledge are central to Indigenous 
food security and sovereignty and needed adaptation actions. 
•	
Adaptation actions that increase food system resilience, including collaboration of health 
authorities among a broad range of food system actors and sectors, are necessary to minimize 
risks to human health from climate change. Efforts are underway across Canada to respond to 
and prepare for the impacts of climate change on food systems in order to protect and support 
health and well-being. Further adaptations will reduce future risks. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 541 
Conceptual framework outlining the relationships among food security, food safety, and health in a changing climate.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 542 
Overview of Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety and Security
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Food security
•	 Increased disruptions to 
food systems affecting the 
stability of food availability, 
accessibility, and use
•	 Climate-related reductions in 
biological diversity in sensitive 
ecological environments, 
leading to less sustainable 
land and aquatic ecosystems
•	 Modification of nutrient 
content and overall production 
of some agricultural 
commodities
•	 Increased economic pressures 
on low-income and subsistence 
food users due to increasing 
food prices and changing 
availability of local and 
traditionally harvested foods
•	 Impacts on nutrition due to decreased 
availability of local and traditional foods
•	 Impacts on nutrition due to effects on 
the amount of nutrients obtained from 
food
•	 Adverse birth outcomes
•	 Impacts on maternal health
•	 Impacts on child development
•	 Exacerbation of chronic diseases
•	 Impacts on mental health and emotional 
well-being
•	 Impacts on health services; for example, 
adults experiencing food insecurity 
require more health care services and 
are more likely to become high-cost 
health care users
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 543 
HEALTH IMPACT OR 
HAZARD CATEGORY
CLIMATE-RELATED CAUSES
POSSIBLE HEALTH EFFECTS
Food safety
•	 Changing climatic conditions 
can affect the transportation 
and deposition of chemical 
contaminants in food systems
•	 Acute and slow-onset climate 
change impacts (such as 
changes in precipitation, 
temperature, and extreme 
weather events) can alter 
the occurrence and survival 
of microbial pathogens in 
food and result in increased 
prevalence of food-borne illness
•	 Extended warm weather 
seasons can increase the 
risks to Canadians via 
increased opportunities for 
food mishandling (such as 
barbequing, picnics) and 
changes to food preferences 
based on food availability (such 
as extended availability of high-
risk food products such as fresh 
produce), increasing risk of 
exposure to food-borne illness
•	 Chemical toxicity at high levels can lead 
to cancer, cardiovascular disorders, 
kidney and bone damage, negative 
immune system effects, developmental, 
endocrine disruption, reproductive 
disorders, cognitive, behavioural, and 
motor impairments; currently the levels 
of chemical contaminants in retail foods 
is monitored closely in Canada, which 
underlines the importance of Canada’s 
surveillance programs in a changing 
climate
•	 Microbial food-borne illnesses (giardiasis, 
campylobacteriosis, salmonellosis) 
lead to diarrhea, vomiting, stomach 
cramps, low-grade fever, chills, headache, 
muscle aches, fatigue, weight loss, 
loss of appetite, severe dehydration, 
inflammation of the brain, meningitis, 
liver disease, birth defects, stillbirth, and 
premature delivery
•	 In severe cases, chemical or microbial 
food-borne illness can result in death
•	 Impacts on health services, for example, 
enhanced national and international 
surveillance and monitoring of food-
borne illness
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 544 
8.1 Introduction
Climate change has widespread implications for food systems globally and in Canada, with important 
health consequences. These climate change impacts touch all components of food systems, including food 
production, processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption. Without adaptation, climate change will 
result in a negative net impact on global food systems (Porter et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2014; Springmann 
et al., 2016; IPCC, 2019a). For instance, increasing water insecurity, combined with rising crop irrigation 
demands due to warming temperatures and less rainfall, are projected to result in substantial global net 
reductions in staple crop yields (Jiménez Cisneros et al., 2014; Porter et al., 2014); decreased fisheries catch 
(FAO, 2015; Arnell et al., 2016); lower nutrient concentrations in staple foods (FAO, 2015); and increased 
global food prices (Porter et al., 2014). Such climate change impacts on global food systems have important 
implications for both food security (i.e., stable access to sufficient and nutritious food to meet dietary needs 
and food preferences for healthy lives) and food safety (i.e., access to food that is not contaminated with 
pathogens or chemical contaminants at levels that could lead to adverse health effects). Thus, these impacts 
will pose significant challenges to human health, including impacts on nutrition, mental wellness, and food-
borne illnesses (Bradbear & Friel, 2013; Bowen & Ebi, 2015; Springmann et al., 2016). These health risks are 
substantial; globally, food-related mortality attributed to climate change is projected to “far exceed” all other 
climate-related health effects (WHO, 2014). 
In Canada, climate change is already affecting food security and safety, particularly in the North (Berry et 
al., 2014a; CCA, 2014). Climate change impacts on food and agriculture, as well as health and well-being, 
are among the top climate change threats that are expected to lead to significant losses, damage, and/
or disruptions in Canada over the next 20 years (CCA, 2019). While the impacts of climate change on 
food systems in Canada will be widespread, they will not be distributed equitably, with some populations, 
subpopulations, and regions experiencing greater barriers to adaptation and disproportionate impacts. 
Despite these risks, food issues have received less attention than other health outcomes in climate-health 
research (Smith et al., 2014; Verner et al., 2016), although research on climate change impacts on food 
systems and human health in Canada is beginning to increase. 
This chapter explores the linkages among climate change, food systems, and human health to understand 
current risks and how Canadians could be affected in the future. It also examines the adaptation options 
available for reducing health risks. To this end, this chapter first outlines the conceptual framework used to 
conduct this analysis. Then, climate change impacts on food systems in the context of human health are 
described. Within food systems, three elements are assessed: climate change impacts on food security and 
related health outcomes, with specific attention to nutrition; on microbial food safety (food-borne pathogens); 
and on chemical food safety (chemical contaminants). The chapter then examines adaptation opportunities 
to reduce food-related health risks and presents illustrative case studies. The final section of this chapter 
highlights knowledge gaps and recommendations related to food systems and adaptation. Throughout the 
chapter, Boxes 8.1 to 8.6 highlight critical cross-cutting concepts and phenomena, as well as presenting case 
studies that showcase climate change impacts and adaptation.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 545 
8.2 Conceptual Framework and Methods
8.2.1 Conceptualizing Climate Change, Food Systems, and Human Health
This chapter is guided by a framework (Schnitter & Berry, 2019) that conceptualizes the breadth and 
complexity of climate change impacts on food systems and hence on human health (Figure 8.1). The 
framework describes the dynamic relationship among food systems, primary dimensions and determinants 
of food security and safety, and human health outcomes in a changing climate.
Within this framework, food systems consist of activities and elements spanning multiple sectors related to 
food production, processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption (Gregory et al., 2005; Ericksen, 2008; 
Anand et al., 2015; HLPE, 2017). These food system components include non-commercial and commercial 
production, transportation, washing, cooking, preparation, storage, consumption, and use of food (Ingram, 
2009; Friel, 2019) and are often interconnected, with the activities of one component affecting the operations 
of others. 
Food systems underpin the primary dimensions of food security by supporting the stability and strength of its 
pillars: food availability, accessibility, and use (Table 8.1) (Pinstrup-Andersen, 2013; Friel & Ford, 2015; Nelson 
et al., 2016). Food security exists when “all people, at all times, have physical, social and economic access 
to sufficient, safe and nutritious food which meets their dietary needs and food preferences for an active 
and healthy life” (FAO, 1996). In contrast, food insecurity exists whenever any of these pillars are unfulfilled. 
Influenced by political, economic, social, and environmental factors (Ericksen, 2008), food security can be 
measured at different spatial and temporal scales (Gregory et al., 2005) and occurs on a spectrum (e.g., food 
secure, marginally food insecure, moderately food insecure, severely food insecure) (Health Canada, 2020). 
Food security or insecurity affects health and well-being and, thus, is a public health issue. 
Food security cannot exist without food safety. The safety of food for human consumption can be 
compromised at any point in food systems, and the ingestion of contaminated food can result in adverse 
health effects and, in severe cases, death. Food safety systems are critical for ensuring that the food 
consumed by Canadians is safe to eat, and that pathogens or contaminants are not present in foods at levels 
that can cause harm. Two elements of food safety and their relationship to climate change are explored in 
this chapter: food-borne pathogens and chemical contaminants. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 546 
Figure 8.1 Conceptual framework outlining the relationships among food security, food safety, and health in a 
changing climate.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 547 
Table 8.1 Pillars of food security and their elements 
FOOD SECURITY PILLARS
ELEMENTS OF PILLARS
Food availability
•	 Production: Amount and types of food available
•	 Distribution: How food is made available, in what form, when, and to 
whom
•	 Exchange: How much of the available food is obtained through 
exchange mechanisms such as food sharing, bartering, trading, 
purchasing, or loans
Food accessibility
•	 Affordability: The purchasing power of households or communities 
relative to the price of food; the cost associated with harvesting, 
hunting, and fishing of local, traditional, and/or country1 foods
•	 Allocation: The economic, social, and political mechanisms 
governing when, where, and how food can be accessed by people
•	 Preference: Social, religious, and/or cultural norms, values, and 
practices that influence consumer demand for certain types of food
Food use
•	 Nutritional value: How much of the daily requirements of calories, 
macronutrients, and micronutrients are provided by the food people 
consume
•	 Social value: The social, religious, and/or cultural functions and 
benefits that food provides
•	 Food safety: Microbial or chemical contamination introduced 
during producing, processing, packaging, distribution, handling, or 
marketing food
Stability
•	 Long-term stability of food availability, accessibility, and use
Source: Adapted from Ericksen, 2008
1	
Traditional Inuit food, also known as country food, is an integral part of Inuit identity and culture, is a significant 
source of nutrients, and contributes to individual and community health and well-being. It includes marine animals 
(e.g., walrus, seals, etc.), caribou, birds, fish, and foraged foods.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 548 
8.2.2 Identifying, Assessing, and Synthesizing Evidence
A rigorous, systematic, and flexible approach was used to identify literature and evidence relevant to climate 
change, food systems, and health. The approach comprised three elements: building from previous assessments; 
conducting a comprehensive search of peer-reviewed and grey literature; and learning from public consultations 
and engagement. 
This chapter built on international (IPCC, 2018; IPCC 2019a; IPCC, 2019b), national (Lemmen et al., 2008; Warren 
& Lemmen, 2014), and human health-specific assessments that summarized literature on the impacts of climate 
change on food-related health (Séguin, 2008; USGCRP, 2016). The chapter draws particularly on two chapters 
from the health-specific assessments The Impacts of Climate Change on Water-, Food-, Vector- and Rodent-Borne 
Diseases (Charron et al., 2008) and Food Safety, Nutrition, and Distribution (Ziska et al., 2016). 
Literature published since the previous Canadian National Climate Change and Health Assessment in 2008 
(Séguin, 2008) was identified and assessed using two separate literature searches, focusing on climate change 
impacts on food security and food safety in Canada. Five databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, 
Embase via Ovid, and MEDLINE via Ovid) were searched using search strings developed in consultation with a 
research librarian. The reference lists of all relevant literature were examined to identify articles not captured 
in the database search. Websites of key government and international agencies (e.g., provincial and territorial 
government websites, Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Health Organization, US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, World Food Programme) were examined to identify relevant grey literature. No language restrictions 
were placed on either search. Citations identified through these searches went through two levels of screening 
conducted by two independent reviewers. First, the titles and abstracts were screened for relevance, then, the 
full texts of articles were screened for relevance. Literature that discussed food security and/or food safety in 
the context of human health and climate change was included in this assessment. While Canadian research was 
prioritized, international research with results relevant to the Canadian context was also included.
The existing literature on climate change impacts on Indigenous food security primarily focuses on Inuit and 
First Nations peoples, with very limited Métis-specific literature (Halseth, 2015; Beaudin-Reimer, 2020). Wherever 
possible, specific Indigenous Peoples are distinguished in this chapter to reflect the diverse perspectives and 
experiences among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and communities. However, some generalizations are 
made, depending on the number and nature of citations used (e.g., Indigenous Peoples reflect more than one 
Indigenous group being referenced) and in instances where there may be shared experiences. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 549 
8.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Systems 
in Canada 
Globalization has created a global food system, in which Canada participates by exporting and importing raw 
and prepared food products to and from other regions of the world (Lake et al., 2012; O’Riordan & Lenton, 
2013). Within Canada, regional and local food systems also co-exist and operate within smaller geographic 
boundaries. For example, Northern Indigenous food systems are often smaller in scale and rely largely on 
local foods sourced through hunting, trapping, fishing, gathering, and harvesting. Beyond food-generating 
practices, Indigenous food systems also encompass environmental governance and stewardship and involve 
the production, innovation, and transfer of Indigenous knowledge to maintain land-based practices (Delormier 
et al., 2017). 
Relationships among food system components and human health in the context of climate change are 
dynamic and complex, in part due to the bi-directional relationship between climate change and food systems 
(Porter et al., 2014). While climate affects all components of the food system, food systems, in turn, can be 
a significant source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and, thus, a driver of climate change (Fanzo et al., 
2018; Friel, 2019). It is estimated that 21% to 37% of total global GHG emissions originate from food systems 
(Mbow et al., 2019). 
Climate creates a number of challenges for food systems in Canada (Table 8.2), and these impacts are 
expected to increase as the climate warms. While Table 8.2 captures many examples, including some specific 
to Indigenous food systems, there are unique characteristics and challenges associated with various food 
systems throughout Canada that will mediate the impacts associated with climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 550 
Table 8.2 Pathways through which climate change increases risks to 
food systems
CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS TO KEY FOOD SYSTEM COMPONENTS
Food production
•	 Increasing temperature extremes and variability, changes in precipitation patterns, and extreme 
weather events can damage crops, reduce agricultural productivity, and decrease yield (Easterling et al., 
2007; Gornall et al., 2010; Butler, 2014b; Campbell et al., 2014; Fanzo et al., 2018; Dodd et al., 2018)
•	 The Canadian Prairies are projected to experience an increased risk of drought in the summer and fall, 
which can lead to reduced groundwater quality and quantity, and reduced water supply for irrigation of 
crops (Sauchyn et al., 2008; Sauchyn et al., 2020)
•	 Sea level rise can cause inundation of agricultural lands in coastal regions, damaging crops and 
creating unsuitable conditions for agricultural production. Inundation can also result in saltwater 
intrusion of aquifers, reducing the quality of irrigation water (Campbell et al., 2014)
•	 Increasing temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns may create more favourable conditions 
for pests, invasive species, and plant diseases (Gornall et al., 2010; Butler, 2014b; AAFC, 2015), 
increasing competition for resources and reducing crop productivity and quality
•	 Rising temperatures and increased concentrations of atmospheric CO2 may decrease the effectiveness 
of some herbicides used for pest control (Porter et al., 2014)
•	 Increasing ozone pollution, a by-product of fossil fuel combustion, can inhibit photosynthesis, 
consequently reducing crop quality and productivity (Gornall et al., 2010; Butler, 2014b)
•	 Temperature extremes can adversely affect livestock health and decrease productivity (Butler, 2014b; 
Bishop-Williams et al., 2015)
•	 Extreme weather events may reduce land available for livestock pasture and foraging (AAFC, 2015)
•	 The distribution and productivity of natural and farmed fish will change as ocean and freshwater 
temperatures, and ocean acidification, increase (FAO, 2008; Campbell et al., 2014; Porter et al., 2014)
•	 Rising temperatures may create favourable conditions for aquatic diseases and invasive species 
(Rahel & Olden, 2008), reducing the quantity and quality of fish, shellfish, and other commercially and 
traditionally harvested marine animals (Larsen et al., 2014)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 551 
CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS TO KEY FOOD SYSTEM COMPONENTS
•	 Increasing temperatures and changing precipitation patterns are altering the quality and distribution of 
populations of traditionally harvested species in Canada (e.g., caribou) (CCA, 2014)
•	 Extreme weather events may facilitate chemical and bacterial contamination of food production sites 
(e.g., contaminated flood waters inundating agricultural crops) (Ziska et al., 2016)
•	 Increasing temperatures and changes in precipitation patterns may create favourable conditions for the 
growth and survival of toxigenic fungi and mycotoxin contamination of agricultural crops (Jaykus et al., 
2008; Tirado et al., 2010)
•	 Climate change may create favorable conditions for pests, increasing the need for pesticides, which 
can lead to increased pesticide residues in the food supply (Lake et al., 2012)
•	 Increasing concentrations of atmospheric CO2 can alter the nutritional content of some agricultural 
crops, decreasing concentrations of protein, iron, zinc, and other key minerals (Muncke et al., 2014; 
Porter et al., 2014; Ziska et al., 2016; Myers et al., 2017)
•	 In Northern Canada, climate change may allow for the emergence of new pathogens, viruses, and 
parasites that affect wildlife harvested as part of Indigenous traditional and country food systems 
(CCA, 2014)
•	 Decreasing ice thickness and coverage and water levels, as well as changing freeze-up and break-up 
periods, challenge the procurement of local foods for Northern Indigenous communities (Ford, 2008; 
Laidler et al., 2009; Wesche & Chan, 2010; Harper et al., 2015a; Wesche et al., 2016; Ford et al., 2019
Food processing
•	 Increasing temperatures and extreme heat events may increase the risk of food spoilage and/or 
contamination in processing facilities, which have food safety implications (Ziska et al., 2016)
•	 Traditional food storage, preservation, and preparation practices may be at risk; for example, 
permafrost thaw may affect the stability and safety of traditional in-ground freezers used by many 
Northern Indigenous communities (CCA, 2014)
•	 Reduced or variable availability of potable water may challenge food processing operations (Campbell 
et al., 2014)
•	 Extreme weather events (e.g., flooding) may disrupt energy supplies, labour availability, and processing 
facility infrastructure critical to processing operations (Ziska et al., 2016)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 552 
CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS TO KEY FOOD SYSTEM COMPONENTS
•	 Climate change impacts may affect the availability, quality, and cost of raw materials and inputs in the food 
production sector, from both international and domestic sources (Edwards et al., 2011; Wong & Schuchard, 2011)
Food distribution
•	 Temperature extremes, permafrost thaw, changes in precipitation patterns, changes in freeze–thaw 
cycles, and extreme weather events can cause physical damage and disruption to transportation 
infrastructure (Palko & Lemmen, 2017)
•	 Extreme weather events can damage distribution and storage facility infrastructure (e.g., grocery 
stores, food banks) (Biehl et al., 2018) and disrupt energy supplies, labour availability, and technological 
infrastructure critical for food distribution (Ziska et al., 2016; Biehl et al., 2018)
Food preparation and consumption
•	 Increasing temperatures may change food preparation behaviours (e.g., barbeques, picnics), increasing 
the risk of exposure to food-borne illness (Ziska et al., 2016; Levison et al., 2018)
•	 Increasing ocean temperature and changes in salinity increase the risk of pathogens in seafood, which 
is often consumed uncooked (e.g., oysters) (Jaykus et al., 2008; Tirado et al., 2010; Ziska et al., 2016)
Source: Adapted from Schnitter & Berry, 2019
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 553 
8.4 Climate Change, Food Security, and Health 
in Canada
8.4.1 Food Security in Canada
The baseline level of food security contributes to the vulnerability of households to the food-related health 
impacts of climate change. Therefore, it is important to understand the baseline prevalence, distribution, 
determinants, and magnitude of food security in Canada. Approximately 12.7% of Canadian households 
experience some level of household food insecurity (Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). This prevalence is likely 
an underestimate, as the survey does not capture those living in First Nations communities (on-reserve), 
full-time members of the Canadian Forces, individuals in prisons, those living in some remote Northern 
communities, or individuals who are under-housed or homeless (Jessiman-Perreault & McIntyre, 2017).
Inequities exist with respect to how food security is distributed and experienced across Canada. Such 
inequities contribute to ongoing health disparities across the country (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and 
Health Equity). Household food insecurity is most prevalent in the territories and the Maritime provinces 
(Figure 8.2), and urban households experience food insecurity to a slightly greater degree (13%) than rural 
households (11%) (Tarasuk et al., 2016; Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). Household food insecurity is more 
common in households with children and those with lone parents, with lone female-headed households being 
most vulnerable (Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). The likelihood of severe food insecurity increases with decreasing 
household income (Statistics Canada, 2012). In 2017–2018, approximately 60% of Canadian households 
whose primary income source was social assistance reported experiencing food insecurity (Tarasuk & 
Mitchell, 2020). Household food insecurity is significantly higher among households where the respondent 
identified as Indigenous (28.2%) or Black (28.9%) (Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). Unemployment, lower 
education (less than a high school diploma), recent immigration (within five years), and self-identification as 
2SLGBTQQIA+ (two-spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex and asexual) also 
increase the risk of household food insecurity (PHAC, 2018). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 554 
Figure 8.2 Baseline household food insecurity status in Canada by province and territory, which can underpin 
vulnerability to food-related climate change impacts on health. Source: Adapted from Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020; 
data from Statistics Canada, 2018.
Indigenous households, in remote and Northern communities in particular, are often significantly challenged 
by food insecurity, which is often rooted in ongoing colonial legacies (Box 8.1). Indeed, the prevalence of food 
insecurity is 3.7 times higher among Inuit adults, 2.7 times higher among First Nations adults (living off reserve), 
and 2.2 times higher among Métis adults than among non-Indigenous adults (PHAC, 2018) (see Chapter 2: 
Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). On-reserve data indicates that just over half (50.8%) 
of First Nations adults live in food insecure households, and 43.2% of households with children were classified as 
food insecure (FNIGC, 2018). With over 68% of households experiencing some level of food insecurity (Rosol et al., 
2011; Huet et al., 2012; Fillion et al., 2014), Inuit living in Nunavut have a higher prevalence of food insecurity than 
any other Indigenous Peoples living in a high-income country (CCA, 2014). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 555 
Box 8.1 Food colonization increases climate change vulnerability for 
Indigenous Peoples 
Indigenous food systems are particularly vulnerable to climate change. The existing higher prevalence of 
food insecurity for many Indigenous Peoples contributes to climate change vulnerability, which is often 
rooted in ongoing colonial legacies. Indeed, Indigenous Peoples in Canada score far worse on virtually every 
health indicator than the general public, a situation that has been directly attributed to historical and ongoing 
processes of colonization (Delormier et al., 2017; Greenwood et al., 2018). Food colonization is a unique food 
security concern for Indigenous Peoples (Cidro et al., 2018) and has played a leading role in the disruption 
and undermining of Indigenous food systems (Morrison, 2011; Whyte, 2016). 
Colonization has resulted in the widespread loss of connection and access to the lands that supported 
Indigenous food systems (e.g., through hunting, gathering, fishing, cultivation, and trading) (Desmarais & 
Wittman, 2014). Colonization and the resulting disruption of Indigenous food systems were by and large 
intentional, paving the way for an imposed food system that has contributed to the health disparities 
experienced by Indigenous Peoples in Canada, including higher rates of food insecurity and chronic diseases 
(Desmarais & Wittman, 2014; Grey & Patel, 2015). In the Indigenous food security movement, underlying 
structures of this ongoing colonialism are identified as the most critical determinant of poor health outcomes 
(Martens et al., 2016). The decrease in consumption of healthy land-based foods, such as wild meats, fish, 
plants, and berries, due to environmental displacement, dispossession, restrictive policies, and cultural 
change, is a direct result of this process (Rudolph & McLachlan, 2013; Delormier et al., 2017). Food insecurity, 
primarily with respect to traditional foods, has resulted in loss of Indigenous knowledge and, in turn, has 
affected the nutritional, emotional, and spiritual health of Indigenous Peoples in Canada. 
Studies have shown that Indigenous food systems are central to Indigenous health and well-being (Desmarais 
& Wittman, 2014) and that increased intake of traditional foods improves Indigenous Peoples’ diet quality and 
health (Johnson-Down & Egeland, 2010; Gagné et al., 2012; Batal et al., 2017). Traditional foods contribute 
to health and well-being because of their frequently higher nutritional value, the sense of identity acquired 
through their traditional harvesting, preparation, and sharing practices, and the increased levels of physical 
activity needed for their procurement (Harper et al., 2015a; Batal et al., 2017). For instance, studies conducted 
with the Gwich’in people in British Columbia (Kermoal & Altamirano-Jiménez, 2016) and in the Northwest 
Territories (Parlee et al., 2005) found that berry picking connects women to their spiritual, emotional, mental, 
and physical selves, in addition to providing significant nutritional value. 
Women, youth, and children are identified as particularly vulnerable to the impacts related to loss of access 
and control over traditional lands that support Indigenous food systems (Lemke & Delormier, 2017; Neufeld et 
al., 2020). The Indigenous knowledge that has been passed on in support of identity, language, and purpose 
has been disrupted at an intergenerational level (Delormier et al., 2017; Lemke & Delormier, 2017). Rudolph & 
McLachlan (2013) maintain that “food insecurity and diet-related disease within Indigenous communities are 
thus best understood in the context of historical injustice.” Taken together, and considering the important role 
that Indigenous food systems play in Indigenous Peoples’ health and well-being, climate change impacts on 
Indigenous food systems have wide-ranging impacts on Indigenous Peoples, Indigenous knowledge systems, 
and Indigenous Rights.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 556 
While some individual and household characteristics are associated with food insecurity trends (e.g., 
socio-economic status, household living arrangement, Indigenous identity), it is important to note that 
population groups are not homogeneous and that food security status is not static. Each individual uniquely 
experiences a range of intersecting social, political, economic, and environmental factors that contribute 
to differential food security status over time (Kapilashrami & Hankivsky, 2018), and therefore different 
and changing vulnerability to climate change impacts on food systems. In some cases, these factors may 
intersect in ways that compound vulnerability to food insecurity in the context of climate change, creating 
disproportionate impacts on some population groups. Food insecurity has close linkages to other indicators 
of material and social disadvantage (Tarasuk & Mitchell, 2020). In many cases, disadvantage can further 
enhance vulnerability to climate-related health risks by creating difficulties that hinder individuals from taking 
measures to protect themselves and adapt (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). 
8.4.2 Food Security as a Public Health Issue
Food security is an important public health challenge that will be affected, mediated, and modified by climate 
change. Household food insecurity is associated with many adverse physical and mental health outcomes, 
including nutritional deficiencies, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, oral health issues, and depression (Table 
8.3) (McLeod & Veall, 2006; Muldoon et al., 2013; Tarasuk et al., 2016; Jessiman-Perreault & McIntyre, 2017). 
Malnutrition due to food insecurity can increase the body’s susceptibility to disease, which can, in turn, limit 
an individual’s ability to access and use food. This can further exacerbate food insecurity and malnutrition 
and establish a vicious cycle of food insecurity and poor health (Aberman & Tirado, 2014). Furthermore, one 
study in Ontario demonstrated that food insecurity can indirectly stress the health care system, as adults 
experiencing food insecurity require more health care services and are more likely to become high-cost 
health care users compared to adults who are food secure (Figure 8.3) (Tarasuk et al., 2015; Li et al., 2016; 
Tarasuk et al., 2016). Given these implications for the health sector, food security in a changing climate is an 
important public health challenge. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 557 
Table 8.3 Examples of health and social challenges associated with 
food insecurity that could be exacerbated by climate change
CATEGORY
HEALTH AND SOCIAL CHALLENGES
Maternal health and 
birth outcomes
•	 Inadequate nutrition during pregnancy can have negative health impacts on 
both the mother and child.
•	 Maternal food insecurity is associated with an increased risk of birth defects. 
•	 Household food insecurity can adversely affect infant and young child feeding 
behaviours and limit the sustainability of breastfeeding.
Child development
•	 Food insecurity can impede both physical and cognitive growth and 
development in early life.
•	 Food insecurity is associated with poorer general health in children.
•	 Food insecurity is associated with iron deficiency anemia and has been linked 
to the development of a variety of chronic conditions, including asthma and 
depression.
Health status and 
chronic disease
•	 People who are food insecure are more likely to experience a myriad of chronic 
conditions, including both mental and physical health challenges.
•	 Food insecure individuals self-report higher levels of poorer health, type 2 
diabetes, heart disease, high blood pressure, and food allergies.
•	 Food insecurity poses additional barriers to chronic disease management, 
which increases the likelihood of adverse outcomes.
Mental health and 
emotional well-being
•	 Food insecurity affects social and mental well-being, which can increase the 
likelihood of depression, distress, and social isolation (see Chapter 4: Mental 
Health and Well-Being).
•	 Child hunger has been identified as a risk factor for depression and suicidal 
symptoms in adolescence and early adulthood.
Health care costs
•	 Food insecurity leads to increased health care costs and increases the 
probability that adults will become high-cost health care users.
•	 In Ontario, total annual health care costs were 23%, 49%, and 121% higher 
for adults in marginally, moderately, and severely food insecure households, 
respectively.
Source: Adapted from Li et al., 2016
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 558 
Figure 8.3 Average health care costs incurred over 12 months by Ontario adults (18 to 64 years of age), 
according to household food insecurity status. Source: Tarasuk et al., 2015.
8.4.3 Climate Change Impacts on the Pillars of Food Security
Climate change poses risks to food systems (see section 8.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Systems in 
Canada) through complex interactions that influence the pillars of food security — availability, accessibility, 
utilization, and stability — which can lead to negative health outcomes among Canadians. Threats to these 
pillars are discussed below.
8.4.3.1 Climate Change Impacts on Food Availability
There are three primary elements associated with food availability: production, distribution, and exchange 
of food (Ericksen, 2008). Climate change can disrupt each of these elements (Figure 8.1). For example, crop 
yields are highly sensitive to changes in temperature and water availability. Air temperatures higher than 
30°C are associated with reduced yields for rain-fed crops (Myers et al., 2017). Temperature variability and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 559 
extremes can also damage crops, especially if these events occur during critical stages of crop development 
(Easterling et al., 2007; Gornall et al., 2010). In 2012, for example, following a summer of extreme heat and 
drought, fruit trees in Ontario bloomed earlier than seasonal norms. Temperatures then dropped, causing a 
frost event that resulted in an 80% loss of apple crops and a 50% loss of strawberry crops in Ontario (ECCC, 2017). 
It is projected that, in Eastern and Central Canada, there will be an increase in the frequency of winter bud kill and 
late killing-frost events (Campbell et al., 2014), which will negatively affect agricultural food production. 
Canada is also expected to experience an increase in frequency and severity of extreme weather events (Bush 
& Lemmen, 2019), which can hinder agriculture and livestock production and also disrupt food distribution 
and exchange. For example, a powerful winter storm in January 2020 caused the City of St. John’s, 
Newfoundland and Labrador, to declare a state of emergency, ordering all businesses, including grocery 
stores, to close. Grocery stores re-opened after four days; however, high consumer demand, combined with a 
disrupted regional food supply chain, resulted in many stores selling out of food and turning away customers 
who had been waiting for hours to purchase basic food staples (Roberts & Cooke, 2020). 
Climate change is expected to affect the diversity of available food globally, which has important health 
implications. Springmann et al. (2016) determined that a total of 529,000 deaths worldwide (78 per million, 
base year: 2010) could occur between 2010 and 2050 due to climate-related reductions in food availability 
and changes in fruit, vegetable, and red meat consumption. In this model, climate-related changes in diet 
(i.e., decreased fruit and vegetable consumption) were projected to result in twice as many deaths as 
climate-related reductions in caloric intake. For Canada, the study projected that between 25 and 33 deaths 
per million will occur in 2050 due to climate-related changes in diet and weight, almost all of which are 
attributable to reductions in fruit and vegetable consumption (Springmann et al., 2016). Should Canada’s 
population grow to a projected 44 million inhabitants (Statistics Canada, 2020), an additional 1100 to 1450 
deaths might be expected in 2050. The adoption of GHG mitigation strategies could decrease the number of 
deaths worldwide due to climate-related changes in food availability in 2050 by 29% to 71%; however, excess 
deaths would remain even under negative emissions scenarios (Springmann et al., 2016).
8.4.3.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Accessibility
Food accessibility relates to the affordability, allocation, and socio-cultural preferences for food (Figure 8.1) 
(Ericksen, 2008), and can be affected by climate change through indirect, but well-known, pathways. Several 
studies have projected the impact of climate change on world food prices (Easterling et al., 2007; Lake et 
al., 2012). For example, global models project that, under the Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP) 
6.0 emission scenario, cereal prices will increase by 1% to 29% by 2050 (Mbow et al., 2019). Other staples, 
such as rice and sugar, are projected to increase in price by as much as 80% compared to their reference 
levels without climate change (Schmidhuber & Tubiello, 2007). Canada’s Food Price Report identified climate 
change as a significant driver of food price increases since 2016. Climate change impacts, including changing 
weather patterns, droughts, wildfires, reduced access to fresh water, and rising sea levels, are projected to 
affect Canadian food systems and contribute to a 3% to 5% increase in overall food prices in 2021 (Charlebois 
et al., 2020; Charlebois et al., 2021). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 560 
As food prices rise, households may lack the economic means to purchase adequate, healthy, and preferred 
foods. Indeed, increased food prices can force consumers, especially those living on low incomes who are 
already at risk of food insecurity, to purchase lower-cost energy-dense processed foods, which contribute 
to excess sodium, sugar, and saturated fat intake and may have negative nutrition and health consequences 
(Lock et al., 2009; Lake et al., 2012). Substituting nutritious foods with inexpensive energy-dense processed 
foods can lead to an increased incidence of nutrient deficiencies and non-communicable diseases, such as 
obesity and type 2 diabetes (Gibson et al., 2004; Lake et al., 2012; Marushka et al., 2017; Kenny et al., 2018). 
Food accessibility is also a function of physical access to food, which can be affected by climate change 
and extreme weather events, in particular (Palko & Lemmen, 2017). For instance, high winds, extreme 
precipitation, flooding, and extreme heat events can disrupt public transportation systems, which many 
urban dwellers rely on to access retail food distribution sites (Palko & Lemmen, 2017). These effects may be 
particularly pronounced for those with disabilities and those living in neighbourhoods categorized as “food 
deserts,” where households are primarily relying on a low income and have little or no nearby access to stores 
or restaurants that provide healthy and affordable foods (Biehl et al., 2018).
8.4.3.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Utilization
Food security extends beyond the supply and demand dynamics of markets to the use of food (Figure 8.1), 
including important aspects related to food safety (see section 8.5 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety 
in Canada) and the nutritional and socio-cultural value of food (see section 8.4.3.3.1 Climate Change Impacts 
on Nutrient Availability) (Ericksen, 2008; Myers et al., 2017). 
Climate change will influence the nutritional value and nutrient composition of diets through its influence on 
the pillars of food security, as well as its impact on the conditions under which food is produced, distributed, 
and individually chosen (The Royal Society, 2009; Lake et al., 2012). As discussed below, such changes 
have implications for overall human health and nutrition through possible effects on nutrient availability, 
biodiversity-related impacts on nutrient access, and dietary transitions and substitutions. 
8.4.3.3.1 Climate Change Impacts on Nutrient Availability
Globally, increasing carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations associated with climate change are projected to 
alter the nutrient content and density of agricultural and seafood products, which can affect food security 
(Macdiarmid & Whybrow, 2019). Experiments growing crops (e.g., wheat, rice, legumes) in controlled 
environments have found that zinc, iron, and protein concentrations are reduced by 3% to 15% when grown in 
conditions with elevated CO2 (550 to 690 ppm) (Myers et al., 2014; Myers et al., 2017). Phytate content was 
also reduced, which could offset some of the zinc and iron losses, as phytates typically reduce micronutrient 
bioavailability (Myers et al., 2014; Myers et al., 2017). Nevertheless, when these nutrient changes are applied 
to contemporary diets globally, it is projected that hundreds of millions of people will be placed at risk of 
zinc, iron, and/or protein deficiencies, and the existing deficiencies of an estimated two billion people will be 
exacerbated (Myers et al., 2017). 
Increasing CO2 concentrations are also changing the nutritional value of important forage for pollinator 
species (Myers et al., 2017). Although the net effect of climate change on pollinators remains unclear, studies 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 561 
indicate that a reduction in animal pollination would decrease yields of numerous pollinator-dependent food 
crops that provide important macro- and micronutrients to humans (Myers et al., 2017). Pollinator declines 
over the long term could reduce dietary intake of fruits, vegetables, nuts, and seeds in many countries, leading 
to increased child mortality and birth defects from vitamins A, E, and B6 (folate) deficiencies, and increased 
risks of heart disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes, and certain cancers (Myers et al., 2017). Varying soils and 
growing conditions, as well as methods of harvesting, processing, and storing food crops, can also influence 
nutrient composition. For example, selenium content varies by geography according to the soil mineral 
content (Lake et al., 2012). 
The health impacts of reduced nutrient densities on food security, however, will depend on overall dietary 
diversity, as well as country-specific enrichment and fortification policies (CFIA, 2014). Similar to impacts in 
other higher-income countries, the impact will likely be lower in Canada, where many staple foods, including 
wheat flour, are fortified with essential micronutrients such as iron and folic acid (CFIA, 2014). Nevertheless, 
health impacts may be more pronounced in specific regions of Canada, such as Northern communities, 
where challenges accessing a diverse diet including fruits, vegetables, and whole grains already exist. Further 
research is therefore needed to understand how climate-related changes in nutrient availability will affect 
food security in Canada.
8.4.3.3.2 Impacts of Climate-Related Biodiversity Loss on Nutrient Access
The impacts of climate change on biodiversity loss will increase risks to food and nutrient access (Rose et al., 
2001; Romero-Lankao et al., 2014). Biodiversity reflects the number and variety of living organisms and plays 
a key role in boosting ecosystem productivity, resilience, and sustainability — in turn, offering many benefits 
to humans and animals, such as soil formation and retention, pollination, climate regulation, and resources 
for foods and pharmaceuticals (IPBES, 2018). 
While agriculture products provide the majority of dietary energy (i.e., calories), seafood is an important 
source of nutrients, such as protein, fat, minerals, and vitamins, for many populations, including Canadians 
(Myers et al., 2017; Marushka et al., 2019). Global estimates suggest that climate-related declining fish 
harvests (IPCC, 2019a) will leave 845 million people vulnerable to deficiencies in iron, zinc, and vitamin A, 
and 1.4 billion people vulnerable to deficiencies of vitamin B12 and omega-3 long-chain polyunsaturated 
fatty acids by 2050 (Golden et al., 2016). Those who are in low-resource settings will be at greater risk of 
nutrient deficiencies because of their limited access to alternatives, such as other sources of animal protein, 
supplements, and nutritionally fortified or enriched foods (Myers et al., 2017). 
The impacts of biodiversity loss are inequitably distributed among human populations. In Canada, Indigenous 
Peoples who depend on the land for sustenance are particularly vulnerable to climate-related biodiversity 
loss (Rose et al., 2001; Richmond & Ross, 2009; Anderson et al., 2018; Kenny et al., 2018; Boulanger-Lapointe 
et al., 2019). For instance, drawing on observations of declining food species in 36 Indigenous communities 
spanning Nunavut, the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, and Nunatsiavut, Rosol et al. (2016) explored the likely 
nutritional impact of possible future diet substitutions. In some cases, substitutions resulted in similar 
nutrient intake, while other alternatives were of lower nutritional value. For example, if Inuit in the region of 
Kivalliq replaced 50% of their fish intake with duck (gram-for-gram), vitamin D intake would decrease by 94%, 
while iron and zinc intake would both increase (Rosol et al., 2016). Similarly, the diets of several First Nations 
in British Columbia rely on locally harvested seafood, meaning that their nutritional health is highly vulnerable 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 562 
to potential climate-related declines in seafood abundance (Box 8.2) (Rosol et al., 2016; Marushka et al., 2017; 
Watts et al., 2017; Rapinski et al., 2018). Indigenous Peoples may respond to these changes by purchasing 
more retail food; however, this response may increase health risks, as shifts from locally harvested to retail 
food often result in increased consumption of processed foods that are higher in fat, refined sugar, and 
sodium (Marushka et al., 2019). Furthermore, in many remote Indigenous communities, retail foods are 
expensive and limited in quantity, quality, and diversity — and do not support cultural continuity, which is 
a critical determinant of Indigenous Peoples’ health — thus complicating effective options for adaptation 
response (Marushka et al., 2019). Along with the effects on diet quality, these declines in locally harvested 
food also have detrimental impacts on mental health outcomes, cultural practices, language, self-
determination, and social cohesion (Batal et al., 2017; Marushka et al., 2019) (see Chapter 2: Climate Change 
and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada and Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being). 
Box 8.2 Climate change impacts on marine environments among 
coastal First Nations communities in British Columbia
Locally harvested seafood is a critical component of the diet and health of coastal First Nations within British 
Columbia. Climate change is projected to exacerbate existing stressors (e.g., colonial fisheries regulations, 
environmental degradation, socio-economic inequalities) on the access to and quality of this Indigenous food 
system, which has implications for the health and nutrition of First Nations Peoples in this region (Marushka 
et al., 2019). 
For instance, one study estimated that traditional seafood consumption provided coastal First Nations with 
the daily Dietary Reference Intake recommendations of omega-3 fatty acids eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and 
docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) (74% to 184%) and vitamin B12 (84% to 152%), and substantial levels of niacin 
(28% to 55%), selenium (29% to 55%), vitamin D (15% to 30%), and protein (14% to 30%). By 2050, climate 
change projections for these coastal communities are projected to reduce the intake of essential nutrients 
by 21% under a “strong mitigation” (RCP2.6) scenario and 31% under a “business-as-usual” (RCP8.5) climate 
change emission scenario (Marushka et al., 2019). The relative impact of these changes varied among sex 
and age groups, based on their average seafood consumption (Marushka et al., 2019). Analysis suggested 
that substituting chicken, canned tuna, and bread would not replace the nutrients lost due to climate-related 
seafood declines, suggesting that market foods cannot easily replace the nutritional value of traditional foods 
(Marushka et al., 2019). 
In an effort to promote food security and sovereignty (Box 8.1), strategies to adapt to climate change 
adaptation that improve seafood harvest potential and access rights to coastal First Nations communities 
are critical (Box 8.6). In response to the need for Indigenous self-determined adaptation (Section 8.6), the 
First Nations Health Authority, under Health Canada’s HealthADAPT program, is establishing the WATCH: We 
All Take Care of the Harvest (Safe and Secure Harvesting of Marine Foods in the Context of Climate Change) 
program, which will result in the development of local- and Indigenous-relevant adaptation strategies to 
reduce the impacts of climate change on Indigenous marine food systems and enhance the resilience of First 
Nations communities in British Columbia (Health Canada, 2019).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 563 
8.4.3.3.3 Impacts of Dietary Transitions and Substitutions on Nutrient Use
Climate change can exacerbate existing and emerging nutritional stresses, including the current nutrition 
transition affecting populations in and outside of Canada. The nutrition transition, which is linked to 
globalization and urbanization, is a shift from traditional diets toward foods higher in calories, fats, and 
sugars, accompanied by a rise in sedentary lifestyles (Wheeler & Von Braun, 2013; Breewood, 2018). A diet 
high in energy-dense processed foods rich in calories, salt, sugar, and saturated fat, and low in whole grains, 
nuts, seeds, legumes, fruits, and vegetables, is a leading risk factor for death and disability in Canada (IHME, 
2016; Bacon et al., 2019). 
Globally, the nutrition transition is contributing to a dual burden of overnutrition (e.g., obesity) and 
undernutrition, along with increased risks of non-communicable and infectious disease (FAO et al., 2018). 
Some of these health effects may be more pronounced for specific population subgroups. Monitoring of, 
and support for, populations that are disproportionately affected is needed, particularly for lower-income 
households that are most affected by rising food prices; those already at nutritional risk, such as women, 
children, and seniors; and those in remote geographical areas, including many Indigenous Peoples (Ford & 
Beaumier, 2011; Lake et al., 2012; Bunce et al., 2016; Collings et al., 2016). More research is also needed on 
the nature, extent, and magnitude of climate change impacts on the nutrition transition.
8.4.3.4 Climate Change Impacts on Food Stability
Longer-term food security requires that food be available, accessible, and used by people in a sustained 
and stable manner over time (FAO, 2008). Climate change can decrease the stability of food systems, which 
has a direct impact on all pillars of food security (Figure 8.1). For example, climate change increases the 
spatial and temporal variability in food production patterns, which affects food availability. Food prices may 
also fluctuate to a greater degree, which will have implications for accessibility. Many knowledge gaps exist 
in terms of how climate change will influence the volatility and stability of global food systems and food 
security, especially with respect to food access and use (Myers et al., 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 564 
8.5 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety 
in Canada
8.5.1 Climate Change, Food Safety, and Food-Borne Pathogens
Food safety can be compromised at any point along food system pathways (Figure 8.1). Given the estimated 
four million cases of food-borne illness per year, microbial food safety is an important public health concern 
in Canada (Thomas et al., 2013). Food-borne illnesses are acquired through the ingestion of contaminated 
food, and symptoms can range from diarrhea and vomiting to more severe illness (e.g., Guillain-Barré 
syndrome, hemolytic uremic syndrome) and death. In Canada, five pathogens (norovirus, Clostridium 
perfringens, Campylobacter spp., Salmonella spp., and Bacillus cereus) account for over 90% of food-borne 
illnesses for which the causative agent is known (Table 8.5) (Thomas et al., 2013). At least four of these 
pathogens are known to be climate sensitive (Kovats et al., 2004; Fleury et al., 2006; Lake et al., 2009; Valcour 
et al., 2016; Wu et al., 2016; Lake, 2017; Park et al., 2018). 
Indeed, in many cases, climatic conditions are directly linked to food-borne illness, as pathogen occurrence in 
foods is affected in the short and long term by climate variables, including temperature, precipitation, extreme 
weather events, and ocean warming and acidification (Semenza et al., 2012a; Liu et al., 2013; Hellberg & 
Chu, 2015; Lake, 2017; Lake & Barker, 2018). Increasing temperature and extreme weather events rank in the 
top three of 19 economic, environmental, and social factors influencing food safety in Canada (Charlebois 
& Summan, 2015). The precise magnitude of climate change impacts on the burden of food-borne disease 
in Canada is uncertain, due to a paucity of research; however, given that many food-borne pathogens are 
climate sensitive (Lake et al., 2009; Tirado et al., 2010; Semenza et al., 2012a; Semenza et al., 2012b; Liu 
et al., 2013; Hellberg & Chu, 2015; Wu et al., 2016; Lake, 2017; Lake & Barker, 2018), the overall food-borne 
disease burden both current and emerging (previously rare) pathogens is expected to increase. For instance, 
mathematical models suggest that climate change will increase the burden of specific pathogens in food in 
Canada (e.g., V. parahaemolyticus in oysters) (Smith et al., 2015) (Box 8.4). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 565 
Table 8.4 Climate change impacts on the occurrence of food-borne 
pathogens and the current annual cases per 100,000 in Canada 
PATHOGEN
SYMPTOMSa 
ANNUAL CASES 
PER 100,000 
(2006)b 
CLIMATE INFLUENCE ON 
PATHOGEN OCCURRENCEc 
Norovirus
Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
stomach cramps, low-grade 
fever, chills, headache, muscle 
aches, fatigue
3,223.79
Decreased air temperature, 
extreme weather events (e.g., 
heavy precipitation, flooding)
Clostridium 
perfringens
Diarrhea, pain and cramps, 
stomach bloating, increased 
gas, nausea, weight loss, loss 
of appetite, muscle aches, 
fatigue. In rare cases, severe 
dehydration, hospitalization, 
death
544.50
Uncertain, but might thrive in 
drought conditions
Campylobacter 
spp.
Fever, nausea, vomiting, 
stomach pain, diarrhea. In 
rare cases, hospitalization, 
long-lasting health effects, 
death
447.23
Changes in the timing or 
length of seasons, increased 
air temperature, precipitation, 
flooding
Salmonella spp., 
non-typhoidal
Chills, fever, nausea, diarrhea, 
vomiting, stomach cramps, 
headache. In rare cases, 
hospitalization, long-lasting 
health effects, death
269.26
Changes in the timing or 
length of seasons, extreme 
weather events, increased air 
temperature
Bacillus cereus
Diarrhea, vomiting. In rare 
cases, hospitalization, long-
lasting health effects, death
111.60
Changes in the timing or 
length of seasons, drought
Verotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli 
non-O157
Diarrhea. In rare cases, 
hospitalization, long-lasting 
health effects, death
63.15
Changes in the timing or 
length of seasons, extreme 
weather events, increased air 
temperature
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 566 
PATHOGEN
SYMPTOMSa 
ANNUAL CASES 
PER 100,000 
(2006)b 
CLIMATE INFLUENCE ON 
PATHOGEN OCCURRENCEc 
Verotoxigenic 
Escherichia coli 
O157
Diarrhea. In rare cases, 
hospitalization, long-lasting 
health effects, death
39.47
Changes in the timing or 
length of seasons, extreme 
weather events, increased air 
temperature
Toxoplasma gondii
Minimal to mild illness 
with fever. In rare cases, 
inflammation of the brain, 
infection of other organs, 
birth defects
28.10
Extreme weather events, 
increased air temperature 
V. parahaemolyticus
Diarrhea, stomach cramps, 
nausea, vomiting, fever, 
headache. In rare cases, liver 
disease
5.53
Extreme weather events, 
increased air temperature, 
increased sea surface 
temperature
Listeria 
monocytogenes
Fever, nausea, cramps, 
diarrhea, vomiting, headache, 
constipation, muscle aches. 
In severe cases, stiff neck, 
confusion, headache, loss 
of balance, miscarriage, 
stillbirth, premature delivery, 
meningitis, death
0.55
Extreme weather events, 
increased air temperatures, 
precipitation
Vibrio vulnificus
Diarrhea, stomach cramps, 
nausea, vomiting, fever, and 
headache. In rare cases, liver 
disease
< 0.01
Extreme weather events, 
increased air temperatures, 
increased sea surface 
temperature
a. Government of Canada, 2019.
b. Thomas et al., 2013.
c. Hellberg & Chu, 2015; Yan et al., 2016; Ziska et al., 2016.
Source: Smith & Fazil, 2019

HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 567 
The relationship between climate change and food-borne illness can be estimated using short-term seasonal 
trends as a proxy. Many studies in temperate regions similar to Canada have linked food-borne contamination 
and disease incidence with seasonal trends (Semenza et al., 2012a; Semenza et al., 2012c). A review 
analyzing studies of food-borne illness in temperate countries identified consistent summer peaks for disease 
caused by Campylobacter spp., Salmonella spp., verotoxigenic Escherichia coli infection, Cryptosporidium (bi-
modal peak with spring and summer highs), and giardiasis (Lal et al., 2012). In New Brunswick, the incidence 
of Campylobacter, E. coli, Giardia, and Salmonella infections were greater in the spring and/or summer 
months (Valcour et al., 2016). In Alberta and Newfoundland and Labrador, ambient air temperatures were 
positively associated with Campylobacter spp., pathogenic E. coli, and Salmonella spp. infections (Fleury et 
al., 2006). Non-cholera Vibrio spp. infections have been associated with rising air and water temperatures and 
prolonged summer seasons (Semenza, et al., 2012a; Semenza et al., 2012c). Recently, it has been proposed 
that non-cholera Vibrio spp. can act as an indicator of climate change in marine systems due to their climate 
sensitivity (Baker-Austin et al., 2017).
Risks of climate-related food-borne illness are expected to vary across Canada, due in part to regional and 
local consumption preferences; for example, risks from seafood-associated pathogens will likely be greater 
in regions with high seafood consumption (e.g., coastal regions). Inuit are at increased risk of climate-related 
impacts on food safety, due in part to climate-sensitive traditional food practices, such as the consumption of 
raw meats, which are sensitive to even slight changes in food storage and transport temperatures (Pardhan-
Ali et al., 2012a; King & Furgal, 2014; Harper et al., 2015a; Harper et al., 2015b; Jung & Skinner, 2017; Rapinski 
et al., 2018; Harper et al., 2019). Furthermore, climate change may introduce new microbial contamination 
into Northern regions through changes to wildlife ranges (Jenkins et al., 2013), permafrost thaw, and other 
environmental changes (Harper et al., 2015a). Additional research is needed on climate-related food safety 
risks that are unique to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as well as Northern communities (Hedlund et 
al., 2014). 
8.5.1.1 Food System Pathways Through Which Climate Change Affects Food Safety
Climate change affects the growth, survival, abundance, and range of pathogens throughout food systems, 
including during food production, processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption (Semenza et al., 
2012a; Semenza et al., 2012c). An overview of how climate change can affect microbial food safety at each 
step of food systems, using E. coli in lettuce as an example, is provided in Box 8.3.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 568 
Box 8.3 Climate change impacts throughout food systems can increase 
public health risks: Escherichia coli O157 in lettuce as an example of a 
climate-sensitive food-borne pathogen
E. coli O157 is a zoonotic enteric pathogen that colonizes the gut of domestic livestock, such as cattle, and 
subsequently is shed in feces. Across North America, this pathogen has been implicated in an increasing 
number of outbreaks associated with produce, including fruits, leafy vegetables, and sprouts (Rangel et 
al., 2005; Heiman et al., 2015; Coulombe et al., 2020). Lettuce is the most common produce commodity 
associated with E. coli O157 outbreaks (Heiman et al., 2015). 
Figure 8.4 presents a conceptual model of how climate change can increase lettuce contamination, thus 
creating public health risks. Lettuce can be exposed to E. coli through the transfer of contaminated feces or 
manure through air, groundwater, soil, and surface water reservoirs. Climate and weather variables, such as 
the timing and intensity of precipitation and temperature changes, can affect the level and prevalence of E. 
coli O157 throughout the production period through to harvest (Table 8.6). This, along with human handling 
and consumption practices, has a direct impact on the public health burden of infections with E. coli O157.
Figure 8.4 Climate-related contamination pathways of lettuce grown in Canada from pathogens shed from livestock.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 569 
Table 8.5 Selected components of lettuce contamination pathways 
that are affected by climate change
DRIVERS OF 
RISK
AIR TEMPERATURE
SURFACE 
WATER 
TEMPERATURE
PRECIPITATION
RELATIVE 
HUMIDITY 
(RH)
Shedding of 
pathogens by 
livestock
Conflicting evidence 
that shedding rates and 
amounts are influenced 
by air temperature and 
heat stress
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not 
applicable
Pathogen 
persistence 
in feces and 
manure
Growth and death 
rates are influenced by 
temperature
Not applicable
Heavy rain can leach or 
wash pathogens from 
feces and manure into the 
environment, including soil 
that might be used to grow 
lettuce
Persistence 
and 
growth are 
favoured by 
high RH
Pathogen 
occurrence and 
persistence in 
soil
Growth and death 
rates are influenced by 
temperature
Not applicable
Longer elapsed time 
between manure application 
and rain is associated 
with less leaching; heavy 
rain can leach or wash 
pathogens from soil into 
the environment; amount of 
rainfall dictates frequency 
of irrigation with potentially 
contaminated water 
that is applied to lettuce; 
precipitation can result in 
wet deposition of airborne 
pathogens
Persistence 
and 
growth are 
favoured by 
high RH
Pathogen 
occurrence in 
groundwater
Not applicable
Not applicable
Heavy rain can leach 
pathogens into 
groundwater, which then 
might be used for irrigation, 
processing, etc.
Not 
applicable
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 570 
DRIVERS OF 
RISK
AIR TEMPERATURE
SURFACE 
WATER 
TEMPERATURE
PRECIPITATION
RELATIVE 
HUMIDITY 
(RH)
Pathogen 
occurrence and 
persistence in 
surface water
Higher temperatures 
can drive more cattle 
to surface water 
and increase direct 
deposition 
Persistence 
in water 
bodies may 
be influenced 
by surface 
temperature
Increased precipitation 
favours runoff into water 
bodies but also dilutes 
surface water; heavy rainfall 
can affect turbidity and 
re-suspend pathogens from 
sediment in water used for 
irrigation, processing, etc.
Not 
applicable
Pathogen 
occurrence and 
persistence 
on plants at 
harvest
Higher temperatures 
necessitate more 
frequent irrigation; 
growth and death 
rates are influenced by 
temperature
Not applicable
Heavy rains favour 
transmission of pathogens 
from soil to lettuce through 
splashing or flooding; 
irrigation soon after heavy 
rainfall events is more 
likely to be affected by 
contaminated runoff; 
droughts increase irrigation 
needs; precipitation can 
result in wet deposition 
of airborne pathogens on 
lettuce 
Persistence 
and 
growth are 
favoured by 
high RH
Pathogen 
occurrence at 
processing
Not applicable
Increased 
surface water 
temperature 
can encourage 
pathogen 
growth in water 
used for food 
processing, 
if improperly 
treated
Rainfall can contaminate 
water used for lettuce 
processing if inadequately 
treated
Not 
applicable
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 571 
DRIVERS OF 
RISK
AIR TEMPERATURE
SURFACE 
WATER 
TEMPERATURE
PRECIPITATION
RELATIVE 
HUMIDITY 
(RH)
Pathogen 
persistence 
from 
processing 
through 
consumer 
storage
Growth rates are 
influenced by 
temperature; increased 
air temperatures can 
affect safe storage 
temperatures, thus 
encouraging pathogen 
growth 
Not applicable
Extreme events can cause 
power outages, resulting 
in deficiencies in cold-
chain management, and 
encourage pathogen growth
Not 
applicable
Consumer 
handling and 
preparation
Longer growing 
and, thus, longer 
consumption seasons 
increase annual 
exposure to Canadian-
grown lettuce
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not 
applicable

The relationship between climate variables and lettuce contamination is complex; therefore, uncertainty 
exists about projected health risks due to climate change. For example, flooding and irrigation are two 
factors that may increase lettuce contamination, yet they are influenced by precipitation in opposite ways: 
increased rainfall could increase risks of contamination due to flooding or reduce risks due to less irrigation. 
More detailed analyses that capture the system’s complexity in a particular context or location are required 
to understand how changes in precipitation will ultimately affect public health risks. Such analyses could 
include mathematical models, which could quantify the relative impacts of each risk driver on public health in 
the studied location and identify points throughout food systems where climate change adaptation measures 
could be most effective. By integrating climate change projections, the model could also allow various 
adaptation options to be tested (Romero-Lankao et al., 2014; ECCC, 2018).
8.5.1.1.1 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Food Production
Food production (e.g., farming, aquaculture) is the stage of food systems where pathogens are most likely 
to be introduced and propagated through to food products. Climate change will create both challenges and 
opportunities for Canadian food production (Warren & Lemmen, 2014) and, therefore, may increase risks to 
food safety. For example, growing seasons may be extended and suitable land for agriculture may expand 
northward as temperatures rise (Schmidhuber & Tubiello, 2007; Gornall et al., 2010; Butler, 2014a; Warren 
& Lemmen, 2014; AAFC, 2015). At the same time, however, as climate conditions warm, pathogens can be 
introduced and become established in these new production regions via increased food production activity, 
range expansion of wildlife and insect vectors, and improved pathogen growth conditions (Séguin, 2008; 
Smith & Fazil, 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 572 
Climate change can affect the release of pathogens from livestock into the environment (Smith & Fazil, 2019). 
Some livestock animals are known, or suspected to, carry and shed greater numbers of enteric pathogens 
during periods of elevated air temperatures (Venegas-Vargas et al., 2016). Increased temperatures expected 
with climate change may result in increased pathogen shedding (Keen et al., 2003; Pangloli et al., 2008), thus 
affecting pathogen abundance in the surrounding environment, crops, and, consequently, food. Increased 
temperature stress or alterations in livestock housing conditions (e.g., indoor versus outdoor environments) 
as a result of climate change could also drive increased antimicrobial use in food-producing animals, which 
could increase antimicrobial-resistant food-borne illnesses in humans (WHO, 2017; MacFadden et al., 2018).
Pathogens released into the environment can be transported via precipitation and directly contaminate food 
sources, such as crops or livestock facilities. The frequency and intensity of precipitation events is expected 
to increase for many regions in Canada as temperatures rise (Bush & Lemmen, 2019), increasing concerns 
about contamination. Without intervention, this contamination could work its way through all stages of food 
systems, ultimately contributing to the burden of food-borne illness. One study in Ontario, for example, found 
temporal associations between human giardiasis incidence and pathogen presence in manure in livestock 
reservoirs, river water level and flow rate, and precipitation (Brunn et al., 2019). As the climate continues 
to change, combinations of drought followed by extreme precipitation could increase these contamination 
events, as dry, compact soil has an increased runoff potential (Yusa et al., 2015). 
Many wildlife and insect vectors, such as rodents, deer, flies, and beetles, contribute to food-borne pathogen 
transmission and therefore can affect food safety. Climate conditions can directly affect these vectors 
(Agunos et al., 2014). For example, climatic variables are known to affect fly population density (Goulson et 
al., 2005; Ngoen-Klan et al., 2011), and flies can be carriers of Campylobacter (Hald et al., 2008). In Ontario, 
a 28% to 30% increase in incidence of illness due to Campylobacter in humans is projected by 2050 due to 
climate-related changes in fly population size and activity (Cousins et al., 2019). 
Warming water temperatures have been linked to seafood contamination and incidence of food-borne 
diseases. For example, modelling studies suggest that risks from V. parahaemolyticus in British Columbia 
could increase by 41% to 45% by the 2060s (Box 8.4) (Smith et al., 2015). In addition to V. parahaemolyticus, 
the abundance of V. cholerae detected along Canadian coasts has increased significantly over time (Banerjee 
et al., 2018). V. cholerae is a highly lethal pathogen (causing cholera) previously restricted to tropical regions, 
but its abundance could increase in Canadian waters with climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 573 
Box 8.4 Projected impacts of climate change on V. parahaemolyticus 
in British Columbia oysters
Human exposure to V. parahaemolyticus, which occurs primarily through the consumption of raw oysters 
that contain the bacterium, causes gastroenteritis (Government of Canada, 2019). Approximately 2.33% of 
V. parahaemolyticus strains are pathogenic (FDA, 2005). Several of these pathogenic strains are present in 
seawater at and above 15°C and are known to concentrate in oysters that ingest the bacteria as they filter 
food from the water (Cabello et al., 2005; Konrad et al., 2017). Water temperature is the key environmental 
variable to which V. parahaemolyticus is sensitive (Young et al., 2015); thus, the prevalence and concentration 
of the bacteria vary seasonally and are expected to increase in many regions as air and water temperatures 
rise with climate change (Parveen et al., 2008; Grimes et al., 2009; Julie et al., 2010; Broberg et al., 2011; FAO 
& WHO, 2011). 
A large portion of Canadian oyster production is located on the coast of British Columbia, with many 
operations in the Strait of Georgia between Vancouver Island and the British Columbia mainland (Comeau 
& Suttle, 2007). Despite careful harvesting and processing protocols intended to reduce the risk of 
contaminated oysters reaching consumers, projected changes in environmental conditions due to climate 
change in areas where oysters are farmed are likely to increase the presence and concentrations of V. 
parahaemolyticus and, therefore, the risk of human exposure and illness. These effects on oyster farming 
operations in British Columbia have been estimated via mathematical modelling, which is summarized in 
Table 8.6 (Smith et al., 2015).
Model results suggest that public health impacts from V. parahaemolyticus in oysters harvested in British 
Columbia, calculated in terms of disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs), could increase by 41% to 45% by 
the 2060s (Smith et al., 2015). In 2006, the burden of food-borne illness attributed to V. parahaemolyticus 
was 5.53 cases per 100,000 Canadians. The majority of these cases were assumed to be attributable 
to undercooked or raw shellfish; thus, if the projected relative increase in the burden of disease from V. 
parahaemolyticus in oysters applies similarly to other shellfish, then the public health burden could increase 
to eight cases per 100,000 Canadians in 40 years. Box 8.5 discusses adaptation options to reduce health 
risks from V. parahaemolyticus. Further development of models of V. parahaemolyticus and seafood risk may 
increase knowledge of the risks from climate change and support seasonal prediction capabilities and other 
health sector responses.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 574 
Table 8.6 Modelling the projected health risks of climate change 
impacts on V. parahaemolyticus in oysters
MODEL ELEMENT
DESCRIPTION
Location
•	 Chrome Island in the Strait of Georgia, British Columbia, Canada
Season
•	 Harvest spread equally among all months of the year
Pathogen
•	 V. parahaemolyticus, 2.33% of which are pathogenic (FDA, 2005)
Oyster species
•	 Farmed Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas
Environmental 
parameters affecting 
growth
•	 Water temperature pre-harvest, air temperature at harvest (oysters held at 
ambient air temperature two to 11 hours post-harvest), and temperature 
during refrigeration affect levels of V. parahaemolyticus
Climate change factors
•	 Increase of mean harvest water temperature by 0.024°C per year 
•	 Increase of daily maximum air temperature by 0.04°C or 0.08°C per year
Human exposure
•	 Dose–response model used with mass of oysters consumed per serving 
and number of servings per year
Health outcomes
•	 Rate of infection with gastrointestinal illness and DALYs attributed to V. 
parahaemolyticus in oysters
Results
•	 DALYs associated with V. parahaemolyticus in oysters harvested in British 
Columbia are estimated to increase by 41% to 45% by the 2060s
•	 This would correspond to an increase to eight cases per 100,000 
Canadians from V. parahaemolyticus in all shellfish by the 2060s
Source: Adapted from Smith et al., 2015
8.5.1.1.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Food Processing and Distribution
Climate variables also affect the occurrence, growth, and survival of pathogens throughout food processing 
and distribution. Any pre-existing contamination can proliferate if food is mishandled during these steps 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 575 
(e.g., inappropriate food storage temperature, cross-contamination), and additional contamination can be 
introduced through, for example, the use of contaminated water during processing (see Chapter 7: Water 
Quality, Quantity, and Security). Extreme weather events associated with climate change, such as flooding, 
high winds, or precipitation can result in power outages that disrupt temperature controls (e.g., refrigeration), 
creating opportunities for pathogen growth and resulting in impacts on food safety and food-borne illnesses.
Air temperature is a key food safety risk during food processing and distribution. The prevalence of poultry 
contaminated with Campylobacter in Canadian processing and retail environments has been positively 
correlated with air temperatures (Smith & Fazil, 2019). Humidity and precipitation also affect the occurrence 
of pathogens throughout processing and distribution. For example, some micro-organisms, such as fungi, 
can produce mycotoxins that cause adverse human health effects, and these micro-organisms can proliferate 
under certain temperature and humidity conditions during the processing of corn and cereal grain products 
(Duarte et al., 2010). In Canada, warmer and wetter conditions due to climate change could encourage fungi 
growth and mycotoxin production (Patriarca & Fernández Pinto, 2017). 
Nearly 30% of retail food consumed in Canada is imported from other countries (Statistics Canada, 2009); 
therefore, any climate-related changes to the occurrence or growth of pathogens during food production 
in other countries, or during food distribution to Canada, could affect the health of Canadians. Cases of 
food-borne illness caused by pathogens previously exotic or rare to Canada could increase in incidence 
with climate change (Smith & Fazil, 2019). Canadian food importers, along with federal, provincial, and local 
public health agencies, should enhance the monitoring of global trends and incidence of food-borne illness 
to anticipate potential new threats to Canadian food systems. Environmental scanning platforms, such as 
the Canadian Food Safety Information Network, may assist with such monitoring, as they include tools to 
identify local or global food safety issues (CFIA, 2018). Additionally, international initiatives, such as the 
European Food Safety Authority’s Climate Change and Emerging Risks for Food Safety project, which lists 
climate-related emerging risks in European food systems (EFSA et al., 2020), may be helpful in informing and 
monitoring existing and emerging food safety risks relevant to Canada. Given the interconnected nature of the 
global food system, and the complex effects climate change has on food systems, monitoring may become 
increasingly challenging and may need to expand in order to appropriately capture the diverse impacts of 
climate change on food safety in Canada. 
8.5.1.1.3 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Food Preparation and Consumption
Climate change impacts on food-borne illnesses at the preparation and consumption stages fall into three 
categories: climate-related behavioural changes by individuals that increase pathogen exposure via food; 
increased pathogen survival and growth on foods during transport or storage; and potential indirect climate-
related changes to human susceptibility and/or exposure to food-borne illness. 
Human behaviour, such as food mishandling events, can lead to cross-contamination or undercooking of 
food products, thus increasing the risk of food-borne illness. Seasonal increases in food mishandling by 
consumers are attributable to higher-risk cooking methods (e.g., barbeque used in the summer may increase 
risk of cross-contamination if the same utensils are used for raw and cooked meats) and consumption 
patterns (e.g., picnics in warm temperatures where foods are less likely to be stored at safe temperatures) 
(Ravel et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2013; Milazzo et al., 2017). In Canada, the contamination of meat products with 
Salmonella spp. does not increase in the summer season, compared to the rest of the year (Smith & Fazil, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 576 
2019); however, human cases of illness caused by Salmonella do increase in the summer (Fleury et al., 2006; 
Ravel et al., 2010; Valcour et al., 2016), suggesting that behavioural factors and/or susceptibility could drive 
the seasonality of illness rates (Ravel et al., 2010). Climate change could also influence food preferences and 
consumption patterns, which may have implications for human health. For example, an extended growing 
season, due to climate change, could provide longer access to fresh produce, which is at increased risk for 
pathogen contamination due to higher temperatures and changes to precipitation, thus increasing the risk of 
food-borne illness. In fact, the rate of E. coli outbreaks linked to raw produce (e.g., lettuce) has increased over 
the last several decades (Rangel et al., 2005; Heiman et al., 2015).
Storing foods at cold temperatures at which pathogens cannot grow is one of the main strategies to maintain 
food safety. Even a 1°C increase in average ambient temperatures, which has already been surpassed in 
Canada due to climate change (see Chapter 1: Climate Change and Health Linkages), can result in significant 
food safety concerns (Smith et al., 2015). Furthermore, the projected increase in extreme weather events 
and resulting power transmission disruptions due to climate change (Warren & Lemmen, 2014) will introduce 
potential disruptions in the cold chain at the consumer level with subsequent increases in food safety risk. 
In Northern Canada, safe food storage in ground freezers used by some Indigenous Peoples is threatened by 
increasing temperatures and permafrost thaw (CCA, 2014).
Finally, other adverse health effects caused or exacerbated by climate change can increase an individual’s 
susceptibility to food-borne illnesses. For example, immunocompromised individuals are at increased risk of 
an infectious illness, including from food-borne pathogens (Pouillot et al., 2015). Furthermore, malnutrition 
arising from food insecurity, extreme weather events (e.g., extreme heat events, flooding), and poor air quality 
can cause adverse health impacts on Canadians, which could compound vulnerability to food-borne illness 
(Kipp et al., 2019).
8.5.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via 
Chemical Contaminants
Food-related chemical hazards occur when chemicals are present in foods at levels that negatively affect 
human health when consumed (CFIA, 2014). Chemical contaminants include a wide range of compounds, 
such as persistent organic pollutants (POPs) (e.g., industrial chemicals, pesticides), heavy metals (e.g., 
arsenic, copper, cadmium, lead, mercury, tin), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). These chemical 
contaminants are introduced into plants and animals through environmentally mediated pathways, such as 
atmospheric deposition and uptake from contaminated soil, water, or other organisms. For example, when 
chemical contaminants are deposited at or near sites of food production or harvesting, such as fish breeding 
grounds, livestock pastures, or agricultural lands, they can be introduced into food systems via contaminated 
water or soil (Thomson & Rose, 2011). Levels of chemical contaminants in commercial foods are monitored 
through regular surveillance activities by Health Canada and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. Chemical 
contaminants may be detected in commercial foods; however, concentrations are generally low and not 
associated with adverse health impacts. Canada’s national food chemical safety program has various 
tools (e.g., monitoring and surveillance programs, guidance on maximum safe concentration levels, and 
consumption advice) to help ensure exposure to food chemical contaminants is as low as possible. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 577 
There is growing evidence that climate change could increase human exposure to chemical contaminants, 
as climate variables, such as temperature, precipitation, wind, hydrological systems, ice and snow 
coverage, and extreme weather events can affect the transport, distribution, concentration, persistence, and 
bioaccumulation of chemical contaminants (Dewailly et al., 2000; Jaykus et al., 2008; Rose et al., 2011; Marvin 
et al., 2013; CCA, 2014; Manciocco et al., 2014; Government of Canada, 2016; Ziska et al., 2016). 
8.5.2.1 Climate Change Impacts on Contaminants Throughout Food Systems
Environmental contaminants are chemicals that accidentally or deliberately enter the environment, often, 
but not always, as a result of human activities. Some of these contaminants may have been manufactured 
for industrial use and, because they are very stable, they do not break down easily. If released into the 
environment, these contaminants may enter the food chain. Other environmental contaminants are naturally 
occurring chemicals, but industrial activity may increase their mobility or increase the amount available to 
circulate in the environment, allowing them to enter the food chain at higher levels than would otherwise 
occur. Levels detected in food sold in Canada are generally low. These contaminants have varying toxicity 
and health effects (Government of Canada, 2016). For example, food-borne exposure to POPs has been 
linked to cancer, negative effects on the immune system, and developmental and reproductive problems 
(Schecter & Gasiewicz, 2003; Pardue et al., 2005; Government of Canada, 2016; Weihe et al., 2016). Exposure 
to food-borne heavy metals, such as lead and mercury, can affect the nervous system and cause cognitive, 
behavioural, and motor impairments (ATSDR, 1999; Thomson & Rose, 2011; Boucher et al., 2012; ATSDR, 
2020; Dewailly et al., 2000; USEPA, 2021). More than 80% of fish consumption advisories in Canada and 
the United States are at least partially attributed to methylmercury (Eagles-Smith et al., 2016), which 
bioaccumulates in aquatic organisms and can cause severe health effects when consumed by humans in 
sufficiently high quantities or over prolonged periods of time (Alava et al., 2018). Biotoxins in the food system 
that can cause health risks to Canadians, and that are linked to climate change, are discussed in more detail 
in Chapter 7: Water Quality, Quantity, and Security. 
Multiple factors contribute to the potential risk and severity of illness resulting from chemical contaminant 
exposure, including an individual’s genetic predisposition and other health conditions, the contaminant type 
and concentration, and the extent of exposure over time (Ziska et al., 2016). Risks are increased in children 
and seniors, since their organ systems have a reduced ability to process and eliminate contaminants (Lopez 
& Goldoftas, 2009; Ferguson et al., 2017). 
8.5.2.1.1 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Chemical Contamination During Food Production
In Canada, the impact climate change has on food safety via chemical contamination is not well understood, 
and the extent of increased risk has not been quantified. For example, additional research is required 
to monitor whether climate change will increase concentrations of contaminants to levels that may be 
associated with adverse health effects. International evidence suggests that climate change is likely to 
increase the risk of chemical contamination during food production through several pathways (Thomson & 
Rose, 2011) (Table 8.7). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 578 
Table 8.7 Examples of environmental chemical contaminants, potential 
adverse health effects,2 and mechanisms through which climate 
change may increase global food safety risks
CHEMICAL 
CONTAMINANT
EXAMPLE ADVERSE 
HEALTH EFFECTS
CLIMATIC 
EVENT
IMPACTS OF 
CLIMATIC EVENT
POTENTIAL FOOD 
SYSTEM RISKS
Arsenic
Acute: nausea; 
vomiting; diarrhea; 
cardiovascular effects; 
adverse brain effects
Chronic: dermal 
effects; numbness in 
hands and feet; skin, 
bladder, and lung 
cancer
Flooding
Transport from 
contaminated sites 
to agricultural land
Uptake into 
foods grown in 
contaminated sites 
(e.g., agricultural 
crops, livestock 
grazing sites)
Drought
Need to use 
wastewater for 
irrigation
More contaminants 
applied to crops
Cadmium
Kidney and bone 
damage; cancer
Freshwater 
warming
Increased uptake 
and bioavailability
Higher 
concentration in 
the food chain
Polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs)
Cancer; endocrine 
disruption; immune, 
neurological, and 
reproductive effects
Oceanic 
warming
Increased Arctic 
algal growth
Higher 
concentration in 
food chain
Warmer, drier 
summers
Need to use 
wastewater for 
irrigation
More contaminants 
applied to crops
Dioxins and 
dioxin-like PCBs
Skin lesions; cancer; 
endocrine disruption; 
immune, neurological, 
and reproductive effects
Flooding
Transport from 
contaminated sites 
to agricultural land
Uptake into milk, 
eggs, and other 
animal products
2	
The examples of health effects associated with chemical contamination in this table are generally associated 
with much higher concentrations of contaminants than levels to which Canadian populations are typically 
exposed. While exposure to some contaminants may increase as a result of climate change in Canada, ongoing 
monitoring and surveillance is needed to determine whether levels would increase high enough to be associated 
with adverse health effects.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 579 
CHEMICAL 
CONTAMINANT
EXAMPLE ADVERSE 
HEALTH EFFECTS
CLIMATIC 
EVENT
IMPACTS OF 
CLIMATIC EVENT
POTENTIAL FOOD 
SYSTEM RISKS
Lead
Hematological, 
gastrointestinal, 
cardiovascular, renal, 
neurological, and 
reproductive effects; 
impaired metabolism 
of vitamin D in children
Flooding
Transport from 
contaminated sites 
to agricultural land
Uptake into 
pastoral foods
Mercury/ 
methylmercury
Impaired neurological 
development; impaired 
peripheral vision; 
sensory disturbances; 
coordination loss; 
impaired speech, 
hearing, and walking; 
muscle weakness
Oceanic 
warming
Increased Arctic 
algal growth and 
methylation
Higher 
concentration in 
fish
Wildfires
Release of 
sequestered 
mercury from soil
Increased uptake 
in foods via 
atmospheric 
deposition
Polycyclic 
aromatic 
hydrocarbons 
(PAHs)
Cancer
Floods
Transport from 
contaminated sites 
to agricultural land
Uptake into 
pastoral foods
Wildfires
Increased 
formation of PAH
Increased 
uptake in food 
via atmospheric 
deposition
Warmer drier 
summers
Need to use 
wastewater for 
irrigation
More contaminants 
applied to crops
Source: Adapted from Thomson & Rose, 2011
 
Increasing temperatures associated with climate change are expected to exacerbate the risks posed by 
POPs, which are already of concern due to their negative health effects (WHO, 2008). Projected warming 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 580 
will enhance the transfer of POPs from oceans, lakes, and rivers to air, which will subsequently extend the 
potential for long-range transport of POPs (Ma et al., 2011). Climate change is also expected to influence 
soil properties and thereby increase the bioavailability of POPs and heavy metals and increase their 
bioaccumulation in food chains (Boxall et al., 2009; Manciocco et al., 2014). Similar trends are anticipated for 
PAHs in a changing climate (Miraglia et al., 2009). 
Increasing extreme weather events associated with climate change will also affect the distribution of 
chemical hazards in the environment. Heavy precipitation and flooding can transport chemicals from direct 
sources (e.g., mines and tailing ponds), as well as contaminated soils, to new locations where food is 
produced (Lake et al., 2005; Boxall et al., 2009; Miraglia et al., 2009; Umlauf et al., 2011; Lake et al., 2015). 
European studies have found that regular flooding of industrial river catchments increase polychlorinated 
dibenzo-p-dioxins dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) levels in soil and grass, which 
can then be transferred to food (Umlauf et al., 2011; Lake et al., 2015). Similarly, researchers found high 
levels of POPs in soil from flooded pastureland and in the milk of animals that grazed on the land (Umlauf 
et al., 2005), as well as high levels of cadmium and lead in wheat, lettuce, and potatoes (Lake et al., 2005). 
Wildfires have also been identified as a pathway for food source contamination, as they release PAHs and 
other contaminants (e.g., dioxins, cadmium, and mercury) into the air, which can then travel long distances 
before they are deposited (Armitage et al., 2011). If these chemicals are deposited into water bodies or on 
agricultural or pastureland, they could be introduced into food systems. Additional research on the impact of 
wildfires on chemical contamination of food is needed.
Rising water temperatures also exacerbate levels of seafood contaminants (e.g., nickel, copper, cadmium, 
lead, and zinc) and risks to aquatic organisms (Ma et al., 2011; Manciocco et al., 2014). For example, rising 
water temperatures can increase PCB metabolites and copper toxicity in rainbow trout (Boeckman & Bidwell, 
2006; Khan et al., 2006; Buckman et al., 2007; Manciocco et al., 2014). Increasing water temperatures also 
affect concentrations of methylmercury in fish and mammals (Carrie et al., 2010) as a result of increased 
metabolic rates and mercury uptake (Booth & Zeller, 2005; Ziska et al., 2016). 
Climate change is projected to increase the incidence of livestock and aquatic pests, parasites, and microbes 
(Lafferty et al., 2004; Ziska et al., 2016), which could encourage greater use of pesticides, herbicides, 
veterinary treatments, and aquaculture drugs (Boxall et al., 2009; Tirado et al., 2010; AAFC, 2015; Ziska et 
al., 2016). This increased incidence is projected to be exacerbated as chemicals used for pest management, 
such as pesticides and herbicides, become less effective as concentrations of CO2 increase (Ziska et al., 
2016). Such changes could lead to increased chemicals from pesticides, herbicides, and veterinary drugs 
entering food systems, with negative implications for human health (Boxall et al., 2009; Miraglia et al., 2009; 
Manciocco et al., 2014; Delcour et al., 2015). 
Greater demand for water resources to maintain agricultural activities is expected as a result of changing 
precipitation patterns and the projected increase in droughts in many regions of the world (Jiménez Cisneros 
et al., 2014). Indeed, some regions are already experiencing stress on water resources and increasingly 
turning to wastewater reuse to meet irrigation needs. Wastewater can contain chemicals, such as PAHs 
and PCBs, which can therefore enter the food chain when used to irrigate agricultural crops (Al Nasir & 
Batarseh, 2008; Rose et al., 2011). Although wastewater is not commonly used in Canada for crop irrigation, 
stressed water resources and response measures could lead to food safety risks in the future and should be 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 581 
monitored. Further, policies and regulations for wastewater use and other water management practices vary 
by country, which has implications for the safety of foods being imported into Canada (Lake et al., 2012). 
8.5.2.1.2 Climate Change Impacts on Food Safety via Chemical Contamination During Food Preparation 
and Consumption
While there is limited research examining how climate change could affect chemical contamination during 
food preparation and consumption, human behaviours may change in response to climate change in ways 
that could increase chemical exposures. For example, processing foods (e.g., drying, smoking) and cooking 
foods at high temperatures (e.g., grilling, frying, roasting, baking) are common sources of food contamination 
by PAHs and heterocyclic amines (Sugimura et al., 2004; Zelinkova & Wenzl, 2015). Consequently, the 
potential increase in barbequing associated with more frequent and prolonged warm days could increase 
exposure to chemicals from barbequed foods (Séguin, 2008).
Some Indigenous communities in Canada have developed alternative gardening and food preservation 
measures in an effort to adapt to climate change. Such activities may be necessary to support individual and 
community food security and sovereignty but may have unintended implications for human health. A study 
of food-related climate adaptation activities implemented, or planned to be implemented, across three First 
Nations communities in British Columbia and one Inuit community in Nunavut, revealed several food safety 
concerns (Steiner & Neathway, 2019). These included PAH contamination from food smoking, chemical 
contamination from the use of tires or treated wood as planters, and chemical and microbial risks from the 
use of greywater for crop irrigation (Steiner & Neathway, 2019). More research is needed to understand how 
such climate change adaptation measures may affect food safety and human health. 
8.5.2.2 Climate Change Challenges Related to Chemical Hazards in Foods in the 
Arctic and Sub-Arctic
Persistent contaminants are found throughout Northern ecosystems, largely from transport from lower 
latitudes through air, water, and terrestrial routes (Kuhnlein & Chan, 2000; Rigét et al., 2016; Brown et 
al., 2018), and from local sources (e.g., mining sites). For example, accelerated temperature rise and 
the consequent melting of glaciers, snow, and sea ice can enhance POP transfer between trophic levels, 
and increase food safety risks for Arctic populations (Ma et al., 2011; Manciocco et al., 2014). Chemical 
contaminants deposited and trapped in glaciers via airborne transportation may be deposited in glacier-fed 
lakes and water bodies as glaciers melt, increasing exposure to humans and wildlife (Bogdal et al., 2009).
In Northern regions, locally harvested foods can be a significant route of contaminant exposure (Ratelle et 
al., 2018), particularly for Indigenous Peoples, as Indigenous food systems in the Arctic and sub-Arctic often 
include large quantities of locally harvested fish, birds, and marine mammals. Fish and marine mammals are 
primary sources of mercury and PCBs (NCP, 2013; Rigét et al., 2016; Brown et al., 2018; Chukmasov et al., 
2019). Similarly, POPs and heavy metals have been found in all components of the Arctic ecosystem (Fillion 
et al., 2014). Once an organism absorbs a contaminant, the contaminant can bioaccumulate in the organism 
or be transferred to other organisms, posing potential health risks to those who consume the organism in 
significant quantities or over an extended period of time (Dewailly et al., 2000; NCP, 2013). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 582 
Variations in contaminant body burdens commonly reflect differences in dietary habits and traditional 
lifestyles (AMAP, 2015; Government of Canada, 2017). For example, POP and metal levels in Inuit women 
are generally higher for those in coastal communities in Nunavik and Nunavut, where there is a higher 
consumption of marine mammals, compared with Inuit women from Nunatsiavut (in Northern Labrador) and 
the Inuvialuit Settlement Region (in the Northwest Territories) (Government of Canada, 2017). Results of the 
Inuit Health Survey (2007–2008) suggest that Inuit men tend to eat traditional foods more frequently and in 
larger quantities than Inuit women (Egeland, 2010). The body burden of POPs and metals were therefore often 
higher in Inuit men than women, sometimes as much as two-or three-fold. Likewise, older adults typically 
consume more traditional foods than younger adults, and generally have higher contaminant body burdens of 
POPs and metals (Government of Canada, 2017). Globally, coastal Indigenous Peoples consume on average 
15 times more seafood per capita than non-Indigenous people (Cisneros-Montemayor et al., 2016), and thus 
may be at increased risk of climate-related alterations in contaminant concentrations in food systems. 
With warmer temperatures leading to earlier sea ice breakup, the toxicity of some contaminants in the water 
column may increase (Gaden et al., 2012). High levels of mercury and PCBs in Arctic fish have been linked to 
enhanced algal growth from warmer water temperatures (Carrie et al., 2010). Climate-related shifts in prey 
type and abundance could also affect contaminant exposure in marine mammals, by affecting foraging times and 
success. Earlier spring sea ice breakup can allow marine animals to forage earlier and for longer periods and allow 
access to foraging areas that were inaccessible under previous breakup regimes (Gaden et al., 2012). 
Exposure to PCBs and mercury in top predatory species may increase with climate change, as Arctic sea ice 
retreats and releases accumulated chemicals to marine environments (Gaden et al., 2012; Alava et al., 2018). 
One study projected that the concentration of methylmercury and PCBs in animals at high trophic levels 
could increase by 8% and 3% by 2100 under a high emissions scenario (RCP8.5) and a no climate change 
scenario, respectively (Alava et al., 2018). Another study found a 3% to 5% increase in methylmercury uptake 
in marine organisms for each 1°C rise in water temperature (Booth & Zeller, 2005). In addition to food safety 
risks, the nutritional value of fish (e.g., omega-3 fatty acids) may also change due to interactions between 
climate change and contaminants and effects on fish metabolism (Alava et al., 2017). Climate change may, 
therefore, increase exposure to chemical contaminants in, and change the nutritional quality of, important 
food sources harvested by Indigenous Peoples (Undeman et al., 2010). Consumption of traditional foods have 
significant importance for the health and well-being of Indigenous Peoples (see Chapter 2: Climate Change 
and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). Guidance from the Government of Canada’s Canadian Arctic 
Contaminants Assessment Report and the Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme suggest that the 
nutritional benefits from consumption of traditional foods outweigh potential risks associated with chemical 
contamination, with few exceptions (Chukmasov et al., 2019). As the climate changes, it will be important to 
enhance research efforts and increase understanding of the impacts of climate change on food safety via 
chemical contamination. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 583 
8.6 Adaptation to Reduce Health Risks
Adaptation is a key component of the response to climate change in Canada and globally and has been 
identified as an urgent need to protect health (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). 
Responsibility for adaptation in Canada is divided between federal and provincial/territorial governments 
(Berry et al., 2014a; Henstra, 2017). Many adaptation measures focused on food security and food safety 
fall within the jurisdiction of public health, which is both a federal issue that crosses provincial and territorial 
borders, and a sub-national issue that falls under provincial health jurisdiction (Austin et al., 2018). Each 
province and territory has its own organizational structure, policy direction, and priorities for delivering public 
health services, determining how adaptation to the effects of climate change on food security and food safety 
is approached (Clarke & Berry, 2012). Regional and local public health authorities also play a critical role in 
maintaining food safety through health protection, promotion, screening, and surveillance (Berry et al., 2018).
Adaptation at the food–health nexus will require intersectoral collaboration (e.g., health, environment, 
agriculture, transportation), and coordination across multiple levels of government and with civil society 
(Hess et al., 2012; Berry et al., 2014a; Smith et al., 2014). Food systems are complex webs of interdependent 
factors that affect food safety and food security and are often transboundary in nature (e.g., involving human 
behaviour, trade, and regulation) (Challinor et al., 2017). Adaptation policy responses that lack high levels of 
coordination across sectors risk being redundant, fragmented, or maladaptive (Magnan et al., 2016; Austin et 
al., 2018). 
Recognizing the diversity of adaptation opportunities for food systems, this chapter examines two types of 
adaptation: climate-centred adaptations, which have a narrow and substantial focus on responding to food-
related impacts of biophysical hazards associated with climate change; and vulnerability-centred adaptations, 
which have a broad and integrative focus on the societal, cultural, environmental, political, and economic 
factors (i.e., social determinants of health), that create and exacerbate vulnerability to food-related impacts 
of climate change (Ebi, 2009; Dupuis & Biesbroek, 2013; Ford et al., 2018). To address climate-related health risks 
relevant to food security and safety in Canada both climate- and vulnerability-centred adaptations are needed. 
8.6.1 Climate-Centred Adaptation Options
8.6.1.1 Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessments
Vulnerability and adaptation assessments (V&As) concerning climate change and health provide an evidence-
based assessment of the key health risks posed by climate change, identify high-risk populations and regions, 
evaluate the effectiveness of existing interventions, and outline adaptation opportunities (Berry et al., 2014a; 
Buse, 2018). These assessments are critical to building public health preparedness for climate change 
(Charron et al., 2008; Hansen & Hoffman, 2011; Berry et al., 2014a; PHAC, 2017; Berry et al., 2018). Regional 
and local health authorities across Canada are increasingly conducting V&As; however, the degree to which 
climate-related impacts on food security and food safety are assessed varies. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 584 
Provincially and territorially, responsibility for completion of V&As reflects mandates for climate change 
adaptation and the jurisdictional landscape for health services. Under the Ontario Public Health Standards, 
for example, health units are required to assess the health impacts of climate change. Several health units 
have, therefore, completed V&As, including Grey Bruce Health Unit (Grey Bruce Health Unit, 2017), Middlesex-
London Health Unit (Berry et al., 2014b), and Simcoe Muskoka District Health Unit (Levison et al., 2017), all 
of which address risks of food-borne illness. Both assessments from Middlesex-London Health Unit and 
Simcoe Muskoka District Health Unit also explicitly consider the multiple dimensions of food security. The 
City of Toronto’s report, Exploring Health and Social Impacts of Climate Change in Toronto (Medical Officer 
of Health, 2013) considers food security and food safety in the context of power outages during extreme 
weather events and insufficiency of food storage standards as temperatures warm. In 2017, Toronto Public 
Health launched a Food Vulnerability Assessment (Zeuli et al., 2018a) to assess the resilience of Toronto’s 
food system under three extreme weather scenarios. Although food security risks were relatively low, they 
were associated with extreme weather events. The city identified a need to develop food resilience plans for 
neighbourhoods already experiencing food insecurity, which could be exacerbated by climate change. The 
report included recommendations to develop poverty-reduction strategies that address unequal food access 
(Zeuli et al., 2018a).
There are challenges in developing robust, actionable food-related V&As. Climate change and health V&As 
rely on surveillance data to assess associations between health outcomes and climatic conditions. While 
surveillance systems are in place to identify food-borne illnesses, the majority of cases of food-borne illness 
are undiagnosed or unreported (Berry et al., 2014a; Harper et al., 2015c; Thomas et al., 2015). Furthermore, 
while there have been advances in climate projections and impact analysis, particularly in localized 
downscaled projections, uncertainty regarding projections of food-borne disease in Canada due to climate 
change remains high. As a result, many V&As do not quantify how climate change may affect food-related 
risks, and, where future trends are examined, they involve only general extrapolations indicating the potential 
direction of change (Ebi et al., 2018). Furthermore, links among climate change, food quality, and water 
quality remain understudied (PHAC, 2017). Therefore, there is a need for future studies to examine how 
projected climate changes will affect food security and food safety (Smith & Fazil, 2019), and how future 
demographic and socio-economic factors will affect the distribution and incidence of such risks in Canada. 
Several programs have been initiated in response to these gaps. For instance, the Public Health Agency of 
Canada’s Preventative Public Health Systems and Adaptation to a Changing Climate Program is focused 
on working with public health stakeholders to expand research on climate change impacts and to support 
adaptations, including surveillance and response to emerging food-borne diseases. In addition, Health 
Canada’s climate change and health adaptation capacity-building program, HealthADAPT, has funded 10 
projects across Canada that aim to improve the knowledge base about the health impacts of climate change 
and develop strategic adaptation plans to address risks by conducting V&As. Partners in these projects 
include provincial and territorial health ministries, local health units, and the First Nations Health Authority in 
British Columbia. Several of these projects will examine climate change impacts on food-borne diseases. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 585 
8.6.1.2 Adaptation Planning 
Climate change adaptation strategies and action plans play important roles in linking evidence to decision-
making, articulating policy goals and objectives, and establishing pathways for adaptation action (Olazabal et 
al., 2019). Adaptation plans are a key component in laying the groundwork for adaptation action in all levels of 
government in Canada, minimizing climate-related impacts on food security and food safety, and maximizing 
resilience-building efforts. However, achieving tangible benefits from these groundwork efforts necessitates 
effective and timely implementation (Lesnikowski et al., 2011; Lesnikowski et al., 2016). 
Discussions about intersections among climate change, food security, and health are often better developed 
in strategic adaptation plans for Indigenous communities, where changing environmental conditions are 
affecting Indigenous food systems (Box 8.5). For example, Newfoundland and Labrador’s climate change 
plan highlights the links between temperature and sea ice changes, on one hand, and decreased access to 
Inuit hunting areas, on the other, and implications for Inuit food security, safety, and mental health outcomes 
(Municipal Affairs and Environment, 2019). Food is also a key priority in territorial adaptation planning, 
where cross-sectoral adaptation actions are being designed to integrate health, conservation, economy, 
and culture. In many provincial climate change adaptation strategies, however, climate-related impacts on 
agricultural production are framed as an economic, rather than a public health, issue. In Nova Scotia, for 
example, adaptation activities in the Department of Agriculture focus on crop diversification, soil and water 
management, pest control, and flood risk management, but do not make explicit linkages with public health 
risks related to food security and food safety (Nova Scotia Environment, 2014). 
Despite its importance, municipal climate change planning is highly uneven across Canada (Guyadeen et al., 
2019). Examples of municipal adaptation plans that address growing climate change risks to food include 
Toronto’s Climate Change and Health Strategy, which sets out several actions that build on the Toronto Food 
Strategy, including identifying the need for infrastructure to support food system sustainability, encouraging 
low-carbon diets, and assessing climate change impacts on food security and food safety (TPH, 2015). The 
City of Surrey, in British Columbia’s agriculturally productive lower mainland, has examined how changing 
temperatures and precipitation will affect agricultural losses and increase the risk of food-borne illness. 
The city’s Agricultural Plan was updated in 2013 to reflect changing climatic conditions (Planning and 
Development Department, 2013). Surrey’s Climate Adaptation Strategy aims to improve local resilience to 
climate-related disruptions in global food prices and supply chains by encouraging crop diversification and 
supporting local research on climate-resilient agricultural practices. The strategy also draws linkages with 
long-term flood risk management and land-use planning mechanisms to improve food production in urban 
spaces. At the regional level, Metro Vancouver’s Food Action Plan Task Force is working to identify how 
municipalities throughout the region are contributing to a resilient regional food system, and how local food-
production capacity can be increased (Metro Vancouver, 2016). Some small towns and rural areas are also 
examining how local food systems will be affected by climate change. The City of Castlegar, British Columbia, 
conducted a Sensitivity Assessment for Food and Agriculture that examined how climate change will stress 
local food production (City of Castlegar, 2010). The assessment proposed several actions to improve the 
adaptive capacity of Castlegar’s food system to climate change, including citizen-based monitoring of crop 
production and awareness-raising about food storage techniques. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 586 
In Quebec, the city of Montréal is conducting a study on the potential for urban commercial agriculture 
on the island of Montréal that supports food system resilience, with the goal of developing a commercial 
urban agriculture strategy and action plan (Ville de Montréal, 2018). However, in the general context of 
climate change planning, municipal policies regarding food production and consumption have commonly 
been adopted with the goal of reducing GHG emissions, and only recently are Canadian cities beginning to 
integrate food production and consumption into adaptation planning. For instance, some local adaptation 
strategies now recognize that higher summer temperatures and power outages due to extreme weather 
events pose a threat to food safety by increasing the risk of food-borne illness (Halifax Regional Municipality, 
2010; City of Windsor, 2012; City of Montréal, 2015; City of Toronto, 2019). Municipal strategies that consider 
food security in the context of climate change often focus on increasing the self-sufficiency of local and 
regional food systems; food systems can be a nexus that provides opportunities to achieve synergies 
between adaptation and GHG mitigation policies (City of Toronto Environment Office, 2008; City of Surrey, 
2013; Zeuli et al., 2018b). 
To support adaptation by Indigenous communities, the First Nations Adapt Program and the Climate Change 
Preparedness in the North Program, administered by Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs 
Canada, funds Indigenous-led climate change risk assessments and supports the development of adaptation 
options (CIRNAC, 2018; CIRNAC, 2019). Many of the funded projects have focused on climate-related impacts 
on health and/or food security. Examples include projects led by the Blood Band in Alberta to increase 
awareness about the impact of climate change on community food security; in British Columbia, the Splatsin 
First Nation’s risk assessment on the impact of flooding on food resources; the Government of Yukon 
Department of Environment’s research on the relationships among climate change, traditional foods, and 
Yukoners’ diets; and a permafrost vulnerability assessment and map of traditional harvest areas conducted 
by the Jean Marie River First Nation with Yukon College. The Climate Change and Health Adaptation Program, 
administered by Indigenous Services Canada, also funds community-driven projects to build adaptive 
capacity for the health impacts of climate change, including a number of projects on food security. 
Efforts are underway at all governmental levels to address climate-related impacts on food production 
and security. Opportunities exist to learn from leading projects and partners that explicitly address risks 
to health and that expand protection of Canadians from future climate change impacts. These actions 
would encourage collaborative partnerships across sectors and inform more effective adaptation action, 
contributing to greater resilience in the population. 
8.6.1.2.1 Adaptation Leadership in Northern Canada to Address Risks to Food Security and Safety
In Northern Canada, adaptation planning is taking place at regional to community levels. Formal planning 
efforts share a common perspective on climate-related health impacts as a cross-cutting challenge and 
emphasize the need to understand and respect relationships among health, conservation, culture, and the 
economy. The integration of Western science and Indigenous knowledge is a key principle found across 
planning documents, although a dominance of scientific framings and government planning approaches 
has been noted (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada) (Bates, 2007; 
Cameron et al., 2015; Labbé et al., 2017; Flynn et al., 2018). Key food-related impacts of climate change 
addressed in many Northern adaptation plans include changes in the availability and accessibility of 
traditional foods, increased contaminants, more unpredictable weather and sea ice conditions, and impacts 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 587 
on mental health outcomes from challenges in preserving Indigenous practices and skills embedded in land-
based activities.
At the regional level, the Pan-Territorial Adaptation Strategy (Government of Nunavut et al., 2011) has 
encouraged cooperation among the territorial governments to understand climate change risks and propose 
appropriate policy response measures. Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami’s National Inuit Climate Change Strategy (ITK, 
2019) aims to enhance coordination of Inuit regional adaptation planning efforts and develop strong linkages 
between global advocacy and participation in local efforts. The plan identifies five priority action areas: 
knowledge and capacity development; health, well-being, and the environment; food systems; energy; and 
infrastructure. Additionally, the National Inuit Committee on Health convenes an Inuit Food Security Working 
Group, which coordinates efforts around nutrition, food security, and health in Inuit regions. 
Strategic frameworks and action plans have also been adopted or are currently being developed at territorial 
and local levels. For example, the Northwest Territories Climate Change Strategic Framework and its 
associated Action Plan (2019 to 2023) detail several adaptation actions that specifically target food security 
and health, such as monitoring Indigenous food sources, conducting surveillance of species distribution, 
geo-mapping food system contamination, monitoring drinking water quality, developing a health advisory 
alert system, and exploring the potential for cultivation of new crops in community gardens as the growing 
season lengthens (Government of Northwest Territories, 2018). The Framework and Action Plan highlight 
that Indigenous knowledge should be used to obtain baseline data to monitor environmental and health 
trends and to identify future research needs. Both the Government of the Northwest Territories Sustainable 
Livelihoods Action Plan for 2019 to 2023 and the Nunavut Food Security Strategy and Action Plan for 2014 
to 2016 also recognize that climate change poses a key risk to food accessibility in the region and state the 
importance of ensuring access to country foods to achieve community food security.
The Government of Nunavut’s strategic document Upagiaqtavut – Setting the Course: Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptation in Nunavut emphasizes community involvement, decision-making by consensus, 
collaboration, resourcefulness, and respect for the environment. The document proposes several outreach 
and research activities, including planning toolkits, incorporating climate change topics into school curricula, 
and encouraging knowledge-sharing from Elders to youth. A number of community-specific actions to 
increase food access were developed through community adaptation planning exercises with federal and 
territorial government support, including delivering hunter apprenticeship programs, repairing or replacing 
dangerous trails to provide access to hunting and fishing areas, improving access to navigation technology 
and equipment, establishing community freezers, and creating awareness programs for safe food storage. 
Based on the results of these projects, a Local Adaptation Planning in Nunavut Toolkit was released in 2011 
to support communities preparing their own adaptation plans (Bowron & Davidson, 2011).
The Government of Yukon is developing a territorial adaptation strategy that builds on past adaptation 
work. The Climate Change and Public Health Project (2013–2014) identified current and projected climate 
change health impacts in Yukon, along with priorities and gaps in knowledge and resources (Government 
of Yukon, 2014). Regarding food policy more broadly, the territory established an Interdepartmental Food 
Security Working Group to propose pathways forward for addressing food security across the portfolios of 
the Departments of Environment; Health and Social Services; Economic Development; Community Services; 
Energy, Mines and Resources; and Education. The territory is also developing a local food strategy, intended 
to encourage regional production and consumption of food and to reduce reliance on food transported from 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 588 
outside of Yukon. Various actions have been proposed to increase Yukon’s food system resilience, including 
the expansion of community markets, funding for irrigation system upgrades and specialized farming 
equipment, and the design of school programs to engage students on issues of food sustainability in Yukon, 
all of which will also enhance climate change adaptive capacity.
8.6.1.3 Surveillance 
Surveillance systems are critical components of adaptation to the health impacts of climate change (Ebi 
& Semenza, 2008; Lam et al., 2019), as they provide ongoing monitoring of health outcomes through the 
collection, analysis, and interpretation of data. While most surveillance systems in Canada related to food 
safety do not currently include climate variables and were not implemented to support climate change 
adaptation, it is possible to use climate information and surveillance results to better understand risks to 
health and evaluate adaptation options (Box 8.5). For example, Smith et al. (2019) used national surveillance 
data from the Canadian Integrated Program for Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance to show a correlation 
between air temperature and precipitation, on one hand, and microbial food-borne contamination, on the 
other. Similar studies have used surveillance data to identify associations between enteric infections and 
temperature (Ravel et al., 2010; David et al., 2017). New opportunities to enhance existing surveillance 
systems exist. For example, there are opportunities to integrate climate variables into the FoodNet Canada 
Surveillance System that tracks enteric disease risks throughout the farm-to-fork continuum in regions of 
urban–rural interface (e.g., retail foods, farm, water) (PHAC, 2017). Nevertheless, challenges for surveillance 
remain. For example, the proportion of enteric infections attributable to food consumption versus water and 
other sources of infection remains unknown (Butler et al., 2016), and the true burden of food-borne illness is 
underestimated due to under-diagnosis and under-reporting (Harper et al., 2015c; Thomas et al., 2015). 
The ability of surveillance systems to provide early warning of the emergence of new or existing climate-
sensitive diseases needs to be further investigated and strengthened (Ford et al., 2014), particularly for high 
emissions scenarios (e.g., RCP 8.5) (Costello et al., 2009; Ebi et al., 2018) and for risks that may emerge 
from outside food systems (e.g., via trade) (Lake, 2017). Climate change could make current food-related 
surveillance systems inadequate, underpinning the importance of horizon scanning to anticipate new threats 
(Lake, 2017).
National household food insecurity data are collected in the Canadian Community Health Survey, so that 
temporal changes in the prevalence of household food insecurity can be detected. However, the survey’s 
results provide an incomplete picture of the state of food security in Canada with each survey cycle, as some 
provinces and territories can opt out of its food security component, and several population groups, including 
First Nations living on reserves and those living in long-term care homes and prisons, are excluded (PROOF, 
2018). Furthermore, the ability to examine fine-scale demographic, temporal, and spatial details with these 
data is limited (PROOF, 2018). Such data have not been used to examine the impacts of climate and climate 
change on food security in Canada (Ebi et al., 2017; Ford et al., 2019; Lam et al., 2019). Because the survey 
has limited ability to capture the multi-dimensional nature of food security among First Nations, Inuit, and 
Métis Peoples, alternative food security measurement approaches must be developed, rooted in cultural 
values and Indigenous knowledge, and focusing on consumption of traditional and retail foods and on the role 
of sharing networks in underpinning food access (Ready, 2016; Ford et al., 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 589 
Existing surveillance systems are insufficient to detect the occurrence and spread of climate-related 
health risks for many Indigenous Peoples in Canada (Harper et al., 2015b; Sawatzky et al., 2018; Lam et 
al., 2019), thus increasing their vulnerability to future impacts (Ford et al., 2010; Harper et al., 2015a). Gaps 
in surveillance have been documented in Indigenous communities, and these gaps exist for a range of 
reasons, such as missing data, differing interactions with health care systems, and high costs of patient 
follow-up needed to provide data (Ford et al., 2010; Harper et al., 2011; Pardhan-Ali et al., 2012a; Pardhan-Ali 
et al., 2012b; Pardhan-Ali et al., 2013; Ford et al., 2014; Harper et al., 2015a; Harper et al., 2015b; Harper et 
al., 2015c). Indigenous knowledge is critical for robust climate change and health surveillance efforts (see 
Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). Several studies demonstrate the 
effectiveness of Indigenous knowledge for community-based monitoring and surveillance systems to monitor 
and respond to climate-related changes in access to Indigenous land-based activities, species distribution, 
food safety, and associated health impacts (e.g., food security, nutrition, personal safety and injury, food-
borne pathogens, and new and re-emerging infectious diseases) (Berner et al., 2016; Blangy et al., 2018; 
Sawatzky et al., 2018; Kipp et al., 2019; Lam et al., 2019). 
Box 8.5 Adaptation actions to reduce emerging V. parahaemolyticus 
risks in oysters
The health risks from V. parahaemolyticus in oysters harvested in Canada are projected to increase due to 
climate change (see Box 8.3). Adaptation efforts are required to prevent these risks from increasing the 
burden of food-borne illness. 
Improved ability to predict emerging risks from V. parahaemolyticus could be used for early warnings, to 
target the timing and location of public health interventions and to inform new health-related industry 
practices. For example, under a predicted strong El Niño–Southern Oscillation event, adaptation efforts could 
include adjustments in industry practices and regulatory policy, especially for seafood that is consumed raw, 
such as oysters. Other options include more stringent post-harvest temperature controls to limit pathogen 
growth. However, during a 2004 V. parahaemolyticus outbreak in Alaska, pathogen levels at harvest posed 
significant health risks, despite post-harvest controls (Martinez-Urtaza et al., 2010). V. parahaemolyticus 
levels at harvest were reduced by an order of magnitude the following year by adopting a new practice in 
which oysters were held 15 to 30 m deeper in the water and, therefore, at colder temperatures, for one month 
before harvest (Martinez-Urtaza et al., 2010). Alternatively, post-harvest processes such as mild heat, high 
hydrostatic pressure, and freezing can reduce levels of V. parahaemolyticus and other pathogens, such as 
V. cholerae and V. vulnificus. These processes generally retain the raw oysters’ sensory characteristics that 
consumers prefer. As risks to health increase with a warming climate, these adaptation options provide 
opportunities to protect Canadians. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 590 
8.6.1.4 Risk Communication and Education
Awareness of climate change risks has a powerful influence on the initiation and development of adaptation 
programs and the adoption of adaptive behaviours (Grothmann & Patt, 2005; Moser, 2014; Ford & King, 
2015). There are a number of examples in which health authorities have undertaken activities to increase 
education and awareness of climate change impacts on food and to promote individual behavioural change. 
In Quebec, the Mon climat, ma santé website was designed to increase public awareness of climate-related 
health impacts. The website provides an introduction to the concept of food insecurity and discusses various 
ways that climate change will affect food production and consumption in Canada and globally. The website 
promotes food security in a changing climate, emphasizing buying local foods, community gardening, and 
holding events such as cooking workshops to teach citizens how to reduce food waste (INSPQ, n.d.). At a 
city level, in Montréal, a 2017 pilot project in the neighbourhood of Notre-Dame-de-Grâce aimed to improve 
emergency preparedness through community resilience workshops. Citizens were encouraged to assemble 
72-hour emergency kits that included recipes suited to emergency situations and food (City of Montreal, 
2018). Additionally, the federal government has funded many projects through First Nations Adapt, Climate 
Change Preparedness in the North, and HealthADAPT programs that include risk communication and 
community-based education. The Young Hunters Program in Arviat, Nunavut, for example, uses SmartIce 
technology to monitor sea ice thickness and keep the community informed about travel conditions. By 
including youth in data collection, young community members simultaneously learn about sea ice and wildlife 
safety. The First Nation of Nacho Nyak Dun in Yukon provides information to the community on climate 
change and food security by conducting knowledge-gathering activities, and then developing and translating 
information into the Northern Tutchone language. 
8.6.2 Vulnerability-Centred Adaptations 
8.6.2.1 Tackling the Root Causes of Vulnerability
The people who are disproportionately affected by climate change impacts on food security and food safety 
are those who are socio-economically disadvantaged and who already experience high burdens of ill health, 
such as people living on a low income, seniors, members of racialized communities, households headed by 
single women, and persons with disabilities (Smith et al., 2014; FAO, 2016). Adaptation actions that address 
societal conditions underlying climate-health vulnerability can enhance food security and food safety, as 
well as contributing to health equity and overall community resilience (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and 
Health Equity). For instance, for Indigenous Peoples, this includes supporting and promoting Indigenous food 
sovereignty (Box 8.6). Opportunities for action discussed in existing literature are diverse and commonly 
examined in the context of Indigenous food systems; they include investing in social safety nets to respond 
to food emergencies (e.g., soup kitchens), poverty alleviation, truth and reconciliation, education, inclusive 
governance, and cultural promotion (Ford et al., 2013; Skinner et al., 2013; Fillion et al., 2014; Ford et al., 2014; 
Organ et al., 2014; Ford et al., 2016; Rosol et al., 2016). These actions have multiple health co-benefits and 
can strengthen important determinants of health, including food security. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 591 
Box 8.6 Indigenous food sovereignty as a climate change solution
The Indigenous food sovereignty movement is rising in response to the imposition of Western industrial food 
systems, as Indigenous nations seek to reclaim their well-being through the revitalization of traditional food 
systems (Whyte, 2016; Delormier et al., 2017). Indigenous food sovereignty connotes an alternative food 
system that involves Indigenous knowledge and mutually beneficial relationships to the land, contrasting 
with many large-scale mainstream food systems characterized by industrialism, capitalism, and globalism. 
Indigenous food sovereignty seeks the integration of political, social, economic, ecological, and spiritual 
aspects of food. It asserts that Indigenous communities have the right to preserve their cultural traditions and 
practices surrounding the production, harvesting, and sharing of food (Lemke & Delormier, 2017). Indigenous 
food sovereignty conveys a “restorative framework for health and community development,” as well as 
healing relationships with each other, the land, animals, and plants (Morrison, 2011). Four central principles 
have been associated with Indigenous food sovereignty (Morrison, 2011):
•	
Food is sacred and cannot be constrained by colonial laws and policies; its value is instead upheld 
by acting on long-standing sacred responsibilities to land, animals, and plants.
•	
Participation in the day-to-day practice of nurturing healthy relationships with land and each other 
is essential to maintaining Indigenous food sovereignty.
•	
Self-determination — the freedom to make decisions regarding food to support healthy people 
and communities — is critical.
•	
There is a need for broad policy reform to reconcile Indigenous food systems with colonial laws 
and policies. 
Addressing Indigenous food sovereignty, as opposed to security, is a challenging task. It involves the analysis 
of the root causes of health disparities experienced by Indigenous Peoples as they relate to food systems, 
including the imposition of colonial food systems. The need for the revitalization of traditional food practices 
is a vital component of food sovereignty and necessitates the recognition of Aboriginal and treaty rights 
(Government of Canada, 2020) so that access to traditional lands may be secured.
In Indigenous systems, food is conceptualized as a gift, a source of life. It plays a central role in ceremonies, 
identity, and culture, and is an integral component of the web of relationships between people and the land 
(Whyte, 2016). Access to traditional foods is an essential element of Indigenous culture, language, and well-
being at the individual and community level. Such access depends on the maintenance of both physical and 
spiritual relationships to the land. 
The linkage between Indigenous knowledge and food is a critical consideration when examining food security 
in the context of climate change. Knowledge of food systems is taught, and relationships with food are 
perpetuated, through social engagements within and among families, communities, and other societies. 
When the Western agri-food system model supplanted the traditional food system, the transmission of 
Indigenous knowledge was greatly diminished (Grey & Patel, 2015; Kermoal & Altamirano-Jiménez, 2016). 
Diets are healthier in those areas where traditional foods are eaten more often (Johnson-Down & Egeland, 
2010; Gagné et al., 2012; Chan et al., 2019). Furthermore, there is a gendered component to the impact of 
food insecurity. Women traditionally hold specialized knowledge about food systems, including its production, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 592 
harvesting, preparation, and safety, and actively promote the nutritional and medicinal properties of food, as 
well as contributing to the stewardship of the land (Lemke & Delormier, 2017).
Mainstreaming or integrating climate change considerations and information on risks to food security and 
food safety into existing policies and programs can also help to address underlying causes of vulnerability. 
Some jurisdictions are taking such actions already. The Government of Nunavut’s Food Security Strategy 
and Action Plan, developed in collaboration with the Nunavut Tunngavik Inc., Inuit organizations, non-
governmental organizations, and the private sector, accounts for climate change impacts on food 
accessibility and promotes food-related skills important for adaptation (NFSC, 2014). Similarly, other 
territorial adaptation plans emphasize the importance of supporting health and wellness activities to build 
community resilience to multiple stresses, including climate change. Other measures to address food 
insecurity focus on increasing the self-sufficiency of local and regional food systems, which, in turn, can 
increase climate resilience (Sonnino, 2016; Dorward et al., 2017). Calgary’s Food System Assessment and 
Action Plan incorporates local climate projections, addresses adaptation challenges and opportunities 
throughout food systems, and showcases local examples of urban farming (City of Calgary, 2012). 
Municipalities across Canada are increasingly encouraging the creation of community gardens, permitting 
the keeping of chickens within city boundaries, supporting farmer’s markets and community agriculture 
programs, and growing urban food forests.3 Such actions can contribute to community climate resilience and 
have many health co-benefits. 
8.6.2.2 Strengthening Health Systems
Strengthening health systems to improve the management of current and future risks from climate change 
is central to adaptation (Ford et al., 2014; Watts et al., 2015) (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System 
Resilience). Public health authorities play a critical role in maintaining health and well-being, through health 
protection, promotion, screening, and surveillance related to food safety (Charron et al., 2008). There is 
limited knowledge of the effectiveness of current measures to reduce health risks from the potential food-
related impacts of climate change (Yusa et al., 2015).
Given the interdependent relationships among food systems, health, and climate change, food can be an 
important intervention point for climate action and health equity within the health care system. For example, 
Nourish: The Future of Food in Health Care, a collaborative initiative led by the McConnell Foundation with 
partners across Canada, has worked to empower health care leaders to take greater actions on climate 
change and health equity issues through interventions with food (Nourish, n.d.).The Nourish Innovator 
Program, which ran from December 2016 to May 2019, brought innovators from 25 Canadian hospitals and 
health authorities together to collaborate on a series of projects that leveraged the power of food to achieve 
impact in three cross-cutting areas: climate, equity, and community well-being. National collaborative projects 
3	
Located in urban areas and mimicking a natural ecosystem, urban food forests consist of perennial trees and edible 
plants (Clark & Nicholas, 2012).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 593 
included initiatives related to traditional and cultural food programs, sustainable menus, value-based and 
local food procurement in health care, and measuring patient food experiences. 
8.6.3 Adaptation Progress and Future Challenges
Adaptation efforts are underway at federal, provincial, territorial, municipal, community, household, and 
individual levels to respond to the food-related impacts of climate change, although analysis in this chapter 
indicates more action is needed. Continued monitoring and evaluation of adaptation will be essential for 
tracking progress in responding to risks and learning from actions, necessitating the development of new 
methods, approaches, and datasets (Ford et al., 2016; ECCC, 2018; Berrang-Ford et al., 2019; Lesnikowski et 
al., 2019).
Barriers impeding efforts to reduce risks to health from climate change impacts on food security and 
safety include uncertainty of climate change impacts; lack of financial resources; insufficient social capital; 
prioritization of more immediate public health challenges; fragmented institutional arrangements; and 
jurisdictional challenges (Huang et al., 2011; Clarke & Berry, 2012; Paterson et al., 2012; Yusa et al., 2015; 
Roser-Renouf et al., 2016; Austin et al., 2018; Austin et al., 2019). There are also potential limits to adaptation, 
although little scholarship has assessed these limits in a climate–health context in general (Ebi & Hess, 2017; 
de Coninck et al., 2018) or for food security and food safety in particular. Associated debates around loss, 
damage, and compensation are relevant in Canada, particularly for Indigenous Peoples, who face an unequal 
and inequitable burden of impact, but have not yet been examined (Ford, 2009; Landauer & Juhola, 2019).
Another challenge to adaptation is that, in climate change policy planning, food security tends to be framed 
as primarily an economic and/or GHG emissions mitigation issue, rather than as a social, cultural, or public 
health challenge that needs to be addressed. Food policies and programs in response to climate change are, 
therefore, being developed primarily under sustainability, mitigation, or resilience policy initiatives and often 
lack strong linkages to public health issues and concerns. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 594 
8.7 Knowledge Gaps and Recommendations 
8.7.1 Food Security 
The existing literature on climate change and food security generally focuses on food availability, and 
research generally places a disproportionately large emphasis on climate change impacts on food 
production, rather than other components of the food system (Nelson et al., 2016). As a result, there is limited 
understanding of the impacts climate change will have on non-production components of food systems 
(i.e., food processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption) (Porter et al., 2014), and on human health. 
Further, studies have tended to concentrate on single-factor changes that might affect food systems, rather 
than delving into the more complex and multi-layered features of food security that require integration 
of environmental, political, economic, and social factors. As a result, a number of knowledge gaps exist, 
particularly regarding food system components most vulnerable to climate change, the consequences for 
human health, and the most effective adaptation strategies (Schnitter & Berry, 2019). 
The severity and significance of climate change effects on food security, as well as the capacity to adapt, 
will vary across the country. Although a number of studies have explored climate change impacts on food 
security in Northern Canada, knowledge gaps persist in that region. Further, improving understanding of 
the main risks and vulnerabilities facing populations in regions south of 60 degrees north latitude, including 
rural and remote communities as well as urban centres, requires targeted analysis. Regional and local food 
system assessments and analyses are needed to identify unique vulnerabilities and inform appropriate 
adaptation strategies, with particular consideration for individuals who will face disproportionate impacts 
and may already face nutritional risk and food insecurity (e.g., low-income households, Indigenous Peoples, 
households headed by single women). 
Given the integrated nature of food systems, disruption of one component of the food system can disrupt 
critical operations of other components. Consequently, future research examining the climate change, food 
security, and human health nexus from a food system perspective would help identify critical vulnerabilities 
and points of adaptation intervention. A food system perspective also encourages the collaboration of all 
food system actors. Indeed, many adaptation actions that contribute to a resilient food system fall outside of 
the jurisdiction of the health sector and will require a multi-sectoral response (Schnitter & Berry, 2019).
To understand risks to food security from climate change, specific knowledge is needed, including research to: 
•	
identify processing and distribution facilities in Canada that are most vulnerable to disruption from 
extreme weather events and prioritize the most vulnerable sites for resilience-building activities;
•	
map food transportation and distribution networks across Canada and identify important facilities 
to assess climate change risks and implement adaptation actions;
•	
investigate how food distribution systems might adapt to short-term disruptions and longer-term 
challenges caused by climate change;
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 595 
•	
examine climate change impacts on nutrition in a Canadian context, including examining the 
impact elevated CO2 concentrations will have on nutritional content of key crops and studying 
potential climate-related diet shifts and implications for Canadians, and analyzing potential food 
substitutions and implications for dietary guidelines;
•	
evaluate and monitor the effectiveness of current measures to reduce health risks from impacts 
of climate change on food insecurity;
•	
enhance research and understanding of key factors that contribute to food insecurity, including 
analysis of compounding, intersecting vulnerability factors and the impact climate change will 
have on this relationship; and 
•	
increase research and understanding of the impacts climate change may have on food security 
specifically for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples. 
8.7.2 Food Safety 
Several Canadian and international studies have used surveillance data to link climate variables and/or 
climate change to incidence of enteric diseases. Fewer studies have directly associated climate change with 
food safety by, for example, linking climate to the occurrence of pathogens in foods or to illness directly 
attributed to food consumption. It is difficult to estimate the precise effect of climate change on food safety, 
as many food-borne pathogens can also be acquired via contaminated water consumption, direct contact 
with animals, and human-to-human transmission. Enhanced and integrated monitoring and surveillance 
of animals, the environment (including water), and foods for pathogens would help to address important 
knowledge gaps. Several food safety surveillance systems are established in Canada to monitor food-borne 
diseases; nevertheless, most of these surveillance systems do not currently include climate variables. An 
opportunity exists to integrate climate variables into food safety surveillance systems to be able to monitor 
trends in climate-related food-borne illness.
Food safety-related issues are under-represented in the climate-health literature relative to other health 
indicators (Springmann et al., 2016). More studies are needed to project the impacts of climate change 
and adaptation measures on food safety in Canada. Risk modelling work conducted thus far indicates that 
food-borne disease risks are projected to increase with climate change for several combinations of foods, 
pathogens, and regions (Smith et al., 2015). These types of mathematical models can be populated with 
data from enhanced surveillance programs that include climate variables, as well as new primary research 
on the evidence for pathogen behaviours under simulated climate scenarios, to derive risk projections for 
more food safety issues. Diseases previously considered exotic or rare to Canada should be reconsidered in 
light of climate changes expected in Canada (Greer et al., 2008). Cross-disciplinary research using various 
methodological tools can provide useful insights and forecast disease transmission patterns under specific 
climatic conditions (Greer et al., 2008). 
More research is also required to fully understand the impact of climate change and variability on the 
fate of chemical contaminants in the environment. While ocean warming and acidification will affect the 
bioaccumulation of contaminants in aquatic species and the structure and distribution of food webs, 
additional research is needed to understand the changing physical biochemical basis and the changing 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 596 
geographical distribution of aquatic species. Furthermore, to address climate-related environmental changes, 
integrated surveillance of water, soils, and foods for contaminants and chemical residues; crops for pesticide 
residues; animal products for veterinary residues; and emerging animal and human diseases is essential 
(WHO, 2008; Tirado et al., 2010). The data generated from this research can be used to identify emerging 
problems and food contamination trends and to contribute to risk assessments (Moulton & Schramm, 2017).
To understand risks to food safety from climate change, specific knowledge is needed, including research to:
•	
regularly review Canadian food inspection regulations and policies to ensure that they are 
robust enough to cover emerging food safety issues, both in Canada and in countries from 
which food is imported;
•	
investigate how climate change adaptation measures may affect food safety and human health 
— for example, examine potential food safety issues and associated adaptations related to 
traditional preparation and storage methods used by Indigenous Peoples and how climate change 
may influence these practices;
•	
enhance and expand existing food safety surveillance systems to include climate variables and to 
integrate monitoring of animals and the environment;
•	
enhance models and derive risk projections for food-borne illnesses in the context of climate 
change; and
•	
examine the impact of climate change on the fate of chemical contaminants in the environment.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 597 
8.8 Conclusions 
This chapter explores the linkages among climate change, food systems, and human health, as well as 
how society can adapt to reduce potential health risks in Canada. Several important themes have emerged 
and reveal the various challenges and opportunities for addressing the impacts of climate change on food 
security and food safety for human health outcomes in Canada, including:
•	
the pervasiveness of climate change impacts on all food system components, throughout the 
production, processing, distribution, preparation, and consumption phases, and the subsequent 
challenges for human health;
•	
the need to consider both the direct and indirect climate-related impacts on food systems, food 
security, and food safety on human health;
•	
the vulnerability of specific populations (e.g., low-income communities, Indigenous Peoples, 
marginalized communities, children, and older adults) to risks associated with food safety and 
food security in the context of climate change;
•	
the importance of acknowledging the multiple and intersecting ways environmental, social, 
political, and economic determinants affect health in the context of food systems, food security, 
and food safety;
•	
the globalization of food systems, causing climate change impacts on food security and health to 
be experienced at both a global and local level; and
•	
the variability of food safety and food security risks to health by region, and the resulting need 
for adaptation models to account for unique place-based experiences (driven by consumption 
patterns, cultural norms, preference, climate, etc.), while accounting for socio-economic barriers 
and other social determinants of health in order to build capacity for resilience.
As challenges to food systems, food security, and food safety present potentially severe threats to human 
health in and outside of Canada (Confalonieri et al., 2007; Friel et al., 2011; Bradbear & Friel, 2013; Porter 
et al., 2014; Bowen & Ebi, 2015; Wang & Horton, 2015; Springmann et al., 2016), it is crucial to gain greater 
understanding of risks from climate change and of opportunities to protect people. Despite existing 
knowledge gaps, efforts to address the health risks associated with climate change impacts on food systems 
are already underway in Canada. Evaluating and monitoring the effectiveness of these activities can elucidate 
important learnings and contribute to the implementation of actions across the country. Collaboration, 
spanning across all sectors and levels of government, will be critical to adapt effectively to climate change 
impacts on food security and safety in Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 598 
8.9 References
Aberman, N.-L., & Tirado, C. (2014). Impacts of climate change 
on food utilization. In B. Freedman (Ed.), Global Environmental 
Change (pp. 717–724). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-5784-4_124>
Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR). 
(1999). Toxicological Profile for Mercury. Retrieved from 
<https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxProfiles/ToxProfiles.
aspx?id=115&tid=24> 
Agency for Toxic Substances & Disease Registry (ATSDR). 
(2020). ToxGuide for lead. Retrieved from <https://www.atsdr.
cdc.gov/toxguides/toxguide-13.pdf>
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC). (2015). Impact of 
climate change on Canadian agriculture.
Agunos, A., Waddell, L., Léger, D., & Taboada, E. (2014). 
A systematic review characterizing on-farm sources of 
Campylobacter spp. for broiler chickens. PLoS ONE, 9(8), 
e104905. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0104905> 
Alava, J. J., Cheung, W. W. L., Ross, P. S., & Sumaila, U. R. (2017). 
Climate change-contaminant interactions in marine food webs: 
Toward a conceptual framework. Global Change Biology, 23(10), 
3984–4001. <https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.13667> 
Alava, J. J., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Sumaila, U. R., & 
Cheung, W. W. L. (2018). Projected amplification of food web 
bioaccumulation of MeHg and PCBs under climate change in the 
Northeastern Pacific. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 13460. https://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-018-31824-5
Al Nasir, F., & Batarseh, M. I. (2008). Agricultural reuse of 
reclaimed water and uptake of organic compounds: Pilot 
study at Mutah University wastewater treatment plant, Jordan. 
Chemosphere, 72(8), 1203–1214. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.01.064 
Anand, S. S., Hawkes, C., de Souza, R. J., Mente, A., Dehghan, 
M., Nugent, R., … Popkin, B. M. (2015). Food consumption and 
its impact on cardiovascular disease: importance of solutions 
focused on the globalized food system: a report from the 
workshop convened by the World Heart Federation. Journal of 
the American College of Cardiology, 66(14), 1590–1614. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2015.07.050> 
Anderson, D., Ford, J. D., & Way, R. G. (2018). The impacts of 
climate and social changes on cloudberry (bakeapple) picking: a 
case study from southeastern Labrador. Human Ecology, 46(6), 
849–863. <https://doi.org/https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10745-
018-0038-3>
Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). (2015). 
AMAP Assessment 2015: Human health in the Arctic. Oslo, 
Norway. <https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v75.33949> 
Armitage, J. M., Quinn, C. L., & Wania, F. (2011). Global climate 
change and contaminants—an overview of opportunities and 
priorities for modelling the potential implications for long-term 
human exposure to organic compounds in the Arctic. Journal 
of Environmental Monitoring, 13(6), 1532–1546. <https://doi.
org/10.1039/C1EM10131E> 
Arnell, N. W., Brown, S., Gosling, S. N., Gottschalk, P., Hinkel, J., 
Huntingford, C., … Zelazowski, P. (2016). The impacts of climate 
change across the globe: A multi-sectoral assessment. Climatic 
Change, 134, 457–474. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-014-
1281-2>
Austin, S. E., Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Biesbroek, R., & Ross, 
N. A. (2019). Enabling local public health adaptation to climate 
change. Social Science & Medicine, 220, 236–244. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.11.002> 
Austin, S. E., Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Biesbroek, R., Tosun, 
J., & Ross, N. A. (2018). Intergovernmental relations for public 
health adaptation to climate change in the federalist states of 
Canada and Germany. Global Environmental Change, 52, 1–22. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.07.010>
Bacon, S., Campbell, N., Raine, K., Tsuyuki, R., Khan, N., Arango, 
M., & Kaczorowski, J. (2019). Canada’s new Healthy Eating 
Strategy: Implications for health care professionals and a call to 
action. Canadian Pharmacists Journal/Revue des Pharmaciens 
du Canada, 152(3), 151–157. <https://doi.org/10.14288/hfjc.
v12i1.275>
Baker-Austin, C., Trinanes, J., Gonzalez-Escalona, N., & Martinez-
Urtaza, J. (2017). Non-Cholera Vibrios: The Microbial Barometer 
of Climate Change. Trends in microbiology, 25(1), 76–84. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tim.2016.09.008 
Banerjee, S. K., Rutley, R., & Bussey, J. (2018). Diversity and 
dynamics of the Canadian coastal Vibrio community: an 
emerging trend detected in the temperate regions. Journal of 
Bacteriology, 200(15), e00787-17. https://doi.org/10.1128/
jb.00787-17 
Batal, M., Johnson-Down, L., Moubarac, J. C., Ing, A., Fediuk, K., 
Sadik, T., … Willows, N. (2017). Sociodemographic associations 
of the dietary proportion of ultra-processed foods in First 
Nations peoples in the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, 
Manitoba, Alberta and Ontario. International Journal of Food 
Sciences and Nutrition, 69(6), 753–761. <https://doi.org/10.1080
/09637486.2017.1412405> 
Bates, P. (2007). Inuit and scientific philosophies about planning, 
prediction, and uncertainty. Arctic Anthropology, 44(2), 87–100. 
<https://doi.org/10.1353/arc.2011.0065>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 599 
Beaudin-Reimer, B. (2020). Perspectives from Métis Harvesters 
in Manitoba on Concerns and Challenges to Sustaining 
Traditional Harvesting Practices and Knowledge: A Distinctions-
Based Approach to Indigenous Food Sovereignty. In P. Settee, & 
S. Shukla (Eds.), Indigenous Food Systems: Concepts, Cases, and 
Conversations (pp. 229). Toronto, ON: Canadian Scholars.
Berner, J., Brubaker, M., Revitch, B., Kreummel, E., Tcheripanoff, 
M., & Bell, J. (2016). Adaptation in Arctic circumpolar 
communities: food and water security in a changing climate. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75(1), 33820. 
<https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v75.33820> 
Berrang-Ford, L., Biesbroek, R., Ford, J. D., Lesnikowski, A., 
Tanabe, A., Wang, F. M., … Heymann, S. J. (2019). Tracking global 
climate change adaptation among governments. Nature Climate 
Change, 9, 440–449.
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014a). Human 
health. In F.J. Warren & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada in a 
changing climate: sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation 
(pp. 191–232). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Berry, P., Enright, P. M., Shumake-Guillemot, J., Villalobos 
Prats, E., & Campbell-Lendrum, D. (2018). Assessing health 
vulnerabilities and adaptation to climate change: a review of 
international progress. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(12), 2626. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph15122626> 
Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Buse, C. (2014b). Assessment of 
vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change in 
Middlesex-London. London, ON.
Biehl, E., Buzogany, S., Baja, K., & Neff, R. (2018). Planning for 
a resilient urban food system: a case study from Baltimore 
City, Maryland. Journal of Agriculture, Food Systems, and 
Community Development, 8(B), 39–53. <https://doi.org/10.5304/
jafscd.2018.08B.008>
Bishop-Williams, K. E., Berke, O., Pearl, D. L., Hand, K., & Kelton, 
D. F. (2015). Heat stress related dairy cow mortality during 
heat waves and control periods in rural Southern Ontario from 
2010–2012. BMC Veterinary Research, 11(1), 291. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12917-015-0607-2> 
Blangy, S., Bernier, M., Bhiry, N., Jean-Pierre, D., Aenishaenslin, 
C., Bastian, S., … Rousse, D. (2018). OHMi-Nunavik: A multi-
thematic and cross-cultural research program studying the 
cumulative effects of climate and socio-economic changes on 
Inuit communities. Ecoscience, 25(4), 311–324. <https://doi.org/
10.1080/11956860.2018.1542783> 
Boeckman, C., & Bidwell, J. (2006). The effects of temperature, 
suspended solids, and organic carbon on copper toxicity to 
two aquatic invertebrates. Water, Air, & Soil Pollution, 171(1–4), 
185–202. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11270-005-9036-3> 
Bogdal, C., Schmid, P., Zennegg, M., Anselmetti, F. S., Scheringer, 
M., & Hungerbuhler, K. (2009). Blast from the past: melting 
glaciers as a relevant source for persistent organic pollutants. 
Environmental Science & Technology, 43(21), 8173–8177. 
<https://doi.org/10.1021/es901628x> 
Booth, S., & Zeller, D. (2005). Mercury, food webs, and marine 
mammals: implications of diet and climate change for human 
health. Environmental Health Perspectives, 113(5), 521–526. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.7603>
Boucher, O., Jacobson, S. W., Plusquellec, P., Dewailly, E., Ayotte, 
P., Forget-Dubois, N., Jacobson, J. L., & Muckle, G. (2012). 
Prenatal methylmercury, postnatal lead exposure, and evidence 
of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder among Inuit children 
in Arctic Québec. Environmental health perspectives, 120(10), 
1456–1461. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1204976>
Boulanger-Lapointe, N. N., Gerin-Lajoie, J., Collier, L. S., 
Desrosiers, S., Spiech, C., Henry, G. H. R., … Cuerrier, A. (2019). 
Berry plants and berry picking in Inuit Nunangat: Traditions in 
a changing socio-ecological landscape. Human Ecology, 47(1), 
81–93. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10745-018-0044-5> 
Bowen, K. J., & Ebi, K. L. (2015). Governing the health risks 
of climate change: towards multi-sector responses. Current 
Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 12, 80–85. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cosust.2014.12.001> 
Bowron, B., & Davidson, G. (2011). Climate change adaptation 
planning: A Nunavut toolkit. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www.climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/nunavut_
toolkit_final_2011_0.pdf> 
Boxall, A. B. A., Hardy, A., Beulke, S., Boucard, T., Burgin, L., 
Falloon, P. D., … Williams, R. J. (2009). Impacts of climate 
change on indirect human exposure to pathogens and chemicals 
from agriculture. Environmental Health Perspectives, 117(4), 
508–514. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.0800084> 
Bradbear, C., & Friel, S. (2013). Integrating climate change, food 
prices and population health. Food Policy, 43, 56–66. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.FOODPOL.2013.08.007>
Breewood, H. (2018). What is the nutrition transition? 
Foodsource: building blocks. Retrieved from <https://www.
tabledebates.org/building-blocks/what-nutrition-transition> 
Broberg, C. A., Calder, T. J., & Orth, K. (2011). Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus cell biology and pathogenicity determinants. 
Microbes and Infection, 13(12–13), 992–1001. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.micinf.2011.06.013>
Brown, T. M., Macdonald, R. W., Muir, D., & Letcher, R. J. (2018). 
The distribution and trends of persistent organic pollutants and 
mercury in marine mammals from Canada’s Eastern Arctic. The 
Science of the Total Environment, 618, 500–517. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.11.052>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 600 
Brunn, A., Fisman, D. N., Sargeant, J. M., & Greer, A. L. (2019). 
The influence of climate and livestock reservoirs on human 
cases of Giardiasis. EcoHealth, 16(1), 116–127. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10393-018-1385-7> 
Buckman, A. H., Fisk, A. T., Parrott, J. L., Solomon, K. R., & Brown, 
S. B. (2007). PCBs can diminish the influence of temperature 
on thyroid indices in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). 
Aquatic Toxicology, 84(3), 366–378. <https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.aquatox.2007.06.016> 
Bunce, A., Ford, J., Harper, S., Edge, V., Namanya, D. B., Berrang-
Ford, L., … Lwasa, S. (2016). Vulnerability and adaptive capacity 
of Inuit women to climate change: a case study from Iqaluit, 
Nunavut. Natural Hazards, 83(3), 1419–1441. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11069-016-2398-6> 
Buse, C. G. (2018). Why should public health agencies across 
Canada conduct climate change and health vulnerability 
assessments? Canadian Journal of Public Health, 109(5–6), 
782–785. <https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-0118-6> 
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s changing climate 
report. Ottawa, ON: Environment and Climate Change Canada.
Butler, A. J., Pintar, K. D. M., & Thomas, M. K. (2016). Estimating 
the relative role of various subcategories of food, water, and 
animal contact transmission of 28 enteric diseases in Canada. 
Foodborne Pathogens and Disease, 13(2), 57–64. <https://doi.
org/10.1089/fpd.2015.1957> 
Butler, C. (2014a). Climate change and global health. 
Oxsfordshire, United Kingdom: Centre for Agriculture and 
Bioscience International. <https://doi.org/10.1079/9781780642
659.0011> 
Butler, C. (2014b). Food and water and climate change. In B. Freedman 
(Ed.), Global Environmental Change (pp. 629-648). Springer.
Cabello, A., Espejo, R., & Romero, J. (2005). Tracing in oysters 
(Tiostrea chilensis) using a Green Fluorescent Protein tag. 
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, 327(2), 
157–166. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jembe.2005.06.009> 
Cameron, E., Mearns, R., & McGrath, J. T. (2015). Translating 
climate change: adaptation, resilience, and climate politics 
in Nunavut, Canada. Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 105(2), 274–283. <https://doi.org/10.1080/000456
08.2014.973006> 
Campbell, I. D., Durant, D. G., Hunter, K. L., & Hyatt, K. D. (2014). 
Food production. In F. J. Warren & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada in 
a changing climate: Sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation 
(pp. 99–134). Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). (2014). Food safety 
hazards. Imported and Manufactured Food Program Inspection 
Manual. Ottawa, ON.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). (2018). Canadian Food 
Safety Information Network (CFSIN). Retrieved from <https://
www.inspection.gc.ca/science-and-research/cfsin/eng/1525378
586176/1525378959647> 
Carrie, J., Wang, F., Sanei, H., Macdonald, R. W., Outridge, P. M., & 
Stern, G. A. (2010). Increasing contaminant burdens in an Arctic 
fish, Burbot (Lota lota), in a warming climate. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 44(1), 316–322. <https://doi.org/10.1021/
es902582y> 
Challinor, A. J., Adger, W. N., & Benton, T. G. (2017). Climate 
risks across borders and scales. Nature Climate Change, (7), 
621–623. <https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3380>
Chan, L., Batal, M., Sadik, T., Tikhonov, C., Schwartz, H., Fediuk, 
K., … Berti, P. (2019). FNFNES Final Report for Eight Assembly 
of First Nations Regions: Draft Comprehensive Technical 
Report. Ottawa, ON: Assembly of First Nations, University of 
Ottawa, & Université de Montréal. 
Charlebois, S., McGuinty, E., Keselj, V., Music, J., Guisto, A., 
Kevany, K., … Moksyakov, A. (2020). Canada’s Food Price Report 
2020 (10th ed.). Dalhousie University, & University of Guelph. 
Retrieved from <https://www.foodincanada.com/wp-content/
uploads/2019/12/Canada-Food-Price-Report-Eng-2020.pdf> 
Charlebois, S., & Summan, A. (2015). A risk communication 
model for food regulatory agencies in modern society. Trends 
in Food Science & Technology, 45(1), 153–165. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tifs.2015.05.004> 
Charron, D., Fleury, M., Lindsay, L. R., Ogden, N., & Schuster, C. J. 
(2008). The impacts of climate change on water-, food-, vector 
and rodent-borne diseases. In J. Sèguin (Ed.), Human health in a 
changing climate: A canadian assessment of vulnerabilities and 
adaptive capacity (pp. 171–210). Ottawa, ON: Health Canada.
Chukmasov, P., Aksenov, A., Sorokina, T., Varakina, Y., Sobolev, N., 
& Nieboer, E. (2019). North Pacific Baleen Whales as a Potential 
Source of Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) in the Diet of the 
Indigenous Peoples of the Eastern Arctic Coasts. Toxics, 7(4), 
65. <https://doi.org/10.3390/toxics7040065>
Cidro, J., Martens, T. R., Zahayko, L., & Lawrence, H. P. (2018). 
First foods as Indigenous food sovereignty: Country foods 
and breastfeeding practices in a Manitoban First Nations 
community. Canadian Food Studies/La Revue Canadienne Des 
Études Sur l’alimentation, 5(2), 25–43.
Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Pauly, D., Weatherdon, L. V., & Ota, 
Y. (2016). A global estimate of seafood consumption by coastal 
indigenous peoples. PloS One, 11(12), e0166681.
City of Calgary. (2012). Calgary Eats! A Food System Assessment 
and Action Plan for Calgary. Calgary, AB.
City of Castlegar. (2010). Adapting to climate change project 
summary report & action plan. Castlegar, BC.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 601 
City of Montreal. (2015). Climate change adaptation plan for the 
Montreal urban agglomeration 2015-2010: Adaptation measures. 
Montreal, QC.
City of Surrey. (2013). Community Climate Action Strategy. 
Surrey, BC.
City of Toronto. (2019). Toronto’s first resilience strategy. 
Toronto, ON.
City of Toronto Environment Office. (2008). Ahead of the storm: 
Preparing Toronto for climate change. Toronto, ON.
City of Windsor. (2012). City of Windsor Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan. Windsor, ON.
Clarke, K. L., & Berry, P. (2012). From theory to practice: A 
Canadian case study of the utility of climate change adaptation 
frameworks to address health impacts. International Journal of 
Public Health, 57, 167–174. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00038-
011-0292-2>
Collings, P., Marten, M. G., Pearce, T., & Young, A. G. (2016). 
Country food sharing networks, household structure, and 
implications for understanding food insecurity in Arctic Canada. 
Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 55(1), 30–49. <https://doi.org/10.
1080/03670244.2015.1072812> 
Comeau, A. M., & Suttle, C. A. (2007). Distribution, genetic 
richness and phage sensitivity of Vibrio spp. from coastal 
British Columbia. Environmental Microbiology, 9(7), 1790–1800. 
<https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1462- 2920.2007.01299.x>
Confalonieri, U., Menne, B., Akhtar, R., Ebi, K. L., Hauengue, M., 
Kovats, R.., … Woodward, A. (2007). Human Health. In M. L. 
Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden, & C. 
E. Hanson (Eds.), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (pp. 391–431). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
University Press.
Costello, A., Abbas, M., Allen, A., Ball, S., Bell, S., Bellamy, R., … 
Patterson, C. (2009). Managing the health effects of climate 
change. The Lancet, 373, 1693. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(09)60935-1>
Coulombe, G., Catford, A., Martinez-Perez, A., & Buenaventura, E. 
(2020). Outbreaks of Escherichia coli O157:H7 infections linked 
to romaine lettuce in Canada from 2008 to 2018: An analysis of 
food safety context. Journal of Food Protection, 83(8), 1444–
1462. <https://doi.org/10.4315/JFP-20-029>
Council of Canadian Academies (CCA). (2014). Aboriginal food 
security in Northern Canada: an assessment of the state of 
knowledge. Ottawa, ON.
Council of Canadian Academies (CCA). (2019). Canada’s top 
climate change risks: the expert panel on climate change risks 
and adaptation potential. Ottawa, ON.
Cousins, M., Sargeant, J. M., Fisman, D., & Greer, A. L. (2019). 
Modelling the transmission dynamics of Campylobacter in 
Ontario, Canada, assuming houseflies, Musca domestica, are a 
mechanical vector of disease transmission. Royal Society Open 
Science, 6(2), 181394. <https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.181394>
Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affiars Camada 
(CIRNAC). (2018). Climate change preparedness in the North 
program. Retrieved from <https://www.rcaanc-cirnac.gc.ca/eng/
1481305554936/1594738066665> 
Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affiars Camada 
(CIRNAC). (2019). First Nation adapt program. Retrieved from 
<https://www.rcaanc-cirnac.gc.ca/eng/1481305681144/15947
38692193> 
David, J. M., Pollari, F., Pintar, K. D. M., Nesbitt, A., Butler, A. J., & 
Ravel, A. (2017). Do contamination of and exposure to chicken 
meat and water drive the temporal dynamics of Campylobacter 
cases? Epidemiology and Infection, 145(15), 3191–3203. 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268817002199> 
de Coninck, H., Revi, A., Babiker, M., Bertoldi, P., Buckeridge, 
M., Cartwright, A., … Sugiyama, T. (2018). Strengthening and 
Implementing the Global Response. In V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, H. O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, … T. 
Waterfield (Eds.), Global warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special 
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-
industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission 
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response 
to the threat of climate change, (p. 132). Cambridge, United 
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Delcour, I., Spanoghe, P., & Uyttendaele, M. (2015). Literature 
review: Impact of climate change on pesticide use. Food 
Research International, 68, 7–15. <https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.foodres.2014.09.030> 
Delormier, T., Horn-Miller, K., McComber, A. M., & Marquis, K. 
(2017). Reclaiming food security in the Mohawk community of 
Kahnawà:ke through Haudenosaunee responsibilities. Maternal 
& Child Nutrition, 13(S3), e12556. <https://doi.org/10.1111/
mcn.12556>
Desmarais, A. A., & Wittman, H. (2014). Farmers, foodies and 
First Nations: getting to food sovereignty in Canada. Journal of 
Peasant Studies, 41(6), 1153–1173. <https://doi.org/10.1080/03
066150.2013.876623>
Dewailly, É., Ayotte, P., Bruneau, S., Lebel, G., Levallois, P., & 
Weber, J. P. (2000). Exposure of the Inuit population of Nunavik 
(Arctic Québec) to lead and mercury. Archives of Environmental 
Health: An International Journal, 56(4), 350–357. <https://doi.
org/10.1080/00039890109604467>
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., & 
Orbinski, J. (2018). Lived experience of a record wildfire season 
in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health, 109(3), 327–337. <https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-
0070-5>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 602 
Dorward, C., Smukler, S. M., & Mullinix, K. (2017). A novel 
methodology to assess land-based food self-reliance in the 
Southwest British Columbia bioregion. Renewable Agriculture 
and Food Systems, 32(2), 112–130. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1742170516000053>
Duarte, S. C., Pena, A., & Lino, C. M. (2010). A review on 
ochratoxin A occurrence and effects of processing of cereal and 
cereal derived food products. Food Microbiology, 27(2), 187–
198. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fm.2009.11.016>  
Dupuis, J., & Biesbroek, R. (2013). Comparing apples and 
oranges: The dependent variable problem in comparing 
and evaluating climate change adaptation policies. Global 
Environmental Change, 23(6), 1476–1487. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.022> 
Eagles-Smith, C. A., Wiener, J. G., Eckley, C. S., Willacker, J. J., 
Evers, D. C., Marvin-dipasquale, M., … Ackerman, J. T. (2016). 
Mercury in western North America: A synthesis of environmental 
contamination, fluxes, bioaccumulation, and risk to fish and 
wildlife. Science of the Total Environment, 568, 1213–1226. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.05.094> 
Easterling, W., Aggarwal, P., Batima, P., Brander, K., Erda, 
L., Howden, S., … Tubiello, F. (2007). Food, fibre and forest 
products. In M. Parry, O. Canziani, J. Palutikof, P. van der Linden, 
& C. Hanson (Eds.), Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (pp. 273–313). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
University Press.
Ebi, K. L. (2009). Public health responses to the risks of 
climate variability and change in the United States. Journal of 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 51(1), 4–12. <https://
doi.org/10.1097/JOM.0b013e31816fd67b>
Ebi, K. L., Berry, P., Hayes, K., Boyer, C., Sellers, S., Enright, 
P. M., & Hess, J. J. (2018). Stress testing the capacity of 
health systems to manage climate change-related shocks 
and stresses. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(11), 2370. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15112370>
Ebi, K. L., & Hess, J. J. (2017). The past and future in 
understanding the health risks of and responses to climate 
variability and change. International Journal of Biometeorology, 
61(S1), 71–80. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-017-1406-1>
Ebi, K. L., Ogden, N. H., Semenza, J. C., & Woodward, A. (2017). 
Detecting and attributing health burdens to climate change. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 125(8), 085004. <https://doi.
org/10.1289/EHP1509> 
Ebi, K. L., & Semenza, J. C. (2008). Community-based adaptation 
to the health impacts of climate change. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 35(5), 501–507. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2008.08.018>
Edwards, F., Dixon, J., Friel, S., Hall, G., Larsen, K., Lockie, 
S., … Hattersley, L. (2011). Climate change adaptation 
at the intersection of food and health. Asia Pacific 
Journal of Public Health, 23(2), 91S-104S. <https://doi.
org/10.1177/1010539510392361>
Egeland, G. M. (2010). Inuit Health Survey 2007-2008. Montreal, 
QC. Retrieved from <https://www.mcgill.ca/cine/files/cine/
adult_report_nunavut.pdf>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2017). High 
and dry in the East.
Environment and Climate Chance Canada (ECCC). (2018). 
Canadian centre for climate modelling and analysis. Retrieved 
from <http://climate-modelling.canada.ca/data/data.shtml>
Ericksen, P. J. (2008). Conceptualizing food systems for 
global environmental change research. Global Environmental 
Change, 18(1), 234–245. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gloenvcha.2007.09.002>
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), Maggiore, A., Afonso, A., 
Barrucci, F., & Sanctis, G. D. (2020). Climate change as a driver 
of emerging risks for food and feed safety, plant, animal health 
and nutritional quality. EFSA Supporting Publications, 17(6), 
1881E. doi:10.2903/sp.efsa.2020.EN-1881
Fanzo, J., Davis, C., McLaren, R., & Choufani, J. (2018). The 
effect of climate change across food systems: Implications for 
nutrition outcomes. Global Food Security, 18, 12–19. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.GFS.2018.06.001>  
Ferguson, A., Penney, R., & Solo-Gabriele, H. (2017). A review of 
the field on children’s exposure to environmental contaminants: 
a risk assessment approach. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(3), 265. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14030265>
Fillion, M., Laird, B., Douglas, V., Van Pelt, L., Archie, D., & 
Chan, H. M. (2014). Development of a strategic plan for food 
security and safety in the Inuvialuit settlement region, Canada. 
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 73(1), 25091. 
<https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v73.25091>
First Nations Information Governance centre (FNIGC). (2018). 
National Report of the First Nations Regional Health Survey 
Phase 3: Volume 2. Ottawa, ON. 
Fleury, M., Charron, D. F., Holt, J. D., Allen, O. B., & Maarouf, A. 
R. (2006). A time series analysis of the relationship of ambient 
temperature and common bacterial enteric infections in two 
Canadian provinces. International Journal of Biometeorology, 
50(6), 385–391. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-006-0028-9> 
Flynn, M., Ford, J. D., Pearce, T., Harper, S. L., & Team, I. R. 
(2018). Participatory scenario planning and climate change 
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability research in the Arctic. 
Environmental Science & Policy, 79, 45–53. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.envsci.2017.10.012>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 603 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 
(1996). Rome declaration on world food security and World 
Food Summit Plan of Action. In World Food Summit (pp. 1–25). 
<https://doi.org/10.1163/ilwo-iiin2>
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO). (2008). Climate change and food security: A framework 
document. Rome, Italy.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 
(2015). Climate change and food systems: Global assessments 
and implications for food security and trade. Rome, Italy.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 
(2016). Climate change and food security: Risks and responses. 
Rome, Italy.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 
International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD), United 
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Food Programme 
(WFP), & World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). The state 
of food security and nutrition in the world: Building climate 
resilience for food security and nutrition. Rome, Italy.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), 
& World Health Organization (WHO). (2011). Risk assessment of 
Vibrio parahaemolyticus in seafood: interpretive summary and 
technical report. Rome, Italy.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2005). Quantitative risk 
assessment on the public health impact of pathogenic Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus in raw oysters. Retrieved from <https://www.
fda.gov/food/cfsan-risk-safety-assessments/quantitative-
risk-assessment-public-health-impact-pathogenic-vibrio-
parahaemolyticus-raw-oysters>
Ford, J. D. (2008). Vulnerability of Inuit food systems to food 
insecurity as a consequence of climate change: a case study 
from Igloolik, Nunavut. Regional Environmental Change, 9, 
83–100. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10113-008-0060-x> 
Ford, J. D. (2009). Dangerous climate change and the 
importance of adaptation for the Arctic’s Inuit population. 
Environmental Research Letters, 4(2), 024006. <https://doi.
org/10.1088/1748-9326/4/2/024006>
Ford, J. D., & Beaumier, M. (2011). Feeding the family during 
times of stress: experience and determinants of food 
insecurity in an Inuit community. The Geographical Journal, 
177(1), 44–61. <https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1111
/j.1475-4959.2010.00374.x> 
Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., King, M., & Furgal, C. (2010). 
Vulnerability of Aboriginal health systems in Canada to climate 
change. Global Environmental Change, 20(4), 668–680. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.05.003>
Ford, J. D., Clark, D. G., & Naylor, A. W. (2019). Food insecurity 
in Nunavut: Are we going from bad to worse? Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 191(20), E550–E551. <https://doi.
org/10.1503/cmaj.190497>
Ford, J. D., Falk, K., Tesar, C., & Jacobsen, R. B. (2018). 
Adaptation and resilience. In Adaptation Actions for a Changing 
Arctic: Perspectives from the Baffin Bay/Davis Strait region (pp. 
307–328). Oslo, Norway: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment 
Programme (AMAP).
Ford, J. D., & King, D. (2015). A framework for examining 
adaptation readiness. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 20, 505–526. 10.1007/s11027-013-9505-8
Ford, J. D., Lardeau, M.-P., Blackett, H., Chatwood, S., & 
Kurszewski, D. (2013). Community food program use in Inuvik, 
Northwest Territories. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 970. <https://
doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-970>
Ford, J. D., Tilleard, S., Berrang-Ford, L., Araos, M., Biesbroek, 
R., Lesnikowski, A., … Bizikova, L. (2016). Opinion: Big data has 
big potential for applications to climate change adaptation. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(39), 
10729–10732. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1614023113> 
Ford, J. D., Willox, A. C., Chatwood, S., Furgal, C., Harper, S., 
Mauro, I., & Pearce, T. (2014). Adapting to the effects of climate 
change on Inuit health. American Journal of Public Health, 
104(S3), e9–e17. <https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2013.301724>
Friel, S. (2019). It’s a consumptagenic world. In N. Krieger (Ed.), 
Climate Change and People’s Health (pp. 57–112). New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press. <https://doi.org/doi:10.1093/
oso/9780190492731.001.0001> 
Friel, S., Bowen, K., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Frumkin, H., 
McMichael, A. J. J., & Rasanathan, K. (2011). Climate change, 
noncommunicable diseases, and development: the relationships 
and common policy opportunities. Annual Review of Public 
Health, 32, 133–147. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
publhealth-071910-140612> 
Friel, S., & Ford, L. (2015). Systems, food security and human 
health. Food Security, 7(2), 437–451. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12571-015-0433-1> 
Gaden, A., Ferguson, S. H., Harwood, L., Melling, H., Alikamik, 
J., & Stern, G. A. (2012). Western Canadian Arctic ringed 
seal organic contaminant trends in relation to sea ice break-
up. Environmental Science & Technology, 46(8), 4427–4433. 
<https://doi.org/10.1021/es204127j>
Gagné, D., Blanchet, R., Lauziere, J., Vaissière, É., Vézina, 
C., Ayotte, P., … Turgeon O’Brien, H. (2012). Traditional food 
consumption is associated with higher nutrient intakes in Inuit 
children attending childcare centres in Nunavik. International 
Journal of Circumpolar Health, 71(1), 18401. <https://doi.
org/10.3402/ijch.v71i0.18401>
Gibson, K., Kneen, C., & Houghton, J. (2004). Making 
the connection: food security and public health. The 
Community Nutritionists Council of BC. Retrieved from 
<https://bcfoodsecuritygateway.ca/wp-content/uploads/
sites/2/2015/11/Making_the_Connection.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 604 
Golden, C. D., Allison, E. H., Cheung, W. W. L., Dey, M. M., 
Halpern, B. S., McCauley, D. J., … Myers, S. S. (2016). Nutrition: 
fall in fish catch threatens human health. Nature, 534(7607), 
317–320. <https://doi.org/10.1038/534317a> 
Gornall, J., Betts, R., Burke, E., Clark, R., Camp, J., Willett, 
K., & Wiltshire, A. (2010). Implications of climate change 
for agricultural productivity in the early twenty-first century. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological 
Sciences, 365(1554), 2973–2989. <https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2010.0158> 
Goulson, D., Derwent, L. C., Hanley, M. E., Dunn, D. W., & Abolins, 
S. R. (2005). Predicting calyptrate fly populations from the 
weather, and probable consequences of climate change. Journal 
of Applied Ecology, 42(5), 795–804. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1365-2664.2005.01078.x>
Government of Canada. (2016). Environmental Contaminants. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/
services/food-nutrition/food-safety/chemical-contaminants/
environmental-contaminants.html> 
Government of Canada. (2017). Canadian Arctic Contaminants 
Assessment Report: Human Health Assessment 2017 (M. S. 
Curren, Ed.). Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://unh.app.box.
com/file/412682049405>
Government of Canada. (2019). Diseases and conditions. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/
services/diseases.html> 
Government of Canada. (2020). Treaties and agreements. 
Retrieved from <https://www.rcaanc-cirnac.gc.ca/eng/11001000
28574/1529354437231> 
Government of Northwest Territories. (2018). 2030 NWT climate 
change strategic framework. Retrieved from <https://www.
enr.gov.nt.ca/en/services/climate-change/2030-nwt-climate-
change-strategic-framework>
Government of Nunavut, Government of Northwest Territories, & 
Government of Yukon. (2011). Pan-territorial adaptation strategy: 
Moving forward on climate change adaptation in Canada’s north. 
Retrieved from <https://www.northernadaptation.ca/sites/
default/files/Pan-Territorial_Adaptation_Strategy.pdf> 
Government of Yukon. (2014). Climate Change & public health. 
Whitehorse, YK.
Greenwood, M., de Leeuw, S., & Lindsay, N. (2018). Challenges 
in health equity for Indigenous peoples in Canada. The Lancet, 
391(10131), 1645–1648. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(18)30177-6>
Greer, A., Ng, V., & Fisman, D. (2008). Climate change and 
infectious diseases in North America: the road ahead. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 178(6), 715. <https://doi.
org/10.1503/CMAJ.081325> 
Gregory, P., Ingram, J., & Brklacich, M. (2005). Climate change 
and food security. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 360(1463), 2139–2148. <https://
doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2005.1745>
Grey Bruce Health Unit. (2017). Climate change and public 
health in Grey Bruce Health Unit: current conditions and future 
projections. Owen Sound, ON.
Grey, S., & Patel, R. (2015). Food sovereignty as decolonization: 
Some contributions from Indigenous movements to food system 
and development politics. Agriculture & Human Values, 32(3), 
<https://doi.org/431–444. 10.1007/s10460-014-9548-9> 
Grimes, D. J., Johnson, C. N., Dillon, K. S., Flowers, A. R., 
Noriea, N. F., 3rd, & Berutti, T. (2009). What genomic sequence 
information has revealed about Vibrio ecology in the ocean-
-a review. Microbial ecology, 58(3), 447–460. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00248-009-9578-9> 
Grothmann, T., & Patt, A. (2005). Adaptive capacity and human 
cognition: The process of individual adaptation to climate 
change. Global Environmental Change, 15(3), 199–213. <https://
doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2005.01.002>
Guyadeen, D., Thistlethwaite, J., & Henstra, D. (2019). Evaluating 
the quality of municipal climate change plans in Canada. 
Climatic Change, 152, 121–143. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10584-018-2312-1>
Hald, B., Skovgård, H., Pedersen, K., & Bunkenborg, H. (2008). 
Influxed insects as vectors for Campylobacter jejuni and 
Campylobacter coli in Danish broiler houses. Poultry Science, 
87(7), 1428–1434. <https://doi.org/10.3382/ps.2007-00301> 
Halifax Regional Municipality. (2010). HRM climate SMART 
community action guide to climate change and emergency 
preparedness. 
Halseth, R. (2015). The nutritional health of the First Nations 
and Métis of the Northwest Territories: A review of current 
knowledge and gaps. Prince George, BC. Retrieved from 
<http://www.nccah-ccnsa.ca/Publications/Lists/Publications/
Attachments/141/2015_04_21_RPT_DietNutritionNWT_EN_Web.
pdf> 
Hansen, L. J., & Hoffman, J. R. (2011). Assessing vulnerability 
to climate change. In Climate Savvy (pp. 55–69). Island Press. 
<https://doi.org/10.5822/978-1-59726-988-9_5> 
Harper, S. L., Berrang-Ford, L., Carcamo, C., Cunsolo, A., Edge, V. 
L., Ford, J. D., … Namanya, D. B. (2019). The Indigenous Climate–
Food–Health Nexus. In L. R. Mason, & J. Rigg (Eds.), People and 
Climate Change: Vulnerability, Adaptation, and Social Justice (pp. 
184-207). Oxford University Press. 
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Ford, J., Cunsolo, A., Wood, M., Team, I. 
R., … Namanya, D. B. (2015a). Climate-sensitive health priorities 
in Nunatsiavut, Canada. BMC Public Health, 15(1), 605. <https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12889-015-1874-3>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 605 
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Ford, J., Thomas, M. K., Pearl, D. L., 
Shirley, J., … McEwen, S. A. (2015b). Acute gastrointestinal 
illness in two Inuit communities: burden of illness in Rigolet and 
Iqaluit, Canada. Epidemiology and Infection, 143(14), 3048–
3063. <https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268814003744> 
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Ford, J., Thomas, M. K., Pearl, D. L., 
Shirley, J., … McEwen, S. A. (2015c). Healthcare use for acute 
gastrointestinal illness in two Inuit communities: Rigolet and 
Iqaluit, Canada. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 74, 
26290. <https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v74.26290>
Harper, S. L., Edge, V. L., Schuster-Wallace, C. J., Ar-Rushdi, M., & 
McEwen, S. A. (2011). Improving Aboriginal health data capture: 
evidence from a health registry evaluation. Epidemiology and 
Infection, 139(11), 1774—1783. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
s095026881000275x>
Health Canada. (2019). Climate Change and Health Adaptation 
Capacity Building Program (HealthADAPT). Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/news/2019/04/
backgrounder-climate-change-and-health-adaptation-capacity-
building-program-healthadapt.html> 
Health Canada. (2020). Determining food security status. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/
services/food-nutrition/food-nutrition-surveillance/health-
nutrition-surveys/canadian-community-health-survey-cchs/
household-food-insecurity-canada-overview/determining-food-
security-status-food-nutrition-surveillance-health-canada.html>
Hedlund, C., Blomstedt, Y., & Schumann, B. (2014). Association 
of climatic factors with infectious diseases in the Arctic and 
subarctic region – a systematic review. Global Health Action, 
7(1), 24161. <https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v7.24161> 
Heiman, K. E., Mody, R. K., Johnson, S. D., Griffin, P. M., & Gould, 
L. H. (2015). Escherichia coli O157 outbreaks in the United 
States, 2003–2012. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 21(8), 1293. 
<https://doi.org/10.3201/eid2108.141364> 
Hellberg, R. S., & Chu, E. (2015). Effects of climate change 
on the persistence and dispersal of foodborne bacterial 
pathogens in the outdoor environment: A review. Critical 
Reviews in Microbiology, 42(4), 548–572. <https://doi.org/ 
10.3109/1040841X.2014.972335> 
Henstra, D. (2017). Climate adaptation in Canada : Governing 
a complex policy regime. Review of Policy Research, 34(3), 
378–399. <https://doi.org/10.1111/ropr.12236> 
Hess, J. J., McDowell, J. Z., & Luber, G. (2012). Integrating 
climate change adaptation into public health practice: using 
adaptive management to increase adaptive capacity and build 
resilience. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(2), 171–179. 
<https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1103515> 
High Level Panel of Experts (HLPE). (2017). Nutrition and food 
systems. Rome, Italy. Retrieved from <http://www.fao.org/3/
i7846e/i7846e.pdf>
Huang, C., Vaneckova, P., Wang, X., FitzGerald, G., Guo, Y., 
& Tong, S. (2011). Constraints and barriers to public health 
adaptation to climate change: a review of the literature. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 40(2), 183–190. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AMEPRE.2010.10.025> 
Huet, C., Rosol, R., & Egeland, G. M. (2012). The prevalence 
of food insecurity is high and the diet quality poor in Inuit 
communities. The Journal of Nutrition, 142(3), 541–547. 
<https://doi.org/10.3945/jn.111.149278>
Ingram, J. (2009). Food system concepts. In R. Rabbinge & A. 
Linneman (Eds.), European food systems in a changing world (pp. 
9–15). ESF-COST.
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). (2016). 
Global burden of disease arrow diagram.
Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ). 
(n.d.). Mon Climat, Ma Santé. Retrieved from <http://www.
monclimatmasante.qc.ca/>
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2018). 
Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts 
of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related 
global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of 
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change 
(V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, 
P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, … T. Waterfield, Eds.). Retrieved from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2019a). 
Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate 
change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land 
management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in 
terrestrial ecosystems (P. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. 
Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, … J. Malley, Eds.). 
Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2019b). 
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing 
Climate (H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, 
M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, … N. Weyer, Eds.). Retrieved from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/srocc/> 
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services (IPBES). (2018). The regional assessment 
report on biodiversity and ecosystem services for the Americas 
(J. Rice, C. S. Seixas, M. E. Zaccagnini, M. Bedoya- Gaitán, N. 
Valderrama, C. B. Anderson, … J. S. Farinaci, Eds.). Germany: 
Bonn.
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2019). National Inuit Climate 
Change Strategy. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/06/ITK_Climate-Change-Strategy_
English.pdf> 
Jaykus, L., Woolridge, M., Frank, J., Miraglia, M., McQuatters-
Gollop, A., Tirado, C., … Friel, M. (2008). Climate change: 
Implications for food safety. Rome, Italy.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 606 
Jenkins, E. J., Castrodale, L. J., de Rosemond, S. J. C., Dixon, 
B. R., Elmore, S. A., Gesy, K. M., … Thompson, R. C. A. (2013). 
Tradition and transition: parasitic zoonoses of people and 
animals in Alaska, Northern Canada, and Greenland. Advances in 
Parasitology, 82, 33–204. <https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-
407706-5.00002-2> 
Jessiman-Perreault, G., & McIntyre, L. (2017). The household 
food insecurity gradient and potential reductions in adverse 
population mental health outcomes in Canadian adults. SSM 
- Population Health, 3, 464–472. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ssmph.2017.05.013>
Jiménez Cisneros, B. E., Oki, T., Arnell, N. W., Benito, G., Cogley, 
J. G., Doll, P., … Mwakalila, S. S. (2014). Freshwater Resources. 
In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. 
Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, … L. L. White (Eds.), Climate Change 
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and 
Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (pp. 229–269). Cambridge, United Kingdom and New 
York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Down, L., & Egeland, G. M. (2010). Adequate nutrient 
intakes are associated with traditional food consumption in 
Nunavut Inuit children aged 3–5 years. The Journal of Nutrition, 
140(7), 1311–1316. <https://doi.org/10.3945/jn.109.117887> 
Julie, D., Solen, L., Antoine, V., Jaufrey, C., Annick, D., & 
Dominique, H.-H. (2010). Ecology of pathogenic and non-
pathogenic Vibrio parahaemolyticus on the French Atlantic 
coast. Effects of temperature, salinity, turbidity and chlorophyll 
a. Environmental Microbiology, 12(4), 929–937. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1462- 2920.2009.02136.x>  
Jung, J. K. H., & Skinner, K. (2017). Enteric Disease Outbreaks: 
Foodborne and waterborne illness among Canadian Indigenous 
populations: A scoping review. Canada Communicable Disease 
Report, 43(1), <https://doi.org/7.10.14745/ccdr.v43i01a02> 
Kapilashrami, A., & Hankivsky, O. (2018). Intersectionality and 
why it matters to global health. The Lancet, 391(10140), 2589–
2591. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(18)31431-4> 
Keen, J. E., Laegreid, W. W., Chitko Mckown, C. G., Bono, J. 
L., Fox, J. M., Clawson, M., & Heaton, M. (2003). Effect of 
exogenous glucocorticoids and dietary change on winter and 
summer STEC O157 fecal shedding in naturally-infected beef 
cattle. In Research Workers in Animal Diseases Conference 
Proceedings.
Kenny, T.-A., Fillion, M., Simpkin, S., Wesche, S. D., & Chan, H. M. 
(2018). Caribou (Rangifer tarandus) and Inuit nutrition security 
in Canada. EcoHealth, 15(3), 590–607. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10393-018-1348-z> 
Kermoal, N., & Altamirano-Jiménez, I. (Eds.). (2016). Living on 
the land: Indigenous women’s understanding of place. Athabasca 
University Press.
Khan, S., Barhoumi, R., Burghardt, R., Liu, S., Kim, K., & Safe, S. 
(2006). Molecular mechanism of inhibitory aryl hydrocarbon 
receptor-estrogen receptor/Sp1 cross talk in breast cancer 
cells. Molecular Endocrinology, 20(9), 2199–2214. <https://doi.
org/10.1210/me.2006-0100> 
King, U., & Furgal, C. (2014). Is hunting still healthy? 
Understanding the interrelationships between indigenous 
participation in land-based practices and human-environmental 
health. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 11(6), 5751–5782. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph110605751> 
Kipp, A., Cunsolo, A., Vodden, K., King, N., Manners, S., & Harper, 
S. L. (2019). Climate change impacts on health and wellbeing 
in rural and remote regions across Canada: A synthesis of the 
literature. Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in 
Canada, 39(4). <https://doi.org/10.24095/hpcdp.39.4.02> 
Konrad, S., Paduraru, P., Romero-Barrios, P., Henderson, S. B., 
& Galanis, E. (2017). Remote sensing measurements of sea 
surface temperature as an indicator of Vibrio parahaemolyticus 
in oyster meat and human illnesses. Environmental Health, 16(1), 
92. <https://doi.org/https://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017- 
0301-x> 
Kovats, R. S., Edwards, S. J., Hajat, S., Armstrong, B. G., Ebi, 
K. L., & Menne, B. (2004). The effect of temperature on food 
poisoning: a time-series analysis of salmonellosis in ten 
European countries. Epidemiology & Infection, 132(3), 443–453. 
<https://doi.org/10.1017/s0950268804001992> 
Kuhnlein, H. V, & Chan, H. M. (2000). Environment and 
contaminants in traditional food systems of Northern 
Indigenous peoples. Annual Review of Nutrition, 20(1), 595–626. 
<https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.nutr.20.1.595> 
Labbé, J., Ford, J. D., Araos, M., & Flynn, M. (2017). The 
government-led climate change adaptation landscape in 
Nunavut, Canada. Environmental Reviews, 25(1), 12–25. <https://
doi.org/10.1139/er-2016-0032> 
Lafferty, K. D., Porter, J. W., & Ford, S. E. (2004). Are diseases 
increasing in the ocean? Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, 
and Systematics, 35, 31–54. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
ecolsys.35.021103.105704> 
Laidler, G. J., Ford, J. D., Gough, W. A., Ikummaq, T., Gagnon, A. 
S., Kowal, S., … Irngaut, C. (2009). Travelling and hunting in a 
changing Arctic: assessing Inuit vulnerability to sea ice change 
in Igloolik, Nunavut. Climatic Change, 94, 363–397. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10584-008-9512-z>
Lake, I. R. (2017). Food-borne disease and climate change in the 
United Kingdom. Environmental Health, 16(S1), 117. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12940-017-0327-0> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 607 
Lake, I. R., & Barker, G. C. (2018). Climate change, foodborne 
pathogens and illness in higher-income countries. Current 
Environmental Health Reports, 5(1), 187–196. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40572-018-0189-9>
Lake, I. R., Foxall, C. D., Fernandes, A., Lewis, M., Rose, M., 
White, O., … Mortimer, D. (2015). The effects of flooding on 
dioxin and PCB levels in food produced on industrial river 
catchments. Environment International, 77, 106–115. <https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.ENVINT.2015.01.006>
Lake, I. R., Foxall, C. D., Lovett, A. A., Fernandes, A., Dowding, A., 
White, S., & Rose, M. (2005). Effects of river flooding on PCDD/F 
and PCB levels in cows’ milk, soil, and grass. Environmental 
Science & Technology, 39(23), 9033–9038. <https://doi.
org/10.1021/es051433a> 
Lake, I. R., Gillespie, I. A., Bentham, G., Nichols, G. L., Lane, 
C., Adak, G. K., & Threlfall, E. J. (2009). A re-evaluation of the 
impact of temperature and climate change on foodborne illness. 
Epidemiology & Infection, 137(11), 1538–1547. <https://doi.
org/0.1017/S0950268809002477> 
Lake, I. R., Hooper, L., Abdelhamid, A., Bentham, G., Boxall, A. B. 
A., Draper, A., … Waldron, K. W. (2012). Climate change and food 
security: health impacts in developed countries. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 120(11), 1520–1526. <https://doi.
org/10.1289/ehp.1104424> 
Lal, A., Hales, S., French, N., & Baker, M. G. (2012). Seasonality 
in human zoonotic enteric diseases: a systematic review. 
PLoS One, 7(4), e31883. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0031883>
Lam, S., Dodd, W., Skinner, K., Papadopoulos, A., Zivot, C., Ford, 
J., … Harper, S. L. (2019). Community-based monitoring of 
Indigenous food security in a changing climate: global trends 
and future directions. Environmental Research Letters, 14(7), 
073002. <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/ab13e4> 
Landauer, M., & Juhola, S. (2019). Loss and damage in the 
rapidly changing Arctic. In R. Mechler, L. Bouwer, T. Schinko, 
S. Surminski, & J. Linnerooth-Bayer (Eds.), Loss and Damage 
from Climate Change. Climate Risk Management, Policy and 
Governance (pp. 425–447). Springer, Cham. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-72026-5_18> 
Larsen, J. N., Anisimov, O. A., Constable, A., Hollowed, A. B., 
Maynard, N., Prestrud, P., … Stone, J. M. R. (2014). Polar Regions. 
In V. R. Barros, C. B. Field, D. J. Dokken, M. B. Mastrandrea, K. 
J. Mach, T. E. Bilir, … L. L. White (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 1567–
1612). Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: 
Cambridge University Press.
Lemke, S., & Delormier, T. (2017). Indigenous Peoples’ food 
systems, nutrition, and gender: Conceptual and methodological 
considerations. Maternal & Child Nutrition, 13, e12499. <https://
doi.org/10.1111/mcn.12499>
Lemmen, D. S., Warren, F. J., Lacroix, J., & Bush, E. (Eds.). (2008). 
From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007. 
Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada.
Lesnikowski, A., Belfer, E., Rodman, E., Smith, J., Biesbroek, 
R., Wilkerson, J., … Berrang-Ford, L. (2019). Frontiers in data 
analytics for adaptation research: Topic modeling. Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 10(3), e576. <https://
doi.org/10.1002/wcc.576>
Lesnikowski, A., Ford, J., Berrang-Ford, L., Paterson, J., Barrera, 
M., & Heymann, J. (2011). Adapting to health impacts of climate 
change: a study of UNFCCC Annex I parties. Environmental 
Research Letters, 6(4), 044009. <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/6/4/044009>
Lesnikowski, A., Ford, J., Biesbroek, R., Berrang-Ford, L., & 
Heymann, J. (2016). National-level progress on adaptation. 
Nature Climate Change, 6(3), 261–264. <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nclimate2863> 
Levison, M. M., Butler, A. J., Rebellato, S., Armstrong, B., Whelan, 
M., & Gardner, C. (2018). Development of a climate change 
vulnerability assessment using a public health lens to determine 
local health vulnerabilities: an Ontario health unit experience. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 15(10), 2237. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15102237>
Levison, M. M., Whelan, M., & Butler, A. (2017). A changing 
climate: assessing health impacts and vulnerabilities due to 
climate change within Simcoe Muskoka. Simcoe Muskoka 
District Health Unit.
Li, N., Dachner, N., Tarasuk, V., Zhang, R., Kurrein, M., Harris, T., Gustin, 
S., & Rasal, D. (2016). Priority Health Equity Indicators for British 
Columbia: Household Food Insecurity Indicator Report. Vancouver, BC: 
Provincial Health Services Authority and PROOF.
Liu, C., Hofstra, N., & Franz, E. (2013). Impacts of climate change 
on the microbial safety of pre-harvest leafy green vegetables 
as indicated by Escherichia coli O157 and Salmonella spp. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology, 163(2–3), 119–128. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2013.02.026> 
Lock, K., Stuckler, D., Charlesworth, K., & McKee, M. (2009). 
Potential causes and health effects of rising global food 
prices. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 339, b2403. <https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.b2403> 
Lopez, R., & Goldoftas, B. (2009). The urban elderly in the 
United States: health status and the environment. Reviews on 
Environmental Health, 24(1), 47–57. <https://doi.org/10.1515/
REVEH.2009.24.1.47> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 608 
Ma, J., Hung, H., Tian, C., & Kallenborn, R. (2011). Revolatilization 
of persistent organic pollutants in the Arctic induced by climate 
change. Nature Climate Change, 1(5), 255–260. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate1167>
Macdiarmid, J. I., & Whybrow, S. (2019). Nutrition from a climate 
change perspective. In A. Gallagher (Ed.), Proceedings of the 
Nutrition Society (pp. 1–8). Cambridge University Press. <https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0029665118002896> 
MacFadden, D. R., McGough, S. F., Fisman, D., Santillana, M., 
& Brownstein, J. S. (2018). Antibiotic resistance increases 
with local temperature. Nature Climate Change, 8(6), 510–514. 
<https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-0161-6> 
Magnan, A. K., Schipper, E. L. F., Burkett, M., Bharwani, S., Burton, 
I., & Eriksen, S. H. (2016). Addressing the risk of maladaptation 
to climate change. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate 
Change, 7, 646–665. <https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.409> 
Manciocco, A., Calamandrei, G., & Alleva, E. (2014). Global 
warming and environmental contaminants in aquatic organisms: 
the need of the etho-toxicology approach. Chemosphere, 100, 
1–7. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.12.072> 
Martens, T., Cidro, J., Hart, M. A., & McLachlan, S. (2016). 
Understanding Indigenous food sovereignty through an 
Indigenous research paradigm. Journal of Indigenous Social 
Development, 5(1), 18-37. 
Martinez-Urtaza, J., Bowers, J. C., Trinanes, J., & DePaola, A. 
(2010). Climate anomalies and the increasing risk of Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus illnesses. Food Research 
International, 43(7), 1780–1790. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodres.2010.04.001> 
Marushka, L., Batal, M., Sharp, D., Schwartz, H., Ing, A., Fediuk, 
K., … Chan, H. M. (2017). Fish consumption is inversely 
associated with type 2 diabetes in Manitoba First Nations 
communities. FACETS, 2, 795–818. <https://doi.org/10.1139/
facets-2017-0023> 
Marushka, L., Kenny, T.-A. A., Batal, M., Cheung, W. W. L., Fediuk, 
K., Golden, C. D., … Chan, H. M. (2019). Potential impacts of 
climate-related decline of seafood harvest on nutritional status 
of coastal First Nations in British Columbia, Canada. PLoS ONE, 
14(2). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0211473> 
Marvin, H. J. P., Kleter, G. A., Noordam, M. Y., Franz, E., Willems, 
D. J. M., & Boxall, A. (2013). Proactive systems for early warning 
of potential impacts of natural disasters on food safety: climate-
change-induced extreme events as case in point. Food Control, 
34(2), 444–456. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
foodcont.2013.04.037 
Mbow, C., Rosenzweig, C., Barioni, L., Benton, T., Herrero, M., 
Krishnapillai, M., … Xu, Y. (2019). Food security. In P. Shukla, 
J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.-O. Pörtner, 
D. C. Roberts, … J. Malley (Eds.), Climate Change and Land: 
an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land 
degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and 
greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems. Retrieved from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/> 
McLeod, L., & Veall, M. (2006). The dynamics of food insecurity 
and overall health: evidence from the Canadian National 
Population Health Survey. Applied Economics, 38(18), 2131–
2146. <https://doi.org/10.1080/00036840500427429> 
Medical Officer of Health. (2013). Exploring Health and Social 
Impacts of Climate Change in Toronto. Toronto, ON.
Metro Vancouver. (2016). Regional food system action plan. 
Vancouver, BC.
Milazzo, A., Giles, L. C., Zhang, Y., Koehler, A. P., Hiller, J. E., & Bi, 
P. (2017). Factors Influencing Knowledge, Food Safety Practices 
and Food Preferences During Warm Weather of Salmonella and 
Campylobacter Cases in South Australia. Foodborne Pathogens 
and Disease, 14(3), 125–131. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
fpd.2016.2201>
Miraglia, M., Marvin, H. J. P., Kleter, G. A., Battilani, P., Brera, 
C., Coni, E., … Vespermann, A. (2009). Climate change and 
food safety: an emerging issue with special focus on Europe. 
Food and Chemical Toxicology, 47(5), 1009–1021. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.fct.2009.02.005> 
Morrison, D. (2011). Indigenous food sovereignty: a model for 
social learning. In A. A. Desmarais, N. Wiebe, & H. Wittman 
(Eds.), Food Sovereignty in Canada: Creating Just and 
Sustainable Food Systems (pp. 97–113). Fernwood Publishing.
Moser, S. C. (2014). Communicating adaptation to climate 
change: the art and science of public engagement when climate 
change comes home. Climate Change, 5(3), 337–358. <https://
doi.org/10.1002/wcc.276> 
Moulton, A. D., & Schramm, P. J. (2017). Climate change and 
public health surveillance. Journal of Public Health Management 
and Practice, 23(6), 618–626. <https://doi.org/10.1097/
PHH.0000000000000550> 
Muldoon, K. A., Duff, P. K., Fielden, S., & Anema, A. (2013). 
Food insufficiency is associated with psychiatric morbidity 
in a nationally representative study of mental illness among 
food insecure Canadians. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric 
Epidemiology, 48(5), 795–803. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00127-
012-0597-3> 
Muncke, J., Myers, J. P., Scheringer, M., & Porta, M. (2014). 
Food packaging and migration of food contact materials: will 
epidemiologists rise to the neotoxic challenge? Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health, 68(7), 592–594. <https://
doi.org/10.1136/jech-2013-202593> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 609 
Municipal Affairs and Environment. (2019). The way forward on 
climate change in Newfoundland and Labrador. St. John’s, NL.
Myers, S. S., Smith, M. R., Guth, S., Golden, C. D., Vaitla, B., 
Mueller, N. D., … Huybers, P. (2017). Climate change and 
global food systems: potential impacts on food security and 
undernutrition. Annual Review of Public Health, 38, 259–277. 
<https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031816-044356>
Myers, S. S., Zanobetti, A., Kloog, I., Huybers, P., Leakey, A. D. B., 
Bloom, A. J., … Usui, Y. (2014). Increasing CO2 threatens human 
nutrition. Nature, 510, 139–142. <https://doi.org/10.1038/
nature13179>
Nelson, M. C., Ingram, S. E., Dugmore, A. J., Streeter, R., Peeples, 
M. A., Mcgovern, T. H., … Smiarowski, K. (2016). Climate 
challenges, vulnerabilities, and food security. PNAS, 113(2), 
298–303. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1506494113> 
Neufeld, H. T. (2020). Socio-Historical Influences and Impacts 
on Indigenous Food Systems in Southwestern Ontario: The 
Experiences of Elder Women Living On-and Off-Reserve. In P. 
Settee, & S. Shukla (Eds.), Indigenous Food Systems: Concepts, 
Cases, and Conversations (pp. 251). Canadian Scholars’ Press.
Ngoen-Klan, R., Moophayak, K., Klong-Klaew, T., Irvine, K. N., 
Sukontason, K. L., Prangkio, C., … Sukontason, K. (2011). Do 
climatic and physical factors affect populations of the blow 
fly Chrysomya megacephala and house fly Musca domestica? 
Parasitology Research, 109(5), 1279–1292. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00436-011-2372-x>
Northern Contaminants Program (NCP). (2013). Canadian Arctic 
Contaminants Assessment Report III on Persistent Organic 
Pollutants (D. Muir, P. Kurt-Karakus, J. Stow, Eds.). Ottawa, 
ON: Northern Contaminants Program, Aboriginal Affairs and 
Northern Development Canada.
Nourish. (n.d.). The Nourish Innovator Program. Retrieved from 
<https://www.nourishhealthcare.ca/about-nourish> 
Nova Scotia Environment. (2014). Agriculture.
Nunavut Food Security Coalition (NFSC). (2014). Nunavut Food 
Security Strategy and Action Plan 2014-16. Retrieved from <https://
www.nunavutfoodsecurity.ca/sites/default/files/files/Resources/
Strategy/NunavutFoodSecurityStrategy_ENGLISH.pdf>
Olazabal, M., Galarraga, I., Ford, J., Murieta, E. S. De, & 
Lesnikowski, A. (2019). Are local climate adaptation policies 
credible? A conceptual and operational assessment framework. 
International Journal of Urban Sustainable Development, 11(3), 
1–15. <https://doi.org/10.1080/19463138.2019.1583234> 
Organ, J., Castleden, H., Furgal, C., Sheldon, T., & Hart, C. 
(2014). Contemporary programs in support of traditional ways: 
Inuit perspectives on community freezers as a mechanism to 
alleviate pressures of wild food access in Nain, Nunatsiavut. 
Health and Place, 30, 251–259. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
healthplace.2014.09.012>
O’Riordan, T., & Lenton, T. (2013). Addressing tipping 
points for a precarious future. Oxford, United Kingdom: 
Oxford University Press. <https://doi.org/10.5871/
bacad/9780197265536.001.0001>
Palko, K., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2017). Climate risks and 
adaptation practices for the Canadian transportation sector 2016. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Pangloli, P., Dje, Y., Ahmed, O., Doane, C. A., Oliver, S. P., & 
Draughon, F. A. (2008). Seasonal incidence and molecular 
characterization of Salmonella from dairy cows, calves, and 
farm environment. Foodborne Pathogens and Disease, 5(1), 
87–96. <https://doi.org/10.1089/fpd.2008.0048>   
Pardhan-Ali, A., Berke, O., Wilson, J., Edge, V. L., Furgal, C., 
Reid-Smith, R., … McEwen, S. A. (2012a). A spatial and temporal 
analysis of notifiable gastrointestinal illness in the Northwest 
Territories, Canada, 1991-2008. International Journal of 
Health Geographics, 11(1), 17. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-
072X-11-17> 
Pardhan-Ali, A., Wilson, J., Edge, V. L., Furgal, C., Reid-Smith, R., 
Santos, M., & McEwen, S. A. (2012b). A descriptive analysis of 
notifiable gastrointestinal illness in the Northwest Territories, 
Canada, 1991-2008. BMJ Open, 2(4), e000732. <https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmjopen-2011-000732> 
Pardhan-Ali, A., Wilson, J., Edge, V. L., Furgal, C., Reid-Smith, R., 
Santos, M., & McEwen, S. A. (2013). Community-level risk factors 
for notifiable gastrointestinal illness in the Northwest Territories, 
Canada, 1991-2008. BMC Public Health, 13(1), 63. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-63> 
Pardue, J., Moe, W., McInnis, D., Thibodeaux, L., Valsaraj, K., 
Maciasz, E., … Yuan, Q. (2005). Chemical and microbiological 
parameters in New Orleans floodwater following Hurricane 
Katrina. Environmental Science & Technology, 39(22), 8591–
8599. <https://doi.org/10.1021/es0518631> 
Park, M. S., Park, K. H., & Bahk, G. J. (2018). Interrelationships 
between multiple climatic factors and incidence of foodborne 
diseases. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(11), 2482. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15112482>
Parlee, B., & Berkes, F. (2005). Health of the land, health of the 
people: a case study on Gwich’in berry harvesting in northern 
Canada. EcoHealth, 2(2), 127–137. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10393-005-3870-z> 
Parveen, S., Hettiarachchi, K. A., Bowers, J., Jones, J. L., 
Tamplin, M. L., McKay, R.,... DePaola, A. (2008). Seasonal 
distribution of total and pathogenic Vibrio parahaemolyticus in 
Chesapeake Bay oysters and waters. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology, 128, 354–361. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijfoodmicro.2008.09.019> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 610 
Paterson, J. A., Ford, J., Berrang-Ford, L., Lesnikowski, A., Berry, 
P., Henderson, J., & Heymann, J. (2012). Adaptation to climate 
change in the Ontario public health sector. BMC Public Health, 
12(1). <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-452> 
Patriarca, A., & Fernández Pinto, V. (2017). Prevalence of 
mycotoxins in foods and decontamination. Current Opinion 
in Food Science, 14, 50–60. <https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
COFS.2017.01.011>  
Pinstrup-Andersen, P. (2013). Contemporary food policy 
challenges and opportunities. Australian Journal of Agricultural 
and Resource Economics, 58(4), 504–518. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/1467-8489.12019> 
Planning and Development Department. (2013). Agriculture 
protection and enhancement strategy in Surrey. Surrey, BC.
Porter, J. R., Xie, L., Challinor, A. J., Cochrane, K., Howden, M. S., 
Iqbal, M. M., … Travasso, M. I. (2014). Food security and food 
production systems. In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, 
K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, … L. L. White (Eds.), 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part 
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (pp. 485–533). Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press. 
Pouillot, R., Hoelzer, K., Chen, Y., & Dennis, S. B. (2015). Listeria 
monocytogenes dose response revisited- incorporating 
adjustments for variability in strain virulence and host 
susceptibility. Risk Analysis, 35(1), 90–108. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/risa.12235>  
PROOF. (2018). Latest household food insecurity data now 
available. Retrieved from <https://proof.utoronto.ca/new-data-
available/> 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2017). FoodNet 
Canada Annual Report 2017. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/surveillance/
foodnet-canada/publications/foodnet-canada-annual-
report-2017.html>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2018). Inequalities in 
food insecurity in Canada. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/publications/
science-research-data/inequalities-food-insecurity-canada-
infographic.html>
Rahel, F. J., & Olden, J. D. (2008). Assessing the effects of 
climate change on aquatic invasive species. Conservation 
Biology, 22(3), 521–533. <https://doi.org/10.1111
/j.1523-1739.2008.00950.x> 
Rangel, J. M., Sparling, P. H., Crowe, C., Griffin, P. M., & 
Swerdlow, D. L. (2005). Epidemiology of Escherichia coli O157: 
H7 outbreaks, United States, 1982–2002. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases, 11(4), 603. <https://doi.org/10.3201/eid1104.040739> 
Rapinski, M., Cuerrier, A., Harris, C., Elders of Ivujivik, Elders of 
Kangiqsujuaq, & Lemire, M. (2018). Inuit perception of marine 
organisms: From folk classification to food harvest. Journal of 
Ethnobiology, 38(3), 333–355. <https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-
0771-38.3.333> 
Ratelle, M., Skinner, K., Laird, M. J., Majowicz, S., Brandow, D., 
Packull-McCormick, S., … Laird, B. D. (2018). Implementation 
of human biomonitoring in the Dehcho region of the Northwest 
Territories, Canada (2016–2017). Archives of Public Health, 
76(1), 73. <https://doi.org/10.1186/s13690-018-0318-9> 
Ravel, A., Smolina, E., Sargeant, J. M., Cook, A., Marshall, 
B., Fleury, M. D., & Pollari, F. (2010). Seasonality in human 
salmonellosis: assessment of human activities and chicken 
contamination as driving factors. Foodborne Pathogens 
and Disease, 7(7), 785–794. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
fpd.2009.0460> 
Ready, E. (2016). Challenges in the Assessment of Inuit Food 
Security. ARCTIC, 69(3), 266–280. <https://doi.org/10.14430/
arctic4579> 
Richmond, C. A. M., & Ross, N. A. (2009). The determinants 
of First Nation and Inuit health: a critical population health 
approach. Health & Place, 15(2), 403–411. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.healthplace.2008.07.004>
Rigét, F., Vorkamp, K., Bossi, R., Sonne, C., Letcher, R. J., & Dietz, 
R. (2016). Twenty years of monitoring of persistent organic 
pollutants in Greenland biota. A review. Environmental Pollution 
(Barking, Essex: 1987), 217, 114–123. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envpol.2015.11.006>
Roberts, M., & Cooke, R. (2020). Low on food, blizzard-
weary St. John’s shoppers head straight to supermarkets. 
CBC News. Retrieved from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/
canada/newfoundland-labrador/grocery-stores-open-st-
john-s-1.5433593> 
Romero-Lankao, P., Smith, J., Davidson, D., Diffenbaugh, N., 
Kinney, P., Kirshen, P., … Villers Ruiz, L. (2014). North America. 
In V. R. Barros, C. B. Field, D. J. Dokken, M. D. Mastrandrea, K. 
J. Mach, T. E. Bilir, … L. L. White (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 1439–1498). 
Cambridge, UK and New York, USA: Cambridge University Press.
Rose, J., Epstein, P., Lipp, E., Sherman, B., Bernard, S., & Patz, 
J. (2001). Climate variability and change in the United States: 
potential impacts on water and foodborne diseases caused 
by microbiologic agents. Environmental Health Perspectives, 
109(S2), 211–221. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.01109s2211> 
Rose, N., Lunazzi, A., Dorenlor, V., Merbah, T., Eono, F., Eloit, M., … 
Pavio, N. (2011). High prevalence of Hepatitis E virus in French 
domestic pigs. Comparative Immunology, Microbiology and 
Infectious Diseases, 34(5), 419–427. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cimid.2011.07.003>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 611 
Roser-Renouf, C., Maibach, E. W., & Li, J. (2016). Adapting to the 
changing climate: An assessment of local health department 
preparations for climate change-related health threats, 2008-
2012. PLoS ONE, 11(3). <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0151558> 
Rosol, R., Huet, C., Wood, M., Lennie, C., Osborne, G., & Egeland, 
G. M. (2011). Prevalence of affirmative responses to questions 
of food insecurity: International Polar Year Inuit Health Survey, 
2007-2008. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 70(5), 
488–497. <https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v70i5.17862> 
Rosol, R., Powell-Hellyer, S., & Chan, H. M. (2016). Impacts 
of decline harvest of country food on nutrient intake among 
Inuit in Arctic Canada: impact of climate change and possible 
adaptation plan. International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 
75(1), 31127. <https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v75.31127>
Rudolph, K. R., & McLachlan, S. M. (2013). Seeking Indigenous 
food sovereignty: origins of and responses to the food crisis in 
northern Manitoba, Canada. Local Environment, 18(9), 1079–
1098. <https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2012.754741> 
Sauchyn, D., Davidson, D., & Johnston, M. (2020). Prairie 
Provinces. In F.J. Warren, N. Lulham, & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), 
Canada in a Changing Climate: Regional Perspectives Report. 
Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada.
Sauchyn, D., Kulshreshtha, S., Barrow, E., Lemmen, D. S., Warren, 
F. J., Lacroix, J., & Bush, E. (2008). Prairies. In D. S. Lemmen, 
F. J. Warren, J. Lacroix, & E. Bush (Eds.), From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007 (pp. 275–328). 
Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada.
Sawatzky, A., Cunsolo, A., Jones-Bitton, A., Middleton, J., & 
Harper, S. L. (2018). Responding to climate and environmental 
change impacts on human health via integrated surveillance in 
the Circumpolar North: A systematic realist review. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(12), 
2706. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15122706> 
Schecter, A., & Gasiewicz, T. A. (Eds.). (2003). Dioxins and 
health. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. <https://doi.
org/10.1002/0471722014> 
Schmidhuber, J., & Tubiello, F. N. (2007). Global food security 
under climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 104(50), 19703–
19708. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0701976104> 
Schnitter, R., & Berry, P. (2019). The climate change, food 
security and human health nexus in Canada: A framework to 
protect population health. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 16(14), 1–2531. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph16142531>
Séguin, J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a changing climate: A 
Canadian assessment of vulnerabilities and adaptive capacity. 
Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. 
Semenza, J. C., Herbst, S., Rechenburg, A., Suk, J. E., Höser, C., 
Schreiber, C., & Kistemann, T. (2012a). Climate change impact 
assessment of food-and waterborne diseases. Critical Reviews 
in Environmental Science and Technology, 42(8), 857–890. 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2010.534706> 
Semenza, J. C., Hoeser, C., Herbst, S., Rechenburg, A., Suk, J. 
E., Frechen, T., & Kistemann, T. (2012b). Knowledge mapping 
for climate change and food-and waterborne diseases. Critical 
Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology, 42(4), 
378–411. <https://doi.org/10.1080/10643389.2010.518520>
Semenza, J. C., Suk, J. E., Estevez, V., Ebi, K. L., & Lindgren, E. 
(2012c). Mapping climate change vulnerabilities to infectious 
diseases in Europe. Environmental Health Perspectives, 120(3), 
385–392. <https://doi.org/10.1289/ehp.1103805> 
Skinner, K., Hanning, R. M., Desjardins, E., & Tsuji, L. J. (2013). 
Giving voice to food insecurity in a remote indigenous 
community in subarctic Ontario, Canada: traditional ways, ways 
to cope, ways forward. BMC Public Health, 13, 427. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-427>
Smith, B. A., & Fazil, A. (2019). How will climate change impact 
microbial foodborne disease in Canada? Canada Communicable 
Disease Report, 45(4), 108–113. <https://doi.org/10.14745/ccdr.
v45i04a05>
Smith, B. A., Meadows, S., Meyers, R., Parmley, E. J., & Fazil, 
A. (2019). Seasonality and zoonotic foodborne pathogens in 
Canada: relationships between climate and Campylobacter, 
E. coli and Salmonella in meat products. Epidemiology 
and Infection, 147, e190. <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0950268819000797>
Smith, B. A., Ruthman, T., Sparling, E., Auld, H., Comer, N., Young, 
I., … Fazil, A. (2015). A risk modeling framework to evaluate the 
impacts of climate change and adaptation on food and water 
safety. Food Research International, 68, 78–85. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.FOODRES.2014.07.006> 
Smith, K. R., Woodward, A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chadee, 
D., Honda, Y., Liu, Q., … Sauerborn, R. (2014). Human health: 
impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. In C. B. Field, V. Barros, 
D. Dokken, K. Mach, M. Mastrandrea, T. Bilir, … and L. L. W. B. 
Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea 
(Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and 
Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 709–754). 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: Cambridge 
University Press.
Sonnino, R. (2016). The new geography of food security: 
Exploring the potential of urban food strategies. Geographical 
Journal, 182(2), 190–200. <https://doi.org/10.1111/geoj.12129> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 612 
Springmann, M., Mason-D’croz, D., Robinson, S., Garnett, T., 
Godfray, C. J., Gollin, D., … Scarborough, P. (2016). Global and 
regional health effects of future food production under climate 
change: a modelling study. The Lancet, 387(10031), 1937–1946. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)01156-3>
Statistics Canada. (2009). Food in Canada. In Human Activity 
and the Environment: Annual Statistics (p. 166). Retrieved from 
<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/16-201-x/2009000/part-
partie1-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2012). Household food insecurity, 2011-2012. 
Data from the 2011-2012 Canadian Community Health Survey. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/
pub/82-625-x/2013001/article/11889-eng.htm> 
Statistics Canada. (2015). Food Security in Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Statistics Canada. (2018). Canadian Community Health Survey 
2017-18. Ottawa, ON.
Statistics Canada. (2020). Table 17-10-0057-01 Projected 
population, by projection scenario, age and sex, as of July 1 (x 
1,000). <https://doi.org/10.25318/1710005701-eng> 
Steiner, L., & Neathway, C. (2019). Indigenous food safety 
and security: Community adaptations in the wake of climate 
pressures. Vancouver, BC.
Sugimura, T., Wakabayashi, K., Nakagama, H., & Nagao, M. 
(2004). Heterocyclic amines: Mutagens/carcinogens produced 
during cooking of meat and fish. Cancer Science, 95(4), 290–
299. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1349-7006.2004.tb03205.x>
Tarasuk, V., Cheng, J., de Oliveira, C., Dachner, N., Gundersen, 
C., & Kurdyak, P. (2015). Association between household 
food insecurity and annual health care costs. CMAJ, 187(14), 
E-429-E436. <https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.150234/-/DC1> 
Tarasuk, V., & Mitchell, A. (2020). Household Food 
Insecurity in Canada, 2017-18. Toronto, ON. <https://doi.
org/10.1097/00008486-200510000-00003> 
Tarasuk, V., Mitchell, A., & Dachner, N. (2016). Household Food 
Insecurity in Canada, 2014. Research to Identify Policy Options 
to Reduce Food Insecurity (PROOF). Toronto, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://proof.utoronto.ca/resources/proof-annual-reports/
annual-report-2014/> 
The Royal Society. (2009). Reaping the benefits: Science and 
the sustainable intensification of global agriculture. Retrieved 
from <https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2009/
reaping-benefits/> 
Thomas, M. K., Murray, R., Flockhart, L., Pintar, K., Fazil, A., 
Nesbitt, A., … Pollari, F. (2015). Estimates of foodborne illness-
related hospitalizations and deaths in Canada for 30 specified 
pathogens and unspecified agents. Foodborne Pathogens 
and Disease, 12(10), 820–827. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
fpd.2015.1966> 
Thomas, M. K., Murray, R., Flockhart, L., Pintar, K., Pollari, F., 
Fazil, A., … Marshall, B. (2013). Estimates of the burden of 
foodborne illness in Canada for 30 specified pathogens and 
unspecified agents, circa 2006. Foodborne Pathogens and 
Disease, 10(7), 639–648.
Thomson, B., & Rose, M. (2011). Environmental contaminants 
in foods and feeds in the light of climate change. Quality 
Assurance and Safety of Crops & Foods, 3(1), 2–11. <https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1757-837X.2010.00086.x> 
Tirado, M. C., Clarke, R., Jaykus, L. A., McQuatters-Gollop, A., & 
Frank, J. M. (2010). Climate change and food safety: A review. 
Food Research International, 43(7), 1745–1765. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.FOODRES.2010.07.003> 
Toronto Public Health (TPH). (2015). A climate of concern: climate 
change and health strategy for Toronto 2015. Toronto, ON.
Umlauf, G., Bidoglioa, G., Christopha, E., Kampheusb, J., Krügerc, 
F., Landmannd, D., … Stehr, D. (2005). The situation of PCDD/Fs 
and Dioxin-like PCBs after the flooding of River Elbe and Mulde 
in 2002. Acta Hydrochimica et Hydrobiologica, 33(5), 543–554. 
<https://doi.org/10.1002/aheh.200400597> 
Umlauf, G., Christoph, E., Lanzini, L., Savolainen, R., Skejo, 
H., Bidoglio, G., … Scherer, H. (2011). PCDD/F and dioxin-
like PCB profiles in soils amended with sewage sludge, 
compost, farmyard manure, and mineral fertilizer since 1962. 
Environmental Science and Pollution Research International, 
18(3), 461–470. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-010-0389-9>
Undeman, E., Brown, T. N., Wania, F., & McLachlan, M. S. (2010). 
Susceptibility of human populations to environmental exposure 
to organic contaminants. Environmental Science & Technology, 
44(16), 6249–6255. <https://doi.org/10.1021/es1009339>
US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA). (2021). Health 
Effects of Exposures to Mercury. Retrieved from <https://www.
epa.gov/mercury/health-effects-exposures-mercury>
U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). (2016). The 
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: 
A Scientific Assessment (A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. Gamble, 
C. Beard, J. Bell, D. Dodgen, … L. Ziska, Eds.). Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from <https://health2016.globalchange.gov/low/
ClimateHealth2016_FullReport_small.pdf >
Valcour, J. E., Charron, D. F., Berke, O., Wilson, J. B., Edge, T., & 
Waltner-Toews, D. (2016). A descriptive analysis of the spatio-
temporal distribution of enteric diseases in New Brunswick, 
Canada. BMC Public Health, 16, 204. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12889-016-2779-5>
Venegas-Vargas, C., Henderson, S., Khare, A., Mosci, R. E., 
Lehnert, J. D., Singh, P., … Rust, S. (2016). Factors associated 
with Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli shedding by dairy 
and beef cattle. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 82(16), 
5049–5056. <https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00829-16> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 613 
Verner, G., Schütte, S., Knop, J., Sankoh, O., & Sauerborn, R. 
(2016). Health in climate change research from 1990 to 2014: 
positive trend, but still underperforming. Global Health Action, 
9(1), 1–9. <https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v9.30723> 
Ville de Montréal. (2018). Montréal’s resilient city strategy. 
Montréal, QC. Retrieved from <https://resilient.montreal.ca/
assets/doc/strategie-montreal-ville-resiliente-en.pdf> 
Wang, H., & Horton, R. (2015). Tackling climate change: The 
greatest opportunity for global health. The Lancet, 386(10006), 
1798–1799. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60931-X> 
Warren, F. J., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2014). Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation. Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada.
Watts, N., Adger, W. N., Agnolucci, P., Blackstock, J., Byass, P., 
Cai, W., … Executive. (2015). Health and climate change: policy 
responses to protect public health. The Lancet, 386(386), 1861–
1914. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60854-6> 
Watts, N., Adger, W. N., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Bai, Y., Byass, P., 
Campbell-Lendrum, D., … Costello, A. (2017). The Lancet 
Countdown: tracking progress on health and climate change. 
The Lancet, 389(10074), 1151–1164. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(16)32124-9>
Weihe, P., Debes, F., Halling, J., Petersen, M. S., Muckle, G., 
Odland, J. Ø., Dudarev, A., Ayotte, P., Dewailly, É., Grandjean, P., 
& Bonefeld-Jørgensen, E. (2016). Health effects associated with 
measured levels of contaminants in the Arctic. International 
Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75, 33805. <https://doi.
org/10.3402/ijch.v75.33805>
Wesche, S. D., & Chan, H. M. (2010). Adapting to the impacts 
of climate change on food security among Inuit in the Western 
Canadian Arctic. EcoHealth, 7(3), 361–373. <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s10393-010-0344-8> 
Wesche, S. D., O’Hare-Gordon, M. A. F., Robidoux, M. A., & 
Mason, C. W. (2016). Land-based programs in the Northwest 
Territories: Building Indigenous food security and well-
being from the ground up. Canadian Food Studies/La Revue 
Canadienne Des Études Sur l’alimentation, 3(2), 23–48. <https://
doi.org/10.15353/cfs-rcea.v3i2.161> 
Wheeler, T., & Von Braun, J. (2013). Climate change impacts on 
global food security. Science, 341(6145), 508–513. <https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1239402>
Whyte, K. (2016). Indigenous food sovereignty, renewal and 
US settler colonialism. In M. Rawlinson, & C. Ward (Eds.), The 
Routledge Handbook of Food Ethics. Routledge.
Wong, J., & Schuchard, R. (2011). Adapting to climate change: a 
guide for food, beverage, and agriculture companies. San Francisco, 
California. Retrieved from <https://www.bsr.org/reports/BSR_
Climate_Adaptation_Issue_Brief_Food_Bev_Ag2.pdf> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2008). The world health 
report 2008: Primary health care (now more than ever). Geneva, 
Switzerland. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/whr/2008/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2014). Quantitative risk 
assessment of the effects of climate change on selected causes 
of death, 2030s and 2050s. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from 
<https://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/quantitative-
risk-assessment/en/>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2017). WHO guidelines on 
use of medically important antimicrobials in food-producing 
animals. Retrieved from <https://www.who.int/foodsafety/
areas_work/antimicrobial-resistance/cia_guidelines/en/>
Wu, X., Lu, Y., Zhou, S., Chen, L., & Xu, B. (2016). Impact of 
climate change on human infectious diseases: Empirical 
evidence and human adaptation. Environment International, 86, 
14–23. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2015.09.007>
Yan, C., Liang, L. J., Zheng, K. Y., & Zhu, X. Q. (2016). Impact 
of environmental factors on the emergence, transmission and 
distribution of Toxoplasma gondii. Parasites & vectors, 9, 137. 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-016-1432-6>
Young, I., Gropp, K., Fazil, A., & Smith, B. A. (2015). Knowledge 
synthesis to support risk assessment of climate change impacts 
on food and water safety: A case study of the effects of water 
temperature and salinity on Vibrio parahaemolyticus in raw 
oysters and harvest waters. Food Research International, 68, 
86–93. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2014.06.035> 
Yusa, A., Berry, P., Cheng, J. J., Ogden, N., Bonsal, B., Stewart, R., 
& Waldick, R. (2015). Climate change, drought and human health 
in Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 12(7), 8359–8412. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph120708359>
Zelinkova, Z., & Wenzl, T. (2015). The occurrence of 16 EPA PAHs 
in food - a review. Polycyclic Aromatic Compounds, 35(2–4), 
248–284. <https://doi.org/10.1080/10406638.2014.918550> 
Zeuli, K., Nijhuis, A., & Gerson-Nieder, Z. (2018a). Resilient 
food systems, resilient cities: a high-level vulnerability 
assessment of Toronto’s food system. Toronto, ON. Retrieved 
from <https://www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2018/hl/bgrd/
backgroundfile-118076.pdf>
Zeuli, K., Nijhuis, A., Macfarlane, R., & Ridsdale, T. (2018b). 
The impact of climate change on the food system in Toronto. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 15(11), 2344. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15112344> 
Ziska, L., Crimmins, A., Auclair, A., Garofalo, J. F., Khan, A. S., 
Showler, A., & Thurston, J. (2016). Food safety, nutrition and 
distribution. In A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. Gamble, C. Beard, J. Bell, 
D. Dodgen, … L. Ziska (Eds.), The impacts of climate change on 
human health in the United States: A scientific assessment (pp. 189-
216). Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
CHAPTER 9
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Climate Change 
and Health 
Equity
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 615 
Lead Author
Rebekka Schnitter, Health Canada
Contributing Authors
Ericha Moores, Natural Resources Canada 
Peter Berry, Health Canada
Marielle Verret, Health Canada 
Chris Buse, University of British Columbia and University of Northern 
British Columbia 
Catherine Macdonald, Alliance for Healthier Communities 
Melissa Perri, Alliance for Healthier Communities and University 
of Toronto
Daniel Jubas-Malz, University Health Network
Suggested Citation
Schnitter, R., Moores, E., Berry, P., Verret, M., Buse, C., Macdonald, C., 
Perri, M., & Jubas-Malz, D. (2022). Climate Change and Health Equity. 
In P. Berry & R. Schnitter (Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing 
Climate: Advancing our Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government 
of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 616 
Table of Contents
Summary
618
Key Messages
618
9.1 Introduction
620
9.2 Methods and Approach
621
9.3 Determinants of Health and Health Equity
622
9.4 Climate Change Impacts on Health Equity
624
9.4.1 Dimensions of Equity in Climate Change and Health Vulnerability
626
Box 9.1 Problematic narratives of “vulnerable populations”
627
9.4.2 An Intersectional Approach to Understanding Climate Change and Health Vulnerability
630
Box 9.2 Gender Based Analysis Plus (GBA+) in the Government of Canada
632
9.4.3 Drivers of Vulnerability: Determinants of Health and Health Inequities
632
Box 9.3 The heterogeneous nature of climate change and health vulnerability
634
9.4.3.1 Natural and Built Environments
635
9.4.3.2 Economic Stability
635
9.4.3.3 Health Care Services and Accessibility 
636
9.4.3.4 Social and Community Context
637
9.4.3.5 Education and Childhood Development 
637
Box 9.4 Human health, gender, and climate change in Canada
639
9.4.4 Assessing Vulnerability to Climate Change Health Impacts
640
9.4.5 Integrating Health Equity into Climate Change and Health Actions
641
9.4.5.1 Resilience and Asset Mapping
643
9.4.5.2 Vulnerability Mapping 
644
Box 9.5 The surveillance and prevention of the impacts of extreme meteorological events on 
the public health system, Quebec
646
9.4.5.3 Climate Change and Health Projections
646
9.4.5.4 Inclusive Community Engagement
647
9.5 Adaptation
647
9.5.1 Adaptation Measures and Equitable Outcomes
648
9.5.2 Adaptation Actions to Enhance Health Equity 
649
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 617 
9.5.3 Planning Adaptation Measures with Equity in Mind
650
Box 9.6 Inuit-led community-based adaptation approach
652
9.5.4 Evaluating Adaptation Measures for Health Equity
654
9.6 Knowledge Gaps 
656
9.7 Conclusion
657
9.8 References 
659
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 618 
Summary
Changes in climate are exacerbating existing health inequities and creating conditions for new inequities to 
emerge. The health effects associated with climate change will not be experienced uniformly. Vulnerability to 
health impacts of climate change is determined by the exposure to climate change hazards, the sensitivity to 
possible impacts, and the capacity to respond to, or cope with them. At the individual level, these three factors 
are influenced by determinants of health, such as socio-economic status, housing quality, and education. 
Determinants of health interact and intersect with inequities in complex ways that render the experiences of 
diverse groups and individuals unique. Structural systems of oppression, such as racism and colonialism, also 
influence an individual’s vulnerability to climate-related health risks. Therefore, effective adaptation measures 
must be intersectional and equity-based. If adaptation efforts are not carefully planned, adaptation efforts may 
benefit only part of the population, and inadvertently worsen existing inequities. Resilience and asset mapping, 
vulnerability mapping, equity impact assessments, and meaningful and inclusive community engagement and 
communications can all contribute to equity-centred adaptation measures.  
Key Messages
•	
Climate change can exacerbate existing health inequities, defined as avoidable and unjust 
differences in health. These inequities — for example, disproportionate impacts on health from 
extreme heat — can increase the health risks from climate change for some individuals and 
populations. Knowledge gaps and data limitations make it difficult to assess and measure how 
climate change has already affected, and will continue to affect, health equity in Canada.
•	
The pathways through which climate change affects health inequities are complex and dynamic. 
These pathways often involve the conditions and factors that affect a person’s health, known 
as determinants of health (such as, income, education, employment, and working and living 
conditions), which can increase or decrease an individual’s exposure or sensitivity to climate-
related health hazards and can create barriers that limit their ability to take protective measures.  
•	
Structural systems of oppression (such as, racism, heteronormativity, and ableism) that result in 
health inequities are underlying drivers of vulnerability to climate change. 
•	
Health equity should be an important focus of climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation 
assessments and related knowledge development activities. Mapping tools (asset mapping, 
vulnerability mapping), enhanced data collection, and inclusive community engagement will help 
identify populations and regions at increased risk, and better inform adaptation measures.
•	
Climate change adaptation measures meant to protect human health are not experienced in the 
same way across populations and communities. In the absence of careful planning, adaptation 
efforts may benefit only part of the population and inadvertently worsen existing health inequities. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 619 
•	
Health equity can be increased and determinants of good health strengthened through 
adaptation. Public health authorities should ensure that adaptation measures are planned and 
implemented so that people who are disproportionately affected by a warming climate benefit 
from them. 
•	
Ensuring inclusive, equitable, and community-based participation in the adaptation process is 
critical for designing and implementing effective adaptation actions that protect the health of all 
Canadians. Participation of racialized and marginalized individuals and communities that already 
experience a disproportionate burden of illness and health inequities is required. 
•	
Climate change mitigation and adaptation measures implemented outside of the health sector 
may affect determinants of health and health outcomes, in either positive or negative ways. Public 
health authorities can ensure that climate action supports health equity and related positive 
health outcomes in Canada through collaboration across jurisdictions, sectors, and disciplines.  

Climate change and health equity framework.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 620 
9.1 Introduction
Climate change impacts and related health risks are experienced in all regions of the world, including Canada. 
These impacts, however, are not distributed uniformly (Friel, 2019; Ebi, 2020). Globally, the greatest health 
risks are currently, and projected to be, experienced by regions already facing disproportionate burdens of 
illness and health inequities, and among populations that have contributed the least to climate change (Islam 
& Winkel, 2017; Friel, 2019). In Canada, there are large disparities related to current and projected climate 
change impacts. For example, communities in Nunavut are experiencing warming at an average rate twice 
that of the rest of Canada and are observing some of the most severe impacts (Bush & Lemmen, 2019), 
despite having the lowest household greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions per capita (Statistics Canada, 2016). 
A dynamic and complex relationship exists between climate change and health equity. Upstream drivers of 
inequities — such as social, cultural, economic, and political structures and systems; structural racism and 
historic and ongoing colonialism; and climate change itself — result in the uneven distribution of power and 
resources across society. This shapes the status of determinants of health (e.g., socio-economic status, 
exposure to environmental hazards, access to health care), which varies across individuals, communities, and 
regions. The resulting relative disadvantages create new or exacerbate existing health inequities, which are 
understood as avoidable and unjust disparities in health status.
The effects of climate change can undermine the status of determinants of health, for example, by hampering 
access to clean air, livelihood, secure shelter, and sufficient and safe food and drinking water (WHO, 2018). 
The status of determinants of health can, in turn, increase or decrease an individual’s exposure or sensitivity 
to climate-related hazards and can create barriers that limit adaptive capacity (Health Canada, 2005). Existing 
health inequities can make it more difficult for some people to prepare for, cope with, and adapt to climate 
change impacts. 
In addition, the outcomes of climate change adaptation actions meant to protect human health are not 
experienced in the same way across populations and communities. These actions can include those by 
decision makers outside of the health sector, for example, in water, energy, or transportation sectors. 
In the absence of proper planning, the outcomes of adaptation actions may benefit some individuals, 
while inadvertently increasing inequities for others. Adaptation planning processes, from conception to 
implementation and evaluation, should include diverse voices and perspectives, particularly from those 
disproportionately affected by climate change impacts on health. In many cases, there is an opportunity to 
enhance meaningful engagement and equitable participation in adaptation processes in Canada. 
It is important to consider health equity in all climate change and health activities, such as conducting 
vulnerability and adaptation assessments (V&As) and building climate resilient health systems (see Chapter 
10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). The absence of such considerations may result in negative 
outcomes, such as inadvertently aggravating existing health inequities and overlooking underlying drivers 
of climate change vulnerability. Public health decision makers can leverage various tools, frameworks, and 
activities to enhance climate change and health activities by giving explicit consideration to health equity 
during planning, implementation, and evaluation of measures. Benefits of such an approach include equitable 
planning processes, interventions with more equitable outcomes, and increased capacity for communities to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 621 
adapt (Deas et al., 2017; Rudolph et al., 2018; Cleveland et al., 2020). Adaptation actions offer the opportunity 
not only to protect health from risks posed by a changing climate, but also to strengthen determinants of 
health, support health equity, and build healthier, more climate resilient communities and health systems. 
Strengthening determinants of health and redressing existing health inequities can help decrease vulnerability 
to health risks related to climate change and build adaptive capacity (WHO, 2015; Friel, 2019; Ebi & Hess, 
2020). While downstream actions, such as those taken by public health actors, can contribute to redressing 
health inequities, dismantling the upstream drivers of inequities is necessary in order to achieve and sustain 
social and health equity (Rudolph et al., 2018). This will require actions beyond those of the public health 
sector. There is increasing recognition from policy leaders in and outside of Canada that responding to social 
and health inequities and related environmental issues requires collaborative, multisectoral policy action 
(Friel, 2019). However, it is out of the scope of this chapter to provide a detailed analysis of upstream policy 
interventions and options. 
This chapter discusses the determinants of health and health equity, and their links to climate change, 
with specific attention to vulnerability and adaptation. A new framework for illustrating the dynamics that 
underlie relationships between climate change and health equity is presented to help understand how 
some populations and communities are experiencing disproportionate health impacts of climate change in 
Canada and may continue to do so without effective interventions. Then, tools and resources that support 
the integration of health equity considerations into climate change and health activities, such as V&As, are 
presented. This chapter also examines the relationship between health equity and climate change adaptation, 
focusing on the potentially positive or negative effects of adaptation action, and how measures can be 
designed to promote health equity. Examples of practical actions that can be taken to better integrate health 
equity considerations into climate change and health adaptation are then presented. The chapter closes with 
a discussion of knowledge gaps and research needs required to enable public health officials to take effective 
actions to protect all people in Canada from climate change. 
9.2 Methods and Approach
A rigorous, flexible approach was used to identify literature and evidence relevant to climate change and 
health equity. Two databases, MEDLINE and Embase via Ovid, were searched for articles published between 
2008 and 2020. English- and French-language literature was included in the search. The reference lists of 
relevant literature were also examined to identify articles not captured in the database search. Websites of 
key government, non-governmental, and international agencies (e.g., Public Health Agency of Canada, Health 
Canada, World Health Organization, provincial and territorial government websites, US Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, National Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health) were examined to identify 
grey literature.
While Canadian research was prioritized, international research with results relevant to the Canadian context 
was also included. Not all population groups are represented equally in the climate change and health 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 622 
literature; experiences specific to people with disabilities, newcomers to Canada, and two-spirit, lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, questioning, intersex and asexual (2SLGBTQQIA+) populations are less 
frequently addressed than are experiences of others. While there is significant literature exploring the impacts 
of climate change on Indigenous Peoples who live on reserves or in rural, remote, or Northern communities, 
there is very little empirical work addressing the vulnerabilities experienced by Indigenous Peoples who live in 
urban settings. Further, research on Inuit and First Nation communities is much more common than for Métis 
communities (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). 
9.3 Determinants of Health and Health Equity
Health inequity refers to health inequalities that are avoidable, unjust, and systematic (CSDH, 2008; NCCDH, 
2013). In contrast, health equity is the absence of unfair systems and policies that cause health inequalities, 
resulting in fair conditions and opportunities conducive to good health for all (Government of Canada, 2019a). 
In Canada, health inequities, including the inequitable distribution of the burdens of disease and poor health, 
exist. For example, evidence indicates a social gradient in health, in which individuals low on the socio-
economic spectrum generally experience worse health than individuals high on the socio-economic spectrum 
(CSDH, 2008). 
Health inequities arise from upstream drivers, commonly structural in nature, that result in the unequal 
distribution of power and resources (National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine, 2017). 
These drivers include social, cultural, economic, and political structures (Commission of the Pan American 
Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities in the Americas, 2019), such as powerful institutions and 
systems (e.g., governments, financial markets) as well as socially constructed systems of oppression (e.g., 
ableism, sexism, capitalism, cisnormativity, heteronormativity, classism, xenophobia), which play a significant 
role in shaping social norms and influencing how society is organized and functions (Rudolph & Gould, 2014; 
Rudolph et al., 2018; Cleveland et al., 2020). 
Structural racism, including historic and ongoing colonialism, historic and cultural trauma, discrimination, 
and social exclusion, is also a significant driver of health inequities (Reading & Wien, 2009; Greenwood et al., 
2018; CPHO, 2019; Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities 
in the Americas, 2019). The cumulative history of disenfranchisement and marginalization has created an 
inequitable distribution of power and resources and has shaped social, economic, political, and cultural norms 
and systems, which benefit parts of the population, while excluding others (Shi et al., 2016), particularly 
Indigenous Peoples and racialized communities. Take, for example, the history of colonization and the impact 
that discriminatory programs, policies, and legislation had, and continues to have, on Indigenous Peoples 
(Halseth & Murdock, 2020). First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples experience disproportionate burdens of ill 
health, including “higher rates of infant mortality, tuberculosis, child and youth injuries and death, obesity and 
diabetes, youth suicide, and exposure to environmental contaminants” (Greenwood et al., 2018). Compared 
to non-Indigenous communities in Canada, the average life expectancy at birth is lower in Indigenous 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 623 
communities; the average life expectancy is 12 years lower for Inuit communities, 11.2 years lower for First 
Nations, and 6.9 years lower for Métis communities (PHAC, 2018). 
Black people1 also experience health inequities that are linked to processes of racism and discrimination, 
rooted in European colonization of Africa and the legacy of the transatlantic slave trade (PHAC, 2020). For 
example, between 2010 and 2013, 14.2% of Black people aged 18 years and older reported their health to be 
fair or poor, compared to 11.3% of White people in Canada (Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Data Tool, 2017; 
PHAC, 2020). The history of colonization and its enduring effects demonstrates how inequities are systemic 
and intergenerational and can compound disadvantage and marginalization (Shi et al., 2016; Moser et al., 
2017; Resurrección et al., 2019). 
Upstream drivers that construct economic, political, environmental, and social factors and conditions are 
known as the determinants of health, which interact to shape an individual’s ability to attain and maintain 
good health (PHAC, 2018; Government of Canada, 2019a). The relative disadvantages that result from 
unequal distribution of power and resources lead to variations in the status of determinants of health among 
individuals. Many determinants of health relate to individuals’ positions in the societal hierarchy and the conditions 
in which they live, work, and age (e.g., income, education, employment) (Government of Canada, 2019a).
It is important to recognize that, while many common determinants of health frameworks have relevance 
for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, there are Indigenous-specific determinants of health that play a 
significant role in influencing health and well-being (Greenwood & de Leeuw, 2012; Commission of the Pan 
American Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities in the Americas, 2019) (see Chapter 2: Climate 
Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). Self-determination, for example, has been noted as an 
important determinant of health that can influence all other determinants (Reading & Wien, 2009). In Chapter 
2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada, the authors highlight that perspectives of 
health and well-being vary within and between First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and include a selection 
of frameworks for determinants of health that articulate these perspectives. 
Climate change can also be understood as a driver of health inequities (Commission of the Pan American 
Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities in the Americas, 2019), given that the current and 
future impacts of climate change on health are not, and will not, be experienced uniformly. Those with more 
resources (e.g., financial, information, social networks) will be better placed to adapt to a changing climate 
and to take actions to protect their health. Climate change is understood as a “threat multiplier” that can 
exacerbate existing health inequities and create conditions for new ones to emerge. 
Redressing health inequities is necessary to ensure all individuals in Canada have equal opportunity to reach 
their full health potential, despite their socio-economic or other socially determined circumstances (NCCDH, 
2013). This is particularly important as the climate continues to warm and as impacts increase. Such action 
can also strengthen health systems, as health inequities result in significant health care costs. For example, 
between 2003 and 2006, the United States spent an estimated 230 billion USD in direct medical care costs 
and more than 1 trillion USD in indirect costs associated with health disparities experienced by minorities 
(Rudolph et al., 2015). 
1	
Black people generally include diverse individuals, populations, and communities in Canada that identify as having 
African or Caribbean ancestry (PHAC, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 624 
9.4 Climate Change Impacts on Health Equity
There is limited knowledge of how health impacts of current and future climate change will affect health 
equity in Canada. Evidence suggests that climate change exacerbates health inequities (Ebi et al., 2016; 
Rudolph et al., 2018; Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities 
in the Americas, 2019; Friel, 2019); however, the magnitude of impacts on health equity, and extent to which 
climate change and health actions (e.g., adaptation measures) will strengthen or weaken health equity, are 
difficult to quantify. This section focuses on establishing linkages between climate change and health equity 
and provides examples relevant to the Canadian public health sector. 
The pathways through which climate change impacts interact with upstream drivers of health inequities and 
determinants of health are complex. Many of these pathways and relationships are interrelated and dynamic, 
and they have implications for an individual’s vulnerability to the health impacts from climate change. 
Compounding this complexity are climate change adaptation activities. Adaptation actions taken within the 
health system to protect human health from risks related to climate change, and those taken outside of the 
health system to address other climate change impacts on society, can have diverse effects on health equity. 
Figure 9.1 presents a framework that illustrates the relationships among climate change impacts, drivers of 
health inequities, determinants of health, and climate change adaptation activities. 
The development of this framework was informed by a number of well-established frameworks for 
determinants of health (Dahlgren & Whitehead, 1991; Queensland Health, 2001; Solar & Irwin, 2010), as well 
as several conceptual frameworks that illustrate the relationship between climate change and health equity 
(Rudolph et al., 2015; Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities 
in the Americas, 2019). The framework presented in this chapter simplifies these complex relationships and 
situates them in a context relevant to Canadian public health. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 625 
Figure 9.1 Climate change and health equity framework.
Upstream drivers of inequity result in the unequal distribution of power and resources, which shapes and 
influences the determinants of health. As previously noted, upstream drivers include social and cultural 
systems and structures (e.g., patriarchy, ableism, cisnormativity, and heteronormativity), political and 
economic systems, and structures (e.g., capitalism, political and educational institutions), structural racism, 
and historic and ongoing colonialism. Climate change is also a driver of inequity and can interact with 
other drivers to aggravate and enhance inequities, while also directly influencing the status of determinants 
of health. For example, impacts from climate change can cause “disturbances to livelihoods, reduced 
material resources, and a loss of a sense of control over one’s life” (Friel, 2019, p.55). The differential status 
of determinants of health across a society (e.g., high-income versus low income, quality housing versus 
substandard housing), and the relative disadvantages this can result in, give rise to health inequities. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 626 
In many cases, determinants of health can drive vulnerability to climate-related health risks. For example, 
exposure to health risks, such as injury during an extreme weather event, is higher for individuals who live 
in substandard housing (Health Canada, 2005; Gamble et al., 2016; Munro et al., 2020; Raker et al., 2020). 
At the same time, climate change effects may also compound vulnerability to specific health risks, through 
their impact on determinants of health and existing health inequities. For example, low income households 
commonly spend a higher proportion of their income on energy costs and have difficulty investing in 
energy-efficiency measures for their homes (CER, 2020). The need to adopt protective measures (e.g., air 
conditioning, visiting cooling centres, purchasing light clothing) for increasing temperatures and extreme heat 
events can act as a financial burden for low income households, resulting in barriers to coping with heat. 
Dimensions of health equity are also associated with climate change and health adaptation. In most cases, 
communities with more resources have higher adaptive capacity (UNEP, 2018; WHO, 2018). Because of this, 
they will likely be able to implement adaptation actions before, and more extensively than, disadvantaged 
communities, further increasing health disparities (Walpole et al., 2009). Many individuals and communities 
may face multiple risks and factors that compound vulnerability to climate change. For example, a number of 
First Nations communities lack access to safe drinking water in Canada. As of February 2020, there were 61 
long-term drinking water advisories in effect for public water systems on reserves (Government of Canada, 
2020). This inequity intersects with other challenges and inequities, such as a disproportionate burden of ill 
health (NCCAH, 2013) and high rates of food insecurity (FNFNES, 2019), which can compound vulnerability 
to climate change health risks in these communities. It is important to note that many marginalized 
communities have, and continue to demonstrate, significant adaptive capacity and resilience to climate 
change, despite challenges and barriers resulting from existing drivers of inequities (e.g., structural racism) 
and unequal distribution of power and resources. 
The outcomes of adaptation actions are not always experienced in the same way across populations and 
communities, and, in the absence of careful planning, these outcomes can benefit some groups, while 
inadvertently causing adverse effects for others. However, adaptation measures present an opportunity 
to address underlying drivers of climate change vulnerability and promote health equity (see section 9.5.2 
Adaptation Actions to Enhance Health Equity). Climate change adaptation measures implemented outside 
of the health sector may also affect determinants of health and health outcomes, highlighting the need 
for collaboration and partnerships across sectors to ensure that climate action supports positive health 
outcomes and health equity in Canada.
9.4.1 Dimensions of Equity in Climate Change and Health Vulnerability
In the context of climate change, vulnerability refers to the “degree to which a system is susceptible to, or unable 
to cope with, adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability and extremes” (IPCC, 2007). The 
vulnerability of individuals or groups to the health impacts of climate change is determined by the exposure to 
climate change hazards, the sensitivity to possible impacts, and the capacity to respond or cope with them (Berry 
et al., 2008; Gamble et al., 2016). 
Understanding the concept of vulnerability, and its primary components, is important for public health actors and 
decision makers, and can aid in understanding health outcomes related to climate change, as well as in identifying 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 627 
where resources and adaptation measures are most needed. However, it is recognized that the term “vulnerability” 
can be highly stigmatizing when applied to individuals or population groups and has frequently perpetuated 
a narrative of victimization (see Box 9.1). The intent of the discussion in this section is not to label vulnerable 
populations, but, rather, to explore how health equity intersects with exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity, to 
shape vulnerability to climate change. While this discussion focuses on determinants of health and health equity 
in the context of climate change vulnerability, it is important to recognize the systemic nature of health inequities 
that construct the conditions that ultimately shape vulnerability. 
Box 9.1 Problematic narratives of “vulnerable populations”
Some research examining the heightened vulnerability of certain populations and communities has perpetuated 
a victimization narrative in which certain groups and communities are portrayed as passive and unable to 
take protective measures or respond to climate hazards. This narrative can be harmful to the populations and 
communities that it refers to, as there is increased risk of reinforcing damaging socially constructed ideas and 
existing stereotypes (Arora-Jonsson, 2011; Kaijser & Kronsell, 2014). Many communities and populations that 
are on the front lines of climate change have been, and continue to be, active drivers of change, demonstrating 
significant adaptive capacity and resilience despite unequal distribution of resources and capacity. 
In addition, some literature has perpetuated another narrative that suggests that front-line communities, 
particularly Indigenous Peoples and women, have “special, almost divine, connection[s] to nature” (Kaijser & 
Kronsell, 2014). This narrative imposes and reinforces a problematic environmental caretaker role. This can 
result in additional labour and responsibilities for people and communities that are already strained for resources 
and capacity (Arora-Jonsson, 2011). Shifting the narrative from one that stereotypes people as victims and/or 
caretakers of the land to one that focuses on community assets and strengths could help to motivate and sustain 
climate action. Research activities must also become more inclusive. By framing climate change adaptation as a 
way to strengthen determinants of health and address drivers of health inequity, solutions can be co-developed 
and led by communities using local and traditional knowledge, culture, skills, and resources to plan, implement, 
and report on adaptation.
All individuals display some vulnerability factors to the health impacts of climate change; however, this 
vulnerability is not uniform. Disproportionate impacts and various experiences of adaptation and resilience 
have been observed across Canada (Wandel et al., 2010; Berry et al., 2014a; Sellers, 2018; Gouvernement du 
Québec, 2019). In many cases, the status of determinants of health plays an important role in influencing 
vulnerability (Kumar, 2018), can increase the risk of exposure or sensitivity to climate-related health risks, and 
can create barriers that limit adaptive capacity (see Figure 9.2). For example, while physiological processes 
(e.g., chronic diseases, decreased sense of thirst, reduced ability to sweat) can increase the vulnerability 
of seniors to heat-related health risks, the entire senior population does not experience the same degree of 
vulnerability. Some people may have greater access to air conditioning and cooling spaces, which have been 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 628 
found to mitigate health risks during extreme temperatures, whereas such adaptations may be less available 
to some seniors because of economic or mobility challenges (Health Canada, 2012). 
Exposure refers to the degree to which individuals or populations may come into contact with climate-related 
health hazards (McMichael et al., 2003). Inequitable exposure to particular climate hazards can result in 
parts of the population experiencing heightened vulnerability and negative health outcomes. For example, 
urban heat islands experience warmer temperatures compared to surrounding regions and can magnify 
health impacts during heat waves (Health Canada, 2020). A study of the 175 largest urbanized areas in the 
continental United States found that in 97% of cities racialized populations are disproportionately exposed 
to high surface urban heat island intensity (SUHI), compared to White residents. Black residents, followed by 
Hispanic residents, have the highest average SUHI exposure. In terms of income, in 70% of cities, people living 
below the poverty line had significantly higher exposure compared to those living at twice the poverty line 
(Hsu et al., 2021). Another study in the United States found that of 108 urban areas analyzed, 94% displayed 
consistent city-scale patterns of elevated land surface temperatures in formerly redlined2 neighbourhoods 
compared to non-redlined neighbourhoods by as much as 7°C (Hoffman et al., 2020). 
In Canada, during a heat wave in Montréal, Quebec, in 2018, 66% of people who died were located in 
urban heat islands. Low-income and social isolation were also determined to be important risk factors 
(Gouvernement du Quebéc, 2019). In Toronto, Ontario, low income and racialized communities have less 
access to tree canopy cover and public green spaces, which can mitigate the urban heat island effect and 
provide other health co-benefits (Greene et al., 2018; Conway & Scott, 2020). 
Sensitivity refers to the degree to which individuals are affected by a climate-related health risk (Adger 
et al., 2004). Sensitivity to climate change health impacts can be shaped by biological traits, such as age, 
genetics, and chronic health conditions (Gamble et al., 2016) and influenced by determinants of health, such 
as socio-economic status and availability of and access to health services (Berry et al., 2008). Climate change 
impacts may affect the status of such determinants and increase sensitivity to health risks related to climate 
change for some individuals. For example, food security is a key determinant of health and contributes to 
positive health outcomes. In Canada, a higher prevalence of household food insecurity has been reported 
among households with children under the age of 18, with households headed by single women being 
most negatively affected (Statistics Canada, 2012). There is also a higher prevalence of food insecurity in 
the Canadian North compared to the rest of the country. Climate change may challenge the availability, 
accessibility, and/or use of food for individuals (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). Such effects can 
increase the prevalence of food insecurity and contribute to adverse health impacts. Compromised health 
status, due to food insecurity, could increase sensitivity to other health risks related to climate change, 
particularly among population groups that already disproportionately experience negative health outcomes 
from a warming climate. 
2	
“Redlining” is the historical practice in which neighborhoods were categorized ranging from “best” to “hazardous” for 
real estate investment. The categorization of neighborhoods was largely based on racial composition. The practice 
resulted in denial of loans and insurance, and subsequent disinvestment in racialized communities. Residents of 
redlined neighborhoods experienced increased segregation, lower home values and ownership, and lower personal 
credit scores. Despite the practice being banned in 1968, the majority of the neighborhoods previously categorized as 
“hazardous” in the US remain racialized communities and low-to-moderate income. The majority of neighborhoods 
categorized as favorable for investment remain predominantly White and above-average income (Hoffman et al., 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 629 
Adaptive capacity refers to the ability of a system to adjust and manage climate change effectively, 
moderating or coping with adverse impacts (IPCC, 2007). Factors that contribute to adaptive capacity 
include access to economic resources, technology, information and skills, public health infrastructure, 
institutional arrangements, and the existing burden of disease (Grambsch & Menne, 2003; Berry et al., 2008). 
Existing social and health inequities contribute to the variation of adaptive capacity across individuals and 
communities in Canada. For example, it is well documented that those with limited access to and use of 
resources (e.g., financial, information, social networks) will experience the most difficulty adapting to climate 
change (UNEP, 2018; WHO, 2018; Friel, 2019). For example, low income households located in flood zones 
may not have the ability to relocate, which increases risk of exposure to flood hazards. In the absence of 
flood insurance, uninsured losses to property and belongings cannot be recovered, compounding economic 
disadvantage and further limiting individual adaptive capacity for future events (Islam & Winkel, 2017; 
Paavola, 2017). 
Climate change impacts on determinants of health can further compound barriers to adaptive capacity 
of individuals and communities, which could result in increased vulnerability to poor health outcomes 
from a warming climate. The availability, accessibility, and acceptability3 of public health and emergency 
management services and infrastructure is not only a determinant of health but can also support community 
resilience to climate change impacts on health (Séguin, 2008) and varies across communities in Canada. 
For example, experiences of inequitable availability, accessibility, and acceptability of health care services 
have been noted among First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples as a result of complex intersecting factors, 
including colonialism, geography, health systems, human resources, jurisdictional issues, cultural safety, 
communications, and the importance and use of traditional medicines (NCCIH, 2019). Thus, existing 
inequities related to health care services may limit adaptive capacity for some individuals, which could 
enhance vulnerability to climate change impacts on health. 
3	
The acceptability of health care services is the willingness of individuals to seek these services because of the perception 
that they are effective and service providers are responsive and “free of social and cultural biases” (NCCIH, 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 630 
Figure 9.2 Social determinants of health interact with the three elements of vulnerability. Source: Gamble et al., 2016.
9.4.2 An Intersectional Approach to Understanding Climate Change 
and Health Vulnerability
In an effort to inform the development of adaptation measures to prepare for climate change, past 
Canadian climate change and health assessments have identified broad categorizations of “vulnerable 
populations” such as seniors and children, pregnant people, Indigenous Peoples, low income individuals, and 
immunocompromised or chronically ill people. Generalizations are often made regarding these populations’ 
characteristics, conditions, and/or circumstances that increase vulnerability to particular health risks of 
climate change. However, such generalizations often fail to recognize the important heterogeneity of these 
population groups and may not adequately reflect how an individual or group understands themselves 
(Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011). They also often overlook how differences among and within populations may 
change over time in the face of climate change (Kaijser & Kronsell, 2014). This “universalizing” of various 
population groups disregards the multidimensional nature of vulnerability and may result in the unique needs 
of individuals being overlooked, creating barriers to effective adaptation. Further, it is common for climate 
change vulnerability research to focus on a single or limited number of discrete variables, such as economic 
status or sex (Kaijser & Kronsell, 2014; Bunce & Ford, 2015). As the understanding of climate change 
vulnerability evolves, there is increasing evidence that the characterization of vulnerability to the health 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 631 
impacts of climate change must include considerations of how multiple existing inequities can interact, 
shaping and compounding experiences and responses to climate change (Gamble et al., 2016). Employing an 
intersectional lens can contribute to this analysis and enhance understanding of climate change vulnerability.
Intersectionality is understood as the complex and interdependent interaction between various individual 
identity factors (e.g., sex, gender, age, language, ability) (Figure 9.3), social norms and cultural practices, 
institutional processes and systems of power and oppression (Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011; Kaijser & 
Kronsell, 2014; Hankivsky & Mussell, 2018). It can help to understand and identify existing power dynamics in 
society (Kaijser & Kronsell, 2014) and “encourages a contextual analysis that probes beneath single identities, 
experiences and social locations to consider a range of axes of difference to better understand any situation 
of disadvantage” (Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011, p. 38). The relevance of applying an intersectional approach 
to public health action to improve health equity has been established, although practical uptake appears low 
in Canada (NCCDH & NCCHPP, 2016). 
Figure 9.3 Examples of intersecting identity factors. Source: Adapted from Government of Canada, 2019b
Applying an intersectional approach to V&As, and to other climate change and health activities, can enhance 
understanding of the patterns of power, social conditions, and individual characteristics that contribute to 
health inequities and influence climate change vulnerability. Broadening this perspective of vulnerability also 
helps inform effective responses to climate change that can simultaneously address underlying drivers of 
inequity and broader social issues (Buse & Patrick, 2020). The application of intersectionality frameworks 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 632 
and the demonstrated effectiveness of practical application in the context of climate change has been 
limited. Nonetheless, tools informed by an intersectional approach, meant to be applied to policy, research, 
and programs across all sectors, are emerging in Canada (Box 9.2). An exploration of tools and resources 
that can enhance integration of health equity considerations into assessments of climate change and health 
vulnerability, and application of an intersectional approach, is provided in section 9.4.5 Integrating Health 
Equity into Climate Change and Health Actions. 
Box 9.2 Gender Based Analysis Plus (GBA+) in the Government of Canada
The Government of Canada recognizes that an intersectional approach is essential to the development and 
implementation of inclusive policy, services, and initiatives for all sectors, including health. Gender Based 
Analysis Plus (GBA+) is an analytical process, informed by an intersectional approach, used to assess how 
diverse groups of men, women, and gender-diverse people may experience government programming, 
policies, research, and initiatives differently (Government of Canada, 2019b). GBA+ goes beyond sex and 
gender differences to consider how gender intersects with other identity factors such as race, ethnicity, socio-
economic status, and other structural conditions. The Government of Canada is committed to applying GBA+ to 
current and future policies, programs, and initiatives, and it is required for key government and budget processes.
When data are available, applying the GBA+ tool to climate change mitigation and adaptation activities can 
result in the identification of positive and negative implications of the activities on various groups in the 
population. Measures to minimize negative impacts and enhance positive effects can then be implemented. 
This may be particularly effective when applied to V&As and to development and implementation of 
adaptation measures and strategies. 
9.4.3 Drivers of Vulnerability: Determinants of Health and 
Health Inequities
As previously discussed, upstream drivers of health inequities, including social, cultural, economic, and 
political structures, as well as structural racism, ongoing colonialism, and climate change, result in the 
unequal distribution of power and resources. This influences the conditions in which individuals live and 
work, shaping determinants of health and giving rise to health inequities. Increasingly, determinants of health 
are recognized as major drivers of climate change vulnerability (Watts et al., 2015; Gamble et al., 2016; 
Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities in the Americas, 2019). 
The determinants of health related to climate change can be grouped into six broad categories (Table 9.1). 
While not an exhaustive list, these determinants are commonly found in the climate change and public health 
literature. Although typically discussed as discrete factors, determinants of health interact with and influence 
each other. For example, income can determine the status of many other determinants of health, including 
stable and safe housing and economic access to nutritious food (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010; CIHI, 2018).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 633 
Table 9.1 Examples of determinants of health related to climate change
Social and community context
•	 Social support and safety net
•	 Social inclusion
•	 Culture
Health and health care
•	 Access to primary care, including health care services
•	 Healthy behaviours
•	 Biology and genetic endowment
Economic stability
•	 Income
•	 Housing stability
•	 Food security
•	 Employment and job security
Natural and physical environment
•	 Working conditions
•	 Housing
•	 Community and neighbourhood
•	 Natural environment
Education
•	 Early childhood education and development
•	 Language and literacy
Additional stratifiers/identity factors
•	 Gender and sex
•	 Mobility
•	 Race
•	 Age
•	 Ability/disability
•	 Indigenous status
Source: Adapted from PHAC, 2008; Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010; Gamble et al., 2016; Ebi et al., 2017; 
Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequities in the Americas, 
2019; Government of Canada, 2019a; USDHHS, 2020

HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 634 
At an individual level, vulnerability to health risks related to climate change likely increases as the number 
of determinants of poor health (e.g., low income, poor housing quality, food insecurity) increases. 
Importantly, individuals and populations that experience health inequities and determinants of poor health 
are not homogeneous, and much variation exists in terms of the experience of health impacts and degree 
of vulnerability, across and among population groups (see Box 9.3). These combinations vary for each 
individual and for each specific health risk. Improving determinants of health and redressing health inequities 
can, therefore, aid in reducing vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change. A selection of key 
determinants of health are analyzed below, establishing the linkages to climate change vulnerability.
Box 9.3 The heterogeneous nature of climate change and health 
vulnerability
In addition to differential experiences of vulnerability, perceptions of vulnerability and perceived efficacy of 
interventions can also differ among and within populations disproportionately affected by climate change. 
Benmarhnia et al. (2017) conducted a qualitative study seeking to understand perceptions of vulnerability 
in populations typically classified as “vulnerable” and their experiences with health intervention measures 
related to Montréal’s heat action plan (HAP).
Two focus groups were conducted — one with individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia and one with 
individuals who have alcohol or drug addictions. Participants discussed their experiences during the last heat 
wave in Montréal; perception of vulnerability to heat-related health risks; and understanding, experience, and 
suitability of the HAP interventions.
The study found that there were significant differences in perceptions of vulnerability to heat-related risks 
between the two focus groups. There were also contrasting opinions between the two groups in terms of the 
appropriateness of the targeted interventions in the HAP. One group supported the idea that public health 
interventions should target specific populations, while the other suggested that addressing the root causes 
of vulnerability, such as social exclusion and material deprivation, should be a focus of public health policies. 
Differences among people within each group were related to perceptions of individual vulnerability to extreme 
heat, and these were particularly pronounced in participants of the group with addictions. 
The heterogeneity of vulnerability between and within the focus groups suggests that “vulnerability is not 
conceived of nor experienced homogeneously by all populations defined as ‘vulnerable’ in public health 
policies” (Benmarhian et al., 2017, p. 6). The authors recommend that, after populations disproportionately 
affected have been identified, policy implementation should involve meaningful consideration of a range of 
experiences and different needs for public health assistance to maximize the effectiveness of interventions 
aimed at protecting health (Benmarhnia et al., 2017). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 635 
9.4.3.1 Natural and Built Environments
Human health depends on conditions constructed within social systems, but also the natural environment and 
ecosystems (Hancock, 2015). The state of ecosystems we live within, and their ability to provide the ecosystem 
services upon which we rely — known as the ecological determinants of health — are fundamental to human 
health. Changes in the environment that compromise the ability of ecosystems to function optimally and provide 
important life-sustaining resources and supplies (e.g., food, water, and oxygen) — for example, those associated 
with climate change — can negatively affect human health and well-being (CPHA, 2015). Recognizing the important 
interactions between ecological determinants of health and social determinants of health, the Canadian Public Health 
Association (CPHA) suggested that an eco-social approach in population health promotion is needed. Such an 
approach provides health and other co-benefits of a more just and sustainable society (CPHA, 2015). 
The design and condition of the built environment is a significant determinant of health and encapsulates the 
external built environment where individuals live, work, play, and study. This includes roads, public transit systems, 
buildings, parks, and other infrastructure (MOHLTC, 2012; PHAC, 2017). Working conditions may be a source of 
physical risks and psychosocial stress, both of which have implications for health and well-being (Mikkonen & 
Raphael, 2010). Certain occupations can increase exposure to natural hazards that are worsened by climate change. 
For example, outdoor workers (e.g., agriculture, landscape, and construction workers) may be at increased risk to the 
health impacts of extreme heat, while emergency responders have increased exposure to extreme weather events such 
as wildfires, flooding, and hurricanes (Berry et al., 2014a; Gamble et al., 2016).
Safe, adequate housing, and well-planned neighbourhoods and cities can promote healthy behaviours and 
contribute to positive health outcomes (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010), even as the climate warms. Communities with 
aging infrastructure may have more difficulty coping with climate impacts; for example, aging water and sewage 
infrastructure may contribute to increased risk of flooding and water contamination (Rudolph et al., 2018). In 
contrast, robust and durable housing may reduce exposure to extreme weather events.
9.4.3.2 Economic Stability
Economic stability and, specifically, income and income distribution have been identified as among the most 
influential determinants of health (Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity and 
Health Inequities in the Americas, 2019). Economic stability has close linkages with, and operates alongside, 
other determinants of health (CIHI, 2018). Income can determine the quality of other determinants of health, 
shaping an individual’s overall living conditions (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010; CIHI, 2018). For example, 
steady and adequate income can ensure stable and safe housing and access to food, which have important 
influences on human health. 
In Canada, on average, low income individuals experience higher rates of chronic disease, heart attack, stroke, 
self-injury, and perceived poorer physical and mental health (CIHI, 2018). Low-income individuals and families 
may face increased challenges with accessing health care services, for example, prohibitive transportation 
costs, prohibitive costs of medication or medical treatments, and an inability to take time off work to go to 
appointments (CMA, n.d.). Inability to pay for out-of-pocket fees associated with health care can be a major 
barrier to accessing health care services (Whitehead & Dahlgren, 2007). The bottom 33% of Canadians, in 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 636 
terms of income earned, are 50% less likely to see a specialist when necessary, 50% more likely to have 
difficulty accessing health care services on weekends or evenings, and 40% more likely to wait five or more 
days to see a physician (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010). Evidence suggests that quality of care is also lower for 
those with low socio-economic status, and discrimination by health care workers associated with low socio-
economic status has been recorded (CIHI, 2018). 
Low-income status is commonly associated with material and social deprivation (Mikkonen & Raphael, 
2010). This is especially important in the context of climate change. Evidence suggests that those with fewer 
resources are less able to protect themselves and adapt to climate change (WHO, 2003; IPCC, 2014; Gamble 
et al., 2016; Friel, 2019). The impacts of climate-driven natural hazards can trigger household financial 
distress (Bank of Canada, 2021) and push people into poverty (Hallegatte et al., 2016). It was estimated that, 
in the absence of natural disasters for the year 2018, 26 million fewer people would have been in extreme 
poverty (World Bank, 2017). Globally, it is estimated that between 3 million and 16 million people could 
be forced into extreme poverty, primarily through climate change impacts on agriculture and food prices 
(Hallegatte, 2016; Hallegatte & Rozenberg, 2017).  
9.4.3.3 Health Care Services and Accessibility 
Accessibility, acceptability, and availability of health care are also important determinants of health. Access 
to health care varies across the population as a result of various socio-economic, geographic, and cultural 
factors (WHO, 2008). In Canada, geographic access to health care facilities and services differs across 
regions. For example, those living in rural and remote areas may have difficulty accessing health care due to 
geographic remoteness, long travel distances to facilities, long wait times, and limited access to specialty and 
emergency services (CIHI, 2018). 
Individuals and populations that experience discrimination and stigmatization often face difficulties obtaining 
resources necessary for good health and encounter barriers accessing health services (PHAC, 2019). 
Discrimination based on race, religion, ethnic origin, gender, or sexual orientation is common, with over one 
in four people in Canada reportedly experiencing at least one form of discrimination in their lifetime (Godley, 
2018; PHAC, 2019). 2SLGBTQQIA+, African, Caribbean, and Black people, as well as Indigenous Peoples, were 
more likely to report being unfairly treated while accessing health services than the general population in 
Canada (PHAC, 2019). 
As noted above, cultural acceptability of health care can also present challenges to accessibility. Language 
barriers and cultural practices may create challenges for some, such as newcomers to Canada and 
Indigenous Peoples, in accessing and accepting health care (Whitehead & Dahlgren, 2007). First Nations, 
Inuit, and Métis peoples across Canada experience inequitable access to health care, which contributes to the 
reinforcement of existing health disparities. For many rural and remote Indigenous communities, accessing 
health care involves travelling long distances, and extended periods of separation from family and social 
networks, which can lead to emotional stress and discourage Indigenous Peoples from seeking care (NCCIH, 
2019). Experiences of anti-Indigenous racism and discrimination also represent a significant barrier to health 
care, leading to unsafe care, mistrust, and ultimately poorer health outcomes (Goodman, 2017; NCCIH, 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 637 
Access to health care can also be more challenging for those with disabilities. A study of Canadian women 
with disabilities found multiple barriers to accessing health care services, including negative attitudes and 
discriminatory practices from some health care providers (Gibson & Mykitiuk, 2012). Timely access to quality 
health care services can play an important role in reducing morbidity and mortality associated with climate-
related health risks. 
Climate change impacts on health systems in Canada are already being observed (see Chapter 10: 
Adaptation and Health System Resilience). For example, melting permafrost in the North can damage health 
and transportation infrastructure important for supply routes and access to health services (Séguin, 2008). 
Given that First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples face unique challenges in accessing health care services, 
climate change impacts on health systems are of particular concern (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and 
Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). 
9.4.3.4 Social and Community Context
Social exclusion refers to individuals and groups that are excluded from fully participating in society. This 
commonly arises from the marginalization of populations, such as racialized groups, to effectively limit 
access to economic, social, and cultural resources (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010; PHAC, 2019). People who 
experience social exclusion are more likely to be unemployed and low income, have difficulty accessing 
health care services, and have limited opportunities to advance their education (Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010). 
At an individual level, social support networks, that is, strong relationships with and support from family, 
friends, and the community, have been associated with positive health outcomes (PHAC, 2008). The broader 
social environment context can also influence human health. A supportive society, which includes social 
stability, recognition of diversity, safety, good working relationships, and cohesive communities, can aid 
in reducing potential risks and adverse impacts on health (MOHLTC, 2012), including mental health (see 
Chapter 4: Mental Health and Well-Being). Such networks can be very important for coping with and adapting 
to climate change impacts. For example, while Indigenous communities in the North are disproportionately 
impacted by climate change, strong social capital has contributed to adaptive capacity and climate change 
resilience (Ratelle & Paquette, 2019). Actions such as cutting wood for Elders and sharing meat from hunting 
with community members strengthen social capital (Ratelle & Paquette, 2019) and contribute to positive 
health outcomes.
9.4.3.5 Education and Childhood Development 
Education is an important determinant of health and can increase opportunities for employment and income 
security (PHAC, 2008; MOHLTC, 2012), thus influencing other important determinants of health (CIHI, 2008; 
WHO, 2008; Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010). Lower levels of education are associated with difficulty accessing 
health care services, decreased ability to interpret and understand health messaging and labels, greater use 
of emergency care, and unhealthy behaviours, such as smoking (CIHI, 2018).
Evidence suggests that early childhood development and experiences have significant biological, 
psychological, and social effects on health; the quality of early childhood development is strongly associated 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 638 
with social and economic gradients of advantage and disadvantage (PHAC, 2008; Mikkonen & Raphael, 2010; 
MOHLTC, 2012; Bennett & Friel, 2014). Existing inequities in child health outcomes can be exacerbated by 
climate change, which can limit adaptive capacity. For example, the ability of families to safely relocate when 
necessary, protect themselves from climate-related health risks, and recover from climate change impacts is 
enhanced as resources, power, and socio-economic status increase (Bennett & Friel, 2014). 
Direct and indirect effects of climate change can affect the health of children (Helldén et al., 2021). For 
example, a study conducted in Southwestern Ontario found an association between extreme heat and 
increased emergency department visits among children (Wilk et al., 2020). Climate change impacts can also 
affect maternal, fetal, and infant health (Kuehn & McCormick, 2017; Bekkar et al., 2020). Canadian research 
has identified a positive association between heat exposure and gestational diabetes, sudden infant death 
syndrome, placental abruption, and early delivery (Auger et al., 2014; Auger et al., 2015; Booth et al., 2017; 
He et al., 2018). Existing inequities, variation in geographic region, and broader socio-economic conditions 
influence the impact of climate change on the health of children (Helldén et al., 2021). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 639 
Box 9.4 Human health, gender, and climate change in Canada
Gender is an important determinant of health and is also a factor influencing climate change vulnerability. 
Gender is understood as the socially constructed roles, norms, and values attributed to women and men 
(Preet et al., 2010). The relationship between climate change and gender has gained increasing attention 
in the climate change literature, complemented by global efforts to advance gender equality, human rights, 
and social equity (Sellers, 2018). However, existing studies often employ a narrow understanding of gender, 
examining the binary experiences of women and men (Bunce & Ford, 2015) and leaving out important 
consideration for other gender identities. 
Individuals whose gender or gender expression do not fall within normative categories often experience 
marginalization, discrimination, and increased risk of violence, which may compound vulnerability to climate 
change. For example, international research finds that, following extreme weather events, 2SLGBTQQIA+ 
populations often face barriers to accessing disaster relief and recovery efforts. These barriers, often driven 
by social and religious stigma, can result in increased vulnerability to health impacts due to the lack of 
secure and safe shelter, medical care, food, and other unmet needs (Dominey-Howes et al., 2014; Gorman-
Murrayet al., 2018; Resurrección et al., 2019). Importantly, 2SLGBTQQIA+ populations have demonstrated 
unique community-based coping strategies and adaptive actions during and after extreme events, such as 
hurricanes, despite their exclusion from response efforts (Dominey-Howes et al., 2014). The impact climate 
change currently has on 2SLGBTQQIA+ populations is a significant knowledge gap in international literature, 
as well as in Canadian research. 
Understanding how gender roles may mediate health impacts across a population can aid in accurately 
assessing health vulnerabilities and developing effective adaptation measures. While there has been limited 
research on the gender-differentiated health impacts of climate change in Canada, some examples are 
provided below:
•	
Inuit women often take part in traditional livelihood activities, such as berry picking and sewing 
garments with sealskin. However, reduced opportunities and quality of traditionally harvested 
species have been observed, in part due to climate change effects, resulting in a reduction in 
earning potential and a shift in livelihood activities, which can have implications for health and 
well-being (Dowsley et al., 2010; Bunce et al., 2016). 
•	
Inuit men are traditionally responsible for hunting activities. Given changing ice conditions and 
other hazards related to climate change (e.g., increased severe wind and flooding), the risk of 
injury for hunters is increasing (Ford et al., 2008). 
•	
In Canada, men are more likely to hold jobs in resource sectors (e.g., agriculture and 
construction), where exposure to outdoor extreme heat can be high (Statistics Canada, 2018) (see 
Chapter 3: Natural Hazards).
•	
Gendered impacts associated with natural disasters, particularly on mental health and sexual 
violence, have been observed. For example, following the 2013 floods in High River, Alberta, a rise 
in anti-anxiety and sleep-aid prescriptions was reported among women. During this same period, 
a rise in sexual assault against women was also reported (Sahni et al., 2016).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 640 
9.4.4 Assessing Vulnerability to Climate Change Health Impacts
Health authorities across Canada and the world are increasingly using V&As as a tool to help individuals, 
communities, and health systems prepare for climate change (Berry et al., 2018). In Canada, 35% of public 
health authorities already have, or are in the process of conducting, a V&A (University of Waterloo Research 
Centre, 2019). They can be conducted at the local, regional, or national levels. 
The primary objectives of a V&A are to understand the association between climate and health outcomes, 
identify current and future impacts on health, understand current conditions of vulnerability to climate-related 
health impacts, explore adaptation options that effectively reduce the current and future adverse health 
implications of climate change, and contribute to capacity-building within health organizations to respond to 
climate change (WHO, 2013; Ebi et al., 2016; Berry et al., 2018). 
Results of V&As, supported by findings from academic literature, help public health authorities identify 
individuals and communities that experience disproportionate impacts on health associated with specific, 
discrete, individual and contextual characteristics (e.g., sex, gender, age, geographic isolation, low income) 
(Benmarhnia et al., 2017; Buse, 2018). When a health equity lens is applied in V&As, they can elucidate 
conditions that contribute to vulnerability specific to the geographic region assessed and determine how 
existing health inequities may be exacerbated with climate change. In the public health field, understanding 
which individuals and groups may face disproportionate impacts from climate change can be useful 
for prioritizing health adaptation measures and resources (Benmarhnia et al., 2017; Berry et al., 2018). 
Additionally, identifying existing health inequities and other local conditions that drive vulnerability in a 
V&A can promote the allocation of resources to address upstream drivers of negative health outcomes to 
strengthen health equity in a community (Buse, 2018). 
According to a survey of Ontario health units in 2016, only 42% of respondents applied a health equity lens 
when identifying, prioritizing, and addressing climate change and health risks in their region (Doyle, 2017). 
Results of a 2019 survey of Canadian health units indicate that 85.1% of respondents consider implications 
for populations deemed to be at higher risk of climate change impacts in their climate change and health 
adaptation actions; however, only 37.3% consider implications for Indigenous Peoples, and 17.9% consider 
sex- and gender-based implications (University of Waterloo Survey Research Centre, 2019). 
An intersectional approach can provide information on interacting variables, at an individual and structural 
level, that shape individual lives and health status (Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011) and that influence health 
inequities. When applied to a V&A process, this can be helpful in identifying which populations may be at 
higher risk of health impacts related to climate change. New V&A guidance from WHO (WHO, 2021) and from 
Health Canada (Health Canada, 2022) includes explicit consideration of health equity. Existing tools may 
complement V&A activities and adaptation actions. For example, the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-
Term Care’s Health Equity Impact Assessment (HEIA) tool can be used to identify unintended — negative or 
positive — health impacts of a planned policy, program, or initiative on marginalized populations (MOHLTC, 
2012). The HEIA workbook and templates allow users to identify unintended health impacts and develop 
recommendations for adjustments to mitigate adverse effects and maximize positive impacts among 
marginalized populations. They can also be used to increase the capacity of organizations to integrate health 
equity into decision making models and service design and delivery (MOHLTC, 2012). While the HEIA tool does not 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 641 
explicitly include climate change, the tool could be useful in assessing the outcomes of climate change and health 
adaptation measures and policies, as part of a V&A process. 
9.4.5 Integrating Health Equity into Climate Change and Health Actions
Climate change and health is an area of increasing interest and work for local and regional public health 
units (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System Resilience). While the concept and promotion of health 
equity is not new for public health actors, challenges remain about how to most effectively integrate this into 
climate change and health activities. Building on the four primary roles identified in the Public Health Roles for 
Health Equity Action Framework (Region of Waterloo Public Health, 2009; NCCDH, 2013), Table 9.2 identifies 
a range of public health actions to address climate change and improve health equity. These actions should 
be accompanied by a recognition and understanding of how historic and ongoing colonialism and racism are 
central to the creation of inequities. 
Table 9.2 Actions to address climate change through established 
public health roles to improve health equity
ROLE 1: ASSESS AND REPORT ON CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND RELATED HEALTH INEQUITIES
•	 Conduct a climate change and health V&A 
	»
Devote time and resources to thoughtfully frame health equity in assessments, identify root causes 
of existing health inequities, and record data and knowledge gaps
	»
Conduct deep, respectful, and meaningful engagement with Indigenous and other racialized and 
marginalized communities, integrating local and traditional knowledge, expertise, and community 
solutions throughout the assessment process 
	»
Internally, ask staff with a focus on health equity to inform the assessment 
	»
Communicate findings to partners, stakeholders, and the community using products tailored to meet 
the needs of diverse populations (e.g., incorporating language and accessibility considerations) 
•	 Contribute to the knowledge base on public health actions to address climate change and health equity 
	»
Document case examples of adaptation activities, promising practices, and lessons learned after 
V&As are conducted
	»
Conduct community asset mapping to better understand existing assets in the community that 
contribute to climate change resilience (Rudolph et al., 2018; UCLA, n.d.)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 642 
ROLE 1: ASSESS AND REPORT ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS AND RELATED HEALTH INEQUITIES (CONTINUED)
•	 Collect data on the health impacts of climate change with an equity lens 
	»
For example, track deaths caused by extreme heat among racialized individuals living in low income 
communities or mental health impacts of climate change among socially disadvantaged populations
	»
Whenever possible, enhance data collection efforts to capture sex-, race-, and gender-disaggregated 
data, as well as other demographic data (e.g., socio-economic status)
•	 Incorporate equity considerations into regular monitoring, surveillance, and reporting
ROLE 2: MODIFY AND ORIENT GHG MITIGATION 
AND ADAPTATION ACTIVITIES TO REDUCE HEALTH INEQUITIES
•	 Assess climate change actions for their implications for health equity before implementing them, to 
minimize negative outcomes and maximize benefits
	»
For example, use the Health Equity Impact Assessment Tool (MOHLTC, 2012), conduct key 
stakeholder interviews with community organizations that work with populations at increased risk, 
and carry out meaningful engagement with populations that are disproportionately affected
•	 Identify opportunities to enhance co-benefits of GHG mitigation and adaptation actions, with particular 
attention to strengthening determinants of good health and addressing root causes of vulnerability
ROLE 3: PARTNER AND COLLABORATE WITH OTHERS TO BUILD CLIMATE-RESILIENT COMMUNITIES
•	 Engage in equitable, community-driven adaptation planning (Adaptation Clearinghouse, 2011; ITK, 
2019) 
•	 Contribute to municipal and regional plans for climate-resilient communities (PlanH, n.d.)
	»
Support further understanding of the concept of unequal vulnerability (Salas et al., 2019)
	»
Identify opportunities to address root causes of health inequities (Buse, 2018) and promote 
determinants of good health
•	 Identify and build collaborative partnerships within and outside of the health sector, and across all 
levels of government, to support multisectoral networks focused on climate change activities
•	 Engage with Indigenous and other racialized communities as partners and sources of expertise
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 643 
ROLE 4: PARTICIPATE IN POLICY DEVELOPMENT RELATED TO CLIMATE CHANGE
•	 Embed health equity into all policy measures
	»
For example, explicitly include health equity in mission, vision, and value statements (The 
Greenlining Institute, 2019) 
	»
Recognize the interconnected systems that drive health inequities and contribute to climate change 
vulnerability (e.g., racism, colonialism, economic structures, etc.)
•	 Raise awareness of needed policies that reduce carbon emissions, contribute to climate-resilient 
communities, and reduce health inequities 
•	 Identify opportunities to mainstream climate change considerations into all proposed health policies 
and regularly evaluate impacts on populations who experience health inequities (PlanH, n.d.; The 
Greenlining Institute, 2019)
Source: Adapted from Muzumdar, 2020; NCCDH, 2021
For many local and regional health units, conducting a V&A is often the first step to protecting their 
communities from health impacts and adapting to future climate change. Such units can conduct practical 
activities and exercises to better understand the social context of their respective jurisdiction and identify 
drivers of climate change and health vulnerability. They can make the V&A more robust and support the 
development of tailored adaptation options for populations at higher risk of impacts. Examples of activities, 
described below, include resilience and asset mapping, vulnerability mapping, climate change and health 
projections, inclusive public engagement, and communications.
9.4.5.1 Resilience and Asset Mapping
Communities have many existing resources that play an important role in building climate resilience (e.g., 
social networks and cohesion). However, such assets and resources can be difficult to identify in common 
sources of data. Community surveys and community-based participatory asset mapping are exercises 
and tools that can identify people, organizations, spaces, and other “intangible factors” that contribute to 
community resilience (Rudolph et al., 2018; UCLA, n.d.). Such information is valuable for informing V&As and 
developing adaptive responses (Buse & Patrick, 2020).
Local initiatives that build an assets-based approach to mapping resilience to climate change and other 
hazards at the community level are increasing in Canada; many of these follow guidance outlined by Colussi 
(2000). For example, the Building Resilient Neighbourhoods (BRN) project (BRN, n.d.) has run applied projects 
across the Capital Regional District of British Columbia, in which local community members participate in 
assessing the resilience of their own neighbourhood to various shocks. The BRN project supplies a suite 
of online resources to support communities in undertaking such an assessment, including checklists for 
resilient neighbourhoods, workshop planning materials, and associated tools (e.g., scenario planning, asset 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 644 
mapping, resilience assessment). The BRN initiatives guide communities through exercises that consider a 
range of issues often overlooked in traditional planning, such as consideration for determinants of health and 
well-being (Wipond et al., 2017). 
The City of Vancouver’s Resilient Neighbourhood Toolkit is employed in a similar initiative and includes a 
series of modules for neighbourhood climate resilience assessment activities, including asset mapping and 
development of resilience action plans (City of Vancouver, n.d.). These activities provide opportunities to 
strengthen relationships among people in different neighbourhoods and increase understanding of where 
risks may exist that would affect certain households or streets. They also examine the community’s capacity 
to plan and respond to climate change impacts. Another innovative example includes a role-playing game 
called Resilientville Canada (CREW, n.d.), in which players take on the role of a community stakeholder 
facing a scenario of either a flood, windstorm, or earthquake. The game gets players to think about their 
social relationships within a neighbourhood and what assets will assist them in strengthening their ability to 
respond to climate-related shocks or stresses. 
These examples of resilience and asset mapping focus more broadly on understanding the assets available 
in communities that contribute to, and enhance resilience to, a broad range of shocks and stressors, including 
extreme weather events and climate change impacts. Assets that contribute to resilience in the health sector 
and mitigate human health impacts are generally included in these exercises. While these activities can be 
modified to focus specifically on health system resilience, there is also benefit in focusing on resilience-
building activities and asset mapping from a broader perspective. This facilitates multisectoral collaboration 
on climate change activities that include appropriate linkages to human health and the health system.
9.4.5.2 Vulnerability Mapping 
Vulnerability mapping provides information on patterns of social conditions and climate change vulnerability 
in a particular region (Gamble et al., 2016; Foster et al., 2019), and can inform V&As. Mapping can be 
accomplished, for example, by developing a social vulnerability index, which uses social vulnerability 
indicators (e.g., socio-economic status, housing tenure, education, age, race, access to medical services, 
etc.) to elucidate the social conditions that drive vulnerability to health impacts or hazards related to climate 
change (Rudolph et al., 2018; Foster et al., 2019). Commonly, social vulnerability maps are combined with 
maps that display exposure to biophysical hazards related to climate change (e.g., wildfires, flooding, 
sea level rise, urban heat islands). The resulting maps aid in understanding the intersection of social and 
biophysical vulnerabilities and in identifying neighbourhoods and regions that experience disproportionate 
risk. Vulnerability maps can inform the V&A process by identifying populations and neighbourhoods that may 
be disproportionately affected by climate change hazards, such as extreme heat events or flooding, and help 
inform public health interventions (Rinner et al., 2010; Gamble et al., 2016; Foster et al., 2019). 
Developing vulnerability indexes and frameworks are typically the first step in developing vulnerability maps. 
There are a variety of approaches to developing vulnerability indicators and indexes related to climate change 
impacts, and various Canadian examples exist (Rinner et al., 2010; Chakraborty et al., 2020; Yu et al., 2021). 
Raval et al. (2019) conducted a review of more than 40 existing climate change vulnerability frameworks that 
analyze community vulnerability to climate impacts in California. The review found a lack of frameworks that 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 645 
adequately reflect the intersectional nature of climate vulnerability. Four frameworks were highlighted in the 
report, recognized for excelling in their ability to comprehensively integrate multiple exposures, population 
sensitivity, and adaptive capacity, as well as their breadth in terms of the number of indicators incorporated 
across exposures and other vulnerability factors and in terms of taking data accessibility into account (Raval 
et al., 2019). These frameworks included: 
•	
Public Health Alliance of Southern California’s California Healthy Places Index (PHASC, 2018)
•	
California Department of Public Health’s California Building Resilience Against Climate Effects: 
Climate Change and Health Vulnerability Indicators (CalBRACE, 2018)
•	
California Energy Commission’s Social Vulnerability to Climate Change (Mazur et al., 2010)
•	
Climate Change Vulnerability Screening Index (English et al., 2013)
These frameworks and indexes may be adapted by public health authorities to increase understanding of 
characteristics and conditions in their regions that may increase or decrease vulnerability to various climate 
change health risks. Such knowledge can be used to inform and enhance V&As. 
Tools based on geographic information systems (GIS) and vulnerability mapping exercises can also 
be helpful in developing and implementing adaptation measures. For example, urban forests provide a 
number of environmental, social, and economic benefits that support health equity, including mitigating air 
pollution; mitigating urban heat island effects; contributing to the management of surface water quantity 
and quality; maintaining and enhancing natural heritage; enhancing economic value; providing direct cost 
savings; supporting improved physical health and emotional well-being; and strengthening communities and 
enhancing social equity (Morrison, 2017). Recognizing these benefits, the Region of Peel, Ontario, developed 
the Peel Tree Planting Prioritization Tool, which aids decision makers in determining where tree planting 
is most beneficial to the community (Richardson, n.d.). Accounting for 12 target benefits, which include 
supporting improved physical health and emotional well-being, strengthening communities, and enhancing 
social equity, the GIS-based tool generates maps at various geographic scales that identify areas in Peel 
Region for tree planting where benefits will be maximized (Richardson, n.d.).
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 646 
Box 9.5 The surveillance and prevention of the impacts of extreme 
meteorological events on the public health system, Quebec
In 2010, the Surveillance and Prevention of the Impacts of Extreme Meteorological Events on the Public 
Health System (SUPREME) programme was developed by the Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
(INSPQ) in collaboration with the Ministry of Public Security (Québec), and the Meteorological Service of 
Environment Canada (now Environment and Climate Change Canada). Combining elements of early warning 
systems, vulnerability mapping, and monitoring and surveillance into a single, real-time, integrated system, 
SUPREME provides public health officials and emergency responders with provincial-level information during 
extreme weather events, informing the implementation of preventive measures and response plans (Toutant 
et al., 2011; Gosselin et al., 2018; INSPQ, 2020). 
The SUPREME system has three primary components. First, when weather forecasts report a possible 
extreme weather event, warnings are sent via email to alert health authorities in real time. Second, 
SUPREME’s online portal provides surveillance and monitoring of six weather hazards: extreme heat, flooding, 
extreme cold, heavy snowfall events, wildfires, and ice storms. Estimated impacts of these hazards to human 
health are also provided, including mortality rates, hospitalizations, emergency department visits, ambulance 
transport, and calls to Info-Santé (INSPQ, 2020). Finally, the online portal includes a GIS-based application 
that displays geographic data on health risks (e.g., urban heat islands), protection factors (e.g., medical 
services, infrastructure, green spaces, and buildings with air conditioning), and the location of vulnerable 
regions. For example, socio-demographic data and other indicators, including a regional deprivation index, 
housing conditions, and language, are used to provide maps that identify communities and regions that may 
experience increased vulnerability to extreme heat events (Toutant et al., 2011; INSPQ, 2021). 
Since its creation, SUPREME has been evaluated twice for level of use, effectiveness, and overall user 
satisfaction. Assessment results indicate user satisfaction is high, and the system is very useful for public 
health authorities (Bustinza et al., 2016; Gosselin et al., 2018). Further, when evaluating SUPREME following 
an extreme heat event in 2010, it was found that the system mitigated the effects of the event on population 
health compared to previous heat events (Toutant et al., 2011). 
9.4.5.3 Climate Change and Health Projections
Climate change projections can provide useful information on how mortality, morbidity, and/or other health 
outcomes related to climate warming may change in the future. This information can help inform adaptation 
and response plans and aid policy makers in understanding long-term impacts of climate change and needed 
resources (Sellers & Ebi, 2017; Rudolph et al., 2018). 
Changes in demographic and socio-economic conditions, urbanization, land use, investments in new 
technologies, governance, the extent to which equity issues are addressed, and other factors can influence 
vulnerability to future health impacts of climate change (Ebi et al., 2016). For example, knowledge of how 
populations exposed to various climate hazards may change (e.g., aging, health status, migration) can assist 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 647 
decision makers to plan adaptation measures to protect populations from health risks (Rudolph et al., 2018). 
Further, considering how health care service and delivery is expected to evolve over the coming decades and how 
they may need to be altered to adapt to climate change is important for health sector decision makers to include in 
iterative planning processes to plan for climate change (Sellers & Ebi, 2017). 
9.4.5.4 Inclusive Community Engagement
Health equity cannot be realized without transparent and accountable inclusion and meaningful engagement 
that provides individuals and groups with agency to represent their interests and experiences (USDN, 2017; 
Rudolph et al., 2018; Friel, 2019). An effective way of including diverse groups and perspectives is through 
broad community engagement when undertaking a V&A. Residents and community-based organizations 
(CBOs) can provide valuable information related to the history and social context of a neighbourhood, past 
experiences with climate events, existing assets and resources that contribute to adaptive capacity, and 
the success and/or challenges of previous public health adaptations (Rudolph et al., 2018). Community 
residents, particularly through CBOs, can provide assistance with data collection and support communication 
and outreach activities with individuals and populations in their respective networks (USDN, 2017). There 
are a number of public engagement strategies and frameworks, and each have their own strengths and benefits 
(NCCDH, 2013; Oickle, 2020). Public health authorities may establish various engagement strategies throughout a 
V&A process, choosing specific activities that align with the objectives of each step in the process. 
9.5 Adaptation
Adaptation is the response that an individual, community, or system takes to better cope with, manage, 
or adjust to changing conditions (Smit & Wandel, 2006) (see Chapter 10: Adaptation and Health System 
Resilience). Over the past decade, the field of climate change and health adaptation has grown significantly 
in Canada, with an increasing number of diverse actors, available resources, and adaptation strategies (Berry 
et al., 2014a). There are multiple dimensions of health equity associated with climate change adaptation. 
Individuals have varying capacity to adapt to climate-related health risks, given differences in determinants of 
health and related contextual factors, such as distribution of resources (Lynn et al., 2011; Ebi et al., 2016). The 
outcomes of adaptation measures are not always uniform or experienced in the same way, and the planning 
and design process of adaptation activities have sometimes left out important voices and partners, such as 
low income communities, racialized populations, and Indigenous Peoples (USDN, 2017; Foster et al., 2019). 
Increasingly, public health actors are recognizing the dimensions of health equity associated with adaptation 
actions and strategies. However, efforts to account for and address health equity in adaptation interventions 
have been limited in Canada and globally. Existing climate change and health equity literature commonly 
analyzes dimensions of equity from the perspective of unequal distribution of climate change impacts and 
vulnerability (Bennette & King, 2018), with significantly less information on how to ensure that the adaptation 
design and implementation process is equitable, that outcomes are fair, and that equity is protected and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 648 
promoted effectively (Deas et al., 2017; Schlosberg et al., 2017). Despite this knowledge gap, opportunities to 
better account for and integrate health equity in climate change adaptation exist. Additionally, adaptation policies 
and measures offer the opportunity to address multiple issues simultaneously, such as protecting health from a 
changing climate, while strengthening determinants of health and redressing drivers of health inequity. 
9.5.1 Adaptation Measures and Equitable Outcomes
Adaptation actions should provide benefits to those most in need; however, outcomes from these measures 
are not experienced in the same way across populations and communities. In the absence of careful 
planning and implementation, adaptation measures may have unintended outcomes that adversely impact 
some population groups or exacerbate existing inequities (Levy & Patz, 2015; Boeckmann & Zeeb, 2016). 
For example, while air conditioning units can be effective adaptation measures for extreme heat, prohibitive 
energy bills may keep some households from using air conditioning, which may increase their risk of health 
impacts related to heat (EPA, 2008). In addition, air conditioning can generate a significant amount of waste 
energy, further increasing outdoor air temperatures (Salamanca et al., 2014), exacerbating the urban heat 
island effect, and increasing cooling demands, which can increase heat-related health risks for those who do 
not have access to air conditioners. 
Increasing green spaces in an urban centre can reduce health risks associated with urban heat islands 
and has a number of associated health co-benefits (Friel, 2019; Health Canada, 2020). However, an 
increase in green spaces could also result in unintended consequences. For example, new green spaces 
could perpetuate gentrification and increase property values in the neighbourhood, which may lead to the 
displacement of low income residents and small local businesses (USDN, 2017; Kreslake, 2019; Cleveland et 
al., 2020). A literature review on the creation of green spaces in urban centres concluded that these spaces 
generally benefited communities that are predominantly high-income and White (Wolch et al., 2014). To 
address these concerns, adaptation plans may involve instituting rent-control policies and other strategies to 
maintain housing affordability when creating green spaces (USDN, 2017).
When adaptation programs are put in place, individuals and population groups may face barriers to accessing 
and using the measures effectively. In efforts to reduce risks from extreme heat, cooling centres are often 
established for residents to get relief. However, an individual who has challenges with mobility (e.g., due 
to low income, disability, and/or social isolation) may have difficulty gaining access to a centre unless 
appropriate supportive measures are put in place (Health Canada, 2012). The City of Greater Sudbury 
partnered with Greater Sudbury Transit to make all transit trips free of charge during extreme heat events to 
ensure equitable access to cooling centres (Evergreen, 2020). Such considerations are needed to ensure that 
adaptation measures can be accessed and used by all, particularly those who face disproportionate risk of 
health impacts related to climate change. Considerations of equity should guide intervention strategies, and 
strategies will be most effective when they are developed in partnership with the community and decision 
makers from across a variety of sectors. 

HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 649 
9.5.2 Adaptation Actions to Enhance Health Equity 
Public health officials can leverage adaptation actions and climate change resilience-building efforts to 
improve health equity and strengthen determinants of health (Boeckmann & Zeeb, 2014; Gould & Rudolph, 
2015; Deas et al., 2017; Rudolph et al., 2018). This is important given that, in Canada, some health disparities 
continue to increase (PHAC, 2018), as does income inequality, particularly in urban centres (Hankivsky, 2014; 
CPA, 2017). 
An example of a collaborative project for climate change adaptation that simultaneously strengthened 
determinants of health is the InosiKatigeKagiamik Illumi: Healthy Homes in Nunatsiavut initiative in Nain, 
Nunatsiavut, Newfoundland and Labrador. It is estimated that 38% of children in Nunatsiavut live in a home 
that is in need of major repairs, and 86% of homes show signs of damage from permafrost melt and ground 
subsidence (ISC, 2019). Homelessness, overcrowding, and difficulties with keeping homes warm due to poor 
quality of structures and/or a lack of economic resources for heating needs were identified as undermining 
health and well-being in the community (Bennett, 2015). Additionally, a lack of land suitable for building, 
the high cost of development, and a frequent need to repair or replace existing homes created a number 
of difficulties meeting housing needs in rapidly expanding communities. The aim of the project was to 
develop climate-resilient housing infrastructure that was also culturally relevant, affordable, energy efficient, 
and reduced the health impacts from overcrowded dwellings and mould. Upon a thorough assessment of 
existing homes in Nain and the surrounding region, residents were engaged in a community-driven process 
for housing design in which they shared existing housing challenges and design preferences, which allowed 
for important cultural values to inform the design of a prototype multi-unit, climate-adapted housing 
development (ISC, 2019). Space to store hunting equipment, a large steel sink for cleaning fish and preparing 
sealskins, and large open-concept living spaces to allow for gathering were all features proposed by residents 
that were incorporated into the final design (Bennett, 2015). 
Another example is the Nunamin Illihakvia Learning from the Land (phase 1) and TUMIVUT: Tracks of Our 
Ancestors Towards a Healthy Future (phase 2) project implemented in Ulukhaktok, Inuvialuit Settlement 
Region, Northwest Territories. This two-phase project focused on strengthening community health and food 
security through increased transmission of Inuit traditional knowledge and promotion of the Inuinnaqtun 
language (ISC, 2019). The program brought together Inuit youth, experienced hunters and sewers, and Elders; 
through a series of activities, knowledge was shared and skills were built around caribou hunting, traditional 
sewing skills, and language. These skill sets and values are important to Inuit in Ulukhaktok, contributing to 
a healthy lifestyle, physically, mentally, and culturally (ISC, 2019). Many benefits were observed as a result of 
the program. Inuit youth gained practical skills that have economic and social value, which was particularly 
beneficial for those who did not have family members who could teach them these traditional skills, or who lacked 
equipment or economic resources to participate in such activities. Participants also noted an increased sense of 
well-being, reduced stress, and strengthened cultural identity (ISC, 2019). The project supported values and skills 
that are important for individual and community health, while also strengthening determinants of health (e.g., food 
security) and building capacity to adapt to increasing climate and societal change.
BlueLA Carshare program is an example of an initiative that combines climate change action with health-
equity objectives. To reduce air pollution and mitigate GHG emissions associated with personal vehicles, the 
City of Los Angeles, California, collaborated with partners to develop an electric vehicle (EV) carsharing pilot 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 650 
project — BlueLA — which was funded through a grant from the California Air Resources Board. Launched in 
2018, BlueLA prioritized service to disadvantaged communities, accounting for low income residents in areas 
with high exposure to air pollution to redress existing health and social inequities. Carshare memberships 
were provided to low income residents at a discounted cost. The EV fleet simultaneously reduced local air 
pollution from gas-fuelled vehicles and mitigated GHG emissions (SUMC, 2019a).
In the first year of the project, 80 EVs were introduced to the community, 130 charging points and 26 charging 
stations were installed, nearly 2000 residents registered as BlueLA members, and more than 12,000 trips 
were made. Approximately 260 t of CO2 were avoided as a result (SUMC, 2019b). Given the success of the 
program, BlueLA was awarded a grant of $3 million dollars from California Air Resources Board to initiate 
phase 2, which will involve scaling up the project to expand into three additional regions: South Los Angeles, 
East Los Angeles, and East Hollywood (SUMC, 2019b). 
9.5.3 Planning Adaptation Measures with Equity in Mind
Adaptation measures that result in equitable outcomes emerge from equitable adaptation processes. 
Ensuring equitable participation and the inclusion of diverse voices at all stages of the adaptation process 
results in better planning and policy making (Race Forward, 2018). While common engagement practices 
and strategies involve many community members, important voices may be missed. Deliberate efforts 
must be made to ensure participation by those who are most at risk of health impacts related to climate 
change. Meaningful engagement can provide valuable information concerning the unique context and 
social conditions of the target community, including current power dynamics and existing inequities. This 
information is required to develop transformative, effective, and equitable adaptation measures that reflect 
the expertise and perspectives of those most affected (Drolet & Sampson, 2017; Schlosberg et al., 2017; Race 
Forward, 2018). 
There are significant challenges with meaningful public engagement in the adaptation process. For example, 
engagement opportunities may be reactive and conducted only after a planning process has been initiated 
and/or after major decisions have already been made. Budget and timeline constraints can also limit the 
effectiveness of engagement processes (USDN, 2017; Foster et al., 2019; Evergreen, 2020). Decision makers 
can ensure more comprehensive participation by ensuring that an appropriate timeline and budget for 
engagement is included in the plan from the outset, engaging community members from the beginning of 
the development and design process, and incorporating input from community members into the adaptation 
strategy to more effectively reflect the needs and unique vulnerabilities of the community (Foster et al., 
2019). This would ensure that interventions address the specific conditions, health risks, and challenges in 
the community (Ebi, 2009). Other benefits of broad community engagement include increased “buy-in” of 
the final adaptation actions, enhanced reach of information dissemination activities, and greater capacity to 
participate in future decision making and planning activities in neighbourhoods (USDN, 2017). 
In Canada, there are examples of effective, broad community and stakeholder engagement during adaptation 
design processes. For example, as part of Middlesex-London Health Unit’s V&A process, a workshop was 
conducted with more than 100 people from various community groups, government agencies, and the health 
sector. In addition to validating preliminary findings from the vulnerability assessment, participants were 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 651 
also provided the opportunity to discuss concerns about climate change impacts on health already observed 
in the community, and identify collaborative efforts needed for effective adaptation. Additionally, workshop 
participants provided their views on (Berry et al., 2014b): 
•	
options for reducing current and future risks to health through adaptation; 
•	
challenges for current and future adaptation efforts to protect health; 
•	
willingness of organizations to participate in strategies for climate change and health adaptation; and 
•	
effective avenues for communicating the results of the V&A. 
Perceptions of needed or appropriate climate interventions may differ between the public and decision 
makers. For example, Schlosberg et al. (2017) reviewed local council climate adaptation plans in Australia 
and compared them to concerns related to climate change and proposed adaptation efforts posted on local 
environmental groups’ websites and social media accounts. The analysis found that there was often little 
correlation between the climate adaptation plans and the concerns expressed by public and environmental 
groups regarding impacts and their suggested adaptation measures. Local government plans largely followed 
a risk- or resilience-based approach, while public interest groups were much more focused on climate change 
impacts on “basic needs and capabilities of everyday life” (e.g., health, food security, housing, etc.), which 
are required to achieve social justice (Nussbaum, 2011; Schlosberg et al., 2017) and support health equity. 
Participatory and community engagement approaches are an opportunity to reduce this disconnect between 
decision makers and public needs and perceptions, and thereby develop effective adaptations that support 
health equity. 
A 2018 U.S. study highlighted the importance of engaging with and understanding the views and perceptions 
of community members to support the development of climate change measures (Kreslake, 2019). To gain 
insight into the perceived importance of adaptation and GHG mitigation measures, residents from three 
regions in the United States (Southern California, Florida, and Arizona) recently affected by extreme weather 
events were surveyed. Participants were categorized using individual-level indicators of vulnerability to the 
health impacts of climate change. The study revealed that perceptions varied across population groups, with 
differences in the types of adaptation and GHG mitigation interventions considered most important. For 
example, there was greater perceived importance of enhanced emergency alert systems among individuals 
with chronic illness (Kreslake, 2019). In addition, racialized groups prioritized communication activities from 
local government regarding climate change impacts and GHG mitigation efforts. Low-income residents were 
among those who indicated the greatest support for actions that would strengthen social services during 
extreme weather events (Kreslake, 2019). 
The differences in perceptions across these groups illustrate the important role public engagement can 
play in developing climate change and health actions. Working with community members and stakeholders 
ensures that adaptation interventions reach those who are disproportionately affected, provide information 
in an accessible way, and motivate and empower individuals to make appropriate choices (Ebi & Semenza, 
2008). Participatory approaches to developing adaptation measures can create the space and opportunity for 
front-line and disadvantaged communities to actively participate in decision making processes that result in 
policies and programs that will directly affect their lives (Ebi & Semenza, 2008; MSC, 2015; USDN, 2017, The 
Greenlining Institute, 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 652 
Box 9.6 Inuit-led community-based adaptation approach
Community-based adaptation processes enable the local community to determine the methods and 
objectives of measures for climate change adaptation. These often involve a partnership between 
communities and institutions and build on existing local and traditional knowledge, skills, networks, 
technologies, practices, and social and cultural norms to produce adaptation measures that address the 
unique needs of local residents (Kirkby et al., n.d.). 
For example, Siku, the Inukitut word for sea ice, is a newly developed mobile application and web platform 
designed by and for Inuit. The app seeks to increase the safety of Inuit hunters from weather and climate-
related hazards, while revitalizing traditional knowledge by sharing practices in their own language (Arctic 
Elder Society, 2019).
With the loss of permafrost and melting sea ice, the safety of hunters has been a prominent concern 
for Northern communities. The app attempts to address these concerns by integrating modern weather 
forecasting, sea ice data, and satellite imagery with first-hand accounts of conditions and wildlife sightings 
using traditional place names in multiple dialects (Arctic Elder Society, 2019). This technology allows hunters 
to share changing and dangerous conditions with their communities using their own language and knowledge 
systems. For example, in one instance, a hunter marked an ice field with a warning sign on the map in the 
app, using the Inuit language to describe the condition (Tutton, 2019). Hours later, the map had been updated 
by other hunters to show that a crack had widened to the point that, if hunters had crossed it, they would have 
been unable to return (Tutton, 2019). 
The Arctic Elder Society, a charity-based organization in Sanikiluaq, Nunavut, supported the app as a way 
to increase the safety of community hunters, as well as to revitalize traditional practices and mobilize Inuit 
knowledge and dialects (Arctic Elder Society, 2019). The community-based approach empowers the hunters 
and citizens as active determinants of community well-being, while increasing social cohesion and knowledge 
of language and cultural practices. This app is a unique project that highlights the right to self-determination 
of Indigenous communities and draws on the strengths of a community to address climate change 
challenges in an innovative and culturally relevant manner. 

Engaging with community members who are at higher risk of climate change impacts on health can also 
enhance existing strategies for climate change adaptation. In a project to better address equity in its climate 
change adaptation work, the City of Vancouver partnered with a non-profit organization, Evergreen, to conduct 
engagement activities among populations whose “voices are not often heard in public decision making on 
climate change” (FCM, 2021). In total, more than 500 community members participated in the engagement 
process, and 21 key stakeholders from community service organizations were interviewed. Engagement 
activities were tailored to meet specific socio-cultural needs and interests of particular population groups 
(e.g., activities were offered in five different languages), designed to reflect the populations’ interests and 
activities (e.g., a senior walking group was engaged in an urban forest walk, where their observations 
of climate change and coping behaviours during extreme heat were collected) and held at familiar, safe 
locations (Evergreen, 2020; FCM, 2021). By sharing their lived experiences, community members provided 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 653 
significant information on the current climate change and health challenges they face, specifically in relation 
to extreme heat and air quality. Feedback on the effectiveness of existing adaptation measures and strategies 
was collected, along with particular needs related to cooling centres, climate change education and awareness, 
transportation, and access to water. As a result, recommendations for enhanced and additional adaptation 
measures were developed, and will be incorporated into the city’s adaptation strategy (Evergreen, 2020). 
A number of frameworks provide guidance and promising practices for inclusive and equitable community 
engagement for planning for climate change resilience and adaptation, including: 
•	
Community-Based Adaptation to Climate-Related Health Impacts Framework (Ebi & Semenza, 2008)
•	
Making Equity Real in Climate Adaptation and Community Resilience Policies and Programs: A 
Guidebook (The Greenlining Institute, 2019)
•	
Equitable, Community-Driven Climate Preparedness Planning Framework (USDN, 2017)
•	
Community-Driven Climate Resilience Planning Framework (Movement Strategy Centre, 2015)
•	
Working Better Together: Collaborating with Inuit on Climate Actions in Inuit Nunangat: A 
Framework for Governmental and Non-Governmental Bodies (ITK, 2019)
To appropriately increase the representation and participation of groups that have often been excluded from 
developing and shaping climate change and health adaptation measures, it is important for decision making 
organizations and actors to recognize, acknowledge, and remove barriers to participation (such as financial 
burdens, travel requirements, language, child care, etc.), as well as to demonstrate sensitivity to the context 
in which engagement is taking place (Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011). Prioritizing time and resources to invest 
in relationship-building and cultivating trust is key to this process, as is creating spaces and engagement 
processes that are culturally relevant, inclusive, and safe for marginalized populations. 
Key considerations and actions that can guide decision makers as they seek to address climate change and 
health risks through community engagement and community-based approaches include the following:
•	
Engage communities and residents at the beginning of and throughout the process of climate 
change assessment and adaptation (Moser et al., 2017).
•	
Recognize the power dynamics between decision-making actors and community members, 
specifically with groups that experience discrimination (Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011; 
Hankivsky, 2014).
•	
Address and replace patterns of behaviours that perpetuate inequities, for example, dominance 
of Western science versus Indigenous knowledge(s) and uneven patterns of participation in 
decision-making processes.
•	
Work with the community to identify current priorities, concerns, challenges, and existing 
inequities (Dhamoon & Hankivsky, 2011). 
•	
Identify the level of literacy about climate change and health in the community, and tailor 
engagement activities appropriately.
•	
Acknowledge communities and marginalized members as active agents of change and determine 
community strengths and assets — avoiding victimization narratives. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 654 
•	
Listen to community members and incorporate their local knowledge and assets.
•	
Meet partners where they are and where they are coming from (Shi et al., 2016; Moser et al., 
2017); for example, conduct engagement activities and speak with residents where they are most 
comfortable, such as traditional community gathering places.
Recognizing the importance of community input into the development of climate change action plans and 
adaptation strategies, local and regional decision makers are developing innovative, community-based 
approaches to collect input. In 2012, the City of Portland, Oregon, began the process of updating its climate 
action plan. Aware that considerations for social equity were absent in prior climate change strategies, the 
City administration took intentional action to integrate equity in every stage of the process and ensured that 
the plan featured an equity lens (Williams-Rajee & Evans, 2016). An Equity Working Group was created, made 
up of six CBOs that represented low income populations and racialized communities. Funding was provided 
to these CBOs to support participation in the working group. The Equity Working Group collaborated with the 
Climate Action Plan Steering Committee to finalize an equity considerations framework, which staff used 
to assess every action proposed in the draft climate action plan. The Equity Working Group then reviewed 
the updated plan to ensure its input had been incorporated effectively. An Equity Implementation Guide was 
also developed by the Equity Working Group as a companion piece to the final 2015 Climate Action Plan, and 
the guide included an implementation approach and further recommendations for incorporating equity into 
climate change actions (Williams-Rajee & Evans, 2016). 
The outcomes of adaptation measures are borne by individuals and organizations at the local level, which 
may foster the perception that adaptation actions are the sole responsibility of local decision makers (Pelling 
& Garschagen, 2019). However, it is important that health equity aspects of adaptation are considered at all 
scales of decision making, given that national, provincial, and territorial policies, standards, and regulations, 
such as land-use planning, building codes, taxation, financial incentives, environmental regulation, and related 
measures influence local conditions and livelihoods and affect many important determinants of health  
(Pelling & Garschagen, 2019). 
In addition to working with a broad range of community members and organizations, stakeholders in and 
outside of the health sector should be engaged in planning for climate change and health adaptation. Climate 
change impacts and conditions that affect determinants of health cross multiple sectors and do not fall 
neatly into defined jurisdictions and mandates, making it difficult to allocate responsibility to one particular 
sector (Friel, 2019). To maximize the opportunity adaptation measures offer to strengthen determinants of 
health and address drivers of health inequity, collaboration, across a range of disciplines (science, social 
sciences, humanities, etc.) and sectors is key (CSDH, 2008; Friel, 2019). 
9.5.4 Evaluating Adaptation Measures for Health Equity
The complex interactions among determinants of health, current and projected health inequities, and climate 
change adaptation measures makes it challenging to assess the immediate and long-term effects of climate 
change interventions on human health and health equity (Boeckmann & Zeeb, 2016). Given the urgency of 
climate change, particularly in relation to effects on the severity and frequency of extreme weather events, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 655 
decision makers must often design and implement adaptation actions in the absence of this information. 
Evaluating adaptation measures for their effectiveness in protecting health, including the promotion of health 
equity, can provide important information about their benefits and identify where modifications may be necessary. 
Frameworks that specifically evaluate the impact of climate change adaptation actions on health equity are 
limited, and few have been evaluated or implemented in practice. Nevertheless, they may be useful in guiding 
public health authorities in their efforts to prepare for climate change impacts. For example, Boeckmann and 
Zeeb’s (2016) framework assesses the effectiveness of an adaptation measure by evaluating its effect on 
seven domains of health determinants (e.g., infrastructure, social, economic, community, environmental) 
(Figure 9.4). Indicators and guiding questions related to access to information, cultural values, health 
services, and civic engagement, are provided to assist users in conceptualizing the positive and negative 
implications of their adaptation measures. 
Figure 9.4 Domain-driven theoretical framework to evaluate adaptation based on justice concerns. Source: 
Boeckmann & Zeeb, 2016.
Recognizing the difficulties associated with attributing health outcomes with specific adaptation 
measures in many cases, this framework highlights the linkages between adaptation and the broader 
social domains associated with determinants of health (Boeckmann & Zeeb, 2016). This provides a much 
broader conceptualization of how adaptation measures fit into various social contexts and can advance 
understanding of possible short- and long-term impacts of adaptation measures on health equity as well 
as related concepts of environmental justice. The framework indicators and guiding questions could be 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 656 
applied in V&As conducted by health authorities to evaluate health adaptation strategies as well as measures 
implemented in other sectors that may have direct and/or indirect impacts on human health. Given that a 
variety of actors are involved in each of the seven domains, the framework also promotes a multisectoral 
approach to adaptation development and evaluation. The practical use of the framework depends on the 
data available (Boeckmann & Zeeb, 2016); however, collaboration among practitioners, academia, and other 
stakeholders can facilitate acquisition of needed research and data.
As noted previously, the HEIA tool (MOHLTC, 2012), and GBA+ tool (Government of Canada, 2019b), although 
not designed specifically in the context of climate change, could be useful for considering health equity in 
climate change actions when applied to V&A processes and adaptation actions. The Equity Assessment Tool 
(Race Forward, 2018) can also be applied to climate change and health activities; it proved to be effective in 
identifying opportunities to enhance racial equity in planning and community-engagement activities in a pilot 
project in Seattle, Washington, based on an extreme heat scenario (Equity Matters, 2015).
9.6 Knowledge Gaps 
In Canada, many knowledge gaps exist about the current impact of climate change on health equity, and how 
this might be exacerbated with future warming. There is increasing recognition that health equity must guide 
adaptation plans; however, there are limited Canadian examples and resources to assist public health actors 
in these activities, and specific examples of health adaptation measures that promote health equity are 
sparse. In many cases, advancing the research and knowledge in this field will require collaboration across 
different levels of government (from local to national scale), sectors, and disciplines. Important knowledge 
needs include: 
•	
Enhanced understanding of how the status of determinants of health and multiple existing 
health inequities can influence current and future climate change and health vulnerability in 
Canada. This includes:
•	
Increased analysis of upstream drivers of inequities, including social, cultural, economic, and 
political structures and systems, and how these interact with climate change to create and 
exacerbate differential health risks and impacts.
•	
Enhanced understanding of how determinants of health and other identity factors individually 
influence vulnerability to climate change impacts on health, and the compounding effect they 
may have when taken together. For example, sex-based differences are often identified when 
examining climate change impacts on particular populations, but analysis of vulnerability as 
a result of gender is rare (Bunce & Ford, 2015). 
•	
Enhanced data collection, including sex-, race-, and gender-disaggregated data, as well as other 
demographic data (e.g., socio-economic status) is required to better analyze how various identity 
factors and existing inequities intersect to shape climate change vulnerability. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 657 
•	
As the understanding of the multidimensional nature of vulnerability evolves, new frameworks and 
tools for assessing individual and community health impacts of climate change that account for 
multiple, simultaneous drivers of vulnerability are required. They should include methods to capture 
information on the broader social, cultural, political, and economic conditions and systems that 
construct inequities, and allow for analysis of how these may further compound vulnerability.
•	
In Canada, there is very little understanding of the relationship between the geographic 
distribution of populations disproportionately affected by climate change, and health 
system capacity. For example, studies that analyze health system capacity relative to where 
disproportionately affected populations live is needed to better inform V&As and develop effective 
adaptation strategies. 
•	
The gap between theoretical approaches (e.g., intersectionality) and practice should be bridged to 
enhance knowledge of how to better account for and integrate health equity considerations into 
climate change and health activities, such as V&As and adaptation plans. 
•	
Enhanced understanding of how various GHG mitigation and adaptation strategies led by the 
health sector as well as other sectors, can affect determinants of health and existing health 
inequities, in a positive or negative way, is needed (Paavola, 2017). Rigorous adaptation evaluation 
and monitoring frameworks and tools are required to better understand this relationship.
•	
 Enhanced guidance and examples of cross-jurisdictional, cross-discipline, and multisectoral 
adaptation measures to protect health and promote health equity are needed.
9.7 Conclusion
This chapter explores the linkages among climate change, determinants of health, and health equity, with a 
particular focus on the dimensions of health equity in climate change vulnerability and adaptation. The drivers 
of climate change and of health inequities are very similar. Large systems, such as transportation, energy, 
and food systems, are significant sources of GHG emissions, but also shape living and working conditions 
and influence other determinants of health (Rudolph et al., 2018). The status of determinants of health can 
mediate the impacts of climate change on health and has a significant effect on vulnerability to such impacts 
and on the ability to adapt. Evidence suggests that climate change impacts can result in new health inequities 
in Canada, and increase existing ones. This is being observed now and is expected to continue in the future in 
the absence of future adaptations that address inequities. 
As understanding of vulnerability continues to evolve, an intersectional approach to conducting V&As and 
adaptation development can capture the complexities of the intersecting drivers of vulnerability and the 
heterogeneous nature of disproportionately affected populations. Greater application of intersectional 
approaches and practices in climate change and health research will provide learnings that public health 
officials can use in their efforts to plan for climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 658 
Given the variation in the status of determinants of health, and thus climate change vulnerability, the 
efficacy of adaptation and response measures to health risks related to climate will vary across individuals, 
communities, and regions. The outcomes of adaptation actions are not always equitable and can 
inadvertently increase health inequities, further reducing adaptive capacity. 
Disadvantaged and marginalized populations commonly experience disproportionate climate change impacts 
on health and often have limited ability to cope or adapt. Thus, it is important that public health actors 
consider health equity in their climate change and health actions. To date, the degree to which health equity 
has been integrated and promoted in climate change and health activities, both globally, and in Canada, 
has been limited. While key knowledge gaps remain, opportunities exist to better account for and integrate 
considerations of health equity into V&As, and adaptation actions to ensure equitable outcomes. Asset 
mapping, vulnerability mapping, and health equity frameworks can complement V&A processes. Enhanced 
community engagement, multisectoral collaboration, and evaluating adaptation measures for impacts on 
health equity can ensure needs are met and outcomes are equitable. 
Climate change adaptation and mitigation measures can be leveraged to address systemic drivers of health 
inequities and other social injustices, which can increase positive health outcomes, social cohesion, and 
resilience to climate change (Rudolph et al., 2018; Kreslake, 2019). Broad multisectoral collaboration and 
cooperation on policy development are needed to advance this work. Public health actors and decision makers 
from all sectors and disciplinary fields have an important opportunity to protect Canadians from climate change 
impacts while concurrently redressing existing inequities and strengthening determinants of health.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 659 
9.8 References 
Adaptation Clearinghouse. (2011). Guide to equitable, 
community-driven climate preparedness planning. Retrieved from 
<https://www.adaptationclearinghouse.org/resources/guide-to-
equitable-community-driven-climate-preparedness-planning.html>
Adger, W.N., Brooks, N., Kelly, M., Bentham, G., Agnew, M., 
& Eriksen, S. (2004). New indicators of vulnerability and 
adaptive capacity. Tyndall Centre Working Paper. Norwich, 
United Kingdom: Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research. 
Retrieved from <https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.112.2300&rep=rep1&type=pdf>
Arctic Elder Society. (2019). The Indigenous Knowledge Social 
Network. SIKU. Retrieved from <https://siku.org/>
Arora-Jonsson, S. (2011). Virtue and vulnerability: Discourses 
on women, gender and climate change. Global Environmental 
Change, 21(2), 744-751. 
Auger, N., Fraser, W.D., Smargiassi, A., & Kosatsky, T. (2015). 
Ambient Heat and Sudden Infant Death: A Case-Crossover 
Study Spanning 30 Years in Montreal, Canada. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 123(7), 712–716. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1307960>
Auger, N., Naimi, A., Smargiassi, A., Lo, E., & Kosatsky, T. (2014). 
Extreme heat and risk of early delivery among preterm and 
term pregnancies. Epidemiology, 25(3), 344-350. doi: 10.1097/
EDE.0000000000000074.
Bank of Canada. (2021). Financial System Review – 2021. 
Retrieved from <https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2021/05/
financial-system-review-2021/#v6> 
Bekkar, B., Pacheco, S., Basu, R., & DeNicola, N. (2020). 
Association of Air Pollution and Heat Exposure With Preterm 
Birth, Low Birth Weight, and Stillbirth in the US: A Systematic 
Review. JAMA Network Open, 3(6), e208243. doi:10.1001/
jamanetworkopen.2020.8243
Benmarhnia, T., Alexander, S., Price, K., Smargiassi, N.K., & 
Kaufman, J.S. (2017). The heterogeneity of vulnerability in public 
health: a heat wave action plan as a case study. Critical Public 
Health, 28(5), 619-625. doi:10.1080/09581596.2017.1322176. 
Bennett, J. (2015). Housing innovations in Nunatsiavut. Canadian 
Geographic. Retrieved from <https://www.canadiangeographic.
ca/article/housing-innovations-nunatsiavut> 
Bennett, C.M., & Friel, S. (2014). Impacts of climate change on 
inequities in child health. Children, 1(3), 461-473. doi: 10.3390/
children1030461
Bennett, H., & King, P. (2018). Pro-equity climate change and 
environmental sustainability action by district health boards 
in Aotearoa/New Zealand. New Zealand Medical Journal, 
131(1481), 56-63.
Berry, P., Clarke, K.L., Fleury, M.D., & Parker, S. (2014a). Human 
health. In F.J. Warren, & D.S. Lemmen (Eds), Canada in a 
changing climate: sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation 
(pp. 191-232). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. 
Berry, P., Enright, P.M., Shumake-Guillemot, J., Prats, E.V., & 
Campbell-Lendrum, D. (2018). Assessing health vulnerabilities 
and adaptation to climate change: A review of international 
progress. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(12), 2626. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15122626> 
Berry, P., McBean, G., & Seguin, J. (2008). Vulnerabilities to 
natural hazards and extreme weather. In J. Seguin (Ed), Human 
Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment of 
Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity (pp. 43-112). Ottawa, ON: 
Health Canada. 
Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Buse, C. (2014b). Assessment of 
Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Climate Change in 
Middlesex-London. Middlesex-London Health Unit. 
Boeckmann, M., & Zeeb, H. (2014). Using a social justice 
and health framework to assess European climate change 
adaptation strategies. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 11(12), 12389-12411. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph111212389> 
Boeckmann, M., & Zeeb, H. (2016). Justice and equity 
implications of climate change adaptation: A theoretical 
evaluation framework. Healthcare, 4(65). doi:10.3390/
healthcare4030065
Booth, G.L., Luo, J., Park, A.L., Feig, D.S., Moineddin, R., & Ray, 
J.G. (2017). Influence of environmental temperature on risk 
of gestational diabetes. CMAJ : Canadian Medical Association 
Journal = Journal de l’Association Medicale Canadienne, 189(19), 
E682–E689. <https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.160839> 
Building Resilient Neighbourhoods (BRN). (n.d.). Retrieved from 
<https://resilientneighbourhoods.ca/> 
Bunce, A., & Ford, J. (2015). How is adaptation, resilience, and 
vulnerability research engaging with gender? Environmental 
Research Letters, 10(12), 123003. doi:10.1088/1748-
9326/10/12/123003
Bunce, A., Ford, J., Harper, S., & Edge, V. (2016). Vulnerability 
and adaptive capacity of Inuit women to climate change: A case 
study from Iqaluit, Nunavut. Natural Hazards, 83(3), 1419–1441. 
Retrieved from: <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11069-016-2398-6>
Buse C. G. (2018). Why should public health agencies across 
Canada conduct climate change and health vulnerability 
assessments? Canadian Journal of Public Health = Revue 
Canadienne de Sante Publique, 109(5-6), 782–785. <https://doi.
org/10.17269/s41997-018-0118-6>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 660 
Buse, C.G., & Patrick, R. (2020). Climate change glossary for 
public health practice: from vulnerability to climate justice. 
Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 74(10), 1-5. 
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019/>
Bustinza, R., Lebel, G., & Dubé, M. (2016). Evaluation of the 
performance of extreme heat warnings issued by the SUPREME 
system in Quebec from 2010 to 2016. Institut National de Santé 
Publique du Québec. Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/
sites/default/files/publications/2291_evaluation_performance_
avertissement_chaleur_supreme.pdf>
California Building Resilience Against Climate Effects 
(CalBRACE). (2018). Climate Change and Health Vulnerability 
Indicators for California. Sacramento, CA: California Department 
of Public Health. 
Canadian Energy Regulator (CER). (2020). Market snapshot: 
Fuel poverty across Canada – lower energy efficiency in 
lower income households. Retrieved from <https://www.
cer-rec.gc.ca/nrg/ntgrtd/mrkt/snpsht/2017/08-05flpvrt-eng.
html?=undefined&wbdisable=false>
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). (2008). 
Reducing Gaps in Health: A Focus on Socio- Economic Status in 
Urban Canada, Canadian Population Health Initiative. Retrived 
from <https://secure.cihi.ca/free_products/Reducing_Gaps_in_
Health_Report_EN_081009.pdf>
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). (2018). In 
Pursuit of Health Equity: Defining Stratifiers for Measuring Health 
Inequality. A Focus on Age, Sex, Gender, Income, Education and 
Geographic Location. Retrieved from <https://www.cihi.ca/sites/
default/files/document/defining-stratifiers-measuring-health-
inequalities-2018-en-web.pdf>
Canadian Medical Association (CMA). (n.d.). CMA Position 
Statement: Ensuring Equitable Access to Care. Retrieved from 
<https://www.cma.ca/sites/default/files/2018-11/PD14-04-e.pdf> 
Canadian Public Health Association (CPHA). (2015). 
Global Change and Public Health: Addressing the Ecological 
Determinants of Health. Retrieved from <https://www.cpha.ca/
sites/default/files/assets/policy/edh-discussion_e.pdf>
Chakraborty, L., Rus, H., Henstra, D., Thistlethwaite, J., & 
Scott, D. (2020). A place-based socioeconomic status index: 
Measuring social vulnerability to flood hazards in the context 
of environmental justice. International Journal of Disaster 
Risk Reduction, 43, 101394. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ijdrr.2019.101394>
Chartered Professional Accountants Canada (CPA). (2017). 
Income inequality in Canada: The urban gap. Retrieved from 
<https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/the-cpa-profession/about-
cpa-canada/key-activities/public-policy-government-relations/
economic-policy-research/income-inequality-canada>
Chief Public Health Officer (CPHO). (2019). Addressing Stigma: 
Towards a More Inclusive Health System. Government of Canada. 
Retrieved from: <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-
aspc/documents/corporate/publications/chief-public-health-
officer-reports-state-public-health-canada/addressing-stigma-
what-we-heard/stigma-eng.pdf>
City of Vancouver. (n.d.). Resilient Neighbourhoods Program. 
Retrieved from: <https://vancouver.ca/people-programs/
resilient-neighbourhoods-program.aspx>
Cleveland, C.J., Ashmore, J., Barnhart, A., Dudley, T., Lillie, M., 
Zhang, A., Lusk, K., Plastrik, P., & Cleveland, J. (2020). Climate 
of Crisis: How Cities Can Use Climate Action to Close the Equity 
Gap, Drive Economic Recovery, and Improve Public Health. 
Boston, MA: Boston University Institute for Sustainable Energy, 
Boston University Initiative on Cities, Innovation Network 
for Communities. Retrieved from <https://www.bu.edu/ise/
files/2020/09/climate-of-crisis-september-2020.pdf>
Colussi, M.M. (2000). The Community Resilience Manual 
– A Resource for Rural Recovery & Renewal. Canadian 
Centre for Community Renewal. Retrieved from <https://
communityrenewal.ca/sites/all/files/resource/P200_0.pdf> 
Commission on Social Determinants of Health (CSDH). 
(2008). Closing the gap in a generation. Health equity through 
action on the social determinants of health. Retrieved from 
<https://www.who.int/social_determinants/final_report/csdh_
finalreport_2008.pdf>
Commission of the Pan American Health Organization on Equity 
and Health Inequities in the Americas. (2019). Health Equity and 
Dignified Lives-Report of the Commission of the Pan American 
Health Organization on Equity and Health Inequalities in the 
Americas. Washington, DC: Pan American Health Organization. 
Retrieved from <https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/51571>
Conway, T., & Scott, J.L. (2020). Urban Forests in a 
Changing Climate. The Greenbelt Foundation. Retrieved 
from <https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/greenbelt/
pages/14604/attachments/original/1600457503/
UrbanForestsChangingClimate_REPORT_E-ver_REV.
pdf?1600457503>
CREW. (n.d.). Resilient Ville Canada. Retrieved from <http://www.
crewtoronto.ca/resilientville/>
Dahlgren, G., & Whitehead, M. (1991). Policies and Strategies to 
Promote Social Equity in Health. Stockholm, Sweden: Institute 
for Future Studies. Retrieved from <http://eurohealthnet.eu/
sites/eurohealthnet.eu/files/publications/DETERMINE-Final-
Publication-Story.pdf> 
Deas, M., Grannis, J., Hoverter, S., & DeWeese, J. (2017). 
Opportunities for Equitable Adaptation in Cities: A Workshop 
Summary Report. Georgetown Climate Center. Retrieved 
from <http://www.georgetownclimate.org/files/report/GCC-
Opportunities_for_Equitable_Adaptation-Feb_2017.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 661 
Dhamoon, R.K., & Hankivsky, O. (2011). Why the Theory and 
Practice of Intersectionality Matter to Health Research and 
Policy. In O. Hankivsky (Ed), Health Inequities in Canada: 
Intersectional Frameworks and Practices (pp. 16-50). Vancouver, 
BC: UBC Press. Retrieved from <https://www.ubcpress.ca/
asset/9407/1/9780774819756.pdf>
Dominey-Howes, D., Gorman-Murray, A., & McKinnon, S. 
(2014). Queering disasters: on the need to account for LGBTI 
experiences in natural disaster contexts. Gender, Place & 
Culture, 21(7), 905-918. <https://doi.org/10.1080/096636
9X.2013.802673>
Dowsley, M., Gearheard, S., Johnson, N., & Inksetter, J. 
(2010). Should we turn the tent? Inuit women and climate 
change. Études Inuit Studies, 34(1), 151–165. <https://doi.
org/10.7202/045409ar> 
Dolyle, H. (2017). Public health unit survey 2016: Climate change 
and health. Presentation to TOPHC. 
Drolet, J. L., & Sampson, T. (2017). Addressing climate change 
from a social development approach: Small cities and rural 
communities’ adaptation and response to climate change in 
British Columbia, Canada. International Social Work, 60(1), 61-73. 
doi: 10.1177/0020872814539984 
Ebi, K. L. (2009). Facilitating climate justice through community-
based adaptation in the health sector. Environmental Justice, 
2(4), 191-195. <https://doi.org/10.1089/env.2009.0031> 
Ebi, K. L. (2020). Mechanisms, policies, and tools to promote 
health equity and effective governance of the health risks 
of climate change; Journal of Public Health Policy, 41,11-
13. doi:10.1057/s41271-019-00212-2. 
Ebi, K. L., Anderson, V., Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Yusa, A. (2016). 
Ontario Climate Change and Health Vulnerability and Adaptation 
Assessment Guidelines. Retrieved from <http://www.health.
gov.on.ca/en/common/ministry/publications/reports/climate_
change_toolkit/climate_change_toolkit.pdf>
Ebi, K. L., Fawcett, S. B., Spiegel, J., & Tovalin, H. (2016). Carbon 
pollution increases health inequities: lessons in resilience from 
the most vulnerable. Revista Panamericana de Salud Publica = 
Pan American journal of public health, 40(3), 181–185.
Ebi, K. L., & Hess, J. J. (2020). Health Risks Due To Climate 
Change: Inequity In Causes And Consequences. Health Affairs 
(Project Hope), 39(12), 2056–2062.
Ebi, K.L., Hess, J.J., & Watkiss, P. (2017). Health Risks and 
Costs of Climate Variability and Change. In C.N. Mock, R. 
Nugent, O. Kobusingye, & K.R. Smith (Eds.), Injury Prevention 
and Environmental Health, 3rd edition. Washington, DC: The 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development & The 
World Bank. doi: 10.1596/978-1-4648-0522-6_ch8
Ebi, K. L., & Semenza, J. C. (2008). Community-based 
adaptation to the health impacts of climate change. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(5), 501-507. doi: 10.1016/j.
amepre.2008.08.018.
English, P. M., Richardson, R., Morello-Frosch, M., Pastor, 
J., Said, G., King, W., … & Jerrett., M. (2013). Racial and 
Income Disparities in Relation to a Proposed Climate Change 
Vulnerability Screening Method for California. The International 
Journal of Climate Change: Impacts and Responses, 4(2), 1–18.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2008). Urban Heat 
Island Basics. In Reducing Urban Heat Islands: Compendium 
of Strategies. Retrieved from <https://www.epa.gov/sites/
production/files/2017-05/documents/reducing_urban_heat_
islands_ch_1.pdf>
Equity Matters. (2015). Extreme heat scenario-based pilot 
project in frontline communities- Community-driven planning 
process- Racial equity mini evaluation. City of Seattle. Retrieved 
from <https://www.usdn.org/uploads/cms/documents/heat_
sceanrio_racial_equity_evaluation_mini-report_-_final.pdf>
Evergreen. (2020). Climate Risks- Engaging Vulnerable Populations. 
Retrieved from <https://www.evergreen.ca/downloads/pdfs/
Evergreen_Climate_Risks_Report_2020_FINAL.pdf>
Federation of Canadian Municipalities (FCM). (2021). Climate 
Change Adaptation through an Equity Lens. Retrieved from 
<https://fcm.ca/en/resources/mcip/climate-change-adaptation-
through-equity-lens>
First Nations Food, Nutrition and Environment Study (FNFNES). 
(2019). Summary of key findings for eight Assembly of First 
Nations regions 2008-2018. Retrieved from <http://www.fnfnes.
ca/docs/FNFNES_Report_Summary_2020-05-27_FINAL.pdf>
Ford, J. D., Pearce, T., Gilligan, J., Smit, B., & Oakes, J. (2008). 
Climate change and hazards associated with ice use in northern 
Canada. Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research, 40(4), 647–659. 
Retrieved from <https://doi.org/10.1657/1523-0430(07-040)
[FORD]2.0.CO;2> 
Foster, S., Leichenko, R., Nguyen, K. H., Blake, R., Kunreuther, 
H., Madajewicz, M., Petkova, E. P., Zimmerman, R., Corbin-
Mark, C., Yeampierre, E., Tovar, A., Herrera, C., & Ravenborg, D. 
(2019). New York City Panel on Climate Change 2019 Report 
Chapter 6: Community-Based Assessments of Adaptation and 
Equity. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1439(1), 
126–173. <https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.14009> 
Friel, S. (2019). Climate Change and the People’s Health (N. 
Krieger, Ed). Oxford University Press. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 662 
Gamble, J.L., Balbus, J., Berger, M., Bouye, K., Campbell, V., 
Chief, K., … & Wolkin, A.F. (2016). Populations of Concern. In A.J. 
Balbus, J.L. Gamble, C.B. Beard, J.E. Bell, D. Dodgen, R.J. Eisen, 
N. Fann, M.D. Hawkins, S.C. Herring, L. Jantarasami, D.M. Mills, 
S. Saha, M.C. Sarofim, J. Trtanj, & L. Ziska (Eds), The Impacts 
of Climate Change on Human Health in the United States: A 
Scientific Assessment. U.S. Global Change Research Program. 
Retrieved from <https://s3.amazonaws.com/climatehealth2016/
low/ClimateHealth2016_09_Populations_small.pdf> 
Georgetown Climate Center. (2020). Equitable Adaptation 
Legal and Policy Toolkit. Retrieved from <https://www.
georgetownclimate.org/adaptation/toolkits/equitable-
adaptation-toolkit/introduction.html>
Gibson, B.E., & Mykitiuk, R. (2012). Health Care Access and 
Support for Disabled Women in Canada: Falling Short of the 
UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities: A 
Qualitative Study. Women’s Health Issues, 22(1), e111-e118. 
Godley, J. (2018). Everyday discrimination in Canada: Prevalence 
and patterns. Canadian Journal of Sociology 43(2), 111-142. 
<https://doi.org/10.29173/cjs29346>
Goodman, A., Fleming, K., Markwick, N., Morrison, T., 
Lagimodiere, L., Kerr, T., & Western Aboriginal Harm Reduction 
Society. (2017). “They treated me like crap and I know it was 
because I was Native”: The healthcare experiences of Aboriginal 
peoples living in Vancouver’s inner city. Social Science & 
Medicine, 178, 87-94. 
Gorman-Murray, A., McKinnon, S., Dominey-Howes, D., Nash, 
C.J., & Bolton, R. (2018). Listening and Learning: Giving Voice to 
Trans Experiences of Disasters. Gender, Place & Culture, 25(2), 
166–87. <https://doi.org/10.1080/0966369X.2017.1334632>
Gosselin, P., Bustinza, R., Jeffers, S., Gachon, P., Bussières, 
L., Gosselin, D., Martin, P., & Labrecque, S. (2018). Supreme: 
An Integrated Heat Health Warning System for Quebec. In J. 
Shumake-Guillemot, & L. Fernandez-Montoya (Eds.), Climate 
Services for Health: Improving Public Health Decision-making in a 
New Climate. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization & 
World Meteorological Organization. Retrieved from <http://www.
ghhin.org/assets/case_study_pdf/WHO-WMO_Case_Phase_3_
Ch5k.pdf>
Gould, S., & Rudolph, L. (2015). Challenges and opportunities 
for advancing work on climate change and public health. 
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 12(12), 15649-15672. doi:10.3390/ijerph121215010 
Gouvernement du Québec. (2019). Vague de chaleur été 2018 à 
Montréal: enquête épidémiologique. Montréal, QC. Retrieved from 
<https://santemontreal.qc.ca/professionnels/drsp/publications/
publication-description/publication/2162/> 
Government of Canada. (2019a). Social determinants of health 
and health inequalities. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/
en/public-health/services/health-promotion/population-health/
what-determines-health.html>
Government of Canada. (2019b). What is GBA+? Retrieved from 
<https://cfc-swc.gc.ca/gba-acs/index-en.html>
Government of Canada. (2020). Ending long-term drinking water 
advisories. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/eng/1506
514143353/1533317130660>
Grambsch, A., & Menne, B. (2003). Adaptation and adaptive 
capacity in the public health context. In A.J. McMichael, D.H. 
Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalan, K.L. Ebi, A. Githeko, J.D. 
Scherage, & A. Woodward (Eds.), Climate change and human 
health: Risks and responses (pp. 1–17). Geneva, Switzerland: 
World Health Organization. Retrieved from <https://www.who.
int/globalchange/publications/climatechangechap11.pdf?ua=1>
Greene, C.S., Robinson, P.J., & Millward, A.A. (2018). Canopy 
of advantage: Who benefits most from city trees? Journal 
of Environmental Management, 208(15), 24-35. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2017.12.015>
Greenwood, M.L., & de Leeuw, S. N. (2012). Social determinants 
of health and the future well-being of Aboriginal children in 
Canada. Paediatrics & Child Health, 17(7), 381–384.
Greenwood, M.L, de Leeuw, S., & Lindsay, N. (2018). Challenges 
in health equity for Indigenous peoples in Canada. The Lancet, 
391(10131), 1645-1648. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-
6736(18)30177-6>
Hallegatte, S., Bangalore, M., Bonzanigo, L., Fay, M., Kane, T., 
Narloch, U., Rozenberg, J., Treguer, D., & Vogt-Schilb, A. (2016). 
Shock Waves: Managing the Impacts of Climate Change on 
Poverty. Climate Change and Development. Washington, DC: 
World Bank. Retrieved from <https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/handle/10986/22787>
Hallegatte, S., & Rozenberg, J. (2017). Climate change through a 
poverty lens. Nature Climate Change, 7(4), 250–256. <https://doi.
org/10.1038/nclimate3253>
Halseth, R., & Murdock, L. (2020). Supporting Indigenous self-
determination in health: Lessons learned from a review of best 
practices in health governance in Canada and internationally. 
Prince George, BC: National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous 
Health. Retrieved from <https://www.nccih.ca/Publications/
Lists/Publications/Attachments/317/Ind-Self-Determine-
Halseth-Murdoch-EN-web-2020-12-02.pdf>
Hancock, T. (2015). Population health promotion 2.0: An eco-
social approach to public health in the Anthropocene. Canadian 
Journal of Public Health = Revue Canadienne de Sante 
Publique, 106(4), e252–e255. <https://doi.org/10.17269/
cjph.106.5161> 
Hankivsky, O. (2014). Intersectionality 101. Institute for 
Intersectionality and Research and Policy, SFU. Retrieved from 
<http://vawforum-cwr.ca/sites/default/files/attachments/
intersectionallity_101.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 663 
Hankivsky, O., & Mussell, L. (2018). Gender-Based Analysis 
Plus in Canada: Problems and Possibilities of Integrating 
Intersectionality. Canadian Public Policy, 44(4), 303-316. 
He, S., Kosatsky, T., Smargiassi, A., Bilodeau-Bertrand, M., & 
Auger, N. (2018). Heat and pregnancy-related emergencies: 
Risk of placental abruption during hot weather. Environment 
International, 111, 295–300. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2017.11.004>
Health Canada. (2005). Climate change: Preparing for the 
health impacts. Retrieved from <https://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/sr-sr/
alt_formats/hpb-dgps/pdf/pubs/hpr-rps/bull/2005-climat/2005-
climat-eng.pdf>
Health Canada. (2012). Heat Alert and Response Systems to 
Protect Health: Best Practices Guidebook. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/migration/
hc-sc/ewh-semt/alt_formats/pdf/pubs/climat/response-
intervention/response-intervention-eng.pdf>
Health Canada. (2020). Reducing Urban Heat Islands to 
Protect Health in Canada: An Introduction for Public Health 
Professionals. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.
canada.ca/content/dam/hc-sc/documents/services/health/
publications/healthy-living/reducing-urban-heat-islands-protect-
health-canada/Reducing-Urban-Heat-EN.pdf> 
Helldén, D., Andersson, C., Nilsson, M., Ebi, K. L., Friberg, P., & 
Alfvén, T. (2021). Climate change and child health: a scoping 
review and an expanded conceptual framework. The Lancet. 
Planetary Health, 5(3), e164–e175. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2542-5196(20)30274-6>
Hsu, A., Sheriff, G., Chakraborty, T. et al. Disproportionate 
exposure to urban heat island intensity across major US cities. 
Nat Commun 12, 2721 (2021). <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-
021-22799-5>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2019). Community 
Voices on Climate Change and Health Adaptation in Northern 
Canada. Government of Canada. Retrieved from <http://www.
climatetelling.info/uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/19-012-climate-
change-c2-ang.pdf>
Institut National de Santé Publique du Québec (INSPQ). 
(2020). Surveillance and Prevention of the Impacts of Extreme 
Meteorological Events on Public Health System (SUPREME). 
Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/en/post-disaster-
mental-health-impacts-surveillance-toolkit/surveillance-
systems/surveillance-and-prevention-impacts-extreme-
meteorological-events-public-health-system-supreme> 
Institut National de Santé Publique du Québec (INSPQ). 
(2021). Géo portail de santé publique. Retrieved from <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/en/post-disaster-mental-health-impacts-
surveillance-toolkit/statistical-dissemination-portals/geo-
portail-sante-publique>
Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami (ITK). (2019). National Inuit Climate 
Change Strategy. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.itk.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/ITK_Climate-Change-Strategy_
English.pdf> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007). AR4 
Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report 
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (M.L. Parry, 
O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, C.E. Hanson, 
Eds). Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA: 
Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Summary for policymakers. In Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. 
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, 
K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. 
Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, & L.L. White (Eds.), 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part 
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, 
USA: Cambridge University Press.
Islam, S.N., & Winkel, J. (2017). Climate change and social 
inequality. New York, NY: United Nations, Department of 
Economic and Social Affairs. Retrieved from <https://www.
un.org/esa/desa/papers/2017/wp152_2017.pdf> 
Kaijser, A., & Kronsell, A. (2014). Climate change through the 
lens of intersectionality. Environmental Politics, 23(3), 417-433. 
doi:10.1080/09644016.2013.835203
Kirkby, P., Williams, C., & Huq, S. (n.d.). A brief overview of 
Community-Based Adaptation. International Centre for Climate 
Change and Development (ICCCAD). Retrieved from <http://
icccad.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/A-brief-overview-of-
Community-Based-Adaptation.pdf>
Kreslake, J.M. (2019). Perceived importance of climate change 
adaptation and mitigation according to social and medical 
factors among residents of impacted communities in the United 
States. Health Equity, 3(1), 124-133. doi:10.1089/heq.2019.0002 
Kuehn, L., & McCormick, S. (2017). Heat Exposure and Maternal 
Health in the Face of Climate Change. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(8), 853. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14080853> 
Kumar, N. (2018). Cities, Climate Change & Health 
Equity. Wellesley Institute. Retrieved from <https://www.
wellesleyinstitute.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Cities-
Climate-Change-Health-Equity-WIJune-2018-fv.pdf>
Levy, B.S., & Patz, J.A. (2015). Climate change, human rights, 
and social justice. Annals of Global Health, 81(3), 310-321. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 664 
Lynn, K., MacKendrick, K., & Donoghue, E.M. (2011). Social 
vulnerability and climate change: Synthesis of literature. Portland, 
OR: US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific 
Northwest Research Station. Retrieved from <https://www.
fs.fed.us/pnw/pubs/pnw_gtr838.pdf>
Mazur, L., Milanes, C., Randles, K., Siegel, D., & the Integrated 
Risk Assessment Branch, Office of Environmental Health Hazard 
Assessment (OEHHA). (2010). Indicators of Climate Change 
in California: Environmental Justice Impacts. Sacramento, CA: 
California Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved from 
<https://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/climate-change/
document/climatechangeej123110.pdf>
McMichael, A.J., Campbell-Lendrum, D.H., Corvalan, C.F., Ebi, 
K.L., Githeko, A.K., Scheraga, J.D., & Woodward, A. (2003). 
Climate change and human health: Risks and responses. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization. Retrieved from <https://
www.who.int/globalchange/publications/climchange.pdf>
Mikkonen, J., & Raphael, D. (2010). Social Determinants 
of Health: The Canadian Facts. York University School of 
Health Policy and Management. Retrieved from <https://
thecanadianfacts.org/The_Canadian_Facts.pdf> 
Morrison, K. (2017). Leveraging the Benefits of Green Space 
for Environmental and Public Health Benefits. Retrieved from 
<https://practisingecohealth.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/
Casebook-Final.pdf>
Moser, S.C., Coffee, J., & Seville, A. (2017). Rising to the 
Challenge, Together: A Review and Critical Assessment of the 
State of the US Climate Adaptation Field. Retrieved from <https://
kresge.org/sites/default/files/library/rising_to_the_challenge_
together_linked_0.pdf>
Movement Strategy Centre (MSC). (2015). Community-driven 
climate resilience planning: a framework. Retrieved from<https://
movementstrategy.org/b/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/MSC-
Community_Driven_Climate_Resilience_Planning.pdf>
Munro, A., Boyce, T., & Marmot, M. (2020). Sustainable Health 
Equity: Achieving A Net-Zero UK. London, United Kingdom: 
Institute of Health Equity. Retrieved from <http://www.
instituteofhealthequity.org/resources-reports/sustainable-
health-equity-achieving-a-net-zero-uk/main-report.pdf>
Muzumdar, P. (2020). Centring equity in emerging public heath 
responses to climate change. National Collaborating Centre for 
Determinants of Health. Retrieved from <https://nccdh.ca/blog/
entry/centring-equity-in-emerging-public-health-responses-to-
climate-change#Reference%2037>
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 
(2017). Communities in Action: Pathways to Health Equity (J.N. 
Weinstein, A. Geller, Y. Nagussie, & A. Baciu, Eds.). Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press. Retrieved from <https://
www.nap.edu/read/24624/chapter/1> 
National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health (NCCAH). 
(2013). An Overview of Aboriginal Health in Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://www.ccnsa-nccah.ca/docs/context/FS-
OverviewAbororiginalHealth-EN.pdf>
National Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health 
(NCCDH). (2013). A guide to community engagement frameworks 
for action on the social determinants of health and health equity. 
Retrieved from <https://nccdh.ca/resources/entry/a-guide-to-
community-engagement-frameworks> 
National Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health 
(NCCDH) & National Collaborating Centre for Healthy Public 
Policy (NCCPP). (2016). Public Health Speaks: Intersectionality 
and Health Equity. Antigonish, NS and Montreal, QC. Retrieved 
from <https://nccdh.ca/images/uploads/comments/
Intersectionality_And_Health_Equity_EN_Mar24.pdf>
National Collaborating Centre for Indigenous Health 
(NCCIH). (2019). Access to Health Services as a Social 
Determinant of First Nations, Inuit and Metis Health. Retrieved 
from <https://www.nccih.ca/docs/determinants/FS-
AccessHealthServicesSDOH-2019-EN.pdf>
National Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health. 
(2021). Climate change resilience part 2: Public health roles and 
actions. Antigonish (NS): NCCDH, St. Francis Xavier University. 
Nussbaum, M.C. (2011). Creating capabilities: the human 
development approach. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Oickle, D. (2020). Community engagement: A public health 
strategy to inform action on health inequities. National 
Collaborating Centre for Determinants of Health. Retrieved from 
<https://nccdh.ca/blog/entry/community-engagement-a-public-
health-strategy-to-inform-action-on-health-in> 
Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (MOHLTC). 
(2012). Health Equity Impact Assessment (HEIA) Workbook. 
Retrieved from <http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/
heia/docs/workbook.pdf>
Paavola, J. (2017). Health impacts of climate change and health 
and social inequalities in the UK. Environmental Health, 16(1), 
113. doi:10.1186/s12940-017-0328-z
Pan - Canadian Health Inequalities Data Tool, 2017 Edition. A 
joint initiative of the Public Health Agency of Canada, the Pan 
- Canadian Public Health Network, Statistics Canada, and the 
Canadian Institute of Health Information.
Pelling, M., & Garschagen, M. (2019). Put equity first in climate 
adaptation. Nature, 569(7756), 327-329. 
PlanH. (n.d.). Climate action and public health. Victoria, BC: BC 
Healthy Communities Society. Retrieved from <https://planh.ca/
take-action/healthy-environments/natural-environments/page/
climate-action-public-health>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 665 
Preet, R., Nilsson, M., Schumann, B., & Evengård, B. (2010). The 
gender perspective in climate change and global health. Global 
Health Action, 3(1). <https://doi.org/10.3402/gha.v3i0.5720>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2008). The Chief 
Public Health Officer’s Report on the State of Public Health in 
Canada, 2008. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.
ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/migration/phac-aspc/cphorsphc-
respcacsp/2008/fr-rc/pdf/CPHO-Report-e.pdf>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2017). Designing 
Healthy Living: The Chief Public Health Officer’s Report on the 
State of Public Health in Canada 2017. Retireved from <https://
www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/documents/services/
publications/chief-public-health-officer-reports-state-public-
health-canada/2017-designing-healthy-living/PHAC_CPHO-
2017_Report_E.pdf> 
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2018). Key Health 
Inequalities in Canada: A National Portrait, Pan-Canadian Public 
Health Network. Retreived from <https://www.canada.ca/
content/dam/phac-aspc/documents/services/publications/
science-research/key-health-inequalities-canada-national-
portrait-executive-summary/key_health_inequalities_full_report-
eng.pdf<
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2019). Addressing 
Stigma: Towards a More Inclusive Health System. Ottawa, ON. 
Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-
aspc/documents/corporate/publications/chief-public-health-
officer-reports-state-public-health-canada/addressing-stigma-
what-we-heard/stigma-eng.pdf>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2020). Social 
Determinants and Inequities in Health for Black Canadians: A 
Snapshot, Pan-Canadian Public Health Network. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/documents/
services/health-promotion/population-health/what-determines-
health/social-determinants-inequities-black-canadians-
snapshot/health-inequities-black-canadians.pdf>
Public Health Alliance of Southern California (PHASC). (2018). 
The California Healthy Places. California Healthy Places Index. 
Retrieved from <https://healthyplacesindex.org/>
Queensland Health. (2001). Social Determinants of Health: The 
Role of Population Health Queensland, Summary Document. 
Queensland, Australia: Queensland Government. Retrieved from 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20120506050300/http://www.
health.qld.gov.au/ph/documents/hpu/24310.pdf>	
 
Race Forward. (2018). Equity Assessment Tool Zero Cities 
Project. Retrieved from <https://www.usdn.org/uploads/cms/
documents/equity_assessment_tool_-zero_cities_project_-_race_
forward_2019.pdf> 
Raker, E.J., Arcaya, M.C., Lowe, S.R., Zacher, M., Rhodes, J., & 
Waters, M.C. (2020). Mitigating health disparities after natural 
disasters: Lessons from the RISK project. Health Affairs, 39(12), 
2128-2135. <https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.01161>
Ratelle, M., & Paquette, F. (2019). Indigenous peoples in Canada 
show how social cohesion is key to resilience. Global Center 
on Adaptation. Retrieved from <https://gca.org/solutions/
indigenous-peoples-in-canada-show-how-social-cohesion-is-key-
to-resilience?utm_sq=g9jvsmn5a4>
Raval, A., Chen, T., & Shah, P. (2019). Mapping Resilience: A 
Blueprint for Thriving in the Face of Climate Disasters. Asian 
Pacific Environmental Network. Retrieved from <https://apen4ej.
org/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/APEN-Mapping_Resilience-
Executive_Summary.pdf>
Reading, C.L., & Wien, F. (2009). Health inequalities and social 
determinants of Aboriginal peoples’ health. Prince George, 
BC: National Collaborating Centre for Aboriginal Health. 
Retrieved from <https://www.nccih.ca/docs/determinants/RPT-
HealthInequalities-Reading-Wien-EN.pdf>
Resurrección, B.P., Bee, B.A., Dankelman, I., Park, C.M.Y., 
Halder, M., & McMullen, C.P. (2019). Gender-transformative 
climate change adaptation: advancing social equity. Stockholm 
Environment Institute. Retrieved from <https://www.sei.org/
wp-content/uploads/2019/11/gender-transformative-climate-
change-adaptation.pdf>
Richardson, G.R.A (n.d.). Peel Region Tree Priority Planting Tool. 
Retrieved from <https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/
PDFS/17_Peel_Region.pdf>
Rinner, C., Patychuk, D., Bassil, K., Nasr, S., Gower, S., & 
Campbell, M. (2010). The role of maps in neighborhood-
level heat vulnerability assessment for the city of Toronto. 
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 37(1), 31-44. 
doi:10.1559/152304010790588089
Rudolph, L., & Gould, S. (2014). Why we need climate, health, 
and equity in all policies. NAM Perspectives. <https://doi.
org/10.31478/201412e> 
Rudolph, L., Gould, S., & Berko, J. (2015). Climate Change, 
Health, and Equity: Opportunities for Action. Oakland, CA: 
Public Health Institute. Retrieved from <http://www.phi.org/
wp-content/uploads/migration/uploads/application/files/
h7fjouo1i38v3tu427p9s9kcmhs3oxsi7tsg1fovh3yesd5hxu.pdf> 
Rudolph, L., Harrison, C., Buckley, L., & North, S. (2018). 
Climate Change, Health, and Equity: A Guide for Local Health 
Departments. Oakland, CA and Washington, D.C: Public Health 
Institute and American Public Health Association. Retrieved 
from <https://www.apha.org/-/media/files/pdf/topics/climate/
climate_health_equity.ashx?la=en&hash=14D2F64530F
1505EAE7AB16A9F9827250EAD6C79
Sahni, V., Scott, A. N., Beliveau, M., Varughese, M., Dover, D. C., & 
Talbot, J. (2016). Public health surveillance response following 
the southern Alberta floods, 2013. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health, 107(2), e142-e148.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 666 
Salamanca, F., Georgescu, M., Mahalov, A., Moustaoui, 
M., & Wang, M. (2014). Anthropogenic Heating of the 
Urban Environment due to Air Conditioning. Journal of 
Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 119(10), 5949-5965. 
doi:10.1002/2013JD021225
Salas, R. N., Knappenberger, P., & Hess, J.J. (2019). The 
Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change: Policy 
Brief for the United States of America. Lancet Countdown and 
American Public Health Association. Retrieved from <http://
www.lancetcountdownus.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/
FINAL-2020_12_02_Lancet-Countdown-Policy-Document-
USA-ENG.pdf?hsCtaTracking=3d902c23-c855-441f-ab5d-
61f4f76a2ea1%7C6d90df30-4bf7-42f3-a282-f61d5292a03e> 
Schlosberg, D., Collins, L.B., & Niemeyer, S. (2017). Adaptation 
policy and community discourse: risk, vulnerability and just 
transformation. Environmental Politics, 26(3), 413-437. doi:10.10
80/09644016.2017.1287628
Séguin, J. (Ed). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved from <https://cdn.dal.
ca/content/dam/dalhousie/pdf/faculty/science/emaychair/
Reports%20Section/Emay_HumanHealthChangClim.pdf>
Sellers, S. (2018). Climate Change and Gender in Canada: A 
Review, Women’s Environment & Development Organization. New 
York, NY: Women’s Environment and Development Organization 
(WEDO). Retrieved from <https://wedo.org/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/GGCA-CA-RP-07.pdf> 
Sellers, S., & Ebi, K.L. (2017). Climate Change and Health under 
the Shared Socioeconomic Pathway Framework. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(1), 3. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15010003>
Shared-Use Mobility Center (SUMC). (2019a). Electric and 
Equitable: Learning from the BlueLA Carsharing Pilot. Retrieved 
from <https://learn.sharedusemobilitycenter.org/wp-content/
uploads/NewFile_SUMC_04.15.19.pdf> 
Shared-Use Mobility Centre (SUMC). (2019b). BlueLA Electric 
Vehicle Carshare Pilot a success after one year – awarded $3 
million to expand to three additional disadvantaged communities 
in Los Angeles. Retrieved from <https://sharedusemobilitycenter.
org/bluela-electric-vehicle-carshare-pilot-a-success-after-
one-year-awarded-3-million-to-expand-to-three-additional-
disadvantaged-communities-in-los-angeles/>
Shi, L., Chu, E., Anguelovski, I., Aylett, A., Debats, J., Goh, K., 
Schenk, T., Seto, K.C., Dodman, D., Roberts, D., Roberts, J.T., 
& VanDeveer, S.D. (2016). Roadmap towards justice in urban 
climate adaptation research. Nature Climate Change, 6, 131-137. 
doi:10.1038/nclimate2841
Smit, B., & Wandel, J. (2006). Adaptation, adaptive capacity and 
vulnerability. Global Environmental Change, 16(3), 282-292. 
Solar, O. & Irwin, A. (2010). A conceptual framework 
for action on the social determinants of health. Social 
Determinants of Health Discussion Paper 2 (Policy and 
Practice). <https://www.who.int/sdhconference/resources/
ConceptualframeworkforactiononSDH_eng.pdf>
Statistics Canada. (2012). Household food insecurity, 2011-
2012. In Data from the 2011-2012 Canadian Community Health 
Survey. Retrieved from <http://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/services/nutrition-science-research/food-security/
household-food-security-statistics-2011-2012.html>
Statistics Canada. (2016). Household greenhouse gas emissions 
per capita, by province and territory, 2016. Retrieved from 
<https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/daily-quotidien/190123/mc-
d001-eng.htm>
Statistics Canada. (2018). Table 282-0007 Labour Force Survey 
estimates (LFS), by North American Industry Classification 
System (NAICS), sex and age group, unadjusted for seasonality. 
Retrieved from <http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/cansim/
a26?lang=eng&id=2820007> 
The Greenlining Institute. (2019). Making equity real in climate 
adaptation and community resilience policies and programs: 
a guidebook. Retrieved from <https://greenlining.org/
publications/2019/making-equity-real-in-climate-adaption-and-
community-resilience-policies-and-programs-a-guidebook/>
Toutant, S., Gosselin, P., Bélanger, D., Bustinza, R., & Rivest, S. 
(2011). An open source web application for the surveillance 
and prevention of the impacts on public health of extreme 
meteorological events: the SUPREME system. International 
Journal of Health Geographics, 10, 39. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1476-072X-10-39>
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). (n.d.). Section 
1: Asset Mapping. UCLA Center for Health Policy Research. 
Retrieved from <http://healthpolicy.ucla.edu/programs/health-
data/trainings/Documents/tw_cba20.pdf> 
University of Waterloo Survey Research Centre. (2019). Survey of 
health sector officials: A contribution to Health Canada’s climate 
change and health adaptation capacity building program and the 
national assessment technical and data analysis report. Report 
prepared for Health Canada.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS). 
(2020). Social determinants of health, Office of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion. Retrieved from <https://
www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/social-
determinants-of-health> 
Urban Sustainability Directors Network (USDN). (2017). 
Guide to equitable, community-driven climate preparedness 
planning. Retrieved from <https://www.usdn.org/uploads/
cms/documents/usdn_guide_to_equitable_community-driven_
climate_preparedness-_high_res.pdf> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 667 
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (2018). The 
Adaptation Gap Report 2018. Nairobi, Kenya: United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP). Retrieved from <https://www.
unenvironment.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report> 
Vancouver Coastal Health. (2021). Community Health and 
Climate Change. Retrieved from <https://storymaps.arcgis.com/
stories/4352804ebb4b4765b7b9b25745bfce19>
Walpole, S.C., Rasanathan, K., & Campbell-Lendrum, D. (2009). 
Natural and unnatural synergies: climate change policy and 
health equity. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 87, 799-
801. doi:10.2471/BLT.09.067116
Wandel, J., Riemer, M., de Gómez, W., Klein, K., de Schutter, 
J., Randall, L., Morrison, M., Poirier, S., & Singleton, C. (2010). 
Homelessness and Global Climate Change: Are we ready? A 
report from the study on the vulnerability to global climate 
change of people experiencing homelessness in Waterloo Region. 
Waterloo, ON. doi. 10.13140/2.1.1317.7927
Watts, N., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Maiero, M., Montoya, L.F., 
& Lao, K. (2015). Strengthening Health Resilience to Climate 
Change: Technical Briefing for the World Health Organization. 
Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/climate-
change/technical-briefing---health-resilience-to-climate-change.
pdf?sfvrsn=b0772759_1&download=true>
Whitehead, M., & Dahlgren, G. (2007). Concepts and principles 
for tackling social inequities in health: Levelling up Part 1. World 
Health Organization Europe. Retrieved from <http://www.euro.
who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0010/74737/E89383.pdf>
Wilk, P., Gunz, A., Maltby, A., Ravichakaravarthy, T., Clemens, 
K.K., Lavigne, E., Lim, R., Vicedo-Cabrera, A.M. (2020). 
Extreme heat and paediatric emergency department visits in 
Southwestern Ontario. Paediatrics & Child Health, 1-5. <https://
doi.org/10.1093/pch/pxaa096>
Williams-Rajee, D., & Evans, T. (2016). Climate Action through 
Equity: The Integration of Equity in the Portland and Multnomah 
County 2015 Climate Action Plan. City of Portland. Retrieved 
from <https://www.portland.gov/sites/default/files/2019-07/
cap-equity-case-study-web29jul.pdf> 
Wipond, R., Barter, S., & Colussi, M. (2017). The Building Resilient 
Neighbourhoods Project: Four Years of Learnings 2012-2016. 
Retrieved from <http://resilientneighbourhoods.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2017/03/BRN_Four_Years_WEB.pdf>
Wolch, J.R., Byrne, J., & Newell, J.P. (2014). Urban green 
space, public health, and environmental justice: The 
challenge of making cities ‘just green enough’. Landscape 
and Urban Planning, 125, 234-244. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
landurbplan.2014.01.017> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2003). Climate Change and 
Human Health: Risks and Responses (A.J. McMichael, D.H. 
Campbell-Lendrum, C.F. Corvalán, K.L. Ebi, A.K. Githeko, J.D. 
Scheraga, & A. Woodward, Eds.). Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/
climchange.pdf> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2008). Closing the Gap 
in a Generation: Health Equity through Action on the Social 
Determinants of Health - Final Report of the Commission on 
Social Determinants of Health. Retrieved from <https://www.who.
int/social_determinants/thecommission/finalreport/en/> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2013). Protecting Health 
from Climate Change: Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. 
Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from <https://apps.who.int/
iris/bitstream/handle/10665/104200/9789241564687_eng.
pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). Strengthening Health 
Resilience to Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved 
from <https://unfccc.int/files/parties_observers/submissions_
from_observers/application/pdf/684.pdf>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). COP24: Special 
Report Health and Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland. 
Retrieved from <https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand
le/10665/276405/9789241514972-eng.pdf?ua=1> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021). Climate Change and 
Health Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. Geneva: World 
Health Organization.  
Yu, J., Castellani, K., Forysinski, K., Gustafson, P., Lu, J., 
Peterson, E., Tran, M., Yao, A., Zhao, J., & Brauer, M. (2021). 
Geospatial indicators of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive 
capacity to assess neighbourhood variation in vulnerability to 
climate change-related health hazards. Environmental Health : 
A Global Access Science Source, 20(1), 31. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12940-021-00708-z>
Yu, J., Castellani, K., Yao, A., Cawley, K., Zhao, X., Brauer, 
M. (2020). Mapping spatial patterns in vulnerability to 
climate change-related health hazards: 2020 Report. 
Vancouver, BC: University of British Columbia. Retrieved 
from <https://open.library.ubc.ca/cIRcle/collections/
facultyresearchandpublications/52383/items/1.0380851>
CHAPTER 10
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Adaptation and 
Health System 
Resilience
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 669 
Lead Author
Peter Berry, Health Canada
Contributing Authors
Paddy Enright, Health Canada and University of Waterloo
Linda Varangu, Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care 
Shanaya Singh, Health Canada
Céline Campagna, Institut national de santé publique du Québec and 
Centre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national de la recherche 
scientifique
Pierre Gosselin, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
andCentre Terre, Eau, Environnement of the Institut national de la 
recherche scientifique 
David Demers-Bouffard, Institut national de santé publique du Québec 
Denise Thomson, University of Alberta
Jérôme Ribesse, Synergie Santé Environnement
Susan Elliott, University of Waterloo
Suggested Citation
Berry, P., Enright, P., Varangu, L., Singh, S., Campagna, C., Gosselin, 
P., Demers-Bouffard, D., Thomson, D., Ribesse, J., & Elliott, S. (2022). 
Adaptation and Health System Resilience. In P. Berry & R. Schnitter 
(Eds.), Health of Canadians in a Changing Climate: Advancing our 
Knowledge for Action. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 670 
Table of Contents
Summary
672
Key Messages
672
10.1 Introduction 
674
10.2 Methods and Approach
676
10.2.1 Current Levels of Adaptation by Canadian Health Authorities
676
10.2.2 Opportunities and Barriers to Health Adaptation in Quebec 
676
10.2.3 Health Co-Benefits of Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Measures 
677
10.3 Health Adaptation to Protect Canadians
677
10.3.1 Health Adaptation Actors
677
10.3.2 Health Adaptation Process
678
10.3.3 Health Adaptation Challenges and Opportunities
685
Box 10.1 Preventive adaptation to keep children safe from climate hazards in playgrounds
689
10.3.4 Effectiveness of Health Adaptation
690
Box 10.2 Improving the climate resilience of Texas Medical Centre 
690
10.3.5 Status of Health Adaptation
692
10.3.5.1 Adaptation by Regional and Local Canadian Health Authorities
698
Box 10.3 Health adaptation in Arviat, Nunavut 
700
Box 10.4 Climate change toolkit for Canadian health professionals 
701
10.3.5.2 Health in Climate Change Plans and Strategies
702
10.3.5.3 Learning from the Quebec Experience
708
10.3.5.4 Individual-Level Health Adaptation
709
10.4 Health System Vulnerability and Resilience to Climate Change Impacts
711
10.4.1 Health System Vulnerability
711
10.4.2 Economic Impacts of Climate Change Effects on Health and Health Systems
721
Box 10.5 Impacts of the 2017 and 2018 wildfires on health systems in British Columbia
723
10.5 Climate-Resilient Health Systems
723
Box 10.6 Health care facility resilience to climate change: Nanaimo Regional General Hospital 
in British Columbia
729
10.6 Health Co-Benefits of Adaptation and GHG Mitigation Measures
730
Box 10.7 Decision support tool to transform the built environment for healthier communities
731
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 671 
Box 10.8 Reducing GHGs and increasing climate resilience at the University Health Network
734
10.7 Knowledge Gaps
736
10.8 Conclusion
739
10.8.1 Scaling Up Health Adaptation 
739
10.8.2 Indigenous Leadership and Collaboration
740
10.8.3 Working with Other Sectors
740
10.8.4 A National Health Adaptation Strategy
740
10.9 References 
742
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 672 
Summary
Changes in climate are affecting the health of Canadians and their health systems. Recent floods, wildfires, 
extreme heat events, and severe storms have had impacts on health facilities and disrupted care to those in 
need. Adaptation measures such as assessments of risks and vulnerabilities, integrated surveillance and warning 
systems, health professional training, and public education can help prepare Canadians and build the climate 
resilience of health systems. Well-designed efforts to adapt to climate change impacts and reduce greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions within and outside of the health sector can result in very large and near-term co-benefits to 
health. Many health authorities in Canada are increasing adaptation efforts. However, disparities in efforts exist 
across the country and adaptation needs to be rapidly scaled up to protect health as Canada continues to warm. 
Key Messages
•	
The effects of climate change on health and on health systems in Canada are already evident and will 
worsen if existing vulnerabilities are not addressed and if gaps in health adaptation are not closed.
•	
Efforts to adapt to climate change — focusing on its health impacts — can significantly reduce 
current and future impacts on individual Canadians, communities, and health systems.
•	
Climate change impacts on health pose significant economic costs to Canadians, and these costs 
will increase in the future unless Canada adapts effectively. 
•	
Canadian health authorities are undertaking a range of measures to adapt to climate change but are 
still lagging in many climate change and health actions to respond to the growing risks to Canadians. 
•	
Many health authorities are not considering key drivers of vulnerability for specific population 
groups and therefore may not be addressing important aspects of adaptation for people 
disproportionately affected, such as First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, racialized populations, 
seniors, women, and those of lower socio-economic status.
•	
Individual Canadians need to increase preparedness for climate change impacts. Many still need to 
take necessary measures to protect themselves and their loved ones from growing risks to health. 
•	
Health authorities must take measures to increase the climate resilience of health systems. This 
means ensuring they remain operational when threatened by hazards and sustainable over the 
longer term, which is one of the most effective ways to protect human health and well-being from 
the impacts of climate change. Adaptation measures must be scaled up rapidly and substantially 
if current and future health impacts are to be reduced. 
•	
Protecting Canadians from climate change requires a commitment to Indigenous leadership and 
partnership in research and adaptation efforts, including engaging with Indigenous Peoples in a 
meaningful way and recognizing and using Indigenous knowledge in a respectful way. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 673 
•	
Major co-benefits to human health can be achieved when decision makers in other sectors (such 
as water, transportation, energy, housing, urban design, agriculture, conservation) promote health 
and health equity through the design and implementation of actions to adapt to climate change 
and mitigate GHGs.
•	
Strong measures to reduce GHGs are needed to protect Canadians, their communities, and their 
health systems from climate change. The health sector can show leadership in reducing its 
carbon footprint and improving environmental sustainability, while building resilience to future 
climate change impacts.
 
Climate resilience of health systems functions. Source: WHO, 2022, Working paper on measuring climate 
resilience of health systems.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 674 
10.1 Introduction 
Recent scientific research has identified potentially more severe impacts of climate change on societies, 
including on human health and health systems, at more modest increases in global mean temperatures 
(Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018; Ebi et al., 2019). These findings, along with the goal of “enhancing adaptive 
capacity, strengthening resilience and reducing vulnerability to climate change” in the Paris Agreement 
(UNFCCC, 2015, p. 9), have increased recognition among health sector officials of the importance of 
adaptation measures to prepare for the health impacts of climate change. 
Haines and Ebi (2019, p. 271) suggest that, “Climate change is causing injuries, illnesses, and deaths, with 
the risks projected to increase substantially with additional climate change, threatening the health of many 
millions of people if there are not rapid increases in investments in adaptation and mitigation.” Growing 
threats to the health of Canadians from current climate variability and future climate change, as documented 
in other chapters of this assessment, require health authorities and individual Canadians to proactively 
prepare for the impacts.
Adaptation measures that get ahead of the curve of increasing climate impacts on ecosystems, 
infrastructure, communities, and health systems will need to move beyond incremental approaches to adopt 
transformative changes. Transformational adaptation directly addresses drivers of risks, including underlying 
vulnerability factors, and contributes to adaptive capacity, and resilience while enhancing social equity and 
gender empowerment (Crump et al., 2019). The term resilience is used in this chapter to refer to “the capacity 
of social, economic, and environmental systems to cope with a hazardous event or trend or disturbance, 
responding or reorganizing in ways that maintain their essential function, identity, and structure, while also 
maintaining the capacity for adaptation, learning, and transformation” (IPCC, 2014, p. 5). Effective action to 
protect health also requires health authorities and their partners to rapidly bring proven interventions to scale 
(Ebi, 2016; Patz & Thomson, 2018).
Previous science assessments increased knowledge of how weather, climate, and the health of Canadians are 
inter-related; how risks might be expected to increase as the climate continues to rapidly warm and become 
more variable; and what actions are needed to protect populations. They also highlighted that the resilience of 
health systems and the willingness of decision makers to take needed adaptive actions will largely determine 
whether and how much future climate change disrupts communities and affects health and quality of life 
(Berry, 2008). 
Specific findings related to the adaptation process and measures being implemented by individual Canadians 
and health systems included the following (Berry, 2008; Berry et al., 2014a):
•	
Roles and responsibilities for health adaptation in Canada have been identified in some areas.
•	
Many adaptation actions are being taken by health authorities at all levels of government and by 
voluntary organizations, including some examples of mainstreaming climate change information 
into current programs and policies.
•	
There are significant gaps in knowledge of the effectiveness of adaptations.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 675 
•	
Gaps in existing adaptation efforts and abilities to cope with risks, combined with widespread 
exposure to climate-related hazards, indicate significant vulnerability to the health impacts of 
climate change.
•	
Health systems in Indigenous communities are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and 
there are significant challenges in the capacity to adapt and protect health.1 
•	
Projected health, demographic, and climate trends suggest vulnerability will continue to increase.
•	
Without ramped-up efforts to adapt, health and social services will come under increasing 
pressure from climate change impacts, such as extreme weather events and disasters.
•	
There are significant opportunities to adapt, stemming from from health officials’ growing 
interest and awareness of threats from climate change, new tools to develop needed measures, 
and individual Canadians’ ability to shift their behaviour and architectural practices to adjust to 
changing climate conditions.
•	
If land-use planning, infrastructure development, emergency preparedness, environmental 
management, transportation planning and climate adaptation activities fail to incorporate human 
health considerations, Canadians will become more vulnerable to climate change impacts on 
health. 
•	
Climate change impacts may exceed the thresholds of current health and related systems (e.g., 
surge capacity, infrastructure design), which were designed based on assumptions of a stable 
climate that are now decades old. 
•	
The increasing probability of cumulative and/or irreversible impacts means there may be limits to 
adaptation and the ability to protect individuals and communities from some impacts on health.
•	
Health authorities at all levels of government need to make tailored adaptation efforts due to 
differences in demographic and health trends, resources and expertise, health care and social 
service delivery, infrastructure, and community design.
•	
Many health and emergency management authorities must mobilize around and proactively plan 
for climate change impacts. Leadership and multi-sectoral actions on the issue are needed to 
make strides in preparing Canadians.
This chapter reviews the development of knowledge since 2012 to build on these findings. It examines 
current impacts of climate variability and change on health systems in Canada and the state of health 
adaptation by health authorities and individual Canadians. Opportunities to increase the resilience of 
individuals, communities, and health systems, as well as challenges to such efforts, are examined to support 
health officials’ efforts to prepare for future impacts. Analysis draws upon findings and recommendations 
from previous national assessments and other sources, to explore whether progress is being made in 
preparing for the impacts of climate change on health in Canada.
1	
The term Indigenous is used in this chapter to refer collectively to the original inhabitants of Canada and their 
descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as defined under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 
1982. Wherever possible, clear distinctions are made between these three distinct, constitutionally recognized 
groups. However, some generalizations are made, depending on the number and nature of citations used (e.g., 
Indigenous Peoples reflects more than one Indigenous group being referenced) and in instances where there may be 
shared experiences.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 676 
10.2 Methods and Approach
A number of research projects were commissioned for development of this chapter, including studies on:
•	
current levels of adaptation by Canadian health authorities;
•	
opportunities and barriers to health adaptation in Quebec; and
•	
health co-benefits of greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation measures.
10.2.1 Current Levels of Adaptation by Canadian Health Authorities
An online survey of the status of Canadian health authorities’ actions to prevent, respond to, and adapt to 
the impacts of climate change and the adaptive capacity and vulnerability of health systems in Canada was 
conducted in both official languages. The survey examined which climate risks health authorities addressed 
most frequently, populations considered to be at highest risk, and current adaptation activities. In total, 219 
participants representing local to national health authorities across Canada were invited to complete the 
online survey. Online survey data collection took place from January 17 to March 13, 2019 (eight weeks). A 
total of 80 surveys were completed with the following breakdown: Atlantic provinces 7; Quebec 11; Ontario 34; 
Prairie provinces 13; British Columbia and the territories 15. 
10.2.2 Opportunities and Barriers to Health Adaptation in Quebec 
Given that the province of Quebec has developed the earliest and most extensive climate change and health 
program in Canada, this study examined the level of adaptation to climate change in the Quebec health sector 
to understand factors that can influence the integration of the climate change dimension, mainly adaptation, 
in these organizations. To determine the factors that may have influenced climate change adaptation in 
Quebec’s health sector, a literature review and interviews with representatives of the health community 
were conducted. The literature review, conducted in May 2019, identified the factors that facilitate or hinder the 
implementation of climate change adaptation actions by public institutions, and the results were used as the basis 
for the interview questions. This was an exploratory review of the literature, since the quality assessment and 
methodological rigour of the selected studies were not in sufficient depth to qualify as systematic. The EBSCOhost 
by Web of Science and Google Scholar search engines were used for the research.
Interviews were conducted between July 2019 and November 2019. Participants in the study represented 
regions across the province and a variety of health-sector functions related to climate change. In total, 
49 people were interviewed, including 25 officials from 16 of Quebec’s 18 health regions. The majority of 
individuals work in environmental health, but others working in occupational health, infectious diseases, 
health promotion, monitoring, construction, and civil safety were also interviewed. Seven officials from 
the Institut national de santé publique du Québec (INSPQ) and seven from the Ministère de la Santé et des 
Services sociaux (MSSS) were also interviewed, as were two people from Ministère de l’Environnement et 
de la Lutte aux changements climatiques. A total of eight officials from Centres intégrés de santé et des 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 677 
services sociaux (CISSS) and Centres intégrés universitaires de santé et des services sociaux (CIUSSS) also 
participated in the study. 
10.2.3 Health Co-Benefits of Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Measures 
This study examined evidence of health co-benefits or risks from GHG mitigation technologies, with a focus 
on Canada. Background information on the current knowledge of health co-benefits or risks was obtained 
through a literature review. Articles identified were then reviewed by title and abstract, based on established 
inclusion criteria. Papers had to discuss known climate change mitigation technologies or policies; how 
they reduce or mitigate GHGs, short-lived climate pollutants, or air pollution; and at least one corresponding 
human health co-benefit and/or associated co-risk. Peer-reviewed journal articles, reports, and books were 
included. Review articles were excluded from the analysis but were used for background information for the 
literature review. The structured review of literature was done from July to October 2018 and was conducted 
using the electronic databases EMBASE, MEDLINE, and Global Health. 
10.3 Health Adaptation to Protect Canadians
10.3.1 Health Adaptation Actors
Measures to help people prepare for the impacts of climate change can significantly reduce health risks 
as the climate continues to change (Smith et al., 2014; Campbell-Lendrum et al., 2015; Ebi et al., 2018a; 
WHO, 2018c; Haines & Ebi, 2019). By and large, the risks to health presented by climate change are not new; 
public health authorities have years of experience and evidence-based learnings about measures to address 
the health effects of air and water pollution, contaminated food, vector-borne diseases, ozone depletion, 
and extreme weather events (e.g., extreme heat events, floods, droughts, wildfires, ice storms, hurricanes) 
(Frumkin et al., 2008; Séguin, 2008; WHO, 2013; Ebi & del Barrio, 2017). 
Preparing for the health impacts of climate change requires a wide range of actors in society to adapt at 
multiple temporal and geographic scales that take into account complex drivers and feedback mechanisms 
of the human–environment system (Crump et al., 2019). Adaptation actors include individual Canadians (all 
Canadians, but particularly people at highest risk of impacts) (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health 
Equity and Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada), health sector decision 
makers in and outside of government, health care and social services professionals (e.g., doctors, nurses, 
home care providers, social workers, pharmacists), officials in other health-related sectors (e.g., water 
systems), and researchers. Health sector adaptation includes health officials, in collaboration with those in 
other fields, taking action to understand, assess, prepare for, and help prevent the health impacts of climate 
change, particularly on the highest-risk populations. It includes designing, implementing, monitoring, and 
evaluating specific measures to reduce health risks (Ebi & Semenza, 2008) and includes broader efforts to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 678 
increase the climate resilience of health systems. Programs, policies, and measures are most effective in the 
shorter and longer term if they concomitantly address inequities and boost general population health, which 
is the foundation of climate-resilient individuals and communities. 
10.3.2 Health Adaptation Process
Adaptation planning by health authorities will often focus on efforts to reduce priority risks from specific 
climate hazards already affecting population health (e.g., development of heat alert and response systems 
[HARS]), surveillance of emerging or new vector-borne diseases, interventions to reduce health risks of 
wildfire smoke), or hazards that threaten health in the future. Health adaptation and resilience-building 
should move society beyond simple coping, which is reactive and concerned primarily with minimizing the 
immediate damage from a particular climate-related impact. Reactive coping responses often lead to greater 
vulnerability in the face of increasingly severe climate change threats. By contrast, health adaptation and 
resilience-building provide a way for health authorities to seize the opportunity climate change presents 
(Watts et al., 2018) to build more equitable and effective health systems. This may be accomplished, for 
example, by developing and implementing systems-level changes and by refining targeted actions, such as 
early warning systems, including HARS. Such actions build social capital and networks (e.g., buddy system 
to check on neighbours requiring assistance) and remove barriers to treatment and recovery during and after 
climate events for disadvantaged populations.    
Health adaptation is most effective when it is anticipatory and proactive given that the climate continues to 
change in Canada at an increasing rate creating greater risks to health, some of which may surprise, disrupt, 
and challenge health authority activities. It is also evidence-informed and future-facing, to include measures 
that protect populations from more severe projected health risks, which may occur earlier than expected. 
Iterative processes for adaptation risk management (e.g., regular climate change and health vulnerability 
and adaptation assessments, evaluation of adaptation effectiveness, Indigenous partnerships, stakeholder 
engagement) help to ensure that adaptation actions address uncertainty of timing, severity, and geographical 
extent of future climate change impacts, including the potential for non-linear risks to health (Ebi et al., 
2016a; Hess & Ebi, 2016; Ebi & del Barrio, 2017). Non-linear risks to health arise from much more severe 
climate impacts that are low probability but potentially high consequence events. The extreme heat event that 
affected northwestern United States and British Columbia in July 2021 and that is likely to have contributed to 
over 700 deaths in that province (Roffel, 2021) was estimated to be a 1 in 1000 year event (Philip et al., 2021). 
Knowledge of how health authorities undertake adaptation has increased (Lesnikowski, 2011; Paterson 
et al., 2012; Ebi & del Barrio, 2017). Effective health adaptation plans and measures are grounded in the 
following considerations:
•	
The adaptation process is instigated and energized by increased awareness and knowledge of 
climate change risks to health in a jurisdiction (Lesnikowski, 2011; Eyzaguirre & Warren, 2014).
•	
National and international health authorities and research institutions identify climate change 
as a priority and provide adequate funding to enable understanding of complex drivers of health 
outcomes across environmental, social, and human systems (Ebi et al., 2016b). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 679 
•	
Groundwork activities (e.g., capacity building, monitoring and surveillance, research) often 
precede and support concrete adaptation actions (e.g., information-sharing, infrastructure 
development, technology and innovation, management and planning, policy development, 
resource transfers and funding support) (Lesnikowski, 2011; Shah et al., 2018).
•	
Health adaptation measures are informed by scientific and/or Indigenous knowledge2 gained 
through a climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessment or other knowledge-
development activities (Shin & Ha, 2012; WHO, 2013; Berry et al., 2018; Watts et al., 2018).
•	
Health adaptation activities are developed and implemented with knowledge and consideration 
of linkages to complementary GHG mitigation measures (ACT, 2018), as there are significant 
opportunities to increase health co-benefits of actions and to reduce possible health risks (Haines et 
al., 2009; Martinez et al., 2018; Haines & Ebi, 2019).
•	
Adaptations to protect health are mainstreamed into existing policies, plans, programs, and budgets 
and are iterative and subject to regular monitoring for effectiveness and enhancement opportunities 
through adaptive management (Ebi, 2011a; WHO, 2013; Wheeler & Watts, 2018). The climate and other 
important drivers of health outcomes (e.g., health systems, demographics) will continue to change, 
resulting in uncertain futures (Sellers & Ebi, 2017).
•	
Health adaptation actions are most effective when they are undertaken to advance health system 
resilience and root causes of vulnerability, and when they consider maximizing public health and 
health equity co-benefits. They are identified through community consultations with a range of 
partners that are either highly exposed to climate hazards and/or may lack capacity to adapt. These 
populations can include First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, women, people living with disability, 
seniors, immigrants, low-income residents, minority language communities, outdoor workers, people 
exposed to environmental pollution, people with preexisting illnesses, people without access to 
insurance, public housing residents, refugees, lone-parent households, students, those experiencing 
homelessness, and young children (Gould & Rudolph, 2015; Deas et al., 2017; Dodd et al., 2018; 
NASEM, 2018).
•	
Adaptations to protect health are intentionally and specifically focused on climate change impacts 
(Dupuis & Biesbroek, 2013) and strive to reduce risks from current climate hazards as well as future 
more severe and frequent impacts, including the possibility of compounding and cascading events 
(Sellers & Ebi, 2017; Glasser, 2019). 
•	
Health authorities take a broad health systems approach to adaptation, to identify and address 
vulnerabilities existing in any and all components of health systems to make them climate-resilient to 
withstand possible impacts on health facilities (WHO, 2015; Balbus et al., 2016; Ebi et al., 2018b).
•	
Collaboration among a multitude of sectors that support and maintain the determinants of health 
(e.g., social housing, water systems managers) is required to prepare successfully for climate change 
impacts on health.  
2	
Discussion of the contribution of Indigenous knowledge toward addressing climate change risks to health is found in 
Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 680 
Figure 10.1 presents a framework that highlights the stages health decision makers go through when 
adapting to climate change risks, informed and initiated by a vulnerability and adaptation assessment for 
climate change and health. Table 10.1 proposes indicators of climate-resilient health system adaptation for 
Canada based on this framework. 
Figure 10.1 Framework for assessment and adaptation to create climate-resilient health systems.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 681 
Table 10.1 Sample indicators of climate-resilient health 
system adaptation
ADAPTATION 
PHASE
ADAPTATION 
ACTION
EXAMPLE INDICATORS3 
Awareness 
building phase
Communication 
campaigns
Uptake of climate change and health communication campaigns 
(e.g., page or video views, observable changes in behaviour, etc.)
Climate change and health information on health authority websites 
(e.g., climate change impacts to health and suggestions for 
behavioural changes that may reduce negative health outcomes)
Number of climate change and health research projects 
completed relative to peer jurisdictions with results disseminated
Media coverage of climate change and health issues
Social media engagement on climate change and health issues 
Groundwork 
adaptation 
phase
Leadership and 
partnering
Proportion of jurisdictions (e.g., communities, provinces, territories 
and/or regions) with climate change action plans that include 
measures to protect health
Proportion of jurisdictions (e.g., communities, provinces, territories 
and/or regions with climate change and health offices/focal points)
Number of key stakeholders (e.g., water authorities, community 
housing groups, assisted-living facilities, school boards, etc.) 
including climate change and health information in risk assessments 
Vulnerability 
and adaptation 
assessment
Proportion of local to national health authorities that have completed 
climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments
Proportion of local to national adaptation and mitigation policies 
with health impact assessments
3	
When possible indicators should be measurable or quantifiable, though in some cases qualitative information may be 
more meaningful to knowledge users. In all cases, indicators should reflect progress towards a meaningful objective. 
Example indicators may need to be adapted to reflect jurisdictional goals and realities.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 682 
ADAPTATION 
PHASE
ADAPTATION 
ACTION
EXAMPLE INDICATORS3 
Groundwork 
adaptation 
phase
(continued)
Integrated risk 
monitoring and 
surveillance
Proportion of local to national health authorities with integrated early 
detection tools and surveillance systems to identify changing health 
risks and impacts (for example, see Chapter 6: Infectious Diseases)
Proportion of local to national health authorities with established 
climate-informed early warning systems for extreme weather 
events and disease outbreaks (e.g., droughts, floods, zoonotic and 
vector-borne diseases)
Climate and 
health research
Coordinated national research agenda on climate change and health
Number of climate change and health research programs and 
networks 
Number of academic publications on climate change and health 
relative to peer jurisdictions
Completion of health research sex- and gender-based analysis 
training
Concrete 
adaptation 
phase
Health workforce 
training and 
education
Proportion of health professional education and training programs 
(e.g., medical school, nursing, and public health programs) with 
course offerings on climate change and health
Proportion of health professionals (e.g., doctors, nurses, 
pharmacists, public health officials) who have received climate 
change and health training
New/upgraded 
infrastructure 
and technology
Proportion of health facilities with contingency plans (e.g., surge 
capacity) for the deployment of sufficient health personnel in case 
of acute shocks
Proportion of health facilities that have reported the completion of 
a climate resilience assessment
Proportion of health facilities with climate resilience informed 
programming
Proportion of health facilities that report adaptation of new 
technologies and products to improve resilience
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 683 
ADAPTATION 
PHASE
ADAPTATION 
ACTION
EXAMPLE INDICATORS3 
Concrete 
adaptation 
phase
(continued)
Indigenous 
health systems 
and communities
Surveillance and early warning capacity for Indigenous communities
Availability of comprehensive, reliable, and culturally specific 
climate change and health indicators
Access to diagnosis and treatment for physical and mental health 
conditions, including climate-sensitive diseases
Established climate change and health focal point in regional to 
national health authorities
Community knowledge and awareness of climate change impacts 
on health
Public health work force available and trained in culturally 
appropriate climate change research, surveillance, and adaptation
Status of water and food security and sovereignty 
Resilience of health care facilities in Indigenous communities
Climate and 
health funding
Local to national funding for climate change and health research 
by issue, region, and population (e.g., Indigenous populations, 
seniors, children, immigrants)
Local to national funding for climate change and health action 
plans, strategies, and adaptation measures
Local to national funding for climate change and health organization 
capacity (e.g., office/focal point for climate change and health)
Climate-informed 
health programs, 
policies, 
standards, 
guidelines, 
regulations
Proportion of health authorities with public health programs 
addressing key climate risks and hazards using most recent 
climate projection information
Proportion of health authorities with public health programs 
addressing at-risk populations (e.g., children, seniors, immigrants) 
using the most recent climate projection information
Proportion of sectors important to health (e.g., industry, energy, 
agriculture, housing, urban design, water, transportation) 
integrating climate change and health information into adaptation 
and GHG mitigation plans, strategies, and measures
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 684 
ADAPTATION 
PHASE
ADAPTATION 
ACTION
EXAMPLE INDICATORS3 
Concrete 
adaptation 
phase
(continued)
Emergency 
preparedness 
and 
management
Proportion of local to national public health and health care 
authorities and facilities with emergency plans that address 
climate-related hazards and growing risks
Proportion of local to national strategies for disaster risk reduction 
that include consideration of risks to health from climate-related 
hazards
Management 
of social and 
environmental  
determinants of 
health
Robust local to national plans to reduce GHGs to meet agreed-
upon international targets 
Established integrated monitoring systems for analysis of 
environmental hazards and health risks from climate change
Existence and enforcement of regulatory standards on air quality, 
water quality, chemical discharges, and waste disposal and 
management
Food security rates among climate-sensitive populations
Access to services that support environmental and social 
determinants of health (e.g., access to safe water, adequate 
housing, employment, energy, and food security) among 
Indigenous populations
Identifying 
best practices, 
conceptual/
analytical tools
Number of tools developed and implemented to support health 
adaptation actions
Adaptation and 
assessment 
guidance
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation 
assessment guidance developed and disseminated for use by 
health authorities
Health 
adaptation plans
Number of climate change and health adaptation plans or 
strategies developed
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 685 
ADAPTATION 
PHASE
ADAPTATION 
ACTION
EXAMPLE INDICATORS3 
Concrete 
adaptation 
phase
(continued)
Networking and 
information- 
sharing
Number of climate change and health networking and information-
sharing mechanisms (e.g., communities of practice) being used to 
support health adaptation
Iterative risk 
management 
phase
Measuring 
and evaluating 
progress
Proportion of completed local to national climate change and 
health vulnerability and adaptation assessments that have a 
monitoring and evaluation plan
Proportion of local to national health authorities that have 
completed more than one climate change and health vulnerability 
and adaptation assessment under an ongoing schedule
Number of local to national health authorities that include climate 
change and health indicators in regular health reports to the public
Learning, 
information-
sharing, 
and course 
correction
Existence of and participation in local to national initiatives for 
information and knowledge-building on climate change and health 
(e.g., communities of practice)
Source: Lesnikowski, 2011; Watts et al., 2015; WHO, 2015; Elliot et al., 2017
10.3.3 Health Adaptation Challenges and Opportunities
Health decision makers can find adapting to climate change challenging if they do not have the required 
technologies (e.g., new vaccines, communications, data sharing), information and skills (e.g., projections of 
health risks, training of health authorities), infrastructure (e.g., climate-resilient health facilities), resources, 
and institutional arrangements (e.g., a climate change and health focal point) (Frumkin, 2011). Barriers can 
also include a lack of authority and leadership for action, a narrow framing for public health interventions that 
omits action on root causes of vulnerability, legal obstacles, and failures in collective decision making (Ford 
& King, 2015; Gould & Rudolph, 2015). Some health systems in rural, remote, and/or Indigenous communities 
are already affected by existing vulnerabilities that increase risks from climate change impacts, for example, 
higher rates of all-cause mortality, less surge capacity during emergencies, reduced access to health 
facilities, and difficulty in retaining health professionals and accessing specialized health care (DesMeules 
& Pong, 2006; Vodden & Cunsolo, 2021) (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health 
in Canada). Health systems and communities with fewer resources have greater difficulties responding to 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 686 
impacts and recovering in ways that protect the health of populations. In Canada, federal and provincial/
territorial levels of government have a key role to play in supporting preparedness activities for local health 
authorities by building capacity through information-sharing, coordination, developing and disseminating 
scientific information, and financial contributions (Austin et al., 2019). Adaptation to the effects of climate 
change will be much greater and ability to protect health will be much more limited without strong measures 
to reduce GHGs (IPCC, 2014; Wheeler & Watts, 2018). 
No population group or Canadian region should bear an unreasonable portion of the costs associated 
with the health and social impacts of climate change. Existing social inequities within a community (e.g., 
income, water insecurity, food insecurity, chronic health disparities) and/or higher rates of disease burdens 
can reduce the adaptive capacity of specific subpopulations (UNEP, 2018; Friel, 2019). Populations and 
communities that lack the capacity to plan for, respond to, and recover from climate change impacts will 
remain disproportionately affected by climate hazards (Berry et al., 2014a; Crump et al., 2019). In Canada, 
this may include rural and remote communities, Indigenous Peoples and communities, racialized populations, 
low-income populations, people with mobility challenges, people who are socially isolated, immigrants, 
renters, outdoor workers, minority language communities, seniors, and people with chronic diseases. In 
some cases, individuals may be subject to multiple, possibly intersecting, vulnerability factors. For instance, 
rural and remote residents, in addition to being more geographically exposed to some climatic hazards (e.g., 
wildfires), are more likely to be elderly, to work outdoors, to have lower average incomes, to have less internet 
access, and to have higher rates of chronic health conditions. Policies and programs to address existing 
social inequities and the root causes of vulnerability are needed to plan for climate change impacts on health 
(CICC, 2021) (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada and Chapter 9: 
Climate Change and Health Equity). 
Other challenges to adaptation can arise when efforts to address climate change impacts by decision 
makers, in or outside of the health sector, are not coordinated and well planned, leading to maladaptation — 
unintentionally increasing risks to other sectors, social groups, or systems (Austin et al., 2016) (Table 10.2). 
Insufficient information and/or limited awareness of risk trade-offs can also lead to maladaptation or to 
insufficient adaptation among individuals to protect themselves and/or their families from the health effects 
of multiple climate hazards. For example, exercising during cooler parts of the day (e.g., night) or staying 
in shady areas to reduce risks from heat may lead to greater exposure to mosquitos and ticks that carry 
vector-borne diseases (Hill, 2012). Actions to plant vegetation like trees on the south side of a home to cool 
the building may be maladaptive if the trees produce pollen and are located near the intake of the furnace 
or air conditioner. They may also be maladaptive if vegetation, including leaves and fallen branches, is not 
maintained and serves to increase the presence of combustible materials near a home or structure that 
connects to a home, such as a fence. In some contexts vegetation may also harbour disease vectors. Efforts 
to conserve energy by opening blinds to take advantage of natural light whenever possible may increase risks 
of heat illness. As well, the use of cooling facilities (e.g., community centres, pools, libraries, malls) and public 
spaces during extreme heat events to protect health may increase risks from COVID-19 if necessary physical 
distancing, hand hygiene, and related measures are not taken (Shumake-Guillemot et al., 2020). 
Maladaptation to climate change increases the risk that health decision makers will become trapped in 
a cycle of responding to and treating ever-increasing negative health outcomes in the population. Poorly 
designed or maladaptive measures may also exacerbate existing inequities, for example, if public information 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 687 
campaigns and funding are lacking (Paavola, 2017). Table 10.2 provides examples of maladaptive actions 
that can affect health. 
Table 10.2 Potential maladaptive actions in efforts to protect health 
from climate change impacts
BROAD TYPE OF MALADAPTIVE 
ACTION
POSSIBLE HEALTH SECTOR EXAMPLES
Failure to anticipate future 
climates 
Health-related infrastructure (e.g., hospitals, drinking water systems) 
built or renovated without resilience to future climates
Adaptation actions not taking 
wider impacts into account
Pollen-producing trees to reduce the urban heat island in urban areas 
GHG and air pollutant emission reductions that lead to minimal air 
quality benefits for disadvantaged neighbourhoods 
Engineered defences that preclude 
alternative approaches and are 
designed without a health equity lens
Adaptation of infrastructure in other sectors that do not maximize 
health co-benefits in short or longer term
Awaiting more information, or not 
doing so, and eventually acting 
either too early or too late
Awaiting better projections and health data to complete or use results 
from a climate change and health assessment, thereby forgoing the 
opportunity for proactive adaptation
Forgoing longer-term benefits 
in favour of immediate adaptive 
actions 
Focus on treating health outcomes and insufficient efforts to build 
healthy and climate-resilient communities (e.g., greening to reduce 
urban heat island effect)
Moral hazard
Encouraging risk taking (e.g., lack of insurance, social safety net, aid 
backup) such as moving to flood plain or urban/forest interface prone 
to wildfires 
Adopting actions that ignore 
local relationships, traditions, 
Indigenous knowledge, or property 
rights, leading to eventual failure
Development of health adaptation plans without broad consultations 
and engagement with diverse and representative populations, leading 
to actions that do not respect unique cultural needs and values (e.g., 
interventions imposed on Indigenous communities)
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 688 
BROAD TYPE OF MALADAPTIVE 
ACTION
POSSIBLE HEALTH SECTOR EXAMPLES
Adopting actions that favour one 
group over others, directly or 
indirectly, leading to breakdown 
and possible conflict
Implementation of health adaptations that are not accessible to 
low-income individuals or those experiencing homelessness (e.g., 
no heatwave cooling centres in low-income neighbourhoods, social 
services not accessible by public transit) 
Retaining traditional responses 
that are no longer appropriate 
Failure to expand monitoring and surveillance systems to detect new, 
emerging, or exotic risks to health 
Source: Adapted from Noble et al., 2014
There are opportunities for robust adaptation through collaboration among officials in a range of sectors (e.g., 
health, water, agriculture, energy, housing, environment, conservation, planning, transport, disaster management, 
and infrastructure) on monitoring and surveillance of climate change impacts on health; identifying higher-risk 
populations; addressing barriers that limit preparedness (e.g., poverty, inadequate housing and infrastructure, 
ineffective communications); reducing uncertainty through increased research on impacts; educating the 
public and decision makers about potential impacts and the benefits of preparedness; and funding needed 
actions (Séguin, 2008; WHO, 2010; Ebi, 2011b; Frumkin, 2011; Ebi & del Barrio, 2017). For example, technical 
and operational synergies can be achieved when health authorities and disaster management officials 
collaborate to improve disaster preparedness and response, communicate risks to the public, and undertake 
risk and vulnerability assessments and health system resilience-building (Banwell et al., 2018). The Emergency 
Management Framework for Canada recognizes the linkages between climate change and emergency 
management and the benefits of multisectoral approaches to resilience-building (PSC, 2017). At the individual 
level, preparing for climate hazards and taking action to avert impending threats requires information about risks 
and effective personal protective measures, resources to take action, and a supportive social network, particularly 
for people who require assistance. 
Given increasing risks and potentially severe impacts on health, adaptation activities need to be rapidly scaled 
up outside of normal health ministry activities (Ebi, 2016). Box 10.1 provides an example of collaboration on 
adaptation among public health and infrastructure decision makers to reduce risks from climate change affecting 
children. A major benefit of collaboration among sectors on the design, implementation, and monitoring of 
adaptation and of GHG mitigation measures is that co-benefits to health from such actions can be maximized 
(e.g., improved mental health from increased social capital, reduced obesity from active infrastructure), while 
potential risks to health of the measures can be reduced (Cheng & Berry, 2013; WHO, 2018c) (see section 10.6 
Health Co-Benefits of Adaptation and GHG Mitigation Measures). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 689 
Box 10.1 Preventive adaptation to keep children safe from climate 
hazards in playgrounds
Children are at increased risk of heat illness and death because of their physiology and because of their 
dependence on caregivers. Developing safer outdoor playspaces for children with preventive measures can reduce 
health risks, particularly as the climate continues to warm and extreme heat events become more frequent. As 
part of a broader Government of Canada initiative to adapt infrastructure to the changing climate, the Standards 
Council of Canada and Health Canada partnered with the National Program for Playground Safety (NPPS) to 
develop guidance to improve the climate resilience of playgrounds. This guidance was included as an Annex in 
the Canadian Standard Association’s Children’s Playspaces and Equipment Standard (CAN/CSA-Z614-14). The 
updated standard supports practical and evidence-based options for climate mainstreaming by municipalities, 
affordable housing providers, and schools when new playgrounds are built or existing ones are renovated. The 
recommended changes in design include planting shade trees, selecting cooler materials for structures and 
surfaces, and adding water features. The guidance applies for all seasons of play, with a particular emphasis 
on keeping playgrounds cooler and comfortable for children and caregivers in the summer to help prevent 
overheating and injuries to children such as burns from metal slides.
Source: Kennedy et al., 2021 
Partnerships with Indigenous Peoples and use of Indigenous knowledge, local context, and values — and 
incorporating sex, gender, and equity considerations into decision-making — support more effective measures 
through a respectful and meaningful adaptation process. Such collaboration can increase the relevance of 
the resulting measures, build capacity, and strengthen resilience through more inclusive and dynamic climate 
change networks within communities. Community-based adaptation research in Indigenous communities can be 
conducted through team-building approaches that identify common goals, support the meaningful engagement 
of knowledge users, and continuously monitor and evaluate progress (Ford et al., 2018) (see Chapter 2: Climate 
Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). 
In recent years, the understanding of adaptation options that modify public health interventions for existing 
climate-related health hazards or address new and emerging risks, thereby building resilience to climate change 
impacts on health, has increased (Paterson et al., 2012; WHO, 2015; UNEP, 2018; ISC, 2019). Each chapter of 
this assessment provides information about adaptation measures to address specific climate change health 
concerns facing Canadians. Several tools to assess adaptation can be used to examine options for reducing risks, 
such as forecasting by analogy, screening, multi-criteria decision analysis, comparative risk assessment, benefit 
cost analysis, cost-effective analysis, and implementation analysis (WHO, 2013). However, using such tools and 
prioritizing measures to reduce health risks from climate change can be difficult if there is insufficient information 
about current and/or projected impacts on health and of the possibility of surprise or unanticipated impacts 
(Wardekker et al., 2012). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 690 
10.3.4 Effectiveness of Health Adaptation
Over the last several decades, the success of public health measures in reducing the health impacts of 
environmental hazards suggests that adaptations to address climate-related health risks can be effective 
in protecting populations. Adaptation can delay the increase in health risks from climate hazards at higher 
levels of warming (CCA, 2019; Ebi et al., 2021). Greater actions to prepare populations and health systems 
for climate change, and to reduce GHGs, would reduce the future burden of disease (Haines & Ebi, 2019). 
However, there is a paucity of information on the effectiveness of specific health adaptation measures in and 
outside of Canada, presenting a significant challenge to decision makers (Bouzid et al., 2013; Anderson et 
al., 2017). One study that reviewed the effectiveness of 56 specific interventions spanning 14 health issues 
of concern related to climate change revealed wide divergence among adaptations in terms of evidence 
(Anderson et al., 2017). Box 10.2 describes how the Texas Medical Centre undertook effective measures to 
increase its resilience to severe storms.
Box 10.2 Improving the climate resilience of Texas Medical Centre 
Texas Medical Centre (TMC) in Houston is the largest medical complex in the United States, comprising 23 
hospitals. In 2001, this medical complex experienced very severe impacts from Tropical Storm Allison, a 
historic thousand-year flood, which caused 22 deaths, cost almost 5 billion USD in damage to the county, and 
resulted in a complete power outage due to damage to emergency generators and electrical switchgear. It 
also led to more than 1000 patients being evacuated and 2 billion USD in research losses. 
After the devastation caused by Tropical Storm Allison, TMC hospitals came together to invest 50 million USD 
in measures to enhance the resilience of their facilities, including a new flood alert system, improved disaster 
mitigation planning, and creation of flood management groups. In addition, infrastructure upgrades were 
undertaken, such as installation of a new on-site combined heat and power plant to eliminate dependence 
on the city’s energy grid and elevation of power service to reduce the risk that it would be flooded. Since the 
upgrades, TMC was struck by Hurricane Rita in 2005, Hurricane Ike in 2008, and Hurricane Harvey in August 
2017. In all of these storms, the medical complex escaped the devastating impacts felt in 2001 that so 
greatly affected patients and staff. In fact, during record-breaking Hurricane Harvey, all TMC hospitals and 
emergency rooms remained operational, although the storm flooded the Houston area. 
Source: Health Care Without Harm, 2018 

More investigation has been conducted on the effectiveness of measures to reduce health risks from extreme 
heat than on health risks from other climate hazards. The scope of discussion in this chapter does not permit 
review of the effectiveness of all health adaptation measures. Information on the current state of knowledge 
on the effectiveness of measures to reduce heat-health risks is presented to highlight the importance of 
regularly evaluating actions to protect health and of integrating uncertainty into the decision-making process. 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 691 
Several studies suggest that, even with a warming climate, population susceptibility to extreme heat events 
has not been increasing, or has even been decreasing, in a number of countries (Fouillet et al., 2008; Kyselý 
& Plavcová, 2012; Schifano et al., 2012; Heudorf & Schade, 2014; Hondula et al., 2015; Arbuthnott et al., 2016; 
Barreca et al., 2016; Sheridan & Dixon, 2016). Research in regionally and economically diverse countries 
also indicates that HARS, components of which can include heat-health warning systems (McGregor et al., 
2015) and heatwave action plans (HAPs) (Casanueva, et.al., 2019; Jay et al., 2021) can reduce poor health 
outcomes associated with extreme heat events (Hess & Ebi, 2016; Anderson et al., 2017; Lee, et al., 2019). In 
2017, an estimated 47 countries had national or subnational HAPs in place (GHHIN, 2018), including Canada, 
which has HAPs in many communities and regions. 
Sheridan and Allen (2018) suggest that implementation of HARS, greater awareness of heat-health risks, and 
improved quality of life have helped reduce the health impacts of heat in the developed world. These systems 
have been shown to be protective in Europe (Matthies et al., 2008; Martinez et al., 2019), France (Fouillet et 
al., 2008), Italy (Michelozzi et al., 2006; Baccini et al., 2011; Morabito et al., 2012), India (Das & Smith, 2012; 
Hess et al., 2018), Shanghai (Tan et al., 2007), Hong Kong (Chau et la., 2009), and Milwaukee (Weisskopf et 
al., 2002). It was estimated that implementing a heat action plan in Ahmedabad, India, in 2010 avoided an 
estimated 1190 average annualized deaths in 2014–2015 (Hess et al., 2018). However, some studies argue 
that robust evidence showing that such systems have a discernable influence on health outcomes is lacking 
(Boeckmann & Rohn, 2014; de’ Donato et al., 2015; Hondula et al., 2015; Weinberger et al., 2018). Well-
designed HARS can result in significant economic savings when the costs of systems are compared with 
their economic benefits. For example, Hunt et al. (2017) calculated the benefit-to-cost ratios of alert systems 
to be 913 for Madrid, 308 for Prague, and 11 for London. 
Many existing health sector policies, programs, and measures aimed at protecting people from extreme heat 
and other climate hazards and health outcomes (e.g., air pollution, infectious diseases, water-borne diseases, 
food-borne diseases, extreme weather events) were not designed incorporating information about increasing 
risks from climate change and so will have limited effectiveness in the future, unless they are modified 
(Haines & Ebi, 2019). In fact, many HARS are not designed to address increased risks posed by a changing 
climate, such as alterations in the onset, duration, and intensity of extreme temperatures and resulting health 
outcomes (Lee et al., 2019). HARS need to be regularly reviewed and evaluated through an iterative process to 
ensure they are fully protective under new climate conditions and hazards (Health Canada, 2012; Hess & Ebi, 
2016; Lee et al., 2019). 
In Canada, researchers in Quebec reported that heat alert systems can be effective (Poitras, 2018) and that 
local and provincial HAPs reduced mortality associated with a severe heat event in 2010 (Bustinza et al., 
2013) and in 2018 (Lebel et al., 2019). Benmarhnia et al. (2016) reported that improvements to the Montréal 
HAP have decreased the number of daily deaths five-fold (see Chapter 3: Natural Hazards). In addition, efforts 
to warn the public about hazardous heat conditions and poor air quality have been found to be effective in 
getting people to take protective measures and in reducing costs to the health system (Gosselin et al., 2018; 
Mehiriz et al., 2018; Mehiriz & Gosselin, 2019). Health authorities in Toronto and Montréal reported that alert 
systems led to an increased awareness of risks to health from heat and to the uptake of health protective 
behaviours, such as drinking water, checking for alerts, wearing looser clothing, and seeking cooler locations 
(Health Canada, 2012; City of Toronto, 2019). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 692 
Additionally, preventive adaptation measures to reduce urban heat islands in Quebec (e.g., reduction of 
concrete/asphalt surfaces, increasing vegetation) were found to be effective in cooling communities and 
reducing health risks (Beaudoin & Gosselin, 2016; Health Canada, 2020d). From an economic perspective, 
the benefits of actions to reduce risks to health from extreme heat can justify implementation (Hunt et al., 
2017) and may reap large cost savings. Tröltzsch et al. (2012) estimated that, between 2071 and 2100, 
implementation of a heat alert system in Germany would result in a value of EUR 2.36 billion in avoided 
deaths and EUR 165 million in hospital savings annually. 
More research is required to better understand the effectiveness of adaptations to extreme heat events and 
to other climate hazards projected to increase in the future (Bouzid et al., 2013; Berry et al., 2014a). National 
estimates of heat-related morbidity and mortality would benefit from greater standardization of surveillance 
definitions and practices to enable comparisons among provinces. This evidence base would benefit the 
design, evaluation, and reporting of future climate change and health adaptation interventions (Hess & Ebi, 
2016). For example, Valois et al. (2017) developed a behavioural index composed of 12 adaptations to gauge 
whether individuals in urban areas are adapting well to high summer temperatures. Studies of effectiveness 
are important because current health adaptations may not reflect important changes in exposure due to 
climate change, such as the longer heat season in many regions (Ebi et al., 2016c), including Canada (Zhang 
et al., 2019). 
10.3.5 Status of Health Adaptation
At the global level, some adaptation progress has been made; for example, at least 92 countries have 
completed vulnerability and adaptation assessments for climate change and health (Berry et al., 2018). 
However, a health adaptation gap exists that increases the vulnerability of people to climate change impacts 
(Watts et al., 2015; Martinez et al., 2018; Watts et al., 2018). The World Health Organization (WHO) collects 
global data every two years on a number of indicators to gauge progress toward preparing for climate change 
impacts on health. The data are reported through the WHO/United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) Climate and Health Country Profiles (WHO, 2018a). The most recent survey, undertaken in 
2017/2018, indicated that there has been progress on climate change and health adaptation internationally, 
but that adaptation plans and strategies vary widely in terms of their scope and that implementation of 
specific actions remains a key challenge (WHO, 2019). In addition, the results of vulnerability and adaptation 
assessments for climate change and health are influencing policy decisions in health ministries in various 
countries, and many health authorities are increasing collaboration with decision makers on adaptation in 
other sectors (WHO, 2019). 
Analysis of Canada’s progress in addressing climate change risks to health, based on the WHO indicators, 
suggests that further actions are needed in some areas (Table 10.3).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 693 
Table 10.3 Canadian performance on WHO climate change and health 
resilience indicators
INDICATOR
STATUS 
IN CANADA4 
SOURCE/COMMENT
A national focal point for climate 
change has been identified in the 
Ministry of Health
Yes
The Climate Change and Innovation Bureau at 
Health Canada is the national focal point for 
climate change and health issues (Government of 
Canada, 2019).
Projects or programs on health 
adaptation to climate change have 
been implemented
Yes
Though gaps remain, Health Canada, the Public 
Health Agency of Canada, the Canadian Institutes 
for Health Research, and Indigenous Services 
Canada are undertaking a range of measures to 
reduce risks to Canadians from climate change 
associated with extreme heat events, air pollution, 
and infectious diseases, and to address special 
challenges faced by Indigenous Peoples living in 
Northern and Southern communities (Government 
of Canada, 2019; Government of Canada, 2020a). 
Numerous provinces and territories are 
undertaking climate change and health 
programming within their jurisdictions.
A national assessment of climate 
change impacts, vulnerability, and 
adaptation for health has been 
conducted
Yes
Séguin, 2008; Berry et al., 2014a
4	
Yes = completed or substantially completed; Partially = actions underway but more effort needed; No = not 
completed or started
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 694 
INDICATOR
STATUS 
IN CANADA4 
SOURCE/COMMENT
Climate information has been 
included in the Integrated Disease 
Surveillance and Response System, 
including development of early 
warning and response systems for 
climate-sensitive health risks
Partially
Early warning systems for climate change health 
risks are generally the mandate of provincial/
territorial and local health authorities. A number 
of health authorities have developed warning 
systems for extreme heat events, floods, and air 
pollution, including real-time surveillance systems 
that use data on multiple vulnerability factors. 
Understanding of climate-driven changes affecting 
infectious disease distribution in Canada are 
still emerging. However, a number of infectious 
diseases known to be climate-sensitive (e.g., Lyme 
disease) are tracked at the national level. 
Estimated costs to implement 
health resilience to climate change 
have been included in planned 
allocations from domestic funds in 
the last financial biennium
Partially 
In Canada, health is primarily the responsibility 
of provinces/territories. Many provinces and 
territories have begun work to build climate 
resilience, including through the allocation of 
financial resources. 
Federally, through Budget 2016 and Budget 2017, 
the Government of Canada committed $125 
million over 11 years to help protect the health of 
Canadians from the impacts of climate change 
and to increase the resilience of our health systems. 
These investments support needed activities such 
as research, education and capacity building. Budget 
2021 allocated $22.7 million to support First Nations 
and Inuit communities in responding to the health 
impacts of climate change.
National Communication submitted 
to UNFCCC has included health 
implications of climate change 
mitigation policies
Partially
Canada’s seventh National Communication 
(2017) recognizes the economic and social 
consequences (including on health) of measures 
to address climate change but does not provide 
detailed information or analysis in this regard 
(Government of Canada, 2017). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 695 
INDICATOR
STATUS 
IN CANADA4 
SOURCE/COMMENT
Activities to increase climate 
resilience of health infrastructure 
have been implemented
Partially
Some health authorities have begun investigating 
or requiring the assessment of the climate 
resilience of health infrastructure (BC Health 
Authorities, 2020; Lower Mainland Facilities 
Management, 2020).
A National Health Adaptation 
Strategy has been approved by the 
relevant government entity
Partially
Canada’s pan-Canadian Framework on Clean 
Growth and Climate Change includes a range 
of actions to address health risks from climate 
change (Government of Canada, 2015).
The Government of Canada has committed 
to developing a National Adaptation Strategy 
(Government of Canada, 2020b).
Actions to build institutional and 
technical capacities to work on 
climate change and health have 
been implemented
Yes
The HealthADAPT program (2019–2022) is building 
the capacity of 10 health authorities in regions 
across Canada to increase knowledge of climate 
change impacts on populations and develop needed 
adaptation actions (Health Canada, 2019).
The national strategy for climate 
change mitigation has included 
consideration of the health 
implications (risks or co-benefits) of 
climate change mitigation actions
Partially
The Government of Canada has recognized 
the need to achieve health co-benefits in the 
implementation of GHG mitigation measures 
(Government of Canada, 2020b). 
A valuation of co-benefits of health 
implications of climate mitigation 
policies has been conducted
Partially
The Government of Canada develops Regulatory 
Impact Analysis Statements for each proposed 
GHG regulation that provides information on its 
objectives and its expected costs and benefits 
(Government of Canada, 2021). Not all proposed, 
or implemented, GHG-reduction measures include 
analysis of health risks or co-benefits.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 696 
INDICATOR
STATUS 
IN CANADA4 
SOURCE/COMMENT
Estimated costs to implement 
health resilience to climate change 
have been included in planned 
allocations from international funds 
in the last financial biennium
Not applicable
Canada does not receive funds from international 
sources to implement actions to protect health 
from climate change.
Similarly, the Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change regularly tracks 41 indicators in five areas 
to gauge efforts to address climate change impacts on health globally. They include (1) climate change 
impacts, exposures, and vulnerability; (2) adaptation, planning, and resilience for health; (3) mitigation 
actions and health co-benefits; (4) finance and economics; and (5) public and political engagement (Watts et 
al., 2018). Following the methods and indicators of the Lancet Countdown, major medical organizations in 
Canada, including the Canadian Medical Association, Canadian Public Health Association, and the Canadian 
Association of Physicians for the Environment began in 2017 to report annually on actions undertaken in 
Canada (Howard et al., 2017; Howard et al., 2018). To improve Canada’s ability to tackle climate change 
specific to the health sector, recommendations include support for tele-commuting and telehealth options; 
creating curricula for all medical and health science faculties related to climate change; communicating the 
links between climate change and human health to the public; funding research on mental health impacts of 
climate change; and enhancing efforts to protect Canadians from extreme heat (Howard et al., 2017; Howard 
et al., 2018).
Two stakeholder workshops were hosted by Health Canada, including one in 2018 to discuss development 
of a pan-Canadian climate change and health surveillance system, and another in 2016, that brought 
together provincial and territorial health and environment officials, municipal health units, researchers, 
non-governmental organizations, and Indigenous partners from across Canada, to explore priority health 
issues, research gaps, and adaptation needs to prepare Canadians and health systems for climate change. 
Recommendations and needed actions from the meetings are presented below (Brettle et al., 2016; 
Knowledge Management, 2018). 
Knowledge and data
•	
Develop a pan-Canadian monitoring and surveillance system that is specific for climate change 
health outcomes and serves the needs of health authorities. 
•	
Key climate change and health indicators adopted across Canada and at specific locations that 
are consistent and standardized with procedures to identify data quality issues. 
•	
Increased data on indicators of climate change and health vulnerability, resilience benchmarks, 
and support for understanding regional vulnerabilities and risk.
•	
Climate change and health vulnerability and adaptation assessments by each province and 
territory to identify opportunities to decrease risks to health.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 697 
•	
Increased surveillance and monitoring of climate-related diseases, and evaluation of the efficacy 
of adaptation and GHG mitigation interventions.
•	
Provide data that can alert stakeholders in real or near-real time to emergencies as well as 
provide data for understanding long-term trends.
Program and policy development
•	
A national “Trees for Health” campaign (e.g., trees planted for patients and caregivers at health 
care facilities).
•	
Funding for sustainable health sector infrastructure.
•	
Guidance on standards for building codes and zoning regulations for the health sector.
•	
Actions to increase health co-benefits of GHG mitigation and adaptation efforts to address 
climate change.
Northern and Indigenous community considerations
•	
Increased actions to address the health challenges and capacity issues Northern and Indigenous 
communities face from climate change.
•	
Increased collaboration with Indigenous communities to support education efforts, communicate 
research findings, and support resilience-building.
Communication and information-sharing
•	
Collaborate on climate change and health communications with the health care community and 
non-governmental organizations.
•	
Increased public health education using evidence-based advice and targeted messaging.
•	
Incorporate information on climate change and health into educational curricula (e.g., health 
professionals).
•	
Develop a single window to provide easy access to climate change and health communication 
materials and messages.
Mechanisms for coordination and collaboration
Increase efforts by federal departments and agencies to support: 
•	
Improved preparation of communities for emergency response/disaster recovery.
•	
Improved coordination on climate change and health activities among all federal health 
departments and agencies, provincial/territorial/local health authorities, and Indigenous partners 
with needed mechanisms (e.g., climate change and health committee, regional working groups, 
monthly webinars, collaborative research projects). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 698 
•	
Establish a platform to share best practices across provinces and territories (e.g., tool for open-
sourcing plans and policies, guidance on developing adaptation options, checklists to assess 
vulnerability, economic analysis of actions).
•	
Map initiatives on climate change and health and provide funding to support needed actions.
•	
Work more closely with U.S. agencies on climate change and health, taking into consideration 
important cross-border agreements (e.g., air quality, water quality).
Progress has been made in some of these areas. For example, since 2007, Health Canada has led a heat-
health program that is providing support and guidance to local, provincial, and territorial health authorities to 
develop HARS to protect Canadians from extreme heat events. The program provides public health authorities 
with guidance on assessing heat-health vulnerabilities at the community level, and on developing heat alert 
protocols, community response plans, and communications plans. To communicate heat-health risks to 
Canadians, including to those most vulnerable to the impacts, Health Canada has developed information 
brochures, infographics, and videos (Health Canada, 2020a; Health Canada, 2020b; Health Canada, 2020c; 
Health Canada, 2021). Health Canada has also collaborated with a number of communities in Ontario 
(Windsor, Ottawa, London, and the Regions of Peel and York) and British Columbia (Vancouver) on innovative 
projects to reduce the urban heat island effect, thereby reducing people’s exposure to higher temperatures in 
urban areas. The projects helped inform development of a guide for public health officials in Canada on how 
to engage with partners to address effects of urban health islands on health (Health Canada, 2020d). 
Through the HealthADAPT program, launched in 2019, Health Canada is providing funding, information, and 
expertise to 10 local and regional health authorities across Canada to help build their capacity to understand 
climate change impacts on populations, develop needed adaptation actions, and communicate with the 
public and stakeholders on these issues. Many of the projects are examining current and future projected 
climate change impacts associated with extreme weather events, including on mental health (Health Canada, 
2019). Project results and learnings are being shared through a pan-Canadian community of practice that 
includes public health officials from all levels of government. 
Previous climate change and health assessments documented adaptation options for protecting health, roles 
and responsibilities for health adaptation, and measures being undertaken by health authorities in Canada 
(Séguin, 2008; Berry et al., 2014a). The following sections provide more detailed information on the current 
state of adaptation in Canada and describe the range of measures being taken at the regional and local level. 
10.3.5.1 Adaptation by Regional and Local Canadian Health Authorities
Efforts are underway by a number of Canadian health authorities and partners in other sectors to prepare for 
climate change impacts on health, including, for example, risks related to extreme heat (Guilbault et al., 2016), 
extreme weather (Kovacs et al., 2018), and wildfires (Kovacs et al., 2020). A survey of 80 health sector 
officials from all regions of Canada conducted in 2018–2019 included respondents from Ontario (34), Quebec 
(11), the Atlantic provinces (7), the Prairie provinces (13), British Columbia (13), and the territories (2). It 
revealed that large majorities (80% or higher) reported taking some kind of action on health risks of concern 
due to climate change that were identified in previous assessment reports. These risks of concern included 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 699 
infectious diseases, air quality, extreme heat, other extreme events, and water safety and security, water 
quality and quantity, and food safety and security. Fewer, but still about four in 10 respondents, indicated they 
are taking action on climate-related mental health risks (see Figure 10.2) (Survey Research Centre, 2019). 
Figure 10.2 Awareness and groundwork activities and actions on climate change and health undertaken by 
Canadian health authorities. Source: Data from Survey Research Centre, 2019.
Many of the activities health authorities have engaged in are awareness-building or groundwork. Just over 
half of respondents (56.3%) indicated they undertake surveillance and monitoring of the health impacts 
from hazards related to climate change. In addition, 53.8% reported undertaking climate change and health 
education and outreach with stakeholders, while just under half (47.5%) have done so with the public. In 
addition, 35% have undertaken a vulnerability and adaptation assessment for climate change and health, 
while fewer have undertaken an assessment of the vulnerability of their organization to climate change 
impacts (25%). Only 21.3% report that they have a climate change and health adaptation strategy, and 10% 
have a climate change and health research plan (Survey Research Centre, 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 700 
Box 10.3 Health adaptation in Arviat, Nunavut 
In Nunavut, climate change has been identified as a major threat to food security and people in this region already 
experience challenges in accessing nutritious foods (see Chapter 8: Food Safety and Security). A community 
research program in Arviat, Nunavut, identified climate change threats to hunting, sharing, and consuming country 
foods and impacts on individual and community well-being, including on culture and identity. Researchers explored 
options to increase access to healthy foods through local production, including introducing a community organic 
composting program to improve local soil quality and establishing a research greenhouse to assess the viability 
of commercial food production. Subsequent research on the greenhouse focused on enhancing the capacity of 
community youth to support its ongoing operation and necessary monitoring and data collection. 
The projects were very successful and had positive impacts on the community through changes in dietary and 
cooking habits. As a result of lessons learned, the Hamlet of Arviat built two hydroponic commercial greenhouses 
(<www.greeniglu.com>). The Community Climate Change Manual5 developed by the Aqqiumavvik Arviat Wellness 
Society provides information that other communities can use to plan similar projects. It includes information on 
building partnerships, engaging youth, reaching out to community stakeholders, building capacity, establishing a 
sustainable planning process, and communications, among other topics. 
Generally, health authorities are undertaking fewer concrete climate change and health actions in response to 
growing risks to Canadians, and there is a need to quickly scale up effective measures. Only one in four health 
authorities surveyed reported having a climate change and health program or dedicated resource, and this 
dropped to one in five for those reporting increasing resources (e.g., funding, human resources) to support 
adaptation measures (Survey Research Centre, 2019). This suggests that the health programs responsible 
for protecting the health of Canadians could themselves be vulnerable to climate change impacts and that 
many health authorities still do not see this issue as a priority, or do not have the resources to address 
climate issues due to competing priorities. Just over one in three (31.3%) indicated they have integrated climate 
change requirements into organizational or corporate health standards. Interestingly, 86% of health authorities 
indicated that they consider the needs of populations at higher risk when developing adaptation strategies. Far 
fewer consider implications for Indigenous Peoples (37.3%) or the use of Indigenous knowledge and perspectives 
in such activities (25.4%). Less than one in five (17.9%) consider sex and gender implications when developing 
measures to reduce climate change risks to health (Survey Research Centre, 2019). 
Broader adaptation actions for health system readiness to prepare for climate change are not yet common 
among Canadian health authorities. For example, only 31% indicated enhancing emergency plans and 
programs to increase the resilience of the health system and associated health services to climate change 
impacts (Survey Research Centre, 2019). In addition, just under a quarter (23.8%) reported providing climate-
informed training for public health professionals, and just less than one in five (18.8%) shared information 
among health service providers to raise awareness of possible climate change impacts on staff and/or 
infrastructure, and to share examples of adaptation options being undertaken. Current levels of education and 
5	
The manual is available at <https://www.aqqiumavvik.com/climate-change> or at Arviat Goes Green <https://www.
facebook.com/Arviat-Goes-Green-359227010893368/>.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 701 
training activities among Canadian health officials are insufficient to provide them with information needed to 
proactively prepare for climate change impacts on health (Hacket et al., 2020). New information is available 
for health authorities and health professionals to use to protect high-risk populations from climate change 
impacts (see Box 10.4), for example, preparing people with spinal cord injuries for more extreme weather 
events (Shapiro et al., 2020). 
Box 10.4 Climate change toolkit for Canadian health professionals 
Developed by the Canadian Association of Physicians for the Environment and funded by Environment 
and Climate Change Canada, the Climate Change Toolkit for Health Professionals6 includes a series of 
complementary modules designed for health professionals and students in health-related fields who wish 
to explore the impacts of climate change on health-related issues. The report provides professionals and 
students with information to help them educate and advocate for programs, practices, and policies required 
to mitigate GHGs and prepare for climate change, especially as these initiatives affect their workplaces and 
communities (Perotta, 2019). The report provides evidence-based information on:
•	
global health impacts of climate change;
•	
impacts of climate change on Canadians;
•	
GHG emissions in Canada by sector and region;
•	
climate change solutions with immediate health benefits;
•	
action on climate change that can be taken at health care facilities;
•	
preparation for climate change in communities; and
•	
engagement in climate change as health professionals.
Information in the toolkit can help health professionals and students in the health care and public health 
sectors engage with patients, peers, and community partners on climate change issues. 
Important limitations of the survey study include the much higher response by health officials in certain 
regions (Ontario versus the territories and Atlantic provinces) and challenges in accurately identifying officials 
responsible for climate change and health activities in health authorities.
Another study of public health unit officials in Ontario in 2016 revealed similar results. In particular, 61% 
of respondents (representing 26 of 36 health units that participated) indicated that they are undertaking 
activities to raise awareness of climate change impacts on health or of the need to reduce GHGs. As 
well, 42% reported monitoring climate hazards such as extreme weather, but only 19% indicated they are 
6	
The toolkit can be accessed at <https://cape.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/Climate-Change-Toolkit-for-Health-
Professionals-Updated-April-2019-2.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 702 
monitoring climate change impacts on health. One-half of respondents confirmed being involved in research on 
climate change and health, with 38% indicating their health units have undertaken a climate change and health 
assessment. Similar to the national survey, but with somewhat higher proportions, 42% of health units reported 
using a health equity lens to identify, prioritize, and address climate change health risks (Doyle et al., 2017). 
Researchers in Quebec have also examined the level of climate change and health adaptation in that province 
through the Quebec Observatory for Adaptation to Climate Change. For a number of concrete adaptations 
that help prepare for climate change impacts, health officials in that province are taking more action. For 
example, 64% (nine of 14) public health departments offer training to staff on climate change and health. 
In addition, 67% have developed prevention plans to reduce risks from extreme heat and 56% have done so 
for floods. However, many public health departments are still in the stages of early adaptation, as they are just 
beginning to allocate budget specifically to adaptation and to develop collaborations with partners in and outside 
of the health sector (e.g., school boards, community organizations, Hydro Québec) (Valois et al., 2018).
Many health authorities in Canada have not sufficiently scaled up climate change and health adaptation 
efforts to protect Canadians from current climate variability and from more severe impacts. Significantly 
ramped-up efforts are needed to train health care professionals, monitor climate change impacts and the 
effectiveness of adaptation measures, prioritize adaptation with sufficient resources, educate the public and 
stakeholders, and integrate considerations and information about higher-risk populations into activities. 
10.3.5.2 Health in Climate Change Plans and Strategies
Many jurisdictions, from local to national levels, in Canada have climate change plans or strategies that 
include adaptation, and a greater number now include actions to protect human health and well-being 
(Kuchmij et al., 2020). Table 10.4 highlights that most provincial or territorial plans now include some 
reference to human health impacts. However, there is wide variation in the climate change and health 
activities by health authorities at all levels. Most Canadian provinces and territories are still in the early stages 
of adapting to the health impacts of climate change, with responses still being fragmented (Austin et al., 2016). 
Currently, few provinces and territories have comprehensive or substantive (e.g., covering a wide range of 
likely risks to health) actions to address climate change and health adaptation as part of their broader climate 
change strategies. Few jurisdictions have a separate action plan or strategy that focuses exclusively on 
climate change and health. Given that analysis in other chapters of this assessment suggest wide-ranging 
health risks and vulnerabilities in communities across Canada, the lack of comprehensive strategies, and the 
wide diversity and inconsistency of health adaptation planning among many health authorities, increase the 
vulnerability of Canadians to current and future projected impacts on health. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 703 
Table 10.4 Examples of Canadian climate change strategies, action 
plans, and reports that include human health 
JURISDICTION
STRATEGY/ACTION PLAN/
FRAMEWORK
EXAMPLES OF HEALTH 
RISKS AND/OR 
DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH 
RECENT ADAPTATION 
EXAMPLES
Yukon
Our Clean Future: A Yukon 
Strategy for Climate Change, 
Energy and Green Economy 
<https://yukon.ca/sites/yukon.
ca/files/env/env-our-clean-
future.pdf>
Permafrost melt; food 
security; cultures; 
flooding; wildfires; 
glacier melt; wildlife and 
aquatic health
Monitoring and planning 
for the health impacts 
of extreme events, 
including wildfires
Northwest 
Territories
2030 NWT Climate Change 
Strategic Framework (2018) 
<https://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/
sites/enr/files/resources/128-
climate_change_strategic_
framework_web.pdf>
Food security; air quality; 
vector-borne diseases; 
mental health
Completed a climate 
change and health 
assessment 
2030 NWT Climate Change 
Strategic Framework 2019–
2023 Action Plan (2018) 
<https://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/
sites/enr/files/resources/128-
climate_change_ap_proof.pdf>
Water quality, wildlife, 
marine life, forests
Completed emergency 
evacuation plans for 
each major territorial 
health-related facility, 
and clean air shelter 
assessments for all 
but one community to 
provide safe zones for 
extreme events such as 
wildfires
Nunavut
Upagiaqtavut: Setting the 
Course – Climate Change 
Impacts and Adaptation in 
Nunavut (2011) <https://
climatechangenunavut.ca/
sites/default/files/3154-315_
climate_english_reduced_
size_1_0.pdf>
Food security; vector-
borne diseases; extreme 
weather events
Niqivut Silalu 
Asijjipalliajuq “Our Food 
and Climate Change” 
initiative to support 
individual projects 
related to food security 
and climate change
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 704 
JURISDICTION
STRATEGY/ACTION PLAN/
FRAMEWORK
EXAMPLES OF HEALTH 
RISKS AND/OR 
DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH 
RECENT ADAPTATION 
EXAMPLES
Assembly of 
First Nations
National Climate Gathering 
Report: Drive Change, 
Leading Solutions <https://
www.afn.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2021/04/Climate_
Gathering_Report_ENG.pdf>
Social determinants of 
First Nations health; way 
of life, cultures; mental 
health; physical health; 
food security; wildlife 
health; biodiversity 
Discussion and 
engagement on climate 
change impacts and 
needed actions include 
related to human health 
Inuit Tapiriit 
Kanatami 
National Inuit Climate Change 
Strategy <https://www.itk.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2019/06/
ITK_Climate-Change-Strategy_
English.pdf>
Social determinants 
of Inuit health; gender-
specific health and 
wellness indicators; 
cultural and harvesting 
activities; mental health
Developed a climate 
change strategy that 
includes human health
Métis National 
Council
Métis National Climate Change 
and Health Vulnerability 
Assessment (2020)7 
Social determinants of 
Métis health; wildfires; 
flooding; landslides; 
extreme heat; drought; 
vector-borne diseases; 
glacial retreat; sea-level 
rise; ocean acidification
Completed a climate 
change and health 
assessment
Ontario
Ontario Climate Change 
Strategy (2015) <https://
dr6j45jk9xcmk.cloudfront.net/
documents/4928/climate-
change-strategy-en.pdf>
Heat; air quality; vector-
borne diseases; food; 
water quality; forestry; 
Indigenous communities
Healthy Environments 
and Climate Change 
Guideline (2018) to 
support the Ontario 
Public Health Standards: 
Requirements for 
Programs, Services, and 
Accountability 
7	
JF Consulting. (2020). Metis National Climate Change and Health Vulnerability Assessment. Not publicly available.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 705 
JURISDICTION
STRATEGY/ACTION PLAN/
FRAMEWORK
EXAMPLES OF HEALTH 
RISKS AND/OR 
DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH 
RECENT ADAPTATION 
EXAMPLES
Ontario
(continued)
Preserving and Protecting 
our Environment for Future 
Generations (A Made-
in-Ontario Environment 
Plan) (2018) <https://prod-
environmental-registry.
s3.amazonaws.com/2018-11/
EnvironmentPlan.pdf>
Quebec 
Quebec in Action: Greener 
by 2020 (2012) <http://www.
environnement.gouv.qc.ca/
changements/plan_action/
pacc2020-en.pdf>
Air quality; socio-
economic conditions; 
heat; UV radiation; 
mental health; vector-
borne diseases 
A Massive Online 
Open Course on 
climate change and 
health developed and 
distributed in 2019 along 
with a book
British Columbia
Preparing for Climate Change 
(2012) <https://www2.
gov.bc.ca/assets/gov/
environment/climate-change/
adaptation/adaptation_
strategy.pdf>
Drought; wildfires 
Interactive air quality 
map that increases 
understanding of air 
pollution, including 
wildfire smoke, and 
provides advice for 
reducing risk
Health Authority Perceptions 
and Capacity for Action: 
Health Impacts of Climate 
Change in BC (2013) <http://
bchealthycommunities.ca/
health-impacts-climate-
change-ha-perceptions/>
Temperature-related 
morbidity and mortality; 
natural hazards; air; 
water quality; food 
safety and security; 
zoonotic diseases; 
extreme heat; sun 
exposure
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 706 
JURISDICTION
STRATEGY/ACTION PLAN/
FRAMEWORK
EXAMPLES OF HEALTH 
RISKS AND/OR 
DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH 
RECENT ADAPTATION 
EXAMPLES
British Columbia 
(continued)
Climate Preparedness and 
Adaptation Strategy (Draft 
Strategy and Phase 1 Actions 
for 2021–2022) <https://
engage.gov.bc.ca/app/
uploads/sites/568/2021/06/
Climate-Preparedness-and-
Adaptation-Strategy-2021.pdf>
Alberta
Focusing on Outcomes: 
An Action Plan for Climate 
Leadership Innovation (2018) 
<https://albertainnovates.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2018/02/
Action-Plan-for-Climate-
Leadership_FINAL_Feb2018.
pdf>
Air quality
Climate Change 
Adaptation Plan to 
help municipalities 
learn about climate 
adaptation, assess how 
vulnerable they are 
to events like floods, 
droughts and severe 
storms, and build 
adaptation plans
Manitoba
A Made-in-Manitoba Climate 
and Green Plan: Hearing from 
Manitobans (2017) <https://
www.gov.mb.ca/asset_
library/en/climatechange/
climategreenplandiscussion
paper.pdf>
Flood; drought; water 
quality
Provincial coordination 
of efforts to reduce 
risks from extreme heat 
through a Heat Alert 
and Response System 
Advisory Group 
Saskatchewan
A Made-in-Saskatchewan 
Climate Change Strategy 
(2017) <https://www.
saskatchewan.ca/business/
environmental-protection-
and-sustainability/a-made-
in-saskatchewan-climate-
change-strategy>
Water quality; vector-
borne diseases
Surveillance and public 
education and outreach 
on vector-borne diseases 
(e.g., Lyme disease and 
West Nile virus) 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 707 
JURISDICTION
STRATEGY/ACTION PLAN/
FRAMEWORK
EXAMPLES OF HEALTH 
RISKS AND/OR 
DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH 
RECENT ADAPTATION 
EXAMPLES
New Brunswick
Climate Change Action Plan 
2014–2020 (2016) <https://
www.nben.ca/en/cons-
pub-climate-change-action-
plan?download=2018:new-
brunswick-climate-change-
action-plan-2014-2020-
government-of-new-
brunswick-april-2014>
Water quality; extreme 
weather events; vector-
borne diseases
Implemented and 
supported a provincial 
HARS with specific 
heat-alert criteria based 
on health evidence and 
region-specific weather 
patterns 
Transitioning to a Low 
Carbon Economy: New 
Brunswick’s Climate Change 
Action Plan (2016) <https://
www2.gnb.ca/content/
dam/gnb/Departments/env/
pdf/Climate-Climatiques/
TransitioningTo
ALowCarbonEconomy.pdf>
Nova Scotia
Toward a Greener Future: 
Nova Scotia’s Climate Change 
Action Plan (2009) <https://
climatechange.novascotia.ca/
sites/default/files/uploads/
ccap.pdf>
Air quality; water quality
Developed a climate-
readiness scan for 
the Department of 
Health and Wellness’s 
Continuing Care Sector
Newfoundland 
and Labrador
The Way Forward on Climate 
Change in Newfoundland 
and Labrador (2019) <https://
www.gov.nl.ca/ecc/files/
publications-the-way-forward-
climate-change.pdf>
Travel safety; Lyme 
disease; mental health; 
food security; Indigenous 
communities
Investigated the 
environmental burden 
of Lyme disease and 
introduced new heat 
advisory criteria for the 
province
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 708 
JURISDICTION
STRATEGY/ACTION PLAN/
FRAMEWORK
EXAMPLES OF HEALTH 
RISKS AND/OR 
DETERMINANTS OF 
HEALTH 
RECENT ADAPTATION 
EXAMPLES
Prince Edward 
Island
Taking Action: A Climate 
Change Action Plan for Prince 
Edward Island 2018–2023 
(2018) <https://www.gov.nl.ca/
ecc/files/publications-the-
way-forward-climate-change.
pdf>
Climate projections 
for emergency 
management; coastal 
erosion; flooding; 
infrastructure resilience; 
water resource 
management
Province-wide climate 
change risk assessment 
to include public health 
and safety 
Source: Adapted from Kuchmij et al., 2020
10.3.5.3 Learning from the Quebec Experience
As a leader on health adaptation, the province of Quebec and its health authorities have been preparing for 
climate change impacts for almost 20 years (Demers-Bouffard, 2021). A formal requirement to prevent and 
mitigate the impacts of climate change on public health and safety was included in the Plan d’action sur les 
changements climatiques (PACC 2006-2012), led by the Quebec Ministère de l’environnement. 
In 2012, the Government of Quebec adopted its Plan d’action 2013-2020 sur les changements climatiques 
(PACC 2013-2020) and the accompanying Stratégie d’adaptation aux changements climatiques 2013-2020, 
spending $200 million on adaptation (Government of Québec, 2012a; Government of Québec, 2012b). These 
include several adaptation objectives related to human health, including:
•	
considering climate change adaptation in land-use planning and other planning decisions;
•	
reducing risks and mitigating the consequences of disasters related to climate change;
•	
preventing excess diseases, injuries, and mortality associated with climate change;
•	
maintaining continuity of health and emergency services during disasters related to climate 
change; and
•	
limiting the psychosocial impacts of climate change.
Through this plan, $22 million was allocated to prevent and limit diseases, injuries, mortality, and 
psychosocial impacts (Demers-Bouffard, 2021). Led by the INSPQ and with the participation of many 
partners, a range of adaptation and knowledge development measures have been implemented by the 
existing Quebec health network. These include an observatory assessing the population’s level of adaptation 
to climate change; a multi-stakeholder zoonotic observatory; a weather and health warning and monitoring 
system; emergency response plans; an allergen-pollens reduction strategy; comprehensive research 
programs on climate change impacts and adaptations; several dozen urban greening pilot projects; and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 709 
several knowledge transfer tools (websites, online courses, manuals, toolkits for surveys and evaluations, 
etc.). For example, the INSPQ, along with other partners, launched a Massive Open Online Course on climate 
change and health for health and social service professionals and for the general public. Other more targeted 
training is available for doctors, nurses, park workers, and other professions. The Mon climat, ma santé and 
MSSS websites provide information on the effects of climate change on health, populations at increased 
risk, and adaptation measures. Detailed clinical guidance is available to physicians for treating illnesses and 
diseases related to climate change and health in their daily practice (Gosselin et al., 2021). 
An evaluation of efforts in Quebec to address climate change impacts on health identified important factors 
that facilitate such efforts and those that can act as barriers. Factors that supported climate change and 
health adaptation progress included (Demers-Bouffard, 2021):
•	
major extreme weather events; 
•	
prioritization of climate change in government planning; 
•	
funding for targeted actions; 
•	
clarity of the roles and responsibilities of each of the stakeholders;
•	
availability of local climate and population data; and 
•	
identification of external resources to support actions.
Important barriers to protecting health effectively included: 
•	
public health resources being monopolized for other priorities;
•	
competition with other public health issues;
•	
organizational focus on the health protection role;
•	
lack of reliable and consistent funding;
•	
ambiguity of roles and responsibilities; and
•	
lack of guidance on the various adaptation measures to be implemented.
Ultimately, political, legal, social, regional, and organizational contexts matter for ensuring that government 
and regional health authorities can act to adapt to climate change. The political and legal contexts empower 
the health sector to respond to climate change by providing objectives and resources, while the social 
and regional contexts influence the development of partnerships and the effectiveness of implementing 
adaptation measures. The organizational context makes it possible to take advantage of the opportunities 
provided (Demers-Bouffard, 2021).
10.3.5.4 Individual-Level Health Adaptation
Individual Canadians have a primary responsibility for adapting to the health impacts of climate change by 
adopting protective behaviours. Educating the public and health professionals about climate change impacts 
on health is a key function of public health officials, and greater efforts are required to reduce risks (Hathaway & 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 710 
Maibach, 2018). Efforts in and outside of Canada to communicate climate change risks and get people to take 
protective behaviours have had mixed success and have faced significant challenges (MacIntyre et al., 2019; 
Maibach, 2019). Many Canadians are aware of climate change impacts on health and concerned about these 
impacts. In 2017, a survey of Canadians found that 79% of people reported being convinced that climate change 
is happening, and, of these, 53% indicated that it is a current health risk and 40% believe it will be a health risk in 
the future (Environics Research Group, 2017). However, concern about impacts is not translating into the adoption 
of protective behaviours; large numbers of Canadians are not taking actions to protect themselves, or their family 
members, from climate change impacts on health, putting themselves at higher risk. For example, the survey in 
2017 revealed that (Environics Research Group, 2017):
•	
43% of Canadians reported that they had taken steps in the past year to protect themselves and 
family members against the bite of an infected mosquito or tick (e.g., using insect repellent, 
wearing long pants and long sleeves, checking for ticks on skin after being outdoors);
•	
37% reported that they had an emergency household plan for what to do during a natural disaster 
or emergency, down from 42% that reported having one in 2008; 
•	
77% reported that they regularly (51%) or occasionally (26%) check for extreme weather alerts, 
which is down from 2008 when 81% reported doing so;
•	
53% reported that they either regularly (21%) or occasionally (32%) change daily routines as a 
result of an extreme weather alert; and
•	
51% reported ever having taken action or changed plans as a result of hearing a heat warning.
Interestingly, when respondents were also asked a separate, more general question about whether they 
had taken steps in the past year to protect themselves or family members from the potential health risks or 
impacts of climate change, only 37% indicated that they had done so. There were very low rates of reported 
actions for some possible health adaptations, such as watching the weather more closely (5%), installing air 
conditioning (2%), having an emergency kit/plan (1%), preparing for storms (1%), and being vigilant for ticks 
on person/pets (1%) (Environics Research Group, 2017). The difference in responses suggests that many 
Canadians do not associate these measures with interventions that can protect them from climate change 
health impacts. In addition, some of the responses to this more general question included “better eating 
habits/gardening,” “recycling,” “increasing a home’s energy efficiency,” and “driving less,” which are actions 
to reduce GHGs. Although better home insulation and driving less can help reduce urban heat islands and 
attendant health risks, there is likely significant confusion among the public of the difference between some 
GHG mitigation and health adaptation measures. 
The media plays an important role in influencing public perception of climate change risks and in influencing 
behaviours to address climate change (Watts et al., 2018; King et al., 2019). Callison and Tindall (2017) 
suggested that media coverage of climate change in Canada has tended to focus on national policy making 
and energy and economic issues, but has often omitted climate justice considerations, including those 
related to Indigenous Peoples and impacts in the Arctic. A review of climate change impacts on health 
covered by Canadian newspapers between 2005 and 2015 suggested that coverage over this time period has 
actually decreased, with greater information being provided to the public on negative climate change impacts 
on health and significantly less on climate change and health adaptation solutions. In fact, only 26% of the 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 711 
articles reviewed included information on actions that can be taken to protect health (King et al., 2019). The 
authors suggest that recent trends in media coverage of climate change in Canada may be partly responsible 
for a lack of public support and actions to address climate change, including preparing for the impacts (King 
et al., 2019). Adaptation by individual Canadians may also be significantly influenced by constraints on their 
ability to take protective actions due to existing inequities in society (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and 
Health Equity). 
10.4 Health System Vulnerability and Resilience 
to Climate Change Impacts
10.4.1 Health System Vulnerability
A range of impacts from extreme weather events and public health emergencies related to climate change 
can affect health facilities and systems (WHO, 2015; Balbus et al., 2016; Curtis et al., 2017; Ribesse & 
Varangu, 2019). The ability of these systems to mitigate climate change impacts on populations will be 
increasingly challenged in the future (Ebi & del Barrio, 2017). For example, cancer care can be disrupted by 
climate-related disasters that affect infrastructure, communications systems, availability of medications, and 
medical records (Man et al., 2018). The Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change suggested that 
health systems are unprepared to manage the impacts of climate change. Specifically, it reported that “A lack 
of progress in reducing emissions and building adaptive capacity threatens both human lives and the viability 
of national health systems they depend on, with the potential to disrupt core public health infrastructure 
and overwhelm health services” (Watts et al., 2018, p. 2479). Globally, between 2005 and 2019, an average 
of 412 health facilities were damaged or destroyed by climate-related disasters annually, and such impacts 
are increasing (UNDRR, 2019). Many decision makers expect climate change to worsen these risks; a survey 
of 814 global cities in 2019 indicted that 67% of respondents believed that climate change would seriously 
affect their public health assets and infrastructure (Watts et al., 2021). 
Health care officials, including first responders, can be affected physically and suffer mental health impacts 
from extreme weather and disaster events. Health infrastructure, such as building envelopes, can be 
damaged or destroyed by wind storms, floods, wildfires, and extreme heat events. Reduced access to critical 
support services, including transportation, power, water supply, and telecommunications, can affect the 
normal operations of a health care facility (Scott et al., 2020; WHO, 2020). Medical and non-medical supplies 
and services (e.g., medications and medical products, blood services, food, linen and site cleaning, waste 
disposal storage and services, data management and patient record systems, and sterilization services) can 
be disrupted by severe weather events in or even outside of Canada. Patient safety can be compromised 
when access to critical health and clinical services, such as surgery or radiation therapy (Xiu-Gee Man et al., 
2018), are reduced or when outpatient services, such as dialysis, are affected. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 712 
During disasters, increased hospital admissions and emergency services in health facilities can create 
stress on operations, particularly where surge capacity is lacking, where there are ongoing requirements for 
medication or treatment, and when patients are transferred from other affected facilities (Ebi et al., 2017; 
WHO, 2020). The activation of the emergency plan within the health care facility is a significant undertaking, 
and health care facilities experiencing climate change-related impacts will incur increased costs (Ribesse & 
Varangu, 2019). 
Climate change is expected to increase future risks to health facility and health system staff, operations, and 
infrastructure in Canada from a range of hazards (Ribesse & Varangu, 2019). Some hazards, such as flooding, 
could affect critical health infrastructure, leading to severe health and socio-economic impacts on Canadians 
(Scott et al., 2020). Scott et al., (2020) examined the risks to health and emergency facilities (e.g., hospitals, 
long-term care centres, outpatient clinics, community health centres, police, fire) from floods due to river 
overflow, extreme rain events, and storm surge. Across Canada, 15.2% (17,177) of all health and emergency 
facilities (112,910) have some exposure to flood hazards, increasing their vulnerability to the impacts of 
this type of extreme event. Health care services constituted 94% or 16,240 of the health and emergency 
facilities that are at risk (Scott et al., 2020). In addition, a study of the climate resilience of facilities at Fraser 
Canyon Hospital in Hope, British Columbia, found that elevated temperatures are already being observed in 
the buildings. The projected quadrupling of hot days (>30°C) between 2016 and 2050 due to climate change 
will exceed the capacity of the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems to maintain thermal 
comfort, necessitating retrofits, such as building envelope upgrades and horizontal shading elements above 
windows (Bartko & Macdonald, 2017). 
Discernable effects of climate change on health and on health systems are already evident and will increase 
in the absence of efforts to address existing vulnerabilities and close the “health adaptation gap” (Martinez 
et al., 2018; Haines & Ebi, 2019). In the United States, Superstorm Sandy, which struck in November 2012, 
severely affected health services in New York, with 3.1 billion USD in recovery costs (Health Care Climate 
Council, 2018). Health facilities in Canada are already being affected by climate hazards (Waddington et al., 
2013; Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b). Health authorities have reported impacts of climate-
related events on the following health facility functions: damage to infrastructure, reduced access to medical 
supplies and products, reduced access to critical support services (including transportation, power, water 
supply, and telecommunications), and activation of emergency services (Canadian Coalition for Green Health 
Care, 2019b).
Table 10.5 provides information on Canadian health facility vulnerabilities to specific climate change hazards. 
It includes examples of climate-related impacts on health facilities. As there is no comprehensive and 
centralized surveillance system for monitoring such impacts, these types of impacts are likely significantly 
under-reported. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 713 
Table 10.5 Canadian health facility vulnerabilities to climate change hazards
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Temperature extremes: extreme 
heat events including longer 
periods, hotter nights, and high 
humidity
•	 Disruption/closure of specific 
departments (e.g., operating 
theatres)
•	 Patient transfers
•	 Increased patient admissions
•	 Increased mortality and therefore 
strain on morgue use
•	 Patients, staff, and visitors 
require safe temperatures to 
maintain good health 
•	 Some medical services and 
procedures (e.g., operating 
theatres) require temperature and 
humidity levels to be maintained 
within specific levels
•	 Warmer temperatures bring 
increased risk of food-, water-, 
and vector-borne diseases
•	 Influx of community members to 
hospitals for use as cooling areas
•	 Royal Victoria Hospital, Barrie, Ontario, 2019: Heat and humidity caused 
the air conditioning to break down in the older portion of the hospital, 
forcing the cancellation of 130 non-emergency surgeries, patient 
transfers, resterilization of medical equipment and linens (CTV Barrie, 
2019).
•	 Nine health regions in Quebec, 2018: A period of extreme heat resulted 
in 86 excess deaths reported. Significant increases in hospitalizations, 
ambulance transports, and emergency admissions observed in several 
regions. Lack of air conditioning in patient rooms caused concern for 
patient health (Poitras, 2018). 
•	 Eight health regions in Quebec, 2010: July 2010 heatwave resulted in a 
significant increase in emergency department admissions (4%) and 33% 
increase in death rates for all of the health regions affected.
•	 Toronto, Ontario, area hospitals, 2002–2010: A 29% increase in 
emergency room visits for specific mental and behavioural diseases was 
observed over a cumulative period of seven days after exposure to high 
ambient temperature (mean daily temperature of 28°C or higher).
•	 Regina General Hospital, Regina, Saskatchewan, 2007: Operating theatre 
closed for eight days due to high heat and humidity levels.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 714 
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Temperature extremes: cold 
snaps, including ice storms and 
extreme snowfalls
•	 Disruption/closure of specific 
services and departments (e.g., 
operating theatres)
•	 Patient transfers
•	 Increased patient admissions
•	 Power outages 
•	 Staff shortages
•	 Disruption to transportation 
networks 
•	 Shortages of blood supplies
•	 Influx of community members 
to hospitals for use as warming 
areas
•	 Energy systems in health 
facilities can be affected by cold 
snaps and ice storms
•	 Winter storms can affect 
transportation networks vital for 
the functioning of health care 
facilities
•	 Eastern Health, St. John’s, Newfoundland and Labrador, 2020: Extreme 
snowfall resulted in the City of St. John’s declaring a State of Emergency 
for eight days. Emergency and urgent services at five health facilities 
in St. John’s were delayed, while all other services at these sites 
were cancelled for a few days. Closures also included family doctor 
and specialty clinics, pharmacies, outpatient blood collections, and 
interruptions in patient services, such as appointments, procedures, and 
surgeries; some health professionals stayed on the job for 60 hours.
•	 Sunnybrook Health Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, 2013: A power grid failure 
from an ice storm lasted 39 hours. Emergency power enabled continued 
activity in trauma bays, emergency rooms, and intensive care units. 
However, some less critical services to patients were affected — medical 
imaging appointments were cancelled, lab tests were delayed, food 
delivery to inpatients was delayed, retail food operations were without 
power, and computer networks and email systems were disrupted. As a 
precaution, six infants in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit were relocated 
to other hospitals. Community members gathered in the hospital for 
warmth (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2017).
Flooding caused by extreme 
rainfall, river flooding, freezing 
water pipes, and storm surges 
resulting from hurricanes
•	 Transfer of patients from affected 
health care facilities
•	 Staff shortages due to health 
impacts and disruptions to 
transportation routes 
•	 Boil water advisories
•	 Power outages 
•	 Hurricanes, storm surges, and 
flooding can damage critical 
health facility infrastructure 
and interrupt supply chains for 
food, water, energy and medical 
supplies
•	 During weather emergencies, 
roads may be destroyed or closed 
to discourage travel 
•	 Hotel-Dieu of St. Joseph Hospital, Perth-Andover, New Brunswick, 
2012: Flooding by more than 1 m of water led to the temporary closure of 
the hospital and the transfer of 21 patients to other facilities (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation, 2012; Government of New Brunswick, 2012). 
Construction of a new essential services building was part of a $7.65 
million investment to restore, preserve, and protect critical infrastructure 
at the hospital (Government of New Brunswick, 2018). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 715 
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Flooding caused by extreme 
rainfall, river flooding, freezing 
water pipes, and storm surges 
resulting from hurricanes
(continued)
•	 Disruption/closure of specific 
departments (emergency, clinics)
•	 Infrastructure damage (roof being 
torn off due to high winds)
•	 Internal flooding, including 
basements
•	 Mental health impacts on staff
•	 Shortages of blood supplies
•	 Damage to medical equipment
•	 Post-event or post-disaster clean-
up can reduce or prevent access 
to health care facilities
•	 Impacts on blood donations by 
the public
•	 Physical and mental health 
of health facility staff can be 
affected by floods
•	 Kings County Memorial Hospital, Montague, Prince Edward Island, 
2010: Heavy rain and a malfunctioning roof drainage system resulted 
in water coming in through the ceiling. The emergency department was 
shut down, and cases were diverted to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in 
Charlottetown (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 2010). 
•	 Quebec hospitals around Montréal, Quebec, 2017: Flooding in the 
cities of Montréal and Laval resulted in evacuation of three health care 
centres (Presse Canadienne, 2017). Patients also had to be transferred 
from a long-term care centre (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 2017). 
The Ministry of Health and Social Services provided psychosocial support 
services throughout Quebec (Presse Canadienne, 2017).
•	 Winnipeg Health Sciences Centre, Manitoba, 2014: Storm rain resulted in 
basement flooding of the Ann Thomas Building, which housed the medical 
device reprocessing area. In addition, numerous equipment storage rooms 
were flooded and patient food services were affected, resulting in service 
delays for patients and visitors. The incident did not create any surgery 
delays, given the ability of the department, maintenance, and cleaning crews 
to work through the night to remove water, repair ceilings, and reprocess 
supplies (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2015a). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 716 
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Flooding caused by extreme 
rainfall, river flooding, freezing 
water pipes, and storm surges 
resulting from hurricanes
(continued)
•	 Alberta Health Services Facilities, Alberta, 2013: Floods resulted in 
evacuations, isolations, and/or damage to multiple hospitals, urgent 
care centres, continuing care and long-term care sites, as well as Alberta 
Health Services corporate, community, emergency medical services 
facilities, and physician offices (Alberta Health Services, 2013a; Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation, 2013; MNP LLP, 2013; United Nurses of 
Alberta, 2013; Alberta Health Services, 2014; Watts, 2014). More than 
1000 patients were evacuated in the Calgary Zone in the first 24 hours 
(Alberta Health Services, 2013b). Staff were displaced from places of 
work, and many had their own homes damaged or destroyed (Watts, 
2014). A number of flood-related boil-water orders were issued across the 
province (Alberta Health Services, 2013a). Mobile mental health teams 
were dispatched to High River to facilitate access to services and provide 
mental health support (Alberta Health Services, 2013b).
•	 Hurricane Maria, Puerto Rico, U.S., 2017: Hurricane Maria caused global 
shortages of medical supplies. The destructive forces of hurricanes 
can have a dual impact on health care facilities — first, they have 
physical impacts on the local facilities and the resources they require 
(Panditharatne, 2018), and, second, they can have an impact on global 
supply chains for medical products (GEP, 2017; Kodjak, 2017). Widespread 
devastation of the critical infrastructure, including power and water 
supplies, resulted in manufacturing challenges (GEP, 2017; Kodjak, 2017). 
Puerto Rico is home to over 50 medical device manufacturers and over 
80 pharmaceutical manufacturers (GEP, 2017) that supply products to 
Canadian hospitals.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 717 
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Extreme winds, including those 
caused by tornadoes and 
hurricanes
•	 Interruptions to information 
technology and communications
•	 Transfer of patients from affected 
health care facilities
•	 Staff shortages due to health 
impacts and disruptions to 
transportation routes 
•	 Increase in admissions
•	 Boil water advisories
•	 Disruption/closure of specific 
departments (emergency, clinics)
•	 Infrastructure damage (roof 
being torn off due to high winds, 
basement flooding)
•	 Mental health impacts on staff
•	 Shortages of blood supplies
•	 Power outages
•	 Tornadoes can damage critical 
health facility infrastructure 
and interrupt supply chains for 
food, water, energy, and medical 
supplies
•	 During weather emergencies, 
roads may be destroyed or closed 
to discourage travel 
•	 Post-event or post-disaster clean-
up can reduce or prevent access 
to health care facilities
•	 Physical and mental health 
of health facility staff can be 
affected by severe storms
•	 Nova Scotia Health Authority, Nova Scotia, 2019: Hurricane Dorian 
generated high winds, causing power outages at many hospitals and 
service locations, which had to operate on emergency generator power. 
Some sites experienced additional impacts, including phone, internet, 
and network issues; water damage; temporary closures; and cancellation 
of patient appointments and procedures (Nova Scotia Health Authority, 
2019a; Nova Scotia Health Authority 2019b).
•	 Victoria General Hospital, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 2003: High winds 
from Hurricane Juan created power outages and tore off parts of the 
hospital roof, requiring the evacuation of 51 patients. The event left 
the entire health care system with a backlog of hundreds of operations 
and appointments. Transportation issues complicated the work of 
Emergency Health Services, and Public Health Services were concerned 
with monitoring food and water safety and the possible spread of 
communicable diseases (Globe and Mail, 2003; Nova Scotia, 2003).
•	 Memorial Hospital, Sudbury, Ontario, 1970: Tornado winds in the city 
resulted in six deaths, 200 injured, and hundreds left homeless. The winds 
ripped off the roof of a partly completed wing of the Memorial Hospital 
(Commito, 2018).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 718 
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Wildfires
•	 Transfer of patients from affected 
health care facilities
•	 Staff shortages due to health 
impacts and disruptions to 
transportation routes
•	 Boil water advisories
•	 Disruption/closure of specific 
departments due to air 
contamination (e.g., emergency, 
clinics)
•	 Infrastructure damage (roof torn 
off by high winds, basement 
flooding)
•	 Mental health impacts on staff
•	 Shortages of blood supplies
•	 During wildfires, roads may be 
destroyed or closed to discourage 
travel 
•	 Post-event or post-disaster clean-
up can reduce or prevent access 
to health care facilities 
•	 Physical and mental health 
of health facility staff can be 
affected by wildfires
•	 Interior Health, British Columbia, 2017: Wildfires resulted in air 
quality warnings due to very high health risk from the smoke, and in 
the temporary closure of 19 health care facilities or sites. Additionally, 
880 patients were evacuated from facilities, and more than 700 health 
services staff displaced, with a total cost to the health authority of $2.7 
million. Many patients were evacuated to neighbouring Northern Health 
facilities, straining health care resources in Kamloops and Prince George 
(Canadian Healthcare Facilities, 2017; Interior Health, 2017).
•	 Northern Lights Regional Health Centre, Fort McMurray, Alberta, 2016: 
A wildfire resulted in 73 acute care patients, including nine babies in the 
neonatal unit and their mothers, and 32 continuing care patients who 
were wheelchair-bound, being moved to three different reception areas 
outside Fort McMurray via ambulances and buses (Warr, 2016). Alberta 
Health Services reserved 92 hotel rooms in Edmonton for the health 
care workers attending to these patients. Other impacts on the hospital 
included smoke damage and air quality concerns (Drinkwater, 2016; 
KPMG, 2017). 
Landslides and avalanches
•	 Interruptions to information 
technology and communications
•	 Transportation routes blocked
•	 Medical operations are 
postponed
•	 British Columbia, 2020: Rockslides after heavy rain damaged cell towers, 
which caused widespread disruptions to phone service across British 
Columbia, including communications with health care staff (Boynton, 2020).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 719 
CLIMATE HAZARD
POTENTIAL IMPACTS 
ON HEALTH FACILITY
EXAMPLES OF VULNERABILITY/
RISK FACTORS
EXAMPLES OF IMPACTS ON CANADIAN HEALTH FACILITIES
Melting permafrost
•	 Building infrastructure 
destabilized
•	 Transportation routes (including 
airstrips) built on permafrost are 
unstable; winter ice roads less 
reliable
•	 Damage to pipelines and power 
lines
•	 Health care facilities and other 
health system buildings require 
stable ground
•	 Canadian Arctic: Rising temperatures in the Far North are melting 
permafrost, requiring a number of health care facility buildings to be 
structurally supported with thermosyphons to prevent them from sinking 
(Holubec, 2008). 
Source: Adapted from Balbus et al., 2016, with data from the Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2020
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 720 
Climate impacts are not all acute events. Impacts can be less drastic and longer-term, but such cumulative 
impacts can also be significant. More frequent rainfall or gradual increase of day- and night-time 
temperatures and humidity levels can strain the physical plant (i.e., air conditioning and ventilation systems) 
while increasing the need for health services (i.e., more patients with heat stress). As another example, 
permafrost melt in Canada’s Far North is damaging the foundations of some medical clinics, and continued 
warming will require remediation to prevent further damage to these structures (Holubec, 2008). Permafrost 
maps were developed for health authorities in Nunavik to guide future decisions about planning new buildings 
and renovating those at structural risk by thawing (L’Hérault et al., 2013). 
Climate hazards can also combine, or cascade, as happened in Dunrobin, Ontario, which was affected by record 
flooding in 2017, devastating tornadoes in 2018, and further severe flooding in 2019. Similarly, flooding in Japan in 
2018 killed more than 200 people and was followed during the clean-up efforts less than a month later by record-
breaking extreme heat that resulted in at least 30 deaths and 10,000 hospital admissions (ABC News, 2018). 
Whether acute climate shocks or chronic stresses, climate impacts will require health systems to respond and 
adapt (Ebi et al., 2018b).
Impacts on health systems in Canada can be very severe, as was the case with the 2013 Southern Alberta 
floods, when some hospitals were forced to close, patients were evacuated, and significant infrastructure 
damage occurred (MNP LLP, 2013; Roles, 2013). The catastrophic wildfires in British Columbia in 2017 and 
2018 also resulted in facility closures, patient transfers, and major disruptions to care (Legassic, 2018). 
Climate events can have disproportionate impacts on Indigenous communities. For example, almost 2000 
people displaced from four First Nations communities in Manitoba after extensive flooding in 2011 were still 
unable to return to their homes in 2017 (Lambert, 2018). 
A major challenge facing health systems in Canada from climate change are possible surprises or 
unexpected hazards, events, or developments; these present new or much more severe threats to the health 
of Canadians or to health systems. For example, significant uncertainty exists about the impacts of climate 
change on human migration, and very little research has been conducted in the Canadian context. However, 
some evidence suggests that climate change could lead to large movements of populations seeking respite 
from climate-related disasters and other impacts. A U.S. National Intelligence Council study warned that 
climate change will continue to threaten the stability of many countries through climate-induced disruptions 
that can overwhelm response capacity (NIC, 2016). Missirian and Schlenker (2017) suggest that, under a high 
emissions scenario, the European Union could see annually an additional 660,000 asylum applications by the 
end of the century, a 175% increase from the present day.
Evidence suggests that many health facilities — a critical component of health systems in efforts to reduce 
climate change impacts — are not taking needed actions to prepare for current risks and future warming. A 
survey of health care facility staff, such as facility directors or managers, sustainability coordinators, and 
energy managers, representing 102 facilities, was undertaken by the Canadian Coalition for Green Health 
Care in 2019 through the Green Hospitals Scorecard questionnaire (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 
2019b). The respondents were primarily located in Ontario but also at some facilities in British Columbia, 
Manitoba, and Nova Scotia. The survey revealed that health authorities are recognizing climate change 
as an issue of concern, and some are taking adaptation measures. For example, 55% reported that senior 
leadership had assigned at least one person with some climate change responsibility in their health authority. 
However, only a small percentage of health care facilities (8%) had acknowledged climate change in their 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 721 
strategic plan or had identified climate risks in specific policies. A smaller number of facilities (4%) reported 
that the impacts of climate-related events, such as flooding and severe weather events, had been recognized 
in other ways. In addition, almost one-third (27%) of facilities had not recognized climate change as an 
issue of concern, and 10% responded that they did not know whether it was an issue of concern (Canadian 
Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b).
Awareness of the need to examine the possible impacts of climate change on health facilities is relatively 
new. Therefore, few health facilities in Canada have undertaken assessments of vulnerability or have a good 
understanding of what vulnerability assessments would entail. Of the health care facility staff respondents 
(99 respondents), 9% reported having completed resilience assessments, while only 4% had completed 
vulnerability assessments (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b).
Use of on-site renewable energy systems can improve the resilience of the health care facility during grid-
based power outages and reduce the generation of GHGs from the use of fossil fuels. Just over a quarter 
(27%) of health care facilities reported that they currently had some form of renewable energy in place, with 
many reporting multiple types of systems (100 participants provided multiple responses for a total of 245) 
(Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b). Of the renewable energy systems currently in place, 
photovoltaic systems are currently the most popular (9%), followed by deep lake cooling (4%), with other 
numerous renewable energy system types at much smaller numbers. The potential growth of renewable 
energy systems in the future is significant, with 46% hoping to implement some renewable energy options in 
the future (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b). The renewable energy types of highest future 
interest are photovoltaic systems (45%), geothermal systems (14%), deep lake cooling (13%), and solar hot 
water (12%) (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b). 
Given that the health system and health facilities are the first and last defence from climate change impacts 
on the health of Canadians, the limited number of existing efforts to build health facility resilience across 
Canada and educate and train health officials suggests ample opportunity to reduce existing vulnerability to 
health impacts. 
10.4.2 Economic Impacts of Climate Change Effects on Health and 
Health Systems
When climate change increases mortality or morbidity, there is a loss of welfare to society and forgone 
income and/or wealth creation. Climate change may also disrupt labour productivity, educational attainment 
and other determinants of health, eroding economic output and future potential. Although limited evidence is 
available, climate change-driven impacts to various economic sectors (e.g., resource extraction) may disrupt 
future government revenues, including those that fund health and social services. In addition, more illnesses, 
injuries, and disease may increase stresses and costs to health systems and result in general impacts on 
economic productivity, with more sick leave and absenteeism (Campbell-Lendrum et al., n.d.; Martinez et al., 
2018). To manage growing health risks effectively, decision makers need to know the following information 
about adaptation options: (1) the economic costs of climate change impacts on health in the absence of 
interventions; (2) the costs of implementing adaptation actions to protect health, including measures in and 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 722 
outside of the health sector; and (3) the costs of health impacts that are residual or that still occur after 
actions are taken (Campbell-Lendrum et al., n.d.). 
There is a paucity of information about the economic costs of current climate variability and projected 
climate change on the health of individuals and on health systems internationally (Hutton & Menne, 2014; 
Martinez et al., 2018) and in Canada (Berry et al., 2014a). However, climate change is expected to result in 
tangible and significant economic costs to health systems and broader society (Kovats et al., 2011; Watkiss, 
2015; Ebi et al., 2017). 
Projections of future economic costs of climate change on health are uncertain and vary widely, depending on 
availability of data and methods used. The WHO has projected that a narrow range of direct climate change 
impacts on health would result in economic costs of 2 billion to 4 billion USD by 2030 (WHO, 2018b). Another 
study, with a broader set of health outcomes and including indirect costs, suggested that European Union 
countries alone might expect health costs between EUR 9 billion and 106 billion for the period 2041–2070 
(Ciscar et al., 2014). In the United States, one study estimated the health costs of 10 climate-sensitive events 
that struck in 2012, including heatwaves, hurricanes, wildfires, flooding, outbreaks of infectious diseases, 
and ozone pollution. The total cost was at least 10 billion USD, related to 900 deaths, 21,000 hospitalizations, 
18,000 emergency room visits, and 37,000 outpatient visits (Limaye et al., 2019). The very severe wildfires in 
Washington and Colorado in that year resulted in 419 deaths and 627 hospital admissions, for a total cost of 
3.9 billion USD (Limaye et al., 2019). 
Recent research in Quebec suggested that, from 2015 to 2065, the projected costs of the increase in health 
effects of ragweed allergies due to climate change are $360 million for governments in that province 
and $475 million for society as a whole. For extreme heat, the study estimated costs of $370 million for 
governments and over $33 billion for society. In addition, increases in Lyme disease due to climate change 
are projected to cost governments $60 million to $95 million, depending on the level of public health 
preparation (Larrivée et al., 2015).
The health care costs will not be borne evenly among the population. For example, evidence suggests that 
the most vulnerable in society bear disproportionate health care costs from the impacts from extreme heat 
(Wondmagegn et al., 2019). Box 10.5 describes the health system impacts and economic costs of recent 
severe wildfire seasons in British Columbia. 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 723 
Box 10.5 Impacts of the 2017 and 2018 wildfires on health systems in 
British Columbia
The 2017 and 2018 wildfire seasons in British Columbia were two of the worst seasons on record. In 2018, 
2117 fires consumed 1,354,284 ha of land, with a total cost of fire suppression of $615 million (Government 
of British Columbia, 2019). The 2017 fires resulted in the evacuation of 65,000 people and a provincial state 
of emergency lasting 70 days (July 7 to September 15) (Government of British Columbia, 2019). Fortunately, 
there were no deaths reported from the fires. However, significant impacts were felt by health systems in 
efforts to protect people. For example, the 2017 wildfires affected 19 health facilities or sites in the Interior 
Health Authority and resulted in 880 patients being evacuated and 700 health services staff being displaced, 
costing the health authority an estimated $2.7 million (Toews, 2018). These fires also resulted in more than 
10,000 evacuees being received by the Northern Health Authority, resulting in over $4.5 million in health 
service delivery costs (Northern Health, 2018a; Northern Health, 2018b). 
In 2018, a number of communities in the Northern Health Authority had to be evacuated because of wildfires, 
including the pre-emptive transfer of patients from the Stuart Lake Hospital in Fort St. James (Northern 
Health, 2018b). The region suffered from wildfires and the associated smoky conditions much of the summer, 
but the experience gained by Northern Health’s staff in supporting Interior Health during the 2017 wildfires 
helped the health authority prepare for and respond to wildfires the following year (Northern Health, 2018c). 
The value of this experience highlighted the role that staff exchanges, knowledge translation, and inter-
organizational collaboration can have in building climate resilience.
Some of the costs to health and health care systems from climate change are avoidable through adaptation, 
but these actions often require upfront development and subsequent maintenance costs. Greater research is 
needed on the costs and benefits of various adaptations to reduce risks to Canadians from extreme heat and 
other climate change hazards.
10.5 Climate-Resilient Health Systems
Because of the increasing severity and frequency of climate-related emergencies and disasters, health 
authorities need to prepare health and emergency services to be able to respond during such events 
(UNDRR, 2015; Watts et al., 2018; WHO, 2018c). Strengthening health systems is a “no-regrets” strategy 
that can reduce climate risks while also protecting health from other global challenges, such as pandemics 
(Banwell et al., 2018). Human health and well-being are most effectively protected from the impacts of 
climate change when health authorities take measures to increase the climate resilience of whole health 
systems (WHO, 2015; WHO, 2018c; Ebi et al., 2019). The “health system” refers broadly to the organizations 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 724 
of people, institutions, and resources that work to protect and promote population health (Ebi et al., 2019), 
encompassing health care planning, facilities, and services as well as traditional public health functions 
(e.g., health promotion through social participation and empowerment; disease surveillance and response; 
emergency preparedness; health research; and health information systems) (WHO, 2015). A climate-resilient 
health system has the capacity to monitor, anticipate, manage, and adapt to the health risks of climate 
change to maintain efficiencies and the ability to improve population health, and to reduce inequities and 
vulnerabilities as climate change impacts increase (WHO, 2015) (Figure 10.3). 
Figure 10.3 Ten components comprising the WHO operational framework for building climate-resilient health 
systems. Source: WHO, 2015.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 725 
Currently, a number of health authorities in non-governmental organizations, bilateral agencies, and national 
and subnational ministries of health are using the WHO Operational Framework to build the capacity and 
information base to mainstream climate change into health policies and programs (Ebi et al., 2019). 
There is greater recognition among health authorities that health facilities play a critical role in protecting 
people from the impacts of climate change, given that they are the last resort for treating illnesses and 
injuries (WHO, 2015; Balbus et al., 2016; Miller et al., 2018). Health facility officials, and broader health 
systems, can prepare for climate change impacts and reduce risks from current hazards by (Balbus et al., 
2016; WHO & World Bank, 2018; Ribesse & Varangu, 2019): 
•	
developing initiatives to become more climate resilient, including adapting policies and processes 
as needed to meet challenges of the changing climate;
•	
leading by example by reducing GHG emissions while promoting sustainability in the entire 
medical supply chain;
•	
making health care facilities safer and more environmentally sustainable;
•	
training health personnel to recognize and understand the effects of climate change; and
•	
encouraging health personnel to advocate and act to reduce the carbon footprint and build resilience.
Health systems in Canada have an opportunity to contribute to efforts to slow climate change while 
increasing resilience to the impacts (Miller et al., 2018). Challenges to adapting to the effects of climate 
change will be much greater without stronger measures to reduce GHGs (IPCC, 2014). Preparing Canadians 
for climate change impacts on health requires robust knowledge of risks to health facilities and health 
care services in the context of broader vulnerabilities facing communities and populations at higher risk. 
Investigations of health facility vulnerability can provide useful data, including estimates of current and future 
climate resilience of buildings and clinical services, and information on patient admissions, to understand 
the needs for improving patient care during climate-related emergencies. For example, Haines and Ebi (2019) 
suggest that efforts to modify current health policies and measures to protect health from climate change 
must consider needed adjustments to new building codes and to the optimal location of new buildings, 
including health facilities, to reduce risks from impacts associated with rising temperatures and flooding. 
New assessment tools and methods exist to help officials in health care facilities in Canada undertake 
studies that gauge their resilience to climate change impacts and inform actions to increase their 
sustainability (Balbus et al., 2016; Ribesse & Varangu, 2019; BC Health Authorities, 2020). For example, in 
partnership with Health Canada, the Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care developed a Health Care 
Facility Climate Change Resilience Checklist (Paterson et al., 2014) that poses questions on emergency 
management, facilities management, health care services, and supply chain management. The Coalition also 
delivered a Climate Change Resilience Mentoring Program, which included online learning resources. 
In addition, a process to assess the vulnerability of infrastructure to climate-related impacts, known as the 
Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee protocol, was developed by Engineers Canada in 
partnership with Natural Resources Canada. This tool guides a review of past climate information to project 
the nature, severity, and probability of future climate-related events and the impacts of these events on 
infrastructure, in terms of deterioration, damage, or destruction, to identify higher-risk components (PIEVC, 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 726 
n.d.). This process was applied to the Nanaimo Regional General Hospital in British Columbia, and the report 
provided information to prioritize components requiring adaptation, as well as to understand the best ways of 
adapting them, through design adjustments or changes to operational and/or maintenance procedures (RDH 
Building Science, 2018).
Most local to national vulnerability and adaptation assessments for climate change and health that have 
been completed in Canada have not examined, or have not included in detail, information on risks and 
vulnerabilities facing health facilities and adaptation options (Séguin, 2008; Gosselin, 2010; Berry et al., 2014a; 
Berry et al., 2014b; Levison et al., 2018). Future assessments would benefit from examination of climate 
change risks to health facilities and the engagement of representatives from the health care sector (Ebi et 
al., 2018b; Ribesse & Varangu, 2019). In British Columbia, a study by the Fraser Basin Council in 2016 found 
that a very severe coastal flood (currently a once in 500-year event) could affect three wastewater treatment 
facilities and 15% of health care facilities, including three hospitals, while displacing approximately 238,000 
people (Fraser Basin Council, 2016).
Climate change and health stress-testing of health facilities and other critical parts of the health system can 
be undertaken as part of broader assessments of disruptive climate-related shocks and stresses that could 
overwhelm the capacity to respond to these events. Health authorities can use hypothetical scenarios and 
simulation exercises in workshop settings to learn about possible resilience tipping points affecting facilities 
to develop and implement appropriate adaptation measures (Ebi et al., 2018b). Stress-testing exercises 
have been undertaken to examine the resilience of hospitals in Vancouver Coastal Health Authority, British 
Columbia (Lower Mainland Facilities Management, 2020). Integrating health facility considerations and 
information in assessments supports broader community preparedness for climate change impacts, given 
the importance of transportation, power, water, and wastewater services to hospitals during emergencies 
and the critical role these facilities play in reducing climate-sensitive injuries, illnesses, and diseases in 
communities (Ribesse & Varangu, 2019). 
Resilience indicator categories for health care facilities in Canada that may be used in assessments have been 
proposed using the WHO Operational Framework (Table 10.6) (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2018). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 727 
Table 10.6 Proposed climate resilience indicator categories for health 
care facilities in Canada
PROPOSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY 
FRAMEWORK COMPONENTS
PROPOSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY 
RESILIENCE INDICATOR CATEGORIES
Leadership and governance
•	 Executive responsibility for climate change
Health workforce 
•	 Staff awareness and knowledge of climate impacts on health 
and the health system and of clinical interventions
•	 Workforce preparation for and support during climate events 
•	 Readiness to communicate internally and externally on 
climate change
•	 Coordination and collaboration on climate change with 
outside agencies
Vulnerability, capacity, adaptation, and 
resilience assessment 
•	 Identification of vulnerabilities to climate change by health 
care facility
•	 Resilience assessment used to develop Health Care Facility 
Resilience Plan
•	 Participation in vulnerability and adaptation assessments 
with local public health and community organizations
•	 Capacity-building plans to address gaps in human resources 
and institutional capacity 
Risk monitoring and early warning
•	 Early warning systems and other tools for extreme weather 
events and climate-sensitive diseases
Health and climate research
•	 Climate change health research at health care facility
Climate-resilient and sustainable 
supply chain and supporting logistics 
•	 Sustainability and resilience to climate-related impacts 
considered in selecting products and services
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 728 
PROPOSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY 
FRAMEWORK COMPONENTS
PROPOSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY 
RESILIENCE INDICATOR CATEGORIES
Climate-resilient and sustainable 
facility infrastructure
•	 Assessment of health care facility’s impact on environment, 
including carbon emissions 
•	 Climate-related impacts included in scoping new 
construction and development
•	 Use of new technologies to address GHG mitigation, 
resilience, adaptation, and emergency management
•	 Health impact assessments for new mitigation and 
adaptation initiatives
Health facility service delivery8 
•	 Staff awareness of climate impacts on health and the 
health system 
•	 Workforce preparation for and support during climate events 
•	 Readiness to communicate internally and externally on 
climate change
•	 Coordination and collaboration on climate change with 
outside agencies
•	 Staff awareness of climate impacts on health and the 
health system 
•	 Early warning systems and other tools for extreme weather 
events and climate-sensitive diseases
•	 Sustainability and resilience to climate-related impacts 
considered in selecting products and services
Emergency preparedness and 
management
•	 Emergency management and continuity plan that has a climate 
change lens and includes actions that anticipate, respond to, 
cope with, recover from, and adapt to climate change
•	 Emergency management and continuity plan based on 
stakeholder engagement and collaboration, with community 
input, buy-in, and approval
Climate and health funding 
•	 Resources available and allocated to increase resilience, 
environmental sustainability, low-carbon mitigation, and adaptation
Source: Adapted from Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2018
8	
 Resilience indicators are shared with other categories.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 729 
Many health sector officials are willing to take actions to prepare health facilities for climate change threats 
when they have the required information about current and future climate change impacts and vulnerabilities. 
A snapshot of the types of actions that health care facilities in Canada have undertaken following a climate 
change resilience assessment was obtained from surveys of participants in the Health Care Facility Climate 
Change Resilience Mentoring Program (2016–2019). A total of 31 participants from 21 health care facilities 
took part in this program, with 13 participants from Ontario-based health care organizations, and others 
from British Columbia, Manitoba, and New Brunswick (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019a). 
The majority (77%) of survey respondents implemented resilience practices in their facilities. These included 
sharing climate-related assessment reports with colleagues; undertaking infrastructure and equipment 
upgrades; exploring renewable energy options; instituting new response codes for climate-related impacts; 
undertaking vulnerability assessments; updating contingency/disaster plan(s) and disaster preparedness 
supply lists; and providing advice to patients on how to stay safe in extreme heat. Many of the participants 
also began a discussion of climate change with senior leaders. The reported primary barriers to undertaking 
climate change resilience assessments were a lack of support from senior leaders and a lack of funds and 
resources (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2019b).
Box 10.6 Health care facility resilience to climate change: Nanaimo 
Regional General Hospital in British Columbia
The Nanaimo Regional General Hospital in British Columbia has recognized the importance of preparing 
for future climate risks by renovating its 247-bed facility for resilience. The hospital, originally constructed 
in 1960 to 1963, underwent numerous renovations and added a new emergency department in 2012 to 
sustainably mitigate risk in the event of an extreme weather event, and meet the demands of serving central 
Vancouver Island’s 160,000 residents and an additional 400,000 referrals (Canadian Coalition for Green 
Health Care, 2015b).
To reduce energy costs while also lowering GHG emissions, the building’s design incorporates several 
sustainability measures. During daylight hours, the majority of the building relies extensively on the use of 
day lighting and natural light from windows and courtyards, even in the trauma room, while operable windows 
allow for natural ventilation (Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care, 2015b). This decreases the reliance on 
electricity and allows for redundancy in the case of an emergency to improve patient outcomes and reduce 
staff stress. The building’s heat recovery chiller features a below-ground labyrinth for heat storage, which can 
be used to pre-heat domestic hot water and to provide heating to exterior zones if needed, such as during an 
extreme weather event. Other measures include displacement ventilation, wood products associated with 
lower GHG emissions, extra roof insulation, solar shading, and digital controls (Canadian Coalition for Green 
Health Care, 2015b). 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 730 
Major cost savings may accrue to health care facilities that take actions to prepare for climate change. A 
study examining a scenario in which a hospital in the United States invested in climate resilience found that 
it would have stayed operational during a hypothetical strike by a major hurricane, avoiding a revenue loss of 
10% (estimated for a facility that did not prepare). It would also have experienced a 5% increase in costs due 
to minor repairs (versus a 20% increase for an unprepared facility) and saved an overall $100 million thanks 
to its climate adaptation actions (Health Care Without Harm, 2018). 
10.6 Health Co-Benefits of Adaptation and GHG 
Mitigation Measures
Because GHG mitigation and a range of adaptation measures have the potential to make great strides in 
advancing population health, the Lancet Countdown on Health and Climate Change suggested that “tackling 
climate change could be the greatest global health opportunity of the 21st century” (Watts et al., 2015). Well-
designed approaches to addressing climate change that engage a wide range of sectors (e.g., energy, water, 
housing, urban planning, transportation, insurance, agriculture, and food systems) through a “health-in-all-
policies” approach9 can result in very large immediate and long-term health co-benefits and cost savings to 
the health system (Haines et al., 2009; Friel et al., 2011; Jarrett et al., 2012; Cheng & Berry, 2013; Springmann 
et al., 2016; NASEM, 2018; WHO, 2018b; Hamilton et al., 2021). For example, GHG mitigation and adaptation 
efforts that significantly reduce fossil fuel use (e.g., changes to the design of transportation infrastructure 
in communities to improve thermal comfort; use of low-emission vehicles; promotion of active and public 
transportation) also improve air quality by reducing fine particulate matter, including black carbon and 
tropospheric ozone; these efforts can have multiple co-benefits, including reductions in cardiovascular and 
respiratory diseases (see Chapter 5: Air Quality). Greening communities to cool them can also have multiple 
knock-on health benefits, such as reducing chronic diseases and improving mental health (Health Canada, 
2020a), as can other measures to make communities more livable, such as walking and biking paths (Green 
et al., 2018). These measures can also have positive impacts by reducing social isolation and crime in some 
neighbourhoods (Beaudoin & Levasseur, 2017). The Government of Canada committed to considering health 
co-benefits, such as reduced air pollutant emissions, when developing policies and measures to reduce GHG 
emissions (Government of Canada, 2016). 
9	
The health-in-all-policies approach requires decision makers in all sectors to integrate human health considerations 
and information into the development of policies and programs (PHAC, 2017).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 731 
Box 10.7 Decision support tool to transform the built environment for 
healthier communities
Public health officials and urban planners require information in order to design or modify the built 
environment in communities for the dual goals of reducing GHG emissions and benefiting human health. 
Developed for application in England, the Impacts of Cycling Tool (ICT)10 allows users to visualize travel 
patterns and analyze various scenarios for the adoption of cycling behaviours. It provides an open-source 
model with a web-based interface that supports visualization of individual and trip-level data, based on the 
English National Travel Survey, 2004–2014. Users can compare scenarios based on modelled increases 
in the proportion of the population who cycle regularly and then estimate likely impacts on travel patterns, 
health, and GHG emissions. The ICT also enables users to investigate the likely outcomes of scenarios with a 
more equitable uptake of cycling behaviours (based on age and gender categories) than the profile of current 
cyclists (Woodcock et al., 2018). 
The value of possible health co-benefits of actions is very large. Non-communicable diseases are estimated 
to cost $68 billion in health care spending per year (PHAC, 2011 as cited in Chronic Disease Prevention 
Alliance of Canada, 2017), while insufficient physical activity has been estimated to cost the health system 
$2 billion in direct treatment costs (Janssen, 2012). Therefore, relatively modest reductions in these 
diseases through efforts to achieve health co-benefits could reap large cost savings. In the United States, it 
has been estimated that clean-energy policies to reduce GHGs consistent with the Paris Agreement target 
could result in lower particulate matter and ozone levels, preventing 175,000 premature deaths by 2030 
and approximately 22,000 deaths each year into the future (Shindell et al., 2016). A similar global analysis 
of health co-benefits from 2020 to 2100 in urban centres included calculations for Toronto (11,000 avoided 
deaths) and Montréal (4000 avoided deaths) (Shindell et al., 2018). In addition, a health-impact analysis 
conducted for the introduction of Tier 3 vehicle and fuel standards in Canada in 2015 estimated that, by 2030, 
the resulting air quality improvements would prevent 1400 premature deaths, almost 200,000 days of asthma 
symptoms, and 2.8 million days of acute respiratory problems, with cumulative health and environmental 
benefits of $7.5 billion (Government of Canada, 2015). Figure 10.4 provides an overview of potential health 
co-benefits and risks associated with a range of GHG mitigation sectors and measures.
10	 The tool is available at <http://www.pct.bike/ict>.
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 732 
Figure 10.4 Potential health co-benefits and risks of GHG mitigation measures. Source: Adapted from 
Luehr, 2018.
Adaptation and GHG mitigation measures that do not consider human health implications can lead to 
negative health outcomes among the population, thus eroding climate resilience (Haines et al., 2009; Haines 
& Ebi, 2019). They may also lead to greater health inequities in the population, increasing the vulnerability of 
individuals and communities to future climate change (see Chapter 9: Climate Change and Health Equity). For 
example, a number of features of neighbourhoods can worsen health equity, including (PHAC, 2017): 
•	
lack of transportation options;
•	
limited access to healthy food, housing, and health care;
•	
lack of parks and recreation facilities;
•	
empty buildings and vacant lots;
•	
poor air or water quality;
•	
lack of safety and higher crime;
•	
increased social isolation; and
•	
residential segregation.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 733 
Compared with GHG mitigation, there has been significantly less study of the potential health co-benefits and 
risks of climate change adaptation measures (Cheng & Berry, 2013). Health officials are recognizing the need 
for a systems-based approach to address climate change through GHG mitigation and adaptation; such an 
approach requires active and purposeful collaboration with other sectors, assessment of local vulnerabilities 
and capabilities, and the co-design of policies and programs based on this information (Ebi et al., 2016a; Ebi 
et al., 2016c). Efforts to achieve health co-benefits in the health sector by reducing GHGs and increasing 
climate resilience through adaptation offer a triple dividend for Canadians, specifically by (1) helping to make 
patients, staff, and communities safer during climate-related disasters and emergencies, (2) contributing to 
the slowing of climate change through the reduction of GHGs, and (3) achieving economic savings at health 
facilities that undertake adaptation efforts. The potential benefits are very large; in 2014, there were 798 
hospitals across Canada with approximately 90,000 beds (CIHI, 2018). Health care facilities (particularly 
hospital campuses) have the highest intensity of energy use of all commercial and institutional buildings in 
Canada, and direct emissions increased between 2009 and 2015 at double the rate of the national average 
(Ribesse & Varangu, 2019). Figure 10.5 illustrates examples of features of low-carbon and resilient health 
care systems that overlap.
Figure 10.5 Climate-smart health care: the intersection of low-carbon health care and resilience. Source: World 
Bank, 2017.
Globally, the average emissions per capita for health care activities is reported as 0.28 tonnes of carbon 
dioxide (tCO2) equivalent (Health Care Without Harm & ARUP, 2019). Canada’s health system has been 
identified as one of the top four emitters among countries, based on per capita emission of 1.1 tCO2 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 734 
equivalent per capita (Health Care Without Harm & ARUP, 2019). The Canadian health sector as a whole, 
primarily hospitals, pharmaceuticals, and physician services, is estimated to have emitted between 4.6% and 
5.1% (29.6–33 Mt CO2 equivalent) annually from 2009 to 2014, or 4.6% of total national GHG emissions in 
2014 (Eckelman et al., 2018). Pichler et al. (2019) estimated the health carbon footprint of Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development countries, which includes CO2 emissions related to providers of 
goods and services for health care, such as medical retailers, hospitals, ambulatory, long-term, or preventive 
health care. The health carbon footprint in Canada in 2014 was estimated to be 5.1% of the total national 
carbon footprint (Pichler et al., 2019). In 2017, at least 16 Canadian hospitals emitted more than 10 kt of 
GHGs (ECCC, 2019). 
In Canada, 26% of health sector emissions arise directly from health care facilities and health care–owned 
vehicles and 13% indirectly from purchased energy sources, such as electricity, steam, cooling, and heating. 
The majority (61%) of GHGs from the health sector are attributed to the supply chain, which includes the 
production, transport, and disposal of goods and services, such as pharmaceuticals and other chemicals, 
food and agricultural products, medical devices, hospital equipment, and instruments (Health Care Without 
Harm, 2019). An estimated 68% of these carbon emissions are generated domestically, indicating that 
imported goods are also a significant contributor to these emissions. 
Box 10.8 Reducing GHGs and increasing climate resilience at the 
University Health Network
The University Health Network (UHN) in Toronto, Ontario, has reduced its direct GHG emissions (from on-site 
combustion of natural gas) and indirect GHG emissions (from consumption of purchased electricity, heat, 
or steam) by 19% from 2010 to 2019 (Vanlint, 2019). Much of the savings arose from 214 energy projects 
completed between 2013 and 2018, saving UHN $18.9 million in utility costs (Vanlint, 2019). UHN is reducing 
carbon emissions by addressing the carbon intensity of its cooling system, which has been described as 
a significant source of global CO2 equivalent emissions from the health sector (Kigali Cooling Efficiency 
Program, 2018). UHN has replaced traditional chillers with deep lake cooling technology, which uses water 
cooled by Lake Ontario, at some of its facilities. This new technology increases capacity, resilience, and 
reliability of UHN’s chilled water system and saves more than $22 million over 20 years, 67 million L of water 
per year, 7 million kWh of electricity per year, and 269 Mt of GHG emissions per year (Vanlint, 2019). 
Additional planned actions to reduce UHN’s carbon footprint will include development of the world’s 
largest raw wastewater energy transfer (WET) system at Toronto Western Hospital and the Krembil 
Discovery Tower. By harnessing thermal energy from wastewater flowing through the nearby campus 
sewer, it is estimated that the new WET system will result in a reduction of 250,000 metric tonnes of 
GHGs over the next 30 years (UHN, 2021). 
Given the large amount of energy and supplies used by organizations in the health sector, such as 
hospitals, efforts to become more sustainable can result in huge economic and health dividends. The U.S. 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 735 
Environmental Protection Agency has estimated that health care facilities in the United States have saved 
more than 192 billion USD in energy costs over the last 20 years (Ribesse & Varangu, 2019). In another 
study, the Health Care Climate Council (2018) found that, if the U.S. health system reduced electricity use 
and carbon pollution by 30%, it would prevent 4130 premature deaths, 85,000 asthma attacks, 4 million 
respiratory symptom events, and 3750 hospital visits by 2030, resulting in savings of approximately 1.2 billion 
USD. Initiatives to improve energy conservation and reduce GHG emissions through adopting appropriate 
building design, purchasing energy efficient products, and incorporating renewable energy systems have 
potentially very large savings for Canadian hospitals; one study which is likely an underestimate suggested 
a savings of a cumulative $150 million per year in utility spending with an average payback period of seven 
years (Waddington & Varangu, 2016). Currently, Health Canada is working with the Standards Council of 
Canada to explore opportunities to integrate climate change information into building codes for hospitals.
Some hospitals in Canada are taking action to reduce their fossil fuel use and GHG emissions and therefore 
become more resilient (Waddington & Varangu, 2016). By reducing on-site energy use, hospitals can 
cope with longer periods of power outages using their limited standby power. One of the challenges in 
understanding GHG emissions reported from hospitals is the lack of consistency in how this information is 
tracked and reported. These inconsistencies make it difficult to consolidate information on progress in the 
health sector.
Canada can learn from actions taken by a number of international partners in efforts to reduce GHGs in the 
health sector and build climate resilience. Pichler et al. (2019) reported that 14 countries, mainly in Europe, 
have been able to reduce the health sector carbon footprint even while real expenditure continues to grow. 
The large potential to benefit human health and the environment is illustrated through the efforts taken by the 
U.K. National Health Service (NHS), which was the first health care system in the world to routinely report on 
GHG emissions. Similar to Canada, the NHS contributes between 4% and 5% of the country’s carbon footprint. 
The NHS has undertaken a concerted effort to understand where the GHGs are generated in the health 
system and has developed a carbon reduction strategy and a roadmap to reduce these emissions. 
In 2016, the NHS Sustainable Development Unit for NHS England and Public Health England reported that 
the NHS reduced its carbon emissions by 11% between 2007 and 2015, exceeding the 10% target set in 2009 
(National Health Service, 2016). The wider sector, which also includes public health and social care, saw a 
13% reduction over the same period. These emission reductions occurred despite an 18% increase in health 
and social care activity. Carbon emissions reductions included a 16% reduction in relation to procurement, 
such as improvements to the footprint of pharmaceuticals; a 4% reduction in energy emissions through 
energy efficiency and conservation; and a 5% reduction in travel (National Health Service, 2016). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 736 
10.7 Knowledge Gaps
New knowledge, partnerships, and capacity-building on climate change and health in the health sector in 
Canada have increased opportunities to use evidence-based information to make greater strides in efforts to 
protect Canadians from future impacts. Assessment tools and methods have been developed, for example, to 
examine the impacts of projected stresses and strains from climate change on health systems and facilities 
to gauge their resilience to climate change impacts. However, much research on climate change and health 
adaptation is not accessible and practical for decision making; few studies exist on the effectiveness of measures 
to protect health, the ease of implementation, and the capacity required for action (Banwell et al., 2018).
Previous national assessments and reports in Canada since 1995 have identified knowledge gaps that need 
to be filled to support decision makers’ efforts to prepare for climate change impacts on health (Royal Society 
of Canada, 1995; Health Canada, 1999; Health Canada, 2001; Health Canada, 2004; Séguin, 2008; Berry et al., 
2014a; Brettle et al., 2016; Maguet, 2020). Disparities exist in the levels of research on climate change and 
health within each province and territory and across the country (Brettle et al., 2016). A review of Canadian 
research on climate change and health conducted from 2006 to 2016 found research on all of the identified 
gaps, but with wide variation in terms of the issue or region of Canada, focus, scale of research, and stage 
of knowledge maturation (e.g., limited numbers of field studies have been conducted and few interventions 
have been evaluated) (Kolnick, 2016). A much greater percentage of the 672 articles on climate change and 
health analyzed populations at increased risk, assessments, natural hazards, and food safety and/or security, 
compared to air quality, toxic substances, or psychosocial impacts. Only 11% of the articles focused on 
adaptation strategies and measures. In addition, the regional focus of research was also quite disparate, 
with many more articles examining climate change and health issues in Quebec, British Columbia, and 
Ontario, fewer in the North, and the least in other parts of Canada, particularly Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, 
and Prince Edward Island (Kolnick, 2016). A large proportion of the research addressed climate change and 
health from a national perspective. This may increase the relevance of these studies to a wider range of 
stakeholders but, in some cases, may decrease the capacity for these studies to inform local-level decision 
making and assessments. 
The study likely did not capture research that incorporated Indigenous knowledge and so does not represent 
a complete picture of climate change and health research in Canada. However, significant knowledge gaps 
exist related to climate change and First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples’ health in Canada, including 
adaptation options (see Chapter 2: Climate Change and Indigenous Peoples’ Health in Canada). Many 
communities in Northern Canada have increased their capacity and expertise related to research management, 
research design, and interpretation and communication of study results (Abele & Gladstone, n.d.). 
Further research is required in the following areas to support efforts to protect health and build climate-
resilient health systems in Canada: 
Adaptation measures
•	
Identification of equitable, effective (including cost-effective) adaptation measures for reducing 
health risks from current climate variability and projected climate change. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 737 
•	
Adaptation measures to address the health challenges and capacity issues First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis peoples face from climate change, including rural, remote, and Northern communities.
•	
Adaptation measures tailored for specific populations, for example, people experiencing 
homelessness (Kidd et al., 2020), children, and older populations and those living in rural, remote 
and Northern communities. 
•	
Adaptation measures to reduce risks to individuals and health systems from compounding and 
cascading events, including from possible non-linear changes in weather and future climate (Ebi 
et al., 2016a).
•	
Technical and operational synergies among actions to reduce disaster risk and options to adapt to 
climate change and health (e.g., health facility emergency preparedness plans) (Banwell et al., 2018). 
•	
Novel, integrated, and multidisciplinary surveillance and monitoring for climate change and health 
(e.g., data collection and analysis, citizen science, laboratory diagnostics, meta-genomics, and 
geospatial mapping) (ECCC, 2020).
•	
Standardized indicators of health risks posed by climate change, along with means of verification, 
similar to the indicators used to measure meteorological and climatological variables, to establish 
baselines for monitoring the effectiveness of adaptations (Cheng & Berry, 2013; Ebi et al., 2018a).
•	
Identification of risk trade-offs associated with various health adaptations (e.g., can breathable 
fabric protect against bites by ticks and mosquitos?; ensuring green spaces that help cool health 
care facilities are designed to not attract disease-bearing vectors). 
•	
Identification of effective tools, dissemination methods, and approaches to communicate climate 
change and health to decision makers and the public (WHO, 2009). 
•	
Effective strategies for aligning climate change and health promotion efforts with communication 
activities to support the reduction of GHGs.
•	
Information to support education efforts, communication of research findings, and resilience-
building in First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities, while supporting and strengthening the 
sharing and application of Indigenous knowledges including adaptation experiences. 
Health system resilience
•	
Current and projected climate-related impacts, vulnerabilities, and costs to health systems and 
facilities (e.g., health policies, programs, services, and infrastructure; health human resources 
planning, management, and training; and supply chains critical for health), including to rural, 
remote, and Northern health systems.
•	
Current and projected climate-related impacts, vulnerabilities, and costs to health systems and 
facilities that serve First Nations, Inuit, and Métis communities.
•	
Effective adaptation and resilience-building measures for health systems and facilities, including rural, 
remote, and Northern health systems and those serving First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples.
•	
Standardized GHG measurement methodologies (e.g., life-cycle assessment) for tracking health 
system and hospital GHG emissions to support targets and goals for the sector to reduce its 
carbon footprint and improve resilience.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 738 
•	
Best approaches for reducing the carbon footprint of the health sector, for example, by retrofitting 
existing health care facilities.
•	
Effective actions to address GHG emissions from the health sector supply chain, including 
evaluation of current purchasing practices in the Canadian health system and opportunities for 
suppliers to develop new, low-carbon products and services for the health sector.
•	
Synergies between actions that support climate change resilience, adaptation, and environmental 
sustainability in the health system and those that support financial sustainability (i.e., savings 
from energy efficiency investments; telemedicine and virtual health care; electronic health care 
records; supply chain costs).
•	
Easily accessible cooling technologies and practices that are not fossil-fuel-based for health care 
facilities, public cooling centres, and cooling for homes, both for new-builds and for retrofits of 
existing buildings.
Health co-benefits and risks of measures 
•	
Synergistic health co-benefits of various strategies to reduce GHG emissions to national targets 
that also reduce air pollution. 
•	
Direct and indirect health co-benefits and risks of measures taken by other sectors (e.g., 
water, agriculture, housing, transportation, insurance, energy, urban planning) to adapt to 
impacts (ECCC, 2020), including for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples and rural, remote, 
and Northern communities.
•	
Strategies that support health, including those that address the root causes of vulnerability and 
health inequities, and support the transition to a low-carbon economy in energy, agriculture, 
transportation, manufacturing, buildings, and other sectors.
Economic costs and benefits 
•	
Economic costs of the impacts of current climate variability and projected climate change on 
human health and health systems in Canada, as well as on social services that support the 
determinants of health.
•	
Assessments of the economic costs and health co-benefits of GHG mitigation and adaptation 
activities (WHO, 2009; Huang et al., 2013). 
•	
Economic, social and health benefits of actions to build climate-resilient health systems (ECCC, 2020).
These research gaps cover a broad spectrum of climate change hazards and impacts on health as well as 
common public health and health system interventions to protect populations. Addressing these information 
needs would likely contribute to reducing threats to Canadians from other health risks such as pandemic 
disease, facilitating adaptation and resilience to a wide range of hazards.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 739 
10.8 Conclusion
Climate change is a growing threat to the health of Canadians, communities, and health systems. Health 
systems and facilities in Canada are vulnerable to climate change, and many are already being affected by 
weather- and climate-related hazards. Climate change is increasing risks to health facility and health system 
staff, operations, and infrastructure. While many factors, such as future levels of inequity, social cohesion, 
and technological innovation will influence how the health of Canadians and their communities are affected 
by climate change, a major driver will be the resilience of health systems and the willingness and capacity of 
decision makers to take needed adaptive actions, in concert with partners in other sectors. 
Adaptation actions to prepare Canadians, including those at higher risk, can be effective in reducing 
health impacts. For example, the recent response to the growing danger of extreme heat events through 
the development of HARS has reduced health risks and poor health outcomes in some countries. Robust 
adaptation to reduce health risks requires adaptation by a wide range of actors in society at multiple temporal 
and geographic scales that take into account complex drivers of poor health outcomes. 
Analysis in this chapter suggests that a number of health authorities, from local to national levels, in Canada 
are taking adaptation actions to reduce health risks. However, fewer are taking concrete actions, such as 
developing a climate change and health program, dedicating targeted resources to adaptation, assessing 
resilience of critical health infrastructure, or training health professionals and staff. In addition, few provinces 
and territories have comprehensive (e.g., covering a wide range of likely risks to health) or substantive climate 
change and health adaptation actions as part of their broader climate change strategies, and no jurisdictions 
have a separate action plan or strategy that focuses exclusively on climate change and health. The wide 
diversity in efforts among health authorities, from local to national levels, with some taking aggressive action 
and others doing less, suggests many communities and health systems are at increased vulnerability to 
current and future projected impacts on health, including potentially very severe effects from compounding or 
cascading events. 
10.8.1 Scaling Up Health Adaptation 
Rapidly scaling up health adaptation measures is needed to help protect Canadians from current health 
hazards and to reduce risks from climate change impacts in the future, such as extreme weather events that 
exceed adaptive thresholds. Health authorities should build upon past and current efforts to prepare for a 
warmer world, such as undertaking vulnerability and adaptation assessments for climate change and health, 
examining risks to health facilities from climate change, and implementing targeted adaptations such as early 
warning systems. This may require going outside of normal approaches used by ministries of health, such 
as expanding integrated monitoring and surveillance activities, mainstreaming information about climate 
risk into new programs and policies, as well as training clinicians, health researchers, and public health 
professionals about how to protect health in a changing climate. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 740 
10.8.2 Indigenous Leadership and Collaboration
Progress in efforts to protect Canadians from climate change requires a commitment to upholding 
Indigenous leadership and partnership in research development and adaptation, including recognizing and 
using Indigenous knowledge in a respectful way. Inherent in these efforts is an openness to diverse ways 
of knowing and of learning from complementary and/or contrasting perspectives for adaptation decision-
making. Respectful collaboration will ensure that actions to protect health are based on meaningful engagement 
informed by the unique circumstances and opportunities of Indigenous Peoples and Northern, remote, and rural 
communities, thereby respecting, upholding, and advancing the rights of Indigenous peoples. 
10.8.3 Working with Other Sectors
Adaptation progress will also require working more closely with decision makers outside of the health sector 
(e.g., water, agriculture, insurance, housing, energy, environment, emergency management, urban planning, 
transport, and infrastructure) to implement preventive and equitable measures to protect Canadians including 
by more vigorously addressing the social and environmental determinants of health. These activities should 
focus on opportunities to address barriers that limit preparedness (e.g., poverty, inadequate housing and 
infrastructure, ineffective communications), and to reduce uncertainty through increased collaborative 
research on impacts and effectiveness of adaptation. 
Strong measures to reduce GHGs are needed to protect health and ensure that the ability of Canadians to 
adapt is not limited due to the severity of impacts. Very large health co-benefits can be achieved through multi-
sectoral climate change adaptation to build resilience and through well-designed GHG mitigation efforts. Health 
decision makers have an important leadership role to play in raising awareness of these benefits and providing 
needed information to support robust efforts to address climate change through GHG mitigation (PHAC, 2017), 
including reducing the carbon footprint of the health sector, which is a major emitter of GHGs. 
10.8.4 A National Health Adaptation Strategy
National adaptation strategies for climate change and health must provide a comprehensive framework 
identifying key actors, accountabilities, priority areas of action, and clear goals and objectives. Such 
strategies can reduce future costs of preparedness through greater sharing of information and through more 
robust collaboration and coordination of efforts (WHO, 2021). The Government of Canada is developing 
its first ever national adaptation strategy that is expected to be released in 2023 (Government of Canada, 
2021). A strong health component of a national strategy would include efforts to provide assistance to 
people and communities at highest risk through equitable adaptation measures. Actions would address the 
physical and operational risks of climate change to health systems and their infrastructure by supporting 
facility assessments, preparedness, and resilience-building, considering the special challenges faced by rural, 
remote and Indigenous health services and through efforts to update relevant codes and standards. It would 
enhance capacity for climate change and health modelling, forecasting, and state of the art early warning 
systems informed by surveillance of climate change and health indicators. A core component of a health 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 741 
adaptation strategy would be to work with other sectors to incorporate the perspectives, needs, and voices of 
equity-seeking groups and the general public. Considerations of social justice and integration of a gendered 
perspective into future climate change and health activities are needed to support resilience-building efforts; 
these considerations include empowering people disproportionately affected by climate change (e.g., 
Indigenous Peoples, women, people of low socio-economic status, immigrants) as educators, caregivers, 
holders of knowledge and agents of social change (Sorensen et al., 2018). 
Greater efforts are needed to educate the public and decision makers about potential impacts and the 
benefits of preparedness to support scaled-up actions. This can include collaborating on climate change and 
health communications with the health care community and non-governmental organizations; increasing 
public health education using evidence-based advice and social marketing approaches; and developing a 
single window to provide easy access to climate change and health communication materials and messages 
(Brettle et al., 2016). Such activities would help Canadians, communities and their health systems move 
beyond responsive and more costly adaptation toward transformational adaptation that builds resilience to 
future climate change. 
A national strategy could address many existing barriers to health adaptation, including limited social capital 
and ability to engage health relevant sectors, cognitive limits to behavioural change (Huang et al., 2011), 
a narrow framing of public health interventions that omits action on root causes of vulnerability (Gould 
& Rudolph, 2015) and the absence of coordinated planning among health sector partners at all levels of 
government. Through close collaboration, health decision makers, civil society partners, researchers, and 
members of the public can meet the challenge of climate change head-on, building more resilient health 
systems and communities to better protect health, now and in the future.
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 742 
10.9 References 
ABC News. (2018). Japan heatwave kills 30 and hospitalises 
thousands as authorities continue flood clean-up. Retrieved from 
<https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-07-22/japan-heatwave-
kills-30-and-sees-thousands-in-hospital/10022488> 
Abele, F., & Gladstone, J. (n.d.). Health Canada Climate Change 
Health Adaptation Program: Synthesis report and impact analysis. 
Climate Telling. Retrieved from <http://www.climatetelling.info/
uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/cchap_final_report.pdf> 
Adaptation to Climate Change Team (ACT). (2018). LCR 
conceptual process model. Retrieved from <http://act-adapt.org/
wp-content/uploads/2018/12/2.2._lcr_best_practices_web.pdf>
Alberta Health Services. (2013a). AHS Update: Medicine Hat field 
hospital to close as waters recede; focus on safe return home for 
evacuees. Retrieved from <https://www.albertahealthservices.
ca/news/releases/2013/Page8677.aspx> 
Alberta Health Services. (2013b). 100 days after the flood. 
Retrieved from <https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/news/
features/2013/Page9142.aspx>
Alberta Health Services. (2014). Alberta Health Services Annual 
Report 2013-2014. Alberta, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.
albertahealthservices.ca/Publications/ahs-pub-2013-2014-
annual-report.pdf>
Anderson, H., Brown, C., Cameron, L. L., Christenson, M., 
Conlon, K. C., Dorevitch, S., Dumas, J., Eidson, M., Ferguson, 
A., Grossman, E., Hanson, A., Hess, J. J., Hoppe, B., Horton, 
J., Jagger, M., Krueger, S., Largo, T. W., Losurdo, G. M., 
Mack, S. R., Moran, C., … Walker, R. (2017). Climate and 
Health Intervention Assessment: Evidence on Public Health 
Interventions to Prevent the Negative Health Effects of 
Climate Change. Climate and Health Technical Report Series. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Retrieved 
from <https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/docs/
ClimateAndHealthInterventionAssessment_508.pdf>
Arbuthnott, K., Hajat, S., & Heaviside, C. (2016). Changes in 
population susceptibility to heat and cold over time: assessing 
adaptation to climate change. Environmental Health, 15(S33). 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-016-0102-7> 
Austin, S. E., Biesbroek, R., Berrang-Ford, L., Ford, J. D., 
Parker, S., & Fleury, M. D. (2016). Public Health Adaptation to 
Climate Change in OECD Countries. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 13(9), 889. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph13090889>
Austin, S. E., Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Biesbroek, R., & Ross, 
N. A. (2019). Enabling local public health adaptation to climate 
change. Social Science & Medicine (1982), 220, 236–244. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.11.002> 
Baccini, M., Kosatsky, T., Analitis, A., Anderson, H. R., D’Ovidio, 
M., Menne, B., … Biggeri, A. (2011).
Impact of heat on mortality in 15 European cities: Attributable 
deaths under different weather scenarios. Journal of 
Epidemiology and Community Health, 65(1), 64–70. <https://doi.
org/10.1136/jech.2008.085639>
Balbus, J., Berry, P., Brettle, M., Jagnarine-Azan, S., Soares, A., 
Ugarte, C., Varangu, L., & Prats, E. V. (2016). Enhancing the 
sustainability and climate resiliency of health care facilities: a 
comparison of initiatives and toolkits. Revista Panamericana de 
Salud Publica = Pan American Journal of Public Health, 40(3), 
174–180.
Banwell, N., Rutherford, S., Mackey, B., & Chu, C. (2018). Towards 
Improved Linkage of Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate 
Change Adaptation in Health: A Review. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(4), 793. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15040793> 
Barreca, A., Clay, K., Deschenes, O., Greenstone, M., & Shapiro, J. 
S. (2016). Adapting to climate change: The remarkable decline 
in the US temperature-mortality relationship over the twentieth 
century. Journal of Political Economy, 124(1), 105-159. 
Bartko, M., & Macdonald, I. (2017). Climate resilience feasibility 
study of facilities at Fraser Canyon Hospital. National Research 
Council Canada, A1-010678.2. Retrieved from <https://
bcgreencare.ca/system/files/resource-files/Fraser%20
Health%20Final%20Report%2010%20November.pdf>
BC Health Authorities. (2020). Climate resilience guidelines for 
BC health facility planning & design. Retrieved from <https://
bcgreencare.ca/system/files/resource-files/Climate resilience-
Guidelines-Health-Facilities_v1-1.pdf>
Beaudoin, M., & Gosselin, P. (2016). An effective public 
health program to reduce urban heat islands in Québec, 
Canada. Revista Panamericana de Salud Publica = Pan American 
Journal of Public Health, 40(3), 160–166.
Beaudoin, M., & Levasseur, M.-E. (2017). Verdir les villes pour 
la santé de la population Verdir les villes pour la santé de la 
population. Institut National De Santé Publique Du Québec. 
Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/
publications/2265_verdir_villes_sante_population.pdf>
Benmarhnia, T., Bailey, Z., Kaiser, D., Auger, N., King, N., 
& Kaufman, J. S. (2016). A Difference-in-Differences 
Approach to Assess the Effect of a Heat Action Plan on 
Heat-Related Mortality, and Differences in Effectiveness 
According to Sex, Age, and Socioeconomic Status (Montreal, 
Quebec). Environmental Health Perspectives, 124(11), 1694–
1699. <https://doi.org/10.1289/EHP203> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 743 
Benmarhnia, T., Zhao, X., Wang, J., Macdonald, M., & Chen, H. 
(2019). Evaluating the potential public health impacts of the 
Toronto cold weather program. Environment International, 127, 
381–386. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2019.03.042> 
Berry, P. (2008). Vulnerabilities, adaptation and adaptive 
capacity. In J. Séguin (Ed.), Human Health in a Changing 
Climate: A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive 
Capacity. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved from <https://
publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-sc/H128-1-
08-528E.pdf>
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014a). Human 
health. In F. J. Warren, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada in 
a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Berry, P., Paterson, J., & Buse, C. (2014b). Assessment of 
vulnerability to the health impacts of climate change in 
Middlesex-London. Report prepared for the Middlesex-London 
Health Unit. London, United Kingdom. Retrieved from <https://
www.healthunit.com/climate-change> 
Berry, P., Enright, P. M., Shumake-Guillemot, J., Villalobos 
Prats, E., & Campbell-Lendrum, D. (2018). Assessing Health 
Vulnerabilities and Adaptation to Climate Change: A Review of 
International Progress. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(12), 2626. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph15122626> 
Boeckmann, M., & Rohn, I. (2014). Is planned adaptation 
to heat reducing heat-related mortality and illness? A 
systematic review. BMC public health, 14, 1112. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-14-1112> 
Bouzid, M., Hooper, L., & Hunter, P. R. (2013). The effectiveness 
of public health interventions to reduce the health impact of 
climate change: a systematic review of systematic reviews. PloS 
One, 8(4), e62041. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0062041> 
Boynton, S. (2020). Landslides created by B.C. storm lead to 
phone service outages across province. Global News. Retrieved 
from <https://globalnews.ca/news/6495369/bc-landslides-cell-
service-roads/>
Brettle, M., MacMillan, K-A., Kolnick, L., & Berry, P. (2016). 
Climate change and health resiliency collaboration: Workshop 
report. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada.
Bustinza, R., Lebel, G., Gosselin, P., Bélanger, D., & Chebana, 
F. (2013). Health impacts of the July 2010 heatwave in 
Québec, Canada. BMC Public Health, 13, 56. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-56> 
Callison, C., & Tindall, D. B. (2017). Climate change 
communication in Canada. Oxford Research Encyclopidia 
of Climate Science. <https://doi.org/10.1093/
acrefore/9780190228620.013.477> 
Campbell-Lendrum, D., Guillemot, J., & Ebi, K. L. (2015). Climate 
change and health vulnerability assessments: A Practical 
Approach. In G. Luber, & J. Lemery (Eds.), Global Climate Change 
and Human Health: From Science to Practice. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass.
Campbell-Lendrum, D., Villalobas Prats, E., & Kendrovski, 
V. (n.d.). Estimating the cost of health adaptation [Webinar 
Presentation]. World Health Organization. Retrieved from 
<https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/resource/CGE_
wenbinar%236_presentation.pdf> 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. (2010). Emergency room 
shut down by flooding. CBC News. Retrieved from <https://www.
cbc.ca/news/canada/prince-edward-island/emergency-room-
shut-down-by-flooding-1.905581>
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. (2012). Flooding 
causes state of emergency in N.B. community. CBC News. 
Retrieved from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/new-
brunswick/flooding-causes-state-of-emergency-in-n-b-
community-1.1196731>
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. (2013). Flood in High 
River destroyed many medical files. CBC News. Retrieved from 
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/flood-in-high-river-
destroyed-many-medical-files-1.1329905> 
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. (2017). Maniwaki long-term 
care home to be evacuated due to floods. CBC News. Retrieved 
from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/ottawa/maniwaki-
seniors-home-evacuated-due-to-floods-1.5133108> 
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2015a). Resiliency 
Profile 1: Health Sciences Centre Well Equipped to Handle 
Flooding Events on Urban Campus. Retrieved from <https://
greenhealthcare.ca/resiliency/images/publications/1-Resiliency-
Profile-Winnipeg.pdf>
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2015b). Resiliency 
Profile 2: Nanaimo Hospital Builds resiliency into new Emergency 
Department. Retrieved from <https://greenhealthcare.ca/resiliency/
images/publications/2-Resiliency-Profile-Nanaimo.pdf> 
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2017). Resiliency 
Profile 7: Ice storm and backup generator failures combine 
for unparalleled challenges. Retrieved from <https://
greenhealthcare.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/04/7-Resiliency-
Profile-Sunnybrook-ice-March24-2017-FINAL.pdf>
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2018). Identifying 
methods, data sources and indicators of climate change impacts 
for assessing the resiliency of Canadian health care facilities. 
Report prepared for Health Canada.
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2019a). Climate 
Change Resiliency Mentoring. Retrieved from <http://
greenhealthcare.ca/mentoring/>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 744 
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2019b). Green 
Hospital Scorecard 2018 Survey Results. Retrieved from <https://
greenhealthcare.ca/ghs/> 
Canadian Coalition for Green Health Care. (2020). Green Health 
Leaders’ Initiative. Retrieved from <https://greenhealthcare.ca/
ghli/>
Canadian Healthcare Facilities. (2017). In the face of Fire. 
Journal of Canadian Healthcare Engineering Society, 38(1), 28-29. 
Canadian Institute for Climate Choices (CICC). (2021). The 
health costs of climate change: How Canada can adapt, prepare 
and save lives. Retrieved from <https://climatechoices.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2021/06/ClimateChoices_Health-report_Final_
June2021.pdf>
Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI). (2018). Quick 
Stats. Retrieved from <https://www.cihi.ca/en/quick-stats>
Casanueva, A., Burgstall, A., Kotlarski, S., Messeri, A., 
Morabito, M., Flouris, A. D., Nybo, L., Spirig, C., & Schwierz, C. 
(2019). Overview of Existing Heat-Health Warning Systems 
in Europe. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 16(15), 2657. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph16152657> 
Chau, P. H., Chan, K. C., & Woo, J. (2009). Hot weather 
warning might help to reduce elderly mortality in Hong 
Kong. International Journal of Biometeorology, 53(5), 461–468. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-009-0232-5> 
Cheng, J. J., & Berry, P. (2013). Health co-benefits and risks of 
public health adaptation strategies to climate change: a review 
of current literature. International journal of public health, 58(2), 
305–311. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00038-012-0422-5> 
Chronic Disease Prevention Alliance of Canada. (2017). 
Submission to SOCI regarding Bill S-228, An Act to amend 
the Food and Drugs Act (prohibiting food and beverage 
marketing directed at children). Retrieved from <https://
sencanada.ca/content/sen/committee/421/SOCI/Briefs/
ChronicDiseasePreventionAlliance_e.pdf>
Ciscar, J. C., Feyen, L., Soria, A., Lavalle, C., Raes, F., Perry, 
M., Nemry, F., Demirel, H., Rozsai, M., Dosio, A., Donatelli, M., 
Srivastava, A., Fumagalli, D., Niemeyer, S., Shrestha, S., Ciaian, P., 
Himics, M., Van Doorslaer, B., Barrios, S., Ibáñez, N.,… Ibarreta, D. 
(2014). Climate Impacts in Europe. The JRC PESETA II Project. 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European 
Union. Retrieved from <https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
repository/handle/JRC87011> 
City of Toronto. (2019). City of Toronto Hot Weather Response 
Framework 2019. Retrieved from <https://www.toronto.ca/
wp-content/uploads/2019/05/9030-2019-HWR-Framework-
updated-05-22-19.AODA_.pdf>
Commito, M. (2018). Six dead, hundreds of homes destroyed: 
Today’s the anniversary of the deadly 1970 tornado. Sudbury 
Local News. Retrieved from <https://www.sudbury.com/local-
news/today-marks-anniversary-of-1970-tornado-699382> 
Council of Canadian Academies (CCA). (2019). Canada’s Top 
Climate Change Risks: The Expert Panel on Climate Change Risks 
and Adaptation Potential. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
cca-reports.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Report-Canada-
top-climate-change-risks.pdf>
Crump, J., Jacob, K., King, P., Mangalagiu, D., Zickgraf, C., 
Abiodun, B. J., Armiento, G., Bailey, R., Baker, E., Bowen, K. J., 
Dankelman, I., Djalante, R., Dutta, M., Hurley, F., Iraola, M. J., 
Kim, R. E., King, R., Kirilenko, A., dos Santos Lucon, O., Lyne, K., 
Martino, D., … Wright, C. Y. (2019). Systemic Policy Approaches 
for Cross-cutting Issues. In P. Ekins, J. Gupta, & P. Boileau (Eds.), 
Global Environment Outlook GEO-6: Healthy Planet, Healthy 
People (p. 425-448). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge 
University Press. Retrieved from <https://wedocs.unep.org/
handle/20.500.11822/27539> 
CTV Barrie. (2019). 130 surgeries cancelled at RVH due to 
A/C malfunction. CTV News. Retrieved from <https://barrie.
ctvnews.ca/130-surgeries-cancelled-at-rvh-due-to-a-c-
malfunction-1.4499225>
Curtis, S., Fair, A., Wistow, J., Val, D. V., & Oven, K. (2017). Impact 
of extreme weather events and climate change for health and 
social care systems. Environmental Health : A Global Access 
Science Source, 16(Suppl 1), 128. <https://doi.org/10.1186/
s12940-017-0324-3> 
Das, S., & Smith, S. C. (2012). Awareness as an adaptation 
strategy for reducing mortality from heatwaves: evidence 
from a disaster risk management program in India, Climate 
Change Economics, 3(2), 1250010. <https://doi.org/10.1142/
S2010007812500108> 
Deas, M., Grannis, J., Hoverter, S., & DeWeese, J. (2017). 
Opportunities for equitable adaptation in cities: A workshop 
summary report. Washington, DC: Georgetown Climate Centre. 
Retrieved from <https://www.georgetownclimate.org/files/report/
GCC-Opportunities_for_Equitable_Adaptation-Feb_2017.pdf>
de’ Donato, F. K., Leone, M., Scortichini, M., De Sario, M., 
Katsouyanni, K., Lanki, T., Basagaña, X., Ballester, F., Åström, C., 
Paldy, A., Pascal, M., Gasparrini, A., Menne, B., & Michelozzi, P. 
(2015). Changes in the Effect of Heat on Mortality in the Last 
20 Years in Nine European Cities. Results from the PHASE 
Project. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 12(12), 15567–15583. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph121215006> 
Demers-Bouffard, D. (2021). L’adaptation aux changements 
climatiques dans le réseau de la santé au Québec : les progrès, 
les facteurs facilitants, les barrières et les besoins. Institut 
national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved from <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/publications/2719-adaptation-changements-
climatiques-reseau-sante-quebec>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 745 
DesMeules, M., & Pong, R. (Eds.). (2006). How healthy are 
rural Canadians? An assessment of their health status and 
health determinants. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Institute of Health 
Information. Retrieved from <https://secure.cihi.ca/free_
products/rural_canadians_2006_report_e.pdf> 
Dodd, W., Scott, P., Howard, C., Scott, C., Rose, C., Cunsolo, A., & 
Orbinski, J. (2018). Lived experience of a record wildfire season 
in the Northwest Territories, Canada. Canadian journal of public 
health = Revue canadienne de sante publique, 109(3), 327–337. 
<https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-018-0070-5> 
Doyle, H., Malim, S., & Tapinder, F. S. (2017). Climate change and 
public health in Ontario. Ontario Public Health Association.
Drinkwater, R. (2016). Fort McMurray fire: Hospital safely moves 
all 105 patients. The Canadian Press. Retrieved from <https://
www.huffingtonpost.ca/entry/9843450> 
Dupuis, J., & Biesbroek, R. (2013). Comparing apples and 
oranges: The dependent variable problem in comparing 
and evaluating climate change adaptation policies. Global 
Environmental Change, 23(6), 1476-1487. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.07.022> 
Ebi K. L. (2011a). Climate change and health risks: assessing 
and responding to them through ‘adaptive management’. Health 
affairs (Project Hope), 30(5), 924–930. <https://doi.org/10.1377/
hlthaff.2011.0071> 
Ebi K. L. (2011b). Resilience to the health risks of extreme 
weather events in a changing climate in the United 
States. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 8(12), 4582–4595. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph8124582> 
Ebi, K. L. (2016). Adaptation and resilience. Public Health 
Reviews, 37(17). <https://doi.org/10.1186/s40985-016-0032-5> 
Ebi, K. L., & del Barrio, M. O. (2017). Lessons Learned on Health 
Adaptation to Climate Variability and Change: Experiences 
Across Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 125(6), 065001. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
EHP405>
Ebi, K. L., Berry, P., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Cissé, G., 
Hess, J., Ogden, N., & Schnitter, R. (2019). Health 
System Adaptation to Climate Variability and Change. 
Washington, DC: University of Washington. Retrieved 
from <https://gca.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/
HealthSystemAdaptationToClimateVariabilityandChange_0.pdf> 
Ebi, K. L., Berry, P., Hayes, K., Boyer, C., Sellers, S., Enright, 
P. M., & Hess, J. J. (2018b). Stress Testing the Capacity of 
Health Systems to Manage Climate Change-Related Shocks 
and Stresses. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(11), 2370. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15112370>
Ebi, K. L., Boyer, C., Bowen, K. J., Frumkin, H., & Hess, J. (2018a). 
Monitoring and Evaluation Indicators for Climate Change-Related 
Health Impacts, Risks, Adaptation, and Resilience. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(9), 
1943. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15091943>
Ebi, K. L., Boyer, C., Ogden, N., Paz, S., Berry, P., Campbell-
Lendrum, D., Hess, J. J., & Woodward, A. (2021). 
Burning embers: synthesis of the health risks of climate 
change. Environmental Research Letters, 16(4), 044042. 
doi:10.1088/1748-9326/abeadd
Ebi, K. L., Hess, J. J., & Isaksen, T. B. (2016c). Using Uncertain 
Climate and Development Information in Health Adaptation 
Planning. Current Environmental Health Reports, 3(1), 99–105. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-016-0077-0> 
Ebi, K. L., Hess, J. J., & Watkiss, P. (2017). Health risks and 
costs of climate change variability and change. In C. N. Mock, 
R. Nugent, O. Kobusingye, & K. R. Smith (Eds.), Injury prevention 
and environmental health: Disease control priorities (3rd, ed.). 
Washington, DC: World Bank Group. 
Ebi, K. L., & Semenza, J. C. (2008). Community-based adaptation 
to the health impacts of climate change. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 35(5), 501–507. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2008.08.018>
Ebi, K. L., Semenza, J. C., & Rocklöv, J. (2016b). Current medical 
research funding and frameworks are insufficient to address 
the health risks of global environmental change. Environmental 
Health: A Global Access Science Source, 15(1), 108. <https://doi.
org/10.1186/s12940-016-0183-3>
Ebi, K. L., Ziska, L. H., & Yohe, G. W. (2016a). The shape of 
impacts to come: Lessons and opportunities for adaptation from 
uneven increases in global and regional temperatures. Climatic 
Change, 139(3), 341-349. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-016-
1816-9>
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2019). 
Facility-report greenhouse gas data. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/environment-climate-change/services/
climate-change/greenhouse-gas-emissions/facility-reporting/
data.html>
Eckelman, M. J., Sherman, J. D., & MacNeill, A. J. (2018). Life 
cycle environmental emissions and health damages from the 
Canadian healthcare system: An economic-environmental-
epidemiological analysis. PLoS Medicine, 15(7), e1002623. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002623>
Elliott, S. J., Bisung, E., Mulligan, K., & Wandel, J. (2017). 
Assessing Resilience of the Canadian Health
System to the Impacts of Climate Change: A Proposed Analytical 
Framework. Report prepared for Health Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Environics Research Group. (2017). Public Perceptions of 
Climate Change – Final Report. Report Prepared for Health 
Canada. Ottawa, ON. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 746 
Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). (2020). 
Climate Science 2050: Advancing Science and Knowledge 
on Climate Change. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://
publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2020/eccc/En4-414-
2020-eng.pdf> 
Eyzaguirre, J., & Warren, F. J. (2014). Adapting: Linking Research 
and Practice. In F. J. Warren, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation (pp. 253–286). Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada.
Ford, J. D., & King, D. (2015). A framework for examining 
adaptation readiness. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for 
Global Change, 20, 505-526. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11027-
013-9505-8> 
Ford, J. D., Sherman, M., Berrang-Ford, L., Llanos, A., Carcamo, 
C., Harper, S., Lwasa, S., Namanya, D., Marcello, T., Maillet, M., 
& Edge, V. (2018). Preparing for the health impacts of climate 
change in Indigenous communities: The role of community-
based adaptation. Global Environmental Change, 49, 129-139. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2018.02.006> 
Fouillet, A., Rey, G., Wagner, V., Laaidi, K., Empereur-Bissonnet, 
P., Le Tertre, A., … Hémon, D. (2008). Has the impact of 
heatwaves on mortality changed in France since the European 
heatwave of summer 2003? A study of the 2006 heatwave. 
International Journal of Epidemiology, 37(2), 309–17. <https://
doi.org/10.1093/ije/dym253>
Fraser Basin Council. (2016). Lower Mainland Flood Management 
Strategy: Phase 1 Summary Report. Retrieved from <https://www.
fraserbasin.bc.ca/_Library/Water_Flood_Strategy/FBC_LMFMS_
Phase_1_Report_Web_May_2016.pdf>
Friel, S. (2019). Climate Change and the People’s Health (N. 
Krieger, Ed). Oxford University Press. 
Friel, S., Bowen, K., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Frumkin, H., 
McMichael, A. J., & Rasanathan, K. (2011). Climate change, 
noncommunicable diseases, and development: the relationships 
and common policy opportunities. Annual Review of Public 
Health, 32, 133–147. <https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
publhealth-071910-140612>
Frumkin, H. (2011). Bumps on the road to 
preparedness. American journal of preventive medicine, 40(2), 
272–273. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2010.11.001>
Frumkin, H., Hess, J., Luber, G., Malilay, J., & McGeehin, M. 
(2008). Climate change: the public health response. American 
Journal of Public Health, 98(3), 435–445. <https://doi.
org/10.2105/AJPH.2007.119362>
GEP. (2017). Puerto Rico Crisis ― Impact on Healthcare Supplies. 
Retrieved from <https://www.gep.com/mind/blog/puerto-rico-
crisis-impact-healthcare-supplies>
Glasser, R. (2019). Special Report: Preparing for the Era of 
Disasters. Australian Strategic Policy Institute. Retrieved from 
<https://www.aspi.org.au/report/preparing-era-disasters> 
Global Heat Health Information Network (GHHIN). (2018). Heat 
health action plans database. Retrieved from <https://ghhin.org/
heat-action-plans-and-case-studies/>
Globe and Mail. (2003). Halifax cleans up after the biggest 
storm in decades. The Globe and Mail. Retrieved from <https://
www.theglobeandmail.com/news/national/halifax-cleans-up-
after-biggest-storm-in-decades/article20451342/>
Gosselin, P. (2010). Health of populations. In C. DesJarlais, 
M. Allard, D. Bélanger, A. Blondlot, A. Bouffard, A. Bourque, D. 
Chaumont, P. Gosselin, D. Houle, C. Larrivée, N. Lease, A. T. 
Pham, R. Roy,
J.-P. Savard, R. Turcotte, & C. Villeneuve (Eds.), Learning to 
adapt to climate change. Montréal, QC: Ouranos. Retrieved 
from <https://www.ouranos.ca/wp-content/uploads/
RapportDesjarlais2010_EN.pdf> 
Gosselin, P., Mehiriz, K., Tardif, I., Lemieux, M-A., & Beaudoin, 
S. (2018). Téléphone santé : un automate d’appel aux résultats 
prometteurs lors de vagues de chaleur ou de smog. Institut 
National de Santé Publique du Québec. Retrieved from <https://
www.inspq.qc.ca/bise/telephone-sante-un-automate-d-appel-aux-
resultats-prometteurs-lors-de-vagues-de-chaleur-ou-de-smog>
Gosselin, P., Bustinza, R. & Bélanger, D. (2021). Les changements 
climatiques Abrégé à l’intention des professionnels de la santé. 
Institut national de santé publique du Québec. Retrieved from 
<https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/2777-
changements-climatiques-abrege-professionnels-sante.pdf>
Gould, S., & Rudolph, L. (2015). Challenges and Opportunities 
for Advancing Work on Climate Change and Public 
Health. International Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 12(12), 15649–15672. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph121215010> 
Government of British Columbia. (2019). Carbon Neutral 
Government Program Requirements. Retrieved from <https://
www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/climate-change/
public-sector/carbon-neutral>
Government of Canada. (2015). Cleaner vehicles and fuels 
for Canadians: Final Tier 3 vehicle and fuel standards. Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/news/
archive/2015/07/cleaner-vehicles-fuels-canadians-final-tier-3-
vehicle-fuel-standards.html> 
Government of Canada. (2016). Pan Canadian Framework on 
Clean Growth and Climate Change. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from 
<https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/themes/environment/
documents/weather1/20170125-en.pdf>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 747 
Government of Canada. (2017). Canada’s Seventh National 
Communication on Climate Change and Third Biennial 
Report—Actions to meet commitments under the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved from <https://unfccc.int/files/national_
reports/national_communications_and_biennial_reports/
application/pdf/82051493_canada-nc7-br3-1-5108_eccc_
can7thncomm3rdbi-report_en_04_web.pdf> 
Government of Canada. (2019). Climate change and health: 
Health effects. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
health-canada/services/climate-change-health.html>
Government of Canada. (2020a). Climate change and health 
adaptation program. Retrieved from <https://www.sac-isc.gc.ca/
eng/1536238477403/1536780059794> 
Government of Canada. (2020b). A healthy environment and a 
healthy economy: Canada’s strengthened climate plan to create 
jobs and support people, communities and the planet. Ottawa, 
ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/services/
environment/weather/climatechange/climate-plan/climate-plan-
overview/healthy-environment-healthy-economy.html> 
Government of Canada. (2021). Greenhouse gas emissions: 
Drivers and impacts. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/environmental-indicators/
greenhouse-gas-emissions-drivers-impacts.html> 
Government of New Brunswick. (2012). Flood Details - 2012-
03-23 - 2012-03-25. Retrieved from <https://www.elgegl.gnb.
ca/0001/en/Flood/Details/322>
Government of New Brunswick. (2018). Perth-Andover hospital 
upgrades nearing completion. Retrieved from <https://www2.
snb.ca/content/gnb/en/news/news_release.2018.05.0629.html>
Government of Québec. (2012a). Québec in Action: Greener 
by 2020 – 2013-2020 Climate Change Action Plan. Québec, 
QC. Retrieved from <https://www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca/
changements/plan_action/pacc2020-en.pdf> 
Government of Québec. (2012b). Québec in Action: Greener 
by 2020 – 2013-2020 Government Strategy for Climate change 
adaptation. Québec, QC. Retrieved from <https://www.
environnement.gouv.qc.ca/changements/plan_action/stategie-
adaptation2013-2020-en.pdf> 
Green, S., Kim, S., Gaudet, M., & Cheung, E. (2018). Doctor’s 
prescription for cycling. Canadian family Physician Medecin de 
Famille Canadien, 64(10), 715–716.
Guilbault, S., Kovacs, P., Berry, P., & Richardson, G. R. A. (2016). 
Cities adapt to extreme heat: Celebrating local leadership. 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved from 
<https://www.iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/PDFS/cities-adapt-to-
extreme-heat.pdf> 
Hackett, F., Got, T., Kitching, G. T., MacQueen, K., & Cohen, A. 
(2020). Training Canadian doctors for the health challenges 
of climate change. The Lancet. Planetary health, 4(1), e2–e3. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(19)30242-6> 
Haines, A., & Ebi, K. (2019). The Imperative for Climate Action 
to Protect Health. The New England Journal of Medicine, 380(3), 
263–273. <https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMra1807873>
Haines, A., McMichael, A. J., Smith, K. R., Roberts, I., Woodcock, 
J., Markandya, A., Armstrong, B. G., Campbell-Lendrum, D., 
Dangour, A. D., Davies, M., Bruce, N., Tonne, C., Barrett, M., & 
Wilkinson, P. (2009). Public health benefits of strategies to 
reduce greenhouse-gas emissions: overview and implications 
for policy makers. Lancet (London, England), 374(9707), 2104–
2114. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61759-1> 
Hamilton, I., Kennard, H., McGushin, A., Höglund-Isaksson, L., 
Kiesewetter, G., Lott, M., Milner, J., Purohit, P., Rafaj., P., Sharma, 
R., Springman, M., Woodcock, J., & Watts, N. (2021). The public 
health implications of the Paris Agreement: a modelling study. 
Lancet Planetary Health, 5(2), e74-e83. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2542-5196(20)30249-7>
Hathaway, J., & Maibach, E. W. (2018). Health Implications of 
Climate Change: a Review of the Literature About the Perception 
of the Public and Health Professionals. Current Environmental 
Health Reports, 5(1), 197–204. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s40572-
018-0190-3> 
Health Canada. (1999). CAPITALizing on Science: Report of a 
Workshop on Climate Change, Science and Health. Canadian 
Journal of Public Health.
Health Canada. (2001). How will climate change affect priorities 
for your health science and policy research? [Conference]. First 
annual national health and climate change science and policy 
research consensus conference. Ottawa, ON. 
Health Canada. (2004). Climate change and health: Research 
report. Ottawa, ON.
Health Canada. (2012). Heat alert and response systems to 
protect health: Best practices guidebook. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/
environmental-workplace-health/reports-publications/climate-
change-health/heat-alert-response-systems-protect-health-best-
practices-guidebook.html>
Health Canada. (2019a). HealthADAPT. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/programs/health-adapt.html>
Health Canada. (2020a). Its much too hot: Protect yourself from 
extreme heat. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.
ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/healthy-living/too-
hot-protect-yourself-extreme-heat.html>
Health Canada. (2020b). Keep children cool! Protect your child 
from extreme heat. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.
canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/publications/healthy-
living/keep-children-cool-extreme-heat.html>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 748 
Health Canada. (2020c). You’re active in the heat. You’re at 
risk! Protect yourself from extreme heat. Ottawa, ON. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/
environmental-workplace-health/reports-publications/climate-
change-health/you-active-heat-you-risk-protect-yourself-
extreme-heat-2011-health-canada-brochure.html>
Health Canada. (2020d). Reducing urban heat islands to protect 
health in Canada. An introduction for public health professionals. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
services/health/publications/healthy-living/reducing-urban-heat-
islands-protect-health-canada.html>
Health Canada. (2021). Extreme heat and human health: 
Information for pharmacists and pharmacist technicians 
[Factsheet]. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/content/
dam/hc-sc/documents/services/publications/healthy-living/
extreme-heat-human-health-pharmacists-technicians/extreme-
heat-human-health-pharmacists-technicians-eng.pdf> 
Health Care Climate Council. (2018). Climate action: A playbook 
for hospitals. Retrieved from <https://climatecouncil.noharm.org/>
Health Care Without Harm. (2018). Safe haven: Protecting lives 
and margins with climate-smart health care. Retrieved from 
<https://noharm-uscanada.org/sites/default/files/documents-
files/5146/Safe%20Haven.pdf>
Health Care Without Harm & ARUP. (2019). Health Care’s Climate 
Footprint: How the Health Sector Contributes to the Global 
Climate Crisis and Opportunities for Action. Retrieved from 
<https://noharm-global.org/sites/default/files/documents-
files/5961/HealthCaresClimateFootprint_092319.pdf> 
Hess, J. J., & Ebi, K. L. (2016). Iterative management of heat 
early warning systems in a changing climate. Annals of the New 
York Academy of Sciences, 1382(1), 21–30.
Hess, J., Lm, S., Knowlton, K., Saha, S., Dutta, P., Ganguly, P., 
Tiwari, A., Jaiswal, A., Sheffield, P., Sarkar, J., Bhan, S., Begda, 
A., Shah, T.A., Solanki, B., & Mavalankar, D. (2018). Building 
Resilience to Climate Change: Pilot Evaluation of the Impact of 
India’s First Heat Action Plan on All-Cause Mortality. Journal 
of Environmental and Public Health, 2018(9). <https://doi.
org/10.1155/2018/7973519> 
Heudorf, U., & Schade, M. (2014). Heatwaves and mortality 
in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 2003-2013: what effect 
do heat-health action plans and the heat warning system 
have?. Zeitschrift fur Gerontologie und Geriatrie, 47(6), 475–482. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00391-014-0673-2> 
Hill, J. (2012). Analysis of Climate Change and Health-Promotion 
Campaigns in Relation to Heat-Health Messages. Report 
prepared for Health Canada. Ottawa, ON.
Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Jacob, D., Taylor, M., Bindi, M., Brown, S., 
Camilloni, I., Dieghiou, A., Djalante, R., Ebi, K. L., Engelbrecht, 
F., Guiot, J., Hijioka, Y., Mehrotra, S., Payne, A., Seneviratne, S. 
I., Thomas, A., Warren, R., & Zhou, G. (2018). Impacts of 1.5ºC 
Global Warming on Natural and Human Systems. In V. Masson-
Delmotte, P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, 
A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, 
J. B. R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I.Gomis, E. Lonnoy, 
T.Maycock, M.Tignor, & T. Waterfield (Eds.), Global Warming of 
1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming 
of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse 
gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the 
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable 
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. Cambridge, United 
Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Holubec, I. (2008). Flat Loop Thermosyphon Foundations in 
Warm Permafrost. Prepared for Government of the NT Asset 
Management Division Public Works and Services and Climate 
Change Vulnerability Assessment Canadian Council of 
Professional Engineers. Retrieved from <https://pievc.ca/sites/
default/files/appendix_b.6_northwest_territories_thermosyphon_
foundations.pdf>
Hondula, D. M., Balling, R. C., Vanos, J. K., & Georgescu, M. 
(2015). Rising Temperatures, Human Health, and the Role of 
Adaptation. Current Climate Change Reports, 1(3), 144–154. 
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-015-0016-4> 
Howard, C., Rose, C., & Hancock, T. (2017). Lancet countdown 
2017 report: Briefing for Canadian policymakers. Lancet 
Countdown, Canadian Medical Association, and Canadian Public 
Health Association. Retrieved from <https://www.cpha.ca/sites/
default/files/uploads/advocacy/2017_lancet_canada_brief.pdf>
Howard, C., Rose, C., & Rivers, N. (2018). Lancet countdown 2018 
report: Briefing for Canadian policymakers. Lancet Countdown, 
Canadian Medical Association, and Canadian Public Health 
Association. Retrieved from <https://cape.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2018/11/2018-Lancet-Countdown-Policy-Brief-Canada.
pdf>
Huang, C., Vaneckova, P., Wang, X., Fitzgerald, G., Guo, Y., & Tong, 
S. (2011). Constraints and barriers to public health adaptation to 
climate change: a review of the literature. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 40(2), 183–190. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
amepre.2010.10.025>
Huang, C., Barnett, A. G., Xu, Z., Chu, C., Wang, X., Turner, L. R., & 
Tong, S. (2013). Managing the health effects of temperature in 
response to climate change: challenges ahead. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 121(4), 415–419. <https://doi.org/10.1289/
ehp.1206025> 
Hunt, A., Ferguson, J., Baccini, M., Watkiss, P., & Kendrovski, 
V. (2017) Climate and weather service provision: Economic 
appraisal of adaptation to health impacts. Climate Services, 7, 
78–86. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cliser.2016.10.004> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 749 
Hutton, G., & Menne, B. (2014). Economic evidence on the health 
impacts of climate change in europe. Environmental Health 
Insights, 8, 43–52. <https://doi.org/10.4137/EHI.S16486>
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC). (2019). Community Voices 
on Climate Change and Health Adaptation in Northern Canada. 
Ottawa, ON. Retrieved from <http://www.climatetelling.info/
uploads/2/5/6/1/25611440/19-012-climate-change-c2-ang.pdf> 
Interior Health. (2017). @Interior Health: A publication for staff 
and physicians of IH. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Climate change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working 
Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Core Writing Team, 
R. K. Pachauri & L. A. Meyer, Eds.). Geneva, Switzerland.
Janssen I. (2012). Health care costs of physical inactivity in 
Canadian adults. Applied Physiology, Nutrition, and Metabolism = 
Physiologie Appliquee, Nutrition et Metabolisme, 37(4), 803–806. 
<https://doi.org/10.1139/h2012-061>
Jarrett, J., Woodcock, J., Griffiths, U. K., Chalabi, Z., Edwards, P., 
Roberts, I., & Haines, A. (2012). Effect of increasing active travel 
in urban England and Wales on costs to the National Health 
Service. Lancet (London, England), 379(9832), 2198–2205. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60766-1> 
Jay, O., Capon, A., Berry, P., Broderick, C., de Dear, R., Havenith, 
G., Honda, Y., Kovats, R.S., Ma, W., Malik, A., Morris, N.B., Nybo, 
L., Seneviratne, S.I., Vanos, J., Ebi, K.L. Heat and Health 2 - 
Reducing the health effects of hot weather and heat extremes: 
from personal cooling strategies to green cities. The Lancet. Vol 
398: 709–24. <https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34419206/>
Kennedy, E., Olsen, H., Vanos, J., Vecellio, D. J., Desat, M., 
Richters, K., Rutledge, A., & Richardson, G. (2021). Reimagining 
spaces where children play: developing guidance for thermally 
comfortable playgrounds in Canada. Canadian Journal of Public 
Health = Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 112(4), 706–713. 
<https://doi.org/10.17269/s41997-021-00522-7> 
Kidd, S. A., Greco, S. & McKenzie, K. (2020). Global Climate 
Implications for Homelessness: A Scoping Review. Journal of 
Urban Health, 98, 385-393. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-
020-00483-1>
Kigali Cooling Efficiency Program. (2018). Global Climate 
Impact from Hospital Cooling. Retrieved from <https://www.
climateworks.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/11/kigali-ceo-
global-hospital-cooling-report.pdf>
King, N., Bishop-Williams, K. E., Beauchamp, S., Ford, J. D., 
Berrang-Ford, L., Cunsolo, A., IHACC Research Team., & Harper, 
S. L. (2019). How do Canadian media report climate change 
impacts on health? A newspaper review. Climatic Change, 152, 
581-596. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2311-2> 
Knowledge Management. (2018). Towards a pan-Canadian 
surveillance system for climate-related health
indicators: Final report. Kingston, ON: KFL&A Public Health.
Kodjak, A. (2017). Hurricane Damage To Manufacturers 
In Puerto Rico Affects Mainland Hospitals, Too. National 
Public Radio. Retrieved from <https://www.npr.org/sections/
health-shots/2017/11/15/564203110/hurricane-damage-to-
manufacturers-in-puerto-rico-affects-mainland-hospitals-too>
Kolnick, L. (2016). Analysis of a decade of climate change and 
health research in Canada: Are researchers making progress 
in addressing identified knowledge gaps?. Report prepared for 
Health Canada. 
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S., Darwish, L., & Comella, M. (2018). Cities 
adapt to extreme weather: Celebrating local leadership. Institute 
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved from <https://www.
iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Cities-Adapt-Website.pdf> 
Kovacs, P., Guilbault, S., Lambert, E., & Kovacs, R. (2020). Cities 
adapt to extreme wildfires: Celebrating local leadership. Institute 
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction. Retrieved from <https://www.
iclr.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Cities-Adapt-to-Extreme-
WILDFIRES_Final_Dec19.pdf> 
Kovats, S., Lloyd, S., Hunt, A., & Watkiss, P. (2011). The Impacts 
and Economic Costs on Health in Europe and the Costs and 
Benefits of Adaptation. Technical Policy Briefing Note Series. 
Oxford, United Kingdom: Stockholm Environment Institute.
KPMG. (2017). May 2016 Wood Buffalo Wildfire Post-Incident 
Assessment Report. Report prepared for Alberta Emergency 
Management Agency. Prepared for Alberta Emergency 
Management Agency. Retrieved from <https://www.alberta.ca/
assets/documents/Wildfire-KPMG-Report.pdf>
Kuchmij, N., Berry, P., Enright, P., Schnitter, R., & Hamilton, 
S. (2020). Climate and Health Vulnerability & Adaptation 
Assessments: A Knowledge to Action Resource Guide. Ottawa, 
ON: Health Canada.
Kyselý, J., & Plavcová, E. (2012). Declining impacts of hot spells 
on mortality in the Czech Republic, 1986–2009: Adaptation to 
climate change? Climatic Change, 113, 437–453. 
L’Hérault, E., Michel, A., Fortier, D., Carbonneau, A-S., Doyon-
Robitaille, J., Lachance, M-P., Ducharme, M-A., Larrivée, K., 
Grandmont, K., & Lemieux, C. (2013). Production de cartes 
prédictives des caractéristiques du pergélisol afin de guider le 
développement de l’environnement bâti pour les communautés du 
Nunavik. Rapport final. Québec, QC : Centre d’études nordiques, 
Université Laval.
Lambert, S. (2018). Judge approves $90M settlement for 
flooded Manitoba First Nations. CBC News. Retrieved from 
<https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/manitoba/manitoba-first-
nations-flooding-settlement-1.4482353> 
 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 750 
Larrivée, C., Sinclair‐Désgagné, N., Da Silva, L., Revéret, J. P., 
Desjarlais, C. (2015). Évaluation des impacts des changements 
climatiques et de leurs coûts pour le Québec et l’État québécois. 
Rapport d’étude. Montréal, QC: Ouranos. Retrieved from <https://
www.environnement.gouv.qc.ca/changementsclimatiques/
evatuation-impacts-cc-couts-qc-etat.pdf>
Lebel, G., Dubé, M., & Bustinza, R. (2019). Surveillance des 
impacts des vagues de chaleur extrême sur la santé au Québec 
à l’été 2018. Institut National De Santé Publique du Québec. 
Retrieved from <https://www.inspq.qc.ca/bise/surveillance-des-
impacts-des-vagues-de-chaleur-extreme-sur-la-sante-au-quebec-
l-ete-2018> 
Lee, V., Zermoglio, F., Ebi, K. L., & Chemonics International Inc. 
(2019). Heatwaves and Human Health: Emerging Evidence and 
Experience to Inform Risk Management in a Warming World. 
United States Agency for International Development. Retrieved 
from <https://www.climatelinks.org/sites/default/files/asset/
document/2019_USAID-ATLAS_Heat-Waves-and-Human-Health.
pdf>
Legassic, A. (2018). Interior Health facilities filling up with 
wildfire evacuated patients. Info News. Retrieved from <https://
infotel.ca/newsitem/interior-health-facilities-filling-up-with-
wildfire-evacuated-patients/it44209>
Lesnikowski, A., Ford, J., Berrang-Ford, L., Paterson, J., 
Barrera, M., & Heymann, S. (2011). Adapting to health impacts 
of climate change: A study of UNFCCC Annex I parties. 
Environmental Research Letters, 6(4), 044009. doi:10.1088/1748-
9326/6/4/044009 
Levison, M. M., Butler, A. J., Rebellato, S., Armstrong, B., 
Whelan, M., & Gardner, C. (2018). Development of a Climate 
Change Vulnerability Assessment Using a Public Health Lens to 
Determine Local Health Vulnerabilities: An Ontario Health Unit 
Experience. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 15(10), 2237. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph15102237>
Limaye, V. S., Max., W., Consitible., J., & Knowlton, K. (2019). 
Estimating the health-related costs of 10 climate-sensitive U.S. 
events during 2012. GeoHealth, 3(9), 245-265. <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2019GH000202> 
Lower Mainland Facilities Management. (2020). Moving 
towards climate resilient health facilities for Vancouver Coastal 
Health. Retrieved from <https://bcgreencare.ca/system/
files/resource-files/VCH_ClimateReport%2BAppendices_
Final_181025.pdf>
Luehr, G. (2018). Health co- ‘benefits’ and ‘risks’ in climate 
change mitigation technologies and policies: A review for 
Canada. Report Prepared for Health Canada.
MacIntyre, E., Khanna, S., Darychuk, A., Copes, R., & Schwartz, 
B. (2019). Evidence synthesis - Evaluating risk communication 
during extreme weather and climate change: a scoping review. 
Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention in Canada 
: Research, Policy and Practice, 39(4), 142–156. <https://doi.
org/10.24095/hpcdp.39.4.06> 
Maguet, S. (2020). Climate change and health: A research agenda 
for BC. Retrieved from <https://shiftcollaborative.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2020/05/Adaptation-Canada-2020-Climate-Change-
and-Health-Dialogue-Report.pdf> 
Maibach, E. (2019). Increasing public awareness and facilitating 
behavior change: Two guiding heuristics. In L. Hannah & T. 
Lovejoy (Eds.), Climate Change and Biodiversity (2nd ed.) Yale 
University Press.
Man, R. X., Lack, D. A., Wyatt, C. E., & Murray, V. (2018). The 
effect of natural disasters on cancer care: a systematic 
review. The Lancet. Oncology, 19(9), e482–e499. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1470-2045(18)30412-1> 
Martinez, G. S., Berry, P., Balbus, J., Hodgson, T., Salazar, M. 
Sellers, S., & Hess, J. (2018). The adaptation health gap: A global 
overview. In H. Neufeldt, G. S. Martinez, A. Olhoff, C. Knudsen, & 
K. Dorkenoo (Eds.), The Adaptation Gap Health Report. Nairobi, 
Kenya: United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 
Retrieved from <https://www.unep.org/resources/adaptation-
gap-report-2018> 
Martinez, G. S., Linares, C., Ayuso, A., Kendrovski, V., Boeckmann, 
M., & Diaz, J. (2019). Heat-health action plans in Europe: 
Challenges ahead and how to tackle them. Environmental 
Research, 176, 108548. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envres.2019.108548> 
Matthies, F. Bickler, G., Marín, N. C., & Hales, S. (Eds.). (2008). 
Heat health action plan guidance. World Health Organization 
Europe. Retrieved from <http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0006/95919/E91347.pdf?ua=1>
McGregor, G. R., Bessemoulin, P., Ebi, K., & Menne B. (Eds.). 
(2015). Heatwaves and Health: Guidance on Warning-System 
Development. World Meteorological Organization and World 
Health Organization. Retrieved from <https://www.who.
int/globalchange/publications/WMO_WHO_Heat_Health_
Guidance_2015.pdf?ua=1>
Mehiriz, K., & Gosselin, P. (2019). Evaluation of the Impacts of a 
Phone Warning and Advising System for Individuals Vulnerable 
to Smog. Evidence from a Randomized Controlled Trial Study 
in Canada. International Journal of Environmental Research 
and Public Health, 16(10), 1817. <https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijerph16101817>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 751 
Mehiriz, K., Gosselin, P., Tardif, I., & Lemieux, M. A. (2018). The 
Effect of an Automated Phone Warning and Health Advisory 
System on Adaptation to High Heat Episodes and Health 
Services Use in Vulnerable Groups-Evidence from a Randomized 
Controlled Study. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health, 15(8), 1581. <https://doi.
org/10.3390/ijerph15081581> 
Michelozzi, P., De Sario, M., Accetta, G., de’Donato, F., 
Kirchmayer, U., D’Ovidio, M., Perucci, C. A., & HHWWS 
Collaborative Group (2006). Temperature and summer 
mortality: geographical and temporal variations in four Italian 
cities. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 60(5), 
417–423. <https://doi.org/10.1136/jech.2005.040857> 
Miller, F., Bytautas, J.P., & Feng, P. (2018). Opportunities 
for engaging Canadian health systems in addressing the 
challenge of climate change. Retrieved from <https://ssrn.com/
abstract=3167088>
Missirian, A., & Schlenker, W. (2017). Asylum applications 
respond to temperature fluctuations. Science (New York, 
N.Y.), 358(6370), 1610–1614. <https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
aao0432> 
MNP LLP. (2013). Review and Analysis of the Government of 
Alberta’s Response to and Recovery from the 2013 Floods. 
Report prepared for the Alberta Emergency Management Agency 
and the Government of Alberta. Retrieved from <https://open.
alberta.ca/dataset/48bd39ee-2a5a-4846-944d-6004e0a8a498/
resource/8404f003-1bde-49d9-a953-d37e0d671dac/
download/2013-flood-response-report.pdf> 
Morabito, M., Profili, F., Crisci, A., Francesconi, P., Gensini, G. F., & 
Orlandini, S. (2012). Heat-related mortality in the Florentine area 
(Italy) before and after the exceptional 2003 heatwave in Europe: 
an improved public health response?. International journal of 
biometeorology, 56(5), 801–810. <https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00484-011-0481-y> 
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 
(NASEM). (2018). Protecting the health and well-being of 
communities in a changing climate: Proceedings of a workshop. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
National Health Service. (2016). NHS and health and care sector 
hit first target on climate change – but more testing goals are to 
come. Retrieved from <https://www.england.nhs.uk/2016/01/
climate-change/>
National Intelligence Council (NIC). (2016). Implications for US 
National Security of Anticipated Climate Change. Retrieved from 
<https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Newsroom/Reports%20
and%20Pubs/Implications_for_US_National_Security_of_
Anticipated_Climate_Change.pdf>
Noble, I. R., Huq, S., Anokhin, Y. A., Carmin, J., Goudou, D., 
Lansigan, F. P., Osman-Elasha, B., & Villamizar, A. (2014). 
Adaptation needs and options. In C. B. Field, , V. R. Barros, D. J. 
Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, 
K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. 
N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. White (Eds.), 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part 
A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, 
USA: Cambridge University Press. 
Northern Health. (2018a). 2017 Cariboo Wildfires: Northern 
Health After Action Report. Prince George, BC: Northern 
Health Emergency Management. Retrieved from <https://
physicians.northernhealth.ca/sites/physicians/files/
news/documents/2018/after-action-review-report-cariboo-
wildfires-2017.pdf> 
Northern Health. (2018b). Stuart Lake Hospital (Fort St. James) 
- advance patient transfers. Retrieved from <https://www.
northernhealth.ca/newsroom/stuart-lake-hospital-fort-st-james-
advance-patient-transfers>
Northern Health. (2018c). Wildfires, heart health and hospital 
projects: NH Board meeting highlights. Retrieved from <https://
www.northernhealth.ca/newsroom/wildfires-heart-health-and-
hospital-projects-nh-board-meeting-highlights?keys=2018%20
wildfire#>
Nova Scotia. (2003). A Report on emergency response to 
Hurricane Juan. Retrieved from <https://www.halifaxexaminer.
ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/report_on_the_emergency_
response_to_hurricane_juan.pdf> 
Nova Scotia Health Authority. (2019a). PSA: Nova Scotia Health 
Authority responding to impacts of Hurricane Dorian. Retrieved 
from <https://www.nshealth.ca/news/psa-nova-scotia-health-
authority-responding-impacts-hurricane-dorian>
Nova Scotia Health Authority. (2019b). Several NSHA facilities 
experiencing downed phones lines in wake of Hurricane Dorian. 
Retrieved from <https://www.nshealth.ca/news/several-nsha-
facilities-experiencing-downed-phones-lines-wake-hurricane-
dorian>
Paavola, J. (2017). Health impacts of climate change and health 
and social inequalities in the UK. Environmental Health, 16, 113. 
<https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-017-0328-z> 
Panditharatne, M. (2018). Six Months After Maria: Puerto Rico’s 
Growing Health Crisis. Natural Resource Defense Council. 
Retrieved from <https://www.nrdc.org/experts/mekela-
panditharatne/six-months-after-maria-puerto-ricos-growing-
health-crisis>
Paterson, J. A., Ford, J. D., Berrang-Ford, L., Lesnikowski, A., 
Berry, P., Henderson, J., & Heymann, J. (2012). Adaptation to 
climate change in the Ontario public health sector. BMC Public 
Health, 12, 452. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-12-452> 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 752 
Paterson, J., Berry, P., Ebi, K., & Varangu, L. (2014). Health care 
facilities resilient to climate change impacts. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 11(12), 
13097–13116. <https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph111213097>
Patz, J. A., & Thomson, M. C. (2018). Climate change and health: 
Moving from theory to practice. PLoS Medicine, 15(7), e1002628. 
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002628>
Perotta, K. (Ed.). (2019). Climate change toolkit for health 
professionals. Canadian Association of Physicians for the 
Environment (CAPE). Retrieved from <https://cape.ca/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/Climate-Change-Toolkit-for-Health-
Professionals-Updated-April-2019-2.pdf> 
Philip, S. Y., Kew, S. F., van Oldenborgh, G. J., Yang, W., Vecchi, 
G. A., Anslow, F. S., Li, S., Seneviratne, S. I., Luu, L. N., Arrighi, 
J., Singh, R., van Aalst, M., Hauser, M., Schumacher, D. L., 
Marghidan, C. P., Ebi, K. L., Bonnet, R., Vautard, R., Tradowsky, 
J., … Otto, F. E. L., (2021). Rapid attribution analysis of the 
extraordinary heatwave on the Pacific Coast of the US and 
Canada June 2021. Retrieved from <https://www.ecodebate.
com.br/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/20210707-rapid-
attribution-analysis-of-the-extraordinary-heatwave-on-the-
pacific-coast-of-the-us-and-canada-june-2021.pdf> 
Pichler, P. P., Jaccard, I. S., Weisz, U., & Weisz, H. (2019). 
International comparison of health care carbon
footprints Environmental Research Letters, 14(6), 064004. 
<https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30121-2>
Poitras, A. (2018). Extreme heatwaves in Quebec. Retrieved 
from<https://climatedata.ca/case-study/extreme-heat-waves-in-
quebec/>
Presse Canadienne. (2017). Quebec floods: Long wait for some 
patients forced out by water. Montreal Gazette. Retrieved from 
<https://montrealgazette.com/news/local-news/quebec-floods-
long-wait-for-some-hospital-patients-forced-out-by-water>
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2017). The Chief 
Public Health Officer’s Report on the State of Public Health in 
Canada 2017 – Designing Healthy Living. Retrieved from <https://
www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/publications/chief-
public-health-officer-reports-state-public-health-canada/2017-
designing-healthy-living.html>
Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee 
(PIEVC). (n.d.). The Protocol. Retrieved from <https://pievc.ca/
protocol>
Public Safety Canada (PSC). (2017). An emergency management 
framework for Canada - Third Edition. Ottawa, ON: Emergency 
Management Policy and Outreach Directorate. Retrieved from 
<https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/rsrcs/pblctns/2017-mrgnc-
mngmnt-frmwrk/2017-mrgnc-mngmnt-frmwrk-en.pdf> 
RDH Building Science. (2018). Nanaimo Regional General 
Hospital Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment Report. 
Retrieved from <https://pievc.ca/sites/default/files/nrgh-pievc-
climate-change-vulnerability-assessment-report-e.pdf>
Ribesse, J., & Varangu, L. (2019). Climate Change Toolkit for 
Health Professionals: Module 6 – Taking Action on Climate Change 
at Health Facilities. Canadian Association of Physicians for the 
Environment (CAPE). Retrieved from <https://cape.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2019/04/Module-6-Final-Solo-April-2-2019.pdf>
Roffel, B. (2021). BC’s heatwave likely contributed to 719 sudden 
deaths in a week, coroner says – triple the usual number. CBC 
News. Retrieved from <https://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/
british-columbia/heat-wave-719-deaths-1.6088793> 
Roles, A. (2013). Southern Alberta Flood. Presented to the 
Canadian Healthcare Network. 
Royal Society of Canada. (1995). Implications of global change 
for human health: Final report of the health issues panel of the 
Canadian Global Change Program. Incidental Report. No IR95-2. 
Schifano, P., Leone, M., De Sario, M., de’Donato, F., Bargagli, A. 
M., D’Ippoliti, D., Marino, C., & Michelozzi, P. (2012). Changes 
in the effects of heat on mortality among the elderly from 
1998-2010: results from a multicenter time series study in 
Italy. Environmental Health : A Global Access Science Source, 11, 
58. <https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-58>
Scott, D., Minano, A., Chakraborty, L., Henstra, D., Thistlethwaite, 
J., & Apajee, Y. (2020). Flood risk analysis of Canadian health 
and emergency infrastructure. Climate Risk Research Group, 
University of Ottawa.
Séguin. J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities 
and Adaptive Capacity. Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved 
from <http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-
sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf>
Sellers, S., & Ebi, K. L. (2017). Climate change and health under 
the shared socioeconomic pathway framework. International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 15(1), 3. 
<https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15010003>
Shah, C., Ford, J., Labbe, J., & Flynn, M. (2018). Adaptation policy 
& practice in Nunavik. OURANOS. Retrieved from <https://www.
ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/RapportFord2018.pdf>
Shapiro, L. T., Gater, D. R., Jr, Espinel, Z., Kossin, J. P., 
Galea, S., & Shultz, J. M. (2020). Preparing individuals 
with spinal cord injury for extreme storms in the era of 
climate change. EClinicalMedicine, 18, 100232. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2019.12.002> 
Sheridan, S. C., & Allen, M. J. (2018). Temporal trends in human 
vulnerability to excessive heat. Environmental Research Letters, 
13(4), 043001. <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/aab214>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 753 
Sheridan, S. C., & Dixon, P. G. (2016). Spatiotemporal trends in 
human vulnerability and adaptation to heat across the United 
States. Anthropocene, 20, 61-73. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ancene.2016.10.001> 
Shin, Y. S., & Ha, J. (2012). Policy Directions Addressing the 
Public Health Impact of Climate Change in South Korea: 
The Climate-change Health Adaptation and Mitigation 
Program. Environmental Health and Toxicology, 27, e2012018. 
<https://doi.org/10.5620/eht.2012.27.e2012018>
Shindell, D.T., Lee, Y., & Faluveg, G. (2016). Climate and health 
impacts of US emissions reductions consistent with 2oC. Nature 
Climate Change, 6(5), 503-507. doi:10.1038/nclimate2935, 2016.
Shindell, D. T., Faluvegi, G., Seltzer, K., & Shindell C. (2018). 
Quantified, localized health benefits of accelerated carbon 
dioxide emission reductions. Nature Climate Change, 8(4), 291-
295. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0108-y
Shumake-Guillemot, J., Amir, S., Anwar, N., Arrighi, J., Böse-
O’Reilly, S., Brearley, M., Cross, J., Daanen, H., … Zaitchik, B. 
(2020). Technical brief: Protecting health from hot weather 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Global Heat Health Information 
Network. Retrieved from <http://www.ghhin.org/assets/
technical-brief-COVID-and-Heat-final.pdf>
Smith, K. R., Woodward, A., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chadee, D. 
D., Honda, Y., Liu, Q., . . . Sauerborn, R. (2014). Human health: 
Impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits. In C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, 
D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. 
Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. Genova, B. Girma, E. 
S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. Mastrandrea, & L. L. 
White (Eds.), Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and 
vulnerability. Part A: Global and sectoral aspects. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 709-754). 
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. 
Retrieved from <https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/>
Springmann, M., Godfray, H. C., Rayner, M., & Scarborough, P. 
(2016). Analysis and valuation of the health and climate change 
cobenefits of dietary change. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 113(15), 
4146–4151. <https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1523119113> 
Survey Research Centre. (2019). Survey of health sector 
officials: A contribution to Health Canada’s Climate Change and 
Health Adaptation Capacity Building Program and the National 
Assessment - Technical and data analysis report. Report 
prepared for Health Canada. University of Waterloo. 
Tan, J., Zheng, Y., Song, G., Kalkstein, L. S., Kalkstein, A. J., & 
Tang, X. (2007). Heatwave impacts on mortality in Shanghai, 
1998 and 2003. International Journal of Biometeorology, 51(3), 
193–200. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00484-006-0058-3> 
Toews, E. (2018). In the face of fire. Canadian healthcare 
facilities. Hospital News. Retrieved from <https://hospitalnews.
com/face-fire-taking-care-healthcare-facilities/> 
Tröltzsch, J., Görlach, B., Lückge, H., Peter, M., & Sartorius, 
C. (2012). Costs and benefits of climate adaptation 
measures. Umweltbundesamt. Retrieved from <https://www.
umweltbundesamt.de/en/topics/climate-energy/climate-
change-adaptation/adaptation-tools/project-catalog/costs-
benefits-of-climate-change-adaptation> 
United Nations Environment Program (UNEP). (2018). 
The Adaptation Gap Report 2018. Nairobi, Kenya. 
Retrieved from <https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/
handle/20.500.11822/27114/AGR_2018.pdf?sequence=3>
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). (2015). Paris Agreement. <https://unfccc.int/sites/
default/files/english_paris_agreement.pdf>
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR). 
(2015). Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-
2030. Retrieved from <https://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/
publications/43291>
United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNDRR). 
(2019). Critical infrastructure including schools, health facilities, 
and roads threatened by the climate crisis. Retrieved from 
<https://www.undrr.org/news/critical-infrastructure-including-
schools-health-facilities-and-roads-threatened-climate>
United Nurses of Alberta. (2013). UNA Calgary office closed, 
many health facilities affected by southern Alberta flooding. 
Retrieved from <https://www.una.ab.ca/194/una-calgary-office-
closed-many-health-facilities-affected-by-calgary-flooding>
University Health Network (UHN). (2021). UNH reducing 
emissions with huge new wastewater energy system. Retrieved 
from <https://www.uhn.ca/corporate/News/Pages/UHN_
reducing_emissions_with_huge_new_wastewater_energy_
system.aspx>
Valois, P., Jacob, J., Mehiriz, K., Talbot, D., Renaud, J.-S., & Caron, 
M. (2018). Portrait de l’adaptation aux changements climatiques 
dans les organisations du secteur de la santé au Québec. Québec, 
QC: Université Laval.
Valois, P., Talbot, D., Caron, M., Carrier, M.-P., Morin, A. J. S., 
Renaud, J.-S., Jacob, J. & Gosselin, P. (2017). Development and 
Validation of a Behavioural Index for Adaptation to High Summer 
Temperatures among Urban Dwellers. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 14(7), 820. <https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph14070820>
Vanlint, L. (2019). A Deeply Cool Year in Energy & 
Environment. Talkin’ Trash with UHN. Retrieved from <https://
talkintrashwithuhn.com/2019/05/03/a-deeply-cool-year-in-
energy-environment/>
Vodden, K., & Cunsolo, A. (2021). Rural and Remote 
Communities. In F. J. Warren & N. Lulham (Eds.), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: National Issues Report. Ottawa, 
ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
changingclimate.ca/national-issues/>
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 754 
Waddington, K., & Varangu, L. (2016). Canadian Coalition for 
Green Health Care Leading the Evolution of Green. Healthcare 
Quarterly (Toronto, Ont.), 19(3), 23–29. <https://doi.
org/10.12927/hcq.2016.24869>
Waddington, K., Varangu, L., Berry, P., & Paterson, J. (2013). 
Preparing for the health impacts of climate change: How ready 
is your health care organization? Journal of the Canadian 
Healthcare Engineering Society, 1, 34–39.
Wardekker, J. A., de Jong, A., van Bree, L., Turkenburg, W. C., & 
van der Sluijs, J. P. (2012). Health Risks of Climate Change: An 
Assessment of Uncertainties and Its Implications for
Adaptation Policies. Environmental Health, 11(67). <https://doi.
org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-67> 
Warr, S. (2016). Northern Lights Regional Health Centre 
evacuation swift and successful. Alberta Health Services. 
Retrieved from <https://www.albertahealthservices.ca/news/
features/2016/page13156.aspx>
Watkiss, P. (2015) A review of the economics of adaptation 
and climate-resilient development. Centre for Climate Change 
Economics and Policy and Grantham Research institute on 
Climate Change and the Environment. Retrieved from <https://
www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/
Working-Paper-205-Watkiss.pdf> 
Watts, N., Adger, W. N., Agnolucci, P., Blackstock, J., Byass, P., 
Cai, W., Chaytor, S., Colbourn, T., Collins, M., Cooper, A., Cox, P. 
M., Depledge, J., Drummond, P., Ekins, P., Galaz, V., Grace, D., 
Graham, H., Grubb, M., Haines, A., Hamilton, I., … Costello, A. 
(2015). Health and climate change: policy responses to protect 
public health. Lancet (London, England), 386(10006), 1861–
1914. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60854-6> 
Watts, N., Amann, M., Arnell, N., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Beagley, J., 
Belesova, K., Boykoff, M., Byass, P., Cai, W., Campbell-Lendrum, 
D., Capstick, S., Chambers, J., Coleman, S., Dalin, C., Daly, M., 
Dasandi, N., Dasgupta, S., Davies, M., Di Napoli, C., Dominguez-
Salas, P., … Costello, A. (2021). The 2020 report of The Lancet 
Countdown on health and climate change: responding to 
converging crises. Lancet (London, England), 397(10269), 
129–170. <https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32290-X>
Watts, N., Amann, M., Ayeb-Karlsson, S., Belesova, K., Bouley, T., 
Boykoff, M., Byass, P., Cai, W., Campbell-Lendrum, D., Chambers, 
J., Cox, P. M., Daly, M., Dasandi, N., Davies, M., Depledge, M., 
Depoux, A., Dominguez-Salas, P., Drummond, P., Ekins, P., 
Flahault, A., … Costello, A. (2018). The Lancet Countdown 
on health and climate change: from 25 years of inaction to 
a global transformation for public health. Lancet (London, 
England), 391(10120), 581–630. <https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(17)32464-9> 
Watts, T. (2014). Alberta Health Services: Southern Alberta 
Floods 2013. Presented at the Hospital Emergency Preparedness 
Conference of Ottawa. Retrieved from <https://www.drieottawa.
org/presentations/20141017/20141017_tom_watts.pdf>
Weinberger, K. R., Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J., & Wellenius, G. 
A. (2018). Effectiveness of National Weather Service heat 
alerts in preventing mortality in 20 US cities. Environment 
international, 116, 30–38. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
envint.2018.03.028> 
Weisskopf, M. G., Anderson, H. A., Foldy, S., Hanrahan, L. P., 
Blair, K., Török, T. J., & Rumm, P. D. (2002). Heatwave morbidity 
and mortality, Milwaukee, Wis, 1999 vs 1995: an improved 
response?. American Journal of Public Health, 92(5), 830–833. 
<https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.92.5.830> 
Wheeler, N., Watts, N. (2018). Climate Change: From Science 
to Policy. Curr Envir Health Rpt 5, 170–178 (2018). <https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40572-018-0187-y> 
Wondmagegn, B. Y., Xiang, J., Williams, S., Pisaniello, D., & 
Bi, P. (2019). What do we know about the healthcare costs of 
extreme heat exposure? A comprehensive literature review. The 
Science of the Total Environment, 657, 608–618. <https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.11.479>
Woodcock, J., Abbas, A., Ullrich, A., Tainio, M., Lovelace, R., 
Sá, T. H., Westgate, K., & Goodman, A. (2018). Development 
of the Impacts of Cycling Tool (ICT): A modelling study and 
web tool for evaluating health and environmental impacts of 
cycling uptake. PLoS Medicine, 15(7), e1002622. <https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002622> 
World Bank. (2017). Climate-smart health care: Low-carbon 
and resilience strategies for the health sector. Washington, DC. 
Retrieved from <https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/
en/322251495434571418/pdf/113572-WP-PUBLIC-FINAL-WBG-
Climate-smart-Healthcare-002.pdf> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2009). Protecting health from 
climate change: Global research priorities. Geneva, Switzerland. 
Retrieved from <https://www.afro.who.int/publications/
protecting-health-climate-change-global-research-priorities> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2010). Protecting health in 
an environment challenged by climate change: European Regional 
Framework for Action. Copenhagen, Denmark. Retrieved from 
<https://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/95882/
Parma_EH_Conf_edoc06rev1.pdf> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2013). Protecting Health 
from Climate Change: Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. 
Retrieved from <http://www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/104200>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). Operational 
Framework for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems. 
Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved form <http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/189951/1/9789241565073_eng.pdf?ua=1>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018a). WHO UNFCCC 
Climate Health Country Profile Project—Monitoring Health 
Impacts of Climate Change and Progress in Building Climate 
Resilient Health Systems. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 755 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018b). Factsheet: 
Climate change and health. Retrieved from <https://www.
who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/climate-change-and-
health#:~:text=Climate%20change%20affects%20the%20
social,malaria%2C%20diarrhoea%20and%20heat%20stress> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018c). COP24 
Special Report: Health and Climate Change. Retrieved 
from <https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand
le/10665/276405/9789241514972-eng.pdf>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2019). 2018 WHO health and 
climate change survey report: Tracking global progress. Retrieved 
from <https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329972>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2020). WHO guidance for 
climate-resilient and environmentally sustainable health care 
facilities. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved from <https://www.
who.int/publications/i/item/9789240012226> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2021). Quality criteria for 
health national adaptation plans. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/quality-criteria-
health-national-adaptation-plans> 
World Health Organization (WHO), & World Bank. (2018). 
Methodological guidance: Climate change and health diagnostic. 
Country-based approach for assessing risks and investing 
in climate-smart health systems. Retrieved from <https://
documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/
documentdetail/552631515568426482/a-country-based-
approach-for-assessing-risks-and-investing-in-climate-smart-
health-systems>
Zhang, X., Flato, G., Kirchmeier-Young, M., Vincent, L., Wan, 
H., Wang, X., Rong, R., Fyfe, J., Li, G., & Kharin, V. V. (2019). 
Changes in temperature and precipitation across Canada. In E. 
Bush & D.S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada’s Changing Climate Report. 
Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved from <https://
changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019>
H E A LT H  O F  C A N A D I A N S  I N  A  C H A N G I N G  C L I M AT E : 
A D VA N C I N G  O U R  K N O W L E D G E  F O R  A C T I O N
Glossary
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 757 
Acute – Occurring over a short period of time (as opposed to chronic).
Adaptation – The process of adjustment to actual or expected climate and its effects. In human systems, 
adaptation seeks to moderate or avoid harm or to exploit beneficial opportunities. In some natural systems, 
human intervention may facilitate adjustment to expected climate and its effects (IPCC, 2014).
Adaptation mainstreaming – Integrating climate change adaptation considerations and information into 
policies, programs, and operations at all levels of decision making rather than creating new policies or policy 
instruments. The goal is to make the adaptation process an essential component of existing decision making 
and planning frameworks (adapted from UNDP, 2005).
Adaptive capacity – The ability of systems, institutions, humans, and other organisms to adjust to potential 
damage, to take advantage of opportunities, or to respond to consequences (IPCC, 2014). 
Aerosols – A collection of airborne solid or liquid particles with a typical size of 0.01 to 10 mm that reside in 
the atmosphere for at least several hours. Aerosols may be of either natural or anthropogenic origin. Aerosols 
may influence climate in two ways: directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and indirectly through 
acting as condensation nuclei for cloud formation or modifying the optical properties and lifetime of clouds 
(IPCC, 2001).
Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool (AQBAT) – A computer application designed by Health Canada that 
provides economic valuation estimates of health impacts of air quality, considering the potential social, 
economic, and public welfare consequences of the health outcomes, including medical costs, reduced 
workplace productivity, pain and suffering, and increased mortality risk (Government of Canada, 2020).
Albedo – The fraction of solar radiation reflected by a surface or object, often expressed as a percentage. 
Snow-covered surfaces have a high albedo; the surface albedo of soils ranges from high to low; vegetation-
covered surfaces and oceans have a low albedo. The Earth’s planetary albedo varies mainly through 
differences in cloudiness, snow, ice, leaf area and land cover changes (IPCC, 2007).
Anomaly – Departure from the average over a reference period (Bush & Lemmen, 2019).
Anthropogenic – Resulting from human activities or produced by human beings (IPCC, 2007).
Atmosphere – The gaseous envelope surrounding the Earth. The atmosphere consists almost entirely of 
nitrogen and oxygen, together with a number of trace gases such as argon and helium, and greenhouse gases 
such as carbon dioxide and ozone. In addition, the atmosphere contains water vapour, clouds, and aerosols 
(WHO, 2003).
Attribution (science) – Identifying the causes of an observed change or event in terms of the relative 
contributions of multiple causal factors (Bush & Lemmen, 2019).
Autochthonous – Formed or originating in the place where it is found.
Baseline – The baseline (or reference) is the state against which change is measured. A baseline period is the 
period relative to which anomalies are computed (IPCC, 2014).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 758 
Black carbon – Commonly known as soot. An aerosol that is emitted as a result of the incomplete 
combustion of carbon-based fuels. Black carbon absorbs solar radiation and has a warming effect. It is 
termed a short-lived climate pollutant given it remains in the atmosphere only for days or weeks (IPCC, 2018).
Burden of disease – The burden of disease can be thought of as the measurement of the gap between 
current health status and an ideal health situation where the entire population lives to an advanced age, free 
of disease and disability (UNEP, 2018). 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) – A naturally occurring gas, also a by-product of burning fossil fuels from fossil carbon 
deposits, such as oil, gas, and coal, of burning biomass, of land use changes, and of industrial processes 
(e.g., cement production). It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas that affects the Earth’s radiative 
balance. It is the reference gas against which other greenhouse gases are measured and therefore has a 
Global Warming Potential of 1 (IPCC, 2014).
Chronic – Occurring over a long period of time (as opposed to acute).
Climate –The average or expected weather and related atmospheric, land, and marine conditions for 
a particular location over a given period. The usual period for averaging weather variables is 30 years, 
as defined by the World Meteorological Organization. The relevant variables are usually temperature, 
precipitation, and wind (IPCC, 2007).
Climate anxiety – See Ecoanxiety
Climate change – A persistent, long-term change in the state of the climate, measured by changes in the 
mean state and/or its variability. Climate change may be due to natural internal processes, natural external 
forcings such as volcanic eruptions and modulations of the solar cycle, or to persistent anthropogenic 
changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use (IPCC, 2014). 
Climate change scenario – See Climate scenario
Climate model – A computer-based representation of the climate system that is based on the physical, 
chemical, and biological properties of its components, their interactions, and feedback processes and that 
accounts for some of the climate system’s known properties. Climate models are used as a research tool, to 
study and simulate the climate, and for operational purposes, to make monthly, seasonal, and year-over-year 
climate projections (IPCC, 2007).
Climate penalty – The impact of climate change alone on air quality based on constant, present-day 
emissions (Wu et al., 2008). 
Climate projection – A climate projection is the simulated response of the climate system to a scenario 
of future emission or concentration of greenhouse gases and aerosols, generally derived using climate 
models. Climate projections are distinguished from climate predictions by their dependence on the emission/
concentration/radiative-forcing scenario used, which is in turn based on assumptions concerning, for example, 
future socio-economic and technological developments that may or may not be realized (IPCC, 2014).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 759 
Climate-resilient health systems – Systems that can anticipate, respond to, cope with, recover from, and 
adapt to climate-related shocks and stresses, to make sustained improvements to population health, despite 
an unstable climate (WHO, 2015).
Climate scenario –  A plausible and often simplified representation of the future climate, based on an 
internally consistent set of climatological relationships that has been constructed for explicit use in 
investigating the potential consequences of anthropogenic climate change, often serving as input to impact 
models. Climate projections often serve as the raw material for constructing climate scenarios, but climate 
scenarios usually require additional information such as the observed current climate (IPCC, 2014).
Climate variability (or internal climate variability) – Variations in the mean state and other statistics (such 
as standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the climate on all space and time scales beyond 
individual weather events. Variability may be due to natural internal processes within the climate system (internal 
variability), or to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forcing (external variability) (IPCC, 2007).
Co-benefits – The positive effects that a policy or measure aimed at one objective might have on other 
objectives, regardless of its net effect on overall social welfare. Co-benefits (or ancillary benefits) are often 
subject to uncertainty and depend on local circumstances and implementation practices, among other 
factors (IPCC, 2014). 
Cryosphere – Places on (and beneath the surface of) the Earth where water is frozen, including snow, sea 
ice, ice shelves, land ice (glaciers and ice caps), freshwater ice (lake and river ice), permafrost, and seasonally 
frozen ground.
Disaster – Severe alterations in the normal functioning of a community or a society due to hazardous 
physical events interacting with vulnerable social conditions, leading to widespread adverse human, material, 
economic, or environmental effects that require immediate emergency response to satisfy critical human 
needs and that may require external support for recovery.
Disaster risk reduction – Denotes both a policy goal or objective, and the strategic and instrumental 
measures employed for anticipating future disaster risk; reducing existing exposure, hazard, or vulnerability; 
and improving resilience (IPCC, 2014).
Dose–response – Association between dose and the incidence of a defined effect in an exposed population. 
Dose–response relationships are used to determine the probability of a specific outcome or disease, or risk of 
a disease, by extrapolating from high doses to low doses and from laboratory animals to humans, and using 
mathematical models that define risk as a function of exposure dose (WHO, 2003). 
Drought – A period of abnormally dry weather long enough to cause a serious hydrological (water) imbalance. 
Drought is a relative term, referring to a particular precipitation-related activity. For example, a shortage 
of precipitation during the growing season impinges on crop production or ecosystem function in general 
(soil-moisture drought or agricultural drought) and during the runoff and percolation season primarily affects 
water supplies (hydrological drought). Storage changes in soil moisture and groundwater are also affected 
by increases in evapotranspiration in addition to reductions in precipitation. A period with an abnormal 
precipitation deficit is defined as a meteorological drought. A megadrought is a very lengthy and pervasive 
drought, lasting much longer than normal, usually a decade or more (IPCC, 2014).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 760 
Early warning system – A system to generate and disseminate timely and meaningful warning information 
to enable individuals, communities, and organizations threatened by a hazard to prepare to act promptly and 
appropriately to reduce the possibility of harm or loss (IPCC, 2014).
Ecoanxiety (climate anxiety) –The anxiety people experience as a result of awareness of ecological threats 
facing the planet due to climate change (Albrecht, 2011; Albrecht, 2012).
Ecological grief (ecogrief) – Distress related to ecological loss or anticipated losses related to climate 
change. These losses may relate to land, species, culture, or lost sense of place and/or of cultural identity and 
ways of knowing. Ecogrief can include loss and trauma related to specific hazards, such as climate-related 
flooding or wildfires, or to slow-onset climate change impacts, such as rising global temperatures, drought, 
melting permafrost, and sea-level rise (Cunsolo & Ellis, 2018).
Ecoparalysis – Ecoparalysis refers to the complex feelings of being unable to do anything grand enough to 
mitigate or stop climate change (Koger et al., 2011).
Ecosystem – The interactive system formed by all living organisms and their abiotic (physical and chemical) 
environment within a given area. Ecosystems can cover a range of scales: from the entire globe, to 
communities of plants and animals living in specific environmental conditions at the continental scale, to 
small systems such as a pond (IPCC, 2007). 
Emergency response – Actions taken before, during, and immediately after an emergency to ensure that its 
effects are minimized and that people affected are given immediate relief and support (Canadian Red Cross 
et al., n.d.).
Emissions scenario – A plausible representation of the future development of emissions of substances 
that may affect radiative forcing (e.g., greenhouse gases, aerosols). These scenarios are based on a set of 
assumptions about driving forces (such as demographic and socio-economic development, technological 
change, and energy and land use) and their key relationships. There are several sets of emissions scenarios 
being used as the basis of climate projections (IPCC, 2014). See also Representative Concentration Pathways 
(RCPs) and Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES).
Exposure – Contact between a person and/or community and one or more biological, psychological, 
chemical, or physical stressors, including stressors affected by climate change.
Extreme weather event – Weather that is rare at a particular place and time of year. Definitions of rare 
vary, but such an event would normally be in the 10th or 90th percentile of probability based on previous 
observations. Extreme weather may vary from place to place. When a pattern of extreme weather persists for 
some time, such as a season, it may be classed as an extreme climate event, especially if it yields an average 
or total that is itself extreme (e.g., drought or heavy rainfall over a season) (IPCC, 2014).
Flood – The overflowing of the normal confines of a stream or other body of water, or the accumulation of 
water over areas not normally submerged. Floods include river (fluvial) floods, flash floods, urban floods, 
rainfall-related (pluvial) floods, sewer floods, coastal floods, and glacial lake outburst floods (IPCC, 2014).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 761 
Food-borne diseases (food-borne illnesses) – Diseases that are infectious, parasitic, or toxic in nature and 
that are acquired through the ingestion of contaminated food (CDC, 2020).
Food security – A state that prevails when people have secure access to sufficient amounts of safe and 
nutritious food for normal growth, development, and an active and healthy life (IPCC, 2014).
Greenhouse gas – Gases in the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation, 
warming Earth’s surface and the lower atmosphere. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour 
(H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4), and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse gases 
in the Earth’s atmosphere. There are also a number of entirely human-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, 
such as halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine-containing substances (IPCC, 2014). 
Ground-level ozone (O3) – Ground-level (tropospheric) ozone (O3) is a colourless and highly irritating gas 
that forms just above the earth’s surface when nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) 
react in sunlight and stagnant air. Exposure to O3 has been linked to premature mortality and a range of 
morbidity health end points, such as hospital admissions and asthma symptoms, as well as negative impacts 
on vegetation and synthetic materials (Environment Canada, 2016). See also Ozone.
Hazard – The potential occurrence of a natural or human-induced physical event, trend or its impact that 
may cause loss of life, injury, or other health impacts. Hazards may also cause damage and loss of property, 
infrastructure, livelihoods, service provision, ecosystems, and environmental resources. In this report, hazard 
usually refers to climate-related physical events or trends or their physical impacts (IPCC, 2014).
Health equity – The absence of unfair systems and policies that cause health inequalities. The reduction of 
inequalities and increase in access to opportunities and conditions conducive to health for all (Government of 
Canada, 2019).
Health inequity – Health differences that are unfair or unjust and modifiable. For example, Canadians 
who live in remote or northern regions do not have the same access to nutritious foods such as fruits and 
vegetables as other Canadians (Government of Canada, 2019).
Health system – All of the activities whose primary purpose is to promote, restore, and/or maintain health. 
The people, institutions, and resources to improve the health of the population they serve, while responding 
to people’s legitimate expectations and protecting them against the cost of ill health through a variety of 
activities whose primary intent is to improve health.
Heat island effect – The effect whereby a smaller area (neighbourhood or zone) within a larger urban area 
is characterized by ambient temperatures higher than those of the surrounding area because solar energy is 
absorbed by materials such as asphalt, shade is lacking, etc. (IPCC, 2001).
Heavy precipitation (rainfall and snowfall) – Heavy rainfall is defined as rainfall greater than the annual 90th 
percentile from all rainfall events greater than 1 mm/day. Similarly, heavy snowfall is defined as snowfall 
greater than the annual 90th percentile from all events greater than 1 mm/day (Bush & Lemmen, 2019).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 762 
Impact – A change in, for example, a health outcome. Impact is used instead of effect to characterize the 
often-complex interrelationships between changes in weather variables (including extreme weather and 
climate events), other factors that determine the magnitude and pattern of a health outcome, and the health 
outcome. For example, changing weather patterns mean that the ticks that can carry Lyme disease are 
increasing their geographic range in southern Ontario. This change in range, along with outdoor activities 
putting people into contact with ticks, increased forestation in some urban areas, and other factors can affect 
the distribution and incidence of the disease. Impacts can refer not only to effects on health, but also to 
effects on ecosystems, economic status, social and cultural assets, infrastructure, and geophysical systems, 
including floods and droughts. 
Indigenous knowledge – There is no single definition of Indigenous knowledge. For our purposes, we 
understand Indigenous knowledge as a set of complex knowledge systems based on the worldviews of 
Indigenous Peoples. Indigenous knowledge reflects the unique cultures, languages, governance systems, and 
histories of Indigenous Peoples from a particular location. Indigenous knowledge is dynamic and evolves over 
time. It builds on the experiences of earlier generations and adapts to present conditions. First Nations, Inuit, 
and Métis each have a distinct way of describing their knowledge. Knowledge-holders are the only people who 
can truly define Indigenous knowledge for their communities (Government of Canada, 2021).
Indigenous Peoples – The term Indigenous is used in this report to refer collectively to the original 
inhabitants of Canada and their descendants, including First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples, as defined 
under Section 35 of the Constitution Act, 1982. Wherever possible, clear distinctions are made between these 
three distinct, constitutionally recognized groups. 
Infectious diseases – Any disease that can be transmitted from one person to another. Transmission may 
occur by direct physical contact, by common handling of an object that has picked up infective organisms, 
through a disease carrier, or by spread of infected droplets coughed or exhaled into the air (IPCC, 2001).
Maladaptation – Any deliberate adjustments in natural or human systems that inadvertently increase 
vulnerability to climatic stimuli; an adaptation that does not succeed in reducing vulnerability but increases it 
instead (IPCC, 2001). 
Mental health – A state of well-being in which every individual realizes his or her own potential, can cope with 
the normal stresses of life, work productively and fruitfully, and make a contribution to her or his community 
(WHO, 2018). Mental health can be demonstrated by the range of thoughts, feelings, and behaviours that 
people experience in their lifetimes. This conceptualization of mental health goes beyond diagnostic 
categories to encompass broader definitions of mental health across cultures and contexts. Mental health, 
like physical health, exists on a spectrum and includes states of mental wellness, mental challenges, and 
mental illness, each of which can influence functioning across life domains (MHCC, 2018).
Methane – A hydrocarbon and greenhouse gas produced through anaerobic (without oxygen) decomposition 
of waste in landfills, animal digestion, decomposition of animal wastes, coal production, and incomplete 
fossil fuel combustion (WHO, 2003). 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 763 
Mitigation (of climate change) – A human intervention to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks of 
greenhouse gases (IPCC, 2014).
Morbidity – Rate of occurrence of disease or other health disorder within a population, taking account of 
the age-specific morbidity rates. Health outcomes include chronic disease incidence/prevalence, rates of 
hospitalization, primary care consultations, disability-days (i.e. days when absent from work) and prevalence 
of symptoms (IPCC, 2001).
Mortality – Rate of occurrence of death within a population within a specified time period. Calculation of 
mortality takes into account age-specific death rates and can thus yield measures of life expectancy and the 
extent of premature death (IPCC, 2001). See also Premature (early) mortality or death.
Nitrous oxide (N2O) – A powerful greenhouse gas emitted through soil cultivation practices, especially the 
use of commercial and organic fertilizers, fossil fuel combustion, nitric acid production, and biomass burning 
(WHO, 2003). 
Ozone (O3) – Ozone, the triatomic form of oxygen, is a gaseous atmospheric constituent. In the troposphere, 
it is created both naturally and by photochemical reactions involving gases resulting from human activities 
(photochemical smog). In high concentrations, tropospheric ozone can be harmful to a wide range of living 
organisms. Tropospheric ozone acts as a greenhouse gas. In the stratosphere, ozone is created by the 
interaction between solar ultraviolet radiation and molecular oxygen. Stratospheric ozone plays a decisive role 
in the stratospheric radiative balance. Depletion of the stratospheric ozone, due to chemical reactions that 
may be enhanced by climate change, results in an increased ground-level flux of ultraviolet (UV) B radiation 
(IPCC, 2001). See also Ground-level ozone.
Particulate matter (PM) – Very small solid exhaust particles emitted during the combustion of fossil and 
biomass fuels. Particulates may consist of a wide variety of substances. Of greatest concern for health are 
particulates of 2.5 μm in diameter or less, usually designated PM2.5 (IPCC, 2001). 
Parts per million (ppm) – Unit of concentration often used when measuring levels of pollutants in air, water, 
body fluids, etc. One ppm is one part in one million by volume (WHO, 2003).
Paris Agreement – At the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris, France, representatives 
of 196 state parties negotiated and adopted an agreement on mitigating greenhouse gas emissions and 
adapting to climate change. The Paris Agreement under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) calls for zero net greenhouse gas emissions during the second half of the 21st 
century. Canada ratified the Paris Agreement in 2016 (Bush & Lemmen, 2019).
Pathogen – An agent that causes disease, such as bacteria, viruses, algae, fungi, and protozoa (Health 
Canada, 2007).
Premature (early) mortality or death – Death that occurs before the average age of death in a certain 
population (NCI, n.d.). 
Preparedness – Developing and readying response and recovery actions to increase a community’s ability to 
respond to future impacts (adapted from the F/P/T Network on Emergency Preparedness and Response, 2004).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 764 
Psychosocial adaptation – Developing or enhancing existing coping behaviours, practices, tools, or 
interventions to protect mental health and social well-being in a changing climate (Séguin, 2008; Brown & 
Westaway, 2011).
Psychosocial health – The interplay between social well-being, which arises from relationships with others 
and one’s context and culture, and psychological well-being, including thoughts, feelings, and behaviours 
(Berry et al., 2014).
Psychoterratic syndromes – Earth-related mental health phenomena such as ecoanxiety, ecoparalysis, and 
solastalgia (Albrecht, 2011).
Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) – A set of emission scenarios (see Emission scenarios) that 
include time series of emissions and concentrations of greenhouse gases, aerosols, and chemically active 
gases, as well as land use/land cover. Representative signifies that each RCP provides only one of many 
possible scenarios that would lead to the specific radiative forcing characteristics. Pathway emphasizes that 
not only the long-term concentration levels are of interest, but also the trajectory taken over time to reach that 
outcome (IPCC, 2014).
Resilience – The capacity of social, economic, and environmental systems to cope with a hazardous event, 
trend, or disturbance, responding or reorganizing in ways that maintain their essential function, identity, and 
structure, while also maintaining the capacity for adaptation, learning, and transformation (IPCC, 2014).
Risk –The uncertainty of future events and outcomes; the likelihood of a future event occurring as well as its 
potential to influence the achievement of an organization’s objectives (Health Canada, 2005).
Sea-level rise – An increase in the mean level of the ocean (IPCC, 2007). 
Sensitivity – The degree to which a system is affected, either adversely or beneficially, by climate-related 
stimuli. The effect may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response to a change in the mean, range, or 
variability of temperature) or indirect (e.g., damage caused by an increase in the frequency of coastal flooding 
due to sea-level rise) (IPCC, 2007).
Social capital – Combined actual or potential resources that can be mobilized through social relationships 
and membership in social networks (Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998, as cited in Resilience Alliance, 2007).
Social cost of carbon – The social cost of carbon is a monetary measure of the global damage expected from 
climate change from one additional tonne of CO2 emissions in a given year (Government of Canada, 2012).
Solastalgia – The distress of bearing witness to ecological changes in one’s home environment due to 
climate change, conceptualized as feeling homesick when a person is still in their home environment 
(Albrecht, 2011; Albrecht, 2012).
Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) – A set of storylines and scenarios based on population, 
gross domestic product, and emissions associated with the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) 
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000). The SRES scenarios (A1, A2, B1 and B2) represent different futures depending 
on differences in two dimensions: economic versus environmental concerns and global versus regional 
development patterns (IPCC, 2007).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 765 
Stakeholder – A person or an organization that has a legitimate interest in a project or entity or would be 
affected by a particular decision (IPCC, 2007).
Storm surge – A temporary increase, at a particular locality, in the height of the sea due to extreme weather 
conditions (low atmospheric pressure and/or strong winds). Storm surge is the excess height above the level 
expected from the tidal variation alone at that time and place (IPCC, 2007). 
Surveillance – The collection, analysis, interpretation, and dissemination of health data (USGCRP, 2016).
Threshold – The level at which sudden or rapid change occurs. In an ecological, economic, or other system, 
it is also a point or level at which new properties emerge, so that predictions that apply at lower levels are no 
longer valid (IPCC, 2007).
Tipping point – The level at which a system reorganizes, often abruptly, and does not return to the initial 
state even if the drivers of the change are abated. For the climate system, it refers to a critical threshold when 
global or regional climate changes from one stable state to another stable state. A tipping point event may be 
irreversible (IPCC, 2014).
Tools (for adaptation) – Methods, guidelines, and simplified processes that enable stakeholders to assess 
the implications of climate change impacts and adaptation options in the context of their operating 
environment. Tools come in a variety of formats and have diverse applications — from cross-cutting or 
multidisciplinary (e.g., climate models, scenario-building methods, stakeholder analysis, decision-support 
tools, decision-analytical tools) to specific sectoral applications (e.g., crop or vegetation models, methods for 
coastal zone vulnerability assessment) (adapted from UNFCCC, n.d.). 
Ultraviolet radiation – Solar radiation with certain wavelengths between the frequencies of visible light and 
X-rays, depending on the type of radiation (UV A, B, or C) (WHO, 2003). 
Urban heat island effect – See Heat island effect 
Vector – An organism, such as an insect, that transmits a pathogen (virus, bacterium, or parasite) from one 
host to another (IPCC, 2001).
Vector-borne disease – A disease that is transmitted between hosts by a vector organism such as a 
mosquito or tick (e.g., malaria, dengue fever, leishmaniasis) (IPCC, 2007).
Vulnerability – The propensity or predisposition to be adversely affected. Vulnerability can be due to 
individual susceptibility, geographic location, socio-economic factors, and a wide range of other factors that 
determine an individual or community’s susceptibility to harm and ability to cope with an event. For example, 
certain individuals can be vulnerable to extreme heat events because of where they live (parts of cities that 
warm more than others) and characteristics of their dwelling (such as whether there is cross-ventilation) 
(IPCC, 2014). 
Water-borne diseases (water-borne illnesses) – Diseases that result from exposure to disease-causing 
microorganisms or chemicals in drinking water or recreational water. Contaminated water most often enters 
the body by ingestion, but contaminants in water can also be inhaled, adsorbed, or enter the body through 
contact with open sores or wounds (Environment Canada, 2001).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 766 
Water security – The capacity of a population to safeguard sustainable access to adequate quantities of 
acceptable-quality water for sustaining livelihoods, human well-being, and socio-economic development, for 
ensuring protection against water-borne pollution and water-related disasters, and for preserving ecosystems 
(United Nations, 2013).
Zoonosis – An infectious disease of vertebrate animals, such as rabies, which can be transmitted to humans 
(WHO, 2003).
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 767 
Government of Canada. (2012). Reduction of Carbon Dioxide 
Emissions from Coal-fired Generation of Electricity Regulations 
(SOR/2012-167). Canada Gazette Part II, 146(19). Retrieved 
from <http://www.gazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p2/2012/2012-09-12/
html/sor-dors167-eng.html> 
Government of Canada. (2019). Social determinants of health 
and health inequalities. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/
en/public-health/services/health-promotion/population-health/
what-determines-health.html>
Government of Canada. (2020). Air Quality Benefits Assessment 
Tool (AQBAT). Retrieved from <https://science.gc.ca/eic/
site/063.nsf/eng/h_97170.html> 
Government of Canada. (2021). Indigenous Knowledge. Retrieved 
from <https://www.canada.ca/en/impact-assessment-agency/
programs/aboriginal-consultation-federal-environmental-
assessment/indigenous-knowledge-policy-framework-initiative/
indigenous-knowledge.html> 
Health Canada. (2005). A Strategy to Implement an Integrated 
Risk Management Framework in Health Canada. Retrieved from 
<https://publications.gc.ca/collections/Collection/H21-232-
2004E.pdf> 
Health Canada. (2007). Glossary. Retrieved from <http://www.
hc-sc.gc.ca/sr-sr/biotech/about-apropos/gloss_e.html#p> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2001). 
Climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. 
Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (J.J. 
McCarthy, O. F. Canziani, N. A. Leary, D. J. Dokken, & K. S. White, 
Eds.). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2007). 
Summary for Policymakers. In M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. 
Palutikof, P. J. van der Linden, & C.E. Hanson (Eds.), Climate 
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (pp. 7-22). 
Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2014). 
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part 
B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (V. R. Barros, C. B. Field, D. J. Dokken, M. D. Mastrandrea, 
K. J. Mach, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K. L. Ebi, Y. O. Estrada, R. C. 
Genova, B. Girma, E. S. Kissel, A. N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P. R. 
Mastrandrea, & L. L.White (Eds.). Cambridge, United Kingdom and 
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
References 
Albrecht, G. (2011). Chronic environmental change: Emerging 
“psychoterratic” syndromes. In I. Weissbecker (Ed.), Climate 
Change and Human Well-being (pp. 43-56). New York, NY: Springer.
Albrecht, G. (2012). Psychoterratic conditions in a scientific 
and technological world. In P. Kahn, & P. Hasbach (Eds.), 
Ecopsychology: Science, Totems, and the Technological Species 
(pp. 241-264). MIT Press.
Berry, P., Clarke, K.-L., Fleury, M. D., & Parker, S. (2014). 
Human Health. In F. J. Warren, & D. S. Lemmen (Eds.), Canada 
in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation (pp. 19–22). Ottawa, ON: Natural Resources Canada.
Brown, K., & Westaway, E. (2011). Agency, capacity, and 
resilience to environmental change: Lessons from human 
development, well-being, and disasters. Annual Review of 
Environment and Resources, 36, 321–342. <https://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-environ-052610-092905> 
Bush, E., & Lemmen, D. S. (Eds.). (2019). Canada’s Changing 
Climate Report. Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. Retrieved 
from <https://changingclimate.ca/CCCR2019>
Canadian Red Cross, Salvation Army, & St. John Ambulance. 
(n.d.). Voluntary sector framework for health emergencies 
(2nd ed.). Retrieved from <https://ccednet-rcdec.ca/sites/
ccednet-rcdec.ca/files/voluntary_sector_framework_for_health_
emergencies.pdf>
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2020). 
Foodborne germs and illnesses. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.
gov/foodsafety/foodborne-germs.html>
Cunsolo, A., & Ellis, N. R. (2018). Ecological grief as a mental 
health response to climate change-related loss. Nature Climate 
Change, 8(4), 275-281. <https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-018-
0092-2>
Environment Canada. (2001). Threats to sources of drinking 
water and aquatic ecosystem health in Canada. NWRI Scientific 
Assessment Report Series No. 1. Burlington, ON: National 
Water Research Institute. Retrieved from <https://www.
southsaskriverstewards.ca/wp-content/uploads/2019/09/
Threats-EnvironmentCanada.pdf> 
Environment Canada. (2016). Common Air Pollutants: Ground-
level Ozone. Retrieved from <https://www.canada.ca/en/
environment-climate-change/services/air-pollution/pollutants/
common-contaminants/ground-level-ozone.html> 
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Network on Emergency 
Preparedness and Response. (2004). National framework for health 
emergency management: Guideline for program development. 
Prepared for the Conference of F/P/T Ministers of Health. 
HEALTH OF CANADIANS IN A CHANGING CLIMATE
 768 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC). (n.d). Methodologies and Tools to Evaluate Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation. Retrieved from <https://unfccc.
int/methodologies-and-tools-to-evaluate-climate-change-
impacts-and-adaptation> 
U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). (2016). The 
Impacts of Climate Change on Human Health in the United 
States: A Scientific Assessment (A. Crimmins, J. Balbus, J. L. 
Gamble, C. B. Beard, J. E. Bell, D. Dodgen, R. J. Eisen, N. Fann, 
M. D. Hawkins, S. C. Herring, L. Jantarasami, D. M. Mills, S. Saha, 
M. C. Sarofim, J. Trtanj, & L. Ziska, Eds.). Washington, DC: U.S. 
Global Change Research Program. <http://dx.doi.org/10.7930/
J0R49NQX>
World Health Organization (WHO). (2003). Climate Change and 
Human Health: Risks and Responses (A. J. McMichael, D. H. 
Campbell-Lendrum, C. F. Corvalán, K. L. Ebi, A. K. Githeko, J. D. 
Scheraga, & A. Woodward, Eds.). Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved 
from <https://www.who.int/globalchange/publications/
climchange.pdf> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2015). Operational 
Framework for Building Climate Resilient Health Systems. 
Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved form <http://apps.who.int/iris/
bitstream/10665/189951/1/9789241565073_eng.pdf?ua=1> 
World Health Organization (WHO). (2018). Mental Health: 
Strengthening our Response. Retrieved from <https://www.who.
int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-
our-response> 
Wu, S., Mickley, L. J., Leibensperger, E. M., Jacob, D. J., Rind, 
D., & Streets, D. G. (2008). Effects of 2000-2050 change on 
ozone air quality in the United States. Journal of Geophysical 
Research: Atmospheres, 113(D6), D06302. <https://doi.
org/10.1029/2007JD008917> 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). (2018). 
Annex I: Glossary (J.B.R. Matthews, Ed.). In V. Masson-Delmotte, 
P. Zhai, H.-O. Pörtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea, P. R. Shukla, A. Pirani, 
W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors, J. B. R. 
Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock, 
M. Tignor, & T. Waterfield (Eds.), Global Warming of 1.5°C. 
An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse 
gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the 
global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable 
development, and efforts to eradicate poverty. Retrieved from 
<https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/chapter/glossary/> 
Koger, S. M., Leslie, K. E., & Hayes, E. D. (2011). Climate 
Change: Psychological Solutions and Strategies for Change. 
Ecopsychology, 3(4), 227–235. <https://doi.org/10.1089/
eco.2011.0041> 
Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC). (2018). The 
Working Mind: Continuum Self Check. Retrieved from <https://
theworkingmind.ca/continuum-self-check> 
Nakicenovic, N., Alcamo, J., Davis, G., de Vries, B., Fenhann, J., 
Gaffin, S., Gregory, K., Griibler, A., Jung, T. Y., Kram, T., Lebre La 
Rovere, E., Michaelis, L., Mori, S., Morita, T., Pepper, W., Pitcher, H., 
Price, L., Riahi, K., Roehrl, A., Rogner, H.-H … Dadi, Z. (2000). Special 
Report on Emissions Scenarios. A Special Report of Working Group 
III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, 
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.  
National Cancer Institute (NCI). (n.d.). Dictionary of Cancer 
Terms. Retrieved from <https://www.cancer.gov/publications/
dictionaries/cancer-terms/def/premature-death> 
Resilience Alliance. (2007). Glossary. Retrieved from <https://
www.resalliance.org/glossary>
Séguin, J. (Ed.). (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. 
Ottawa, ON: Health Canada. Retrieved from <http://publications.
gc.ca/collections/collection_2008/hc-sc/H128-1-08-528E.pdf> 
United Nations. (2013). Water Security and the Global Water 
Agenda: A UN-Water Analytical Brief. Hamilton, ON: United 
Nations, Institute for Water, Environment & Health. Retrieved 
from <https://www.unwater.org/publications/water-security-
global-water-agenda/>
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). (2005). 
Adaptation Policy Frameworks for Climate Change: Developing 
Strategies, Policies and Measures (B. Lim, & E. Spanger-Siegfried, 
Eds.). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). (2018). The 
Adaptation Gap Report 2018. Nairobi, Kenya: United Nations 
Environment Programme.
