AUGUST 2019
A  SPECIAL REPORT ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE IN CANADA 
HEAT WAVES 
AND HEALTH
Heat Waves of the Future
Longer, hotter, and more of them: a look at 
what climate models project for Canada
Heat and Your Health
Heat stress and social vulnerability: what 
you need to know to stay safe
Risk to Resilience
Take action to prevent global warming 
from getting worse
Heat Waves and Health
A Special Report on Climate Change in Canada
© 2019 Prairie Climate Centre
Prairie Climate Centre
University of Winnipeg
Richardson College for the Environment and Science Complex
Winnipeg, Manitoba
info@climateatlas.ca
The views expressed herein do not necessarily represent the views of Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, 
Environment and Climate Change Canada, or the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of Canada.
Funding for this project has been made possible through contributions from:
1
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
Introduction
Many Canadians welcome the arrival of hot summer 
days as respite from our long, cold winters. Understandably, 
we tend to think of more summer heat as a good thing.
But too much heat can be dangerous. 
Kim Perrotta, Senior Director of Health and Policy for the 
Canadian Association of Physicians for the Environment 
(CAPE), notes that high temperatures “can increase 
premature deaths, cause heat stroke, and can aggravate 
heart disease and respiratory diseases.” She warns that “this 
is actually a real concern for human health that’s affecting a 
large portion of the country.” 
Extreme heat can also worsen mental health issues such as 
depression and anxiety. And it increases the risk of droughts 
and forest fires, which in turn have serious implications for 
our personal and community health.
Communities across Canada know the dangers of heat all too 
well. Heat waves and extreme heat warnings have happened 
frequently in recent summers, including in Winnipeg, Ottawa, 
Halifax, Toronto, and—most dramatically—Montreal. In the 
summer of 2018, temperatures in Montreal soared for eight 
days straight, reaching a searing high of over 40°C with the 
humidex. Sixty-six people died from the heat.¹ 
Other areas of southern Quebec were also hit by heat waves, 
bringing the total death toll across the region to eighty-six.²
Rising temperatures are a problem especially for people in 
larger cities. Gord Perks, a city councillor in Toronto, worries 
about rising temperatures becoming hazardous to the people 
in his city. “We’ve been lucky so far that we haven’t had a 
deadly heat wave,” he said in 2018. “We haven’t had that, but 
we’re likely to. All the models say we’re going to.”
There’s no doubt that with climate change we’re going to 
see more heat waves. Even temperate coastal cities such 
as Vancouver are preparing for extreme heat impacts. “I 
don’t think any of us ever thought we’d use the words 
‘heat wave’ and ‘Vancouver’ in the same sentence,” said 
former Vancouver city councillor Andrea Reimer, “but now 
it’s something we not only have to expect, but that we’re 
experiencing.”
This report by the Prairie Climate Centre (PCC) takes a look at what extreme heat means for the health of Canadians. It draws on data 
and stories available through the Climate Atlas of Canada - an interactive tool produced by the PCC that combines science, mapping, 
and storytelling to make climate change meaningful to Canadians. Learn more at climateatlas.ca. 
 “I don’t think any of us ever thought 
we’d use the words ‘heat wave’ and 
‘Vancouver’ in the same sentence.”
- Andrea Reimer, former Vancouver city councillor
2
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
Heat Waves 
of the Future
What is a heat wave?
In general, a heat wave is an extended period of unusually 
hot weather. There isn’t a simple, commonly accepted 
scientific definition of a heat wave. For this map and 
report, we define it as a period of at least three days in a 
row that reach 30 °C or higher. We use this because 30 °C 
is experienced as a ‘hot’ day anywhere in Canada, and a 
string of these hot days will increase the likelihood of heat 
impacts that matter to Canadians.
What will heat waves be like in 
the future? 
Heat waves are projected to become longer, hotter, and 
more frequent. 
This map shows that heat waves are likely to happen 
frequently in the coming decades—if the current pace of 
greenhouse gas emissions is allowed to continue. 
The daytime and night-time average temperatures during 
heat waves are both projected to rise almost everywhere 
across the country, meaning that heat waves are expected 
to get hotter as well as more common.
And worryingly, these future heat waves are projected to 
last much longer than the ones we’ve experienced in the 
recent past. Many of these heat waves linger for more than 
just three days, and some are projected to last for weeks in 
the hotter parts of the country.
Urban heat islands
The effects of heat waves will be especially severe in our 
cities and towns, because they tend to be much warmer 
than the surrounding countryside. This is called the “urban 
heat island effect.” It happens because the closely packed 
buildings and paved surfaces that make up our cities 
amplify and trap heat.
The temperatures reported in the Climate Atlas of Canada do 
not take the urban island effect into account. The frequency, 
length, and intensity of heat waves in these locations are likely 
to be somewhat higher than shown on the map.
Victoria
Nearer the end of this century, 
cities like Victoria could regularly 
experience at least one heat wave 
per year.
Calgary
Historically, heatwaves are rare in Calgary. 
By 2051-2080, however, climate models 
project an average of 4 heatwaves per year. 
Regina
The average number of days per 
year that reaches or exceeds 34 °C 
is expected to increase from 3 to 
over 23 by 2051-2080.
Yellowknife
Heatwaves in the arctic? In a 
high carbon future, places like 
Yellowknife may experience at 
least one heat wave per year on 
a regular basis. 
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
3
About the data
The data in this report are derived from an ensemble of 24 downscaled global climate models obtained from the Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium (PCIC; pacificclimate.org). Values and comparisons use ensemble averages across the 30-year periods 1976-
2005 and 2051-2080 under the High Carbon (or RCP8.5) emissions scenario that assumes greenhouse gas emissions will continue 
to increase at current rates throughout this century. This latest-generation model data has been made available thanks to a 
partnership with Environment and Climate Change Canada, PCIC, Ouranos, and the Computer Research Institute of Montréal. See 
the Climate Atlas at climateatlas.ca to explore more data and to see what happens if the world reduces its greenhouse gas emissions 
and slows the pace of global warming.
Montreal
Heatwaves are projected to become 
even hotter, with daytime max 
temperatures averaging 33.0 °C by 
2051-2080.
Toronto
By 2051-2080, overnight 
temperatures during heatwaves 
will remain at or above 21 °C on 
average, an increase of 1.7 °C.
Halifax
By 2051-2080, Halifax is 
projected to experience a 
dozen 30 °C days per year, up 
from an average of just 1 per 
year historically. 
Winnipeg
Heat waves in Winnipeg 
historically lasted between 3 
and 4 days. By 2051-2080, 
they are projected to persist 
for longer than 7 days.
Average Number of Heat Waves per Year
2051-2080
(High Carbon Scenario)
         0                           3                       6
Explore more maps at
climateatlas.ca
Ottawa
By 2051-2080, a heat wave in 
Ottawa could last for longer 
than 17 days. Historically, the 
longest heat wave would be 
closer to just 4 days.
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
4
Less directly, rising temperatures can impact our health 
by producing more air pollution. High temperatures “bake” 
vehicle exhaust, turning it into harmful surface-level ozone 
and smog. Smog is often concentrated in big cities, but air-
quality problems can be just as bad in rural and suburban 
areas, especially as Canada experiences more wildfires. Air 
pollution can irritate your eyes, nose, and throat, worsen 
pre-existing heart and lung problems, or in some cases, cause 
long-term health issues.⁴ 
Importantly, heat can affect mental health and community 
well-being too. Occurrences of mood disorders, anxiety 
disorders, dementia, and psychological distress have all been 
shown to increase when the mercury goes up.⁵ Heat can have 
an impact on interpersonal interactions, with increases in 
irritability and aggression.⁶,⁷ Domestic violence and violent 
crimes have also been shown to spike during heat events.⁸
Who is vulnerable to extreme heat?
Toronto City Councilor Gord Perks notes that when extended 
heat waves happen, “a large part of the population suddenly 
becomes vulnerable.” We saw the tragic reality of these risks 
in the summer of 2018, as serious heat waves struck many 
Canadian cities. In Montreal, temperatures remained high for 
eight days straight and 66 people died from the heat. Most of 
the victims were older men living alone.⁹
All of us experience increased health risks from hot weather, 
but as the 2018 Montreal heat wave shows, some people are 
more vulnerable than others. Managing the effects of heat is 
largely dictated by a person’s ability to access resources.¹⁰ For 
example, people without adequate housing, air-conditioning, 
or sufficient supplies of drinking water will have difficulty 
dealing with the heat. 
People who are socially isolated or those with mobility 
issues may have challenges getting help and moving to 
cooler locations. Individuals who have difficulty accessing 
or understanding public health information such as heat 
warnings may be at greater risk as well. Dr. Jean Zigby, 
a palliative care physician in Montreal, says that people 
experiencing social isolation, and especially people with 
mental health issues, are at higher risk: “they seem to be 
a disproportionate percentage of the population that are 
found, unfortunately, dead due to heat exhaustion.” 
Other factors such as pre-existing medical conditions and 
being particularly sensitive to heat (especially seniors and 
Heat & Your Health
Extreme heat can do a lot of harm to your body if you’re unable to cool down. Health practitioners  warn against a 
number of heat-related health problems. Heat impacts can range from cramps and rashes to more severe illnesses that are 
caused by prolonged exposure, such as fainting, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke. In the most extreme circumstances, being 
unable to lower your body temperature could result in death.³ 
Mental Health
Respiratory Health
Cardiovascular Health
Extreme Heat Impacts Your...
When extended heat waves happen, 
“a large part of the population 
suddenly becomes vulnerable.” 
- Gord Perks, Toronto city councillor
5
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
children) affect vulnerability. Dr. Zigby says that “we see a lot 
of patients deteriorate after smog episodes and after heat 
waves,” and notes that when the heat rises it’s a “huge risk” 
for his patients “every time they take a trip outside.” 
It’s also important to remember that anyone who is active 
outside, by participating in outdoor activities or working 
outdoors, is at increased risk.
Taking action to prevent health impacts
Communities across Canada are making an effort to manage 
the reality of increased heat under climate change. Both 
Montreal and Toronto have extreme heat response and 
adaptation plans, and are putting in measures to reduce risk.
Dr. Zigby says “we’re seeing an increased sensitivity on the 
part of our public health officials and our city officials in order 
to make sure that infrastructure has been adapted for heat 
waves.” He reports that over the past 15 years, Montreal 
has implemented “plans to actually contact people who are 
socially isolated in order to make sure that they get access 
to cool areas”. He also notes that there has been “a massive 
investment in parks where there is a component of water 
included” that allows children and other vulnerable people to 
cool themselves off. 
Acting on their heat response plan, the City of Montreal took 
steps to reduce risk during the 2018 heat wave. Firefighters 
and police officers went door-to-door in vulnerable 
neighbourhoods to check on residents and offer advice on 
how to stay safe. The city also increased available paramedics 
and ambulances, sent out alert bulletins, extended public 
pool hours, and opened emergency cooling centres.¹¹ The 
mortality rate during the 2018 heat wave was much reduced 
compared to another serious heat wave in 2010, very likely 
thanks to better forecasting and public health interventions.²
In Toronto, some community groups are taking the 
response to heat waves into their own hands. A group of 
faith organizations have banded together to open their 
doors during extreme heat events, creating a network of 
community-organized cooling centres and strengthening 
social resilience to the threat of extreme heat. ¹²
Developing a support network within your community can 
be an effective way to look out for people who may be more 
vulnerable. Regular check-ins when weather warnings are 
issued can be an easy way to make sure everyone is safe, 
informed, and receiving help if needed.
Individuals and communities can rise to the challenges 
of heat waves with these sorts of actions, but social and 
political change is needed as well to reduce the risks more 
generally.
For example,  Montreal city planner Chakib Benramdane 
notes that the built environment of cities makes warming 
worse, but “where there is lots of greenery, lots of nature, 
this nature absorbs these effects. Nature is well-made, it 
balances itself.” He argues that cultivating more extensive 
vegetation, trees, water, and natural spaces is the best 
solution to the urban intensification of heat risks. 
Developing, improving, or expanding green space within city 
centres can greatly decrease temperatures on the ground and 
reduce the impacts of extreme heat events.¹³ And in addition 
to reducing temperatures, the presence of green spaces 
such as parks, trees, and natural vegetation has been linked 
to a number of additional health benefits. These include 
better mental and physical health, and overall well-being.¹⁴,¹⁵ 
Studies also show green spaces can provide a boost to social 
connections and build community.¹⁶
 “We’re seeing an increased sensitivity 
on the part of our public health 
ofﬁcials and our city ofﬁcials in order 
to make sure that infrastructure has 
been adapted for heat waves.”
- Dr. Jean Zigby, physician
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
6
Drought poses many risks to Canada’s people and 
environment. During a drought, farmers’ crops wilt, forests 
become much more prone to fire, hydroelectric production 
can be interrupted, and water sources can run low. 
Perhaps less obvious, however, are the various ways in which 
drought can negatively impact human health. 
For example, as water levels in lakes, rivers, and wetlands 
decrease and flows stagnate, concentrations of toxins and 
water-borne diseases increase. Many food-borne illnesses, 
vector-borne diseases, and fungal diseases also spread more 
quickly during periods of hot and dry weather.¹⁷ These effects 
can lead to decreased availability of drinking water, higher 
risk of food shortages, and increased rates of human illness.
Drought conditions can decrease air quality, which impacts 
respiratory health. As soil dries up, it can be picked up by the 
wind as dust. Dusty conditions lead to coughing, wheezing, 
and irritation of the eyes, nose, and throat. 
Drought-like weather also leads to more wildfires. Wildfire 
smoke particles are much smaller than dust particles, and can 
become embedded in our lungs, causing severe respiratory 
and cardiovascular illnesses.¹⁸
The economic impacts of drought can be massive. Canada’s 
last major drought (during the summers of 2001 and 2002) 
resulted in a $5.8 billion drop in Canada’s Gross Domestic 
Product.¹⁹ Large economic losses such as this profoundly 
affect communities, families, employers, and workers, causing 
many to experience stress and other mental health issues.²⁰
Droughts are periods of long-lasting and widespread water shortages that can have dramatic environmental and socio-
economic impacts. Climate projections showing summers with multiple heat waves, or heat waves that last for weeks on end, 
imply that drought will become much more likely and widespread. Although droughts happen for many different reasons, heat 
is usually a key component. All else being equal, more heat means more drought. 
Drought & Your Health
Lower water levels 
and ﬂow
Dry, dusty 
conditions
Economic 
losses
Interrupted 
hydroelectricity
7
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
Our health systems and collective resilience to heat waves 
rely on electricity generation, which can also be impacted 
by drought. Two-thirds of Canada’s electricity is generated 
by hydro.²¹ When water resources are put under strain, 
communities that rely on hydroelectricity may face power 
disruptions. Nuclear power plants also require significant 
volumes of water to operate safely, and may have to be shut 
down under drought conditions. The use of fossil fuel power 
to offset the loss of hydro and nuclear impacts our health by 
decreasing air quality, and power failures mean that vital air-
conditioning systems stop working, often during heat waves 
when they are needed most.
Taking action on drought
Protecting our health from the impacts of drought and heat 
waves will require creative thinking. There are also many 
ways we could reduce our water usage, including upgrading 
to high-efficiency appliances and xeriscaping (landscaping 
that requires little to no irrigation).
Currently, much of our urban infrastructure and developed 
land is designed to remove water during heavy rainfall events 
and the spring melt. More water could be made available 
during heat waves and droughts if our urban and rural 
landscapes retained water, for example by increasing the 
amount of green space in a city or allowing natural wetlands 
to thrive on the landscape.²²
What should you do during a 
heat wave?
1. Be aware when extreme heat warnings are issued 
in your area. Prepare yourself and those around 
you for the increased temperatures.
2. When it is hot out, limit the amount of time you 
spend outdoors, especially when participating 
in strenuous activities. Staying indoors in air-
conditioned and well-circulated spaces is the best 
way to keep cool. If you don’t have access to air 
conditioning or a cool basement at home, public 
buildings such as libraries or cooling shelters offer 
spaces that can be used to cool down.
3. When outdoor activities are unavoidable, try to 
schedule them for earlier or later in the day when 
the temperature has cooled off. While outside, 
take frequent breaks in order to not overexert 
yourself. 
4. Drink plenty of water to keep hydrated. Limit 
alcohol intake, and swap alcoholic drinks for 
non-alcoholic alternatives to reduce the risk of 
dehydration. 
5. Wearing lightweight and lightly coloured clothing 
along with a hat (and sunscreen to prevent 
sunburns) can make all the difference by reducing 
your exposure to the sun’s rays and making sure 
your body can breathe. Stick to shaded areas away 
from the direct heat of the sun.
6. Reducing the risk from heat waves is a team 
effort. Look out for neighbours and people in 
your community who may need help protecting 
themselves. Checking in and making sure everyone 
is safe and doing well is an effective way to reduce 
risk.
Read more at Health Canada: “Extreme Heat: Heat Waves”³ 
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
8
When forest ﬁre researcher Mike Flannigan looks ahead at what climate change means for wildfires in Canada, he 
doesn’t beat around the bush: “in a word, the future is smoky.” Research shows that climate change will worsen the three 
major factors that influence wildfires: having longer fire seasons, more dry fuel to burn, and frequent lightning strikes that 
start fires.²³
Wildﬁres & Smoke
Longer, hotter ﬁre 
seasons
More evaporation, 
drier fuels
More storms 
and lightning
The Triple Threat of Rising 
Temperatures
Record-breaking wildﬁre seasons have made 
headlines across Canada every summer in recent years. In 
August 2018, British Columbia declared a provincial state of 
emergency due to forest fires. At its peak, there were over 
560 wildfires burning in the province. The smoke from the 
fires travelled thousands of kilometres, causing air quality 
warnings to be issued across BC, Alberta, and as far away as 
southern Manitoba.²⁴ 
Wildfire risks will intensify as climate change makes 
summers longer and drier, leading to more health impacts for 
Canadians. When he considers what’s in store for Canada, 
Flannigan says simply that “There is a lot more fire in the 
future, and we better get used to it.”
 
 
More wildfires mean more wildfire smoke, and more smoke 
means more smoke-related health problems. Kim Perrotta 
of CAPE says that “with wildfires, you have the injuries and 
deaths that can happen immediately. But you also have the 
stress that happens from evacuations.” 
In addition, Perrotta notes, wildfire smoke exposes Canadians 
to “extremely high levels of air pollution that we would never 
see otherwise.” And since smoke travels easily, these health 
problems don’t only affect people who live in fire-prone 
areas.  
How does wildﬁre smoke affect our 
health?
Think of a smog-filled industrial city like Beijing. The air in 
these cities is often filled with very tiny particles that are 
an especially dangerous type of air pollution. The extremely 
small size of these particles means that they are easily carried 
by wind across large distances, and can also penetrate deeply 
into your lungs, causing irritation and inflammation.  
 
When we talk about wildfire smoke as a health issue, we’re 
essentially talking about a type of very intense air pollution. 
Dense smoke from wildfires can have fifty times the amount 
of these tiny particles than the World Health Organization’s 
guidelines for safe exposure. 
 
By far, the biggest health impact from wildfire smoke is 
difficulty breathing. Emergency room visits spike during 
wildfires. Perrotta says that increased exposure to wildfire 
smoke “could put people in the hospital, it could aggravate  
“With wildﬁres, you have the injuries and 
deaths that can happen immediately. But 
you also have the stress that happens from 
evacuations.”
- Kim Perrotta, Senior Director, CAPE
9
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
asthma, it’s going to aggravate heart conditions. It could lead 
to premature deaths, but probably there are long-term health 
impacts from it too.”
Wildfire smoke impacts aren’t limited to breathing issues. 
According to Jeff Eyamie, an Air Quality Officer with Health 
Canada, “there’s now evidence to connect wildfire smoke 
with low birth weight, stroke, cardiovascular disease, and all 
kinds of other health impacts.”  
 
The good news is that when the smoke goes away, these 
short-term risks usually go away too. Scientists are also 
conducting research to determine what long-term impacts 
are caused by short-term smoke exposure.²⁵ But since the 
short-term impacts can be serious, it’s important to protect 
yourself and others during a smoke event.   
Community health and wildﬁres
 
There are well-known links between wildfire smoke and 
anxiety, depression, and other mental health challenges.²⁶ 
When much of BC was ablaze in 2018, the Canadian Mental 
Health Association ramped up its communications efforts 
to address these risks, and various provincial governments 
in Canada have developed mental health strategies for 
responding to wildfires.²⁷  
 
Wildfire smoke is particularly challenging for remote and 
rural communities. “If you are in an isolated community, like 
a northern First Nation community that’s only accessible by 
air, it can be very isolating to be in a prolonged smoke event, 
where you can’t really move. You can’t do your traditional 
activities outdoors,” says Eyamie. Smoke events make 
everyday life harder in places where services are already 
limited, and if evacuation is needed the process can be 
extremely difficult and stressful for people and communities.
Wildfire evacuations have real, and often devastating, 
psychological and social health impacts from the disruptions 
they cause to normal life. From the 2016 Fort McMurray 
fires, there is evidence showing higher levels of stress, 
anxiety, depression, PTSD, and substance abuse following 
the disaster.²⁸ This is why it’s vital that emergency responses 
include mental health and social supports during and after 
a fire.²⁹ For Indigenous communities in particular, service 
delivery needs to be flexible and culturally relevant.³⁰
Reducing wildﬁres
In the big picture, the real challenge is how to reduce forest 
fire smoke in the first place. That means reducing wildfires, 
especially through better forest management. Eyamie 
explains, “we have to manage our forests intelligently, with 
fire as part of forest management. We have to welcome fire 
as a creative force within the ecosystem.”  
 
At the same time, it’s vital that we reduce the number 
of human-caused wildfires—by respecting fire bans, for 
example. Almost half of wildfires are caused by humans, 
which means there’s a lot we can do to stop them. 
 
But regardless of how well we manage wildfires, there’s no 
denying we’ll be seeing more of them in the years to come. 
That’s why it’s more important than ever to cut our fossil 
fuel emissions. The more effort we put into reducing climate 
change, the less our communities will be impacted in the long 
run. 
Who is vulnerable to wildﬁres?
We all breathe, which means that all of us are 
vulnerable to the impacts of wildfire smoke. And a 
majority of us are especially vulnerable, including: 
 »
People who work, play, or spend significant time 
outdoors 
 »
People with asthma, allergies, or certain other 
health issues 
 »
People with limited economic means 
 »
Children 
 »
Older adults
 »
Pregnant women
How to stay safe during 
wildﬁre season31
1. 
Be aware: information and tools are available to 
track wildfire smoke and air quality in your region 
(FireWork, Air Quality Health Index).
2. 
Drink plenty of water: keep hydrated to help your 
body deal with the smoke. 
3. 
Reduce exposure to the smoke: reduce time spent 
outdoors and limit strenuous activity. Keep house 
and car windows closed and recirculate the air inside. 
4. 
Breathe filtered air: use HEPA filtration in your home, 
or seek out public buildings like shopping malls, 
community centres or libraries that may have cooler, 
smoke-free environments.
5. 
Seek medical assistance: when feeling discomfort or 
exhibiting symptoms, consult your physician or local 
health authority. 
6. 
Monitor and help others who may be vulnerable, 
such as children or the elderly.
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
10
One of the best strategies to reduce the risks posed 
by very high temperatures is to prevent global warming from 
getting worse. The more we allow our climate to change, the 
more extreme heat we will all face. 
There are two aspects of climate action: mitigation (making 
sure climate change doesn’t get worse) and adaptation 
(getting ready to handle the impacts of ongoing climate 
change). We have to both reduce the severity of climate 
change and take steps to live with the change that’s already 
happening.
Mitigating and adapting to climate change require a 
combination of:
Technical know-how
To find solutions that allow us to effectively transition to 
low-carbon sources of energy, to provide data and analysis to 
understand global warming and its consequences, to create 
innovative adaptation tools and methods.
Political will
To create market incentives such as carbon pricing that 
reduce our collective reliance on high-carbon fuels, and to 
create climate-smart laws and regulations in the face of 
resistance and denial.
Personal responsibility
To recognize the importance and urgency of the global 
warming threat, to make changes in our own lives, and to 
empower community, government, and business leaders to 
take a key role in our communal effort, so we can creatively 
rise to the collective economic, social, and health challenges.
Fortunately, many of the things we can do to reduce and 
adapt to climate change are also good for our health and 
well-being. They also make great economic sense. Kim 
Perrotta of CAPE says “Many climate solutions actually 
provide immediate health co-benefits for the jurisdiction that 
takes action. By investing in public transit and active modes of 
transportation, we can increase levels of physical activity and 
decrease air pollution, which will in turn reduce chronic 
diseases and acute health impacts; health issues that produce 
billions of dollars in health-related costs for Canadians every 
year. ”
If we rethink how we build and live in our cities, develop 
active and public transportation, and shift towards the 
use of renewables for our energy needs, we can make lasting 
improvements to the health and prosperity of our 
communities at the same time as we do our part to take care 
of Earth’s climate.
Take Action
11
HEAT WAVES AND HEALTH
1 Santé Montréal.  “Epidemiological In-
vestigation: Heat Wave Summer 2018 in 
Montréal - Summary.” https://santemontreal.
qc.ca/fileadmin/user_upload/Uploads/tx_as-
ssmpublications/pdf/publications/Resume_
EnqueteChaleurMtl_2018_Anglais.pdf
2 Climate Data Canada. “Extreme heat 
waves in Québec.”  https://climatedata.ca/
case-study/extreme-heat-waves-in-quebec/
3 Health Canada. “Extreme heat: heat 
waves.” https://www.canada.ca/en/
health-canada/services/sun-safety/extreme-
heat-heat-waves.html
4 Jacob, Daniel J., and Winner, Darrell A. 
“Effect of climate change on air quality.” 
Atmospheric Environment 43.1: 51-63. 
5 Lõhmus, Mare. “Possible Biological 
Mechanisms Linking Mental Health and 
Heat—A Contemplative Review.” Interna-
tional Journal of Environmental Research and 
Public Health. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.
org/09f6/92a58bb5afff105b70ea2e70e5c-
783523ce8.pdf
6 WGBH News. “Heat and aggression: How 
hot weather makes it easy for us to offend
https://www.wgbh.org/news/lo-
cal-news/2018/07/11/heat-and-aggression-
how-hot-weather-makes-it-easy-for-us-to-
offend
7 Anderson, Craig. 2001. “Heat and vio-
lence.” Current Directions in Psychological 
Science. Volume 10 Issue 1. pgs:33-38
8 BBC News. “Heatwave: Is there more 
crime in hot weather?” https://www.bbc.
com/news/uk-44821796
9 Direction régionale de santé publique, 
CIUSSS du Centre-Sud-de-l’Île-de-Montréal. 
“Canicule : Juillet 2018 – Montréal – Bilan 
Préliminaire.” https://santemontreal.qc.ca/
fileadmin/fichiers/actualites/2018/07_juil-
let/BilanCanicule2018VF.pdf
10 Banks, Nick et al. “Climate change 
and social justice: an evidence review.” 
https://www.jrf.org.uk/report/cli-
mate-change-and-social-justice-evidence-re-
view
11 City of Montréal. “Heat wave in Montréal: 
The city activates the intervention level of its 
extreme heat response plan.” https://www.
newswire.ca/news-releases/heat-wave-in-
montreal-the-city-activates-the-interven-
tion-level-of-its-extreme-heat-response-
plan-687260881.html
12 Climate Atlas of Canada. “Heat Waves 
and Hope.” https://climateatlas.ca/video/
heat-waves-and-hope
13 University of Leeds. “A Brief Guide 
to the Benefits of Urban Green Spaces.” 
https://leaf.leeds.ac.uk/wp-content/up-
loads/2015/10/LEAF_benefits_of_urban_
green_space_2015_upd.pdf
14 CBC News. “Green space improves men-
tal health, well-being.” https://www.cbc.ca/
news/health/green-space-improves-mental-
health-well-being-1.2672323
15 Terton, Anika. “Building a Climate-Re-
silient City: Urban ecosystems.” http://
prairieclimatecentre.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2017/04/pcc-brief-climate-resil-
ient-city-urban-ecosystems.pdf
16 Globe and Mail. “Growing cities struggle 
to stay green.” https://www.theglobeandmail.
com/life/growing-cities-struggle-to-stay-
green/article35107379/
17 Yusa, A., Berry, P., J Cheng, J., Ogden, N., 
Bonsal, B., Stewart, R., & Waldick, R. (2015). 
Climate change, drought and human health 
in Canada. International journal of environ-
mental research and public health, 12(7), 
8359-8412. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC4515727/
18 Government of Canada. “Particulate 
matter 2.5 and 10.” https://www.canada.ca/
en/environment-climate-change/services/
air-pollution/pollutants/common-contami-
nants/particulate-matter.html
19 Wittrock V., Wheaton E. SRC Publica-
tion No. 11927-1E07. SRC; Saskatoon, SK, 
Canada: 2007. Towards Understanding the 
Adaptation Process for Drought in the Cana-
dian Prairie Provinces: The Case of the 2001 
to 2002 Drought and Agriculture.
20 Wittrock V., Kulshreshtha S.N., Wheaton 
E. Canadian prairie rural communities: Their 
vulnerabilities and adaptive capacities to
drought. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Glob. Chang.
2011;16:267–290. doi: 10.1007/s11027-
010-9262-x.
21 Natural Resources Canada. “Elec-
tricity Facts.” https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/
science-and-data/data-and-analysis/ener-
gy-data-and-analysis/energy-facts/electrici-
ty-facts/20068#L1
22 Venema, Henry and Temmer, Jennifer. 
“Building a Climate-Resilient City:
Water supply and sanitation systems.” 
http://prairieclimatecentre.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2017/04/pcc-brief-climate-resil-
ient-city-water-supply-sanitation.pdf
23 Climate Atlas of Canada. “Forest Fires 
and Climate Change.” https://climateatlas.ca/
forest-fires-and-climate-change
24 Postmedia News and the Canadian Press, 
“B.C. Declares State of Emergency as Heavy 
Smoke from Its Wildfires Blanket Alberta 
Cities,” National Post, August 15, 2018, 
https://nationalpost.com/news/canada/cp-
newsalert-b-c-declares-state-of-emergency-
over-wildfires-2.
25 Marks, Robin. “For Many, No Long-
Term Health Impacts from Wildfire 
Smoke, But More Studies Needed,” 
University of California San Francisco 
(blog), October 24, 2017, https://www.
ucsf.edu/news/2017/10/408766/
long-term-health-impacts-wild-
fire-smoke-may-include-cardiac-respirato-
ry-effects.
26 Crawford, Tiffany. “B.C. Wildfires 2018: 
Mental Health a Concern as Smoke Chokes 
Province,” Vancouver Sun, August 23, 2018, 
https://vancouversun.com/news/local-news/
mental-health-a-concern-as-wildfire-smoke-
continues-to-choke-province.
27 Canadian Mental Health Association. 
“Coping through a natural disaster emer-
gency.” https://cmha.bc.ca/documents/cop-
ing-through-a-natural-disaster-emergency/ 
28 Agyapong, Vincent I. O., Michal Juhás, 
Matthew R. G. Brown, Joy Omege, Edward 
Denga, Bernard Nwaka, Idowu Akinjise, 
et al. “Prevalence Rates and Correlates of 
Probable Major Depressive Disorder in 
Residents of Fort McMurray 6 Months After 
a Wildfire.” International Journal of Mental 
Health and Addiction 17, no. 1 (February 1, 
2019): 120–36. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11469-018-0004-8.
29 Felix, Erika D., and Walid Afifi. “The Role 
of Social Support on Mental Health After 
Multiple Wildfire Disasters.” Journal of Com-
munity Psychology 43, no. 2 (2015): 156–70. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcop.21671. 
30 Government of Canada. Standing Com-
mittee on Indigenous and Northern Affairs. 
“From the Ashes: Reimagining Fire Safety 
and Emergency Management in Indigenous 
Communities.” June 12, 2018. https://www.
ourcommons.ca/Committees/en/INAN/
StudyActivity?studyActivityId=9708266.
31 Government of Canada. “Wildfire smoke 
and your health.” https://www.canada.ca/
en/environment-climate-change/services/
air-quality-health-index/wildfire-smoke/
wildfire-smoke-health.html 
The Climate Atlas Of Canada
The Climate Atlas of Canada is an interactive tool for 
citizens, researchers, businesses, and community and 
political leaders to learn about climate change in Canada. 
It combines climate science, mapping and storytelling to 
bring the global issue of climate change closer to home, 
and is designed to inspire local, regional, and national 
action and solutions.
The Atlas is one of the only tools in the world that 
integrates interactive web design with climatology, 
cinema, and cartography to geovisualize and connect 
scientiﬁc data with personal experience in compelling 
and easy-to-use ways.
The Prairie Climate Centre is committed to making climate change meaningful and relevant to Canadians of all walks of life. 
We bring an evidence-based perspective to communicating the science, impacts, and risks of climate change through maps, 
documentary video, research reports, and plain-language training, writing, and outreach.
Learn More at: climateatlas.ca
"Many climate solutions actually provide immediate health co-
benefits for the jurisdiction that takes action. By investing in public 
transit and active modes of transportation, we can increase levels 
of physical activity and decrease air pollution, which will in turn 
reduce chronic diseases and acute health impacts; health issues 
that produce billions of dollars in health-related costs for 
Canadians every year. ”
- Kim Perrotta
Senior Director, Health and Policy
Canadian Association of Physicians for the Environment
